UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Motor Effects in Rating Lines’ Length Using a Dichotomous Scale

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4kp12586

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Laskin, Lyuben

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Motor Effects in Rating Lines’ Length Using a Dichotomous Scale
Lyuben D. Laskin (laskin@mail.bg)

Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria
Abstract
The aim of this study is to demonstrate how the execution of
particular task-specific motor movements can influence subjects’
ratings of simple stimuli. Sixty-four participants in one control and
two experimental groups rated lines of 36 different lengths. Lines
appeared on a computer screen and subjects gave their ratings
using a standard keyboard. In the experimental groups trials did
not change automatically, but subjects had to press a specific
button (called the “trial change button”), which was next to one of
the response buttons. It was hypothesized that this manipulation
would lead to assimilation of the ratings toward the category
whose button was next to the trial change button. The results
confirmed this hypothesis. Possible explanations of the results are
discussed.
Keywords: context effects; scale ratings; grounded cognition;
motor actions.

Introduction
According to traditional views in psychology and cognitive
science, the role of sensory and motor processes in
cognition is only peripheral. Our sensory organs receive
information from the outside world and that information is
transduced into amodal symbols which represent
knowledge. High-level cognition (language, memory,
decision making, problem solving, etc.) consists of the
interaction of these symbols with each other, the product of
which is either the activation of other amodal symbols, or
their transduction into motor commands.
Researchers from the field of grounded cognition
(Barsalou, 2008) assign a very different role to our sensory
and motor systems. According to that view, the brain does
not explicitly represent amodal symbols, but rather highlevel cognition emerges from the interaction between the
brain, the body, and the environment. This can also be stated
by saying that high-level cognition is grounded in sensory
and motor representations, not amodal, abstract symbols.
An ample amount of empirical results supports the views
of grounded cognition. Evidence shows that haptic, visual,
auditory sensations, proprioception, as well as execution of
motor actions, all influence higher-level cognitive
processes, like memory, language processing, visual and
motor imagery, and so on (for a review, see Barsalou,
2008).
The aim of this study is to demonstrate how motor actions
required for the execution of a particular cognitive task can
affect high-level cognitive processes. More specifically, we
are going to try to show this by demonstrating how motor
actions necessary to perform a scale rating task can
influence the ratings.

There already exists a field in psychology which deals
with the so-called context effects in scale ratings. There is
bountiful experimental literature demonstrating changes in
subjects’ ratings, influenced by factors like the range of the
stimuli, their distribution, the sequence of their presentation,
and so on.
Some of the studies demonstrate how context can
systematically1 change the ratings of stimuli evaluated only
by one dimension. Examples include judgments of square
sizes (Parducci & Perrett, 1971; Sarris & Parducci, 1978),
weights (Parducci & Marshall, 1962; Sherif, Taub, &
Hovland, 1958), and the length of lines (Kokinov, Hristova,
& Petkov, 2004; Petrov & Anderson, 2005).
Other studies demonstrate contextual effects in the ratings
of more complex stimuli (stimuli that must be evaluated
based on more than one dimension). For example, Cooke &
Mellers (1998) asked participants to rate flats’ attractiveness
based on their rent, number of rooms, and distance from
campus. Mellers (1982) demonstrates such effects in equity
judgments, and Wedell, Parducci, & Geiselman (1987)
show contextual effects in ratings of the attractiveness of
female faces.
There are a number of influential theories which try to
explain such experimental results. One of the first theories
in the field is the adaptation-level theory (Helson, 1964).
According to that theory, the stimuli a person has rated
leave a general impression with which all other stimuli are
compared while being assessed. Another powerful theory in
this field is the range-frequency theory (Parducci, 1965,
1968, 1974). It claims that a stimulus’ rating is a
compromise between the range and frequency principles.
The former refers simply to the lower and higher end of the
stimulus material (e.g., the smallest and the biggest square,
if the task is to judge the size of different squares). The
latter principle is concerned with the distribution of the
stimuli (e.g., uniform, positively or negatively skewed, etc).
Discussing in detail these and other theories in the field of
contextual effects in scale ratings is beyond the scope of this
paper.
To our knowledge, there are no studies showing changes
in people’s ratings of stimuli caused by “peripheral” factors
like the specific motor actions executed during the process
of rating itself. Furthermore, none of the theories presented
1

For a change to be considered systematic, it has to be in one
particular direction. When the change is in the direction of the
context (e.g., when there are more big squares than small squares
in the stimulus material and an average square receives a higher
rating than normal), the effect is called assimilation, whereas when
the change is in the opposite direction of the context, the effect is
called contrast or compensation.

1892

above predict any such effects. As was mentioned earlier,
the aim of the current study is to demonstrate how taskspecific motor actions can influence subjects’ performance
in the task. Next, we will review some of the literature
concerned with how executing particular motor actions
affects some cognitive processes which don’t seem to be
directly related to the motor actions.

Motor Effects in High-Level Cognitive
Processes
In this section, we will briefly present empirical results
showing how different motor actions can influence highlevel cognitive processes. The most commonly used
experimental paradigms are described below.
Cacioppo, Priester, & Berntson (1993) use the isometric
arm flexion and extension paradigm to trigger the so-called
approach and avoidance systems. The authors argue that
when these systems are activated, stimuli that people
interact with are perceived as more positive or more
negative, respectively. In a series of experiments they ask
subjects to either place their palms at the bottom of a table
and to lift slightly (flexion condition) or to place their palms
at the top of the table and to push slightly (extension
condition), while at the same time observing Chinese
ideographs which they later rate as pleasant or unpleasant.
The results show that ideographs observed during arm
flexion are later rated as more pleasant, whereas those
observed during extension are rated as less pleasant.
Another commonly used method is inducing a smile or a
frown by asking subjects to hold a pen or a pencil with their
teeth or with their lips, respectively. The muscles activated
during these actions are also active during one of the above
facial expressions. Using this manipulation, Strack, Martin,
& Stepper (1988) showed that holding a pen between the
teeth or between the lips leads to evaluating cartoons as
funnier or less funny, respectively.
Head nodding or shaking are meaningful gestures in most
cultures. They convey agreement/disagreement with or
approval/disapproval of someone else’s behavior, a
witnessed event, etc. Wells & Petty (1980) used the
association between the type of head movement and the
created mental set toward the currently active concepts to
show that making vertical head movements while listening
to a message leads to higher agreement with the message,
whereas making horizontal movements leads to lower
agreement.
For a review of other experiments showing motor
influence on high-level cognitive processes, see Briñol &
Petty (2008).

Possible Explanations of These Findings
The explanation that most papers provide for the obtained
results is related to the existing associations between a
motor action and a cognitive response (e.g., nodding
associated with agreement). These associations are created
during a person’s life and influenced by their culture. But
how are they created?

Zwaan & Madden (2005) provide one possible
mechanism by which such associations can be established.
According to their interconnected experiential traces
theory, all mental representations are experiential, that is,
created during some form of interaction with the outside
world. They define two types of representations: referent
and linguistic. The former are multimodal memory traces
laid down during interaction with the environment. The
latter representations are laid down during receiving or
producing linguistic information (e.g., talking, listening,
writing, etc.). A very important feature of these
representations is that they can be interconnected
(associated).
The authors propose co-occurrence as a possible
mechanism for establishing these associations. When two
events occur simultaneously or in succession, the neural
assemblies which represent those events establish stronger
connections with each other (Hebb, 1949). For example, the
visual image of a falling glass of water is likely to be
associated with the sound of breaking glass. This happens
because in a person’s lifetime, the experience of a glass
falling on the ground from a certain height has almost
always been followed by a specific sound (that of breaking
glass). Thus, that person develops anticipation for that
sound after seeing a falling glass.

Experiment
Likert scales are often used in pilot studies or even as
dependent measures in experiments. Researchers exploring
contextual effects in ratings have showed that these
measures can sometimes be affected by factors other than
those being investigated by the particular study (see studies
reported in the introduction). However, they have
emphasized on “cognitive” factors and have not studied any
possible influence of sensory or motor processes on
subjects’ ratings. The current experiment’s goal is to make
the first step in filling this gap by demonstrating changes in
subjects’ ratings influenced by the specific hand movements
they make while rating lines of different lengths.
One common feature of the experiments demonstrating
motor effects in high-level cognitive processes reviewed in
the previous section is that they all exploit associations
between different types of representations that have already
been formed throughout participants’ lives. The current
experiment will try a different approach by attempting to
create new short-term associations between particular motor
movements and conceptual categories.
Having in mind the interconnected experiential traces
theory of Zwaan & Madden (2005), it can be hypothesized
that if the activation of a particular category is repeatedly
coupled with the execution of a motor action, a temporary
association between the respective category and motor
action might be created. After that, the execution of the
motor action alone may be sufficient to activate the category
with which it was associated.

1893

Hypotheses
In the current experiment, participants’ task was to rate
lines’ lengths using a dichotomous scale (a line could be
rated as “short” or “long”). If the motor actions (hand
movements) required for giving one of the two responses
are different in nature this can lead to the creation of a new
associative connection between them (i.e., between one of
the two categories and the respective hand movement). If,
then, one of the motor actions is activated, it should also
activate the associated category.
When one of the two categories is more active than the
other, this can increase the probability of the line being
currently rated to receive that particular rating (e.g., a
middle-sized line may be rated as “long” if that category’s
base-level activation is higher that usual). This hypothesis
was tested using the procedure described below.

Method
Participants 64 New Bulgarian University (26 males, 38
females) undergraduate students volunteered for this study.
Stimuli The stimulus material consisted of 36 lines of
different lengths appearing in the middle of a computer
screen. The shortest line was 38 pixels and the longest line
was 668 pixels, with an increment of 18 pixels. Lines were
2 pixels thick.
Apparatus Lines were presented on a 17’’ TFT monitor
with a resolution of 1024 x 768 pixels. The responses were
obtained using a standard computer keyboard. The
experimental script was written with the E-Prime 1.1
software.
Design and procedure The experiment was conducted in
small rooms with each participant being tested individually.
Subjects sat in front of a computer and the instructions were
presented to them in written form across the screen, as well
as explained to them by the experimenter. In short, the
instructions said that subjects would take part in a study
concerned with people’s judgment of length and that their
task would be to rate different lines presented on the screen
as “short” or “long” using the two specified buttons on the
keyboard.
The experiment employed a between-subject design with
one control group and two experimental groups (see Table
1). In the control group the procedure was the following:
after they heard the instruction subjects went through a
training session to be familiarized with the experiment. The
training session was the same as the experimental session,
but only 10 (out of 36) lines were presented in random
order. In the experimental session all 36 lines were
presented 2 times each, resulting in a total of 72 trials.
Figure 1 shows what a single trial looked like.
The procedure in the experimental groups was identical to
that of the control group, except for the transition between
trials. In the experimental groups, subjects had to press an
additional button at the end of each trial (called the “trial
change button”) in order to see the next trial (Figure 2). The
trial change button was positioned either next to the “short”
button or next to the “long” button (see Table 1).

Figure 1: Every trial in the control group started with a
fixation cross for 500 ms, followed by a 100 ms interstimulus interval, followed by a 3000 ms exposure of the
line to be rated, and a 1000 ms inter-trial interval.
Subjects were asked to use only their right index finger to
give their responses. Between every two trials they had to
put their finger in a neutral position between the response
buttons (the black rectangle in Figure 2)2. The sequence of
actions in every trial (after the line’s appearance on the
screen) was: press one of the response buttons – press the
trial change button – return to neutral position.

Figure 2: The F4 and F9 buttons were used as response
buttons (for responding “short” or “long”), and the F1 and
F12 buttons were used as trial change buttons. Both
response buttons and trial change buttons were counterbalanced across conditions.
The dependent measure in this study was the response to
each line (“long” vs. “short”).
Table 1: The position of the trial change button with
respect to the response buttons in the three groups.
Ex. Group

Ex. Group

Control

1

2

Group

TCB next

“Long”

“Short”

to

button

button

No TCB

After the end of the experiment, subjects were debriefed,
thanked, and dismissed.
2

All other keyboard button functions were disabled, so pressing
other buttons accidentally did not affect the experimental
procedure. Thus, subjects were instructed to rest their wrists on the
keyboard without worrying about accidentally pressing buttons
other than those which were part of the procedure.

1894

According to the main assumption in this study, the
different types of movements should be associated with one
of the two categories. That is, the categories “long” and
“short” should be associated with a hand movement to the
left or a hand movement to the right (depending on the
experimental condition). Since in the two experimental
groups the position of the trial change button also requires a
hand movement either to the left or to the right immediately
before the presentation of the next line to be rated), that
movement should activate the respective category more than
its rival category and the probability that each line is rated
with that category should increase.

aggregating the data for individual lines (that is, one
individual measure stood for the percentage of a particular
line rated as “long” in one of the three conditions), F (1, 35)
= 68.11, p < 0.001. Three individual t-tests were performed
to compare the three groups. The analyses revealed
significant results between experimental group 2 and the
control group, t (35) = 4.38, p < 0.001, ES = 0.73, also
between experimental groups 1 and 2, t (35) = 4.98, p <
0.001, ES = 0.83, and marginally4 significant results
between experimental group 1 and the control group, t (35)
= -2.3, p = 0.027, ES = 0.4.
Table 2: The standard residuals for the chi-square
analysis.

Results and Discussion
The expected results following this manipulation were that
there is going to be an assimilation of the responses toward
the position of the trial change button. That is, if the trial
change button is next to the “long” response button, the
probability that an arbitrary line is rated as “long” should be
higher than in the control group, and if the trial change
button is next to the “short” response button, the probability
should be lower. The actual results confirmed these
expectations (Figure 3).

“Short”

“Long”

Control
Group

-,9

,8

Ex. Group 1

-2,2

1,9

Ex. Group 2

3,1

-2,7

These results show that the presence of a trial change
button always affects subjects’ ratings. However, it is also
evident that there is an asymmetry in the difference between
the two experimental groups and the control group. That is,
when the trial change button is next to the “short” response
button the effect is stronger than when it is next to the
“long” response button. This and other questions are
discussed in the next section.
Figure 3: The probability for every line to be rated as
“long” in the three conditions. As was expected, in
experimental group 1 more lines were rated as “long” and in
experimental group 2 more lines were rated as “short”, in
comparison with the control group.

General Discussion

All individual responses (the number of individual
responses was number of subjects * number of trials per
subject) were divided in three groups (the two experimental
groups and the control group). “Long” responses were
coded as “1”, and “short” responses were coded as “0”. A
chi-square analysis was performed in order to test if the
results in the three groups differed significantly, χ2 (2) =
26.54, p < 0.01. The standard residuals3 are given in Table
2. As can be seen, the two experimental groups were the
main contributors for the significance of the results.
Since this analysis had too many individual measures, for
a higher certainty in the significance of the results a
repeated-measures ANOVA was also performed after

The results of this study showed that “non-cognitive”
factors can also affect “cognitive” processes like judgment
and categorization under certain circumstances. We think
these results contribute to both the field of embodiment and
grounded cognition, as well as to the field of context effects
in scale ratings. The two main findings are: (1) task-specific
motor actions can potentially affect subjects’ ratings in a
scale rating task, and (2) temporary associations between
referent and/or linguistic representations can be established
even for a short period of time.
Of course, there still remain a lot of open questions. In
relation to the first finding, one thing that needs to be
explored empirically is whether the same results can be
obtained with a larger scale (e.g., a 7-point Likert scale).
One might argue that the task in the current study was not
scaling at all, but rather simple categorization.
4

3

Standard residuals are used to determine which cells contribute
most for the rejection of the null hypothesis in a chi-square
analysis. Absolute values equal to or greater than 2 are considered
statistically significant.

Due to the increasing probability of making a type I error when
performing more than 1 t-test on overlapping statistical data, the
acceptable level of significance was not 0.05, but was set to α = 1 –
3
√(1 – 0.05) = 0.017. For that reason p = 0.027 is considered a
marginally significant result.

1895

Another open question regarding the first finding is
concerned with the observed asymmetry between the two
experimental groups. All performed statistical analyses
showed that the assimilation is stronger when the trial
change button was next to the “short” response button than
when it was next to the “long” response button. A possible
explanation for this result can be found in the linguistic
notion of markedness (Andrews, 1990). This term was
coined by the Russian linguist Nikolai Trubetzkoy. Even
though he used it to explain some phonological phenomena,
other authors later extended the notion to other linguistic
fields, including semantics. An unmarked form of a concept
is a basic and natural form, whereas a marked form is one
that is derived from the unmarked form. For example,
lioness is the marked form of lion, since lion can refer to
both male and female lions, whereas lioness only refers to
female lions. Since, as was mentioned earlier, the task that
subjects received in this experiment can be considered
categorization, some markedness effects can also be
observed. When talking about the size of a line, it is more
natural to think about its “length”, rather than its
“shortness”. This suggests that “long” is the unmarked
category, and “short” is the marked category5. That might be
the reason why the experimental manipulation was weaker
for the experimental group in which the trial change button
was next to the “long” response button. Subjects are simply
more confident in responding “long” than in responding
“short”. However, this clearly is a post-hoc explanation and
needs further confirmation.
It has also been brought to our attention that the results
could be explained by assuming that subjects press the
button closer to the TCB in order to save time and effort and
not because of the activated referent or linguistic
representations. This is a valid point and needs to be
addressed in future studies.
Regarding the second finding in this study, the open
questions are concerned with the exact mechanisms
underlying these associations. Zwaan & Madden (2005)
propose a sound theory, but it is not specified in enough
detail.
Returning to the current study, one interesting question is
related to the exact representations that are associated.
Throughout this paper, it was assumed that the semantic
category (“long” or “short”) is associated with the particular
type of movement (hand movement to the left or to the
right). A second possibility is that it is the visual image of a
button that is associated with the respective category. In that
case, every time subjects have to press the trial change
button, their attention is directed toward the respective
response button too, and that activates its category. The

5
Results from the control group support this hypothesis. About
60% of the lines were rated as long, and only 40% as short, χ2(1) =
45.93, p < 0.001 (this difference would not be expected if subjects
have no bias toward either category). It seems that subjects find it
more natural to call a middle length line “long”, rather than
“short”.

results of the current experiment are unable to disambiguate
between these possibilities.

Future Studies
It is clear that there are a lot of open questions that need
to be investigated empirically. In this section, we will
propose two experiments that might clarify some of them.
The first one is a natural extension to the current study.
Namely, can the same results be obtained if there are more
than two responses, that is, if a larger scale is used? The
procedure in that study is going to be the same, but there are
going to be more than two response buttons (e.g., 7 buttons
for a 7-point scale) and again the trial change button is
going to be placed at one side of the scale. If our hypothesis
is correct, the same assimilation effect should be observed.
The second proposed experiment is aimed at answering
the question of whether or not the obtained results are
simply due to the fact that subjects’ attention is being
directed towards a particular response button every time
they press the trial change button (see the discussion in the
previous section) or if the results are due to a time/effort
saving incentive. The proposed procedure is the following.
There are going to be three experimental sessions. In the
first session, subjects will have the same rating task as in the
current study (i.e., rating lines’ lengths). However, instead
of “long” and “short”, the available response categories are
going to be “big” and “small”. If the assumptions made in
this paper are correct, during this session these categories
should be temporarily associated with the hand movements
required for giving these responses.
In the second session, subjects will have a task whose
goal will be to make them press one of the two response
buttons more frequently than the other (e.g., a circle will
appear on the left or on the right side of the screen and the
subjects’ task will be to press the respective button on the
keyboard; the circle will appear more frequently in the right
or in the left, depending on subjects’ experimental
condition). Again, if the assumptions made in this paper are
correct, this should make the movement that has been
executed more frequently more active than the other
movement, and that would make the associated category
more active as well.
In the third experimental sessions, subjects will have a
task identical to that of the first session, but the stimuli will
be different (e.g., rating squares, instead of lines), but again
using the same categories for responses (“big” and “small”).
If one of the two categories is more active than the other
(because of the manipulation in the second experimental
session) this should lead to a higher probability of
responding with that category. Since in no part of this
procedure is there any trial change button, the “attention”
and time/effort saving explanations of the results can safely
be ruled out.
Both proposed experiments are going to be performed in
the near future.

1896

Conclusions
This study showed effects of motor actions on the process of
rating lines as “long” or “short”. The results are considered
to contribute to both the field of grounded cognition and the
field of context effects in scale ratings (or even to fields like
psychophysics, if the effects of the methodology of
measuring subjects’ perceptions for different stimuli are to
be taken seriously).
There are still many open questions which must be further
explored. Despite all uncertainties however, these results
show that it is quite likely that sensory and motor processes
can be significant factors in the process of scaling (a finding
that is not predicted by the main theories explaining
contextual effects in scaling).

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Armina Janyan, Boicho Kokinov,
Encho Gerganov, Georgi Petkov, Ivan Vankov, and Stefan
Mateev for the fruitful discussions. I would also like to
thank my thesis advisor Penka Hristova for her advice,
support, and encouragement without which my first
publication would not have been the same. And last but not
least, I want to thank Meryl Varadinov for helping me in
fixing many small but significant details in this paper.

References
Andrews, E., (1990). Markedness theory: the union of
asymmetry and semiosis in language. Duke University
Press.
Barsalou, L.W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual Review
of Psychology, 59, 617-645.
Briñol, P., & Petty, R. E. (2008). Embodied persuasion. In
G. R. Semin & E. R. Smith (Eds.), Embodied grounding:
Social, cognitive, affective, and neuroscientific
approaches. Cambridge University Press.
Cacioppo, J. T., Priester, J. R., & Berntson, G. G. (1993).
Rudimentary determinants of attitudes: II. Arm flexion
and extension have differential effects on attitudes.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 5-17.
Cooke, A. D. J., Mellers, B. A. (1998). Multiattribute
judgment: attribute spacing influences single attributes.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 24 (April), 496-504.
Hebb, D. O. (1949). The Organization of Behavior: A
Neuropsychological Theory. New York:Wiley.
Helson, H. (1964). Adaptation level theory: an experimental
and systematic approach to behavior. New York: Harper
& Row.
Kokinov, B., Hristova, P., Petkov, G. (2004). Does
Irrelevant Information Play a Role in Judgment? In
Proceedings of the 26th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ., pp.
720-725.
Mellers, B. A. (1982). Equity judgment: a revision of
Aristotelian views. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, Vol. 111, No. 2, 242-270.

Parducci, A. (1965). Category judgment: a range-frequency
model. Psychological Review, Vol. 72, No. 6, 407-418.
Parducci, A. (1968). The relativism of absolute judgments.
Scientific American, Vol. 219 (6), 84-90.
Parducci, A. (1974). Contextual effects: a range-frequency
analysis. Handbook of Perception, Vol. 2, NY: Academic
Press, 127-141.
Parducci, A., Marshall, L. (1962). Assimilation vs. contrast
in the anchoring of perceptual judgments of weight.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, Vol. 63, No. 5, 426437.
Parducci, A., Perrett, L. F. (1971). Category Rating Scales:
Effects of relative spacing and frequency of stimulus
values. Journal of Experimental Psychology, Vol. 89,
427-453.
Petrov, A., Anderson, J. (2005). The dynamics of scaling: a
memory-based model of category rating and absolute
identification. Psychological Review, 112 (2), 383-416.
Sarris, V., Parducci, A. (1978). Multiple Anchoring of
Category Rating Scales. Perception and Psychophysics,
Vol. 24 (1), 35-39.
Sherif, M., Taub, D., and Hovland, C. (1958). Assimilation
and contrast effects of anchoring stimuli on judgments.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, Vol. 55, No. 2, 150155.
Strack, F., Martin, L., & Stepper, S. (1988). Inhibiting and
facilitating conditions of the human smile: A
nonobtrusive test of the facial feedback hypothesis.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 768–
777.
Wedell, D. H., Parducci, A., and Geiselman, R. E. (1987). A
formal analysis of ratings of physical attractiveness:
successive contrast and simultaneous assimilation.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 23 (May),
230-249.
Wells, G. L., & Petty, R. E. (1980). The effects of overt
head movement son persuasion: Compatibility and
incompatibility of responses. Basic and Applied Social
Psychology, 1, 219–230.
Zwaan, R.A. & Madden, C.J. (2005). Embodied sentence
comprehension. In Pecher, D. & Zwaan, R.A. (Eds.)
Grounding cognition: The role of perception and action in
memory, language, and thinking. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK, pp 224-245.

1897

