UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Multiple-choice testing can improve the retention of nontested related information

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6w80f5c3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Little, Jeri
Bjork, Elizabeth Ligon

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Multiple-choice testing can improve the retention of nontested related information
Jeri L. Little (jerilittle@ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1285 Franz Hall, Box 951563
Los Angeles, CA 90024 USA

Elizabeth Ligon Bjork (elbjork@psych.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1285 Franz Hall, Box 951563
Los Angeles, CA 90024 USA

Abstract

Perhaps the increased difficulty of answering a recall
question correctly (versus a similar MC question) accounts
for this difference; that is, retrieval, but not necessarily the
recognition and selection of a correct answer, modifies
memory (e.g., Bjork, 1975; McDaniel & Masson, 1985).
We argue, however, that answering an MC question need
not be just a matter of recognizing the correct alternative. In
a well-constructed MC test, the test-taker likely recognizes
most or all of the alternatives from previous study, but must
decide whether or not that alternative is an appropriate
answer to the question at hand (Sax & Collet, 1968; Whitten
& Leonard, 1980). Often processes of discrimination and
memory search are utilized as one thinks not only of which
alternative is correct and why, but also of which alternatives
are incorrect and why. Certain MC tests could, therefore,
invoke a type of processing comparable to that invoked by
recall tests (Whitten & Leonard, 1980).

Taking an initial test leads to improved performance on later
tests for those previously tested questions. Whether prior
testing improves one’s ability to answer related questions,
however, is less clear, with some results showing impairment
for related information, an effect called retrieval-induced
forgetting (RIF; e.g., Anderson, Bjork, & Bjork, 1994). Two
experiments investigated the use of initial multiple-choice
tests on the retention of previously studied prose passages,
specifically on the retention of related, but initially nontested
information. In both experiments, an incorrect alternative on
the initial test served as the correct answer to a related
question on the final test. Results demonstrated that the
retention of related information can, indeed, be facilitated by
initial multiple-choice tests (Experiment 1) and that this
benefit is dependant upon using competitive incorrect
alternatives (Experiment 2). We discuss how and why our
results differ from previous work (e.g., RIF) and address
possible educational applications.
Keywords: memory; testing effects; prose passages; RIF

Related Information

Introduction
Testing is ubiquitous in education. In most cases, teachers
use tests to assess how much a student has learned.
Similarly, when students self-test (e.g., with flashcards or
practice tests), they typically do so in order to assess their
current mastery of the to-be-learned materials. Testing,
however, can have other benefits that extend beyond
evaluation because retrieval modifies memory so as to
improve future recall (see Bjork, 1975).

Multiple-Choice Tests in Educational Contexts
Nowhere is the implementation of testing more widespread
than in educational contexts, and in such contexts, the use of
multiple-choice (MC) tests is very popular. Some concerns
exist regarding their use, however. One concern is that MC
tests might provide less opportunity for learning than do
cued-recall (e.g., short answer) or free-recall (e.g., essay)
tests. Indeed, some studies have shown that although initial
MC, cued-recall, and free-recall tests all lead to better
retention of the tested information, as compared to nontested
information, retention of tested information is better after
cued-recall or free-recall tests (e.g., Gay, 1980; Kang,
McDermott, & Roediger, 2007; McDaniel, Anderson,
Morrisette, & Derbish, 2007).

Although previous testing is clearly beneficial for retention
of identical information, it is less clear whether testing
might also benefit the retention of related, but initially
nontested information. For example, if one reads a chapter
about several U.S. presidents and then answers questions
about some of those presidents, will information about the
other presidents be strengthened as well? This issue seems
particularly germane to the educational context where
instructors would rarely ask the same questions on both a
quiz and a later exam. In addition, instructors often give
practice tests to students, with the intention of providing
them with an idea of what the later exam will be like, while
not providing them with the actual questions.
On the basis of previous research examining the effects of
initial testing on the later recall of related information, one
might expect the retention of such information to be
impaired. To illustrate, using a retrieval-practice paradigm,
Anderson, Bjork, and Bjork (1994) found that—after an
initial study phase—testing or giving retrieval practice to
some items from a given category improved their later
recall, but impaired the recall of other items in that category
that were not themselves tested, as compared to the recall of
items from another category, none of which were tested—a
phenomenon now known as retrieval-induced forgetting.
Thus, it seems possible that by giving initial tests or practice

1535

questions, instructors could be inadvertently impairing their
students’ performance for related nontested questions that
may appear on later exams.
Such retrieval-induced forgetting has been demonstrated
for educational materials, including facts (Chan, 2009;
Macrae & MacLeod, 1999); prose materials (Carroll,
Cambell-Ratcliffe, Murnane, & Perfect, 2007); and even
one’s native language when words from a second language
were practiced (Levy, McVeigh, Marful, & Anderson,
2007). Retrieval-induced forgetting has been argued to
occur as the consequence of inhibitory processes needed to
resolve competition among alternative responses to the same
or similar cues (Anderson et al., 1994). Interestingly, it is
argued that the processes that lead to forgetting are largely
unconscious, as competitive alternatives need not be
explicitly brought to mind for them to be suppressed. To
the extent that related concepts are brought to mind,
however, and can then be used to access the correct answer
to a given question, related information might be facilitated.
Indeed, in recent work, Chan, McDermott, and Roediger
(2006) developed question pairs such that answering one
question on an initial test would encourage the spontaneous
recall of information related to the second question that was
then to be asked on the later test. Using these question
pairs, Chan et al. found facilitation for related, but initially
nontested information, although this result likely depended
upon specific aspects of the procedure and materials in
addition to the facilitative nature of the pairs (i.e., a 24-hr
delay between the initial and final tests and integrated
encoding of the to-be-learned information). In subsequent
research, Chan (2009) demonstrated that although
facilitation for these initially nontested, related items
occurred at a 24-hr delay when the information had been
learned in a prose context, forgetting occurred at a shorter
delay when the information had been learned as an
unordered series of facts. Importantly, in all of these studies
that used short delays to final test, no facilitation was found
for related information, even though the time spent on the
initial test led to a greater amount of time-on-task—that is,
time that the participant spent thinking about information
from the tested passage.
In the present research, we tested whether MC tests might
afford a benefit for related information that is not as easily
afforded by cued-recall tests. Multiple-choice tests differ
from free- and cued-recall tests in that they provide students
with a set of related (and often competitive) concepts
through which they can consciously search in selecting the
correct answer, whereas cued-recall tests do not. For
example, if given a cued-recall question about who served
as the fourth president of the United States, although one
may eventually recall the answer (i.e., Madison), in the
process of doing so, other alternatives (e.g., Adams,
Jefferson) may also become activated by the cue and
compete for access and thus need to be suppressed in order
to access Madison, according to inhibitory accounts of
retrieval-induced forgetting. In contrast, if given an MC
question with competitive alternatives provided (e.g.,

Adams, Jefferson), test-takers may be encouraged to
consciously think about such competitors in selecting which
president was the fourth (e.g., Adams and Jefferson held
office prior to Madison, Jefferson was the third president,
etc.), thereby strengthening information they spontaneously
recall about these other presidents. Accordingly, MC tests
(with competitive alternatives) might both reduce the
possibility of retrieval-induced forgetting effects as well as
encourage a type of spontaneous recall that later supports
the enhanced recall of related, nontested information.
In Experiment 1, we explored this possibility by
examining the effects of initial testing of some of the
information presented in a prose passage on the later recall
of related information using a variation of the retrievalpractice paradigm; specifically, we employed initial MC
tests rather than cued-recall tests and then compared the
recall of the previously tested items and related nontested
items to that of control items from a passage not previously
tested. We had two major questions in mind: (a) to what
extent would the initial MC tests enhance the recall of
previously tested information and (b) would the use of MC
questions during initial testing enhance the recall of related
information; that is, would the use of MC questions in the
initial test allow related items to be facilitated instead of
impaired—that is, escape retrieval-induced forgetting? In
addition, we utilized a feedback manipulation to see whether
being shown the correct answer after attempting to answer a
question would affect later recall of both previously tested
and related information. Although shown to improve recall
of previously tested information, it is uncertain how
feedback might affect recall of related information.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants A total of 112 students at the University of
California, Los Angeles, participated for credit in an
introductory psychology course.
Design We used a 2 (item type: previously tested,
previously nontested related) x 2 (feedback: present, absent)
within-subjects design plus an independent control group.
Materials Two passages were constructed, one about Saturn
and one about Yellowstone National Park, and ten pairs of
MC questions were created for each passage. The two
questions in each pair were semantically related in that both
questions tested the same topic (e.g., geysers) and had the
same four alternatives (e.g., Old Faithful, Steamboat
Geyser, Castle Geyser, and Daisy Geyser), but different
correct answers (e.g., What is the tallest geyser in
Yellowstone National Park? Answer: Steamboat Geyser;
and, What is the oldest geyser in Yellowstone National
Park? Answer: Castle Geyser). Questions were divided
into two 10-item sets for a given passage, with the two
questions from each pair randomly assigned to a different
set.

1536

Procedure All participants were given 10 min to read the
first passage and were instructed to continue studying it if
they finished early. Participants in the testing condition
were then given an initial 10-item MC test (i.e., all items in
one of the question sets for that passage) with questions
presented one at a time on the computer. For a given test,
all questions were either followed by feedback (feedback
present) or not (feedback absent) after the participant
provided an answer. Feedback entailed the entire question
being re-presented, with the answer printed in red.
Following study and test of the first passage, participants
followed the same procedure for the second passage except
that if feedback had been provided in the first MC test, then
it was absent in the second test and vice versa.
Participants in the control condition received no tests;
rather, they engaged in a non-verbal filler task (i.e., playing
Tetris) following their study of each passage (for the same
amount of time as would have been needed to take the test).
Finally, both tested and control participants received a
final cued-recall test after a 5-min retention interval during
which they played Tetris. Forty questions were presented
one at a time on the computer screen; as cued-recall
questions, they did not appear with any answer alternatives.
For the tested condition, except for the absence of
alternatives, half of the questions were identical to the MC
questions (i.e., previously tested) and half were the
nontested related items (i.e., the remaining questions from
the two 10-item sets that had not appeared in the initial MC
tests). Related questions were always tested before
previously tested questions. For the control condition, all
questions were previously nontested and served as a
baseline. Topic (Passage) order, question set, and feedback
(after Passage 1 or Passage 2) were counterbalanced.

Results and Discussion
Initial MC Test Performance Participants in the tested
condition correctly answered an average of 70% (SD =
17%) of the questions on the initial MC tests.
Final Test Performance Final test performance is
presented in Figure 1. As shown, we found evidence that
taking an initial MC test improved the recall of both
previously tested and previously nontested related
information as compared to the control condition. 1
1

Overall, participants in the nontested control group correctly
answered 31% (SD = 13%) of the questions on the final test,
recalling marginally more answers in the first half of the test (M =
33%, SE = 2%) than in the second half (M = 29%, SE = 2%), F(55)
= 3.5, p = .07, a finding consistent with previous accounts of
output interference. Because of this marginal difference in
performance for the first half and second half of the test, we
compared recall for previously tested questions in the tested
condition (which were always presented in the second half of the
final test) with recall for questions in the control condition that

Recall performance of participants in the tested condition
was compared to the corresponding performance of
participants in the nontested control condition via planned
independent-samples t tests and, importantly, benefits were
found for both types of questions. Specifically, these
comparisons revealed that (a) previously tested questions
given feedback (M = 65%, SE = 3%) and previously tested
questions not given feedback (M = 51%, SE = 3%) were
both answered correctly more often than the control
questions (M = 29%, SE = 2%), t(110) = 10.88, p < .001,
and t(110) = 6.45, p < .001, respectively; and (b) questions
related to previously tested questions that had received
feedback (M = 40%, SE = 3%) and questions related to
previously tested questions that had not received feedback
(M = 43%, SE = 3%) were both answered correctly more
often than the control questions (M = 33%, SE = 2%), t(110)
= 2.10, p < .05 and t(110) = 3.10, p < .01, respectively.

Figure 1: Correct recall percentages as a function of item
and feedback type in Experiment 1. White bars show
baseline recall for initially non-tested questions by control
participants. Error bars represent +/- 1 SE.
To summarize, in Experiment 1, we found a generalized
benefit of testing such that the answers to questions on a
final cued-recall test were recalled more often when
preceded by initial MC tests than when not. Most
importantly, this benefit occurred even when the questions
on the final cued-recall test were not identical, but only
related to those on the initial MC tests, and even though
answering such questions correctly on the final test involved
recall of an answer that participants had needed to select
against during the initial MC test.
Thus, providing
participants with practice on initial MC questions allowed
related information not only to escape impairment but,
indeed, to be enhanced.
Although retrieval-induced
forgetting is largely believed to occur as the result of the
unconscious suppression of competitive alternatives, MC
tests provide learners with the competitors and thus they can
be consciously examined. For example, if students are
given a set of alternatives that had all occurred in the
required reading, as is the case for a MC question in our
were presented in the second half of the final test. Similarly, recall
for nontested questions in the tested condition was compared with
recall for the questions in the control condition that were presented
in the first half of the test. This method of analysis provides a
more conservative test of facilitation for related information.

1537

experiment (e.g., 88 Earth days, 176 Earth days, 10 Earth
hours, and 30 Earth years for the question: How long does it
take Saturn to revolve around the Sun?), they could use
these alternatives as a guide for searching their relevant
knowledge set for the answer (e.g., 88 days and 176 days
are wrong as they are related to Mercury; Saturn has a
shorter day than Earth). Hence, even if students were
unable to recall the answer to this particular question if
asked in the format of a cued-recall question, if asked in the
format of a MC question with possible alternatives
provided, knowledge of related information presented in the
passage might be utilized to reject incorrect alternatives;
and, in this process, the student may spontaneously answer
other related, but nontested questions. Indeed, we believe
that such spontaneous retrievals may be the process by
which the observed benefit for related but previously
nontested items occurred in Experiment 1. For such a
beneficial search process to be invoked, however, it would
seem necessary that the incorrect choices be potential
answers (i.e., competitive alternatives to the correct answer),
thus requiring the student to select against them with the use
of associated information from the passage. In contrast,
without competitive alternatives, perhaps a benefit to related
nontested information would not occur because the
alternatives would not encourage this type of search
strategy.
We sought to explore this possibility in
Experiment 2 by manipulating the competitiveness of the
incorrect alternatives in the initial MC tests that followed
the reading of prose passages.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we tested whether the benefit of testing
observed for related but previously nontested items in
Experiment 1 arose from a type of search strategy
engendered by the use of competitive alternatives in the
initial MC tests, as described above. To do so, we
manipulated the plausibility of the incorrect alternatives,
hypothesizing that the more plausible the incorrect
alternatives were as answers, the more competitive they
would be and the more processing they would require in the
attempt to reject them—processing that would likely involve
retrieval of associated information from the passage and
thus deeper processing of both the correct and the incorrect
alternatives. Accordingly, we predicted that initial MC
questions using more plausible incorrect alternatives would
lead to a greater recall benefit for both previously tested
information and previously nontested related information
than would initial MC questions using less plausible
incorrect alternatives.

Method
Participants A total of 28 students at the University of
California, Los Angeles, participated for credit in an
introductory psychology course.

Design We used a 2 (item type: previously tested,
previously nontested related) X 2 (MC question type:
competitive, non-competitive) within-subject design for the
testing condition plus a control condition, with all
participants serving in both conditions.
Materials Two passages were constructed, one about the
Solar System and one about Ferrets, and eight question pairs
were created for each passage. Related questions tested
information from the same passage and the same type of
information served as the correct answer for both questions
(e.g., numbers, terms, proper names). To illustrate, the
answers to two such questions (How many inches long is an
average ferret tail? and How many years ago were ferrets
first domesticated, according to mitochondrial DNA
evidence?) were both numbers (i.e., 5 and 2500,
respectively).
To utilize a MC format for each of these questions, four
incorrect alternatives were chosen from other information
presented in the passage. Two incorrect alternatives were
highly related to one question in the pair (and thus, plausible
answers for it) and the other two alternatives were highly
related to the other question (and thus, plausible answers for
it). Thus, for a given pair, there were six alternatives
(including the two correct answers). Because all of the
alternatives for a given pair had the same type of answers
(e.g., numbers), each of the six alternatives could be used in
constructing two three-alternative MC questions for each
question in these pairs. By manipulating which alternatives
were used, we created a competitive and non-competitive
version of each question. For example, in competitive
versions, the incorrect alternatives were 7-10 and 20 for the
first question and 1500 and 3500 for the second question.
For the non-competitive versions, the incorrect alternatives
were 1500 and 3500 for the first question and 7-10 and 20
for the second question.
Next, two new questions were constructed for each
question-pair to serve as the nontested related questions on
the final cued-recall test. As in Experiment 1, for these new
questions, correct answers were previously incorrect
alternatives on the MC questions. For example, although 710 was used as an incorrect alternative on the initial test, it
was the correct answer to the question, “How long do
ferrets typically live?” Similarly, 3500 was the correct
answer to the question, “According to archaeological
evidence, how long ago were ferrets domesticated?”
In summary, the six possible alternatives for each of the
eight question-pairs were manipulated so as to make both of
the three-alternative questions in each pair competitive or
non-competitive for a given participant. On the initial MC
test, all participants answered eight competitive questions
and eight non-competitive questions. The final test included
previously nontested questions for which previously
incorrect alternatives (either competitive or noncompetitive) were now the correct answers.

1538

Procedure All participants were given 10 min to read the
first of two passages and were instructed to continue
studying the passage if they finished reading early. Next
participants either took a test or engaged in a non-verbal
filler task. When the passage was tested, participants were
given an initial MC test with 16 questions (i.e., eight
question pairs) for which they gave verbal responses.
Questions appeared one at a time on a computer, and no
feedback was given. When the passage served as the
nontested control passage, participants played Tetris
following its presentation for 3 min (the same time needed
to take the test). If given a MC test after the first passage,
then that participant engaged in the non-verbal filler task
after the second passage and vice versa.
Finally, after a 4-min retention interval during which all
participants played Tetris, a final 64-question cued-recall
test was given. The 32 questions for the tested topic
(previously tested and previously nontested related) and the
32 questions from the nontested control topic were
presented on a computer screen, one-at-a-time, and
participants gave a verbal response to each. Questions from
the previously tested topic were always tested last. Topic
(Passage) order, plausibility of alternatives, and testing
(after Passage 1 or after Passage 2) were counterbalanced.

Results and Discussion
Initial MC Test Performance On the initial MC test,
participants correctly answered more non-competitive
questions (M = 86%, SE = 3%) than competitive questions
(M = 66%, SE = 3%), t(27) = 5.67, p < .001, confirming that
competitive alternatives make questions more difficult to
answer correctly than do non-competitive alternatives.
Final Test Performance Final test performance is
presented in Figure 2. For previously tested questions,
correct answers to competitive questions (M = 37%, SE =
3%) were recalled marginally less often than were correct
answers to non-competitive questions (M = 45%, SE = 4%),
t(27) = 1.76, p < .10, a pattern consistent with the initial MC
performance. For previously nontested questions from the
same topic, however, the effect was in the opposite
direction: correct answers that had previously been incorrect
competitive alternatives (M = 47%, SE = 5%) were recalled
more often than were correct answers that had previously
been incorrect non-competitive alternatives (M = 36%, SE =
4%), t(27) = 2.55, p < .05, confirming our prediction that
initial MC questions with competitive alternatives would
lead to enhanced recall of related information as compared
to initial MC questions with non-competitive alternatives.
When compared to control items (M = 27%, SE = 3%),
answers to both previously tested competitive questions (M
= 37%, SE = 3%) and previously tested non-competitive
questions (M = 45%, SE = 4%) were facilitated, t(27) =
3.10, p < .01 and t(27) = 4.54, p < .001, respectively,
demonstrating a testing effect. For previously nontested

questions from the tested topic, those with answers that had
previously been incorrect competitive alternatives (M =
47%, SE = 5%) were correctly answered more often than
questions from the control passage (M = 36%, SE = 4%),
t(27) = 2.21, p < .05, whereas those with answers that had
been incorrect non-competitive alternatives (M = 36%, SE =
4%) were not, t(27) = 0.1, p > .05

Figure 2: Correct recall percentages as a function of item
type and competitiveness of MC alternatives on the initial
MC test in Experiment 2. Error bars represent +/- 1 SE.
In Experiment 2, we manipulated the competitiveness of a
given question by choosing incorrect alternatives that were
either plausible or implausible answer choices to examine
whether competitiveness of the alternatives was a critical
factor in the facilitation of related information, and our
results suggest this to be the case. Of concern, however, is
whether the benefit we observed resulted from the increased
processing of the incorrect alternatives as hypothesized, or
simply occurred as an artifact of initial test performance.
Because competitive questions were more difficult to
answer than non-competitive ones, perhaps the benefit
observed was merely a consequence of the participant being
more likely—on the initial MC test—to select an incorrect
competitive alternative than to select an incorrect noncompetitive alternative, and then to recall that previously
incorrect answer on the final test when given the related
question (for which the answer might now be correct). For
example, on the initial MC test, a participant might
incorrectly choose 7-10 (instead of 5) when given the
question, “How many inches long is an average ferret tail?”
If the participant then gives 7-10 as the correct answer for
the question, “How long do ferrets typically live?” on the
later test, one cannot be sure whether that participant is
giving that answer believing it to be correct or giving that
answer because it was chosen before and is now primed as
an answer for all questions where it is plausible.
If such generalized strengthening of alternatives is the
mechanism that leads to this effect, then participants should
not demonstrate the pattern of results previously shown for
related questions when recall is conditionalized upon
answering the corresponding MC question correctly. A
conditional analysis demonstrated, however, that marginally
more answers to related questions were recalled correctly
when those answers were previously incorrect competitive
alternatives (M = 50%, SE = 4%) than when they were
previously incorrect non-competitive alternatives (M = 41%,
SE = 4%), t(27) = 1.91, p = .07. Thus, the possibility that

1539

this effect is driven by cases in which a participant chooses
the incorrect answer and then carries it to a new question
(where it then happens to be correct) seems unwarranted.

about all of the alternatives—not only why a given answer
is correct, but also why other answer choices are wrong.

Acknowledgments

General Discussion
The present results imply that taking an initial MC test not
only improves one’s ability to recall that information on a
later cued-recall test, but also improve one’s ability to recall
nontested, but related information on a later test—provided
that the initial test utilizes incorrect alternatives that are
competitive. Furthermore, although an MC question is
often easier to answer than a comparable question in a cuedrecall format (i.e., same question, without the choices), to
the extent that the question has competitive alternatives, that
question may invoke processes that are similar to those
involved in recall (e.g., memory search, retrieval checks),
thus leading to comparable benefits to the tested
information. Moreover, use of MC questions may provide a
way to insure that access to related nontested information is
not impaired on a later test.
Educators may be concerned that the initial test provides
participants with additional time to think about the tested
topic, whereas no such additional time is allocated to the
nontested control topic. Although a valid concern, our
findings need to be viewed in the context of previous work
using the retrieval-practice paradigm in which additional
time is not allotted for nontested control materials and in
which nontested information from a tested topic is rarely
facilitated and, in fact, is typically impaired (e.g., Macrae &
MacLeod, 1999; Carroll et al., 2007). Indeed, with a similar
procedure and educational prose materials, but with an
initial cued-recall test, Chan (2009) did not find facilitation
for related information, even when the questions on the
initial test were created to be facilitative for questions on the
final test. One might thus argue that our finding of
facilitation occurred because our MC questions—unlike
cued-recall questions—exposed participants to the future
answers for related questions (in the form of incorrect
alternatives), thus providing shallow priming that leads to
facilitation on the later test. Against such an argument,
however, are the findings of Experiment 2 where
alternatives were exposed in both competitive and noncompetitive conditions and yet facilitation only occurred
when alternatives were competitive, thus ruling out an
explanation in terms of priming. Instead, our findings are
consistent with the explanation that competitive MC
questions lead to enhanced performance for nontested
related information, owing to the deeper processing of the
incorrect alternatives that they engender, as compared to
processing engendered by noncompetitive MC questions.
We believe that the present results have implications for
both instructors and students. Instructors can create quizzes
and study guides that improve retention for both initially
tested information as well as related information that is not
itself tested. Students can benefit from tests by thinking

We thank Ashley Kees for her valuable contributions in
both the conception and implementation of this work and
Robert Bjork for his valuable insights. Grant 29192G from
the McDonnell Foundation supported this research.

References
Anderson, M. C., Bjork, R. A., & Bjork, E. L. (1994).
Remembering can cause forgetting: Retrieval dynamics in
long-term memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20, 1063-1087.
Bjork, R. A. (1975). Retrieval as a memory modifier. In R.
Solso (Ed.), Information processing and cognition: The
Loyola Symposium Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Carroll, M., Campbell-Ratcliffe, J., Murnane, H., & Perfect,
T. (2007). Retrieval-induced forgetting in educational
contexts: Monitoring, expertise, text integration, and test
format. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 19,
580-606.
Chan, J. C., McDermott, K. B., & Roediger, H. L. (2006).
Retrieval-induced facilitation: Initially nontested material
can benefit from prior testing of related material. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 135, 553-571.
Gay, L. R. (1980). The comparable effects of MC versus
short-answer tests on retention. Journal of Educational
Measurement, 17, 45-50.
Kang, S. H. K., McDermott, K. B., Roediger, H. L. (2007).
Test format and corrective feedback modify the effect of
testing on long-term retention. European Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 19, 528-558.
Levy, B. J., McVeigh, N. D., Marful, A., & Anderson, M.
C. (2007). Inhibiting your native language: The role of
retrieval-induced forgetting during second language
acquisition. Psychological Science, 18, 19-34.
Macrae, C. N., & MacLeod, M. D. (1999). On recollections
lost: When practice makes imperfect. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 463-473.
McDaniel, M. A., Anderson, J. L., Derbish, M. H., &
Morrisette, N. (2007). Testing the testing effect in the
classroom. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology,
19, 494-513.
McDaniel, M. A., & Masson, M. E. J. (1985). Altering
memory representations through retrieval. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 11, 371-385.
Sax, G., & Collet, L. S. (1968). An empirical comparison of
the effects of recall and MC tests on student achievement.
Journal of Educational Measurement, 5, 169-173.
Whitten, W. B., & Leonard, J. M. (1980). Learning from
tests: Facilitation of delayed recall by initial recognition
alternatives. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Learning and Memory, 6, 127-134.

1540

