UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Negative Transfer in Matchstick Arithmetic Insight Problems

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1tr868dz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Kershaw, Trina
Braasch, Jason
Flynn, Christopher

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Negative Transfer in Matchstick Arithmetic Insight Problems
Trina C. Kershaw (tkershaw@umassd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth
285 Old Westport Road, North Dartmouth, MA 02747 USA

Jason L. G. Braasch (jason.braasch@univ-poitiers.fr)
Centre de Recherches sur la Cognition et l’Apprentissage, Université de Poitiers
5, rue Théodore Lefebvre, 86000 Poitiers, France

Christopher K. Flynn (christopherkflynn@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth
285 Old Westport Road, North Dartmouth, MA 02747 USA

Abstract
The current experiment examined whether successful solution
on one type of problem, indicating the relaxation of a
constraint, had a negative impact on subsequent problems that
did not involve the same constraints. One hundred and fortyfive participants solved a series of matchstick arithmetic
problems. In one group, participants were given three
relatively simple “chunk decomposition” problems (CD). A
second group solved one “operator decomposition” (OD)
problem, involving more constraints, between the baseline
CD problem and two later problems. The third group solved
three OD problems, similarly placed. Results indicated that
successful solution of an OD problem produced negative
transfer to subsequent CD problems in the form of longer
solution times. Participants who did not successfully solve
OD problems did not slow down on subsequent problems;
they displayed evidence of positive transfer. The findings
were interpreted with reference to theories of constraint
relaxation and its relationship to problem solving
performance.
Keywords: mental set; insight problem solving; negative
transfer

Procedures in Problem Solving
Whenever new problems are encountered in everyday life,
our general approach is to apply procedures or solutions that
produced successful outcomes in the past. For example, in
the event that you are moving a couch to a new apartment, it
is possible that the couch will not fit through a particular
doorway or up a particular flight of stairs. Solutions that
worked in the past were to unscrew the feet on the couch, or
to try the other stairway/doorway into the apartment. If we
try one of these solutions and it works again, we will likely
bring them to bear when similar situations arise in the
future.
Similarly, procedures or solutions that have worked in
one context are often evoked and applied to another context.
In the first author’s most recent move, her bookcase was too
large to fit up the front staircase, but could be brought up the
back staircase with little trouble. Because the try-the-otherstaircase procedure worked in a different situation, it may be

that the procedure becomes generalized, thus making it
more likely to be employed in a variety of situations.
However, known procedures do not always apply to new
situations, and, in fact, may lead to situations of impasse. To
use one final example, again from the first author’s most
recent move, her box spring would not fit up the front
staircase. The back staircase was next attempted with no
success. She and her movers tried rotating the box spring in
multiple orientations on each staircase to no avail. Over an
hour was spent attempting to apply a known procedure that
was not leading to any progress. Eventually, a neighbor
suggested using a chainsaw to split the box spring and fold
it in half. The chainsaw procedure was used and the box
spring entered the apartment. Thus, a successful procedure
was applied, but only after lengthy misapplications of
known, and previously useful, procedures.
The preceding everyday example of misapplying
previously successful procedures to the moving of furniture
is analogous to the sequence that occurs when solving
insight problems. An individual’s initial representation of an
insight problem is often faulty because unhelpful prior
knowledge and experiences are activated by the problem
(Kershaw & Ohlsson, 2004; Knoblich, Ohlsson, Haider, &
Rhenius, 1999; Ohlsson, 1992). The individual’s initial
problem-solving attempts are guided by this unsuitable
knowledge. These initial attempts are usually unsuccessful
and the individual then enters a period of impasse, in which
no overt problem-solving behavior occurs. In order to exit
the impasse, the individual must relax constraints (Knoblich
et al., 1999; Ohlsson, 1992) or overcome mental sets caused
by incorrect application of procedures (Luchins, 1942). The
likelihood of relaxing constraints or breaking mental set
depends on the number and strength of the constraints or
procedures.

Constraint Relaxation and Breaking Mental
Set
The difficulty of a particular insight problem is dependent
upon several factors. For many insight problems, including
famous examples such as the nine-dot problem, the necklace

.
1505

problem, and the four tree problem, multiple types of
constraints interact to make the achievement of solution
difficult (Kershaw & Ohlsson, 2004). For example,
Kershaw and Ohlsson identified perceptual (figural integrity
and other Gestalt laws), knowledge (prior experiences and
knowledge), and process (size and variability of search
space) constraints that prevent solution of the nine-dot
problem. Likewise, Flynn, Gordon, and Kershaw (2010)
identified perceptual and knowledge constraints in the four
tree problem.
Several researchers state that the difficulty of a particular
problem can be found in the strength of constraints present
in a particular problem. For example, Knoblich et al. (1999)
identified three types of constraints in matchstick arithmetic
problems: value, operator, and tautology. The value
constraint, the weakest of the three, suggests that numerical
values on one side of an equation cannot be changed
without compensatory changes on the other. The operator
constraint, which is described as having a moderate level of
strength, signifies that arithmetic functions (operators)
cannot be arbitrarily changed. The tautology constraint,
which is the strongest of the three, signifies that arithmetic
equations should follow a particular format in which a
calculation is specified. That is, an arithmetic operation on
one side of the equation should indicate a value on the other
side of an equation, such as V + I = VI. While statements
like II = II = II are valid, they are not common in arithmetic
and therefore violate the tautology constraint.
Knoblich et al. (1999) also classified the difficulty of
matchstick arithmetic insight problems by the strength of
the chunks that had to be decomposed in order to solve the
problem. People tend to view Roman numerals as perceptual
chunks, but the strength of these particular chunks depends
on the numeral or other element of the equation. Tight
chunks, such as V and I, are composed of single units.
Loose chunks, such as VII and III, are composed of other
chunks. For example, VII is composed of three tight chunks,
V, I, and I. Knoblich et al. also suggest there are
intermediate chunks, such as operators like the plus sign (+)
and the equal sign (=). Although these symbols are
composed of other chunks, people are unlikely to have
experience decomposing a + into its horizontal and vertical
components, for example.
A different explanation of the difficulty of a particular
problem is the success of the procedures applied to the
problems that preceded it. In a classic demonstration of
mental set, Luchins (1942) gave participants a series of
water jug problems. The first five problems could all be
solved successfully using a particular procedure, but the last
five problems either could not be solved using the known
procedure or could be solved using a simpler procedure.
Luchins (1942) found that participants continued to apply
the known procedure to the last five problems, and that over
half of the participants were unable to solve problems for
which the known procedure could not be applied. That is,
participants experienced impasse on some problems and
were unable to break impasse to reach solution.

Thus, the difficulty of particular insight problems may be
due to the number and strength of constraints or procedures
present. Likewise, the likelihood of relaxing these
constraints or procedures should also be affected by number
and strength. Knoblich et al.’s (1999) theory presupposes
that relaxing one weak constraint will be much easier than
relaxing multiple strong constraints. Researchers have
implemented experimental interventions to increase the
likelihood of constraint and procedure relaxation. For
example, Kershaw and Ohlsson (2004) and Flynn et al.
(2010) developed training procedures that targeted
particular constraints, such as practicing non-dot turns for
the nine-dot problem (Kershaw & Ohlsson) or comparing
solved analogs of the four tree problem (Flynn et al.).
Luchins and Luchins (1950) tried to prevent mental set by
limiting the amount of liquid available, adding a fourth jar
to the problems, and giving participants physical objects
(actual jars and water) instead of using paper-and-pencil
forms of the problems. Of these three manipulations, only
adding a fourth jar was successful, because participants
needed to figure out the amount that each jar could hold for
each problem. Luchins and Luchins’ other two
manipulations did not work because participants were poor
at keeping track of how much liquid they had used or they
persisted in doing paper-and-pencil calculations prior to
using the physical materials.

The Current Experiment
In the current experiment, we examine the connection
between the strength of constraints and the effect of mental
set by using matchstick arithmetic insight problems of two
types. One type of problem we used required the
decomposition of loose chunks. For example, to solve VI =
VII + I, a participant needs to move a single matchstick (I)
from VII to VI, thus making the solution of the problem VII
= VI + I. Knoblich et al. (1999) states that these types of
problems require the relaxation of the value constraint and
the decomposition of loose chunks. For simplicity sake, we
refer to these problems as chunk decomposition (CD)
problems.
The second type of problem we used required the
decomposition of the operator in the problem, in this case
the plus sign (+). For example, to solve VII = VII + I, a
participant needs to move the vertical matchstick from the +
to the second VII, thus making the solution of the problem
VII = VIII – I. Knoblich et al. (1999) note that these type of
problems require the relaxation of the value and operator
constraints as well as the decomposition of loose and
intermediate chunks. We refer to these problems as operator
decomposition (OD) problems. Although Knoblich et al.
make a conceptual distinction between constraint relaxation
and chunk decomposition mechanisms, we group both into
the general category of constraints in the current work.
Thus, CD problems contain two constraints and OD
problems contain four. Because OD problems contain a
greater number of constraints, as well as stronger
constraints, they should be harder to solve than CD

.
1506

problems as well as require longer solution times,
predictions that are supported by Knoblich et al.’s findings.
In this experiment, all participants solve three CD
problems. Participants differed in the number of OD
problems that they received. A baseline group of
participants did not receive any OD problems, a second
group received one OD problem, and a third group received
three OD problems. The groups that received the OD
problem(s) solved one CD problem, the OD problem(s),
followed by two additional CD problems, which functioned
as transfer problems.
Our first research goal was to examine how the
sequencing of constraint relaxation types affected solution
time. In the group that did not receive any OD problems, we
expected a general decrease in solution time across the CD
problems because, as stated by Knoblich et al. (1999), once
constraints are relaxed they will remain relaxed. In the
groups that receive the OD problem(s), we explored the
possibility that solving the OD problem(s) would make it
more difficult to solve the subsequent CD problems.
Knoblich et al. (1999, cf. Ohlsson, 1992) posit that
constraint relaxation occurs through the natural spreading of
activation after persistent failure is experienced via impasse.
Because activation to memory nodes decays, it is possible
that the CD solution space might become reconstrained after
participants spend some time exploring the OD solution
space. Therefore, successful solution of OD problems may
make solving subsequent CD problems difficult because the
constraint would need to be re-relaxed, thus leading to
longer solution times for the CD problems received after the
OD problem(s) relative to the CD problem received prior to
the OD problem(s).
Our second research goal involved the amount of time
that participants spent using the procedure needed to solve
the OD problems. Thus, we manipulated the mental set that
participants experienced due to the OD problems. Some
participants only received one OD problem, while others
received three. We expected that participants who received
three OD problems would show longer solution times on
subsequent CD problems than the participants who only
received one OD problem relative to the CD problem solved
prior to the OD problem(s). We will refer to these post-OD
problems as return-to-chunk-decomposition problems and
therefore they will be labeled RCD1 and RCD2.
Öllinger, Jones, and Knoblich (2008) explored similar
questions using matchstick arithmetic problems. In
Experiment 2 they found that solving a series of CD
problems did not affect the solution rate for one OD
problem (type CR1 in their experiment), although they did
affect the solution rate for other constraint relaxation
problem types. In Experiment 3 they found that solving a
series of constraint relaxation problems negatively impacted
CD problems, but the constraint relaxation problems were of
a different type than the OD problems used in the current
experiment. Thus, while Öllinger et al. (2008) explored
similar questions to the current experiment, the current work
builds on these findings in terms of providing solvers with

different problem types and in varying the number of OD
problems between participants.
Overall, we made the following predictions for the
experiment:
1) Participants who receive OD problems will have slower
solution times than participants who do not receive OD
problems on RCD1 compared to the baseline CD problem
(B).
2) Participants who receive three OD problems will have
slower solution times than participants who receive one OD
problem on RCD1 compared to B.
3) Participants who do not receive OD problems will show
faster solution times from B to RCD1 and from RCD1 to
RCD2. Participants who receive OD problems will not show
this pattern.

Method
Participants
Participants were 145 introductory psychology students who
received research credit for their participation. Sixty of the
participants were from the University of Illinois at Chicago
and 85 of the participants were from the University of
Massachusetts Dartmouth. No demographic data were
collected about the participants.

Materials
A series of matchstick arithmetic insight problems were
developed for the study. The problems were of two types,
chunk decomposition (CD) and operator decomposition
(OD). Following the terminology of Knoblich et al. (1999),
the CD problems required the decomposition of loose
chunks, which are composite Roman numerals (such as IV,
VII, etc.). In each problem, one matchstick is moved from
one numeral to another. For example, the problem V = VI +
I is solved by moving one matchstick from VI to V, thus
making the answer VI = V + I (an acceptable alternate
solution is V = IV + I). The CD problems and their solutions
are in Table 1.
Table 1: CD problems and solutions.
Problem
XI = XII + I
V = VI + I
VI = VII + I
VII = VIII + I

Solution(s)
XII = XI + I
VI = V + I, V = IV + I
VII = VI + I
VIII = VI + I

The OD problems were akin to Knoblich et al.’s (1999)
constraint relaxation (Type B) problems, and specifically
required the relaxation of the operator constraint by
decomposing the plus sign (+) into two matches and moving
the vertical match elsewhere in the location, thus turning the
operator into a minus sign (-).For example, the problem II =
VIII + V is solved by moving the vertical matchstick from
the + to the II, thus making the answer III = VIII – V (an

.
1507

acceptable alternate solution is II = VIII – VI). The OD
problems and their solutions are in Table 2.
Table 2: OD problems and solutions.
Problem
VII = VII + I
II = VIII + V
V = VII + I
I = V + III

Solution(s)
VII = VIII - I
III = VIII – V, II = VIII – VI
VI = VII – I, V = VII – II
II = V – III, I = IV – III

Procedure
Participants were run individually. After completing the
consent process, participants were given a packet containing
the experimental materials. Rules for solving matchstick
arithmetic problems were provided on each problem page in
the packet. The rules were:
A) Only one matchstick is to be moved.
B) A matchstick cannot be discarded; that is, it can only be
moved from one position in the equation to another.
C) A slanted stick cannot be interpreted as a vertical
matchstick.
D) The result must be a correct arithmetic equation.
In addition to these rules, participants were given a list of
Roman numerals and their Arabic numeral equivalents (e.g.,
X = 10).
The first problem for all participants was XI = XII + I,
which served as a practice problem. Participants were given
five minutes to work on the problem and were instructed to
alert the experimenter when they came up with a solution. If
the participant correctly solved the problem, the
experimenter summarized the participant’s actions and
stated that the solution was correct. The experimenter
emphasized that one matchstick had been moved to create a
correct equation. If the participant came up with an incorrect
solution, the experimenter referred back to the rules to
explain why the solution was incorrect. For example, the
participant might be reminded that only one matchstick
could be moved. If the participant did not solve the practice
problem correctly within the time limit, the experimenter
first checked to see if he/she had any questions and then
gave him/her two more minutes to work on the problem. If,
after this additional time, no solution was offered, then the
experimenter explained how to move one matchstick to
achieve the correct solution, XII = XI + I.
The second problem in the packet was the baseline chunk
decomposition problem (B), V = VI + I. Participants had
four minutes to work on this problem (and all subsequent
problems). Participants wrote down their start time, worked
on the problem, and wrote down the end time if they came
up with a solution. The accuracy of the solution was
checked by the experimenter. If the solution was incorrect,
the experimenter used the rules to point out the inaccuracies
of the solution.
The penultimate and final problems in the packet were
also CD problems. As stated previously, the penultimate
problem, VI = VII + I, will be referred to as the first return-

to-chunk-decomposition problem (RCD1), and the last
problem, VII = VIII + I, will be referred to as the second
return-to-chunk-decomposition
problem
(RCD2).
Participants received the same instructions and same amount
of time to solve the B, RCD1, and RCD2 problems.
The problems in between B and the RCD1, RCD2
sequence differed by condition. One group of participants
did not receive any OD problems. A second group of
participants received one OD problem between B and the
RCDs. A third group of participants received three OD
problems between B and RCDs. On all OD problems,
participants followed the same procedure as used for the CD
problems by writing down their start and end times and
checking their solutions with the experimenter.
After completing RCD2, participants filled out a problem
familiarity survey, which asked participants if they had seen
and solved any of the matchstick arithmetic problems prior
to the experimental session. No participants had any
familiarity with the matchstick arithmetic insight problems.
At the end of the session, participants were debriefed and
thanked for their participation.

Analysis
Participants were originally grouped by the number of OD
problems they received. There were 46 participants who
received no OD problems, 50 who received one OD
problem, and 49 who received three OD problems.
However, initial examination of the data revealed that not
all participants in the OD conditions solved the OD
problems. Therefore, participants were regrouped by the
number of OD problems they solved. If participants did not
solve the OD problems, we could not expect that they also
relaxed this constraints associated with these problems.
Thus, in the final analyses, there were 64 participants who
solved no OD problems, 35 participants who solved one OD
problem, and 46 participants who solved three OD
problems.1
Time to solve the B, RCD1, and RCD2 problems was
calculated by subtracting the end time from the start time for
each problem. If a participant did not solve one of these
problems, then his/her time data were not included. The
number of non-solvers was low for each problem: one
participant did not solve B, five participants did not solve
RCD1, and three participants did not solve RCD2. The
time-to-solve data were then screened for outliers, which
were defined as time to solve values that were greater than
three standard deviations above the mean. Rather than
deleting data list-wise, data points were removed case-wise.
Three time-to-solve values were removed from the B and
RCD1 values, and four time-to-solve values were removed
from the RCD2 values.
Three variables were computed for the planned
comparisons between the solution times. First, a value was
_____________________________________________

.
1508

1

Removing participants who did not conform to their groups
rather than regrouping participants led to the same pattern of
results.

calculated for RCD1 – B, that is, the difference between the
time needed to solve the baseline and first return to chunk
decomposition problems. Next, a value was calculated for
RCD1 – RCD2, that is, the difference between the time
needed to solve the first and second return to chunk
decomposition problems. Third, a value was calculated for
B – RCD2, that is, the difference between the time needed
to solve the baseline and second return to chunk
decomposition problems.

Results
A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) compared
participants on the difference between the time needed to
solve the baseline chunk decomposition problem (B) and the
time needed to solve the first return-to-chunkdecomposition problem (RCD1). The ANOVA was
significant, F (2, 135) = 4.44, p < .05, η2 = .06. Tukey posthoc tests indicated that participants who solved three OD
problems showed a significant increase in solution time
from the B to the RCD1 problems (M = 19.26 seconds, SD =
43.44) compared to participants who did not solve any OD
problems (M = -4.18 seconds, SD = 40.99), p < .05.
Participants who did not solve any OD problems showed a
decrease in time-to-solve between B and RCD1. There was
also a marginal difference between participants who did not
solve any OD problems and those who solved one OD
problem (M = 15.41 seconds, SD = 45.74), p = .09.
Importantly, there was no difference between participants
who solved one OD problem and those who solved three.
A second analysis compared participants on the difference
between the time needed to solve RCD1 and RCD2 (RCD1
– RCD2). A one-way ANOVA did not show any inter-group
differences, F (2, 129) = .86, p > .05, η2 = .01.
A third analysis compared participants on the difference
between the time needed to solve B and RCD2 (B – RCD2).
A one-way ANOVA showed an overall difference between
the conditions, F (2, 131) = 4.64, p < .05, η2 = .07. Tukey
post-hoc tests indicated that participants who did not solve
any OD problems needed significantly less time to solve
RCD2 than to solve B (M = 15.14 seconds, SD = 23.08)
compared to participants who solved three OD problems (M
= 2.35 seconds, SD = 22.25), p < .05. There was also a
marginal difference between participants who did not solve
any OD problems and those who solved one OD problem
(M = 3.69 seconds, SD = 24.30), p = .07. There was no
difference between participants who solved one OD
problem and those who solved three.

Discussion
The current work produced four main important findings.
First, in the absence of successful OD performance,
participants got progressively faster when solving CD
problems. This finding suggests that relaxation of the value
constraint made it easier to solve subsequent value
constraint problems. In this sense, we found some evidence
of positive transfer on problems that presumably required
relaxation of the same constraint. This finding supported our

third prediction, that participants who did not receive OD
problems would show faster solution times from B to
RCD1, while participants who received OD problems would
not show this pattern. This finding also supports Knoblich et
al.’s (1999) theory – once a constraint is relaxed, it will
remain relaxed and affect subsequent performance on
similar problems.
Second, the current results provide greater confidence that
constraint relaxation can also negatively impact subsequent
problem solving performance, particularly in the event that a
different, more complex constraint was relaxed. Generally,
successful solution of OD problems resulted in longer
subsequent solution of CD problems compared to those who
did not solve or were not presented with OD problems.
Thus, the longer solution times indicate that there was at
least some negative transfer associated with the relaxation
of the operator constraint. Solution of an OD problem
appeared to make it more difficult to solve the simple CD
problems; this difficulty was absent for those who did not
solve OD problems. This finding supports our first
prediction, that participants who received OD problems
would have slower solution times than participants who did
not receive OD problems on RCD1 compared to B.
Additionally, this finding replicates and extends the findings
of Öllinger et al. (2008), who also found successful solution
of constraint relaxation problems (of a different type)
affected later problem solving performance.
Third, as stated previously, we varied the number of OD
problems that were presented to participants and were
solved in between the CD problems. Participants who
solved one and three OD problems displayed similar
indications of negative transfer on subsequent RCDs, as
evidenced by longer solution times. This finding did not
support our second prediction, in which we predicted
relatively slower solution times for participants who
received three OD problems than participants who received
one OD problem. Our finding suggests that, indeed, after
one successful solution of an OD problem, the operator
constraint was relaxed. Moreover, there did not seem to be
an additional slowing associated with solving multiple OD
trials.
The final important point is that the negative transfer
effects associated with the relaxation of the operator
constraint were relatively lasting. That is to say that
successful solution not only affected the immediate CD
problem, but also the problem that followed. Although the
current data does not provide an indication of how longlasting this kind of negative transfer would be, there did
seem to be a “downstreaming” effect into subsequent
problem solving performance, beyond the problem situation
that immediately followed the constraint relaxation.
Overall, the findings of this experiment point to the
manner in which previously appropriate procedures can be
persistently misapplied to a new situation. As demonstrated
by Luchins (1942; Luchins & Luchins, 1950), mental set
can hinder future problem solving. Mental set and other
interference effects fit within the larger concept of negative

.
1509

transfer, in which prior knowledge and experiences hinder
learning in new situations that are similar to known
situations. The type of negative transfer effects shown in
this experiment are similar to those proposed by Singley and
Anderson (1989): participants show behavioral slowing due
to the misapplication of a procedure. However, the
misapplication is an incorrect method, not a non-optimal
method, and this misapplication of procedure lasts for more
than one trial, thus lending some support to Woltz, Gardner,
and Bell’s (2000) theory of negative transfer.
Further work is needed to address the direction and
duration of negative transfer effects. It is possible that
completing a series of CD problems could lead to negative
transfer on the OD problems. Likewise, it would be
interesting to determine if increases in solution time on the
RCD problems lasts more than two iterations. The negative
transfer literature is divided on whether negative transfer
effects are fleeting (e.g., Singley & Anderson, 1989) or
lingering (e.g., Woltz et al., 2000). Additional studies
extending the number of to-be-solved CD problems may
inform on this issue.
Another future direction for this research would be to
examine the processes that underlie the interaction between
constraint relaxation mechanisms. Our findings, as well as
the findings of Öllinger et al. (2008), show that relaxing
some constraints hinders the relaxing of other constraints.
One explanation for these findings is that successful
solution of OD problems may make solving subsequent CD
problems difficult because the constraint would need to be
re-relaxed. Thus, there would be longer solution times for
the CD problems received after the OD problems relative to
the CD problem received prior to the OD problems.
Alternatively, relaxing a stronger constraint, such as the
operator constraint present in the OD problems, may cancel
out a weaker constraint, such as the value constraint present
in the CD problems. Although this a different explanation
the same effect would be expected, in which solution times
are longer for the CD problems received after the OD
problem(s) than for the CD problem received prior to the
OD problem(s). A third possibility is that the relaxing of
multiple constraints opens up the problem space too much,
thus leading to a difficulty in finding a correct solution path
(c.f. Ohlsson, 1996; Ormerod, MacGregor, & Chronicle,
2002). This third explanation would also lead to the same
pattern of results. Future research should address the
mechanisms that underlie constraint relaxation interactions
and, if possible, attempt to tease apart which of these three
possibilities best explains negative transfer in problem
solving performance.

References
Flynn, C.K., Gordon, L.T., & Kershaw, T.C. (2010).
Multiple paths to transfer and constraint relaxation in
insight problem solving. Unpublished manuscript.
Kershaw, T.C., & Ohlsson, S. (2004). Multiple causes of
difficulty in insight: The case of the nine-dot problem.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 30(1), 3-13.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., Haider, H., & Rhenius, D.
(1999). Constraint relaxation and chunk decomposition in
insight problem solving. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25(6),
1534-1555.
Luchins, A.S. (1942). Mechanization in problem solving:
The effect of Einstellung. Psychological Monographs, 54,
1-95.
Luchins, A.S., & Luchins, E.H. (1950). New experimental
attempts at preventing mechanization in problem solving.
Journal of General Psychology, 42, 279-297.
Öllinger, M., Jones, G., & Knoblich, G. (2008).
Investigating the effect of mental set on insight problem
solving. Experimental Psychology, 55(4), 269-282.
Ohlsson, S. (1992). Information-processing explanations of
insight and related phenomena. In M. Keane & K.
Gilhooly (Eds.), Advances in the psychology of thinking.
London: Harvester-Wheatsheaf.
Ohlsson, S. (1996). Learning from performance errors.
Psychological Review, 103(2), 241-262.
Ormerod, T.C., MacGregor, J.N., & Chronicle, E.P. (2002).
Dynamics and constraints in insight problem solving.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 28(4), 791-799.
Singley, M.K., & Anderson, J.R. (1989). The transfer of
cognitive skill. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Woltz, D.J., Gardner, M.K., & Bell, B.G. (2000). Negative
transfer errors in sequential skills: Strong-but-wrong
sequence application. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 26(3), 601-625.

Acknowledgments
We thank Valentina Pacheco and Justin Faria for their
assistance with data collection. We also thank three
anonymous CogSci reviewers for their comments and
suggestions for future research.

.
1510

