UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
On the Notion of Intended Meaning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4z82q1kd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Cruciani, Marco

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

On the Notion of Intended Meaning
Marco Cruciani (marco.cruciani@unitn.it)
Dept. of Information Engineering and Computer Science
University of Trento, Italy

Abstract
The issue of intended meaning is an open problem in the
study of linguistic processes. The paper presents a notion of
intended meaning based on the idea of speaker’s preference
for a state of affairs to which a sentence refers. Its argument
has two components. The first is the conception of meaning
developed by analytic philosophy of language; that is, the
meaning of a sentence depends on the truth conditions of
the sentence, and the meaning of an expression depends on
contribution of that expression to the truth value of the
sentence in which it appears. The second is the notion of
agent’s interest, as a state of affairs which implies a goal of
agent, as developed by cognitive social theory. The paper
maintains that a speaker’s intended meaning establishes
when the truth conditions of a sentence and the possibility
conditions of the state of affairs preferred by the agent
match. The last part of the paper illustrates three linguistic
disputes to support its theoretical intuitions. The first
dispute concerns syntactic ambiguity, while the other two
disputes concern semantic ambiguity. The paper deals with
the general problem of the semantic underdeterminacy of
the conventional meaning of natural language sentences. Its
specific contribution relates to the problem of intended
meaning in communicative processes and to meaning
negotiation processes in conflicting interactions.

The state of affairs preferred by a speaker because it
implies his/her goal provides the truth conditions which
determine the intended meaning in the specific situation
of use. From this perspective, the determination of
intended meaning is viewed as a selection of a state of
affairs which makes a sentence true (via truth conditions)
and satisfies the agent’s interest in situation.1
However, the aim of the paper is not to argue in favour
of this conception, since the author has done so elsewhere
(Cruciani, 2009b), but rather to explain its ontology. The
schema in figure 1 illustrates the notion of intended
meaning as it is conceived here. At the bottom of the
schema is a sentence which, given a context of use, has
some plausible interpretations. Each interpretation refers
to a state of affairs which makes the sentence true: that is,
it refers to specific truth conditions. The correspondence
between the state of affairs preferred by the speaker and
one of the states of affairs which make the sentence true
determines the intended meaning. In other words, when
the possibility conditions of the state of affairs preferred
by speaker match the truth conditions of a sentence, we
have intended meaning.
intended meaning

Keywords: state of affairs; truth conditions; semantic
underdeterminacy; intended meaning; interest; negotiation.
[state of affairs preferred]goal

Introduction
The issue of intended meaning is an open problem in the
study of linguistic processes (see Grice 1957, 1989;
Kripke, 1979; Sperber & Wilson, 1986; Clark, 1996;
Recanati, 2001; Bach, 2004; Bianchi, 2006). In this paper
I present a notion of intended meaning based on the
notion of speaker’s preference for a state of affairs to
which a sentence refers. This notion derives from the
analysis of negotiation processes and the determination of
meaning in linguistic controversies provoked by
ambiguous clauses in contracts. The paper’s contribution
to the notion of intended meaning is based on the
following thesis: given a set of contextually plausible
interpretations of a sentence, the agent’s intended
meaning is determined by his/her extra-semantic
situational interests (Cruciani, 2009a). It uses the notion
of interest viewed as a state of affairs preferred by an
agent because it implies his/her goal (see Conte &
Castelfranchi, 1995).
In my view, the notion of the intended meaning of
declarative sentences is founded on the relation between
the states of affairs in which a sentence is true and the
speaker’s preferences ordering in regard to the states of
affairs in which the sentence is true. A sentence can be
true with respect to different sets of truth conditions,
which correspond to different states of affairs (more
technically, they correspond to sets of states of affairs).

[state of aff. 1

state of aff. 2

state of aff. n] interest

[interpret.1

interpret. 2

interpret. n] context

sentence

Figure 1

Meaning, Truth Conditions, States of
Affairs and Context
In this section I illustrate the relation among meaning
based on truth conditions, states of affairs, and context of
use, and I outline some differences between semantics and
pragmatics in regard to the phenomenon of semantic
underdeterminacy. I base my view on the conception of
1

Hence, the process of determining intended meaning can be
explained in terms of preferences ordering.

1028

meaning as developed by analytic philosophy of language
(specifically by structural semantics). This maintains that
the meaning of a sentence depends on its truth conditions,
and that the meaning of an expression depends on the
contribution of that expression to the truth value of
sentence in which it appears (see Tarski, 1944). This
notion entails that knowing the truth conditions of a
sentence corresponds to knowing how the world would be
if the sentence were true; but it does not correspond to
knowing whether or not the sentence is actually true (see
Wittgenstein, 1921). Hence, in cognitive terms, a speaker
who knows the truth conditions of a sentence knows the
meaning of the sentence even if s/he does not know how
the world actually is, but only how it would be if the
sentence were true.
The conception of meaning as (a set of) truth conditions
is accepted by most philosophers and pragmatists of
language. Any disagreement essentially concerns whether
conventional meaning (obtained by linguistic conventions
and rules) is sufficient to provide truth conditions or
whether other items are required as well. In other words,
is it sufficient to know semantic conventions and
linguistic rules or do we need to know elements of the
specific situation of use?
On a semantics view, conventional meaning and a small
number of contextual parameters are sufficient to
determine the truth conditions of a sentence (proposition
expressed by the sentence). On a pragmatics of language
view, conventional meaning is not sufficient to determine
a unique set of truth conditions (semantic
underdeterminacy): we need information on the context of
use to complete the conventional meaning and to
determine
the
truth
conditions.
Semantic
underdeterminacy occurs when the conventional meaning
of a sentence used by a speaker in a specific situation,
coded by semantic conventions, underdetermines the
proposition explicitly expressed by the utterance (see
Travis, 1975, 1981; Searle, 1979, 1980).
In semantics, context is composed of some objective
elements of the situation of utterance, and it is used to
decode only some problematic kinds of expressions:
indexical and demonstrative expressions such as “I”,
“here”, “now” and “this”, “that” (see Kaplan, 1977)2;
pronouns such as “she”, “he” (e.g. anaphoric use); cases
of structural and lexical ambiguity (see Perry, 1997); and
verbal tense.3 In semantics, truth conditions lie at the level
of the objective context of utterance and conventional
meaning (obtained by linguistic conventions and rules).
Pragmatists do not agree, however, arguing that in order
to fix truth conditions we need supplementary contextual
information. This information consists of shared
knowledge (encyclopaedic and local), the discourse or
sentence in which an expression is used, and elements of
the physical surroundings.4 A technical distinction
between information on the semantic context and
information on the pragmatic context is that the former is
made accessible by and constrained to linguistic form of
expression, while the latter is made accessible by

2

Note that Kaplan (1989), when introducing the “directing
intention”, admits a ‘cognitive turn’ for the reference of
demonstrative pronouns (see Bianchi, 2006).
3
On possessive expressions see Clark (1992).
4
On background of meaning see Searle (1980).

speaker’s communicative intentions and is not constrained
to linguistic form.
I do not deal, in the paper, with the problem of whether
there is a need for non-linguistic information to fix a
unique set of truth conditions; there is a need
(pragmatics/semantics distinction debate). I instead deal
with the problem of intended meaning when a number of
interpretations are all plausible in the same context (any
context or combination of contexts).
I report a simple example to shed light on this point.
The issue is the following: the conventional meaning of a
sentence, even without indexical expressions, and
structural and lexical ambiguity, actually underdetermines
the proposition expressed by the sentence. And even with
the additional pragmatic contribution of relevant
contextual information, it is not always possible to fix a
unique proposition. The sentence is as follows: (1) “there
is water on Pluto”. I do not know whether there is water
on Pluto, but I understand the sentence because I am able
to imagine the ways in which there might be water on
Pluto: for example, in the form of ice on the planet’s
surface or in the form of gas in its atmosphere.
Consequently, sentence (1) can have at least two
interpretations (two different sets of truth conditions); that
is, it can be true both if there is water in the form of ice on
the surface and if there is water in the form of gas in the
atmosphere. The two truth conditions correspond to
different states of affairs:
a.
b.

“there is ice on the surface of Pluto”;
“there is water vapour in the atmosphere of
Pluto”.

Hence, (1) can refer to both states of affairs. This is the
case if we consider linguistic conventions, but also, in our
propaedeutical example, if we consider the text of the
sentence in which the word “water” appears and we use
encyclopaedic knowledge (e.g. physical states of water).
In general, then, how is it possible to determine the
speaker’s intended meaning when a sentence admits to
various meanings all plausible in a context of use (or any
combination of contexts), that is, when the context seems
not to be conclusive?

Intended Meaning and Speaker’s Meaning
In this section I illustrate the notion of speaker’s meaning
proposed by Grice (1989) in regard to the notions of
“what is said” (explicit level of communication) and
“what
is
communicated”
(implicit
level
of
communication). Speaker’s meaning corresponds to “what
is communicated” by a speaker with a sentence. “What is
communicated” is understood by an interlocutor by mean
of an inference (i.e. conversational implicature) based on
the conventional meaning of the sentence and contextual
information concerning the situation in which the sentence
is uttered. Relevant information is made accessible to the
interlocutor by means of speaker’s communicative
intentions. Essentially, Grice argues that conventional
meaning, completed with treatment of ambiguity and
indexical expressions (latu senso), determines a unique
proposition (“what is said”), and he examines the implicit
communicative process based on it.
Most philosophers, linguists, and relevant theorists
agree on the notion that the speaker’s meaning is “what is

1029

communicated” by a speaker (implicit level of
communication). But they do not agree on the role of
conventional meaning in fixing “what is said” by a
speaker (explicit level of communication) (see Sperber &
Wilson, 1986; Carston, 1988, 2002; Recanati, 1989, 1993;
Travis, 1997; Levinson, 2000; Bianchi, 2004). They
consequently argue that we need some inferential (or
associative) processes based on contextual information
(e.g. free enrichment, transfer, saturation, bridging,
narrowing, broadening, etc.). These processes fix a unique
proposition (the one explicitly expressed by a sentence). In
other words, these processes fix “what is said” by a
speaker with a sentence in a specific situation.
Consequently, conversational implicature determines, on
the basis of “what is said” and further contextual
information, “what is communicated” by a speaker.
However, not all pragmatists agree on the temporal
sequence of the above processes. Some of them maintain
that implicature works in parallel with free enrichment,
transfer, etc.5 However, according to (a weak version of)
contextualism in pragmatics, my proposal in regard to
intended meaning concerns the level of “what is said”
(explicit level of communication).6
I consider that if pragmatic processes, based on nonlinguistic contextual information made accessible by
communicative intentions, are not sufficient to determine
a unique set of truth conditions (proposition), then, in
order to determine the explicit level of communication,
we can take into account the speaker’s preferences for the
states of affairs which make a sentence true.

State of Affairs and Preference
In this section I outline the notion of preference for a state
of affairs based on the comparative notions: “better than”
(>), “equal in value to” (≡) and “at least good as” (≥)
taken from decision theory (see Hansson, 1994). Using
this language, it is possible to express the preferences of
agents for states of affairs. For instance, on writing:
[(sa1)>(sa2)]Ag, we assert that an agent prefers the state of
affairs 1 rather than the state of affairs 2.
Decisions theorists assume that a rational agent
correctly chooses an option if the ordering of options
realizes certain properties: ordering, continuity,
independence (see Myerson, 1991). For my purposes here,
it is sufficient to consider the property of ordering, which
concerns completeness and transitivity. Completeness for
weak preference is defined as follows:
the relation ≥ is complete if and only if for any elements
A and B of its domain, either A ≥ B or B ≥ A.
Transitivity for weak preference is defined as follows:
the relation ≥ is transitive if and only if it holds for all
elements A, B and C of its domain, so that if A ≥ B and B
≥ C, then A ≥ C.
5
On the notion of explicature in Relevant Theory (see Carston,
1988); on impliciture in linguistics (see Bach, 1994).
6
However, communication can succeed at the “what is said”
level, for instance, in contracts and scientific texts. Note that
when communication takes place at the implicit level a speaker
can retract his/her statements; instead, when communication
happens at the explicit level, s/he cannot freely retract.

These properties ensure that an agent is able to compare
some options coherently with his/her own interest.
However, it is possible that an agent is not always able to
compare all options clearly, but this does not prevent
him/her from choosing coherently with his/her own
interest. In our case, we can consider an agent as
preferring one state of affairs coherently with his/her own
interest if s/he chooses in accordance with the rule which
states:
an alternative is uniquely the best if and only if it is better
than all the other alternatives. If there is uniquely a best
alternative, choose it (see Hansson, 1994).
Hence, in order to consider an agent’s choice coherent
with his/her interest, it is sufficient that s/he is able to
determine the best state of affairs among others without
necessarily ordering the other states of affairs. In this case,
a partial ordering is sufficient to consider agents rational.

A Case of Syntactic Ambiguity
In this section I illustrate a case of structural ambiguity
where support by the context is not sufficient to determine
the state of affairs to which a sentence refers. I cite a case
of linguistic controversy provoked by a labour agreement
stipulated by a firm and a local trade union. The
agreement stated the modes, schedules and procedures for
the placement of redundant workers on a publicly-funded
wages guarantee scheme and their job mobility.
The situation was as follows: the firm was attempting to
turn around its economic-financial performance
(economic reorganization) and had begun the procedures
for the placement of redundant workers on the public
wages guarantee scheme and for job mobility. To make
the procedures lawful, the firm stipulated a collective
company-level agreement with the local trade union to
order to manage surplus workers. During the procedures,
a controversy arose in regard to the one-off payment of a
sum of money as an incentive for voluntary redundancy
(as provided for the agreement). The controversy
developed around two different interpretations of a
specific clause in the agreement. The clause was the
following:
“The firm shall pay a lump sum to workers accepting
voluntary redundancy during the wage guarantee fund’s
validity (…)”.7
The linguistic controversy concerned whether the
expression: “during the wage guarantee fund’s validity”
referred to “the firm” or to “workers accepting voluntary
redundancy”, and therefore, whether only redundant
workers who resigned would receive the sum of money or
whether all workers (both redundant and still employed)
who resigned in that period would receive the lump sum
payment as an incentive.
Which state of affairs made the clause true?
7
In Italian the clause is as follows: “L’azienda riconoscerà al
personale dimissionario nel periodo di vigenza della Cassa
Integrazione Guadagni straordinaria un importo forfetario una
tantum (…)”.

1030

States of Affairs and Goals
The state of affairs preferred by the firm corresponded to
its interest that only workers covered by the wage
guarantee fund resigned, so that the firm could use the
fund (it was limited by the agreement) for other employed
workers (who took place of workers who accepted
voluntary redundancy) and thus avoid paying their wages.
The goal of the firm was to reduce the total amount of
one-off incentives, to reduce payment of wages and to
complete its restructuring. The state of affairs which
comprised the possibility conditions for achievement of
the firm’s goal can be expressed as follows: ‘the firm pays
a lump sum for voluntary redundancy to only workers on
the wages guarantee fund’.
The state of affairs preferred by the trade union
corresponded to its interest in extending to all workers the
possibility of receiving the lump sum for voluntary
dismissal during the period of the redundancy payment
scheme. The goal of the trade union was to improve the
economic circumstances of workers as much as possible.
The state of affairs which comprised the possibility
conditions for achievement of the trade union’s goal can
be expressed as follows: ‘the firm pays a lump sum for
voluntary redundancy to all workers (those on the wages
guarantee fund and those in employment) during the
period of the wage guarantee fund’s validity’.

Intended Meaning and Negotiation
In short, the goal of the firm was to reduce total wages,
reduce total incentives and complete its restructuring. The
interest of the firm was to move employed workers from
regular employment to placement on the public wages
guarantee scheme. The goal of the trade union was to
improve the economic circumstances of workers. The
interest of the trade union was to enable all workers to
receive the sum of money.
The state of affairs was negotiated as follows: the firm
gave eligibility to incentive to all workers. It thus obtained
stability of the company-level agreement avoiding the risk
of halting the reorganization and having to return the
money already furnished by the state for wage guarantee
fund. The trade union gave stability to the agreement by
confirming its validity and obtaining the voluntary
redundancy incentive for all workers. The state of affairs
fixed in the negotiation was compatible with the truth
conditions which made one interpretation of the clause
true and excluded the other interpretations.

Two Cases of Semantic Ambiguity
In this section I illustrate two cases which concern two
linguistic disputes provoked by the same clause in a
nation-wide collective agreement stipulated by a trade
union and Confindustria (corresponding to the British
CBI). I show that the two different negotiations of
interests gave rise to two different intended meanings in
two very similar contexts. The clause was the following:
“The parties agree on working hours, which apply also to
groups of workers, with respect to flexibility regarding the
seasonality of products […]. The parties further agree
that, at company level, the modes and schedules of

implementation will be agreed with the local trade union
representatives”.8
The dispute centered on the expression “seasonality of
products”. The two interpretations were:
(a) ‘seasons of the year’;
(b) ‘peaks in the market’,
respectively in both cases. The clause’s meaning was
important because of its impact on the criterion for
implementing flexibility measures. In both cases the
respective interpretations were the same: in the former
case the company adopted interpretation (b), and the local
trade union adopted interpretation (a). Analogously, in the
latter case, another company adopted interpretation (b)
and the same trade union adopted interpretation (a). In my
view, it is very interesting that the same agent was
involved in both situations and negotiated the same
interpretations with different agents. In particular, I would
stress that, in the two negotiations, different interests
induced the same agent (the trade union) to select two
different meanings in two very similar contexts.
Before I report the two cases I shall briefly present the
notion of ‘meaning negotiation’. According to Bouquet
and Warglien, agents have a meaning negotiation problem
whenever they have:
“the problem of reaching an agreement on the meaning of
an expression when an agreement is valuable for all
agents, but agents have conflicting preferences over which
solution should be selected, so that every agreement
implies that at least someone has to concede to some
extent to other agent” (Bouquet & Warglien, 2002, p. 2).
In what follows, I shall show how agreement on
situational extra-semantic interests selects which is the
intended meaning in linguistic disputes.9

Case 1
In case 1, the term “flexibility” in the clause meant that
the company, during some periods of the year, could
require its employees to work a large amount of overtime.
Overtime was required on Saturdays or in addition to the
daily regular working hours. The company compensated
overtime with paid rest days taken in other periods of the
year. Essentially, the clause regulated the times and ways
in which the company could require overtime and
compensate it with paid rest days.
The company was interested in managing working
hours with discretionary power in order to save money,
8

The clause in Italian is as follows: “Le parti convengono, a
titolo di flessibilità sulla stagionalità dei prodotti e per le attività
di installazione e montaggio, sull’orario plurisettimanale, da
realizzarsi anche per gruppi di lavoratori”. […] “Le parti altresì
concordano che, a livello aziendale, verranno convenute, tramite
accordo, le modalità di attuazione oltre che i tempi di
implementazione dell’orario settimanale di cui al presente punto
con le rappresentanze sindacali unitarie e le organizzazioni
sindacali territoriali”.
9
As Clark puts it, “we cannot hope to understand language use
without viewing it as joint action built on individual actions. The
challenge is to explain how all these actions work” (Clark 1996,
p. 4).

1031

possibly on the basis of information unavailable to the
local trade union (e.g. orders). In particular, the interest of
the company was to be able to use overtime without
paying the wage supplements due and to distribute the
cost of paid rest days among periods according to its
needs (its discretion). Moreover, the company was
interested in being able to resort to overtime at any time of
the year on the basis of market demand, and it was not
interested in hiring new personnel or in paying overtime
regularly. On the other hand, the trade union was
interested in reducing (or avoiding) the use of overtime
and particularly if it was not regularly paid, in favouring
the right to rest and to plan free time. It was also
interested in inducing the company to hire new personnel
and/or pay overtime regularly.
The company argued that overtime should be regulated
with respect to peaks in the market: specifically, the
company could resort to unpaid overtime at any time of
the year on the basis of market demand. The company
could not know peaks in the market in advance and thus
could not fix a specific period a priori. The trade union
argued that overtime should be regulated with respect to
the seasons of the year in which the company’s products
were most in demand, spring in particular.
The two interpretations were both plausible in the
situation, where the relevant combination of contexts
consisted of the linguistic context, i.e. the text of the
clause; the encyclopeadic knowledge, i.e. the contract’s
rules (e.g. civil code); and local knowledge, i.e. the
specific shared activity which the clause regulated. At this
point the parties attempted to reach an agreement by
negotiating their interests. And, in the end the company
and the trade union fixed the intended meaning whereby
“seasonality of products” stood for “season of year when
products are particularly in demand”; in particular a
‘positive season’ was spring and a ‘negative season’ was
autumn. They agreed that, in a positive season, the
company could utilize non-regularly-paid overtime, while
in the negative season overtime was recompensed with
paid rest days. How did the agents determine the intended
meaning? How did the negotiation of interests work?
The company obtained high discretionary power to
utilize unpaid overtime in the positive season (from
March to June) de facto independently of peaks in the
market, and to arrange paid rest days in a period of year
when it did not need labour, that is, during the negative
season (from September to December). The company
relinquished overtime throughout the year (except in the
positive season) and discretionary power to distribute paid
rest days during the negative season. The trade union
obtained a reduction in unpaid overtime (except in the
positive season) and the right of employees to choose
which days to use for paid rest during the negative season.
Moreover, the trade union induced the company to hire
new personnel or to pay overtime regularly (except in the
positive season). The trade union relinquished to check
overtime in the positive season. Finally, the trade union
relinquished the possibility of distributing paid rest days
throughout year, in that they could only be taken in the
negative season.
The agents’ interests were mediated with respect to the
specific situation: each party gave up something in favour
of the other party, and meaning (a) (compatible with the
agreement reached) was finally fixed.

Case 2
In case 2, the term “flexibility” meant that the company
could hire temporary workers and manage working hours
and shifts according its needs.
The company was interested in hiring temporary
workers on the basis of increased orders in any period of
the year. The company was also interested in managing
temporary workers because of information unavailable to
the trade union. The trade union was interested in
reducing temporary work; in particular, it was interested
in restricting the use of temporary labour to only limited
periods of the year. Moreover, the trade union was
interested in reducing the use of temporary workers and in
changing temporary jobs into salaried ones (on both
permanent and fixed-term contracts).
The company claimed that the use of temporary labour
must be regulated in accordance with peaks in the market:
that is, at any time of the year on the basis of market
demand. The company could not know peaks in the
market in advance and thus could not fix a specific period
a priori. The trade union claimed that the use of
temporary labour must be regulated according to the
seasons of the year in which the company’s products are
most in demand, summer in particular.
The two interpretations were both plausible in the
situation, where the relevant combination of contexts
consisted of the linguistic context, i.e. the text of the
clause; encyclopaedic knowledge, i.e. the rules of
contracts (e.g. civil code); and local knowledge, i.e. the
specific shared activity which the clause regulated. At this
point the parties attempted to reach an agreement by
negotiating their interests. And, in the end, the company
and the trade union fixed the intended meaning whereby
“seasonality of products” stood for “peaks in the market”.
How did the agents determine the intended meaning?
How did the negotiation of interests work in this case?
The company and the trade union reached an agreement
in which the employer could use, in the case of peaks in
the market throughout the year, an amount of temporary
labour representing only ten percent of salaried labour
(employees). Hence the company obtained high
discretionary power throughout year, but only for a
limited number of workers. The trade union obtained a
reduction in the use of temporary labour (ten percent of
the workforce), but relinquished control over it. Finally, it
lost bargaining power on new hirings.
The agents’ interests were mediated with respect to the
specific situation: each party gave up something in favour
of the other party, and meaning (b) (compatible with the
agreement reached) was finally fixed.
In the two negotiations, two different meanings were
determined for the same expression on the basis of two
different negotiations of interests; even the same agent
determined two different intended meanings with regard
to the two different interests. It is in this sense that
situational interest drives the determination of intended
meaning.

Conclusion
The paper has presented a notion of intended meaning for
declarative sentences. Its argument has been based, on the
one hand, on meaning as truth conditions and, on the
other, on interest as a state of affairs preferred by a
speaker because it implies his/her goal. The compatibility

1032

of the two notions is centered on the notion of state of
affairs.
The notion of intended meaning presented in the article
is compatible with that of “what is said” in pragmatics:
that is, it represents the explicit level of communication. It
is compatible with “what is said” because it is fixed by
means of pragmatic processes based on information not
constrained to the linguistic form of the sentence. But it
differs from “what is said” because of the kind of
information used: essentially, the pragmatic context refers
to items in the current situation or past situations
(linguistic context, shared knowledge, physical
surroundings). Instead, my approach also takes into
account future states of affairs related to agents’ goals.
On this view, the truth conditions which make a
sentence true can be fixed by means of the commitment of
agents to realizing a certain state of affairs. However,
agents do not fix meaning freely; rather, they are
constrained by sets of truth conditions previously selected
by a combination of relevant contexts in the specific
situation.
We have seen three cases of structural and semantic
ambiguity where semantics, which should be able to fix
meaning in these kind of cases, failed. We have also seen
that standard pragmatic information is not conclusive in
fixing the intended meaning; as a consequence, the
situational interests of agents have been taken into
account. In conclusion, this notion seems to be adequate
to express intended meaning, given a set of contextually
plausible interpretations, both in cases of communicative
processes to determine speaker’s intended meaning and in
cases of negotiation to resolve linguistic disputes.

Acknowledgements
I thank Lawyer Dr. Sonia Guglielminetti for helpful
discussions and advices on several cases of controversy.
This research is supported by the Okkam project (cofunded by the European Commission - GA 215032) –
www.okkam.org

References
Bach, K. (1994). Conversational impliciture. Mind &
Language, 9, 2, 124-162.
Bach, K. (2004). Minding the gap. In C. Bianchi (Ed.),
The pragmatics/semantics distinction. Stanford: Csli.
Bianchi, C. (2004). Semantics and pragmatics: distinction
reloaded. In C.Bianchi (Ed.), The pragmatics/semantics
distinction. Stanford: Csli.
Bianchi, C. (2006). Nobody loves me: quantification in
context. Philosophical Studies, 130, 2, 377-397.
Bouquet, P. & Warglien, M. (2002). Meaning negotiation:
an invitation. In P. Bouquet (Ed.), Meaning negotiation
papers from the AAAI workshop. Edmonton: AAAI
Press.
Carston, R. (1988). Implicature, explicature and truththeoretic semantics. In R. Kempson (Ed.), Mental
representations. Interface between language and
reality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Carston, R. (2002). Linguistic meaning, communicated
meaning and cognitive pragmatics. Mind and
Language, 17, 1-2, 127-148.
Clark, H.H. (1992). Arena’s of language. Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press & Csli.

Clark, H.H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press.
Conte, R., & Castelfranchi, C. (1995). Cognitive and
social action. London: University College London.
Cruciani, M. (2009a). Cono del linguaggio, negoziazione
degli interessi e significato inteso di clausole
contrattuali ambigue. Sistemi Intelligenti, 21, 3, 473-88.
Cruciani, M. (2009b). Intended meaning and situational
interest. Proceedings of the 31° Conference of
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2747-2752). Austin,
(TX): Cognitive Science Society.
Grice, P. (1957). Meaning. Philosophical Review, 66,
377-88.
Grice, P. (1989). Studies the way of words. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Hansson, S.O. (1994). Decision theory. A brief
introduction. Dept. Philosophy and the History of
Technology, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm.
http://www.infra.kth.se/~soh/decisiontheory.pdf
Kaplan, D. (1977). Demonstratives. An essay on
semantics, logic, metaphysics, and epistemology of
demonstratives and other indexicals. In J. Almong, J.
Perry & H. Wettstein (Eds.), Themes from Kaplan.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989.
Kaplan, D. (1989). Afterthoughts. In J. Almong, J. Perry
& H. Wettstein (Eds.), Themes from Kaplan. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Kripke, S. (1979). Speaker’s reference and semantic
reference. In A. French, et al. (Eds.) Contemporary
perspective in the philosophy of language. Dordrecht:
Reidel.
Levinson, S. (2000). Presumptive meanings. The theory of
generalized conversational implicature. Cambridge
(MA): MIT Press.
Myerson, R.B. (1991). Game theory. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Perry, J. (1997). Indexical and demonstratives. In R. Hale
& C. Wright (Eds.), Companion to the philosophy of
language. Oxford: Blackwell.
Recanati, R. (1989). The pragmatics of what is said. Mind
& Language, 4, 4, 207-32.
Recanati, R. (1993). Direct reference: from language to
thought. Oxford: Blackwell.
Recanati, F. (2001). What is said. Synthese, 128, 75-91.
Searle, J. (1979). Expression and meaning. Cambridge:
University Press.
Searle, J. (1980). The Background of meaning. In J.
Searle, F. Kiefer and M. Bierwisch (Eds.), Speech act
theory and pragmatics. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Searle, J. (1992). The rediscovery of mind. Cambridge:
MIT.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1986). Relevance theory:
communication and cognition. Oxford: Blackwell.
Tarski, A. (1944). The semantic conception of truth and
the foundation of semantics. Philosophical and
Phenomenological Research, 4, 341-56.
Travis, Ch. (1975). Saying and understanding. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Travis, Ch. (1981). The true and false: the domain of
pragmatics. Benjamins: Amsterdam
Travis Ch. (1997). Pragmatics. In R. Hale & C. Wright
(Eds.), A companion to the philosophy of language.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, L. (1921). Tractatus logico-philosophicus.
Oxford: Blackwell.

1033

