UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
On-line Interactions of Context and Grammatical Aspect

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2gh19651

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Anderson, Sarah
Matlock, Teenie
Spivey, Michael

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

On-line Interactions of Context and Grammatical Aspect
Sarah E. Anderson (sec57@cornell.edu)a,
Teenie Matlock (tmatlock@ucmerced.edu)b,
Michael J. Spivey (spivey@ucmerced.edu)b
a

b

Department of Psychology, Cornell University, Uris Hall, Ithaca, NY 14853 USA
Cognitive and Information Sciences, University of California, Merced, Merced, CA 95344 USA
Abstract

What role does grammatical aspect play in the time course of
understanding motion events? Although processing differences
between past progressive (was walking) and simple past
(walked) aspect suggest differences in prominence of certain
semantic properties, details about the temporal dynamics of
aspect processing have been largely ignored. The current work
uses mouse-tracking (Spivey, Grosjean, & Knoblich, 2005) to
explore motor output in response to contextual descriptions
and aspectual forms. Participants heard descriptions of terrain
(difficult or easy) and motion events described with either the
past progressive or simple past while placing a character into a
scene to match this description. Overall, terrain descriptions
modulated responses to past progressive more than to simple
past in the region of the screen corresponding to the path.
These results, which suggest that perceptual simulation plays a
role in the interpretation of grammatical form, provide new
insights into the understanding of event descriptions.
Keywords: Language Processing; Event Understanding;
Mouse-Tracking; Embodied Cognition; Motion Verbs

The emerging consensus is that language influences thought
(see Boroditsky, 2000; Lucy, 1992; Matlock, Ramscar, &
Boroditsky, 2005), but the extent to which this generalizes is
uncertain. How does language influence the way people think
about everyday events? Can grammar influence the way
events are conceptualized, and if so, how? Does hearing just
“-ed” versus “-ing” on a motion verb influence listeners’
cognitive processing and motor response, and if so, how? The
goal here is to explore the influence of grammatical aspect on
the conceptualization of motion events. The main question is
how grammar and contextual descriptions differentially
influence motor output as people understand language.
Many language theorists have observed that grammatical
aspect provides temporal information about the internal
structure of a verb, specifically providing information about
the completion, duration, or repetition of the action (Comrie,
1976; Frawley, 1992). This temporal information, though
subtle, can exert a substantial influence on the way a sentence
is understood. Take, for example, the following sentences:
“David ran to the university,” and “David was running to the
university.” Both convey information about an event that
occurred in the past, although they use different aspectual
forms. The first sentence uses the simple past form of the
verb “ran,” emphasizing the completion of the action. In
contrast, the second uses the past progressive form,
emphasizing the ongoing nature of the action. Despite
agreement that aspect provides such temporal “coloring” of a
verb’s information, potential processing differences between

these aspectual forms have received little attention in
psycholinguistic research.
More recently, however, aspect was explored in a series of
offline studies that examined spatial outcome differences in
response to simple past and past progressive verbs (Matlock,
Fausey, Cargill, & Spivey, 2007). Participants read a
sentence like “This morning David walked to the university”
(simple past) or “This morning David was walking to the
university” (past progressive), and looked at a schematic
drawing that showed a path leading to the destination
described in the sentence and ten unevenly spaced identical
silhouette characters on the path (e.g., pedestrian with leg
extended forward and arms bent as if in motion). Participants
were instructed to “circle the man that the sentence is most
naturally referring to.” In brief, participants were more likely
to circle a character in the middle region of the path with
sentences containing past progressive verbs (was walking),
and more likely to circle a character in the latter region of the
path in response to sentences containing a simple past verb
(walked). A similar pattern emerged in a subsequent
experiment in which participants were asked to indicate
where along the path an object had been dropped after
reading simple past or past progressive sentences. These and
other results suggest that when participants read simple past
sentences, they focus on the end of the path, or the location
of the completed action in the scene. In contrast, when
participants read past progressive sentences, they focus on
the middle section of the path, where the ongoing action
would be taking place. These data suggest that different
aspectual forms have consequences for thinking about motion
events, but questions about the time course of processing
remain.
On-line processing differences were initially addressed in a
series of experiments by Madden and Zwaan (2003), in
which the authors demonstrated different aspectual forms
produce reaction time differences in narrative reading. Their
participants were quicker to respond to pictures showing a
completed action after they had read a sentence containing a
simple past verb (e.g., The car sped through the intersection)
versus a sentence containing a past progressive verb (e.g.,
The car was speeding through the intersection). However, no
such latency differences were found when participants read
sentences containing past progressive verbs and saw pictures
of intermediate action. The authors suggest that the effect
was missing in the past progressive condition because readers
represented the ongoing action at different stages of
completion. In other words, past progressive verbs could
potentially correspond to any of a number of intermediate
actions, and this could be un-captured by picture verification

1198

and reaction time tasks. Therefore, their results suggest that
different aspectual forms lead to processing differences in
real time. (For other work on aspect and spatial
representation, see Ferretti, Kutas, & McRae, 2007; Magliano
& Schleich, 2000; Morrow, 1985).
Such reaction time data have revealed valuable insights
into the processing of aspect. However, as suggested by the
work of Madden and Zwaan (2003), they are somewhat
limited when investigating diffuse representations. In
addition to such offline and reaction time experiments, there
is a great deal of information about real-time cognitive
processing in the dynamics of the response. For example,
evidence suggests that factors influencing latency to respond
also influence later aspects of response dynamics meaning
that the temporal dynamics of the motor movement that
executes a response contain volumes of virtually untapped
data. As a simple example, Abrams and Balota (1991) asked
participants to perform a lexical decision task by making
rapid limb movements in opposite directions to indicate
whether a string of letters was a word or not. As expected,
they found that the frequency of the word influenced reaction
time, with high frequency words eliciting faster responses
than low frequency words. Also, they found that word
frequency influenced response kinematics after the response
was initiated. Responses to high frequency words were
executed with greater force than responses to low frequency
words (Abrams & Balota, 1991). These findings suggest that
word frequency not only influences the time required to
recognize a word, but also influences response dynamics,
implying that the response system is not slavishly executing a
completed command regarding the categorical status of the
word. This makes a compelling case for looking not only at
reaction time differences, but also at variables of the motor
movements themselves initiated in response to a stimulus.
To better understand the potential differences in the online processing of different aspectual forms, we have
employed the methodology of computer-mouse tracking.
Monitoring the streaming x- and y-coordinates of goaldirected mouse movements in response to spoken language is
a useful indicator of underlying cognitive processes. In
contrast to ballistic saccades, arm movements allow for a
continuous, smooth motor output within a single trial to
complement eye-tracking research. Spivey, Grosjean, and
Knoblich (2005) demonstrated that these mouse movements
can be used to index the continuous activation of lexical
alternatives. By recording the x,y coordinates of the mouse as
it moved with the goal-directed hand motion to click on the
appropriate object, competition between the partially activate
lexical representations was revealed in the shape and
curvature of the hand-movement trajectories.
Further, some of our own data indicates that mousetracking is useful and informative for exploring research
questions on the on-line processing of grammatical aspect
(Anderson, Fausey, Matlock, & Spivey, 2008). In one
experiment, participants listened to sentences like, “Tom
jogged to the woods and then stretched when he got there,”
or “Tom was jogging to the woods and then stretched when
he got there.” While participants heard these sentences, they

saw scenes consisting of a path curving upwards from left to
right, and terminating at the destination described in the
sentence. A character was located to the right of the
beginning of the path and under the destination, separated
from the scene by a black box framing the destination and
path. Similar to our earlier offline results, participants
dropped the character closer to the center of the path with
past progressive verbs and closer to the destination with
simple past verbs. Further, the two aspectual forms elicited
significantly different movement durations: Participants
moved the character into the scene for a longer duration of
time with past progressive verbs than when they heard
sentences containing simple past verbs. These drop location
and movement duration results converge with and further
inform earlier research, supporting that past progressive
aspect focuses attention on the on-going nature of the action
while simple past aspect focuses attention on the end state of
that action, even during real time processing.
In the current experiment, we sought to extend these
findings by investigating the way verbal aspect may interact
with terrain descriptions. Research has shown that context
descriptions interact with fictive motion verbs to produce
both differences in patterns of eye movements and in reaction
times (Matlock, 2004; Richardson & Matlock, 2007).
However, the impact of such descriptions on grammatical
aspect has not been explored. Here we use mouse-tracking
methodology to investigate how different aspectual forms
interact with similar context descriptions. Participants heard
two sentences. The first provided a contextual description of
the path and the second manipulated grammatical aspect. For
example, on target trials participants heard a context sentence
describing the path as either difficult (i.e., “The road to the
university was rocky and bumpy”) or easy (“i.e., “The road to
the university was level and clear”), before a target sentence
containing either a simple past verb (i.e., “David walked to
the university where he sat in class”) or a past progressive
verb (i.e., “David was walking to the university where he sat
in class”). While hearing these sentences, participants saw
scenes containing a diagonal path that originated halfway up
the screen and extended from the extreme left to the top and
center of the screen (corresponding to the destination in the
sentence). The orientation of the path was changed to this
short, diagonal path from the long, curvy path of earlier
research (Matlock, et al., 2007; Anderson, et al., 2008) to
allow for more thorough and precise investigations of
potential spatial and movement duration differences. A
character was located to the right of the beginning of the path
and under the destination. It was separated from the scene by
a black box framing the destination and path.
We explored several hypotheses. If past progressive verbs
sentences elicit more attention to the path, then the effect of
context description was expected to be greater with past
progressive verbs than when they contained simple past
verbs.
Specifically, we predicted that context would
modulate movement durations and spatial attraction to the
path more in the past progressive sentences than in the simple
past verb sentences. Further, we wanted to explore the
influence of the visual scene’s path on movement durations.

1199

The visual scene---with a path starting halfway up the screen--would enable us to examine if the trajectories produced in
response to each aspectual form would reliably differ for the
entire trajectory of the hand or only in the region of the
screen corresponding to the path. If differences emerged
across the entire trajectory, then the effect of grammatical
aspect would appear to be more global, and to exert influence
across the entire event description. However, if differences
emerged only in the region of the screen corresponding to the
path, then the effect of grammatical aspect would appear to
be specific to the parts of the event it describes.

right of the beginning of the path and under the destination,
separated from the scene by a black box framing the
destination and path. See Figure 1. The depicted items in the
scene were taken from clipart and edited in Adobe
Photoshop. The only moveable item in the scene was the
character, which subtended an average of 1.53 degrees of
visual angle in width by 2.05 degrees in height. The
destinations were an average of 11.22 degrees of visual angle
in width by 4.09 degrees in height, and the path itself
occupied a square of 8.42 degrees of visual angle in width by
6.11 degrees of visual angle in height. The character was
located 14.25 degrees of visual angle from the destination.
The stimuli were presented using Macromedia Director MX,
Method
and mouse movements were recorded at an average sampling
Participants. A total of 64 undergraduates at Cornell rate of 40 Hz. The display resolution was set to 1024 x 768.
University participated in the experiment for extra credit in
psychology courses. All participants were right handed and
native speakers of American English.
Materials. Twelve sentences were created from adapting the
stimuli used in the offline studies of Matlock et al. (2007).
As we hoped to elicit movements across the extent of the
scene, from which we could extract differences in motor
dynamics between the two conditions, a final clause that
described an event at the destination was added, encouraging
movement all the way to the destination. Similarly, two
contexts for each stimulus were created. Hence, four
versions of each of the 12 experimental items were created,
as shown in (1) below: (1a) rough context description, simple Figure 1: Example target visual scene accompanied by target
past verb, (1b) rough context description, past progressive
sentences (1a, 1b, 1c, or 1d).
verb, (1c) smooth path description, simple past verb, (1d),
smooth path description, past progressive verb.
Additionally, to keep participants from developing strategies
specific to the experimental sentences, 12 filler items were
1a) The road to the university was rocky and bumpy. / David walked created. The fillers were of the same form as the target
to the university where he sat in class.
sentences: each contained a context description and either a
1b) The road to the university was rocky and bumpy. / David was
past progressive or simple past verb. These filler trials varied
walking to the university where he sat in class.
1c) The road to the university was level and clear. / David walked to from the target trials such that the context description
provided no information about the path (i.e., “The weather in
the university where he sat in class.
the valley was warm and humid”) and such that they
1d) The road to the university was level and clear. / David was
described no movement along the path (i.e., “Janet swam in
walking to the university where he sat in class.
the pool and then dried in the sun,”). These filler items were
Sentences were recorded using a Mac-based speech accompanied by 12 filler scenes, created using a short path
synthesizer program. Each of the 12 experimental items was beginning on the right side of the screen and slanting to the
spliced in order to produce both a past progressive and a top, center of the screen. Besides the direction of the path,
simple past version, ensuring that the prosody of both of the each filler scene was quite similar to the target scenes, for
targets were otherwise identical. Similarly, the context instance, character outside of a scene that contained the path
description was spliced onto the beginning of each of these and destination mentioned in the filler sentence.
target sentences. A pause of one second separated the offset Procedure. Participants were asked to make themselves
of each context sentence from the onset of the target comfortable in front of the computer, and allowed to adjust
sentence. The experimental items were counterbalanced the mouse and mouse-pad to a location that suited them.
across four presentation lists. Each list contained three First, participants read instructions to place the character in
instances of each condition, so that all participants heard all the scene to make the scene match the sentences they heard.
twelve target sentences, but only heard one version of each.
Upon signaling to the experimenter that they understood the
Corresponding visual scenes were created for each target task, they were next presented with two practice trials
sentence pair. Each target visual scene consisted of a (similar in form to the filler trials), followed by the
diagonal path starting halfway up and on the extreme left side experimental task. At the onset of each trail, participants
of the screen. The path slanted to the right, terminating in the were presented with the entire visual scene. After a 500 ms
middle at the top of the screen. A character was located to the preview, the sound file began. After the participant had

1200

moved the character (though not to any particular location), a
“Done” button appeared in the bottom left corner of the
screen. Participants clicked this button to move to the next
trial. A blank screen with a button in the center labeled
“Click here to go on” separated trials from each other. The
entire experiment lasted approximately 20 minutes.

Results
Mouse movements were recorded during the grab-click,
transferal, and drop-click of the character in the experimental
trials. Prior to the analyses, the data were screened to remove
extremely long trials. Movement durations 20 seconds or
more were removed because they constituted an unusually
long time for a mouse-movement. Using this criteria, only
three trials(less than 0.4%) of trajectories, were excluded.
Drop Locations. Previous offline results revealed that
participants chose a location closer to the middle of the path
as the best representative of a sentence containing a past
progressive verb, while selecting a location closer to the
destination as the best representative of a sentence containing
a simple past verb (Anderson, et al., 2008, Matlock, et al.,
2007). By plotting the drop point (location along the path
where each participant let go of the mouse to “drop” the
character) in each of the four conditions, the current results
demonstrate a similar trend. See Figure 2. There was not a
significant interaction of terrain description and verb aspect
(p’s > .5). However, there was a main effect of verb aspect
when comparing the average drop x-coordinate, F (1,62) =
8.462, p < 0.05, with the average drop x-coordinate being
further left (closer to the path) when participants heard past
progressive verbs (M = 476.71, SD = 68.81) than when they
heard simple past verbs (M = 494.82, SD = 61.74). Similarly,
there was a main effect of aspect when comparing the
average drop y-coordinate, F (1,62) = 6.048, p < 0.05, with
the average drop y-coordinate being lower (further from the
destination) when participants heard past progressive verbs
(M = 219.04, SD = 37.02) than when they heard simple past
verbs (M = 210.65, SD = 41.01). This tendency to drop a
character closer to the path in the past progressive condition,
and close to the destination in the simple past condition,
replicates previous evidence that the ongoing nature implied
by a past progressive verb draws attention to the middle
portion of the path, whereas there is a tendency to focus
attention on the destination in response to simple past verbs.

Figure 2: Drop locations in response to simple past verbs (left
panel) and past progressive verbs (right panel).
Movement Durations. We began our investigation of online
processing by looking at the temporal dynamics of the
movement of the character. There was no significant
interaction of context and aspect when comparing overall
movement durations (i.e., the length of time from the initial
grab of the character to the final drop of the character into the
scene), p’s> .2. There was a significant interaction of context
and aspect on movement durations specifically within in the
region of the screen corresponding to the depicted path, F(1,
63) = 4.6, p < .05. See Figure 3. In the region of the path, the
average movement duration for simple past verbs was not
substantially different when the context was first described as
rough (M= 2448.33, SD=1848.88) or smooth (M=2478.72,
SD= 1527.17). On the other hand, the average movement
duration in the region of the path for the past progressive
verbs was slower when the context was first described as
rough (M = 2667.70, SD=1679.86) than when it was
described as smooth (M=2121.88, SD=1240.13). Because
simple past verbs focus attention on completed action,
context descriptions do not significantly impact the
movement dynamics. On the other hand, because past
progressive verbs encourage attention to the ongoing-ness of
the action, context descriptions of the location of that
ongoing action do influence processing. These data extend
previous research significantly, suggesting that aspect
influences the real-time movement dynamics of the event
being matched and that these dynamics are sensitive to visual
information. Also, as predicted, the context descriptions
modulate this on-line measure when aspect focuses attention
to the ongoing action of the verb.

Figure 3: Movement duration differences in the region of the
visual scene corresponding to the path.
Raw Time Analyses: To begin looking at the differences in
spatial attraction to the visual scene’s path across conditions,
we first looked at average x- and y-coordinates within eight
500ms time-bins of the movement duration. There was no
significant interaction between aspect and terrain, p’s>.1, or
main effect of either variable, p’s>2. However, breaking the
movement into time bins serves only as an approximation of
actual attraction over raw time. These 500ms time-bins were
not time locked to the sound files, and hence did not have a

1201

fixed starting time. Because the offset of verb occurred late
within the sound files and because many participants did not
begin to move the character until after the end of the sound
file (with an average 1400 ms lag between offset of verb and
end of sentence), these data are not synchronized to a fixed
point. Future work will address potential raw time spatial
differences more fully.
Spatial Attraction. Figure 4 shows the average timenormalized trajectories in each of the four conditions. The
mean simple past and past progressive trajectories at each of
the 101 time-steps in the top panel of Figure 4 illustrate that
in the rough terrain context, the average past progressive
trajectory curved more toward the path than the average
trajectory elicited by the simple past sentences, but only near
the end of the trajectory. However, in the smooth terrain
description, (Figure 2, bottom), there appears to be greater
attraction toward the path across a greater portion of the
trajectory for the past progressive verbs.

away from the simple past x-coordinates and toward the path
between time-steps 89 and 101, p’s <.05, and no significant
divergence in the y-coordinates. This difference is
commensurate with the observed differences in drop
locations for past progressive and simple past verbs described
earlier. Even though there was no significant interaction
between aspect and context description on drop location, this
significant divergence so late in the time-normalized
trajectories may simply be an artifact of drop locations.
On the other hand, in the smooth context description, there
were significant divergences of the past progressive xcoordinates away from the simple past x-coordinates towards
the path between time steps 48 and 60, p’s <.05, and again
between time steps 65 and 89, p’s < .05. There was also
significant divergence of the average past progressive ycoordinates away from the average simple past y-coordinates
and towards the path between time steps 89 and 101. Again,
this divergence late in the trajectory may be an artifact of the
drop locations in each condition.
While these results are encouraging, they are not as
convincing as the path-movement duration results (Figure 3).
It is curious that the spatial attraction differences were
detected in the smooth context description but not as robustly
in the rough context description. Perhaps the visual stimuli
used to depict the path simply did not appear to afford
difficult or uneven travel, and the incongruence in the
linguistic description and the visual appearance of the path
hindered the emergence of full spatial differences in this
context description. Future work is slated to investigate this
possibility.

General Discussion

Figure 4: Average time-normalized simple past and past
progressive trajectories in rough and smooth terrain contexts.
To determine whether the divergences observed across the
simple past and past progressive sentence trajectories in the
rough and smooth terrain descriptions were statistically
reliable, we conducted a series of t-tests. These analyses were
conducted separately on the x- and the y-coordinates at each
of the 101 time-steps. In order to avoid the increased
probability of a Type-1 error associated with multiple t-tests,
and in keeping with Bootstrap simulations of such multiple ttests on mouse trajectories (Dale, Kehoe, & Spivey, 2007), an
observed divergence was not considered significant unless
the coordinates between the simple past- and past
progressive-sentence trajectories elicited p-values < .05 for at
least eight consecutive time-steps.
In the rough context description condition, there was
significant divergence of the past progressive x-coordinates

The results reported here are consistent with previous
research using mouse-tracking (Anderson, et al., 2008),
narrative reading (Madden & Zwaan, 2003), and offline
judgment tasks (Matlock, et al., 2007). They also provide
new evidence that different grammatical forms influence the
processing of event descriptions, with the simple past (e.g.,
walked) focusing attention on the end of the path and the
location of the completed action, and past progressive (e.g.,
was walking) focusing attention to the “middle” of the event
and the spatial region of that ongoing action. In addition to
corroborating previous work on grammatical aspect, these
data also reveal new insights about processing through the
examination of continuous motor output in response to
aspectual and contextual differences.
First, drop locations reliably differed between aspectual
forms, with the past progressive condition eliciting drop
locations closer to the path, and the simple past condition
eliciting drop locations closer to the destination. These data
are in line with earlier research, and were not significantly
altered by terrain description. Contextual descriptions did
interact significantly with verbal aspect in movement
durations, specifically within the region of the screen
depicting the path.
Contextual descriptions did not
significantly modulate simple past movement durations,
because of the simple past’s emphasis on the completed

1202

action. However past progressive movement durations were
significantly faster when preceded by an easy terrain
description than when preceded by a rough terrain
description. Because these differences emerge only in the
region of the path in the visual scene, but not in the overall
trajectory, these data suggest that grammatical aspect exerts
processing influences specific to the parts of the event it
describes.
Similarly, while the coarse measure of raw-time spatial
attraction to the path did not reveal statistically significant
results, there was a significant spatial divergence of the past
progressive trajectory away from the simple past trajectory
and toward the destination in both contextual descriptions.
Divergences late in the trajectory may be a result of
differences in drop location, but divergences across the
trajectories after the smooth context description provide
further evidence for processing differences between these
two aspectual forms. More specifically, our results may
suggest that differences in underlying perceptual simulations,
resulting in these differences in the dynamics of the motor
response, may account for observed processing differences.
The current research has notable implications for several
areas of research. Although grammatical aspect has been
considered to provide minimal semantic information by
providing subtle temporal nuance, our results indicate that
aspect can significantly influence on-line processing. This
work also investigates grammatical aspect using a novel
approach, allowing for the examination of more fine-grained
temporal information, which complements the existing
reaction time data. In addition, our results provide evidence
to support cognitive linguists’ claims regarding meaning as a
conceptualization of linguistic descriptions, and the idea that
aspect, like many domains of language, involves dynamic
conceptualization (Langacker, 1987: Talmy, 2000).
More broadly, this work resonates with embodied
cognition work on perceptual simulation and language
understanding (Barsalou, 1999). It also dovetails with the
methodological advances of Balota and Abrams (1995) by
providing new evidence from the temporal dynamics of a
response after the response has been initiated, and
demonstrating that the motor system is not a robot-like
automaton triggered by completed cognitive processes.
Rather, motor processes are co-extensive with cognitive
processes during perceptual/cognitive tasks (e.g., Balota &
Abrams, 1995; Gold & Shadlen, 2000; Spivey et al., 2005;
This work also comports with our understanding of how
mental models and visual information are coordinated in
motor output. Similarly to the way understanding of spatial
events is created and observed through tracking eye
movements (Richardson & Matlock, 2007; Spivey & Geng,
2001), this work demonstrates that event understanding takes
place differently as a function of changes in context
descriptions and grammatical aspect. Finally, the work
explores a new way that language may influence thought.

References
Abrams, R.A. & Balota, D.A. (1991). Mental chronometry: Beyond
reaction time. Psychological Science, 2, 153-157.
Anderson, S. E. . Matlock, T., Fausey, C., & Spivey, M.J. (2008).
On the path to understanding on-line processing of grammatical
aspect. Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 143-148), Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Barsalou, L. (1999). Language comprehension: Archival memory or
preparation for situated action? Discourse Processes, 28, 61-80.
Balota, A. D. & Abrams, R. A. (1995). Mental chronometry:
Beyond onset latencies in the lexical decision task. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 21,
1289-1302.
Boroditsky, L. (2000). Metaphoric structuring: Understanding time
through spatial metaphors. Cognition, 75, 1-28.
Comrie, B. (1976) Aspect. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dale, R., Kehoe, C., & Spivey, M. (2007). Graded motor responses
in the time course of categorizing atypical exemplars. Memory
and Cognition, 35, 15-28.
Ferretti, T. R., Kutas, M., McRae, K. (2007). Verb aspect and the
activation of event knowledge in semantic memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 33,
182-196.
Frawley, W. (1992). Linguistic semantics. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Gold, J. I. & Shadlen, M. N. (2000). Representation of perceptual
decision in oculomotor commands, Nature, 404, 390-394.
Langacker, R. W. (1987). Foundations of cognitive grammar:
Theoretical prerequisites. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.
Lucy, J.A. (1992). Grammatical Categories and Cognition: A Case
Study of the Linguistic Relativity Hypothesis. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Madden, C.J. & Zwann, R.A. (2003). How does verb aspect
constrain event representations? Memory & Cognition, 31, 663672.
Magliano, J.P. & Schleich, M.C. (2000). Verb aspect and situation
models. Discourse Processes, 29, 83-112.
Matlock, T. (2004). Fictive motion as cognitive simulation. Memory
& Cognition, 32, 1389-1400.
Matlock, T., Ramscar, M., & Boroditsky, L. (2005). On the
experiential link between spatial and temporal language.
Cognitive Science, 29, 655‐664.
Matlock, T., Fausey, C., Cargill, S., & Spivey, M. (2007,
November). On the path toward understanding the dynamics of
aspect descriptions in motion events. Paper presented at 48th
Annual Meeting of the Psychonomic Society, Long Beach,
California.
Morrow, D.G. (1985). Prominent characters and events organize
narrative understanding. Journal of Memory and Language, 24,
304-319.
Richardson, D. C., & Matlock, T. (2007). The integration of
figurative language and static depictions: An eye movement study
of fictive motion. Cognition, 102, 129-138.
Spivey, M. & Geng, J. (2001). Oculomotor mechanisms activated
by imagery and memory: Eye movements to absent objects.
Psychological Research, 65, 235-241.
Spivey, M.J., Grosjean, M. & Knoblich, G. (2005). Continuous
attraction toward phonological competitors. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 102, 10393-10398.
Talmy, L. (2000). Toward a cognitive semantics. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

1203

