UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Order Effects in Categorization: Identifying "the Nuts" in Poker
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/63x85982
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)
Authors
Gane, Brian D.
Catrambone, Richard
Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                   Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

      Order Effects in Categorization: Identifying ”the Nuts” in Poker
                                                  Brian D. Gane
                                           Georgia Institute of Technology
                                              Richard Catrambone
                                           Georgia Institute of Technology
Abstract: Research in concept learning indicates that the order of example instances affects acquisition of conceptual
structures. There is less research, however, regarding how example order affects categorization skill. Might the order
of training examples affect categorization even after the concepts have been learned? Participants were trained to
categorize sets of playing cards into the best possible poker hand. Training followed either a blocked (the best hand
remained the same for contiguous trials) or a mixed order (the best hand did not repeat more than twice in a row).
Preliminary results suggest that example order affects categorization reaction time (RT) during acquisition training:
the blocked order reduced RT. This trend reversed, however, during transfer trials: the mixed group had lower RT.
These findings suggest that example order plays a role in developing categorization skill. We offer a preliminary
explanation regarding how participants’ strategy develops based on the order of training examples.
                                                          667

