UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Order Effects in Moral Judgment

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3sf3f8nn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Wiegmann, Alex
Okan, Yasmina
Nagel, Jonas
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Order Effects in Moral Judgment
Alex Wiegmann (Alex.Wiegmann@psych.uni-goettingen.de)
Jonas Nagel (jnagel1@uni-goettingen.com)
Stefan Mangold (smangol@gwdg.de)
Department of Psychology,
University of Göttingen, Germany

Yasmina Okan(yokan@ugr.es)
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Granada
Campus Universitario de la Cartuja s/n ,18071, Granada, Spain

Abstract
Explaining moral intuitions is one of the hot topics of recent
cognitive sciences. In the present article we focus on a factor
that attracted surprisingly little attention so far, namely the
temporal order in which moral scenarios are presented. We
argue that previous research points to a systematic pattern of
order effects that has been overlooked until now: Only
judgments of actions that are normally regarded as morally
acceptable are affected by the order of presentation.
Additionally, this is only the case for dilemmas immediately
preceded by a scenario where the proposed action was judged
as morally unacceptable. We conducted an experiment that
confirmed this pattern and allowed us to analyze the
individual level responses it was generated by. We argue that
investigating order effects is necessary for approaching a
complete descriptive moral theory.
Keywords: moral intuitions; trolley dilemmas; order effects

Introduction
In the past decades, trolley dilemmas have been used
extensively for testing philosophical and psychological
theories of moral judgments. In the standard description of
the trolley dilemma introduced by Philippa Foot (1967), an
out-of-control train threatens to kill five people standing on
its track. The only way to prevent this is to pull a switch that
redirects the train onto a different track where it will kill
only one person. In a modification of this scenario
(Thomson, 1976), the only possibility to prevent the five
people from being killed is to push a heavy person from a
footbridge onto the track. This would stop the train but kill
the heavy person. Numerous studies (e.g., Hauser,
Cushman, Young, Jin, & Mikhail, 2007) have shown that
given the same number of people being killed vs. saved,
participants approve of acting in the first but not in the
second scenario. Several competing descriptive theories
explicate psychological principles supposed to underlie this
pattern of moral intuitions (e.g. Greene et al., 2001; Hauser,
2006). However, surprisingly little is known about potential
effects of the order in which several consecutive scenarios
are presented. It is plausible to assume that consecutive
scenarios will not be judged independently of each other: A
principle or mechanism that is activated when a particular
scenario is represented or evaluated might later be applied to
a series of subsequent scenarios. However, only few studies

have dealt with this issue so far (Petrinovich & O’Neill,
1996; Lanteri, Chelini, & Rizzello, 2008). Their results
suggest that under certain circumstances moral judgments
can indeed be transferred from one situation to another.
If such order effects could be replicated systematically,
this would have important implications for psychological
theories aiming to explain patterns of moral reasoning at a
descriptive level. Furthermore, relevant practical
implications would arise both for methodological
considerations inside the research laboratory (in terms of
controlling for order effects when designing experiments)
and for everyday judgments outside the lab.
The present work has three main goals. First, we will
provide the first comprehensive review of previous
empirical research on order effects in moral judgments, and
we will demonstrate that a systematic pattern of results has
been overlooked so far. Second, we will empirically test the
existence, extent and direction of order effects in reasoning
about moral dilemmas. Finally, we will discuss the
theoretical and practical implications of our findings,
focusing on psychological theories of moral reasoning.

Order Effects in Previous Research
Speaking of order effects in moral judgment, there are at
least two possible interpretations that could be labelled
“within-scenario order effect” and “between-scenarios order
effect”, respectively. The first type of effect results if the
order in which information concerning one particular
situation is presented affects judgment. If, for example, the
task is to judge the permissibility of an action, and the
results solely differ as a function of the particular sequence
in which positive and negative consequences are presented,
a “within-scenario order effect” occurs. Second, a judgment
regarding an action in a particular scenario might be
influenced by a judgment that had previously been made
about a different scenario. To illustrate, consider two
conditions in which a given scenario C is preceded by one
of two different scenarios (A vs. B). Differences in
judgments of the action scenario C between the two
conditions would – all other things being equal – instantiate
a “between-scenarios order effect”. The present research
will focus on this second category of order effects.

2111

One of the few studies addressing “between-scenarios
order effects” in moral reasoning was conducted by
Petrinovich and O’Neill (1996). Their aim was to analyze
whether the presentation order of a set of moral dilemmas
would affect participants’ level of agreement or
disagreement with the action proposed in each case. In one
condition (standard order), the dilemmas were arranged
according to decreasing predicted agreement with the
potential action, whereas in the second condition (reversed
order) the presentation order was reversed. While
Petrinovich and O’Neill (1996) did not report any order
effects in an experiment comparing three dilemmas that
differed with regards to content (Study 2, Forms 1 and 1R),
a reanalysis of their data revealed an order effect for the
dilemma with the highest predicted agreeability. In
particular, the average agreement rating in this scenario was
significantly higher if the scenario had been presented first
than if it had been preceded by the other two dilemmas
(t57=2.11; p<.05, two-tailed). In contrast, the other two
dilemmas received almost equally low ratings in both order
conditions. A reanalysis of a similar experiment using a
different set of dilemmas (Study 2, Forms 3 and 3R) also
revealed that the average rating for one of the positively
rated dilemmas varied between the two order conditions.
The average rating was lower if the scenario had been
directly preceded by a dilemma that received lower (as
opposed to higher) ratings (t68=2.88; p<.01, two-tailed).
Another experiment reported by Petrinovich and O’Neill
(1996; Study 2, Forms 2 and 2R) compared three different
versions of the trolley dilemma. As in the previously
reported experiments, a reanalysis revealed order effects for
the two scenarios with the highest predicted agreeability
(t57=2.93; p<.01, two-tailed, and t57=2.58; p<.05, two-tailed,
respectively). However, the third scenario that involved
pushing a person from a footbridge in order to stop the train
(cf. Table 1) was not affected by the order of presentation.
Similarly, Lanteri, Chelini, and Rizzello (2008) reported
order effects for the standard trolley dilemma, but not for
the footbridge scenario. In addition, similar order effects
were found incidentally in some studies. For example,
Nichols and Mallon (2006) found that acting in a case
equivalent to standard trolley was marginally more likely to
be judged as breaking a rule if the scenario was preceded by
a footbridge-equivalent case than if presented in the first
position. No analogous effects of a preceding standard
trolley-equivalent case on judgments in the footbridge-like
case were reported. Recently, Lombrozo (2009) incidentally
found results analogous to those obtained by Lanteri et al.
(2008). Finally, Alistair Norcross (2008) described an
interesting order effect outside of an experimental setting
that is nevertheless relevant for the present research. He
points out that when he asked his students to evaluate the
standard switch-trolley dilemma in the first position, the
majority judged that diverting the trolley is permissible.
However when this dilemma was preceded by a scenario in
which saving the lives of five patients requires to kill a
healthy person in order to transplant his organs, the

proportion of students judging that diverting the trolley is
permissible was considerably lowered.

A Systematic Pattern
We claim that a closer look at the findings reported reveals a
systematic pattern: First, all dilemmas that are affected by
an order effect were rated positively (in the sense that the
proposed action is on average rated as morally
right/acceptable). Dilemmas that received a negative rating
seem to be unaffected. Second, the dilemmas that were rated
positively are only affected if they are directly preceded by
a dilemma that was rated negatively. In this case, the ratings
were lower or, in those cases in which the response format
is dichotomous, the proportion of people that judge the
action to be acceptable decreased.
Previous attempts to account for between-scenario order
effects failed to fully capture the pattern we are suggesting
here. For instance, Petrinovich and O’Neill (1996) argue
that the initial strength of the response (agreement vs.
disagreement) influences subsequent responses. If this were
true, dilemmas that are normally rated negatively should
also be affected by the order of presentation. However, this
does not seem to be the case, since these dilemmas seem to
be rated equally negative in all cases. Lanteri et al. (2008)
take this asymmetry into account when explaining their
results. However, they focus on properties of specific
scenario contents instead of formulating a general pattern.
It is important to note that so far there is no evidence for a
major change of people’s judgments at a qualitative level. In
Petrinovich and O’ Neill’s study (1996), the ratings for the
proposed action do not seem to change enough to be
regarded as acceptable in one order condition but as
inacceptable in the other. In Lanteri et al. (2008), the
percentage of people judging the proposed action as
acceptable is indeed lowered, but it still remains above 50%.
Taking into account all the previous points, the main goal
of our work will be to empirically test the existence of the
pattern described above. If an order effect is present we will
aim to determine its strength and, in particular, whether it
can be strong enough to lead people to disagree with a
proposed action that they would normally (i.e., when
evaluated independently) agree with. We will use several
variations of the trolley dilemma due to the existence of a
large body of previous research establishing how the
modification of different factors in these dilemmas affects
how they are judged.

2112

individually approached on campus and asked to indicate
for one of the scenarios (n=20) whether Karl should act in
the proposed way or not on a scale from 1 to 6, where 1 was
“not at all” and 6 was “absolutely”. Table 2 shows the
average ratings for the different scenarios.

Experiment
Subjects
Fifty participants (35 women) were recruited using the lab
in the psychology department at the University of
Göttingen. They were randomly distributed to the different
experimental conditions. The average age was 23
(SD=2.83).

Table 2: Mean ratings (standard deviations) of agreement
and percentage of subjects disagreeing with the proposed
action in the five scenarios when evaluated independently.

Materials
We presented participants a series of five moral dilemma
scenarios (the standard switch trolley and four
modifications; see Table 1). Each scenario included a brief
description of a situation and an action that could potentially
be carried out in each case, accompanied by a diagram
depicting the situation schematically. The initial description
of the situational set-up was identical for all scenarios: An
out-of-control trolley rapidly approaches three railroad
workers who will die if Karl, the only bystander in the
scenario, does not intervene.
Table 1: Summaries of the actions proposed in the five
dilemmas
Scenario

Proposed action

Push

Push the large person from the bridge in order to
stop the train

Trap

Push a button that will open a trap door in order to
let the person on top of the bridge fall onto the
track and stop the train

Redirect

Redirect a train containing one person that is on a
safe parallel track onto the main track in order to
stop the train

Run Over

Redirect an empty train that is on a safe parallel
track onto the main track in order to stop the train
thereby running over a person that is on the
connecting track

Standard

Press a switch that will redirect the out-of-control
train onto a parallel track where it will run over
one person

Scenario (each n=20)
Run
Measure
Push
Trap
Redirect
Over
Standard
Mean Rating
1.95
3.4
4.15
4.4
4.45
(SD)
(1.76)
(1.76)
(1.42)
(1.14)
(1.15)
% Disagreement
80
40
30
10
15
Note. % Disagreement is the percentage of subjects who gave a rating <3,5
on a scale ranging from 1 to 6.

Based on these results we ordered the five scenarios
according to level of agreement with the proposed action
(i.e., Push<Trap<Redirect<Run Over<Standard). From here
onwards we will refer to this ordering as the level of
agreeability of the scenario, as defined by the extent to
which participants agree with the action when the dilemmas
are judged independently.

Procedure

This introduction was followed by a description of a
specific action that Karl could conduct in order to save the
three workers. This action was different for each of the five
scenarios, but in all cases it resulted in the death of one
innocent person (see Table 1). Instructions were included to
ensure that participants assumed that the proposed action
was the only available option in each case that, if carried
out, would always lead to the described outcome. The
number of potential victims (3 vs. 1) was kept constant
across scenarios.
In order to establish a baseline of agreement with the
action proposed in each of the five different scenarios we
conducted a pilot study using a different sample consisting
of 100 University of Göttingen students. Participants were

The experiments were run individually on computers.
Initially, the instructions were presented on the screen,
followed by the five different scenarios. After each scenario,
participants were requested to rate, on a scale from 1 to 6,
whether Karl should act in the proposed way or not, where 1
was “not at all” and 6 was “absolutely”. Half of the
participants saw the sequence of dilemmas in increasing
order of agreeability (Least Agreeable First [LAF]
condition, beginning with Push), whereas the other half saw
the sequence of dilemmas in the reverse order (Most
Agreeable First [MAF] condition, beginning with Standard).
The computerized format of the task guaranteed that each
dilemma was judged before the following one was
presented. Furthermore, there was no possibility for
participants to withhold their judgment until the end of the
sequence or to switch back in order to change a previously
given rating.

Results
To test whether the pattern of ratings of the dilemmas
differed in the two orders of presentation, a 2*5 mixed
analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted, where the
first factor was the order of presentation (LAF vs. MAF,
between-subjects) and the second factor was the scenario
judged (within-subjects). The results are shown in Table 3
and Figure 1. They revealed a main effect for order of
presentation. Specifically, average ratings were significantly
lower in LAF compared to MAF (F[1,48]=8.03; p<0.01).
Furthermore, we found a main effect for scenario

2113

(F4,192=23.44; p<0.001), confirming our expectation of
different average agreeability ratings for the scenarios.
Crucially, the interaction between order of presentation and
scenario was significant (F4,192=8,2; p<0.001), suggesting
the presence of a strong asymmetric order effect, in line
with our predictions.

Figure 1: Mean ratings of agreement with the proposed
action in the five scenarios when evaluated sequentially, as
a function of the order of presentation. Error bars indicate
SEM. The bold line at y=3.5 indicates the division between
average agreement and disagreement. MAF = Most
Agreeable First; LAF = Least Agreeable First.

Discussion

Table 3: Mean ratings (standard deviations) of agreement
and percentage of subjects disagreeing with the proposed
action in the five scenarios evaluated sequentially, as a
function of the order of presentation.
Scenario

Order
Condition

Redirect

Run
Over

Push

Trap

MAF
(n=25)

2.16
(1.21)

Mean ratings (SD)
3.24
3.84
3.84
(1.69)
(1.52)
(1.57)

4.08
(1.53)

LAF
(n=25)

2.16
(1.31)

2.12
(1.33)

2.52
(1.36)

2.68
(1.41)

2.52
(1.42)

Standard

% Disagreement
MAF
(n=25)

76

52

40

32

32

LAF
(n=25)

80

80

72

72

68

average rating was 4.08, while the average was only 2.68
when it appeared at the end of the sequence. This difference
was significant (F1,48=11,39, p<0.01). In contrast, the
average rating for the Push scenario was the same in both
orders (2.16). Moreover, after computing the within-subjects
differences between the ratings for the Standard and the
Push scenarios, it can be shown that the average difference
is significantly larger in MAF than in LAF (F1,48=14,69;
p<0.001), a result that further supports our prediction of an
asymmetrical order effect.
It is worth noting that the difference between the ratings
for the Standard scenario in the two order conditions is
relevant not only in quantitative but also in qualitative
terms: Treating ratings below 3.5 as disagreement and above
3.5 as agreement with the action proposed in a particular
scenario, the majority of participants’ ratings in LAF would
fall into the first category (18 out of 25; 72%) whereas the
majority of participants’ ratings in MAF would fall into the
second (18 out of 25; 72%). This difference is significant
(χ21=9.68; p<0.01). The same is true for Run Over
(χ21=8.01; p<0.01), Redirect (χ21=5.20; p<0.05), and Trap
(χ21=4.37; p<0.05), but not for Push (χ21=0.12; p=0.73).

Note. % Disagreement is the percentage of subjects who gave a rating <3,5
on a scale ranging from 1 to 6. MAF = Most Agreeable First. LAF = Least
Agreeable First.

In order to test our prediction more specifically, we
conducted planned comparisons involving Standard and
Push as examples of scenarios typically eliciting high and
low agreeability ratings, respectively. The average rating for
Standard varied considerably depending on the position in
which it appeared. When it had been evaluated first, the

In sum, the data were largely in line with the pattern we
discovered in previous studies: The judgments of actions
that received a positive rating when inquired independently
(Standard, Run Over, Redirect) differed significantly in the
two order conditions. In contrast, ratings for the action in
Push, which was rated negatively when judged
independently, did not differ in the two conditions.
Furthermore, in the MAF condition, the pattern of the
average ratings was very similar to the one obtained when
the scenarios were judged independently. In contrast, the
average ratings in the LAF condition differed widely from
those independent ratings.
It should be noted, however, that the results obtained for
one of the scenarios cannot be directly derived from the
aforementioned pattern. In particular, Trap was also affected
by the order of presentation (both in quantitative and in
qualitative terms), even though the proposed action in this
scenario was rated slightly negative when judged
independently. This finding motivated us to have a closer
look at the results at the level of individual participants. In
particular, we explored the data treating the ratings as a set
of binary choices made by each participant (i.e., treating
ratings < 3,5 as indication of disagreement and ratings > 3,5
4 as indication of agreement with the proposed action) and
observed the tendency that a disagreement with an action
was “transferred” to the judgment of the action in the next
scenario. That is, an action receiving a positive rating when
judged independently received lower ratings when presented
as part of a sequence if the preceding scenario was rated
negatively by the same participant. In contrast, positive
ratings did not affect the ratings of the next action (i.e.
changing them into positive ones) if this action was rated
negatively in independent ratings. For instance, in the LAF

2114

condition, only three out of 20 participants who disagreed
with the proposed action in the initial Push-scenario
changed their rating towards agreement during the whole
sequence, resulting in 17 votes against the proposed action
in the final Standard scenario. In contrast, when participants
started with Standard, eleven out of the 17 participants who
voted in favor of the proposed action changed their ratings
towards disagreement on the way to Push, resulting in only
six positive ratings for the proposed action in this final
scenario of the sequence. Reformulating the pattern this way
allows order effects to occur not only for actions rated
positively when judged independently but also for actions
rated negatively on average provided that the number of
participants who would disagree with the proposed action in
a particular scenario is sufficiently higher than the number
of participants who would disagree with the action in the
subsequent scenario. Within a sequence of scenarios this
excess of “disagreements” can be transferred to the next
scenario and cause an order effect. On the flipside, an order
effect might also occur when the action to be judged in a
particular dilemma is preceded by a dilemma where the
proposed action is judged positively. Again, it just has to be
the case that the number of disagreements in the preceding
scenario would be sufficiently higher than in the following
scenario if both scenarios were rated independently.
A similar distribution of nominal data could well underlie
the results obtained by Petrinovich & O’Neill (1996).
Unfortunately, we cannot conclusively confirm this claim
because only aggregated results are reported.
It is not possible to determine from our data why the
reported asymmetry occurs. However, a possible
explanation is the existence of a difference in the urge to
justify prohibitions and permissions. When we, e.g., prohibit
a child to play with knives we automatically think of – or
already have in mind – a justification for this prohibition.
Prohibitions seem to call for a justification. In contrast, we
do not think about a justification regarding most things we
permit. We do not feel an urge to explain or justify to
someone why, e.g., he or she is allowed to walk around.
Normally, we only justify or explain permissions when a
prohibition is the default case. For instance, we might
explain to a child that in the case of an emergency an
ambulance is permitted to drive over red lights although it is
usually prohibited. Applying this line of reasoning to the
asymmetric pattern found in our data it might be the case
that because participants prohibited the proposed action in
Push they were - consciously or unconsciously - thinking
about a justification for their prohibition. If they reach a
rough justification like "You must not kill an innocent
person", they might keep this principle in mind and apply it
to the remaining scenarios. Since an innocent person has to
be killed in all scenarios in order to rescue three persons,
participants might judge all proposed actions as prohibited.
In contrast, when they start with a scenario where they judge
the proposed action as permissible it might be the case that
no effort is invested in justifying this judgment and,

therefore, no such justification is applied to the remaining
scenarios.

Implications for Descriptive Moral Theories
An important goal of descriptive moral theories is to provide
an explanation of an average person’s moral judgments that
is as comprehensive as possible. A potential source of
variance in moral judgments which has received comparably
much attention is the structural set-up of the situations in
question (e.g., whether the victim serves as means or sideeffect in saving the three workers; see Cushman, Young, &
Hauser, 2006). However, the effects generated by the
manipulation of these factors are usually fairly small, i.e.
they account only for a very limited amount of the total
variance in moral judgments and thus leave a good portion
of between-subject differences unexplained. Thus,
considering only factors concerning the objective situational
set-up is by no means sufficient to generate a
comprehensive descriptive moral theory. Rather, it seems to
be necessary to take into account additional psychological
mechanisms that influence how a given situational set-up is
apprehended, represented, and evaluated. In our experiment,
for example, previously judged scenarios seemed to serve as
a reference which influenced the judgment of subsequent
scenarios. This reference is exogenous to the subsequent
scenarios, but indispensable to predicting and explaining the
reactions regarding them. Note that, under a certain order
condition (LAF), the effects of objective situational
parameters that can usually be found have almost entirely
vanished. The strength of this effect demonstrates the large
predictive potential of such exogenous factors and underpins
the importance of spending more efforts on investigating
them in the future.
According to our results, differential experiences prior to
a moral judgment can have a profound influence on this
judgment. Such effects can be expected to be especially
large under conditions that strongly suggest the adequacy of
transferring a certain judgment from one scenario to the
next. This is the case if one person is required to give
several subsequent judgments on various cases similar in
structure or content in a within-subjects design. As our
results suggest, extreme caution is required if responses
generated under such conditions are to be attributed to
properties of the scenarios themselves.
Finally, we believe that between-scenario order effects
might also play a role under conditions outside the
laboratory. The viewpoints taken by people discussing
moral issues in everyday life might be highly affected by the
issues that have been discussed immediately before. This
influence might not only be quantitative, but even
qualitative. Possible areas of application might be the design
of public opinion polls or surveys that consecutively gauge
responses to several (moral) issues. Previous research in
other contexts showing that such instruments can be highly
sensitive to effects of question positioning (e.g., Benton &
Daly, 1991;) in combination with our results from the moral
domain support this claim. On the other hand, we

2115

acknowledge that the similarity between the dilemmas used
in our study might particularly encourage the transfer of
judgments between scenarios. It might be that in cases
where the issues in question present a larger variability in
structure or content, order effects would diminish, and
ratings would be more similar to those made independently.

Summary and conclusions
In this article, we have argued that order effects can have a
profound influence on judgments of actions in moral
dilemma situations. Amongst order effects, we subsume
cases in which a given action is judged differently when
rated independently, as compared to when it has been
preceded by one or several other scenarios. We began by
reviewing the (scarce) literature on order effects in moral
psychological research. We then reported the results of an
experiment conducted in order to find out whether the
pattern of results extracted from the literature reviewed
could be replicated. For four out of our five scenarios this
was the case: Three scenarios that received positive ratings
when evaluated independently received negative ratings
when directly preceded by a scenario that had been judged
negatively. The ratings for Push were also in line with this
pattern, since the proposed action in this case was rated
negatively when judged independently and was not affected
by the order of presentation.
However, one scenario where the proposed action
received slightly negative ratings when judged
independently (Trap) was also affected by the order of
presentation. This finding motivated us to have a closer look
at the results by performing an analysis treating the
individual ratings as binary choices. Following this analysis,
we reformulated the pattern as follows: In those cases in
which a participant disagrees with the action proposed, this
judgment is likely to be “transferred” to the judgment of the
action in the next scenario, even if this action is rated
positively when judged independently. However, positive
ratings are not able to change the ratings of the next action
into positive ones if people normally disagree with the
action proposed in this case.
We went on by speculating what could explain the
asymmetry between negative and positive ratings in terms
of the potential to be transferred to the next case. One
candidate feature discussed was the greater urge to justify
prohibitions (negative ratings) compared to permissions
(positive ratings). Of course, more research is needed in
order to evaluate explanatory mechanisms underlying the
observed asymmetry.
In the last section of the paper, we discussed the
implications of our findings for descriptive theories of
morality. We argued that descriptive moral researchers
should be extremely cautious when interpreting results of
experiments using within-subjects designs. Furthermore, we
contended that they should devote more attention to general
psychological mechanisms contributing to moral judgment
in addition to focusing on features of particular scenarios.

Overall, the present study should draw the attention of
descriptive theories of moral judgment to previously
overlooked important sources of variance such as order
effects. Due to the crucial implications of these findings,
much more empirical and theoretical research needs to be
done in the future in order to address determinants,
mechanisms, and boundary conditions of the issues
discussed here.

Acknowledgements
We thank Johanna Kirchhoff for data collection.

References
Benton, J. E. & Daly, J. L. (1991). A question order effect
in a local government survey. Public Opinion Quartely,
55, 640-642.
Cushman, F., Young, L., & Hauser, M. (2006). The role of
conscious reasoning and intuition in moral Judgment:
Testing three principles of harm. Psychological Science,
17(12), 1082-1089.
Foot, P. (1967). The problem of abortion and the doctrine of
the double effect. Oxford Review, 5, 5-15.
Greene, J. D., Sommerville, R. B., Nystrom, L. E., Darley,
J. M., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). An fMRI investigation of
emotional engagement in moral judgment. Science,
293(5537), 2105-2108.
Hauser, M. (2006). Moral minds: How nature designed our
universal sense of right and wrong. Ecco.
Hauser, M., Cushman, F., Young, L., Kang-Xing Jin, R., &
Mikhail, J. (2007). A dissociation between moral
judgments and justifications. Mind & Language, 22(1), 121.
Lanteri, Chelini, & Rizzello (2008). Lanteri, A., Chelini, C.,
& Rizzello, S. (2008). An experimental investigation of
emotions and reasoning in the trolley problem. Journal of
Business Ethics, 83(4), 789-804.
Nichols, S., & Mallon, R. (2006). Moral dilemmas and
moral rules. Cognition, 100(3), 530-542.
Norcross, A. (2008). Off her trolley? Frances Kamm and the
metaphysics of morality. Utilitas, 20(01), 65-80.
Petrinovich, L., & O'Neill, P. (1996). Influence of wording
and framing effects on moral intuitions. Ethology and
Sociobiology, 17(3), 145-171.
Thomson, J. J. (1976). Killing, letting die, and the trolley
problem. The Monist, 59, 204-217.

2116

