UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Pair Analysis and Joint Action Theory: A Research Protocol to Study Cognition and Interaction
in Visual Analytics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/05n1442q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Hernandez, Richard Arias
Kaastra, Linda T.
Fisher, Brian D.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Pair Analysis and Joint Action Theory: A Research Protocol to Study
Cognition and Interaction in Visual Analytics
Richard Arias Hernández
Simon Fraser University, School of Interactive Arts and Technology

Linda T. Kaastra
University of British Columbia, Media and Graphics Interdisciplinary Centre

Brian D. Fisher
Simon Fraser University, School of Interactive Arts and Technology
Abstract: Visual analytics, the ”science of analytical reasoning with interactive visual interfaces,” calls for the development of new models of human cognition in analytic interaction with information technology. While foundational
work brings traditional cognitive science models to address interaction with visualization environments, research
protocols to empirically test these models in ”the wild” are lacking. We combine a research protocol called ”Pair
Analysis” with H.H. Clark’s Joint Action Theory as a theory-methods package for studying cognition and interaction
in visual analytic environments. Pair Analysis, an observed analytic interaction by a subject matter expert and a
visual-analytic tools expert, provides a unique empirical window into the cognitive process of analytical reasoning
and the social processes of interaction. We use JAT’s operational concepts to characterize analytic dyads’ thought
processes and joint use of visualization technology. Our main hypothesis is that sustaining rhythmic interactions in
Pair Analysis is indicative of sustaining cognitive flow.

526

