UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Pattern Recognition Principle Theoretical Model of Mind-Brain Functioning
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7018q7m9
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)
Author
De Paiva, Gilberto
Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                  Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                     University of California

       Pattern Recognition Principle Theoretical Model of Mind-Brain
                                                   Functioning
                                                 Gilberto de Paiva
Abstract: The Computational Theory of Mind and the Connectionist Neural Model are actually the dominant
cognitive models in the scientific community. But there is still a discussion about their compatibility as the basis of
Cognitive Science. A more fundamental explanation of this two leading cognitive mechanisms in physical basis can
give a better explanation of the mind and brain phenomena.
   I propose the concepts of PATTERN RECOGNITION-PROCESSING-LEARNING as NECESSARY AND SUF-
FICIENT PRINCIPLE to build a solid foundation of cognitive science. This encloses a general body-mind, physical,
psychological, neural, functional and computational reductionist explanation of the mind cognitive phenomena.
   Supporting arguments are: 1- Pattern recognition is a necessary principle for cognitive science. It is a key process
in many different scientific areas, but no cognitive science model takes it formally for a general brain-mind theory. 2-
The equivalence of the physical-neural-computational mechanisms of pattern recognition as the basis of the cognitive
phenomena in performing all cognitive functions (sensory, memory, learning, processing, logical, feeling, emotions,
thought, consciousness, etc) , which are here demonstrated. 3- I also propose some key biological cognitive processes
and strategies strictly related to pattern recognition processing. 4- A definitional-explicative modeling building
theory is also shown giving simple, understandable and unambiguous definitions and scientific explanation of most
key cognitive concepts like thinking, self and consciousness. Such a theory is of fundamental importance because those
type of cognitive concepts lacks even a reasonable definition. With a scientific-objective definitions we can evaluate,
compare and estimate its consistency and also propose experimental and empirical experiments. As an example I
suggest one preliminary definition of self-consciousness as: ”the recognition by the pattern recognition system of the
patterns of its own activity”. 5- A mathematical-logical formalism study of cognitive pattern recognition is here
proposed as theoretical basis. Here a general formal definition of pattern recognition is proposed in the cognitive
science scope. 6- With this theoretical formulation we are able to include other cognitive properties to any basic
definition as far as needed, demonstrating it as a solid and promising theory.
   As any candidate as a complete theory of cognitive science, this model allow us to reinterpret all branches of
human reasoning, including the philosophy and foundations of science and the human understanding of the universe.
With the promising applied pattern recognition technology already in development, this model could help to give
some directions to artificial intelligence and also neurobiology and psychology-sociology research.
                                                           519

