UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Perceptual Simulations of Temporal Uses of In and On in First and Second Language
Processing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/72c3t5zr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Onnis, Luca
Jackson, Daniel
Spivey, Michael

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Perceptual Simulations of Temporal Uses of In and On in First and Second
Language Processing
Luca Onnis (lucao@hawaii.edu)
Department of Second Language Studies, University of Hawaii
Honolulu, HI 96822 USA

Daniel Jackson (danieloj@hawaii.edu)
Department of Second Language Studies, University of Hawaii
Honolulu, HI 96822 USA

Michael J. Spivey (spivey@ucmerced.edu)
School of Social Sciences, Humanities and Arts, University of California, Merced
Merced, CA 95343 USA
Abstract

literal semantic content of containment and support
respectively, to take on grammatical characteristics, a
process often described as grammaticalization (Hopper &
Traugott, 1993). Thus, conventionalization over time would
lead to semantic bleaching, such that the same prepositions
– and the expressions they are embedded in – would be
processed differently, whether they are used literally or
idiomatically. Some evidence for a processing difference
between literal (spatial) and idiomatic (temporal) uses of
prepositions comes from a preliminary neuropsychological
study. Kemmerer (2005) reports that brain-damaged
subjects with left perisylvian lesions failed a test of
knowledge of the temporal meanings of prepositions, but
passed a test that assessed knowledge of the corresponding
spatial meanings of the same prepositions, suggesting that
the spatial and temporal meanings of prepositions are
represented and processed independently of each other in
the brains of adult speakers.
In the present study we considered an alternative
hypothesis, namely that idiomatic prepositional uses in
one’s native language are not entirely arbitrary, as they may
activate image-schematic perceptual simulations during
language processing (Gibbs, 2006; Richardson, Spivey,
Barsalou, & McRae, 2003; Zwaan, 2004). Spatial
prepositions have been studied for artificial intelligence and
automated translation (e.g., Andre et al., 1987; RetzSchmidt, 1988), as well as for their complex mappings to
various gradations in spatial relations (e.g., Bowerman &
Choi, 2003; Coventry & Garrod, 2004) and imageschematic mental representations (Brugman & Lakoff,
1988). In particular, previous research has demonstrated our
tendency to use spatial metaphors to help us understand time
(e.g., Boroditsky, 2000). A wide variety of laboratory
experiments have clearly demonstrated a role for embodied
sensorimotor properties (or “perceptual simulations”) in
language processing (e.g., Barsalou, 1999; Bergen, Matlock,
Lindsay, & Narayanan, 2007; Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002;
Richardson et al., 2003). There is in fact a long history to
embodied sensorimotor accounts of language that predates
the recent spate of laboratory experiments. The field of
cognitive linguistics has provided a number of spatial

Prepositions in natural languages often appear to be governed
by arbitrary conventionalized idiomatic uses (e.g., I was born
in May, I will see you on Sunday). We present empirical
evidence that such prepositional uses are not entirely
arbitrary, as they activate image-schematic perceptual
simulations during language processing.
In Experiment 1, native speakers of English were prompted to
think about either the date or the month of their birthday, and
then select one of four calendar diagrams, two foils, one flat
calendar and one box-like calendar diagram designed to
invoke perceptual simulations of support and containment
respectively. There was a significant relationship between the
question prompt (implicitly eliciting in or on) and the type of
calendar chosen (containment or support). Thus, spatial
schemas can be spontaneously activated when thinking about
time even for non-literal, idiomatic uses.
Prepositional uses are notoriously difficult for English L2
learners. We surmised that improper prepositional uses may
be linked to improper underlying perceptual simulations. This
was confirmed in Experiment 2 where Japanese-speaking
students of English were presented the same task as
Experiment 1. Here, results indicate no relation between the
date or month question and calendar choice. The experiments
offer both theoretical and practical insights into how
prepositions are processed by individuals with varying levels
of language knowledge.

Keywords: Perceptual simulations; prepositions; second
language learning; embodied cognition.

Introduction
Prepositions in natural languages often appear to be
governed by arbitrary conventionalized idiomatic uses (e.g.,
Vandeloise, 1991). For example, native English speakers
tend to take it for granted that one uses the preposition “on”
to refer to the date on which one was born but one uses “in”
to refer to the month in which one was born. These are of
course conventional idiomatic uses that didn’t have to be
that way, and are “partly a matter of collocational habit”
(Lindstromberg, 1998, p. 76). How are these idiomatic
prepositional uses processed in the mind? On one account,
locative prepositions such “in” and “on” lose their original

889

descriptions of linguistic meanings in the form of “image
schemas” (Gibbs & Colston, 1995; Lakoff, 1987;
Langacker, 1987; Talmy, 1983). In particular, image
schemas (two-dimensional layouts of idealized trajectors
and landmarks) have proven especially illustrative for
understanding the varied meanings of spatial prepositions
(Brugman & Lakoff, 1988; Talmy, 1983; Tyler & Evans,
2003). Indeed, image schemas may be the quintessential
generic form of the perceptual simulations that underlie the
understanding of prepositions like over, on, and in.
Therefore, it may not be surprising to find that more
specific properties of spatial relationships (such as the
containment properties of “in”, or the support properties of
“on”) become articulated in our perceptual simulations of
the spatial metaphors we use for understanding time. Thus,
although they are idiosyncratic, idiomatic uses of
prepositions in English such as “I will see you on Thursday”
may not be entirely arbitrary. Rather, they may involve
perceptual simulations and/or image schemas based on the
preposition being used (e.g., Brugman & Lakoff, 1988). We
set out to test this hypothesis in Experiment 1.
Studying the processing of idiomatic prepositions in adult
native speakers bears not only theoretical import, but also
practical implications for learning a second language.
Prepositional uses are recognized as notoriously difficult for
English L2 learners to acquire, especially when their native
language has no equivalent prepositions (e.g., in Korean, I
May was born), or it possesses one single general
preposition that collapses the meaning of two (e.g., in
Japanese, ni subsumes both in and on), or it uses different
prepositions (e.g., in Italian, I am going in Italy). Textbooks
and materials for English second language (L2) learners
emphasize the arbitrary nature of non-literal prepositional
uses and have little to offer except the instruction to
memorize either rules or examples. In Experiment 2, we
hypothesized that Japanese L2 learners of English struggle
with prepositional uses particularly because they cannot rely
on the congruent perceptual simulations underlying such
uses. In the Discussion section, we argue that an embodied
account of sentence processing can potentially change
instructional practices in second language education. We
propose that if image-schematic mental representations are
part and parcel of sentence processing, then language
teaching curricula should benefit from taking advantage of
that additional source of information in training secondlanguage learners.
To summarize, the main goal of Experiments 1 and 2 was
to investigate the influence of language on the activation of
image schematic perceptual simulations. Perceptual
simulation was operationally defined as the process of
selecting a visually presented object, a calendar, congruent
with a conventionally accepted response to a target question
(date or month of birth). There were two experimental
conditions (Date and Month), both of which incorporated
four calendar diagrams designed to invoke perceptual
simulations of support (Figure 1, item 1) or containment
(Figure 1, item 2) or neutral filler items (Figure 1, items 3

and 4). Participants were first asked to think about the date
or month of their birthday, then select one of the four
calendars (in the experimental conditions). Japanese learners
of English were additionally asked to respond to a sentence
completion task eliciting the prepositions in or on. The
following research questions were intended to explore the
issues outlined above:
1. Do native speakers of English select calendar images
whose perceptual simulation (container vs. support) is
congruent with the unmentioned preposition (on or in) that
is associated with the prompted question (date of birth or
month of birth, respectively)?
2. Do Japanese speakers of English as a foreign language
select calendar images whose perceptual simulation
(containment vs. support) is congruent with the
unmentioned preposition that is associated with the
prompted question?
3. For the Japanese participants, does the presence or
absence of an image influence the accuracy of responses in
the sentence completion task?
4. Do those Japanese speakers who do select the
congruent image respond with the correct English
preposition?
5. In the case of Japanese participants, do higher
proficiency speakers select the congruent primes more often
than lower proficiency speakers?

Figure 1. Calendar diagrams used in the date prompting
condition, with the support image at the top-left.

Figure 2. Calendar diagrams used in the month prompting
condition, with the containment image at the top-left.

890

Experiment 1

birth?” accompanied the calendar images depicted in Figure
1 or Figure 2 depending on the experimental condition. The
calendar images were printed on a US letter sheet of paper.
Participant choices were recorded by the experimenter.

Different languages use their spatial prepositions to carve up
the various possible spatial relationships in a variety of
ways. For example, where English uses “in” for
containment spatial relationships, and “on” for support
spatial relationships, Spanish and Japanese use a single
preposition (“en” and “ni” respectively) for both
containment and support (for discussion, see Coventry &
Garrod, 2004). Moreover, where English collapses tightlyfitting containment and loosely-fitting containment into a
single “in” category, Korean uses the prepositions “kkita”
for the former (plus tight-fit support) and “nehta” for the
latter (Bowerman & Choi, 2003; Choi & Bowerman, 1991;
Mandler, 1992). Interestingly, English-learning infants can
actually learn the tight-fit containment-or-support spatial
category (referred to as “kkita” in Korean) when they are
given a spoken novel word with which to label the image
(Casasola, Bhagwat, & Burke, 2009). Thus, children’s
categorization of spatial relationships is influenced by the
spatial prepositions they grow up with. Might even adults’
real-time perceptual simulations of the language they read
and hear be influenced by the preposition they use to
describe an event (even if that preposition does not call for a
literal meaning, but a purely idiomatic one)?

Results
Congruence of perceptual simulations To address the
above research questions in Experiments 1 and 2, Pearson’s
Chi-squared test with Yates’ continuity correction was used
to determine whether observed differences were statistically
significant. An alpha level of .05 was set for each test we
conducted. Experiment 1 was devised to answer the first
research question, regarding the congruence of perceptual
simulations in native speakers. The English native speakers
in this study tended to select calendar images whose
perceptual simulation was congruent with the preposition
associated with the prompted question: 98% selected the
support calendar when prompted with the date question, and
41% selected the container calendar when prompted with
the month question. There was a significant relationship (χ2
= 23.73, df = 1, p < .001) between the date or month
question prompt (eliciting in or on) and the type of calendar
chosen (containment or support). Thus, it appears that
spatial schemas can be activated in one’s native language
when thinking about time even for idiomatic prepositional
usages.

Method

Experiment 2

Participants Fifty-one native English-speaking students
were recruited at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa.

A key topic of research in the area of spatial language is the
cross-linguistic variation of how a given language’s spatial
prepositions partition and categorize various spatial
relationships (Bowerman & Choi, 2003) – which brings us
to the crux of the question addressed in Experiment 2. When
second language (L2) learners make errors with spatial
prepositions, what is the character of the perceptual
simulations they generate (see also Coventry & GuijarroFuentes, 2008; Tyler & Evans, 2003)?

Materials Since almost every spatial preposition in every
language has a quite varied range of uses (e.g., Bowerman
& Choi, 2003; Brugman & Lakoff, 1988; Haspelmath,
1997; Lindstromberg, 1998), the experiment focused on a
particular idiomatic use of a spatial preposition, and
examined the perceptual simulations that native speakers
may be generating when they understand that particular
idiom. Two sets of four calendar diagrams were designed to
each include a single image that would invoke a perceptual
simulation of support or containment. For instance, in the
top-left corner of Figure 1, the diagram corresponds to the
expression, born on [date] because it displays a spatial
affordance of support, and the diagram in the top-left corner
of Figure 2 corresponds to the expression, born in [month]
because it displays a spatial affordance of containment. The
circle and triangle diagrams are filler items intended to
distract participants from figuring out the experimental
manipulation and also to mitigate the potential influence of
cultural bias due to the prototypicality of the flat calendar.
The arrangement of the support and containment calendar
diagrams was counterbalanced from left to right to avoid
location preferences.
Procedure Randomly assigned participants were first
prompted (without mentioning the prepositions “in” or
“on”) to think about the date or month of their birthday.
Then one of two questions, “Which one of these calendars
would you use to indicate the date [or, month] of your

Method
Participants
Eighty-two
native
Japanese-speaking
undergraduate students enrolled in an English program at a
private university in Tokyo, with a mean age of 20.5 years
(SD = 5.4), voluntarily participated. On average, they had
studied English for 8.8 years (SD = 2.6), and had spent a
mean of 0.9 years abroad in English-speaking countries (SD
= 2.1). When asked to rate their ability to use English on a
scale of one to 10, their average rating was 4.5 (SD = 1.6).
Materials The same materials as Experiment 1 were used.
Materials were remotely delivered via the Internet using a
survey software (www.surveymonkey.com).
Procedure Participants were randomly assigned to an
experimental condition or a control condition. In the
experimental condition, participants were prompted with the
statement that read “Think about the date [or, month] of
your birthday” and then asked to select a calendar picture as

891

in Experiment 1. In the control condition, participants were
prompted with the same statement but did not view the
calendar pictures. Next all participants in both conditions
were asked either, “What is the date of your birthday?” or
“What is the month of your birthday?” and subsequently
typed their answer in a blank field preceded by the stem, “I
was born ...”. Following this, they completed a 10-item
cloze test (Brown, 1998) and filled out a questionnaire in
Japanese, in part based on the Language Experience and
Proficiency Questionnaire (Marian et al., 2007). All
participants’ responses (calendar choice, sentence
completion, cloze items chosen, and responses to the
questionnaire, were recorded by the survey software, and
later downloaded for analysis by the experimenter.

prepositions correctly to answer the above question: 55% of
participants in the date condition and 50% in the month
condition used the correct preposition (χ2 = 0.33, df = 1, p =
.57). Also, no significant interaction was found between the
experimental and control group in terms of accuracy of
response (χ2 = 0.16, df = 1, p = .69). Therefore, the presence
or absence of the calendar images appeared not to influence
accuracy of production. This is reasonable, given that
participants were presented with a choice of four different
calendars, and thus it is not apparent which of the four
should have independently primed the a correct answer.
These results appear to rule out an account in terms of
conceptual priming, that is that conceptual representations
based on a visual context prime other conceptual
representations and preposition choices in production.
The possibility of an influence of calendar choice on
accuracy was more closely examined through research
question four, which probed whether participants who
selected the congruent image provided an accurate response
to the target question. Only 40% of them did (χ2 = 1.2, df =
1, p = .27), suggesting that for these participants, there is no
relationship between image choice and accurate production.
Image choice and proficiency in L2 learners Finally, the
fifth research question examined the likelihood of a
relationship between image choice and proficiency level.
After standard test item analysis techniques were applied to
the cloze test, two items with low discrimination indices
were excluded. Internal reliability was found to be .61 for
the remaining eight items. We ran a logistic regression
analysis, using a generalized linear model, with cloze test
scores predicting congruency of calendar choice. Although
the results were not significant under a two-tailed test (t =
.56), there was a positive trend (slope coefficient = 0.08688)
toward higher proficiency participants selecting images
corresponding with the prepositional uses implied by the
prompt question. This trend was confirmed using a chisquare analysis. A median cut-off point for high versus low
proficiency was established and the relationship between
choosing an image congruent with the prompt question and
proficiency level (cloze test) was tested. Although these
results were not significant (χ2 = 2.13, df = 1, p = .14), of
those participants who did select the congruent image, a
greater number were in the high proficiency group (19) than
in the low proficiency group (11).

Results
Congruence of perceptual simulations in L2 learners Our
second question in this research project aimed to address the
issue of congruence between prepositional use and elicited
schemas with Japanese-speaking EFL learners. Here, in
stark contrast to the findings in Experiment 1 with native
English speakers, the results indicated no relation between
the date or month question and calendar choice: 85%
selected the support calendar when prompted with the date
question, and 30% selected the container calendar when
prompted with the month question (χ2 = 0.92, df = 1, p =
.34). As might be expected, second language learners of
English in this study did not show a tendency to select
calendar images congruent with the time question posed to
them. To directly compare native and non-native speakers,
we collapsed the data from Experiment 1 and 2, and fitted a
generalized log-linear model with three variables (Native
Language, Prompt Question, Calendar Diagram). This
saturated statistical model yielded a significant three-way
interaction. To properly assess this significance, we
followed a model simplification method (Crawley, 2005),
by deleting the three-way interaction from the model, and
checking whether a simpler model would lose explanatory
power. Indeed the models differed (p = 0.025), so we
retained the more complex model with the three-way
interaction. The analyses confirmed that only the native
English speakers show a tendency to select calendar
diagrams consistent with the prompt question posed to
them.
Calendar images and accuracy in L2 learners Our third
research question asked whether the presence or absence of
an image would influence English non-native speakers’
accuracy of responses by way of a visual priming. Answers
to the question, “What is the date of your birthday?” or
“What is the month of your birthday?” were coded as either
correct or incorrect for the experimental and control groups,
depending on whether participants produced on or in. For
the date question, neutral responses in which participants
optionally deleted the preposition (e.g., I was born Ø
December 11th) were excluded from the analysis (n = 12).
To begin with, there was no apparent difference in the
ability of participants assigned to the date and month to use

General Discussion
The present study looked at the susceptibility of
individuals to forming spatial image schematic perceptual
simulations when thinking about non-spatial metaphorical
expressions. Although prompted to consider time, native
speakers activated schemas for spatial prepositions, as
shown by their selection of calendar images congruent with
either containment or support. On the contrary, Japanesespeaking learners of English as a foreign language tended
not to associate the spatial and temporal meanings of
prepositions in this manner.

892

At present a number of questions remain unanswered
about the role of perceptual simulations in second language
learning. We suggest a few avenues for research that we are
currently investigating, and that would shed light on
whether it is possible to use image-schemas to assist L2
learning. First, further research should address to what
extent L2 proficiency matters in activating perceptual
simulations. The Japanese group we tested was comprised
of low-to-intermediate level of English learners, who had
mainly received formal schooling in Japan and little or no
genuine immersion. It is possible that a comparison between
this group and a more proficient group of L2 speakers will
reveal a significant difference in the learners’ susceptibility
to perceptual simulations.
Follow-up studies will test for the reverse direction of the
effect obtained in Experiment 1. That is, can priming a
particular perceptual simulation influence the type of phrase
that a speaker chooses to produce? Previous work has
shown that participants’ use of in and on is influenced by a
variety of factors in the scene, including animacy of the
Figure and the Ground, as well as the function and degree of
concavity of the Ground, (Feist & Gentner, 1998; 2003).
Future experiments could explore this use of in and on for
idiomatic expressions that only metaphorically involve a
spatial relation. For example, participants could be
presented a single picture of either the box-like calendar
(Fig. 2 top-left) with the month of their birthday included in
its top portion or the flat calendar (Fig. 1 top-left) with the
day of their birthday included in its top portion. They would
then be instructed to report their date [or, month] of birth,
and the measure is whether they use the preposition in or on.
This type of manipulation would provide evidence regarding
the bi-directionality of influences between perceptual
simulations and language processing – showing not only
that concepts can potentiate sensorimotor primitives (Mahon
& Caramazza, 2008), but also that sensorimotor primitives
can potentiate concepts. This is particularly relevant for L2
learning situations where the exposure to the statistical
patterns of a specific idiom are less robust. Under such
circumstances, the choices between seemingly-acceptable
prepositions and perceptual simulations are more openended, and thus malleable by one another. Conversely, the
extensive statistical exposure of English L1 speakers is
expected to entrench their perceptual simulations, resulting
in a more uni-directional influence. Evidence of perceptual
malleability in L2 learners would then set the stage for other
manipulations investigating the learnability of prepositions
in L2. It is possible that perceptual experience guides
learning and use. In fact, Celce-Murcia and Larsen-Freeman
(1999) have claimed that “anchoring the meaning of
prepositions in spatial relationships is the first step to
helping students learn to deal with areas where the meaning
is more abstract” (1999, p. 405). Activating the spatial
meanings of these prepositions may give rise to simulations
of containment and support that serve to anchor the
temporal senses of in and on, respectively. New experiments
can thus be devoted to an explicit investigation of a novel

visual-context-oriented method of learning prepositions in a
second language. Experiments that follow from this line of
research can make explicit comparisons and tests between
alternative second language teaching methods (e.g., Brown,
2006; Cook, 1996; Long & Doughty, 2009; Nunan, 1999),
as well as explore additional prepositions. While language
educators have often made suggestions regarding the use of
images and other cognitively appropriate stimuli in teaching
English prepositions (e.g., Celce-Murcia & Larsen-Freeman,
1999), their suggestions often lack rigorous empirical
grounding. In particular, it remains for studies to incorporate
both the use of pedagogic tasks involving pictures and the
insights available from experimental cognitive linguistics in
a single series of laboratory studies.
The two experiments presented in this study are merely
the first steps in this research project, but they suggest that
assisting the learning of subtle idiomatic use of spatial
prepositions by adding visual aids that correspond to the
image schemas (or perceptual simulations) associated with
those prepositions might be a viable solution to helping L2
learners use language in a more native-like manner. By
encouraging learners to think about the perceptual
simulations that match the prepositions being used,
language teaching materials and methods can make some of
the more subtle and seemingly-arbitrary properties of a
second language become more accessible to learners.
Finally, such image-schema-based training methods could
also help assess the effectiveness of motor simulations in
the treatment of language disorders. For example,
Kemmerer (2005) reports that brain-damaged subjects with
left perisylvian lesions failed a test of knowledge of the
temporal meanings of prepositions, but passed a test that
assessed knowledge of the corresponding spatial meanings
of the same prepositions. Training regimes that activate
particular motor simulations might help reestablish the
spatio-temporal links of prepositional usages in braindamaged patients.
In closing, the two experiments reported here suggest that
L1 and L2 speakers pay differential attention to image
properties when spatial language is employed to talk about
time. The results seem to support a conclusion consistent
with the idea that image schemas may underlie perceptual
simulations recruited during language processing. These
experiments add to evidence that shows how spatial
language directs attention as a function of particular entities
and the interaction between them (Coventry, et al., 2010),
which points to an explanation grounded in both cognitive
linguistic theory and embodied sensorimotor accounts.
Findings from future research may offer insight into the role
of language experience.

References
André, E., Bosch, G., Herzog, G., and Rist, T. (1987).
Coping with the intrinsic and deictic uses of spatial
prepositions. In Artificial Intelligence II, Proceedings of
the Second International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence: Methodology, Systems, Applications, Varna,

893

Bulgaria, eds. P. Jorrand and V. Sgurev, 375-382.
Amsterdam: North Holland.
Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptual Symbol Systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22 (4), 577-660.
Bergen, B., Lindsay, S., Matlock, T., & Narayanan, S.
(2007). Spatial and linguistic aspects of visual imagery in
sentence comprehension. Cognitive Science, 31, 733-764.
Boroditsky,
L.
(2000).
Metaphoric
Structuring:
Understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition,
75(1), 1-28.
Boroditsky, L. & Ramscar, M.J.A. (2002). The roles of
body and mind in abstract thought. Psychological
Science, 13(2), 185-188
Bowerman, M. and Choi, S. (2003). Space under
construction: Language specific spatial categorization in
first language acquisition. In D. Gentner and S. GoldinMeadow (Eds) Language in Mind: Advances in the study
of Language and Cognition (pp. 387-428). Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Brown, H. D. (2006). Principles of language learning and
teaching, 5th edition. Pearson.
Brown, J. D. (1998). An EFL readability index. JALT
Journal, 20, 7-36.
Brugman, C., & Lakoff, G. (1988). Cognitive topology and
lexical networks. In S. Small, G. Cottrell & M. Tanenhaus
(Eds.), Lexical Ambiguity Resolution. San Mateo, CA:
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc.
Casasola, M., Bhagwat, J., Burke, A.S. (2009). Learning to
Form a Spatial Category of Tight-Fit Relations: How
Experience With a Label Can Give a Boost.
Developmental Psychology, 45(3), 711-722.
Celce-Murcia, M., & Larsen-Freeman, D. (1999). The
grammar book: An ESL/EFL teacher's course. Boston,
MA: Heinle & Heinle.
Choi, S., & Bowerman, M. (1991). Learning to express
motion events in English and Korean: the influence of
language-specific lexicalization patterns. Cognition, 48,
83-121.
Cook, V. (1996). Second language learning and language
teaching, 2nd edition. Hodder Arnold Pub.
Coventry, K. R., Lynott, D., Cangelosi, A., Monrouxe, L.,
Joyce, D., & Richardson, D. C. (2010). Spatial language,
visual attention, and perceptual simulation. Brain &
Language, 112, 202-213.
Coventry, K.R., & Garrod, S.C. (2004). Saying, seeing and
acting. The psychological semantics of spatial
prepositions. Psychology Press. Hove and New York.
Coventry, K. R., & Guijarro-Fuentes, P. (2008). Spatial
language learning and the functional goemetric
framework. In P. Robinson & N. C. Ellis (Eds),
Handbook of cognitive linguistics and second language
acquisition (pp. 114-138). New York: Routledge.
Feist, M. & Gentner, D. (1998). On plates, bowls, and
dishes: Factors in the use of English IN and ON.
Proceedings of the 20th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society.

Feist, M. & Gentner, D. (2003). Factors involved in the use
of IN and ON. Proceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society.
Gibbs, R.W. (2006). Embodiment and Cognitive Science.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Gibbs, R., & Colston, H. (1995). The cognitive
psychological reality of image schemas and their
transformations. Cognitive Linguistics, 6, 347-378.
Glenberg, A. M., & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding
language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9,
558-565.
Haspelmath, M. (1997). From space to time: Temporal
adverbials in the world’s languages. (Lincom Studies in
Theoretical Linguistics, 3.) Munich & Newcastle: Lincom
Europa.
Kemmerer, D., (2005). The spatial and temporal meanings
of English prepositions can be independently impaired.
Neuropsychologia, 43, 797-806.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire, and dangerous things:
what categories reveal about the mind. University of
Chicago Press.
Langacker, R.W. (1987). Foundations of cognitive
grammar: Theoretical Prerequisites. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Lindstromberg, S. (1998). English Prepositions Explained.
John Benjamins.
Long, M. & Doughty, C. (2009). (Eds.). The handbook of
language teaching. Wiley-Blackwell.
Mahon, B.Z., & Caramazza, A. (2008). A Critical Look at
the Embodied Cognition Hypothesis and a New Proposal
for Grounding Conceptual Content. Journal of
Physiology, 102, 59-70.
Mandler, J.M. (1992). How to Build a Baby: II. Conceptual
Primitives. Psychological Review, 4, 587-604.
Marian, V., Blumenfeld, H.K., & Kaushanskaya, M. (2007).
The Language Experience and Proficiency Questionnaire
(LEAP-Q): Assessing language profiles in bilinguals and
multilinguals. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 50, 1-28.
Nunan, D. (1999). Second language teaching and learning.
Heinle & Heinle.
Retz-Schmidt, G. (1988). Various views on spatial
prepositions AI Magazine, 9, 95-105.
Richardson, D., Spivey, M., Barsalou, L., & McRae, K.
(2003). Spatial representations activated during real-time
comprehension of verbs. Cognitive Science, 27(5), 767780.
Talmy, L. (1983). How Language Structures Space. In H.
Pick & L. Acredolo (eds.) Spatial Orientation: Theory,
Research, and Application. New York, Plenum.
Tyler, A., & Evans, V. (2003). The semantics of English
prepositions: Spatial scenes, embodied meaning and
cognition. Cambridge University Press.
Zwaan, R.A. (2004). The immersed experiencer: toward an
embodied theory of language comprehension. In: B.H.
Ross (Ed.), The Psychology of Learning and Motivation,
Vol. 44 (pp. 35-62). New York: Academic Press.

894

