UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Phonological Encoding in Word Naming and Word Typing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/70t7t97f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Chen, Jenn-Yeu
Li, Cheng-Yi

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Phonological Encoding in Word Naming and Word Typing
Jenn-Yeu Chen (psyjyc@mail.ncku.edu.tw)
Institute of Cognitive Science, National Cheng Kung University
1 University Road, Tainan City, Taiwan 701

Cheng-Yi Li (adamli100@gmail.com)
Institute of Cognitive Science, National Cheng Kung University
1 University Road, Tainan City, Taiwan 701

Abstract
The process of phonological encoding was investigated in
primed word naming and word typing with Chinese
monosyllabic words. The target words shared or did not share
the onset consonants with the prime words. The stimulus
onset asynchrony (SOA) was 100 ms or 300 ms. Typing
required the participants to enter the phonetic letters of the
target word, which correspond roughly to the onset and the
rhyme of the word’s syllable. Regardless of SOAs, response
times were shorter in the related condition than in the
unrelated condition (an onset priming effect) for word typing,
but were similar for word naming. The results suggest that
naming and typing in Chinese may involve somewhat
different phonological encoding processes even though both
tasks require accessing the phonological codes. It is
hypothesized that phonological encoding in Chinese is
syllable driven in word naming, but is segment driven in word
typing.

with retrieving the segmental contents and the wordshape
frame of the word to be produced. The segments are then
assigned to the slots in the wordshape frame sequentially
from left to right according to the phonotactic principles of
the language. The result of this segment-to-frame
association (called syllabification) is phonological syllables,
which are fed to the next stage of processing for phonetic
encoding and articulation. In this model (illustrated in
Figure 3), the syllables are assembled products of
phonological encoding. The model was solely based on
empirical evidence from Indo-European languages such as
English, Dutch, and German.
Content Network

Structure Network

peach

Concept

Keywords: Naming, Typing; Phonological Encoding; Word
Production.

Word-shape Frame
ω
peach

Word

Introduction
The organization of a production system, natural or
artifactual, must be constrained by the kind of outputs it is
designed to produce. The production system for a car is
organized differently than the production system for an
airplane. The production systems for different kinds of cars
(sedan vs. truck) are probably also organized differently.
For natural languages, it has been shown recently that the
word form encoding component of the word production
system is organized differently for different languages such
as Dutch and Chinese. In the present study, we show that
the process of phonological encoding in word production is
also somewhat different for naming and typing within the
same language, Chinese, even though both tasks involve
accessing phonological codes.
The phonological codes of a word may contain the
syllables (e.g., /seg/ and /ment/ for the word ‘segment’), the
individual segments (e.g., /s, ε, g, m, ə, n, t/) and the
prosodic features (the stress pattern ‘σσ) of the word.
Theories of word production vary in whether the syllables
are hypothesized as stored and retrieved units (Dell, 1986;
Ferrand, Segui, & Grainger, 1996; Santiago, MacKay,
Palma, & Rho, 2000), or whether they are assembled online
during phonological encoding (Levelt, Meyer, & Roelofs,
1999). According to the model proposed by Levelt and
colleagues (the LMR model), phonological encoding starts

Segments

/i/

/p/

/ch/

onset nucleus coda
__
__
__

1
3

2

Motor Programs

<pich>

Figure 3: Production of an English CVC monosyllable for
naming. Arrows signify activation. Button terminals signify
assignment of contents to structures.
Assuming a similar architecture to the LMR model, Chen
and colleagues (Chen, Dell, & Chen, 2002; O’Seaghdha,
Chen & Chen, 2010) examined Mandarin Chinese recently
but proposed that phonological encoding starts with
retrieving the stored syllables of the word. The segmental
contents and the syllable frame of each syllable are then
retrieved for the same kind of segment-to-frame association
process as in the LMR model. The difference between the
LMR model (Figure 3) and the Chinese model (illustrated in
Figure 4) can be characterized as the difference between
segment-driven and syllable-driven processes. The
difference, as we maintained previously, is due to the

1435

different design characteristics of the phonological systems
in the respective languages. The English and the Dutch
phonology emphasize words and segments (large number of
syllable types, syllable boundaries are often ambiguous,
segments may be resyllabified in a different context,
syllables carry stress and are not equally weighted), whereas
the Chinese phonology emphasize syllables (clear syllable
boundaries, syllabification prohibited, simple syllable
structures, small number of syllable types).
Content Network

Structure Network

peach

Concept

Word-shape Frame
ω
tao2

Word

σ(2)
Syllable

Segments

tone 2 assigned

/tao/

Syllable Frame

onset rhyme
__
__

/ao/

/t/
1

2

Motor Program

<tao2>

Figure 4: Production of a CV monosyllable in Mandarin for
speaking. Arrows signify activation. Button terminals
signify assignment of contents to structures. For simplicity,
a rhyme is represented as a segment.
Typing is a production task which resembles speaking in
many aspects except perhaps for the motor outputs. For
speaking, the motor output involves moving several
articulators simultaneously and sequentially in a highly
coordinated fashion to produce syllable-sized gestures
(MacNeilage, 1998). For typing, the motor output involves
moving the fingers of both hands entirely discretely and
sequentially (even though planning is done in parallel,
Rumelhart & Norman, 1982; Salthouse, 1986). Both tasks,
however, will need to access the phonological contents of a
word, especially true in Chinese. The question we asked
was whether the same kind of phonological encoding
process operates in speaking and typing.
One hypothesis is that the same kind of phonological
encoding process operates in speaking and typing. Although
the motor outputs of typing are more discrete and sequential
than those of speaking, the individual keystrokes may still
be organized hierarchically into chunks of the word and the
syllable sizes (Cooper, 1983). Accordingly, the entire
process of producing a word would be identical in speaking
and typing except that the specific motor muscles involved
are different. Recent studies by Damian and colleagues

(Zhang and Damian, in press; Shen and Damian, 2009) with
English showed that writing accessed orthographic codes
(graphemes) whereas speaking accessed phonological codes
(phonemes or segments). However, writing involves a
segment driven process just like speaking. In English,
writing and typing are similar enough so that Damian and
Shen’s findings can be taken as the basis for the sameprocess hypothesis when speaking and typing are being
compared. In Chinese, however, writing and speaking are
distinctly different, and so are writing and typing (to be
explained immediately). Therefore, hypothesizing about the
phonological encoding processes in speaking and typing
Chinese requires some explanation of the way Chinese
characters are typed.
Chinese characters are logographs. Writing a Chinese
character involves writing the strokes in a specific order and
configuration. In contrast, the most commonly used
methods of typing a Chinese character (zhuyin in Taiwan
and pinyin in Mainland China) involve entering the phonetic
letters of the word such as the onset consonant, the medial
vowel, the rhyme, and the tone (for the zhuyin method),
which bear no resemblance whatsoever with the strokes in
writing. Nevertheless, what displays on the computer screen
after phonetic typing is the orthographic form of the
character. The phonological form is also shown, but only as
an intermediate output before the typist hits the Enter key.
Given the way Chinese characters are typically typed (the
phonetic typing method), it can be reasonably assumed that
word typing might involve accessing the phonological codes
of a word much like word speaking or naming. It can, then,
be asked whether the same or different kinds of
phonological encoding process underlie Chinese word
naming and word typing.
Because previous studies have shown that speaking a
word in Chinese is syllable driven, the same-process
hypothesis predicts that typing a word in Chinese is also
syllable driven. The contrasting hypothesis is that somewhat
different kinds of phonological encoding process operate in
speaking and typing. Because the individual keystrokes are
organized discretely in typing, the process might emphasize
the individual keystrokes, and, accordingly, the segments,
more than the higher order units like the syllables. Support
for the emphasis comes from analysis of typing errors,
which, according to Norman and Rumelhart (1983), suggest
that words are parsed into single-letter and two-letter units
for execution. There may be two consequences of this
emphasis. First, syllabification may not be necessary. Once
the segmental contents of a word are retrieved, they are
mapped to segment-sized motor programs for execution.
This is different from speaking, where the initially retrieved
segmental contents of a word are assembled back to
syllables in order to be mapped to syllable-sized motor
programs for execution. Second, the influence of higherorder units such as syllables and words may be weak
because the end products are segments. In sum, the
different-process hypothesis predicts that typing a word in

1436

Chinese might be segment driven (illustrated in Figure 5), in
contrast to the syllable driven process in speaking (Figure 4).
Content Network

Structure Network

peach

Concept

Word-shape Frame
ω
tao2

Word

process hypothesis predicts greater negative priming for
naming than for typing (assuming syllable competition is
greater than segment competition) or similar negative
priming for naming and typing (assuming syllable
competition is no greater than segment competition). Due to
the uncertainties about the level of competition, the extent
of competition, and the effect of SOA, the orthographic
manipulation was included more for an explorative purpose
than for testing the present hypotheses.

Method
Segments

/ao/

/t/

/2/

onset rhyme tone
__
__
__

1
3

2

Motor Programs

<t>

<ao>

<2>

Figure 5: Production of a CV monosyllable in Mandarin for
typing as modified from the speaking model of Figure 4
according to the prediction of the different-process
hypothesis.
To test the hypotheses against each other, we employed a
primed word naming task and a primed word typing task
using Chinese monosyllabic words. Typing was performed
with the zhuyin method. The target words shared or did not
share the onset consonants with the prime words. We
compared the onset priming effects (the difference in
response times between the related and the unrelated
conditions) between the two tasks. Because previous studies
have observed no onset effect in Chinese speaking tasks
(masked priming and implicit priming, Chen, Chen, & Dell,
2002; Chen, Lin, & Ferrand, 2003; O’Seaghdha, Chen, &
Chen, 2010), the same-process hypothesis predicts no onset
priming effects for either task, whereas the different-process
hypothesis predicts no priming for the naming task but
significant onset priming for the typing task.
In addition to manipulating phonological overlap, we also
manipulated orthographic overlap such that the prime and
the target words shared or did not share the first radical.
With an unmasked priming procedure and stimulus onset
asynchronies of varying lengths, previous studies showed
that an orthographic overlap would produce positive (43 ms),
negative (57 and 85 ms) or no (115 ms) priming in a word
naming task (Perfetti & Tan 1998). According to one
explanation, negative priming is due to form-related
competition whereby the episodic memory trace of the
prime is reactivated by the shared orthographic form in the
target and competes with the target for phonological
encoding (O’Seaghdha & Marin, 2000). If the level of
competition is lexical, both the same-process hypothesis and
the different-process hypothesis predict similar negative
priming for naming and typing. If the level of competition is
phonological, the same-process hypothesis predicts similar
negative priming for the two tasks, while the different-

Participants
Twenty-six native Mandarin Chinese speakers were
recruited for the typing task and twenty-two for the naming
task. They were students from National Cheng Kung
University and the surrounding universities. The
participants for the typing task were all habitual zhuyin
typists with an average typing speed of 62.7 characters per
min. All the participants had normal or corrected-to-normal
vision and they were paid for participation.

Design and Materials
Thirty characters served as targets. Each was paired with
four types of prime characters according to whether it
shared the onset consonant or the first radical with the prime.
An example is given in Table 1. The frequencies and the
stroke numbers were matched among the four types of
primes. There were a total of 120 pairs, which were
randomly ordered for each participant. The experiment
included one between-subjects factor (typing method) and
three within-subjects factors (phonological relatedness,
orthographic relatedness, and stimulus onset asynchrony),
each with two levels. The SOA was either 100 or 300 ms.
For each of the four types of prime-target pairs, half was
presented with 100-ms SOA and the other half with 300 ms.
The half which was presented with 100-ms SOA for half of
the participants was presented with 300-ms SOA for the
other half of the participants, and vice versa.
Table 1: An example of the prime-target pairs as a
function of phonological and orthographic relatedness
between the primes and the targets. The mean frequencies
and the mean stroke numbers of the prime characters
(standard deviations in parentheses) are also given.

+Radical

-Radical

1437

Characters
Pinyins
Mean frequency
Mean strokes
Characters
Pinyins
Mean frequency
Mean strokes

+Onset
梯- 桃
ti1-tao2
224 (34)
11.6 (2.8)
泰- 桃
tai4-tao2
238(87)
11.9 (3.5)

-Onset
概-桃
gai4-tao2
258 (119)
10.9 (3.6)
棄-桃
qi4-tao2
276 (112)
12.4 (3.4)

Apparatus and Procedure
The experiment was programmed in Visual Basic for the
typing task and in E-Prime for the naming task. Both were
run on a personal computer (Intel® Core™2 Quad CPU,
Q6600@2.40GHz) with a 20-inch LED screen (32bits,
1400x1050 pixels, 8-ms refresh rate), a standard keyboard,
and a microphone. For the typing task, the experiment
began with a familiarization phase, followed by a practice
block of six trials and the experiment block of 120 trials. To
ensure the participants knew the exact phonetic letters of
each character used in the experiment, all of the characters
(120 primes and 30 targets) were shown one at a time in a
random order. The participants had to type in the correct
phonetic letters of each character. If a mistake was made,
the correct answer was offered. All of the incorrectlyanswered characters were presented again at the end of the
list. The procedure was repeated until no characters were
incorrectly typed.
A trial for the practice and the experimental blocks
consisted of a fixation cross appearing at the center of the
computer screen for 1 sec. The prime character appeared in
the Ximing font for 100 or 300 ms, followed immediately
by the target character in the Biaokai font. Each character
subtended about 2˚visual angle horizontally and vertically
from a viewing distance of 50 cm. The participants were
asked to type in the phonetic letters of the target character as
quickly and accurately as possible. The response time was
recorded and measured to the accuracy of millisecond from
the onset of the target character to the first keystroke of the
typing response. Response accuracy was also recorded.
All of the participants completed the typing task before
coming back a month later for the naming task. For the
naming task, exactly the same procedure was employed,
except that the participants were asked to name the
characters out loud. The response time was registered at the
onset of the participants’ vocal response.

effect of 9.5 ms): F(1, 2895) = 4.2, p < .05. None of the
interactions were significant, p’s > .2.

Figure 1: Mean RTs as a function of phonological
relatedness, orthographic relatedness, and SOA from the
typing task.

Naming
Errors were less than 2%. Response times were similarly
analyzed as they were for typing. The mean RTs as a
function of phonological relatedness, orthographic
relatedness and SOA are plotted in Figure 2. The only
significant effect in the figure is that of SOA. Response
times were faster under 300-ms SOA than under 100-ms
SOA: F(1, 2516) = 323.9, p < .0001. Response times were
somewhat slower when the prime and the target shared the
first radical than when they did not (a negative orthographic
priming effect of 5.6 ms), but the effect fell short of the
conventional level of significance, p = .134. None of the
other effects were significant, p’s ranging from . 454 to .932.

Results
Typing
Errors were infrequent (less than 6%) and were not analyzed.
Response times (RT) for the correct trials were analyzed
using a linear mixed model (Statistical Analytic System, the
PROC MIXED procedure) with subjects and items as
random-effect variables and phonological relatedness,
orthographic relatedness and SOA as fixed-effect variables.
The mean RTs as a function of phonological relatedness,
orthographic relatedness and SOA are plotted in Figure 1.
The most notable effects in the figure are that of SOA and
that of phonological relatedness. Response times were faster
under 300-ms SOA than under 100-ms SOA: F(1, 2895) =
62.4, p < .0001. Response times were also faster when the
prime and the target shared the onset consonant than when
they did not (a positive onset priming effect of 30 ms): F(1,
2895) = 35.3, p < .0001. Response times were somewhat
slower when the prime and the target shared the first radical
than when they did not (a negative orthographic priming

Figure 2: Mean RTs as a function of phonological
relatedness, orthographic relatedness, and SOA from the
naming task.

Combined Analysis
When the data from both tasks were included in the analysis
with task as an additional fixed-effect variable, the results
revealed significant main effects for all fixed-effect
variables: F(1, 5440) = 68.3, p < .0001 for task, F(1, 5440)
= 259.3, p < .0001 for SOA, F(1, 5440) = 21.5, p < .0001
for phonological relatedness, and F(1, 5440) = 5.9, p < .02

1438

for orthographic relatedness. Importantly, the task x
phonological relatedness interaction was significant: F(1,
5440) = 23.5, p < .0001, confirming the different findings in
the separate analyses. The task x orthographic relatedness
interaction was not significant, F < 1, confirming the similar
findings in the separate analyses. The only remaining
significant effect was that of task x SOA. All of the other
effects were nonsignificant, p’s ranging from .262 to .997.

Discussion
Single word naming and typing in Chinese both involve
accessing the phonological codes of the word, but the motor
outputs are different. Does word typing involve the same or
different phonological encoding processes from word
naming? Using an unmasked priming procedure and
manipulating phonological and orthographic overlaps
between the prime and the target characters, we observed
significant positive onset (phonological) priming in the
typing task, but no priming in the naming task. At the same
time, we also observed significant and comparable negative
radical (orthographic) priming in both tasks.
The orthographic priming effects were similar in the
naming and the typing tasks. It is important to note that
these effects did not vary with phonological relatedness.
That is, whether the prime and the target shared the onset
consonant did not affect the orthographic priming effect.
This could suggest (1) lexical competition whereby the
reactivated prime word competed with the target word for
phonological encoding, or (2) phonological competition
whereby the phonological contents of the prime and the
target competed for selection. It is not possible for the
present study to determine whether the observed
orthographic priming was due to lexical or phonological
competition, and whether phonological competition between
syllables is equivalent in magnitude to that between
segments. As a result, the similar orthographic priming
effects are interesting, but uninformative for testing our
hypotheses. The following discussion will focus on the
different phonological priming effects.
The different phonological priming effects observed in
word naming and word typing suggest that the two types of
tasks likely involve somewhat different phonological
encoding processes, but an alternative account needs to be
considered first. The alternative account would argue that
the segmental effect in word typing occurred at the stage of
motor output. That is, knowing ahead of time the first
segment of a word allowed the participants to prepare the
motor act of typing that segment, or even to start typing
before they had retrieved the response word. Either
possibility is highly unlikely because the prime-target SOAs
were too short (100 and 300 ms) to allow the processing of
the prime to proceed to the motor stage in time to benefit the
production of the target at that level. The finding that onset
priming in word typing did not vary with SOAs also helps
to rule out these possibilities.
The different phonological priming effects can be
explained by postulating two different models for word

naming and word typing. Figure 3 illustrates a production
model for speaking a monosyllabic Chinese word proposed
previously (O’Seaghdha, Chen, & Chen, 2010). The model
is applicable to a word naming task if we focus on the
production phase of naming and also ignore the concept
level. In the model, syllables are retrieved as chunks. The
segmental contents and the syllable frame are separately
spelled out, followed by the sequential assignment of the
individual segments to the categorized slots in the frame.
The result of this phonological encoding process is a
syllable-sized motor program for articulation. Figure 4
illustrates the same model modified for typing. In this model,
tone is assumed to be one of the segmental contents of a
syllable and is assigned last; there is no explicit syllable
level; and the sequential assignment of the individual
segments to their categorized slots leads to several segmentsized motor programs, rather than one syllable-sized motor
program.
The segment-sized output characterizes an important
feature of the typing model and distinguishes it from the
naming model. In fact, it also contrasts with the naming
model hypothesized for Germanic languages (Roelofs, 1997;
Levelt, Meyer, & Roelofs, 1999). The different
characteristics of the outputs for typing and naming serve to
constrain the processing at earlier stages differently.
Specifically, the syllable-sized output for naming prescribes
that phonological encoding address the syllable, whereas the
segment-sized output for typing prescribes that it address
the segment in the planning process. The segmentaddressing system gives rise to the onset priming effect
observed in the typing task, whereas the syllable-addressing
system produces no onset priming in the naming task.
To summarize, the results of the present study, as far as
the onset priming effects go, support the hypothesis that
somewhat different phonological encoding processes are
involved in speaking and typing. The process is syllabledriven in speaking, but segment-driven in typing. And this
is due to the different natures of the outputs the two tasks
aim to produce.
In our previous work (Chen, Chen, & Dell, 2002; Chen,
Lin, & Ferrand, 2003; O’Seaghdha, Chen & Chen, 2010),
we emphasized and investigated cross-linguistic differences
in the design characteristics of Chinese and English/Dutch
(with respect to the phonological system) and how the
processing mechanisms of phonological encoding differ
accordingly. In the present study, we highlighted another
important factor that might modulate the processing
mechanism within the same language. The idea that the
specific form of the output must in some way drive the form
of the intermediate representations in a production system
should surprise no one. The input of a production system
can differ greatly from the output. Given that production is a
process that translates a specific input to a specific output,
the final form of the output (the goal state of the production
system) must require that the intermediate representations
approach that form, or else production would fail. This idea

1439

is consistent with any system that is adaptive and goaldirected.
The hypothesis that the forms of the internal
representations are constrained by the form of the output in
a production system is consistent with previous models that
postulate different modality-specific lexicons for speaking
and writing, based on neuropsychological evidence (Ellis &
Young, 1988; Caramazza, 1997). It is also consistent with
the theoretical concept of embodiment in cognition (Lakoff
& Johnson, 1999; Clark & Chalmers, 1998).
Many issues remain and further work awaits researchers.
Convergent evidence is needed from other production tasks
and procedures (e.g., word naming and picture naming with
masked primes, the form preparation task). The difference
between word typing in Chinese and word naming in
English deserves investigations. Even though both involve
segment-driven processes, they may be motivated
differently. As mentioned earlier, the well-cited model of
word production for English/Dutch assumes syllable-sized
outputs. If the assumption is valid, the segment-driven
process of phonological encoding must find a different
motivation in the English/Dutch speaking system than that
in the Chinese typing system. On the other hand, it could be
that the assumption has been false. The hypothesis also
bears a broader implication for understanding the cognitive
system in general.
Finally, word typing (or typewriting) used to be a special
skill of a small group of professionals. As a result, research
on typewriting has been sparse. With the increasing
popularity of computer word processing, typewriting has
become a common skill of literacy like handwriting. As a
production task, it is time for the production researchers to
begin investigating this new technologically-driven skill of
the digital age in order to understand its similarities and
differences from the speaking task.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the NSC96-2413-H-006-004MY2 grant.

References
Caramazza, A. (1997). How many levels of processing are
there in lexical access? Cognitive Neuropsychology, 14,
177-208.
Chen, J.-Y., Chen, T.-M., & Dell, G. S. (2002). Word-form
encoding in Mandarin Chinese as assessed by the implicit
priming task. Journal of Memory and Language, 46, 751781.
Chen, J.-Y., Lin, W.-C., & Ferrand, L. (2003). Masked
priming of the syllable in Mandarin Chinese speech
production. Chinese Journal of Psychology, 45, 107-120.
Clark, A. and Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind.
Analysis, 58, 7-19.
Cooper, W. E., (1983). Introduction. In W.E. Cooper (Ed.),
Cognitive aspects of skilled typewriting (pp. 1-38). New
York: Springer-Verlag.
Dell, G. S. (1986). A spreading-activation theory of retrieval

in sentence production. Psychological Review, 93, 283321.
Ellis, A. W., & Young, A. W. (1988). Human cognitive
neuropsychology. Hove, UK: LEA.
Ferrand, L., Segui, J., & Grainger, J. (1996). Masked
priming of word and picture naming: The role of syllabic
units. Journal of Memory and Language, 35, 708-723.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh:
The embodied mind and its challenge to Western thought.
New York, NY: Basic Books.
Levelt, W. J. M, Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1999). A
theory of lexical access in speech production. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 22, 1–75.
MacNeilage, P. F. (1998). The frame/content theory of
evolution of speech production. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 21, 499-546.
Norman, D. A., & Rumelhart, D. E. (1983). Studies of
typing from the LNR Research Group. In W.E. Cooper
(Ed.), Cognitive aspects of skilled typewriting (pp. 45-65).
New York: Springer-Verlag.
O’Seaghdha, P. G., Chen, J.-Y., & Chen, T.-M. (2010).
Proximate units in word production: phonological
encoding begins with syllables in Mandarin Chinese but
with segments in English. Cognition, 115, 282-302.
O'Seaghdha, P. G. & Marin, J. W. (2000). Phonological
competition and cooperation in form-related priming:
Sequential and nonsequential processes in word
production. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception & Performance, 26, 57-73.
Perfetti, C. A., & Tan, L. H. (1998). The time-course of
graphic, phonological, and semantic activation in Chinese
character identification. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24, 1–18.
Roelofs, A. (1997). The WEAVER model of word-form
encoding in speech production. Cognition, 64, 249–284.
Rumelhart, D. E., & Norman, D. A. (1982). Simulating a
skilled typist: A study of skilled cognitive-motor
performance. Cognitive Science, 6, 1-36.
Salthouse, T. A. (1986). Perceptual cognitive, and motoric
aspects of transcription typing. Psychological Bulletin, 99,
303-319.
Santiago, J., MacKay, D. G., Palma, A., & Rho, C. (2000).
Sequential activation processes in producing words and
syllables: Evidence from picture naming. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 15, 1–44.
Shen, X., & Damian, M. F. (2009). Role of phonology in
handwritten word production. Poster presented at the 15th
Annual Conference on Architectures and Mechanisms for
Language Processing (AMLaP), 7-9 September,
Barcelona.
Zhang, Q., & Damian, M. F. (in press). Impact of
phonology on the generation of handwritten responses:
Evdience from picture-word interference tasks. Memory
& Cognition.

1440

