UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Phonetic training makes word learning easier

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8q76w1sc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Prefors, Amy
Dunbar, David

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Phonetic training makes word learning easier
Amy Perfors (amy.perfors@adelaide.edu.au)
Department of Psychology, University of Adelaide

David Dunbar (david.dunbar@student.adelaide.edu.au)
Department of Psychology, University of Adelaide
Abstract
Motivated by the idea that differences between adult and child
language learners may stem in part from initially minor differences (such as in phonetic perception) that cascade throughout
other aspects of language learning, we explored to what extent
training adults on a novel phonetic contrast results in improved
learning of words that incorporate that contrast. Results indicate that distributional training on a novel phonetic contrast
improves word learning as well as the ability to discriminate
a related contrast. We discuss implications for how adults’
phonological abilities in affect other aspects of language learning, and also for understanding the effectiveness of different
phonetic training regimes.
Keywords: language acquisition; phonetic learning; second
language learning

Introduction
Children and adults differ both qualitatively and quantitatively in their ability to acquire a new language. Adults
have difficulty with many aspects of language acquisition,
from phonetic perception (Werker & Tees, 1984; Werker &
Lalonde, 1988; Kuhl, 2004) to language processing (Clahsen
& Felser, 2006) to certain aspects of syntax (e.g., Johnson &
Newport, 1989; Birdsong, 2006). Scientists have proposed
many theories to account for the difference between children
and adults; these theories differ in both the degree and type of
contribution made by pre-existing language-specific biases.
Although nearly everyone agrees that (due to the inherent logical problem of induction posed by language learning) some
bias must be necessary to explain successful language acquisition, explanations about the nature of the bias – and the difference between children and adults – vary considerably.
Some argue that there is a fundamental difference between
first and second language acquisition: that acquisition in children is guided by an innate Universal Grammar and languagespecific acquisition procedures, but that adult acquisition is
directed by more domain-general learning mechanisms (e.g.,
Bley-Vroman, 1990). There are many other possibilities,
however, since children and adults differ profoundly in their
cognitive capabilities and typical linguistic input. Children
have significantly poorer cognitive skills, including memory
and processing speed; perhaps these differences aid children
to learn language by enabling them to isolate and analyze
components of a linguistic stimulus (Newport, 1988) or to
over-regularize inconsistent input (Hudson Kam & Newport,
2005; Singleton & Newport, 2004). Another possibility is
that learning a second language is made more difficult due
to interference from the first language; indeed, the evidence
that experience with a first language influences acquisition of
a second is extensive (e.g., Mayberry, 1993; Iverson et al.,

2003; Tan, 2003; Weber & Cutler, 2003; Hernandez, Li, &
MacWhinney, 2005). This explanation overlaps considerably
with the related point that adult brains are in many ways less
plastic, and therefore less malleable in response to novel input
(Elman et al., 1996; MacWhinney, 2005). Other explanations
suggest that adults and children differ in their style of learning (Ullman, 2004) as well as the nature of the social support
(Snow, 1999) and linguistic input (Fernald & Simon, 1984)
they receive. Of course, many of these possibilities may be
true simultaneously.
This work investigates yet another possibility – that small
differences in children’s abilities along one dimension or aspect of language can have cascading effects, resulting in
larger differences in other aspects of language. These initial minor differences might be due to language-specific skills
that naturally decay over time, or could be due to domaingeneral changes in the underlying cognitive abilities that subserve them. Key to this idea is the notion that, because language is such an intertwined, multi-dependent system, small
differences in one aspect of language can be steadily amplified when it comes to the acquisition of other aspects. This
idea is similar to the neo-constructivist view of KarmiloffSmith (1998): both suggest that differences in eventual linguistic performance may derive from cascading effects that
result from variation in more basic skills. That view focuses
on abnormal development in children, however. Our work is
motivated by an extension of this viewpoint: the notion that
some of the well-attested differences between child and adult
learners may result from the more minor, lower-level differences between adults and children. To investigate this, we begin by identifying aspects of language acquisition where one
might expect to see cascading effects, and investigate whether
performance in one improves performance in the other.
What minor difference between adults and children might
have significant cascading effects onto other aspects of language? One possibility derives from children’s well-attested
superior phonological processing and perception abilities.
Young infants can distinguish between phonemes in all natural languages, but lose that ability by the age of 10-12 months
if they have not received sufficient linguistic input for a language containing that phoneme (Eimas, Siqueland, Jusczyk,
& Vigorito, 1971; Werker & Tees, 1984; Kuhl, 2004). Adults
who begin acquisition of a language later in life, even after
decades of experience using the language, show phonological deficits in perception, production, and processing (e.g.,
Flege, 1995; Pallier, Colomé, & Sebastián-Gallés, 2001; Sebastián-Gallés & Soto-Faraco, 1999).

1613

Moreover, it is quite difficult to train adults to learn a phonetic contrast that does not exist in their native language.
Various training regimes exist; some rely on implicit learning of the phonemic categories based on distributional information (Maye & Gerken, 2001, 2002; Shea & Curtin,
2005; Hayes-Harb, 2007), while in others explicit feedback
is given (Jamieson & Morosan, 1989; Bradlow, AkahaneYamada, Pisoni, & Tohkura, 1999; McCandliss, Fiez, Protopapas, Conway, & McClelland, 2002). Although it is possible to train adults to discern non-native phonetic contrasts,
the resulting phonetic representations are often fragile. For
instance, when trained through implicit distributional learning, adults show little ability to generalize their knowledge to
other non-native contrasts that differ along an analogous phonetic feature (Maye & Gerken, 2001), even though infants are
able to do so (Maye, Weiss, & Aslin, 2008).

suggests that although adults can be trained to distinguish
novel contrasts, this ability is fragile, and they have difficulty generalizing that contrast to analogous contrasts (Maye
& Gerken, 2001). However, this work used synthesized stimuli not found in any natural language, and training included
many filler items, so that there was effectively less than five
minutes of exposure to the phonemes of interest. Would
adults be able to generalize with more exposure or on a more
naturally-produced contrast? In other training regimes adults
show robust differences in both perception and production of
a novel contrast (Lively, Logan, & Pisoni, 1993; Bradlow et
al., 1999; McCandliss et al., 2002), but these regimes differed
in many ways from Maye and Gerken (2001): they were significantly longer, used more natural stimuli, and involved explicit training with feedback, among other differences. Most
importantly, most of these studies did not evaluate generalization to a novel but similar phonetic contrast. Among those
that did, generalization to the novel contrast was successful,
but the training paradigms involved giving explicit feedback
rather than distributional training (e.g., McClaskey, Pisoni, &
Carrell, 1983; Wang, Spence, Jongman, & Sereno, 1999). It
is therefore unclear whether the limited generalizability observed in Maye and Gerken (2001) is due some inherent inability to generalize based on distributional information, or is
due to other details in the training regime. In this work, we
incorporate an implicit distributional training regime similar
to that of Maye and Gerken (2001), but one of longer duration
and with more natural stimuli. Do these changes in training
result in improved generalizability, both in terms of novel but
similar phonetic contrasts, but also in terms of the ability to
use the new phonetic categories when learning new words?

Why might difficulties in phoneme perception be responsible for adults’ relatively poor performance on other aspects of
language? It is well-known that adults have difficulty rapidly
processing fluent speech in their second language (e.g., Guillelmon & Grosjean, 2001; Clahsen & Felser, 2006), which
may be in part due to difficulty in perceiving and representing
the phonemes that make up that speech. Difficulties in rapid
processing could lead to difficulties in segmenting words and
mapping those words onto their correct referents; difficulties
in identifying words – particularly function words, which are
generally shorter and more phonologically impoverished than
content words – might result in more difficulty identifying the
appropriate parse for sentences and therefore the correct underlying grammatical structure. Consistent with this, phonological working memory is correlated with second language
skills in adults (e.g., Perani, 2005), and speech processing efficiency is related to other aspects of linguistic competence
in children (Tsao, Liu, & Kuhl, 2004; Fernald, Perfors, &
Marchman, 2006). Empirical evidence reveals that knowledge of lower-level aspects of language (such as phonological
perception or statistical segmentation) can help in the acquisition of more complex linguistic phenomena (Werker & Yeung, 2005; Mirman, Magnuson, Graf Estes, & Dixon, 2008).
Recent computational work suggests that word learning and
phonetic category learning are more effective when occurring
simultaneously (Feldman & Griffiths, 2009), and that knowledge of phoneme distributions may aid in speech segmentation and identification of lexical categories (Christiansen,
Onnis, & Hockema, 2009). However, there is no work we
are aware of that explores whether the ability to recognize a
phonetic contrast assists adults in other areas of language.

Training. The first task consisted of phonetic training based
on distributional learning, similar to the task in Maye and
Gerken (2001). Subjects in the TRAINED condition were
trained on the unaspirated velar plosive voiced/voiceless contrast (/g/-/k/), which occurs in languages such as Hindi but
not in English (both phonemes sound like a “g” to an English

The work here addresses that issue. We train adult learners
to perceive a non-native phonetic contrast and then evaluate
how this affects their ability to learn novel words containing
the phonetic contrast in question. Our results are relevant not
only to the possibility that deficits in phonetic skills may have
cascading effects through other aspects of language; they are
also relevant to the question of how generalizable adult phonetic learning is. As mentioned previously, existing work

1 No participants were native speakers of a language with the phonetic contrast we sought to train. 52 were native English speakers.
To ensure that native language was not a factor, we performed all
analyses on the full population as well as the English speakers only.
Results were identical, so we report the full population results.
2 Of the original 61 subjects, 9 were excluded from the final analysis (5 due to technical difficulties, 1 for failure to follow instructions and 3 who performed at chance levels on the control task,
indicating inattention). This left 25 participants in the CONTROL
condition and 27 in the TRAINED condition.

Method
We trained 61 participants recruited from the student population1 at the University of Adelaide on two tasks: a phonetic
training task and a word-learning task. Participants2 were
randomly assigned to either a CONTROL or a TRAINED condition, which differed in terms of the nature of the phonetic
training given.

Task 1: Phonetic learning

1614

already existed in English (/d/ and /th /). On the trained trials, the phonemes were the ones that the TRAINED group had
been trained on (/g/ and /k/). Finally, on the untrained trials, subjects were presented with a phonetic contrast that also
does not exist in English and that is also defined by voice onset time, but differs in place of articulation – the unaspirated
bilabial plosive voiced/voiceless contrast (/b/ and /p/, both of
which sound like “b” to an English speaker).3 The untrained
trials enabled us to evaluate whether our subjects could generalize any learning to similar phonemes that differed on the
same feature. There were 12 test trials for each contrast, totaling 36 testing trials in all; no feedback was given, and the
order of all test trials was randomized.

Figure 1: Distribution of stimuli used in phonetic training, defined
along a continuum based on VOT. Tokens 2 and 7 occurred four
times as often as tokens 1 and 8.

Task 2: Word learning

speaker). The /g/ and /k/ phonemes differ in terms of voiceonset time (VOT), such that /g/ contains a pre-voicing component while /k/ does not. It is therefore possible to gradually
convert /g/ tokens into /k/ by successively removing parts of
the pre-voicing component. Doing so yields a continuum of
eight tokens from /g/ to /k/, separated by an average of 17ms
in VOT from each other, and identical to each other except for
the pre-voicing. As in Maye and Gerken (2001), we presented
subjects with a bimodal distribution of these phonemes, as illustrated in Figure 1; thus, some tokens (e.g., 2 and 7) occurred four times as often as others (e.g., 1 and 8). Stimuli were recorded from a male native speaker of Hindi and
edited using Praat phonetics software. Each of the phonemes
occurred in one of three vowel contexts (/a/, /i/, and /u/).
In order to control for time spent listening to speech sounds
across groups, subjects in the CONTROL condition also listened to a distribution of phonemes. However, they heard tokens from a phonemic contrast they could already recognize:
the dental plosive aspirated/unaspirated voiced/voiceless contrast (/d/-/th /, which sound like “d” and “t” respectively to
a native English speaker). As before, these phonemes were
used to create a continuum of eight tokens extending from /d/
to /th /. Since these phonemes differ along aspiration as well
as voicing, the tokens were created by removing voicing and
then adding aspiration in continuous steps.
In both conditions, participants listened to a total of 912
tokens presented in random order and separated by 250 ms
each, for a total of approximately 11 minutes of exposure
to the sounds. During stimulus presentation the participants
were told not to speak or read, but also that they need not
consciously concentrate on the sounds. To alleviate boredom,
they were allowed to doodle while listening.
Testing. Discrimination of the phonetic contrast was tested
by presenting participants in both conditions with trials in
which they heard three phonemes, two of which were identical. They were asked to press a button indicating whether the
third phoneme they heard was the same as the first or the second (the distribution of correct answers was balanced across
trials). There were three kinds of trials, defined by the nature of the phonemes tested. On control trials, the phonemes

Training. The word learning task was a standard task in
which participants were presented with 12 different image
types distributed over three stages of 36 trials each, making
108 trials in all. One each trial, an image was paired with
a word, and the participants were instructed to try to learn
the word-picture mapping. Words consisted of minimal pairs
differing in initial position on each of the contrasts: trained:
[g]ipur, [k]ipur, [g]anug, and [k]anug; control: [d]ipur, [th ]ipur,
[d]anug, and [th ]anug; and untrained: [b]ipur, [p]ipur, [b]anug,
and [p]anug. To ensure that the words differed only in the
initial sound, words were created by splicing the same stem
(-anug or -ipur) to the initial phonemes. The images corresponded to some of the earliest words spoken by children,4
and were thus presumed to be highly familiar to all participants. The specific image-word pairing was randomized for
each participant. The order of presentation of images was
also random, with the constraint that each word-image pair
was presented three times during each stage.
Testing. There were three testing sessions of 12 trials each,
occurring after each stage. During each test trial, one of the
12 images was presented and participants heard two minimal pairs differing along the contrast in question (trained,
untrained, or control). Thus, a participant might see a picture of a cat and hear [b]ipur followed by [p]ipur. Their task
was to indicate whether the first or second word they heard
was correct. No feedback was given.

Results
Task 1: Phonetic learning
Phonetic learning was evaluated by comparing performance
on the phonetic test. As Figure 2 illustrates, participants in
the TRAINED condition outperformed those in the CONTROL
3 For trained and control trials, the exemplar tested on corresponded to token 1 and 8 from each continuum. Due to a coding
error, the exemplar in the UNTRAINED trials corresponded to tokens
2 and 7 rather than 1 and 8. If anything, this is a more stringent test
of generalization, but also means that it is more difficult to compare
performance on the UNTRAINED trials to the other two. We discuss
the implications of this in subsequent sections.
4 They consisted of images of babies, balls, books, cats, chairs,
birds, beds, cars, cookies, cups, dogs, and shoes.

1615

Figure 2: Phoneme discrimination test results. Participants who received distributional training outperformed participants in the CON TROL condition, but all participants performed above chance on all
stimuli, suggesting that the test itself may have trained them. Error
bars reflect standard error.

condition on both the trained and untrained stimuli.5
Interestingly, participants in both conditions performed
above chance on the trained and untrained stimuli.6 This suggests that the phonetic testing itself may have trained the participants in the CONTROL condition, which is not an unreasonable suggestion since it closely corresponds to the “prototype” training employed by Jamieson and Morosan (1989) or
the “two-seven” condition of Hayes-Harb (2007). To evaluate
to what extent such training occurred, we split scores on the
phonetic test in half and compared performance on the first
six test trials for each stimulus type with performance on the
final six test trials of each. As Figure 3 indicates, both groups
improved significantly over the course of the test.7 There was
no difference between the CONTROL group’s performance in
the final half of testing and the TRAINED group’s performance
in the first half: in other words, training during testing was so
effective that it resulted in performance equivalent to having
listened to distributional information for over 10 minutes.
It is also evident that performance on the trained stimuli
was superior to performance on the untrained stimuli. This
is true even for participants in the CONTROL condition, for
whom there should have been no difference between the two
types of stimuli (since they had heard neither before). This
is probably an artifact of the coding error described earlier
in which the untrained test stimuli consisted of tokens 2 and
7, rather than tokens 1 and 8 as for the trained stimuli. The
trained stimuli were therefore probably both more effective
at teaching participants the contrast, and also easier to differentiate (and hence get correct on the test). Consistent with
the hypothesis that this was a training effect, analysis of the
5 For trained: t(50) = 2.11, p = 0.04, untrained: t(39) =
2.68, p = 0.011, both two-tailed. Note that the degrees of freedom
for the untrained trials were adjusted from 50 to 39; this was because
Levene’s test for equality of variance indicated unequal variance.
6 TRAINED group on trained stimuli: t(24), p < 0.001; on untrained stimuli: t(24) = 5.03, p < 0.001; CONTROL group on trained
stimuli: t(26), p < 0.001; on untrained stimuli: t(26), p < 0.01.
7 Difference between the first and second half of the test trials
for the CONTROL participants: t(26) = 1.87, p = 0.036; for the
TRAINED participants: t(24) = 2.12, p = 0.022, both one-tailed.

Figure 3: Were participants trained over the course of phonetic testing? Performance on the first half of testing is compared to performance on the second half. Both the TRAINED and CONTROL
groups performed significantly better over the course of testing on
the trained stimuli. While there was a positive trend, the difference
in performance on the untrained stimuli for either group across the
two halves of testing was not significant. The differential effects on
trained and untrained stimuli is probably because the trained stimuli were easier to discriminate (tokens 1 and 8) than the untrained
stimuli (tokens 2 and 7).

first trial of testing reveals that participants in the CONTROL
condition performed equally, no better than chance, on both
trained and untrained stimuli. In any case, the important
finding – that subjects were able to generalize their phonetic
learning to an untrained but related contrast – is unaffected
by this detail.

Task 2: Word learning
Are participants able to generalize their phonetic discrimination abilities to a new task (word learning), as well as a
new contrast? If the phonetic representations acquired are
fragile enough, it is possible that they might not, since word
learning incorporates many skills: hearing and identifying
the phoneme in the context of an entire word; mapping that
word onto an image; and doing so while simultaneously trying to learn other word-image mappings. If the task is difficult enough and the representation weak enough, one might
expect that it would not transfer.
To answer this question we compared overall performance
on the word-learning task, the results of which are shown
in Figure 4. As one would expect, participants in both
groups were able to identify the control words above chance.
The TRAINED group performed above chance on the trained
words, which began with the sound they were trained on;
however, they performed at chance on the untrained words.8
By contrast, the CONTROL group was unable to distinguish
words beginning with any of the unfamiliar phonemes above
chance. There was no difference in performance over the
8 Differences

from chance (50%) performance for the TRAINED
group: on words with the control contrast: t(24) = 8.118, p < 0.001;
on words with the trained contrast: t(24) = 2.941, p = 0.007; on
words with the untrained contrast: t(24) = 0.282, p = 0.781. For
the CONTROL group: on words with the control contrast: t(26) =
7.710, p < 0.001; on words with the trained contrast: t(26) =
−0.090, p = 0.929; on words with the untrained contrast: t(26) =
0.991, p = 0.331. All tests are two-tailed.

1616

Figure 4: Word learning results. Participants in both groups were
able to identify the correct words for the control stimuli above
chance. The TRAINED group was above chance on words beginning with the sound they were trained on, but not on the related
untrained sound. The CONTROL group, which was not trained on
any phonemes, was unable to learn words beginning with both the
trained and untrained sounds.

course of the word-learning task for any condition on any
stimuli, suggesting that the task did not itself train phoneme
discrimination.

Discussion
Motivated by the idea that differences between adult and child
language learners may stem in part from initially minor differences that cascade throughout other aspects of language
learning, we explored to what extent training adults on a previously unheard (novel) phonetic contrast results in improved
learning of words that incorporate that contrast. Adults were
assigned to either a TRAINED or CONTROL condition and
trained distributionally, as in Maye and Gerken (2001). Both
conditions were exposed to a bimodal distribution of phonetic
sounds defined by voice onset time, but differed on whether
the modes of the distribution mapped onto an existing phonetic contrast (the CONTROL condition: /d/ and /th /) or a novel
contrast (the TRAINED condition: /g/ and /k/). We found that
training on the phonetic contrast improved the learning of
words beginning with that contrast, as well as the ability to
discriminate a related contrast. These results have implications for how phonological abilities in adults affect other aspects of language learning, and for understanding how well
distributional training enables phonetic generalization.
One interesting aspect of our findings is that as tasks became increasingly far removed from the original training, the
ability to generalize diminished. The TRAINED group was
able to generalize their phonetic learning to be able to discriminate a related but untrained contrast on a phonetic perception task, but when word learning was involved, they were
only capable of learning words that began with the contrast
they had been trained on. The CONTROL group was able
to learn the trained and untrained contrast on the basis of
the phonetic testing regime, but the resulting knowledge was
more fragile than in the TRAINED group: their were unable to
apply this ability to the problem of word learning. These re-

sults, in combination with the findings of other training studies (e.g., Bradlow et al., 1999; Maye & Gerken, 2001; McCandliss et al., 2002; Hayes-Harb, 2007), suggest that the
ability to generalize phonetic learning (either to a related contrast or to another task) may depend strongly on the depth and
nature of the training involved. It is possible that additional
training would improve the ability to generalize even further.
Relatedly, it is possible that our phoneme test did not measure
phonetic category learning per se, and was more a measure
of the raw ability to discriminate acoustically between two
phonemes; if so, the limited generalization may have been
due to the fact that our participants simply improved in their
discrimination ability, but did not acquire phonetic categories
in any reasonable sense (although the border between these
two options is rather fuzzy). In general, the precise effect of
training amount or type on generalization ability, and the nature of its dependence on the quantity and type of input, are
matters for future study.
Our work was inspired in part by the idea that apparently
major differences in language learning abilities may to some
extent stem from smaller differences that have a cascading
effect over time. While our findings are consistent with this
notion, much work remains to be done to explore it more
thoroughly, especially in the realm of adult language learning (research by Karmiloff-Smith and colleagues explores a
similar idea in the area of language disorders). On one hand,
it may appear unsurprising that being able to hear a phonetic
contrast makes it easier to learn words that differ on that contrast. On the other hand, one might have expected phonological perception to have no effect on word learning: despite
their poor perception, adults are arguably superior to children
when it comes to acquiring vocabulary. Further work is essential, both for exploring whether linguistic abilities besides
phonological perception affect other aspects of language, and
for exploring whether phonological perception has effects on
aspects of language besides word learning. This can include
training studies like ours, as well as studies that evaluate how
different aspects of language acquisition are affected by individual differences in adult phonetic perception (which are
known to exist: see, e.g., McCandliss et al., 2002; Golestani
& Zatorre, 2004; Perani, 2005; Golestani & Zatorre, 2009).
We conclude by noting an interesting puzzle: although the
idea that deficiencies in one area of language acquisition can
have cascading effects throughout other areas makes sense
and is well-supported in the child acquisition literature (e.g.,
Tsao et al., 2004; Werker & Yeung, 2005; Fernald et al.,
2006), so is the idea that jointly learning two aspects of language can improve performance in both (e.g., Feldman &
Griffiths, 2009; Frank, Goodman, & Tenenbaum, 2009; Maurits, Perfors, & Navarro, 2009). However, the former implies
that deficits in one area should propogate to another, while the
latter implies that deficits in one area may be compensated for
or overcome by skills or information from another. It is possible that both are true for different areas or in different ways,
but as yet we know very little about the mechanisms or details

1617

underlying either, so it is difficult to know for sure. As usual,
further research is necessary.

References
Birdsong, D. (2006). Age and second language acquisition and
processing: A selective overview. Lang. Learning, 56(1), 9–49.
Bley-Vroman, R. (1990). The logical problem of foreign language
learning. Linguistic Analysis, 20, 3–49.
Bradlow, A., Akahane-Yamada, R., Pisoni, D., & Tohkura, Y.
(1999). Training Japanese listeners to identify English /r/ and
/l/: Long-term retention of learning in perception and production.
Perception & Psychophysics, 61(5), 977–985.
Christiansen, M., Onnis, L., & Hockema, S. (2009). The secret
is in the sound: From unsegmented speech to lexical categories.
Developmental Science, 12(3), 388–395.
Clahsen, H., & Felser, C. (2006). How native-like is non-native
language processing? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10(12), 564–
570.
Eimas, P., Siqueland, D., Jusczyk, P., & Vigorito, J. (1971). Speech
perception in infants. Science, 171, 303–306.
Elman, J., Bates, E., Johnson, M., Karmiloff-Smith, A., Parisi, D.,
& Plunkett, K. (1996). Rethinking innateness: A connectionist
perspective on development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Feldman, N., & Griffiths, T. (2009). Learning phonetic categories
by learning a lexicon. In 31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society.
Fernald, A., Perfors, A., & Marchman, V. (2006). Picking up speed
in understanding: Speech processing efficiency and vocabulary
growth across the 2nd year. Dev. Psych., 42(1), 98–116.
Fernald, A., & Simon, T. (1984). Expanded information contours in
mothers’ speech to newborns. Dev. Psych., 20, 104–113.
Flege, J. (1995). Second-language speech learning: Theory, findings, and problems. In W. Strange (Ed.), Speech perception
and linguistic experience: Issues in cross-language research (pp.
229–273). Timonium, MD: York Press.
Frank, M., Goodman, N., & Tenenbaum, J. (2009). Using speakers’
referential intentions to model early cross-situational word learning. Psych. Sci., 20(5), 654–661.
Golestani, N., & Zatorre, R. (2004). Learning new sounds of speech:
Reallocation of neural substrates. Neuroimage, 21(2), 494–506.
Golestani, N., & Zatorre, R. (2009). Individual differences in the
acquisition of second language phonology. Brain & Language,
109, 55–67.
Guillelmon, D., & Grosjean, F. (2001). The gender marking effect
in spoken word recognition: The case of bilinguals. Memory &
Cognition, 29, 503–511.
Hayes-Harb, R. (2007). Lexical and statistical evidence in the acquisition of second language phonemes. Second Language Research,
23(1), 65–94.
Hernandez, A., Li, P., & MacWhinney, B. (2005). The emergence of
competing modules in bilingualism. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
9(5), 219–224.
Hudson Kam, C., & Newport, E. (2005). Regularizing unpredictable
variation: The roles of adult and child learners in language formation and change. Language Learning and Development, 1(2),
151–195.
Iverson, P., Kuhl, P., Akahane-Yamada, R., Diesch, E., Tokura, Y.,
Kettermann, A., et al. (2003). A perceptual interference account
of acquisition difficulties with non-native phonemes. Cognition,
87, B47–B57.
Jamieson, D., & Morosan, D. (1989). Training new, nonnative
speech contrasts: A comparison of the prototype and perceptual
fading techniques. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 43(1), 88–
96.
Johnson, J., & Newport, E. (1989). Critical period effects in second
language learning: The influence of maturational state on the acquisition of English as a second language. Cognitive Psychology,
21, 60–99.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1998). Development itself is the key to understanding developmental disorders. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
2(10), 389–398.
Kuhl, P. (2004). Early language acquisition: Cracking the speech
code. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 5, 831–843.

Lively, S., Logan, J., & Pisoni, D. (1993). Training Japanese listeners to identify English /r/ and /l/: II. the role of phonetic environment and talker variability in learning new perceptual categories.
Journal of the Acoustic Society of America, 94, 21242–1255.
MacWhinney, B. (2005). A unified model of language acquisition.
In J. Kroll & A. De Groot (Eds.), Handbook of bilingualism: Psycholinguistic approaches (pp. 49–67). Oxford University Press.
Maurits, L., Perfors, A., & Navarro, D. (2009). Joint acquisition of
word order and word reference. In 31st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Mayberry, R. (1993). First-language acquisition after childhood
differs from second-language acquisition: The case of American
Sign Language. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 36,
1258–1270.
Maye, J., & Gerken, L. (2001). Learning phonemes: How far can
the input take us? In 25th annual conference of the BUCLD.
Maye, J., & Gerken, L. (2002). Infant sensitivity to distributional
information can affect phonetic discrimination. Cognition, 82,
B101-B111.
Maye, J., Weiss, D., & Aslin, R. (2008). Statistical phonetic learning
in infants: Facilitation and feature generalization. Developmental
Science, 11(1), 122–134.
McCandliss, B., Fiez, J., Protopapas, A., Conway, M., & McClelland, J. (2002). Success and failure in teaching the [r]-[l] contrast
to Japanese adults: Tests of a Hebbian model of plasticity and stabilization in spoken language perception. Cognitive, Affective, &
Behavioral Neuroscience, 2(2), 89–108.
McClaskey, C., Pisoni, D., & Carrell, T. (1983). Transfer of training of a new linguistic contrast in voicing. Perception and Psychophysics(34), 323–330.
Mirman, D., Magnuson, J., Graf Estes, K., & Dixon, J. (2008). The
link between statistical segmentation and word learning in adults.
Cognition, 108, 271–280.
Newport, E. (1988). Constraints on learning and their role in language acquisition: Studies of the acquisition of American Sign
Language. Language Sciences, 10, 147–172.
Pallier, C., Colomé, A., & Sebastián-Gallés, N. (2001). The influence of native-language phonology on lexical-access: Exemplarbased versus abstract lexical entries. Psych. Sci., 12, 445–449.
Perani, D. (2005). The neural basis of language talent in bilinguals.
Trends in Cognitive Science, 9(5), 211–213.
Sebastián-Gallés, N., & Soto-Faraco, S. (1999). Online processing
of native and non-native phonemic contrasts in early bilinguals.
Cognition, 72, 111–123.
Shea, C., & Curtin, S. (2005). Learning allophones from the input.
In 29th annual conference of the BUCLD.
Singleton, J., & Newport, E. (2004). When learners surpass their
models: The acquisition of American Sign Language from inconsistent input. Cognitive Psychology, 49, 370–407.
Snow, C. (1999). Social perspectives on the emergence of language.
In B. MacWhinney (Ed.), The emergence of language (pp. 257–
276). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Tan, L. (2003). Neural systems of second language reading are
shaped by native language. Human Brain Mapping, 18, 158–166.
Tsao, F., Liu, H., & Kuhl, P. (2004). Speech perception in infancy
predicts language development in the second year of life: A longitudinal study. Child Development, 75(4), 1067–1084.
Ullman, M. (2004). Contributions of memory circuits to language:
The declarative/procedural model. Cognition, 92, 231–270.
Wang, Y., Spence, M., Jongman, A., & Sereno, J. (1999). Training
American listeners to perceive Mandarin tones. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 106, 3649–3658.
Weber, A., & Cutler, A. (2003). Lexical competition in non-native
spoken word recognition. JML, 50, 1–25.
Werker, J., & Lalonde, C. (1988). Cross-language speech perception: Initial capabilities and developmental change. Dev. Psych.,
24(5), 672–683.
Werker, J., & Tees, R. (1984). Cross-language speech perception:
Evidence for perceptual reorganization during the first year of life.
Infant behavior and development, 7, 49–63.
Werker, J., & Yeung, H. (2005). Infant speech perception bootstraps
word learning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9(11), 519–527.

1618

