UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Preschoolers sample from probability distributions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5f25c61x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Denison, Stephanie
Bonawitz, Elizabeth Baraff
Gopnik, Alison
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Preschoolers sample from probability distributions
Stephanie Denison (smdeniso@berkeley.edu) Elizabeth Baraff Bonawitz (liz b@berkeley.edu)
Alison Gopnik (gopnik@berkeley.edu)
Thomas L. Griffiths (tom griffiths@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
Abstract
Researchers in both educational and developmental psychology have suggested that children are not particularly adept hypothesis testers, and that their behavior can often appear irrational. However, a growing body of research also suggests that
people do engage in rational inference on a variety of tasks.
Recently researchers have begun testing the idea that reasoners
may be sampling hypotheses from an internal probability distribution when making inferences. If children are reasoning in
this way, this might help to explain some seemingly irrational
behavior seen in previous experiments. Forty 4-year-olds were
tested on a probabilistic inference task that required them to
make repeated guesses about which of two types of blocks had
been randomly sampled from a population. Results suggest
that children can sample from a probability distribution as evidenced by the fact that, as a group, they engaged in probability
matching and that the dependency between successive guesses
decreased over time.
Keywords: Cognitive Development; Causal Learning; Approximate Bayesian Inference; Sampling Hypotheses

Introduction
Young children are faced with a variety of novel situations
on a daily basis. They encounter countless episodes in which
they must reason about why particular events unfold the way
they do, what this means in terms of how related events might
unfold in the future, and how this newly acquired information fits into the knowledge they already possess. Humans
revise their beliefs throughout development, often beginning
with relatively flawed beliefs and progressing towards an increasingly accurate portrayal of the world. However, no current theory provides a satisfactory explanation of how children decide which hypotheses to test. Somehow they must
search through the potentially infinite number of hypotheses
that exist at the beginning of the learning process. Here, we
investigate this question by asking whether young children
can make probabilistic inferences via a process of sampling
hypotheses from probability distributions.
The question of whether children and adults are capable of
using rational inference to search through a hypothesis space
and revise their beliefs has drawn mixed empirical findings.
To begin, Piaget noted that children tend not to reason systematically about hypotheses, at least until they reach the formal operational stage in late childhood (Piaget, 1983). Since
Piaget, some researchers have found evidence to corroborate
this claim, stating that children often appear to navigate randomly through a selection of predictions and explanations
(Siegler & Chen, 1998). For example, researchers in educational psychology have revealed evidence suggesting that
young children and even non-expert adults are not particularly skilled hypothesis testers (e.g., Kuhn, 1989; Klahr, Fay,
& Dunbar, 1993). Furthermore, developmental psychologists
have found that children often revise their beliefs surprisingly

slowly, suggesting a struggle to efficiently update theories
(e.g., Carey, 1991; Wellman, 1990).
On the other hand, at least two kinds of evidence exist
to suggest that children might be capable of using rational
inference to generate, search through and evaluate hypotheses. First, recent research in cognitive psychology suggests
that people reason in ways that are consistent with optimal
Bayesian models in a variety of tasks (e.g., Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2005; Goodman, Tenenbaum, Feldman, & Griffiths,
2008). Although most of this work examines adult reasoning, a growing body of evidence suggests that children can
also reason in a way that is consistent with Bayesian inference (e.g., Gopnik et al., 2004; Kushnir & Gopnik, 2005;
Schulz & Gopnik, 2004; Schulz, Bonawitz, & Griffiths, 2007;
Goodman et al., 2006). For example, Xu and Tenenbaum
(2007) found that preschoolers can systematically integrate
prior knowledge regarding hierarchical information with evidence in order to apply the correct labels to a variety of objects in a word learning task and Schulz et al. (2007) and
Kushnir and Gopnik (2007) found that children’s causal inferences rationally depend on both their prior beliefs and the
observed evidence. Second, many researchers advocate the
theory-theory of conceptual development, which states that
children’s knowledge is organized into abstract, coherent conceptual systems, similar to those found in science (Carey,
1985; Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997; Murphy & Medin, 1985;
Wellman & Gelman, 1992). This framework predicts that
children will engage in hypothesis testing in ways similar
to scientists during learning, and much evidence has accumulated in support of this view (e.g. see Karmiloff-Smith
& Inhelder, 1974; Bonawitz, Lim, & Schulz, 2007; Legare,
Gelman, & Wellman, in press). However, the theory-theory
does not specify where the hypotheses are derived from in
the first place or how children could be expected (albeit unconsciously) to compute full Bayesian inference over (often)
infinite hypothesis spaces.

The sampling hypothesis
Although Bayesian inference corresponds well to the theorytheory of conceptual development, researchers who advocate
a rational approach to human inference do not suggest that
adults and children actually work through the steps of Bayes’
rule in daily life. Evaluating all possible hypotheses each time
new data are observed would not be feasible both from a formal and a practical standpoint, given the large number of hypotheses that would require consideration. One way to think
about how the mind may be approximating Bayesian inference is to start with good engineering answers to this problem. Techniques for approximating Bayesian inference have

2272

already been developed in the fields of machine learning and
statistics and we can see whether humans are also using some
version of these strategies.
One strategy for implementing Bayesian inference is
sample-based approximation (Shi, Feldman, & Griffiths,
2008; Sanborn, Griffiths, & Navarro, 2006). This approach
states that people might be approximating Bayesian inference
by evaluating a small sample of the many possible hypotheses. This “sampling hypothesis” has been supported by additional empirical data that suggest people often base their decision on just a few samples (Goodman et al., 2008; Mozer,
Pashler, & Homaei, 2008). Indeed, in many cases an optimal solution is to take only one sample (Vul, Goodman, Griffiths, & Tenenbaum, 2009). Sampling partly involves picking
a hypothesis at random from the distribution. However, the
process is not entirely random in that distributional information may be used to generate hypotheses that are highly likely
more often than those that are less likely. This strategy allows
the learner to entertain a variety of hypotheses, ensuring that
they will spend more resources testing likely hypotheses but
will not overlook a lower probability hypothesis that could
turn out to be correct.
The sampling strategy predicts “probability matching”: aggregating over numerous samples, generated by different individuals in a group, should return the original distribution;
as the number of samples approaches infinity, the closer the
result will be to the distribution. This benefit of averaging is
called the “wisdom of crowds”. If instead people generate a
“best guess”, then aggregating over numerous samples should
result in an inaccurate reflection of the distribution, characterized by an overweighting of the most likely hypothesis.
Sampling also depends on independence between guesses;
the more independent the draws from the distribution, the
more accurate the sample will be. However, we might expect that if a single individual is generating multiple guesses,
then there may be dependence between guesses, but this dependence may decrease as time between guesses increases.
Recently, Vul and Pashler (2008) tested the sampling hypothesis in adults. They asked individuals to make guesses
about a variety of real-world statistics such as: What percentage of the world’s airports are in the United States? In an Immediate condition, participants were asked to make guesses
about a variety of real-world statistics and then asked the
questions a second time directly after. In a Delayed condition,
the question was asked for the second time two weeks later. It
was found that an individual’s error was reduced when their
guesses were averaged compared to each of their individual
guesses in both the Immediate and Delayed conditions. There
was also a greater benefit of averaging guesses in the Delayed group than in the Immediate group; the independence
of guesses and, therefore, accuracy was greater after a time
delay. This suggests that adults were most likely sampling
guesses from an internal distribution rather than always providing an optimal guess.
The results from Vul and Pashler (2008) suggest that

adults may be approximating rational solutions when making
guesses about frequencies, in accordance with the sampling
hypothesis. We turn to the question of whether or not children
are drawing samples from probability distributions in a similar way. We explore two predictions of the sampling hypothesis. First, if children use a strategy of sampling hypotheses
from a distribution, we should see that the probability with
which they select hypotheses should match the distribution.
This contrasts with a strategy of maximizing (always choosing the most likely answer) or guessing (randomly providing
responses, independent of their probability), which make different predictions. We will refer to this as the probability
matching prediction. Second, because sampling depends on
independence, we can predict that increasing dependencies
between guesses will decrease the degree to which responses
accurately reflect the distribution. We will call this the dependency prediction.
While results of several studies seem to suggest that children do in fact probability match in numerous situations (e.g.
see Kam & Newport, 2009; Kushnir, Wellman, & Gelman,
2008; Bonawitz, Chang, Clark, & Lombrozo, 2008; Sobel,
Tenenbaum, & Gopnik, 2004), to our knowledge, no research
has demonstrated the dependency prediction, or analyzed results in terms of the sampling hypothesis. While much research has demonstrated the sophisticated graded response of
children on average, any particular child’s response is often,
paradoxically “non-optimal.” That is, often developmental
studies involve forced-choice responses, and so the predictions of any single child seem in conflict to rational models: Why wouldn’t children simply always choose the most
likely response, rather than some fraction of children choosing the likely response and some smaller fraction choosing
the unlikely response? If children are in fact approximating
rational inference by sampling hypotheses at least in some
situations, this may provide an account of these data. More
importantly, the sampling hypothesis may also provide an account of how children navigate through potentially infinite
hypothesis spaces during learning: rather than computing full
Bayesian inference over the whole hypothesis space, children
sample a subset of hypotheses. We now turn to our experiment to explore this question.

Do children sample hypotheses?
We investigate the sampling hypothesis in preschool-aged
children by testing their ability to use probability information to make guesses about which of two colored blocks was
most likely to be sampled from a population (consisting of a
4:1 ratio) on a single random draw. This design allows us to
investigate whether children demonstrate the first of two sampling signatures: probability matching. First, we predict that
if individual children are sampling from a distribution of hypotheses, their responses will be closer to the correct distribution (i.e., 80% red blocks) than would be predicted by random
guessing (50% red, blue guesses) or maximizing (100% red
guesses). Second, the dependency prediction suggests that

2273

Figure 1: Stimuli and method used to test the sampling hypothesis in children.
red, blue, and green domino sized wooden blocks; one red,
one yellow and one green paper cup; a rigid green bag; and a
transparent container. (See Figure 1).

children who are given a long delay between guesses will
demonstrate greater independence of guesses across trials
than children who provide guesses following only a very short
delay and we can model these dependencies via a Markov
process. As a result of differences in independence between
guesses, the distribution over guesses in the Long Wait condition should be closer to the predicted distribution than the
distribution over guesses in the Short Wait condition.

Methods
Participants Forty 4-year-olds were recruited from
preschools located on the U.C. Berkeley campus. The
children were randomly assigned to one of two conditions,
each consisting of 20 children: the Long Wait condition,
which included 8 males and 12 females (M = 54 months;
R = 48 mos – 62 mos) and the Short Wait condition, which
included 11 males and 9 females (M = 53 months; R = 48
mos – 59 mos). On additional child was tested and excluded
due to failure to pass an initial comprehension check (see
procedure below). The children’s ethnicities reflected the
composition of the area.
Stimuli A large box (12in × 12in × 18in) constructed out
of cardboard and covered in yellow felt previously used in
Bonawitz et al. (2008) was used. All five surfaces excepting
the back side of the box were intact and covered with felt.
A hole was cut out of the top of the box in the front right
corner where a toy with a transparent sphere with lights and
a spinner inside connected to a cylindrical shaft was inserted
such that only the sphere was visible to the children. The toy
activated by pressing a button on the shaft, causing it to light
up and play music. An opaque activator bin was placed on
the back left corner of the box. Additional stimuli included

Procedure Short Wait Condition. Each testing session
was videotaped for data retrieval and a second experimenter
recorded all responses online. The experiment began with the
child and experimenter sitting across from one another with
the large yellow box in between them—the front side facing
the child and the back side facing the experimenter. The experimenter introduced children to the large yellow box saying, “This is my big toy and I’m going to show you how it
works.” The experimenter then took two blocks of each color
(red, blue, and green) and placed them on the table. She
showed the children that when a red block or a blue block is
placed in the activator bin, the toy lights up and plays music
and when a green block is placed in the bin, the toy does not
activate. In reality, the experimenter was surreptitiously activating the toy by pressing a button. Previous work suggests
that children (and even adults) find this manipulation compelling (Bonawitz et al., 2008). A comprehension check was
then performed to ensure children remembered that the blue
and red blocks make the toy activate and that green blocks
did not. Next, the experimenter began Trial 1 by having the
child count 20 red blocks and 5 blue blocks one at a time and
placing them into a transparent container. The order of block
color was counterbalanced. After counting the blocks, the experimenter shook the blocks in the container to mix them and
poured them into the rigid bag. She then placed the container
upside down in front of the activator bin on the yellow box
and placed it on top of the container. She then accidentally
knocked it over toward the activator bin. Just after the bag fell

2274

over, the experimenter activated the toy and said, “Oh, I think
one of the blocks must have fallen into the toy! Can you tell
me which color it was?” Once the child answered the question, the experimenter pretended to remove the block while
turning off the toy. Finally she asked, “and why do you think
it was a [red/blue] chip?” Once children provided an answer,
the experimenter began Trial 2 by saying, “That was kind of
funny how I accidentally tipped the bag over and it made the
toy go off. Should I try to make that happen again? First we
have to count our blocks again.” The second and third trials
progressed exactly the same as Trial 1. At the end of Trial
3, the majority of children were asked three follow-up questions: the experimenter asked which color they guessed fell
into the activator on the first, second, and third trials.
Long Wait Condition. The Long Wait condition was identical to the Short Wait except that children completed Trial
1 in the first testing session, Trial 2 in a second testing session one week later, and Trial 3 in a third testing sessions one
week after Trial 2.

Results
There were no age differences between groups (t(38) =
0.11, p = ns). Responses were coded by first author and reliability coded by a research assistant blind to experimental
hypotheses. All responses uniquely and unambiguously were
either “red” or “blue” and agreement was 100%.
Probability Matching As expected, looking only at the
first responses, there were no differences between conditions,
χ2 (1, n = 40) = 1.9, p = ns. To assess whether or not children
probability matched, we averaged the first response of children in both the Long Wait and Short Wait condition. Overall,
children’s responses reflected probability matching (70% providing the more probable chip response). That is, results suggest that children were not simply randomly guessing, as responses were significantly different from chance (p < .05; binomial test), but not significantly different from the predicted
distribution of .8 (p =ns, binomial test). Similarly, children
were not “maximizing” by always providing the most probable response (i.e. always choosing the red chip), or responses
would have approached ceiling.
Dependency Measures To assess whether children’s responses were independent from one another across trials,
we first assessed what the independent sampling assumption
would predict. That is, given probability θ of sampling a particular chip, what should the distribution of three responses
look like? Because there are two possible responses (red (r)
or blue (b)) and there are three trials, there are simply 23 or
eight possible hypotheses (rrr, rrb, rbr, rbb,. . ., bbb). Thus,
assuming independence between trials, the probability of any
particular hypothesis (e.g., rrb) is simply the probability of
sampling each chip (i.e. (.8) ∗ (.8) ∗ (.2)). In this way, we can
compute probabilities for all eight hypotheses. We compared
the expectation to the observed distribution of children in the
Short Wait and Long Wait conditions (see Table 1).

Table 1: Pattern of responses expected under independent
sampling compared with frequencies in the Long Wait and
Short Wait conditions.
Responses
red,red,red
red,red,blue
red,blue,red
red,blue,blue
blue,red,red
blue,red,blue
blue,blue,red
blue,blue,blue

Expectation
.512
.128
.128
.032
.128
.032
.032
.008

Long Wait
10
1
2
3
0
1
1
2

Short Wait
1
1
10
0
1
6
1
0

Chi-squared tests revealed a significant difference between
children’s responses in the Short Wait condition to both the
Long Wait condition, χ2 (7, N = 40) = 22.3, p < .05, and to
the expected distribution, χ2 (7, N = 20) = 18.6, p < .05.1
However, the difference between the Long Wait condition
and the expected distribution was not statistically significant,
χ2 (7, N = 20) = 6.57, p = ns. This suggests that while children in the Long Wait condition were providing responses
that followed the predictions of independent samples, children in the Short Wait condition were doing something else.
Indeed, a quick examination of Table 1 suggests that children in the Short Wait condition were simply alternating responses. To directly compare the two conditions, we coded
children’s responses in terms of whether they repeated a response (e.g. “red” then “red” again) or alternated (e.g. “red”
then “blue”). Comparing condition by repetition/alternation
revealed significant differences both when we coded for repetition/alternation over all three responses, Fisher Exact (N =
33), p < .0001, and when we coded for repetition/alternation
over two responses, χ2 (1, N = 80) = 29.5, p < .0001.
Another way to think about dependency is to model children’s responses as a Markov process and consider the transition matrix. We computed the empirical frequencies with
which children moved from a “red chip” response to a “blue
chip” response, and so forth (see Table 2). If children are producing independent samples, the probability of producing a
particular response should be the same regardless of the previous response. However, this analysis revealed a strong dependency between responses in the Short Wait condition, Fisher
Exact (N = 20), p < .0001, and a much weaker dependency
in the Long Wait condition, Fisher Exact (N = 20), p = .03.
These results suggest that although children’s pattern of responses in the Long Wait condition were close to the predicted distribution, there were still dependencies between a
single child’s guesses.
1 Because the approximation to the χ2 distribution is unreliable
with small cell entries, we computed the null distribution numerically. We generated 10,000 contingency tables with these frequencies, computed χ2 for each, and then computed p values by examining the quantile of the observed χ2 value.

2275

Table 2: Transition matrices in the two conditions.
Long Wait
Short Wait
Next r Next b
Next r Next b
Current r
21
7
4
17
Current b
4
8
18
1

We conducted one final analysis to rule out the hypothesis that children in the Short Wait condition showed more
dependency in responses than children in the Long Wait condition purely because children in short wait were more likely
to remember their guesses. If children in the Long Wait condition had simply forgotten their previous responses more often than children in the Short Wait condition, they would be
much less likely to show dependencies between guesses simply due to memory differences between trials. Recall that at
the conclusion of the experiment children were asked which
color block they had said fell in on each of the three previous
trials. Looking at whether children answered all questions
correctly, we found no difference in memory between conditions, χ2 (1, N = 32) = 3.14, p = .08. However, because there
was arguably a marginal difference between conditions, we
also gave the children a memory score from 0-3 depending
on how many memory questions children answered correctly;
comparing memory scores also revealed no significant differences, t(30) = −1.52, p = ns.

Discussion
Our experiment examined whether children’s responses in a
simple causal reasoning task could be accounted for in terms
of sampling from a probability distribution. The results of the
experiment provide evidence in support of the sampling hypothesis in children. First, children’s behavior reflected probability matching. That is, as a group, children provided a percentage of red and blue guesses that corresponded with the
actual distribution of red and blue blocks in the population,
rather than maximizing and choosing the red block on every guess or randomly guessing 50% of each color. Second,
children’s responses reflected the predicted patterns of independence and dependence across conditions. After delays of
one week, children showed a greater amount of independence
between guesses than did children who did not experience a
delay. Furthermore, in contrast to results from the Long Wait
condition, analyses of the Short Wait condition revealed that
individual children showed strong dependence between their
three guesses; thus these children were not randomly sampling from the distribution.
One might ask whether the findings suggesting that children are probability matching in our experiment were an artifact of our particular design. If children were aware that
they would be asked the same question multiple times, they
might not have been motivated to provide an optimal response, knowing that they would have two more chances to
provide guesses. However, children were not aware that they
would be playing the game multiple times in either the Long

Wait or the Short Wait conditions. Furthermore, it is unlikely
that such young children would be capable of engaging in
such sophisticated planning. Moreover, at the conclusion of
the three trials we asked children whether they remembered
the guesses they had provided on each trial. Across both conditions children’s memories were fuzzy, with the majority of
them only being able to accurately report one or two of their
initial responses in both the Long Wait and Short Wait conditions and there was no difference between conditions on the
memory check.
Although our findings were consistent with the sampling
hypothesis in that children both probability matched and displayed greater independence of guesses given a time delay,
we did not find evidence for a “wisdom of crowds” effect.
The wisdom of crowds predicts that when guesses are aggregated across individuals, this should provide a score that is
closer to the actual distribution than the individual guesses
alone. Instead, we found no differences between children’s
first guess and the majority of three responses, χ2 (1, N =
40) = .23, p = ns. Given that Vul and Pashler (2008) found
this benefit with adults, we might have expected to find a similar increased advantage of aggregation with children. However, we elected to use a forced choice paradigm due to the
young age of our participants, and this may have reduced the
sensitivity of our measure such that we were unable to detect the effect. In future work we may explore this further
by designing a task that would allow children to make more
fine-grained responses.

Future Work
Future work will continue to evaluate the sampling hypothesis in children to investigate the role of evidence in children’s
hypothesis generation and sampling. For example, we are
looking at whether young children are capable of rapidly updating hypotheses based on evidence during a causal learning task. The prediction following the Sampling Hypothesis
is that children will update their hypothesis space following
either confirming or disconfirming evidence and will adjust
their predictions accordingly, and should sample their next
hypothesis from the remaining possible hypotheses.
Another future direction will involve investigating the sampling hypothesis in even younger children and current research suggests some possible appropriate methods. In an experiment examining single-event probability, Denison and Xu
(in press) used a crawling procedure to show that 13-monthold infants can make predictions about single-event probability. They used two trials, one to establish which of two objecttypes individual infants preferred and another to test probabilistic inference. They showed infants two large populations
of objects, one with a 4:1 ratio of desirable: not-desirable objects and the other with the opposite ratio. The experimenter
removed a single item from each of the two populations one at
a time and placed them into separate opaque containers. The
infant was then encouraged to crawl to the container of their
choice. Findings suggested that infants could predict which
of the two populations would most likely yield a single-item

2276

sample of their preferred object.
Finally, although other work suggests that children do
demonstrate graded sensitivity to probabilities with similar
designs (Bonawitz et al., 2008) and we chose a sample probability that maximized the difference between chance response and a strategy of maximizing, further conditions could
strengthen our findings here by demonstrating that children’s
responses match probabilities across an array of values. For
example, ongoing studies in our lab suggest that preschoolaged children’s first responses do also match to samples
where the probabilities are 19:1, 15:5, 12:6, and 10:10. Furthermore, we can demonstrate that children can sample from
probability distributions in a more complex hierarchical sampling task. We have adapted the current procedure to show
children an overall population of blocks that is physically separated into two sub-populations with different distributions.
This design allows assessment of children’s ability to make
valid probabilistic inferences when they must take into account the condition that the block is being sampled from only
one of the two sub-populations.

Conclusions
The current experiment provides a first step in examining the
sampling hypothesis in children. Children in our experiment
engaged in probability matching and demonstrated increased
independence of guesses when given a time delay, suggesting
that they may have engaged in a process of sampling from
probability distributions. This sampling behavior may begin
to explain how children navigate through the potentially infinite number of hypotheses they face at the outset of a learning
process. More generally, the sampling hypothesis may also
begin to explain how it is that children’s behavior can appear
irrational when examined individually but may actually reflect a rational strategy overall.
Acknowledgments. Thanks to participating daycares and families,
as well as Tiffany Tsai, Madeline Hanson, Beth McCarthy and Jennifer Ng for help with data collection. This research was supported
in part by the James S. McDonnell Causal Learning collaborative
and grant IIS-0845410 from the National Science Foundation.

References
Bonawitz, E., Chang, I., Clark, C., & Lombrozo, T. (2008). Ockham’s razor as inductive bias in preschoolers causal explanations.
In Proceedings of the 7th international conference of development
and learning.
Bonawitz, E., Lim, S., & Schulz, L. (2007). Weighing the evidence:
Children’s theories of balance affect play. In Proceedings of the
29th annual conference of the cognitive science society.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Carey, S. (1991). Knowledge acquisition: Enrichment or conceptual
change? In S. Carey & S. Gelman (Eds.), Epigenesis of mind:
Essays on biology and cognition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Denison, S., & Xu, F. (in press). Twelve- to 14-month-old infants
can predict single-event probability with large set sizes. Developmental Science.
Goodman, N., Baker, C., Bonawitz, E., Mansinghka, V., Gopnik, A.,
Wellman, H., et al. (2006). Intuitive theories of mind: A rational approach to false belief. In Proceedings of the 28th annual
conference of the cognitive science society.

Goodman, N., Tenenbaum, J., Feldman, J., & Griffiths, T. L. (2008).
A rational analysis of rule-based concept learning. Cognitive Science, 32:1, 108-154.
Gopnik, A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D., Schulz, L., Kushnir, T., &
Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal learning in children: Causal
maps and bayes nets. Psychological Review, 111, 1-31.
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. N. (1997). Words, thoughts, and theories. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). Structure and strength
in causal induction. Cognitive Psychology, 51, 354-384.
Kam, C., & Newport, E. (2009). Getting it right by getting it wrong:
When learners change languages. Cognitive Psychology, 59:1,
30-66.
Karmiloff-Smith, A., & Inhelder, B. (1974). If you want to get
ahead, get a theory. Cognition, 43:3, 195-212.
Klahr, D., Fay, A., & Dunbar, K. (1993). Heuristics for scientific
experimentation: A developmental study. Cognitive Psychology,
25, 111-146.
Kuhn, D. (1989). Children and adults as intuitive scientists. Psychological Review, 96, 674-689.
Kushnir, T., & Gopnik, A. (2005). Young children infer causal
strength from probabilities and interventions. Psychological Science, 16:9, 678-683.
Kushnir, T., & Gopnik, A. (2007). Conditional probability versus
spatial contiguity in causal learning: Preschoolers use new contingency evidence to overcome prior spatial assumptions. Developmental Psychology, 44, 186-196.
Kushnir, T., Wellman, H., & Gelman, S. (2008). The role of
preschoolers’ social understanding in evaluating the informativeness of causal interventions. Cognition, 107:3, 1084-1092.
Legare, C., Gelman, S., & Wellman, H. (in press). Inconsistency
with prior knowledge triggers children’s causal explanatory reasoning. Child Development.
Mozer, M., Pashler, H., & Homaei, H. (2008). Optimal predictions
in everyday cognition: The wisdom of individuals or crowds?
Cognitive Science, 32, 1133-1147.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories in
conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92, 289-316.
Piaget, J. (1983). Piagets theory. In P. Mussen (Ed.), Handbook of
child psychology (4th ed., Vol. 1). New York: Wiley.
Sanborn, A. N., Griffiths, T. L., & Navarro, D. J. (2006). A more
rational model of categorization. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Schulz, L., Bonawitz, E., & Griffiths, T. (2007). Can being scared
give you a tummy ache? naive theories, ambiguous evidence and
preschoolers causal inferences. Developmental Psychology, 43,
1124-1139.
Schulz, L., & Gopnik, A. (2004). Causal learning across domains.
Developmental Psychology, 40:2, 162-176.
Shi, L., Feldman, N., & Griffiths, T. L. (2008). Performing Bayesian
inference with exemplar models. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Siegler, R., & Chen, Z. (1998). Developmental differences in rule
learning: A microgenetic analysis. Cognitive Psychology, 36,
273-310.
Sobel, D., Tenenbaum, J., & Gopnik, A. (2004). Children’s
causal inferences from indirect evidence: Backwards blocking
and bayesian reasoning in preschoolers. Cognitive Science: A
Multidiscipinary Journal, 28:3, 303-333.
Vul, E., Goodman, N. D., Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B.
(2009). One and done? optimal decisions from very few samples.
In Proceedings of the 31st annual conference of the cognitive science society.
Vul, E., & Pashler, H. (2008). Measuring the crowd within: Probabilistic representations within individuals. Psychological Science,
19:7, 645-647.
Wellman, H. M. (1990). The child’s theory of mind. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Wellman, H. M., & Gelman, S. A. (1992). Cognitive development:
Foundational theories of core domains. Annual Review of Psychology, 43, 337-375.
Xu, F., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). Word learning as Bayesian
inference. Psychological Review, 114, 245-272.

2277

