UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Questioning the Free Will Comprehension Question

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8th3w7hs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Cokely, Edward
Feltz, Adam

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Questioning the Free Will Comprehension Question
Edward T. Cokely (cokely@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany
Michigan Technological University, Dept. of Cognitive & Learning Sciences, 49931, Houghton, Mi

Adam Feltz (adfeltz@schreiner.edu)
Philosophy and Interdisciplinary Studies, 2100 Memorial Boulevard
Kerrville, Texas 78028 USA

intuitions about determinism's relation to free will
and moral responsibility.1 But “determinism” is a
“term of art”. Because determinism is a term of art,
some have worried that some folk may not be fully
internalizing or understand determinism when making judgments about free will or moral responsibility.
We agree that this is a problem for any measure of
folk intuitions about determinism's relation to free
will and moral responsibility. In this paper, we
present evidence from two studies suggesting that
one can make the deterministic nature of some scenario more transparent to participants with a simple
manipulation. We argue that these results provide
some important insights into judgments of free will
and moral responsibility, the processes responsible
for those judgments, and the philosophical importance of those judgments.

Abstract
Understanding the folk notion of free will and moral
responsibility is important for a host of applied and
theoretical issues in psychology, philosophy, and ethics. The bulk of experimental research has focused on
folk intuitions concerning determinism's relation to
free will and moral responsibility. However, determinism is a difficult term for many folk to understand.
Accordingly researchers often use comprehension
questions to identify and exclude large proportions of
participants who seem to struggle with relevant concepts. Here, we document some of the cognitive mechanisms involved in folk judgments related to comprehension of determinism, and its relations to free
will and moral responsibility. Results provide prescriptions for experimental designs that can increase
comprehension, potentially decreasing sampling biases. Theoretical and methodological implications are
discussed.

Free Will Comprehension Question

Keywords: Free will, moral responsibility, experimental philosophy, judgment, decision making, cognitive control, methodology.

In recent years, researchers have attempted to help
shed light on folk notions of freedom and moral responsibility. For example, Nahmias, Morris, Nadelhoffer, and Turner (2005; 2006) found that most
people judge that people in some deterministic universes are free and morally responsible—a result that
has been widely replicated (Feltz & Cokely, 2009;
Nahmias, Coates, & Kvaran, 2007; Nichols & Knobe,
2007). These results indicated that many people have
compatibilist intuitions that free will and moral responsibility are compatible with the truth of determinism. Relatively few people have incompatibilist
intuitions that free will and moral responsibility are
not compatible with the truth of determinism.
However, many theorists have worried that participants do not fully understand the deterministic nature
of the commonly used scenario. If participants do not
appropriately appreciate the deterministic nature of
the scenario, then their responses do little to help
illuminate folk intuitions about determinism's relation
to free will and moral responsibility. The worry is

Free Will and Moral Responsibility
One of the most persistent philosophical problems
deals with difficult issues surrounding free will and
moral responsibility. When grappling with these
issues, some philosophers take what ordinary people
think about free will and moral responsibility to be
important theoretical considerations for a variety of
reasons. For example, beliefs in free will and moral
responsibility form essential cornerstones of many
people's relationships to themselves and others. Some
philosophers even go so far as to say that if we find
that humans in fact do not have free will and moral
responsibility, we should continue to let people indulge in the myth that they can be free and moral
responsibility (Smilansky, 2002). But typically,
philosophers have not conduced systematic or controlled scientific studies to uncover what ordinary
people think about free will and moral responsibility.
Over the past decade, empirically minded theorists
have begun filling in this lacuna.
Most of the debate about free will and moral responsibility concerns determinism's relation to free
will and moral responsibility. The empirical investigation of folk intuitions about free will and moral
responsibility has reflected this tradition. Most empirical studies so far have focused on ordinary people's

1
There are, or course, some exceptions. For examples,
Vohs and Schooler (2008) explore the effects of increasing
anti-free will beliefs, Woolfolk, Doris, and Darley (2006)
explore intuitions about moral responsibility as a function
of constraint, and Miller and Feltz (2009) discuss Frankfurt-style cases. These studies do not obviously gauge
people's intuitions about determinism's relation to free will
and moral responsibility.

2440

Typically, participants are volunteers or are given for
partial course credit for participating. In these situations, there may be some reason for the participants
to complete the survey, but there is little reason for
them to spend a great deal of time or effort completing the surveys. In these conditions, participants may
fail the comprehension question because of a relative
lack of concentration, effort, or time needed to understand the deterministic nature of the scenarios.
Hence, one hypothesis is that increasing incentives
for participants to understand the deterministic nature
of the scenarios would increase correct answers to the
comprehension question.
An alternative hypothesis is that the order of presentation of questions biases responses to the comprehension question. On a standard “two systems” conception of cognition, System 2 (controlled, deliberative processing) works to override and correct System
1 processing (effortless, quick, effortless processing)
(Stanovich & West, 2000; but see Cokely, 2009 or
Gigenerenzer & Regier, 1996; Osman, 2004 for critical discussion of “dual systems”). Hence, once impressions are formed (e.g., after making other judgments about crimes that have high emotional valence), one can only attempt to correct previous,
perhaps erroneous intuitions. Unfortunately, theory
suggests that many people do not have the requisite
cognitive control capacities that would allow such an
intervention. Fortunately, evidence suggests biases
can also be overcome or entirely avoided by shaping
the initial interpretation and representation of tasks
before alternative intuitions are issued. This shaping
requires early intervention (e.g., early selection cognitive control or changes in task orders) and can
circumvent the need to correct biased processing
(Cokely & Kelly, 2009; Cokely, Parpart, & Schooler,
2009; for related mechanistic accounts see also Query
Theory by E. Weber, E.J. Johnson, & colleagues).
To be clear, cognitive processes associated with
philosophical intuitions (e.g., long term memory
activation and retrieval dynamics) may be shaped by
participants’ representation of the content of the
previously viewed scenarios. Such influence is especially likely when the task involves a strong affective
component. Evidence already suggests that a scenario's affective strength can alter people's judgments
concerning freedom and moral responsibility (Nichols & Knobe, 2007). Those given especially strong
affective scenarios tend to give more compatibilistfriendly responses than those given a relatively less
affectively charged scenario. Nichols and Knobe
(2007) even go so far as to say that these results indicate the existence of an “affective bias” for judgments of freedom and moral responsibility.
We hypothesized that a similar phenomenon might
occur with respect to the comprehension question.
When affective components are presented before the
comprehension question, they may alter the interpre-

especially problematic because the philosophical
sense of determinism is highly technical and
nuanced. To illustrate, Alfred Mele (2006) describes
determinism as the thesis that “at any instant exactly
one future is compatible with the state of the universe
at that instant and the laws of nature” (p. 3). This
notion is conceptually distinct from other, yet related,
notions such as fatalism. Fatalism is “the thesis that
whatever happens must happen; every event or state
of affairs that occurs, must occur, while the nonoccurrence of every event and state of affairs is likewise
necessitated” (Bernstein, 2002, p. 65). One reason
why fatalism and determinism are distinct concepts is
that fatalism is consistent with determinism being
true or false (Bernstein, 2002). That is, all things may
happen necessarily even if some things are indeterministically caused (e.g., God may have foreknowledge of all events). Many compatibilists believe that
fatalism rules out free will and moral responsibility.
Hence, it is difficult but essentially important to convey to non-philosophers an accurate notion of determinism that does not imply something too strong
(e.g., fatalism) or something that is too weak (e.g.,
indeterminism).
To help ensure that participants understand the
deterministic nature of the scenarios, many authors
include comprehension questions. It is common practice to exclude those who fail the comprehension
checks (Nahmias, Morris, Nadelhoffer, & Turner,
2005, 2006). However, one shortcoming of previous
research is that often the number of participants who
fail the comprehension question is not reported and
no empirically tested explanation is offered why
participants fail the checks. Feltz, Cokely, and Nadelhoffer (2009) suggest that “many participants
often fail the manipulation checks in these kinds of
studies” (p. 16).2 But why do so many people fail the
manipulation checks and how can we get more
people to pass them? We explore this question in a
series of two experiments.

Experiment 1
One possible explanation of why participants do
not give the “correct” answer to the comprehension
question is that they may not spend the time necessary to internalize the description of determinism.
2

In one of the few studies that report the percentage
of participants who were excluded, Nahmias, Coates,
and Kvaran (2007) reported that they excluded 22
percent of their participants because of comprehension failures. However, in their study, participants
first answered the comprehension question. Anecdotal evidence suggests that in other experiments, rates
of failure were much higher. These data provide
some evidence suggesting that placement of the comprehension question is a key factor in correct responses (see Experiments and Discussion)

2441

tation of the task making it difficult to give the normatively correct answer to the comprehension question (e.g., as this answer could contradict the previous
answer that participants feel very strongly about).
However, when the comprehension question is presented first and in the absence of affective information, many people may find it relatively easier to
answer the comprehension question according to the
supplied definition. Hence, this possibility generates
the hypothesis that if the comprehension question is
presented first and before affective material, then
there should be more correct answers to the comprehension question than if the comprehension question
is presented after affective material.

gists are right that all of our decisions are ultimately
caused by events occurring before our birth? and (4)
Regardless of how you answered question 3, if the
psychologists are right, is it accurate to say that if the
universe were re-created, people would make all the
same decisions?
In the Early Selection condition, participants only
read the first paragraph and then answers questions
(3) and (4) (with appropriate substitution). After
answering questions (3) and (4), they went to a separate page where the entire scenario was present and
they were asked to answer questions (1) and (2).
They were instructed not to go back and change their
answers to (3) and (4) after they submitted their answers.

Methods and Materials
Participants

There were three conditions in Experiment 1. In the
Control and Paid condition, participants read the
following scenario from Nahmias, Coates, and Kvaran (2007):

In the Control and Early Selection conditions, participants completed the surveys at the PhilosphicalPersonality website. In the Paid condition, participants completed surveys at Schreiner's Behavioral
Philosophy Lab. Participants were tested in 6 groups
of no larger than 12 and no smaller than 4 participants. They received exactly the same materials as
those in the Control condition. Participants completed
the survey at computer terminals and were told that
they would be paid $2.00 for getting at least 80% of
the questions correct.
Following standard practice, we eliminated all
those with extensive philosophical training (all those
reporting having a B.A. or greater in philosophy),
those whose first language was not English, and those
who reported themselves to be age 18 or under.

“Most respected psychologists are convinced
that eventually we will figure out exactly how
all of our decisions and actions are entirely
caused. For instance, they think that whenever
we are trying to decide what to do, the decision
we end up making is completely caused by the
specific thoughts, desires, and plans occurring in
our minds.
The psychologists are also convinced that these
thoughts, desires, and plans are completely
caused by our current situation and the earlier
events in our lives, and that these earlier events
were also completely caused by even earlier
events, eventually going all the way back to
events that occurred before we were born.
So, once specific earlier events have occurred
in a person's life, these events will definitely
cause specific later events to occur. For example,
one day a person named John decides to kill his
wife so that he can marry his lover, and he does
it. Once the specific thoughts, desires, and plans
occur in John’s mind, they will definitely cause
his decision to kill his wife.
Assume the psychologists are right that events
that occurred before John was born definitely
caused his decision to kill his wife. Please rate to
what degree you agree with the following statements.”

Results and Discussion
Question (3) is one typical comprehension question. Table 1 represents the numbers of those who
passed and failed the question for each condition:
Table 1: Comprehension Failures.
Fail
Pass
Early Selection
(N = 71)

23, 32%

48, 68%

Control (N =
115)

54, 47%

61, 53%

Paid (N = 40)

24, 60%

16, 40%

The difference between Early Selection and Control
was significant χ2 (1, N = 186) = 3.837, p = .05. The
difference between Early Selection and Paid was
significant, χ2 (1, N = 111) = 7.99, p = .005. However, the difference between Control and Paid was
not significant χ2 (1, N = 155) = 2.02, p = .16, but
showed a very small, potential non-significant trend.

After reading this scenario, participants were asked to
rate their level of agreement with the following two
sentences (1 = strongly disagree, 4 = neutral, 7 =
strongly agree): (1) John decided to kill his wife of
his own free will; (2) John is morally responsible for
killing his wife. Immediately following those two
questions, participants were asked two 'yes' or 'no'
questions: (3) Do you personally think the psycholo-

2442

in the Extra Sentence condition. Participants in this
condition read the following passage in addition to
the passage read by those in No Sentence: “That
means that if the psychologists are right and the
world was exactly re-created, people would make all
the same decisions.” They were then asked two questions: (a) According to the psychologists, is it accurate to say that if the universe was exactly re-created
people would make all the same decisions? and (b)
Regardless of how you answered question 1, do you
personally think the psychologists are right that all of
our decisions are completely caused by our current
situation, earlier events in our lives, and events occurring before our birth? They could only respond
'yes' or 'no'. On a separate page, both groups were
given an addition sentence: Please imagine that one
day a person named John decides to kill his wife so
that he can marry his lover, and he does it. Following
this sentence, they were asked to rate their level of
agreement with two sentences (1 = strongly disagree,
4 = neutral, 7 = strongly agree): (c) John decided to
kill his wife of his own free will, (d) John is morally
responsible for killing his wife. After submitting their
answers to (a) and (b), participants could not go back
and change their answers.
Results and Discussion Results for each condition
are reported in Table 2.
Table 2: Comprehension Failures.
Fail
Pass

These results suggest that a substantial number of
participants can pass the comprehension question. In
addition, giving participants incentive to answer the
comprehension question correct did not have a reliable effect. Rather, the position of the question seemed
to be the most relevant factor determining participants judgment accuracy. However, one possible
alternative explanation might be that the rather lengthy scenarios complicates interpretation and is the
primarily reason participants did not make the correct
inference concerning the deterministic nature of the
scenarios. Participants may be more likely to lose
track of the deterministic nature of the scenarios
because they are so long and the comprehension
questions late in the series of questions (Nichols and
Knobe, 2007). To rule out this possible explanation,
we performed a second experiment to replicate and
extend the results of Experiment 1.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was designed to address two different
issues. First, the length of the scenarios was drastically reduced. If we still find an effect with respect to
the placement of the comprehension question, then it
is not likely that the length of the scenario is what
was responsible for differences observed in Experiment 1. Second, we wanted to make perfectly clear
what the correct answer to the comprehension question was. So, in one version of the scenario we provided a sentence that clearly states what the correct
answer to the comprehension question was. This
provides the strongest test of whether the placement
of the comprehension question is responsible for
correct to that question in comparison to the ‘too
lengthy’ hypothesis. Those who received the extra
sentence should get the comprehension question
correct more frequently than those who did not receive the extra sentence. In addition, those who receive the extra sentence and the comprehension question first should give the correct response to the comprehension question more often than those who receive the extra sentence with the comprehension
question second.

“No Sentence” (N = 60)

36, 60%

24, 40%

“Extra sentence” (N = 49)

16, 33%

33, 67%

The difference between the two conditions was statistically significant, χ2 = (1, N = 109) = 8.09, p = .004.
To test whether order made a difference in these
judgments, an additional experiment was conducted.

Experiment 2b
Participants Participants completed the survey on
the Philosophical Personality website. The same
exclusion criteria that applied in Experiment 2a applied in Experiment 2b. After excluding these participants, 187 participants remained.
Methods and Materials Participants received the
exact same materials as those in Experiment 2a except that the order of the questions was reversed.
Participants received questions in the following order: (c), (d), (a), (b). Importantly, participants received the sentence concerning John killing his wife
before they answered all questions. Questions (c) and
(d) appeared on one page. Once participants answered (c) and (d), they then answered on a separate
page (a) and (b) and were not able to go back to
change their answers to (c) and (d).
Results and Discussion Results for Experiment 2b
are reported in Table 3.

Experiment 2a
Participants Participants completed the short survey
on the Philosophical Personality website. We excluded those who reported that their first language
was not English, had at least a bachelors degree in
philosophy, and who were under 18. After excluding
these people, there were 109 participants remaining.
Methods and Materials Participants were randomly
divided into two conditions. One group was in the No
Sentence condition where they read the following
passage: “Most respected psychologists are convinced that our thoughts, desires, and plans are completely caused by our current situation, the earlier
events in our lives, and events that occurred before
we were born.” The other group of participants were

2443

Table 3: Comprehension Failures
Fail

Pass

“No Sentence” (N = 89)

54, 61%

35, 39%

“Extra sentence”

56, 57%

42, 43%

(N = 98)
The difference between the two conditions was not
statistically significant, χ2 = (1, N = 187) = .24, p =
.62. Importantly, across experiment 2a and 2b, the
order had an effect on whether those who received
the extra sentence version gave the correct answer, χ2
= (1, N = 147) = 7.84, p = .005.3

General Discussion
Our experiments suggest that the placement of the
comprehension question was an important factor in
whether participants give the correct answer. Experiment 1 suggested that those who received the comprehension question first and in the absence of affective material were more likely to give the correct
answer than those who received it later and after the
presence of affective material. Moreover, Experiment
1 suggested that motivation to understand the scenarios was not a reliable, primary factor in whether
people were able to make the correct inferences about
the deterministic nature of the scenarios (although it
is possible, but by no means certain, it could become
more influential with higher levels of incentive).
Experiment 2 suggested that the length of the scenario was not responsible for comprehension failures.
In addition, Experiment 2 suggested that the order of
presentation was a factor even when it was very clear
what the correct answer to the comprehension question was.
These results lead to some clear prescriptions regarding how to go about measuring comprehension in
these scenarios. If one desires to maximize the usable
sample (i.e., those who pass the comprehension question) and avoid potential sample bias one should
present the comprehension question first and before
any potentially biasing, affective content. These results also indicate that people may interpret scenarios
and questions differently than intended by the experimenters (Feltz & Cokely, in press; see also Cokely

& Feltz, 2009a; 2009b) or at least that the ability to
infer correctly the deterministic nature of these scenarios is plastic. A common explanation of failures to
the comprehension questions is that the participant
did not “care” enough or could not correctly apply or
understand the deterministic nature of the scenarios.
However, our data suggest something different. Perhaps those who fail the comprehension question
simply interpret and represent the question differently. Perhaps they understand the question in a fundamentally different way. Perhaps they are biased by
affect. Given their understanding of the task, they
may not be giving an incorrect answers at all (Feltz,
Cokely, & Nadelhoffer, 2009; but for more general
examples from the judgment and decision making see
Gigerenzer, 1991, and Gigerenzer & colleagues). In
such cases, these responses reveal something important about how plastic our intuitions about freedom
and moral responsibility can be. The understanding
of determinism appears to bi-directional—correctly
understanding determinism could influence judgments about free will and moral responsibility. But
importantly, it could be that beliefs about free will
and moral responsibility can influence judgments
about determinism. If all of this is true, it provides a
more plausible description of the rich and nuanced
ways people go about making a host of important
judgments about themselves, their place in the world,
and their relationships with others. Critically, results
such as these (and others) necessitate that experimental philosophers and cognitive scientists adopt psychologically sensitive multimethod approaches to the
investigation of folk intuitions.

Acknowledgments
Authorship is equal. We would like to thank Joshua
Knobe, Shaun Nichols, Mark Isaac, and participants
at the NEH Summer Institute for Experimental Philosophy for helpful comments.

References
Bernstein, M. (2002). Fatalism. In R. Kane (Ed.), The
Oxford Handbook of Free Will (pp. 65-81). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cokely, E.T. (2009). Beyond generic dual processes:
How should we evaluate scientific progress?
PsycCritiques,Vol. 54, Release 51, Article 10.
Cokely, E.T., & Feltz, A. (2009). Adaptive variation
in judgment and philosophical intuition. Consciousness and Cognition, 18, 355-357.
Cokely, E.T., & Feltz, A. (2009). Individual differences, judgment biases, and theory-of-mind: Deconstructing the intentional action side effect
asymmetry. Journal of Research in Personality,
43, 18-24.
Cokely, E. T., & Kelley, C. M. (2009). Cognitive
abilities and superior decision making under risk:

3

In some of the experimental conditions, we found that
answering the control question interacted with judgments
about moral responsibility, as expected. Those who failed
the comprehension question agreed more strongly that the
person is morally responsible than those who passed. In
both experiments, people's judgments about free will did
not change as a function of answering the comprehension
question correctly.

2444

Nahmias, E., Morris, S., Nadelhoffer, T., & Turner, J.
(2006). Is incompatibilism intuitive? Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research, 73(1), 28-53.
Nichols, S., & Knobe, J. (2007). Moral Responsibility and Determinism: The Cognitive Science of
Folk Intuition. Nous, 41, 663-685.
Osman, M. (2004). An evaluation of dual-process
theories of reasoning. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 11, 988–1010.
Smilansky, S. (2002). Free will, fundamental dualism, and the centrality of illusion. In R. Kane
(Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Free Will (pp. 489505). New York: Oxford University Press.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual
differences in reasoning: Implications for the rationality debate? Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
23, 645-726.
Vohs, K., & Schooler, J. (2008). The value of believing in free will: Encouraging a belief in determinism increases cheating. Psychological Science, 19,
49-54.
Weber, E. U., Johnson, E. J., Milch, K. F., Chang, H.,
Brodscholl, J. C., & Goldstein, D. G. (2007).
Asymmetric discounting in intertemporal choice:
A querytheory account. Psychological Science, 18,
516–523.
Woolfolk, R., Doris, J., & Darley, J. (2006). Identification, situational constraint, and social
cognition: Studies in the attribution of moral responsibility. Cognition, 100, 283-301.

A protocol analysis and process model evaluation.
Judgment and Decision Making, 4, 20-33.
Cokely, E.T., Kelley, C.M., & Gilchrist, A.H. (2006).
Sources of individual differences in working
memory: Contributions of strategy to capacity.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 13, 991-997.
Cokely, E. T., Parpart, P., & Schooler, L. J. (2009).
On the link between cognitive control and heuristic processes. In N. A. Taatgen & H. van Rijn
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 31 Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2926-2931).
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Feltz, A., & Cokely, E. (in press). Individual differences and theory-of-mind judgments: Side effects
and order effects. Philosophical Psychology.
Feltz, A., & Cokely, E. T. (2009). Do judgments
about freedom and responsibility depend on who
you are?: Personality differences intuitions about
compatibilism and incompatibilism. Consciousness and Cognition, 24, 342-350.
Feltz, A., Cokely, E. T., & Nadelhoffer, T. (2009).
Natural compatibilism v. natural incompatibilism:
Back to the drawing board. Mind & Language, 24,
1-23.
Gigerenzer, G. (1991). How to make cognitive illusions disappear: Beyond "heuristics and biases". In
W. Stroebe & M. Hewstone (Eds.), European Review of Social Psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 83-115).
Chichester: Wiley.
Gigerenzer, G. (1996). On narrow norms and vague
heuristics: A rebuttal to Kahneman and Tversky
(1996). Psychological Review, 103, 592–596.
Gigerenzer, G. (1998). Surrogates for theories.
Theory & Psychology, 8, 195–204.
Gigerenzer, G., & Regier, T. (1996). How do we tell
an association from a rule? Comment on Sloman
(1996). Psychological Bulletin, 119, 23–26.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P. M., & the ABC Research
Group. (1999). Simple heuristics that make us
smart. New York, NY: Oxford University
Johnson, E. J., Haubl, G., & Keinan, A. (2007). Aspects of endowment: A query theory of value construction. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning Memory and Cognition, 33, 461–474.
Mele, A. (2006). Free Will and Luck. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Miller, J., & Feltz, A., (2009). Frankfurt and the folk:
An empirical investigation of Frankfurt-style cases. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Nahmias, E., Coates, J., & Kvaran, T. (2007). Free
will, moral responsibility, and mechanism: Experiments on folk intuitions. Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 31, 214-242.
Nahmias, E., Morris, S., Nadelhoffer, T., & Turner, J.
(2005). Surveying freedom: Folk intuitions about
free will and moral responsibility. Philosophical
Psychology, 18(5), 561-584.

2445

