UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Reasoning through Mindful Actions: Effect of Instruction and Spatial Ability on
Understanding Dynamic Systems
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1685f8f4
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)
Author
Chan, Margaret
Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                  Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                     University of California

  Reasoning through Mindful Actions: Effect of Instruction and Spatial
                       Ability on Understanding Dynamic Systems
                                                Margaret Chan
                                       Teachers College, Columbia University
Abstract: The ability to understand systems is important for individuals engaged in various domains in science.
Prior research has demonstrated direct-manipulation animation (DMA) effectively supports learners to understand
dynamic systems. However, the role of learners’ characteristics and scaffolding upon their performance remains
unclear. The current study examines how instruction and spatial ability modulates learners’ executive attention
when they use DMAs to learn physical systems. To demonstrate comprehension and reasoning ability, participants
were asked to explain and predict outcomes of ”what-if” scenarios. Their eye-movements during their interaction with
DMAs were recorded. Participants’ eye-gaze patterns and learning performance revealed interactivity itself did not
lead to understanding of these systems. Instead, the conjunction of attending to relevant information while actively
manipulating the animation facilitated retention and reasoning. Spatial ability, however, was not significant in
predicting performance. Overall, findings suggest learning with interactive animation involves cognizant interchange
between bottom-up visuo-motor support and top-down cognitive control.
                                                         598

