UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Recognizability of Individual Creative Style Within and Across Domains: Preliminary Studies

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1411w92c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Gabora, Liane

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Recognizability of Individual Creative Style Within and Across Domains:
Preliminary Studies
Liane Gabora (liane.gabora@ubc.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia
Okanagan campus, 3333 University Way
Kelowna BC, V1V 1V7, CANADA
Abstract

themselves, and to those who appreciate what they do, it is
not predicted by well-known theories of creativity.
This paper presents the results of preliminary experiments
designed to test the hypothesis that creative individuals
possess a distinctly recognizable creative style, and that this
creative style is recognizable not just within a domain but
across domains. We begin by discussing well-known
theories of creativity, and how the phenomena of individual
style and ‘voice’ are not predicted by them. Three studies
are then presented. The first two studies test the hypothesis
that the phenomenon of creative style is real; that is, that
creative individuals such as artists and writers genuinely
exhibit a creative style that others come to associate with
them. The third study tests the hypothesis that an
individual’s creative style is recognizable not just in one
domain, but across different domains. Finally, we discuss
how the findings are compatible with a new theory of
creativity.

It is hypothesized that creativity arises from the self-mending
capacity of an internal model of the world, or worldview. The
uniquely honed worldview of a creative individual results in a
distinctive style that is recognizable within and across
domains. It is further hypothesized that creativity is domaingeneral in the sense that there exist multiple avenues by
which the distinctiveness of one’s worldview can be
expressed. These hypotheses were tested using art students
and creative writing students. Art students guessed
significantly above chance both which painting was done by
which of five famous artists, and which artwork was done by
which of their peers. Similarly, creative writing students
guessed significantly above chance both which passage was
written by which of five famous writers, and which passage
was written by which of their peers. These findings support
the hypothesis that creative style is recognizable. Moreover,
creative writing students guessed significantly above chance
which of their peers produced particular works of art,
supporting the hypothesis that creative style is recognizable
not just within but across domains.

Theories of Creativity

Keywords: art; creative writing; creativity; Darwinian
theory; expertise; heuristic search; honing; style; voice.

This section very briefly summarizes some leading theories
of how the creative process works, and then presents a new
theory of creativity referred to as honing theory.

Introduction
The therapeutic nature of the creative process is well
known. Eminent creators and laypeople alike often claim
that through engagement in creative activities they gain a
clearer sense of themselves as unique individuals. By
making artistic choices, and observing how these choices
guide subsequent thoughts about the work, eventually
culminating in original, creative form, they acquire selfknowledge, and often, are left with a sense of completeness.
The transformation that occurs on canvas or on the written
page is said to be mirrored by a sense of personal
transformation and self-discovery that occurs within.
Artists often find a style that feels as if it is ‘theirs’ only
after periods of exploration with different media and
established styles and art forms. Similarly, writers speak of
transitioning from a stage in which they were merely
imitating the styles of authors they admired to a stage in
which they discovered their own authentic ‘voice’. This
sense of self-discovery may seem to the creator as real as
anything he or she has ever experienced, and the transition
from merely imitating others to finding one’s own
identifiable style is often evident to anyone exposed to an
individual’s creative works. But although the phenomenon
of recognizable creative style seems obvious to artists

Creativity as Heuristic Search
Inspired by the metaphor of the mind as a computer (or
computer program), it was proposed that creativity involves
a process of heuristic search, in which rules of thumb guide
the inspection of different states within a particular state
space (set of possible solutions) until a satisfactory solution
is found (Eysenck, 1993; Newell, Shaw & Simon 1957;
Newell & Simon 1972). In heuristic search, the relevant
variables are defined up front; thus the state space is
generally fixed. Examples of heuristics include breaking the
problem into sub-problems, hill-climbing (reiteratively
modifying the current state to look more like the goal state),
and working backward from the goal state to the initial state.
A variation on this is the view that creativity involves
heuristics that guide the search for, not a possibility within a
given state space, but a new state space itself (e.g., Boden,
1990; Kaplan & Simon, 1990, Ohlsson, 1992). That is, it
involves switching from one representation of the problem
to another, sometimes referred to as restructuring
(Weisberg, 1995).

2350

The Expertise View of Creativity
Some posit that creativity involves everyday thought
processes such as remembering, planning, reasoning, and
restructuring; no special or unconscious thought processes
need be postulated (Perkins, 1981; Weisberg, 2006). This is
sometimes referred to as the expertise view of creativity
because it stresses the extent to which creative acts draw
upon familiarity with a particular domain of knowledge.
Thus this view in particular is associated with the notion
that creativity is highly domain-specific; expertise in one
domain is not viewed as enhancing creativity in another
domain. The expertise view is also associated with the
notion that the creative process result in products that are
largely derivative, or reproductive (as Weisberg puts it), as
opposed to genuinely new, or productive.

theories of creativity is that it focuses on not just
restructuring as it pertains to the conception of the task, but
as it pertains to the worldview as a whole. When faced with
a creatively demanding task, there is an interaction between
the conception of the task and the worldview. The
conception of the task changes through interaction with the
worldview, and the worldview changes through interaction
with the task. This interaction is reiterated until the task is
complete, at which point not only is the task conceived of
differently, but the worldview is subtly or drastically
transformed. Thus one distinguishing feature of honing
theory is that the creative process reflects the natural
tendency of a worldview to seek integration or consistency
amongst both its pre-existing and newly-added components,
whether they be ideas, attitudes, or bits of knowledge; it
mends itself as does a body when injured.

The Darwinian Theory of Creativity
Another approach to modeling the creative process involves
framing it in Darwinian terms. While some philosophers
describe the growth of knowledge as Darwinian merely in
the sense that conjectures must be refutable, i.e., able to be
selected against (Popper, 1963; Lorenz, 1971), Campbell
(1960) goes further, arguing that a stream of creative
thought is a Darwinian process. The basic idea is that we
generate new ideas through ‘blind’ variation and selective
retention (abbreviated BVSR): ‘mutate’ the current thought
a multitude of different ways, select the fittest variant(s),
and repeat this process until a satisfactory idea results. The
variants are ‘blind’ in the sense that the creator has no
subjective certainty about whether they are a step in the
direction of the final creative product.
Currently the Darwinian view of creativity is most closely
associated with Simonton (1998, 1999a,b, 2007a,b), who
views creativity as essentially a trial-and-error process in
which the most promising ‘blindly’ generated ideational
variants are selected for development into a finished
product. It should be noted that the endeavor to apply
natural selection to creative thought is not without critics
(Dasgupta, 2004; Eysenck, 1995; Gabora, 2005, 2007;
Sternberg, 1998, Thagard, 1980; Weisberg, 2000).
Nevertheless, the development of a creative idea can be said
to be evolutionary in the very general sense that it exhibits
descent with adaptive modification.

The Honing Theory of Creativity
Central to the honing theory of creativity is the notion of a
worldview, by which we mean one’s internal model of the
world, as well as one’s values, attitudes, predispositions,
and habitual patterns of response (Gabora, 2000, 2004,
2008, Gabora & Aerts, 2009). Honing theory posits that
creativity arises due to the self-organizing, self-mending
nature of a worldview, and that it is by way of the creative
process the individual hones (and re-hones) an integrated
worldview. Honing theory places equal emphasis on the
externally visible creative outcome and the internal
cognitive restructuring brought about by the creative
process. Indeed one factor that distinguishes it from other

The Recognizability of Creative Style
Theories of creativity based on heuristic search, the
acquisition of expertise, or chance, random processes, such
as BVSR, give no reason to expect that the act of creation
leads to a clearer or more integrated sense of self, or that the
works of a particular creator should exhibit a unique and
recognizable style. This is particularly so if, as is often
claimed, creativity is strongly domain-specific (Baer, 1998;
Sawyer, 2006; Weisberg, 2006). If creativity is limited to a
particular domain then why should it result in a global sense
of wellbeing or integration?
Claims about the domain-specificity of creativity are
based largely on findings that correlations amongst
alternative measures of creativity are small, and expertise or
eminence with respect to one creative endeavor is rarely
associated with expertise or eminence with respect to
another (e.g. Getzels & Jackson, 1962). Thus, for example,
creative scientists rarely become famous artists or dancers.
The focus of these studies is squarely on expertise or
eminence as evidence of creative achievement. But what if
creative achievement is measured not by expertise or
eminence but by having found a way to express what is
genuine and unique about us through whatever media we
have at a given time at our disposal? One might expect that
an artist’s or scientist’s personal style comes through in how
he or she prepares a meal or decorates a room, what
creativity researchers refer to as little-c (Richards, Kinney,
Benet, & Merzel, 1988) or mini-c (Beghetto & Kaufman,
2007) creative activities. Findings of domain-specificity in
creativity may have more to do with the fact that we focus
on creative achievement at a level that takes a decade or
more to obtain (Simonton, 2007), as opposed to looking for
evidence that creative potential and personal style
transcends particular domains. In other words, looking for
evidence of exceptional creativity in multiple domains is not
the only or necessarily even the best way to address the
question of whether creativity is domain-specific. Another
way is to look for evidence that an individual exhibits a
creative style in one domain that also ‘comes through’ when
engaged in creative activities in other domains.

2351

Although the phenomenon of recognizable style or voice
is not predicted by the view that creativity is a matter of
heuristic search, expertise, or Darwinian selection, it is
predicted by the honing theory of creativity. We have seen
that, according to honing theory, creativity is the process by
which one hones a worldview, and each idea the creator
comes up with is a different expression of the same
underlying core network of understandings, beliefs, and
attitudes. A worldview has a characteristic structure, and the
creator’s various outputs are reflections of that structure,
and they are related to one another, and potentially pave the
way for one another. Thus honing theory predicts that
creative individuals have a recognizable style.
There is evidence that human creativity is more consistent
with honing theory than with competing theories of
creativity with respect to developmental antecedents of
creativity, personality traits of creative individuals, and
studies of lifespan creativity (Gabora, under revision). This
paper reports on the results of creative style experiments
that provide further support for the theory. The goal of the
first two studies was to find empirical evidence for the
common belief that there really is such a thing as
recognizable style or voice. Although artists have no doubt
this is true, it has not been studied by psychologists, and as
we have seen, most theories of creativity do not predict it.
The goal of the third study was to test a more controversial
prediction of honing theory, the prediction that the structure
of a worldview manifests in a unique and recognizable way,
to varying degrees, through different creative outlets. Thus
for example, you might recognize someone’s art by
knowing how they dress or decorate.

Study 1: Within-domain Recognizability of Artistic
Style
The first study tested the hypothesis that individuals who
are highly familiar with the art of a given artist will
recognize other works by that artist that they have not
encountered before.

Method
Participants The research was conducted with 10 University
of British Columbia undergraduates majoring in art who
were highly familiar with five well-known artists, and with
each other’s art.
Materials and Procedures Prior to the study, participants
were instructed to bring from home a recently completed
painting that they had never discussed with or shown to any
of their classmates. They were asked to hide their signatures
or any other identifying feature of the painting. Before the
study, the paintings were examined to ensure that signatures
and any other identifying features had been covered.
At the beginning of the study, the art students were shown
three well-known paintings by each of five well-known
artists as a refresher. The well-known artists were Picasso,
Monet, Van Gogh, Dahli, and Andy Warhol. These artists
were decided upon because previous discussion with the

class indicated that all students were highly familiar with
them. The students were then shown ten unfamiliar (rare or
newly completed) works that they had not studied in class.
Signatures on all artworks were covered by black tape. The
art students were given a questionnaire and asked to guess
which famous artist did each painting. For each answer they
were also asked to state how certain they were on a 3-point
scale that they had not encountered the work before.
They were also shown the paintings by their fellow
classmates that they had never seen before. The rationale for
showing classmates’ paintings was to control for the
possibility that with the well-known artists, a participant
who, though not recognizing the creative voice, might guess
above chance levels to which era or country the artist
belonged. The only sufficiently large number of artists from
the same era and locale that the students were familiar with
were their own classmates. As with the famous artists, they
were asked to guess which classmate did each painting, and
to state how certain they were on a 3-point scale that they
had not encountered the work before.
The participants were debriefed, and the results were
analyzed. If a participant had encountered a work before, or
was uncertain about having encountered it before, the score
for this question was not included in the analysis. Less than
5% of scores were not included in the analysis.
Analysis The data were analyzed to determine if the
participants correctly identified the artists at above-chance
levels. First, a proportion correct score for each participant
was computed. For example, if a participant correctly
identified seven out of 10 possible artists, the proportion
correct score for that person was .70. Then, the proportion
correct score that would have been obtained on the basis on
random guesses for each question was computed. For
example, for the well-known artists, since there were 5 of
them, the proportion correct based on random guesses was
.20. One-sample t-tests were then computed comparing the
average proportion correct scores to the proportion correct
values that would have been obtained had participants been
randomly guessing. A one-sample randomization test
(Manly, 2007) was used to compute the p-levels for these ttest values, given the small sample sizes, and .05 was used
as the criterion for statistical significance.

Results
The results are divided into two sections: recognition of
famous artists, and recognition of classmates’ art.
Recognition of Famous Artists For the task in which art
students were asked which famous artist painted each
painting, the mean proportion correct was .78 (SD = .12).
The proportion correct that would have been obtained on the
basis of random guesses was .20. This difference is
statistically significant, t(9) = 15.3, p < .0001, r (effect size)
= .98. Thus art students were able to distinguish above
chance which famous artists created pieces of art they had
not seen before. 	  

2352

Recognition of Classmates’ Art A similar result was
obtained with works of art by the students themselves. The
mean proportion correct was .74 (SD = .29). The proportion
correct that would have been obtained on the basis of
random guesses is .11. This difference is significant, t(9) =
6.8, p < 0.0001, r = .92. Thus art students also correctly
identified their classmates’ art above chance.

Table 2: Sample of written passage by well-known writer
provided to creative writing students as a test of their ability
to recognize writer’s style.
“However, here they are, safe and well, just like their own
nice selves, Fanny looking as neat and white this morning as
possible, and dear Charles all affectionate, placid, quiet,
cheerful, good humour. They are both looking very well, but
poor little Cassy is grown extremely thin, and looks poorly. I
hope a week's country air and exercise may do her good. I am
sorry to say it can be but a week. The baby does not appear so
large in proportion as she was, nor quite so pretty, but I have
seen very little of her. Cassy was too tired and bewildered just
at first to seem to know anybody. We met them in the hall -the women and girl part of us -- but before we reached the
library she kissed me very affectionately, and has since
seemed to recollect me in the same way.”

Study 2: Within-domain Recognizability of the
Notion of a Writer’s ‘Voice’
This study tested the hypothesis that individuals who are
highly familiar with the work of a given writer will
recognize other works by that writer that they have not
encountered before.

Method
Participants The research was conducted with seven
University of British Columbia advanced undergraduate
creative writing students who were highly familiar with five
well-known writers, and with each other’s writing.
Materials and Procedures The analogous procedure to that
described above for art students was used for creative
writing students. Prior to the study, they had been asked to
write a passage about a kitchen and a poem about a month
of the year. They were explicitly asked to include no
immediately identifying content in their writing (e.g., no
mention of surfing if it is known that they like surfing).
These constituted their two pieces of writing. At the
beginning of the study they were given three well-known
written passages by each of ten well-known writers as a
refresher. The well-known writers were Ernest Hemingway,
Douglas Coupland, Emily Dickinson, Walt Whitman, Allen
Ginsburg, Jack Kerouac, TS Eliot, Jane Austin, George
Orwell, and Franz Kafka. These writers were chosen
because previous discussion with the class indicated that all
students were highly familiar with them. A sample of one of
the written passages by well-known writers (in this case,
Ernest Hemingway) that were provided to creative writing
students as a refresher is provided in Table 1.
Table 1: Sample of written passage by well-known writer
provided to creative writing students as a refresher.
“If the book is good, it is about something that you know, and
is truly written, and reading it over you see that this is so, you
can let the boys yip and the noise will have that pleasant
sound coyotes make on a very cold night when they are out in
the snow and you are in your own cabin that you have built or
paid for with your work.”

The creative writing students were then shown twenty rare
passages that they had not studied in class. A sample of one
of the passages by well-known writers (in this case, Jane
Austin) is provided in Table 2.

The creative writing students were also given the two
pieces of writing by each of their fellow classmates (the
passage about a kitchen and the poem about a month of the
year) that they had never seen before. They were given a
questionnaire, and asked to guess which famous writer
wrote each passage in the first set of passages, and which
classmate wrote each passage in the second set. For each
answer, they were also asked to state on a 3-point scale how
certain they were that they had not encountered the work
before.
Participants were debriefed, and the results were
analyzed. As in the first study, if the participant had
encountered the work before, or was uncertain about having
encountered it before, the score for this question was not
included in the analysis. Once again, less than 5% of scores
were not included in the analysis.

Results
The results are divided into two sections: recognition of
famous writers, and recognition of classmates’ writing.
Recognition of Famous Writers For creative writing
students exposed to passages by famous writers, the mean
proportion correct was .34, (SD = .28). The proportion
correct that would have been obtained on the basis of
random guesses is .10. This difference is significant, t(7) =
7.0, p < 0.0001, r = .94. Thus creative writing students
correctly identified above chance passages by famous
writers that they had not encountered before.
Recognition of Classmates’ Writing A similar but less
pronounced result was obtained with passages written by the
students themselves. The mean proportion correct was .27
(SD = .16). The proportion correct that would have been
obtained on the basis of random guesses is .14. This
difference is significant, t(7) = 2.3, p < 0.05, r = .66. Thus,
creative writing students also correctly identified above
chance passages written by classmates.

2353

Study 3: Cross-domain Recognizability of Style
This experiment tested the hypothesis that familiarity with
an individual’s creative work in one domain facilitates
recognition of that individual’s creative work in another.

Method
Participants The same seven University of British
Columbia advanced undergraduate creative writing students
who participated in Study 2 also participated in Study 3.
They were highly familiar with each other’s writing, but
unfamiliar with each other’s art.
Materials Each creative writing student brought one piece
of covered art to the professor’s office. They were asked to
hide their signature and any other identifying feature. Before
the study, the paintings were examined to ensure that
signatures and other identifying features had been hidden.
Procedure The students were shown unsigned art done by
classmates. They were given a questionnaire and asked to
guess which classmate did which piece of art. As above, for
each answer they were also asked to state on a scale of 1-3
how certain they were that they had not encountered the
work before. If they had seen the piece before, or thought
they might have seen it before, their answer was not
included in the analysis. Less than 5% of scores were
discarded from the analysis.

Results
The mean proportion correct was .39 (SD = .27). The
proportion correct that would have been obtained on the
basis of random guesses is .17. This difference is
significant, t(6) = 2.2, p < 0.03, r = .67. Thus creative
writing students were able to identify above chance which
of their classmates created a given work in a domain other
than writing, specifically art.

Discussion and Conclusions
The experiments with artists and writers reported here
provide support for the hypothesis that different works by
the same creator exhibit a recognizable style or ‘voice’, and
that this recognizable quality even comes through in
different creative outlets. Art students were able to
distinguish significantly above chance which famous artists
created pieces of art they had not seen before. They also
correctly identified their classmates’ art significantly above
chance. Similarly, creative writing students correctly
identified significantly above chance passages by famous
writers that they had not encountered before, and correctly
identified their classmates’ writing significantly above
chance. Creative writing students additionally correctly
identified significantly above chance works of art produced
by classmates. (The opposite study, determining whether art
students correctly identify written passages generated by
their classmates, has not yet been carried out.)

The higher recognizability of artistic style (study 1) than
writer’s style (study 2) comes as a surprise. It cannot be
entirely due to the famous artists coming from a wider range
of eras and locales than the famous writers, for if that were
the correct explanation, the recognizability of classmates’
art in Study 1 and classmates’ writing in Study 2 should
have been comparable. Perhaps there are fewer constraints
on artists, i.e. fewer demands that the work ‘make sense’,
and it need not exhibit plot structure or character
development. Thus there may be more acceptable ways of
‘doing one’s own thing’. The analysis takes into account
that there were twice as many writers to choose from as
artists, but in future studies the number of famous artists and
writers will be the same, in order to make the studies as
comparable as possible.
The results support the hypothesis that creators have a
recognizable style. These findings are not predicted by
theories of creativity that emphasize chance processes or the
accumulation of expertise. If creative output is a matter of
chance or the acquisition of expertise, then what is the
source of this identifiable personal style? These findings are,
however, predicted by honing theory, according to which
personal style reflects the uniquely honed structure of an
individual’s worldview. The finding that creative writing
students were able to identify above chance which of their
classmates created a given work in a domain other than
writing, specifically art, supports the prediction that creators
hone a uniquely structured worldview that exhibits a style
that is recognizable not just within a domain but across
domains. Further experiments are underway to replicate
these findings with larger groups of participants, and adapt
the general procedure to study the recognizability of style
within and across domains using trained jazz musicians.
It is worth pointing out how this approach, in particular
the investigation of recognizable cross-domain style, differs
from typical attempts to determine to what extent higher
cognition is domain-general versus domain-specific. As
mentioned in the introduction, it is commonly assumed that
this issue can be resolved by determining to what extent
ratings of expertise in one domain are correlated with
ratings of expertise in another. An unspoken assumption
here is that ratings of expertise are all that is needed to
detect any quality that might characterize or unify an
individual’s creative or intellectual ventures, and indeed that
outputs of higher cognitive processes are objectively
comparable. In reality, while manifestations of higher
cognition are sometimes comparable, even quantitatively,
often there is little objective basis for comparison. The
present results suggest that higher cognition is domain
general not in the sense that expertise in one enterprise
guarantees expertise in another, but in the sense that there
are multiple interacting venues for creative exploration and
self-expression open to an individual, and through which
that individual’s worldview may be gleaned. It may be that
our potential for cross-domain learning is only just
beginning to be exploited, through ventures such as the
Learning through the Arts program in Canada, in which

2354

students, for example, learn mathematics through dance, or
learn about food chains through the creation of visual art. It
seems reasonable that if knowledge is presented in
compartmentalized chunks, students end up with a
compartmentalized understanding of the world, while if
knowledge were presented more holistically, a more
integrated kind understanding may be possible.

Acknowledgments
This work is funded by grants from the Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC) and the
GOA program of the Free University of Brussels. The
author wishes to thank Brian O’Connor for insightful
discussion and statistical help.

References
Baer, J. (1998). The case for domain specificity in
creativity. Creativity Research Journal, 11, 173–177.
Beghetto, R. A., & Kaufman, J. C. (2007). Toward a
broader conception of creativity: A case for mini-c
creativity. Psychology of Aesthetics, Cre- ativity, and the
Arts, 1, 73–79.
Campbell, D. T. (1960). Blind variation and selective
retention in creative thought as in other knowledge
processes. Psychological Review, 67, 380−400.
Dasgupta, S. (2004). Is creativity a Darwinian process?
Creativity Research Journal, 16, 403−413.
Eysenck, H. J. (1993). Creativity and personality:
Suggestions for a theory. Psychological Inquiry, 4, 147178.
Eysenck, H. J. (1995). Genius: The natural history of
creativity. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Gabora, L. (2000). Conceptual closure: Weaving memories
into an interconnected worldview. In (G. Van de Vijver &
J. Chandler, Eds.) Closure: Emergent Organizations and
their Dynamics. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 901, 42–53.
Gabora, L. (2004). Ideas are not replicators but minds are.
Biology & Philosophy, 19(1), 127-143.
Gabora, L. (2007). Why the creative process is not
Darwinian. Commentary on 'The creative process in
Picasso's Guernica sketches: Monotonic improvements
versus nonmonotonic variants' by D. K. Simonton.
Creativity Research Journal, 19(4), 361-365.
Gabora, L. (2008). The cultural evolution of socially
situated cognition. Cognitive Systems Research, 9(1-2),
104-113.
Gabora, L. & Aerts, D. (2009). A model of the emergence
and evolution of integrated worldviews. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology. 53, 434-451.
Getzels, J. W. & Jackson, P. W. (1962). Creativity and
Intelligence. New York: John Wiley.
Kaplan, C. A. & Simon, H. A. (1990) In search of insight.
Cognitive Psychology, 22, 374−419.
Newell, A., Shaw, C. & Simon, H. (1957). The process of

creative thinking. In H. E. Gruber, G. Terrell & M.
Wertheimer (Eds.) Contemporary approaches to creative
thinking (pp. 153-189). New York: Pergamon.
Newell, A. & Simon, H. (1972). Human problem solving.
Edgewood Cliffs NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Ohlsson, S. (1992). Information-processing explanations of
insight and related phenomena. In M. T. Keane & K. J.
Gilhooly (Eds.) Advances in the psychology of thinking
(Vol. 1, pp. 1–44). New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Perkins, D. N. (1981). The mind’s best work. Cambridge
MA: Harvard University Press.
Richards, R., Kinney, D. K., Benet, M., & Merzel, A. P. C.
(1988). Assessing everyday creativity: Characteristics of
the Lifetime Creativity Scales and validation with three
large samples. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 54, 476–485.
Sawyer, R. K. (2006). Explaining creativity: The science of
human innovation. New York: Oxford University Press.
Simonton, D. K. (1998). Donald Campbell's model of the
creative process: Creativity as blind variation and
selective retention. Journal of Creative Behavior, 32(3),
153–158.
Simonton, D. K. (1999a). Creativity as blind variation and
selective retention: Is the creative process Darwinian?
Psychological Inquiry, 10, 309−328.
Simonton, D. K. (1999b). Origins of genius: Darwinian
perspectives on creativity. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Simonton, D. K. (2007). The creative process in Picasso’s
Guernica sketches: Monotonic improvements versus
nonmonotonic variants. Creativity Research Journal,
19(4), 329−344.
Simonton, D. K. (2007b). Rejoinder: Picasso’s Guernica
creativity as a Darwinian process: Definitions,
clarifications,
misconceptions,
and
applications.
Creativity Research Journal, 19(4), 381−394.
Sternberg, R. J. (1998). Cognitive mechanisms in human
creativity: Is variation blind or sighted? Journal of
Creative Behavior, 32, 159−176.
Thagard, P. (1980). Against evolutionary epistomology. In
P. D. Asquith & R. N. Giere (Eds.) PSA: Proceedings of
the Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science
Association, pp. 187-96.
Weisberg, R. W. (1999). Creativity and knowledge: a
challenge to theories. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.) Handbook
of creativity (pp. 226-259). Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Weisberg, R. W. (2000). An edifice built on sand? Review
of Origins of Genius: Darwinian Perspectives on
Creativity, D. K. Simonton. Contemporary Psychology:
APA Review of Books, 45, 589-593.
Weisberg, R. W. (2003). Creativity: Understanding
innovation in problem solving, science, invention, and the
arts. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley.
Weisberg, R. W. (2006). Creativity: Understanding
innovation in problem solving, science, invention, and the
arts. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley and Son.

2355

