UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Relational Versus Attributional Mode of Problem Solving?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1bn7z2nv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Bliznashki, Svetoslav
Kokinov, Boicho

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Relational Versus Attributional Mode of Problem Solving?
Svetoslav Bliznashki (valsotevs@gmail.com)
New Bulgarian University, 2 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Boicho Kokinov (bkokinov@nbu.bg)
New Bulgarian University, 2 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria
Abstract
We argue that the concept of relational priming (e.g. Schunn
1996, Day 2007) can be extended from priming of specific
relations to generating a cognitive state during which subjects
are particularly likely to encode and use relations. We
conducted an experiment in which three groups of subjects
did different tasks before a target matching to sample task was
introduced which contrasted a relationally versus an
attributionally similar alternative. Subjects in one condition
were asked to solve tasks involving relational reasoning while
subjects in another condition were asked to tasks involving
only attributes. As expected subjects in the first condition
were more likely to pick up the relationally similar alternative
while in the second condition the results reversed relative to a
control group. In conclusion we argue that this study shows
that encoding of relations can be a subject to unconscious
context influence.
Keywords: relational priming; context dependence; encoding
of relations, cognitive state

Introduction
Since Gentner’s Structure Mapping theory (Gentner 1983) a
great deal of research has been concentrated upon analogical
reasoning in terms of mapping of higher-order relations.
Although the mechanisms employed by the mapping
process have been extensively studied little is currently
known about the nature of the processes involved in
relational encoding. This study attempts to scratch the
surface of this complex matter by asking the question of
whether the process of relational encoding is subject to
certain external and internal context influences. While the
answer to this question certainly would not reveal the nature
of the encoding process it would hopefully tell us something
about certain specific aspects of its functioning.
Currently there is some agreement that the phenomenon
of relational priming exhibits a somehow automatic (i.e. not
subjected to voluntary control, external influence and
conscious experience) nature (e.g. Kokinov 1996, Schunn
1996, Day 2007, Hristova 2009)1. The abovementioned
studies employ different methodologies ranging from
naturalistic-like settings (Schunn 1996) to Stroop-like
interference Reaction Time paradigms (Hristova 2009).
1

But see Spellman et al. (2001) whose results indicate that
relational priming took place only when participants were
explicitly instructed to pay attention to the relations existing
between the stimuli (words) involved in the studies.

There is however a common thread among these research
projects – the use of specific relations. In other words all
these (and other) studies concentrated on exploring the
relational priming by using concretely represented,
nameable relations. The same naturally holds true for
relational priming in psycholinguistic research (e.g. Gagne
2005, Estes 2006).
Instead of continuing this well established line of research
we concentrated on the question of whether a global
cognitive state can be induced in which people are more
likely to encode relations in general. It can be said that we
are still concerned with relational priming but we employ a
rather broad, holistic and abstract definition of the
phenomenon.
We hypothesized that subjects confronted with tasks
explicitly involving relational reasoning will subsequently
be more likely to continue this style of reasoning when
dealing with completely different tasks. We also
hypothesized that subjects forced to encode and use
attributes of objects will be considerably less likely to
encode (and use) relations in subsequent tasks. In other
words we argue that not only specific relations can be
primed with similar other relations but also a “relational
mode of thinking” can be induced by use of specific task
requirements. Thus we claim that relational priming (and
consequently “attributional priming”) is a much more
complicated and abstract phenomenon than currently
conceived by traditional research in the area.
Another hypothesis related to the current study concerns
the subjects’ ability to cope with the particular priming task.
Since we argue that task requirements can possibly induce a
particular cognitive state it follows that the degree to which
this actually happens should depend upon a subject’s
particular ability to successfully cope with the task at hand
(the priming task).

Experiment
In the current experiment we tested three different groups of
subjects in order to see whether prior tasks influence
significantly relational and attributional reasoning during a
target task. In the first condition subjects solved six different
mental rotation tasks, in the second condition subjects
solved six items from Raven Progressive Matrices test (e.g.
Raven 2003) and in a third condition no task preceded the
target task. The three groups are called attributional,
relational and control conditions respectively.

2743

The target task was a single matching to sample task
borrowed from Medin et al. (1990). During this task
subjects were required to choose the more similar from two
alternative figures to a target figure. One of the alternatives
embodied a unique common relation with the target (we
called this one the relational alternative) while the other
shared a unique attribution with the target (we called it the
attributional alternative).
We hypothesized that subjects in the relational condition
would be more likely to pick up the relational alternative in
the target task (compared to the control group where no
priming task was present) because the Raven Progressive
Matrices test requires subjects to encode and map complex
higher-order relations. On the other hand since the mental
rotation task involved dealing with attributes and first order
relations between parts of objects we expected that subjects
from the attributional condition would be more likely to
choose the attributional answer to the matching to sample
task (again compared to the non primed control condition).
As mentioned above we also hypothesized that there would
be a correlation between subjects’ levels of performance on
the prior tasks and the degree of subsequent relational
priming. Moreover since subjects in the attributional task
were expected to be les likely to give relational answers to
the target task we expected a negative correlation between
levels of performance during the priming task and the
proportion of relational answers to the target task in the
attributional condition. By the same logic we expected a
positive relationship to exist in the relational condition.
Design. A simple between group design was employed
which involved three independent groups of subjects
allocated to the attributional, the relational and the control
conditions. The three levels of our independent variable
were defined by the task the subjects in the respective
condition had to solve before the target matching to sample
task. The dependent measure was defined as whether a
given subject gave a relational or attributional answer to the
target task. The target task was the same for all participants.
Stimuli. The stimuli for the attributional condition consisted
of six mental rotation tasks. Each task involved sixteen
versions of a particular letter from the Latin alphabet. Thus
there were six letters in that condition and each letter
appeared sixteen times. Each version of a letter was
presented in a rotated position. For eight of the versions it
was possible to obtain the original letter via mental rotation
(these represented the so called true versions of a particular
task since the subjects’ task was to indicate whether the
particular version could or could not be rotated in order to
arrive at the original letter) and for the other eight versions it
was impossible to do so for these versions were rotated
mirror images of the original letter (these were called the
false versions). Each letter (both the true and the false
versions) was rotated at eight different angles. The degrees
of rotation were 40, 80, 120, 160, 200, 240, 280 and 320
degrees. The six letters used for each of the six tasks were

Z, R, F, N, P, S. Each individual task was represented as the
sixteen versions of a particular letter arranged in a 4x4
matrix printed on an A4 portrait sheet of paper. The order of
the true and false versions as well as the order of the eight
different angles of rotations was randomized across the six
tasks. The order of the six tasks was randomized across
participants. Since subjects were required to make a
judgment for each letter version in each task (i.e. subjects
were asked to indicate whether a particular version was a
rotated original letter or a rotated mirror image of the
original letter) there were 6x16=96 judgments made by each
participant in the attributional condition. A sample of three
letters is presented at figure 1. The top three letters represent
instances of the false alternatives and the bottom three
letters represent instances of the true alternatives.

Figure 1. Examples of the mental rotation task.
Subjects from the relational condition were presented
with six of the Raven Progressive Matrices items. These
items were the odd numbered items from series E (the last
series) from the test. Thus subjects had to solve items E1,
E3, E5, E7, E9 and E11. The items were presented in this
ascending order for all participants in this condition.
Subjects in this condition were asked to fill the blank in
each item with one of the options available at the bottom of
the page. The original instruction from the test was given to
each participant. The original test panes were used.
The target matching to sample task presented to the
participants at the end of the experiment was borrowed from
Medin et al. (1990). It is depicted in figure 2. The target is at
the top of the figure and is denoted with T. The two
alternatives are denoted with B1 and B2 respectively. The
subjects’ task was to indicate which one of the two options
was more similar to the target. As already mentioned the B1
option shared a unique attribute with T (a checked circle)
while the B2 option shared a unique relation with T (same
shading of the objects).
Procedure. In both the attributional and the relational
conditions subjects were given a maximum amount of time
of one minute for each individual task (one item from the
Raven test or one mental rotation task consisting of sixteen
individual versions of a letter). In the attributional condition
subjects were instructed to make as many accurate
judgments as possible for each task for one minute. In the
relational condition subjects were instructed to try to solve
each item correctly for one minute. Prior to the experiment
subjects from the attributional condition were given a
practice trial consisting of sixteen versions of the letter L.

2744

Note that the two priming task are both quite different
from the target task. Thus it seems rather unlikely that some
specific features of the priming tasks may have influenced
subjects’ judgments during the final matching to sample
task.

B1

B2

Figure 2. Example of the matching to sample task.
The subjects from the relational condition were given the
original instruction from the Raven test as well as items C9,
D3 and D8 as complementary practice trials. In each
condition after the instruction the experimenter encouraged
the participants to try to solve the practice task all by
themselves and explained their errors as well as the correct
solutions when needed after the one minute maximum time
interval. After the experimenter was convinced that subjects
understood the procedure the real study began.
The experimenter used a stop watch in order to keep track
on time for each task.
In both the relational and the attributional conditions
participants indicated their responses verbally and the
experimenter wrote down their answers on a scoring sheet.
In the attributional condition subjects were instructed to
indicate whether a version of a letter could be rotated to its
original position by moving from the top row down and
moving from left to right within a particular row of a given
matrix of sixteen versions of a letter. In case a participant
failed to answer to all versions of a mental rotation task
within a minute the sheet containing the matrix was
removed out of her sight but the participant was asked to try
to guess the correct answers for the remaining versions of
the letter. Similarly in the relational condition if a person
didn’t answer to a Raven item within one minute the pane
was taken out of her sight but the participant was asked to
try to guess the correct answer anyway.
A thirty seconds interval separated the six priming trials
from each other in each experimental condition.
Immediately after the end of the initial stage the target
stimulus was presented in an ostensibly unrelated task and
the subject was asked to indicate whether B1 or B2 option
was “more similar” to the T figure (see figure 2). No time
limit was present during the final task.
The subjects from the control condition proceeded
immediately to this final stage of the experiment, i.e. they
were not involved in any prior task.
After the participants indicated their answers they were
asked whether they spotted the relational similarity between
the target and the B2 option. After their answer was written
down by the experimenter the subjects were debriefed and
the experiment finished.

Subjects. 110 students from New Bulgarian University
participated in the study for partial course credit. Thirty five
participated in the attributional condition, thirty five
participated in the relational condition and forty participated
in the control condition. Overall there were 62% females
and 38% males in the study which were allocated
proportionally to all three conditions.
Results and Discussion. Table 1 below shows the raw
number of subjects within each condition which gave the
attributional and the relational answers to the target task.
Numbers in parentheses represent the respective
percentages.
table 1.

Attrib.
Cond.
Rel. Cond.
Contr.
Cond.

#Attrib.
Answers
29 (83%)

# Rel.
Answers
6 (17%)

Total
35 (100%)

11 (31%)

24 (69%)

35 (100%)

24 (60%)

16 (40%)

40 (100%)

The results are summarized in figure 3 below. The bars
represent the proportion of people giving the relational
answer in each condition.
figure 3
Probability of choosing the
relational alternative

T

0,8
0,6
0,4
0,2
0
Men_Rot

Raven

Control

Condtion

As can be seen the data are in line with our hypotheses:
subjects from the relational condition were more likely to
pick up the relational answer during the matching to sample
task compared to subjects in the control condition. Also the
subjects from the attributional condition picked up the
attributional answer more frequently compared to the
baseline control condition. In order to asses the significance
of our results we conducted a series of statistical analyses.
First we fitted a logistic regression model to the data with
our three experimental conditions treated as a single

2745

categorical predictor and subject’s answer as a categorical
dependent variable (a relational answer was coded as 1
while an attributional answer was coded as 0 for each
participant). The model including our independent variable
significantly outperformed the null model (including only
the intercept): Chi Square of Likelihood Ratio Change (2) =
20.049, p<0.001. Thus we see that there is a highly
significant effect of our independent variable. Since we
defined our control condition as the reference condition for
the analysis the b coefficients of the model represent the
difference between the other two conditions to the control
condition. These were b = -1.17 (1), p = 0.034 for the
attributional condition and b = 1.19 (1), p = 0.015 for the
relational condition. Thus we see that the relational task
significantly increases the probability of relational answer
while the attributional task decreases it relative to the
control condition.
The pseudo R2 estimate (Nagelkerke) for the effect of the
independent variable was equal to 0.224 – a reasonably high
estimate.
Since both conditions were significantly different from
the control condition and since their coefficients were with
opposite signs it logically follows that the two experimental
conditions were significantly different from each other.
In order to further support our results we conducted a
series of chi squared analyses. First we assessed the
significance of our independent variable as a whole. As with
the regression analysis the results were highly significant –
chi square (2) = 19.109, p<0.001. We proceeded with three
post hoc comparisons which compared the proportions of
relational answers between all three groups. The results
showed that the relational and the attributional conditions
were significantly different from each other – chi square (1)
= 18.9, p<0.001. Both the conditions were also significantly
different from the control condition – chi square (1) = 4.705,
p = 0.03 for the difference between the control and the
attributional conditions and chi square (1) = 6.122, p =
0.013 for the difference between the control and the
relational conditions. Thus we see that all our conditions
exhibited different proportions of relational answers2.
Looking back at figure 3 we see that subjects from the
relational condition were most likely to give a relational
2

Technically speaking we should decrease our significance levels
when performing these kinds of multiple comparisons in order to
keep the type 1 error probability equal to 0.05 for all comparisons
simultaneously. This was achieved by adopting a 0.033(3) level of
significance for each comparison (we assumed a directed
alternative hypotheses because we had strong prior expectations
about the results from the study). We see that all our comparisons
fall below this level of significance. Here we reported the
probabilities from two-tailed tests which should be divided by a
factor of two in order to obtain the one-tailed probabilities which
fall way below the adopted significance level (although the chi
square tests are regarded as inherently two-tailed a test of equality
of proportions can be performed which has a one-tailed version;
for the case of 2x2 tables the equality of proportions and the chi
square tests are mathematically equivalent). Thus we can be
confident that all three groups differ significantly from each other.

answer to the target task while those from the attributional
condition were least likely to do so. The control condition
was somewhere in between the other two.
These results strongly support our main hypothesis about
the possibility to induce a cognitive state which enhances
subjects’ ability to encode relations. However there still
exists the possibility of people encoding the relation
embodied in the target task with approximately equal
frequency but for some reason being more prone to choose
it in the relational condition. When asked about whether
they had spotted the “same shading” relation, however, only
two participants from the control condition claimed they had
and only one participant from the relational condition did so
(these numbers refer only to subjects who gave the
attributional answer to the target task, of course; all subjects
who responded relationally reported spotting the unique
relation). Thus such an alternative explanation seems highly
unlikely. Overall the results support our hypothesis of
relational priming being an abstract and profound
phenomenon with deep impact on cognitive functioning.
Previously we stated our additional hypothesis that
subjects’ ability to cope with the priming tasks at question
should correlate with the degree to relational priming they
exhibit. Moreover we hypothesized that there should be a
positive correlation between the number of correctly solved
trials in the relational condition and the proportion of
relational answers to the target task and a negative
correlation between the number of correctly solved trials in
the attributional condition and the proportion of relational
answers to the target task. In both conditions we expressed
the number of correctly solved trials as percentages from the
overall number of trials. The overall number of trials was
six in the relational condition and ninety six for the
attributional condition. We calculated the point biserial
correlations between these measures and the dependent
variables separately for each experimental condition. The
results indicated a significant positive relationship in the
relational condition – rpbis = 0.36, p=0.018 (one tailed).
There was also a significant negative relationship in the
attributional condition – rpbis = -0.31, p=0.037. Thus it seems
that our hypothesis is supported from the data3. These
results seem reasonable since we can not expect subjects to
be primed by task requirements if they are unable to fulfill
the particular task.

Conclusion
In this study we successfully demonstrated that relational
priming extends beyond the use of particular relations. It
3

We tested this hypothesis further by conducting logistic
regression analyses with the percentage of correct responses as
independent covariate and the response to the target task as a
dependent variable. In the case of the relational condition the full
model significantly outperformed the null model - Chi Square of
Likelihood Ratio Change (1) = 4.63, p=0.031. In the case of the
attributional condition the results were marginally significant - Chi
Square of Likelihood Ratio Change (1) = 3.833, p=0.05. These
results however test a two tailed hypothesis.

2746

We would also like to thank Veselina Feldman and Kalina
seems fertile to talk of cognitive states which enhance
Bojadjieva whose usage of the Raven Progressive Matrices
subjects’ ability to encode relations. Moreover it appears
test as filler in another experiment dealing with analogical
that such cognitive states may be induced through external
reasoning inspired a discussion which led to the current
context factors. We consider our results relevant to the area
study.
of analogical mapping research since encoding of relations
is obviously a prerequisite for subsequent mapping and
transfer.
References
We also demonstrated that individual differences in terms
Day, S. & Gentner, D. (2007). Nonintentional Analogical
of subjects’ ability to cope with a particular task is a
inference in text comprehension. Memory and Cognition,
relevant variable for it significantly mediates the task’s
35 (1), 39 – 49.
ability to induce the desired cognitive state for a particular
Estes, Z. (2003). Attributive and relational processes in
subject.
nominal combination. Journal of Memory and Language,
We would like to stress that items from the Raven’s test
48, 304 – 319.
didn’t embody the “same shading” relation of the target task
Estes, Z., and Jones, L. L. (2006). Priming via relational
and thus could not have possibly primed the relational
similarity: A copper horse is faster when seen through a
answer directly. Also the tasks from the mental rotation
glass eye. Journal of Memory and Language, 55, 89 –
condition did not involve any different or specific textures
101.
and consequently could not have primed the uniquely shared
Gagne’, C. L. (2001). Relation and lexical priming during
attribute of the attributional option of the matching to
the interpretation noun-noun combinations. JEP:
sample task.
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 27, 236 - 254.
Also few of the subjects who chose the attributional
Gagne’, C. L. (2002). Lexical and relational influences on
answer claimed to have spotted the uniquely shared relation
the processing of novel compounds. Brain and Language,
so our results are likely to have arisen from influencing
81, 723 – 735.
relational encoding rather than from manipulating subjects’
Gagne ‘, C. L., Spalding, T. L., & Ji, H. (2005). Rerelation vs. attribute preference.
examining evidence for the use of independent relational
Prior to the experiment we felt that using many matching
representations during conceptual combination. Journal of
to sample tasks (which would have enabled us to use
Memory and Language, 53, 445 – 455.
parametric statistical analyses on one hand and would have
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
granted our results with additional validity on the other) was
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7(2), 155 –
not as warranted as it may appear at first. The reasons for
170.
this are straightforward – we suspected that once a particular
Hristova, P. (2009). Unintentional and unconscious
subject have spotted the unique shared relation in one item
analogies between superficially dissimilar but relationally
they would search and easily find these relations on
similar simple structures. In: Proceedings of the Second
subsequent items. Thus we were afraid that no matter how
International Conference on Analogy.
many items we used our dependent measure would basically
Hristova, P. (2009). Unconscious analogical mapping? In:
degenerate to a dichotomy. In such a case using parametric
Proceedings of 31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive
statistical analyses would be faulty and misleading. Another
Science Society.
reason for avoiding the use of several different matching to
Kokinov, B. & Yoveva, M. (1996). Context effects on
sample tasks was that we speculated that our priming effect
problem solving. In: Proceedings of the 18th Annual
may exhibit a limited time duration and thus only the first
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Erlbaum,
few items would experience the effect. In case of
Hillsdale, NJ.
counterbalancing the order of items across participants this
Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., & Gentner, D. (1990).
effect might easily be obscured if we decided to run some
Similarity involving attributes and relations: Judgments of
comparisons at the items level.
similarity and difference are not inverses. Psychological
Trying to replicate our results with different target item(s)
Science, 1, 64-69.
and different priming tasks is a part of our future research Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., & Gentner, D. (1993).
agenda. Another part is exploring the duration of the
Respects for similarity. Psychological Review, 100(2), 254 –
priming effect.
278.
Raven, J., Raven, J.C., & Court, J.H. (2003). Manual for
Acknowledgements
Raven's Progressive Matrices and Vocabulary Scales.
Section 1: General Overview. San Antonio, TX: Harcourt
This research was financially supported by the
ANALOGY project (NEST program, contract 29088)
Assessment.
funded by the EC.
Schunn, C. D. & Dunbar, K. (1996). Priming, analogy and
We are grateful to Douglas Medin, Robert Goldstone and
awareness in complex reasoning. Memory and Cognition,
Dedre Gentner for publishing and making available online
24, 271 – 284.
the stimulus material part of which we used in our study.

2747

Spellman, B. A., Holyoak, K. J. and Morrison, R. G. (2001).
Analogical priming via semantic relations. Memory and
Cognition, 29, 383 – 393.

2748

