UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Replicating Color Term Universals through Human Iterated Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/64t7z802

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Xu, Jing
Griffiths, Thomas
Dowman, Mike

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Replicating Color Term Universals through Human Iterated Learning
Jing Xu (jing.xu@berkeley.edu)
Thomas L. Griffiths (tom griffiths@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, 3210 Tolman Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

Mike Dowman (Mike@ImageScope.net)
ImageScope
Abstract

in an attempt to resolve the debate over the universality of
color naming. For example, Kay and Regier (2003; Regier,
Kay, & Cook, 2005) showed that the focal colors in the WCS
data largely fall in similar regions to those seen in English;
in another study they defined a statistical measure of “wellformedness”, and used this measure to show that observed
systems of color terms correspond to a near-optimal partition
of color space (Regier, Kay, & Khetarpal, 2007).
The consistent cross-linguistic structure highlighted by the
WCS raises a new question: Where do these universals come
from? They may be a result of cultural universals that may
arise from the homogeneity of biological traits and evolutionary paths across cultures that constrain people to consider
only a limited range of color categories when learning language, thus forcing color term systems to conform to a limited range of universal types (Hawkins, 1988). However, if
we view language as a system culturally transmitted from
generation to generation, a simpler hypothesis is that these
universals may arise directly from biases that cause learners
to prefer some color categorizations over others, but that do
not place absolute constraints on the types of color categories
that are learnable. One way to explore this hypothesis is using
the iterated learning model, a simple model of cultural transmission in which a sequence of agents each learns from the
behavior of the previous agent in the sequence (Kirby, 2001).
In an iterated learning model of the transmission of systems
of color terms, each agent learns a system of color terms from
examples provided by another agent, and then generates examples which are provided to the next agent in the sequence.
Mathematical analyses of iterated learning show that as this
process continues, the information being transmitted gradually changes to become consistent with the learning biases of
the agents involved (Griffiths & Kalish, 2007; Kirby, Dowman, & Griffiths, 2007). If systems of color terms similar
to those seen in the WCS emerge from a process of cultural

In 1969, Berlin and Kay proposed that there exist crosscultural universals in the form of basic color terms. To test
this hypothesis, the World Color Survey (WCS) collected color
naming data from 110 non-industrial societies, identifying regularities in the structure of languages with different numbers
of terms. This leaves us with the question of where these universals come from. We use a simple model of cultural evolution known as “iterated learning” to explore the hypothesis
that universals emerge from human perceptual and learning biases. We conducted an experiment simulating the process of
cultural transmission in the laboratory, and compared the results to the systems of color terms that appear in the WCS data.
Our results show that cultural evolution results in convergence
of systems of color terms towards a form consistent with the
WCS, supporting the hypothesis that universals are the result
of perceptual and learning biases.
Keywords: basic color terms; iterated learning model; color
term universals; cultural evolution; Bayesian inference.

Introduction
Linguistic universals – properties that seem to hold across all
human languages – have the potential to provide unique insight into the nature of human cognition. Universals in systems of color terms are among the best documented of these
properties. Berlin and Kay (1969) proposed that color naming
systems across different cultures are based on one or more of
eleven focal colors corresponding to the English color terms
black, white, red, green, yellow, blue, brown, purple, pink, orange, and gray. Kay and McDaniel (1978) and Kay and Maffi
(1999) later refined this model to emphasize the six Hering
primary colors (black, white, red, green, yellow, and blue)
(Hering, 1964), and to characterize the process by which societies might transition from one system of color terms to another as new terms are introduced.
The World Color Survey (WCS) was initiated in the late
1970’s to provide a more comprehensive empirical test of the
univerality hypothesis (Kay, Berlin, & Merrifield, 1991; Kay,
Berlin, Maffi, & Merrifield, 1997). In the WCS, a total of 330
color chips, comprised of 40 equally spaced Munsell hues at 8
levels of lightness and achromatic chips at 10 levels of lightness (see Figure 1), were presented to speakers of 110 different languages in non-industrial societies. Those speakers
were asked to name each color chip, and also to point out the
most representative chip for each color term. Later analysis of
the WCS data showed that the universality hypothesis was by
and large confirmed (Kay et al., 1997). Recently, several statistical analyses of the WCS data have also been conducted

Figure 1: The World Color Survey stimulus array.

352

transmission by iterated learning, then the biases of individual learners may be sufficient to explain the regularities seen
across human societies.
Previous work has used computer simulations to demonstrate that iterated learning with simulated agents can produce systems of color terms similar to those seen in the WCS
(Dowman, 2007, 2009). In this paper, we test the hypothesis
that color naming universals may be a result of the perceptual and learning biases of human learners by conducting a
large-scale laboratory experiment based on iterated learning.
In our experiment, human learners acquire and transmit novel
systems of color terms, providing a human simulation of the
process of cultural evolution. We examine how these systems
of color terms change over time, comparing the results to the
WCS. We show that, consistent with the hypothesis that perceptual and learning biases are the source of color-naming
universals, the systems of color terms generated by our iterated learning chains converged over time to become more
consistent with the WCS.
The plan of the paper is as follows. The next section provides further details of the iterated learning model and its
predictions about the influence of learning biases on the outcome of cultural transmission. We then present our experiment, which used human learners to simulate the cultural
transmission of systems of color terms. Analyzing the results
of this experiment raises some technical challenges, which
we address by introducing a novel method for quantifying the
correspondence between the languages produced by our participants with those in the WCS. We conclude the paper by
discussing the implications of our results, and consider some
of the potential limitations of our analysis.

(a)

data

(b)

data

p(h|d)

h1

p(d|h)

d1

...

data

p(h|d)

h2

p(d|h)

d2

p(h|d)

...

inductive biases, being a factor that combines with the observed data to yield a conclusion.
In the cultural transmission process, data are passed along
a chain of learners. Assume that the same Bayesian inference process happens repeatedly at each generation, with
each learner sampling a hypothesis from their posterior distribution and generating data by sampling from the likelihood
function associated with that hypothesis. This process can be
analyzed as a Markov process: The probability each learner
selects a particular hypothesis depends only on the data produced by the previous generation. Griffiths and Kalish (2005,
2007) showed that when learners share a common prior distribution, the probability a learner selects a hypothesis converges to the prior probability of that hypothesis as the process of iterated learning continues. Likewise, the probability of generating data d converges to the prior predictive distribution, being the average of the likelihood over the prior,
p(d) = ∑h p(d|h)p(h).

Much of human knowledge is not learned from the world directly, but from other people. When we learn languages, we
learn them from the utterances of existing speakers, and our
utterances inform the next generation of speakers. A simple
way to model this process of cultural transmission is in terms
of “iterated learning”, as illustrated in Figure 2. We imagine
a sequence of learners, each of whom observes data, forms
a hypothesis about the process that produced those data, and
then generates data for the next learner based on that hypothesis.
We can analyze the process of iterated learning by assuming that our learners are rational Bayesian agents. In this
framework, learners come up with the posterior probability
P(h|d) of a hypothesis h given the observed data d by applying Bayes’ rule,
P(d|h)P(h)
∑h′ (d|h′ )P(h′ )

d0

hypothesis

Figure 2: Iterated learning. (a) Each learner sees data produced by the previous generation, forms a hypothesis about
the process by which those data were produced, and uses this
hypothesis to produce the data that will be supplied to the
next generation. (b) In iterated learning with Bayesian agents,
each learner sees data d, and uses Bayes’ rule to compute
the posterior probability of each hypothesis h, p(h|d). The
learner samples a hypothesis from this distribution, and then
generates data from the distribution p(d|h).

Iterated Learning

P(h|d) =

hypothesis

The convergence of iterated learning to the prior potentially provides an explanation of linguistic universals, including universals in color naming. Languages are constantly being passed from speaker to speaker via a process of cultural
transmission similar to iterated learning. If this process provides a way for perceptual and learning biases of the kind
captured by a prior distribution to have an effect on the structure of languages, we should expect languages to demonstrate
properties that are consistent with human biases. If this hypothesis is correct, we should expect to see systems of color
terms transmitted via a process of iterated learning to change
over time to resemble those that appear in the WCS. To test
this idea, we ran a series of iterated-learning chains among
an English-speaking population in our laboratory, comparing
the systems of color terms produced by those chains to those
seen in the WCS.

(1)

where P(d|h) is the likelihood, indicating the probability of
observing d if h were true, and P(h) is the prior probability,
indicating the extent to which the learner was willing to accept h prior to observing d. The prior encodes the learner’s

353

Color Term Transmission in the Lab
Methods
Participants Participants were 390 members of the community at the University of California, Berkeley, receiving
either course credit or approximately $10/hr for taking part in
the experiment.
Stimuli Each participant learned a system of color terms
by being provided with examples of colors and the terms that
were associated with them, and then generalized those terms
to new colors. The color stimuli were presented on an Apple iMac computer by a Java program, and the monitor was
calibrated using a ColorVision Spyder2 colorimeter/color calibrator on regular basis. A total of 330 colors were used as
stimuli, corresponding to the computer screen analogues of
the 330 Munsell color chips used in the WCS. Each term was
a randomly-allocated pseudo word (from Rastle, Harrington,
& Coltheart, 2002), and varied across participants.
Procedure We simulated a total of 30 iterated learning
chains, each with 13 “generations” of learners. Each chain
varied in the number of terms that were allowed in the “language” being transmitted, with two, three, four, five or six
terms per language. The first learner in each chain received
data generated from one of three types of initial partition of
the WCS color space: hue, lightness, and random. The “hue”
and “lightness” partitions were approximately equal vertical
and horizontal partitions of the color space into the relevant
number of categories; the “random” partitions were a truly
random partition of the color space, generated uniquely for
each chain. These three kinds of initial partitions were used as
a means of checking the convergence of iterated learning: by
starting the chains with very different systems of color terms,
we could easily establish when the influence of the inital partition had disappeared. The following generations of learners
all received data generated from the responses of the previous
generation, as detailed below. We ran a total of 20 random
chains, four for each number of terms, and five hue and five
lightness chains, one for each number of terms.

Figure 3: Representative examples of the data produced by
simulating iterated learning of systems of color terms in the
laboratory. Each panel shows one system of color terms, with
arbitrary colors indicating the term assigned to each chip in
the World Color Survey array. Each column is one chain with
a particular number of terms, each row shows a different generation. The first row shows the random partitions used to
initialize each chain.

Results
Figure 3 shows one set of chains initialized with random partitions, with the number of terms varying from two to six.
Through this simple visualization of the data, we can see
that each chain started from an unnatural color term system
(a random partition), and that transmission along the chains
resulted in a very rapid restructuring towards a more regular form. However, it is not clear how well these laboratorygenerated data fit the WCS data. In the next section, we use a
measure of the difference between each system of color terms
and a randomly selected set of responses from the WCS data
to test the convergence of the chains and to compare them to
the kinds of systems seen across human languages.

Each participant was trained on the system of color terms
by being shown a set of chips together with the corresponding
terms. The total number of observed chips was six times the
number of terms in the language. These chips were chosen
at random from the 330 chips making up the full array, and
then provided labels according to either the initial partition
(for the first learner) or the responses of the previous learner
(for subsequent learners). These training examples remained
on the screen while the participant went on to label all 330
color chips from the WCS array. On every trial, they were
presented a color chip and asked to select one of the terms
to label the color chip. No feedback was given during this
phase of the experiment. The responses of each participant
thus produced a partition of the set of 330 chips, and this
partition was used to generate the labels given to chips for the
next learner in the chain.

Using Variation of Information to Analyze
Color Term Systems
Analyzing the results of our experiment presents a challenge:
how can we evaluate whether two systems of color terms are
similar? Various methods have been proposed for solving this
problem. For example, Kay and Regier (2003) converted the
color chips from Munsell space to CIE L*a*b* space so they
could compute the centroid for each color term. Centroid distances could then be used to compare clusterings. However,
just using centroid measurements may discard important information about the variance of a cluster, and about the locations of boundaries. This method is also dependent on the
psychological validity of the CIE L*a*b* representation of
colors, which is disputable (Dowman, 2007).
Since our participants’ responses consisted of partitions of

354

the same set of colors as those used in the WCS, we used
a technique that compares the Munsell arrays directly, without referring to another color space. This technique uses an
information-theoretic measure known as Variation of Information (VI) to compare clusterings of a set of items (Meila,
2003). Given two clusterings C and C′ , the VI is
V I(C,C′ ) = H(C) + H(C′ ) − 2I(C,C′ )

have reached the same distribution over languages. Figure 4
shows the VI values for the three types of initialization in each
language system, showing individual chains with two to six
terms for the hue and lightness initialization and the average
over all chains for the random initialization.
To test for a difference in VI values across chains, we
ran a two-way ANOVA at each generation with initialization and number of terms as the two factors. The main effect
of number of terms are significant for all generations (p <
0.05); while only the initial systems (F(2, 23) = 196.78, p <
0.0001) and the first generation (F(2, 23) = 11.19, p < 0.001)
showed a statistically significant effect of initial partition.
These results are consistent with a relatively rapid convergence towards a common distribution. Rapid convergence is
to be expected in this experiment, since only a very small
proportion of the color chips were labeled in each generation,
providing a good opportunity for other factors (such as the
learning and perceptual biases of the participants) to influence the resulting systems of color terms. This can be seen
in Figure 3, where the initial partitions quickly give way to
more systematic responses.

(2)

where H(C) is the entropy of C,
K

H(C) = − ∑ P(k) log P(k)

(3)

k=1

where k ranges over the cluster labels and P(k) is the probability of an item being assigned to each cluster, and I(C,C′ )
is the mutual information between the two clusterings
′

I(C,C ) =

K

K′

P(k, k′ )

P(k, k′ ) log
∑∑
P(k)P′ (k′ )
′

(4)

k=1 k =1

where P(k, k′ ) is the probability an item belongs to cluster k
in clustering C and to k′ in clustering C′ .
While VI was originally developed for comparing clusterings, a clustering is simply a partition of a set of items, just
as our systems of color terms partition colors according to
the terms applied to them. The VI value for two systems of
color terms is thus calculated by comparing the distribution
of the terms in the two systems, as well as the extent to which
they agree with one another. A high VI value reflects a larger
difference between two clusterings, whereas a small VI value
indicates that the two clusterings are more similar. Our primary analytic tool was comparing the partitions produced by
our participants with those observed in the WCS data. We
did this by randomly selecting one speaker from each of the
110 languages in the WCS data set, and then calculating the
VI of the partition produced by our participants with the 110
partitions from the WCS. Finally, we average across all of
the languages from the WCS, to give us a single measure of
consistency.1

Comparison to the WCS
As described above, to compare our experimental results with
the WCS data, VI values were calculated between the responses of each participant and 110 randomly selected WCS
systems. Figure 5 shows the VI values for all 20 random
chains. A paired t-test on the VI values for the initial and
final systems in those random chains showed a statistically
significant difference (t(19) = 11.44, p < 0.0001), indicating
a significant reduction of VI along iterated learning chains,
resulting a better fit to the WCS data.
The remaining question is how close our data are to the
WCS data: What counts as a low VI score? To address this
question, we randomly selected another set of systems from
the WCS data, one from each of the 110 languages. Using the
same method as used above, we computed the VI between the
two sets of WCS data. The average pairwise VI is shown in
Figure 5. This average lies close to the mean VI seen in our
random chains once they converge. We tested the difference
between the VI scores produced by the final participants in
each of our random chains and the VI scores for speakers
sampled from the WCS using a two-samples t-test. The result
was not significant (t(128) = −0.29, p = 0.78). These results
suggest that the systems of color terms generated from our lab
are indeed consistent with the data collected from the WCS.

Testing Convergence
The theoretical analyses of iterated learning outlined above
predict that, no matter what language begins a chain, it will
eventually converge to a distribution over languages reflecting the prior. We could evaluate this prediction by comparing
the chains generated with different initial partitions. A necessary characteristic for convergence is that the VI to the WCS
data should not differ between chains, since they should all

Rotation Analysis
One potential objection to the conclusion that our chains are
moving closer to the WCS could be that the reduction in
VI may merely be a result of increasing regularity in the responses. As the systems of color terms in the random chains
move towards more regular forms, the VI scores will go down
naturally, regardless of whether the actual partition of terms
reflects the structure of the WCS or not. To further test the
consistency between our experiment results and the WCS

1 While

it would be desirable to also average over speakers, this
was too computationally intensive to be practical in our current analyses. We observed little variation in average VI across sampled sets
of speakers. We chose to use a single speaker rather than a composite
formed by aggregating across speakers within a language (a “mode
map”) on the grounds that this might not produce a system typical
of the language of any individual, especially as different speakers of
the same language sometimes use different numbers of color words
(Kay & Maffi, 1999).

355

Initial Partition by Hue

Initial Partition by Lightness

Random Initial Partition

4

4

3.5

3.5

3.5

3

3

3

2.5

2.5

2.5

2

2

2

1.5

1.5

1.5

1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

VI

4

0

0

5

0

10

0

Number of Iterations

5

0

10

2 Terms
3 Terms
4 Terms
5 Terms
6 Terms
0

5

Number of Iterations

10

Number of Iterations

Figure 4: Variation of Information (VI) fit to WCS data for iterated-learning chains with three types of initial partitions and two
to six color terms. Results for random initial partitions are averaged over four chains each.

VI for Random Chains vs. English and WCS Data

VI for Rotated Random Chains

4

2.4

3.5
3

2.35

2

VI

VI

2.5

2.3

1.5
1

2.25
WCS
Random

0.5
0

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

2.2

14

Number of Iterations

0

5

10

15

20

−15

−10

−5

0

Degree of Rotation

Figure 5: Variation of Information (VI) fit to WCS data for
random chains. The dashed line shows the VI for comparing
the WCS to itself.

Figure 6: Variation of Information (VI) fit to WCS data for
rotations of the final partitions produced by chains initialized
with random partitions.

data, we compared the degree of match of each system to
the WCS data when it was rotated in the hue dimension by
varying amounts. We would expect that the more a partition
was rotated out of position, the lower the resulting degree of
match would be. This procedure was used by Regier et al.
(2007) in connection with their measure of how “optimal” a
set of color terms was as a division of the color space into
maximally perceptually distinct regions.
Figure 6 shows the mean VI values of the partitions generated by the final participants in our random chains, when
rotated from 0 to 20 steps in the hue dimension. Paired
t-tests on VI values for no-rotation vs. maximum-rotation
(t(19) = −6.12, p < 0.01), no-rotation vs. quarter-rotation
(t(19) = −3.66, p < 0.001), and no-rotation vs. three-quarter-

rotation (t(19) = −4.61, p < 0.001) all showed statistically
significant differences, indicating that the data from the experiment fits the WCS data significantly better than the rotated systems. This analysis thus confirmed that the iterated
learning chains did converge to forms closer to the WCS.

Discussion
We tested the idea that human color-naming universals may
be a result of shared learning and perceptual biases, demonstrating that systems of color terms similar to those seen in
a variety of non-industrial societies emerge purely as a result of cultural transmission. Using Variation of Information as a measure of the difference between systems of color

356

terms generated in our experiment and the WCS data, we
showed that the VI for systems generated by iterated learning rapidly decreases as the systems moves from unnatural
random partitions to more regular forms. Our rotation analysis also showed that this reduction of VI can not be explained
as simply a result of the emergence of more regularity, but
reflects the adoption of a form consistent with the WCS data.
One objection that could be made with respect to our study
is that our English-speaking subjects could have been imposing a system of colour naming reflecting that of English on the
languages in our experiments, rather than using pre-linguistic
universal biases. As English has 11 basic color terms, many
more than the 2 to 6 terms in our experiments, none of the
emergent languages could reflect English very closely, which
we could expect would minimize the potential for our participants knowledge of language to shape the colour categories
formed in the experiment. We take the finding that systems of
color terms similar to those seen in the WCS can be produced
by cultural transmission by English speakers as supporting
our argument that human learning and perceptual biases may
be sufficient to explain universals, under the assumption that
the English-speaking participants in our experiments share
the same learning and perceptual biases as the members of
non-industrial societies surveyed by the WCS. This result is
less surprising when we take into account previous findings
relating the color term categories produced by English speakers with cross-linguistic trends. For example, Boster (1986)
found that when English speakers were asked to recursively
split a set of color chips into subsets, the partitions they produced corresponded to those seen in other languages with a
corresponding number of terms.
Our experiment and subsequent analyses not only demonstrate that iterated learning may provide a valuable experimental method for investigating human inductive biases, but
also show that languages formed in the laboratory by English
speaking participants seem to converge toward a form consistent with the WCS. These results suggest that the colornaming universals may come from the learning and perceptual biases of human learners, brought out through the process of cultural transmission. In particular, our results supplement previous computational modeling results demonstrating
that such properties could be produced by iterated learning
with simulated agents. We anticipate that similar pairings
of laboratory experiments and computer simulations will be
effective in further elucidating how languages and concepts
change through cultural transmission.

Boster, J. (1986). Can individuals recapitulate the evolutionary development of color lexicons? Ethnology, 25, 61-74.
Dowman, M. (2007). Explaining color term typology with
an evolutionary model. Cognitive Science, 31(1), 99-132.
Dowman, M. (2009). Evolution of basic color terms. In
J. W. Minett & W. S.-Y. Wang (Eds.), Language evolution
and the brain (p. 109-139). Hong Kong: City University of
Hong Kong Press.
Griffiths, T. L., & Kalish, M. L. (2005). A Bayesian view
of language evolution by iterated learning. In B. G. Bara,
L. Barsalou, & M. Bucciarelli (Eds.), Proceedings of the
Twenty-Seventh Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (p. 827-832). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Griffiths, T. L., & Kalish, M. L. (2007). Language evolution by iterated learning with bayesian agents. Cognitive
Science, 31, 441-480.
Hawkins, J. (Ed.). (1988). Explaining language universals.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Hering, E. (1964). Outlines of a theory of the light sense.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kay, P., Berlin, B., Maffi, L., & Merrifield, W. R. (1997).
Color naming across languages. In C. L. Hardin & L. Maffi
(Eds.), Color categories in thought and language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Kay, P., Berlin, B., & Merrifield, W. R. (1991). Biocultural
implications of systems of color naming. Journal of Linguistic Anthropology, 1, 12-25.
Kay, P., & Maffi, L. (1999). Color appearance and the emergence and evolution of basic color lexicon. American Anthropologist, 101, 743-760.
Kay, P., & McDaniel, C. (1978). The linguistic significance
of the meanings of basic color terms. Language, 54, 610646.
Kay, P., & Regier, T. (2003). Resolving the question of color
naming universals. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 100, 9085-9089.
Kirby, S. (2001). Spontaneous evolution of linguistic structure: An iterated learning model of the emergence of regularity and irregularity. IEEE Journal of Evolutionary Computation, 5, 102-110.
Kirby, S., Dowman, M., & Griffiths, T. L. (2007). Innateness
and culture in the evolution of language. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 104, 5241-5245.
Meila, M. (2003). Comparing clusterings by the variation
of information. In Learning theory and kernel machines
(p. 173-187).
Rastle, K., Harrington, J., & Coltheart, M. (2002). 358,534
nonwords: The ARC nonword database. Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 55A, 1339-1362.
Regier, T., Kay, P., & Cook, R. S. (2005). Focal colors are
universal after all. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 102, 8386-8391.
Regier, T., Kay, P., & Khetarpal, N. (2007). Color naming
reflects optimal partitions of color space. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 104, 1436-1441.

Acknowledgments. This work was supported by grant number
BCS-0704034 from the National Science Foundation. We thank
Tony Lai, Jason Martin, Linsey Smith, and Joe Vuong for their assistance in collecting and analyzing the data.

References
Berlin, B., & Kay, P. (1969). Basic color terms: Their universality and evolution. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

357

