UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Self-Organization, Embodied Cognition and the Bounded Raionality Concept

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6mx0w6bn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Bizzotto, Maria Luisa

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Self-Organization, Embodied Cognition and the Bounded Rationality
Concept
Maria Luísa Bissoto (malubissoto@yahoo.com)
Centro Universitário Salesiano de São Paulo (UNISAL) Americana, SP, Brazil
Faculdade Salesiana Dom Bosco, Piracicaba, SP, Brazil
Post-Graduate Program
“Apprendere” - Cognition, Education and Learning Research Group
Prudente de Moraes, 1341, Piracicaba, SP, Brazil
among several variables and rationally choice the best
decisional option. They have thus created conditions to
think more deeply and systematically about the role of the
decision maker subjectivity to the decision process.
However since the last years from XX century the Expected
Utility Theory has been the target of a strong criticism,
mainly concerning: a restrictive conception of the human
cognition, understanding it basically as an “algorithmic
machine”, b. the idealization of the decision maker as a
super-rational agent, omniscient and omnipotent within the
decision process and c. the concept of information on
which this theory relays, quantitative and syntactic, making
the relation between the informational input and the value
attribution to the decisional variables a paradox1. These
critics have stimulated other theorizations characterized by
reconsidering two principal questions: the optimized reason
principle and the Maxim Expected Utility principle.

Abstract
This research has aimed to debate some decision
making theoretical principles, in particular the
bounded rationality concept. The conceptions of
cognition subjacent to this concept, its main
limitations for understanding the human decision
process and the possible contributions from two
other theoretical perspectives- the self-organization
process and the embodied cognition concept have
been methodologically analyzed. The concluding
comment claims that: a. other forms to conceive
the human cognition are still necessary to better
understand the cognitive basis of human making
decision process; b. the Self-Organizing and
Embodied Cognition Theories, as understood here,
might constitute themselves as relevant
contributions to the development and reflection
concerning the making decision process and the
Bounded Rationality concept.
Keywords: decision making; bounded rationality;
self-organization; embodied cognition.

The Bounded Rationality Concept:
cognitive presuppositions

Introduction
Electing perspectives for acting and making decisions are
critical aspects of the human life and theoretical
explanations about these topics could be retraced to the
Greek Antiquity. A common characteristic to several of
these explanations is concerning the conception that the
decision making is essentially a logical-rational process, in
which utility principles are prevalent. This conception has
became historically stronger and influenced by four sources:
the Illuminist thought from XVII century, the probabilistic
mathematical theories elaborated from XVIII century, the
Utilitarian philosophical-economic theories from XVIII
century, and the Neoclassic Economic theories, developed
from XIX century on (Buchanan & O’Connell, 1996; Taleb,
2007; Glimcher, Camerer, Fehr & Poldrack, 2009). Since
the middle of XX century the approaches that conceive the
decision making process under the expected utility premises
- like those that have been derived and influenced by F.
Ramsey, von Neumann e Morgestern (1944), L. Savage
(1954) e R. Jeffrey (1956) works – have obtained a wide
and important diffusion. These theories have constituted an
important scientific advance for understanding the human
decision process, presenting for the first time questions
about the decision maker preferences, the capacity to order

1952

H. Simon when contesting the conception of
rational/optimized decision considered its substitution
for the concept of satisfactory decision; founded on
three main issues: a) the human beings are cognitive and
perceptually restricted, never being able to fully
apprehend the environmental complexity, b) these
restrictions impact the decision making process,
generating a “cost”, compelling the decision maker to
find alternative actions that satisfy the decision
requirements at other levels (“satisficing” principle) and
c) the difficulties and restrictions found in making a
decision disclose and clarify its significance, making the
process to find satisfactory alternatives adjustable to the
decision maker limitations and to the environmental
parameters.
These statements sustain the bounded rationality
concept developed by H. Simon and formalized in A
Behavioral Model of Rational Choice, in Models of
Man, 1957. In Simon’s definition this is the term used
“to designed rational choice that takes into account the
cognitive limitations of the decision maker- limitations
of both knowledge and computational capacity” (1997,
p. 291).
1

See Kahneman & Tversky, 1979; Simon, 1989, Juarrero,
1999; Gigerenzer & Selten, 2001.

The bounded rationality concept is widely used at
present and has been employed in several areas “to
relax” the strong rational view (decision optimized
paradigm) concerning the Classical Decision Theories.
Despite that, the comprehension about the nature of
human cognition upholds the same principles in both
approaches, mainly: a. the appeal to the symbolicnormative reasoning, b. the ontological and
epistemological gap between subject/object and c. a
tight relation among the conception of rationality, truth
criteria and a necessary coherence (consistency)
between the decision maker and their purposes.
In an article from 1993 A. Vera and H. Simon
explained the conception of cognition underlying to the
bounded rationality concept. The reasoning process is
understood as a sequential and symbolic (internal)
computational processing of information1, recursively
operating within this basis: input - processing of
information - output (reply/behavior). Symbols, on this
perspective, are patterns: “(…) when we say that
symbols are patterns, we mean that pairs of them can be
compared (by one of the system's processes) and
pronounced alike or different, and that the system can
behave differently, depending on this same/different
decision.”(Vera&Simon,1993,p.03).
The information/symbols processing is thus
conceived: a) inputs are received from the exterior
environment as patterns of sensorial stimulations and
codified by perceptual processes in symbols; b) these
symbols are indexed and stored in the long term
memory; c) the elicitation of the meaning denoted by
the symbols is made by another symbol, used as input,
to get access to a referring object stored in the memory,
to affect it or to be affected by it.
It is observed that this conception is, essentially, the
same used for computational mind theories2; that have
not been satisfactorily successful to explain the
plasticity and flexibility of the human cognitive – and
decision making- process. Simon and Vera (1993) have
added contributions from the Behavioral Psychology to
this conception of computational mind, relaxing thus
some of the hardest cognitivist arguments. This
Behaviorist basis can be especially observed when the
authors argued for a semantical basis in their conception
of
computational
cognition3:
the
patterns
received/perceived for a system are already abstracted,
represented and stored with an aggregated meaning.
This meaning, not being universal, which would be
opposite to the concept of bounded rationality, would
follow the material and cultural surroundings in which
the (symbolic) system is inserted. In such a way it
would –circularly- justify, for example, the different
attributions of meaning that exist among/within distinct
cultures.
2

3

Simon had aimed during his academic life to understand
how human cognition and decision making process really
work. But does the juxtaposition of elements of two
theories (computational mind theory and Behavior
Psychology) both of that understanding the cognition and
the behavior in terms of causal or functional relations,
based in input/output or stimulus/response, appropriately
elucidate the human cognitive processes? Or the making
decision process? Does the human cognition really
“operate” on a computational-representational model?
Could the information, at least in the scope of the living
beings, still continue to be narrowly understood as a “data
flow”?
The concept of bounded rationality, while
circumscribing the rationality and decision process limits,
situating them as context-time dependents, modified the
general comprehension about the human decision-making
process. But this “new” focus does not seem yet
satisfactory to really understand the human cognition; at
least not under the behaviorist-rationalist perspectives that
remain underlying to it. For a more “realistic” theoretical
approach about the decision and cognitive human
processes other ontological and epistemological bases are
fundamental. We discuss that these bases must be
searched in a conception of embodied cognition, which
conceives the cognition as a vital self-organizing process.

Cognition: an embodied self-organizing
process
The self-organization concept is intended as concerning to
the natural process of trends ordering observed in
complex systems, both artificial and natural (Debrun,
Gonzales & Pessoa, Jr., 1996; Haken, 2000; Piers, Muller
& Brent, 2007). It was a term “coined in the 1940s to
label processes in which systems become more highly
organized over time, without being ordered by outside
agents or by external programs” (Shalizi et. al., 2004). A
concept strongly attached to this is that of emergence,
here understood as the appearance (materialization) of
qualities not yet observed in a system from its selforganizing interaction and that cannot be understood by
the analysis (on an individual basis) of the relations or
elements of the system4.
Within the scope of this paper both concepts the one
about self-organizing process and the one about
emergence are relevant for representing by which the
organization of a system modifies itself; reaching other
levels of complexity. This complexity alteration that
enables a system to diversify its surrounding coupling is
the definition here conceived to the embodied cognition
concept, or “vital cognition”. In the core of this
conception (and following Hutchins, 1995, Clark, 1997,
Zunda, 1999, Wheeler & Clark, 2007, Calvo & Gomila,
2008), the cognitive process is qualified by some
undissociated attributes: it’s situated, social and

See also Argyris, 1973; Walczack, 1998 e Patokorpi, 2008.
See Rastier, 1996; Floridi, 2004.

4

1953

See Bissoto, 2007, 2008; Halley & Winkler, 2007.

distributed. It’s observed that within this conception it is
not necessary to dichotomously disembody the
affective/rational attributes from the human cognition. As
embodied beings situated and embedded in a physical
circumstantiality, whose comprehension is semantically
and socially constructed, reason and emotion/affection are
imbricated, mutually influencing themselves, being not
possible to disentangle one from the other.
Some theoretical approaches between the bounded
rationality and the embodied cognition concepts are
possible. The (behavioral) premise of the first concept
implies in an interactive relation system/environment and
in a situated and embodied action - in the sense that there
is a material “body”, natural or artificial, acting in a
determined time/space. However there is a fundamental
difference between both the proposals concerning to how
the system-environmental interaction occurs.
The
bounded
rationality
concept,
when
epistemologically considered, can be described as a
meaning-sign appropriation one. The system is always
acting to apprehend the reality “really” existent in the
exterior world, generating diachronically a response/a
behavior resulting of the symbolic decoding. When
understanding the embodied cognition as a selforganizing movement of a system the main
epistemological assumption is that the interrelation
system/surrounding is an interpretative one. Although it
does not discard the assumption of an existent materiality
that sustains, displays and sets parameters for the
embedding system/environment, there is not in the
embodied cognition concept the comprehension that this
materiality contains any meaning that could objectively be
abstracted by a system. According to these considerations
signs - and information - are not entities that “carry” an
aggregated meaning. They are rather material elements
that arise modifications: they provoke the formation of an
interpretation, implying in a systemic attribution of value
and in changing perspectives for the interacting system.
There is not, in this optics, incomplete or badlystructuralized information: everything that can be
perceived/selected and meant/interpreted as relevant, from
the vital dynamics of each system, comes to be
meaningful; guiding the action of this system in the
space-time of its surroundings5.

dynamical self-organizing system “health” and not just
looking for a satisfactory or excellent platform of
stability. A “good” decision is one that prepares the
system to get energy and informational resources, which
will lead it to other (richer, in the system’s optics)
possible organizing openings.
Socially, the decisor’s choices still within the embodied
cognition
perspective
are
understood
as
enlargement/disclosure of other interactive horizons
which will impulse the enaction of new meaning
attributions and therefore the institutions self-organizing
vitality; rather than the statement of decisions that aims
narrowly a prompt and short-termed efficiency of certain
functions of those institutions.
In this scope the bounded rationality concept might be
understood considering the perception and action
limitations inherent to a determined system in the
circumscription of the possibilities for the embedding of
this system resulting of order parameters: those
boundaries
that
once
emerging
from
the
system/surrounding coupling work as attractors,
“forming”/enacting a decision pattern. The analysis of
these order parameters by the system itself (or by an
observer) can “materialise” for this system an
interpretative understanding of this dynamics, causing it
to be less “evanescent” and allowing the system to
disclose which will be the next organizational parameters
to be configured, making a dialogue with its trajectory
possible.
Understanding the decision making processes under this
embodied-self-organizing cognitive perspective is
relevant for considering: a. that the “utilities” or
preferences of the system are dependents from the
historical of interactions system/surroundings already
constituted for a system, b. how this system has been
successful to perceive other organizing horizons and c. to
make possible to think the decision making process as a
decentralized one, systemic and surrounding distributed
and not circumscribed to the logic-cerebral rationality.
The “not-rational”, “irrationals” or the “bad” decisions are
not conceived as errors but as tied within the organizing
perspectives of a system, any evaluation of that could just
be thought a posteriori, and for the observer’s
perspective.
The actions assumed for a system (a decision maker)
within the incessant informational and energetic flow that
this access, are conflicting. Any decision attends to the
certain states of the system, ignoring others. There is a
momentary “pacification” of the system although a state
of “unsated” is always latent, which pressures the system
to levels of criticality. From these levels the system could
organize itself in new relational situations. But it can be
“crystallized” or also “paralyzed” when not obtaining
informational and energetic resources that allow it to
foment or to choose other organizing routes; which would
stimulate the emergence of other systemic configurations.
Furthermore a system could reach so high disorder levels

The making decision process
Decision, within the embodied cognition perspective as
here understood, is the choice executed by a system
concerning to its adaptative efforts. This adaptative
process is, by the way, understood as integration, as
relational adjustment to the changing enviroment, rather
than forced behavior of adequateness. It is a process to
make the world meaningful6 and must address the
5

See C.S.Peirce, 1972.
See von Uexkhüll, s/d; Skarda & Freeman, 1987; Johnson,
1999; van Djik et. al., 2008.

6

1954

main focus of the Decision-Making field still “targets” the
human cognition rational aspects.
In the perspective of this paper further researches could
analyze if under this theoretical bases we could increment
the human decision process a. debating alternative ways
to theorize what is information and its role in the
decisional process; b. understanding the cognitive process
as “using” the information interpretatively, when this
“usage” is nestled in a systemic organization and not
relying just on rational capacities and c. widening the
interpretative universe of a system, searching to better
comprehend how the social and distributed cognitive
attributes would favor to this system “disclose”
organizing alternatives.

(from inherent reasons, like a disease, or from
surroundings reasons, like a catastrophic event) that its
decision acts would attend just minimal organizational
requirements, and its organizational continuity would
become impracticable.

Concluding Comments
The decision making theories, including those that follow
the bounded rationality principles, have traditionally
supported the idea of a decisor agent that controls a data
flow – received from the outside- by rational/intellective
cognitive process, obtaining therefore a better decisional
management. Nevertheless, other decision making
process conceptions are possible, mainly when one
considers that the decisor system/environmental relation
involves more than the creation of syntactic mental
models - or, still, as defended by the bounded rationality
principles, a (weakly) semantic model.
Kunreuther & Meyer’s research (2001) show us
information relative to a survey about complex making
decisions, which are referents to important aspects of our
daily life like health, family, security and financial
decisions. The authors analyzed the contrast between
how this kind of decision should be made and how they
are made (Kunreuther & Meyer, 2001, p. 05). The
concluding comments claim that the human complex
decision making are characterized for not adequately
considering the available information about the
probability of an event to occur, fail when differentiating
these probabilities, in terms of relevance, attitudes
showed for thoughts like “these things will not happen
with me”; are strongly influenced by normative social
rules, the social status quo, the present situation- “I’d
better not think about this ever”, emotions and affects,
failing to learning from other decisional situations.
These remarks also allow us defend the assumption that
the research for others ways to comprehend the human
making decision process is still a strong scientific
requirement. As has been discussed in this paper the
embodied concept and the self-organization theory are
serious theoretical alternatives for another understanding
of the human cognitive and decision making process. The
decision making process, as understood here, is closely
cohesive within the system/surroundings embedding, in
the scope of an embodied and self-organizing cognition.
Some theoretical decision-making perspectives have
been incorporating both of the concepts here approached.
The Embodied Cognition Theory has been employed in
the Consumer Decision-Making Research (Malter, 1996),
in the studies on Cognitive-Decision Making (Stewart,
2006) and Neuroeconomics (Hardy-Vallée, 2007) and the
Self-Organizing Theory has been thought in the analysis
of the collective making-decision (Johnson et. al., 1998)
and on the descentralization in (economical) social
networks (Roy, Nair & Venema, 2009). Despite of these
new branches about the decision making process, the

References
Argyris, C. (1973). Some Limits of Rational Man
Organizational Theory. Public Administration Review,
Vol. 33, No. 3, 253-267.
Bissoto, M.L. (2007). Auto-organização, cognição
corporificada e os princípios da racionalidade limitada.
Ciências & Cognição; ano 04, v. 11, 80-90.
______. (2008). Das (im)possibilidades da Relação Autoorganização e Informação: uma perspectiva de análise.
Auto-Organização Estudos Interdisciplinares, col.
CLE, vol. 52, 33-58.
Buchanam, L. & O’Connell, A. (1996). A Brief History of
Decision Making. Harvard Business Review, Boston, v.
74, n. 06, 61-78.
Calvo, P. & Gomila, T. Handbook of Cognitive Science:
an Embodied Approach. Amsterdan: Elsevier.
Clark, A. (1997). Being There: Putting Brain, Body and
World Together Again. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Debrun, M; Gonzales, M.E.Q.; Pessoa Jr., O. (1996)
Auto-organização: estudos interdisciplinares em
filosofia, ciências naturais e humanas, e artes,
Campinas/SP:
Unicamp,
Centro
de
Lógica,
Epistemologia e História da Ciência, v.18.
Floridi, L. (2004). Open Problems in the Philosophy of
Information. Metaphilosophy, 35, 4, 554-582.
Gershenson, C. & Heylighen, F. (2003). When Can We
Call a System Self-Organizing? 7th European
Conference on Advances in Artificial Life (pp. 606–
614). Dortmund, Germany: Springer.
Gigerenzer, G.; Selten, R. (2001). Bounded Rationality.
Cambridge/MA: MIT Press.
Glimcher, P.; Camerer, C.; Fehr, E.; Poldrak, R. (2009).
Neuroeconomics: Decicion Making and the Brain.
Elsevier.
Halley, J. D., & Winkler, D. A. (2008). Classification of
emergence and its relation to self-organization.
Complexity, 13(5), 10–15.
Haken, H. (2000). Information and self-organization: A
Macroscopic Approach to Complex Systems. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag.

1955

Skarda, C.A., Freeman W. J. (1987). How brains make
chaos in order to make sense of the world. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 10, 161-195.
Stewart, T. (2007). Embodied Decisions: Models of
Decision Making Within a Larger Cognitive
Framework. In Hardy-Vallèe, B. Cognitive Decision
Making: Empirical and Foundational Issues. Newcastle,
U.K.: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Taleb, N. The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly
Improbable. NY: Random House, 2007.
van Dijk, J.; Kerkhofs, R.; van Rooij, I., Haselager, P.
(2008). Can There Be Such a Thing as Embodied
Embedded
Cognitive
Neuroscience?
Theory
Psychology, 18, 297-318.
Vera, A.; Simon, H. (1993). Situated action: a Symbolic
Interpretation. Cognitive Science, 17, 7-48.
von Uexkhüll, J. Dos animais e dos homens. Lisboa:
Livros do Brasil, s/d.
Walczack, S. (1998). Neural network models for a
resource allocation problem, IEEE Transactions on
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B 28(2), 276-284.
Wheeler, M. & Clark, A. (2008). Culture, embodiment
and genes: unravelling the triple helix. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B 363(1509): 35633575.

Hardy-Vallée, B. (Ed.). (2007). Cognitive DecisionMaking: Empirical and Foundational Issues. Newcastle,
U.K.: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild.
Cambridge/MA: MIT Press.
Johnson, M.L. (1999). Embodiment Reason. In G. Weiss
& H. F. Haber (eds) Perspectives on Embodiment: The
Intersections of Nature and Culture. UK: Routledge,
1999.
Johnson, N., Rasmussen, S., Joslyn, C., Rocha, L., Smith,
S. & Kantor, M. (1998). "Symbiotic intelligence: self
organizing knowledge on distributed networks, driven
by human interaction." In: 6th International Conference
on Artificial Life. C. Adami, et al. (Eds.). MIT Press.
Juarrero, A. (1999). Dynamics in Action: Intentional
Behavior as a Complex System. Cambridge: MITpress.
Kahneman, D.; Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect Theory: An
Analysis of Decision under Risk, Econometrica, 47,
263-291.
Kunda, Z. (1999). Social Cognition: Making Sense of
People. Cambridge/MA: MIT Press.
Kunreuther, H., R. Meyer, R. Zeckhauser, P. Slovic, B.
Schwartz, C. Schade, M. F. Luce, S. Lippman, D.
Krantz, B. Kahn and R. Hogarth. (2002). High Stakes
Decision Making: Normative, Descriptive and
Prescriptive Considerations. Marketing Letters, 13(3):
259-278.
Malter, A. (1996). An Introdution to Embodied
Cognition: Implications for Consumer Research,
Advances in Consumer Research, v. 23, Provo:
Association for Consumer Research, 272-276.
Newell, A. Human Problem Solving. USA: Prentice Hall,
1972.
Patokorpi, E. (2008). Simon's paradox: Bounded
rationality and the computer metaphor of the mind.
Human Systems Management, IOS Press, v. 27, n 04,
285-294.
Peirce Edition Project. (1992). The Essential Peirce.
(vol.1). Indianapolis, Indiana, USA. (original
manuscript 1867-1893).
Piers, C., Muller, J., Brent, J. Self-Organizing Complexity
in Psychological Systems. (2007). Psychological Issues,
67. Lahan MD: Jason Aronson.
Rastier, F. (1996). Problématiques du signe et du texte.
Intellectica, 2, 23, pp. 11-52.
Roy, D., Nair, S., Venema, H. (2009). Enabling SelfOrganization and Social Networking. In Swanson, D. &
Badhal, S. Creating Adaptive Policies: A Guide for
Policy-Making in an Uncertain World. Canada: The
International Development Research Centre.
Shalizi, C. R., Shalizi, K. L., Haslinger, R. (2004).
Quantifying self-organization with optimal predictors,
Physical Review Letters, vol. 93, no. 11, pp. 1–4.
Simon, H. A. (1989). A Razão nas Coisas Humanas.
Trad. M.G. Segurado. Lisboa: Gradiva Publicações.
Simon, H. (1997). Models of Bounded Rationality. vol. 3.
Cambridge/MA: MIT Press.

1956

