UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Short-Term Word Priming Across Eye Movements

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3g26h7ck

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Denton, Stephen
Shiffrin, Richard M.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Short-Term Word Priming Across Eye Movements
Stephen E. Denton (sedenton@umail.iu.edu) and Richard M. Shiffrin (shiffrin@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, and Cognitive Science Program, Indiana University
1101 E. 10th Street, Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract

or the foil. The corresponding prime conditions are termed
target-primed, foil-primed, and neither-primed, respectively.
The preference effects revealed by Huber et al. (2001)
proved to be readily manipulatable, changing in magnitude
and direction as a function of prime saliency (e.g., Huber,
Shiffrin, Quach, & Lyle, 2002; Weidemann et al., 2005; Weidemann, Huber, & Shiffrin, 2008). Thus, when the prime is
made more salient, either through a longer presentation duration or though an active task that required responding to
the prime, the conventional priming effect diminishes or in
some cases reverses. Prime saliency manipulations result in
reduced facilitation (or slight deficits) in target-primed conditions, while leading to increased accuracy in foil-primed
conditions.

The authors conducted a short-term repetition priming experiment (using a visual, forced-choice word identification task)
that compared a standard priming condition, where prime and
target words appeared in the same spatial location, with an experimental condition in which prime and target words were
spatially separated enough to necessitate an eye movement.
Prime presentation duration was manipulated and, within both
eye movement conditions, it was found that short primes produced a preference to choose a primed alternative, whereas for
longer duration primes this preference was absent. Based on
the similarity between eye movement conditions, it is argued
that prime and target features from separate fixations are still
confusable and that evidence regarding prime feature must still
be discounted. A computation model that includes these offsetting components of source confusion and discounting provides
an excellent account of our results.
Keywords: short-term priming; immediate priming; repetition
priming; perceptual identification

The ROUSE Model

The term priming refers to a well-known information processing effect wherein one stimulus (a prime) influences a
similar or related stimulus (a target) presented at a later time.
The influence the prime has on the target is usually one of
facilitation. In the typical priming task trial, the prime is presented first followed by a target that is briefly flashed and
masked. This paradigm is referred to as short-term or immediate priming because primes are presented immediately
prior to the targets, with inter-stimulus intervals generally less
than a second. The first stimuli is called a prime because it
is thought to “prime the pump” for a related target, yielding
faster and more accurate responding. However, priming does
not simply result in facilitation. Previous research has indicated that there is an intricate set priming effects that occur
across various situations and experimental conditions (e.g.,
Huber, Shiffrin, Lyle, & Ruys, 2001; Weidemann, Huber,
& Shiffrin, 2005). Some experiments find facilitation, while
other fail to find facilitation or even find reliable deficits due
to priming.
Huber et al. (2001) began to systematically examine the
effects of priming using a two-alternative forced-choice (2AFC) testing procedure with the goal of separating the perceptual and decisional components involved in priming. Observers were asked to correctly identify a previously flashed
target word when given a choice between it and an incorrect
foil word. This study indicated that priming largely arises
from preferences to choose whatever has been primed. For
example, in repetition priming (priming in which the prime
can be the same word as either the target or foil), it was
found was that with short prime presentation durations, priming with the target increases accuracy and priming with the
foil decreases accuracy, when both are compared to a control
condition in which the prime is unrelated to either the target

To account for a range of findings within the 2-AFC identification paradigm, Huber et al. (2001) developed a featurebased Bayesian model of short-term priming. The responding
optimally to unknown sources of evidence (ROUSE) model
accounted for experimental priming data by incorporating
the two offsetting components of feature source confusion
and discounting. The source confusion portion of the model
posits that features can be carried over from the prime to
the target percept, without source information. Thus, when
a choice word is presented, feature activations could be due
to the prime presentation, the target presentation, and/or noise
without the source of the activation being known to the system. This factor alone can produce the standard priming effect, as it causes a preference toward prime-related choice
words. The discounting mechanism in the model can counteract this preference, because this component posits that perceived features are assigned evidence and feature evidence
is discounted when known to have come from the prime. A
Bayesian decision process then arrives at an optimal response
given it is operating on this noisy and discounted evidence.
The implication here is that making the prime more salient
(e.g., long presentation duration) leads to increased discounting of prime feature evidence. Thus, discounting mechanisms
can explain a lack of, or a reversal in, the typical priming preference.
In the ROUSE model, choice words are represented as
a feature vector, typically consisting of 20 binary features (Huber et al., 2001). Features can be independently
activated by the prime, with a probability α, by the target,
with a probability β, or be activated due to noise, with a probability γ. The system is assumed to only have access to what
features are active and not the source of their activation (i.e.,
source confusion), therefore the probabilistic effect of α, if

2302

not counteracted, will result in a preference toward primed
choice words. This preference is counteracted by a decision process that assigns lower levels of evidence to features
that might have been activated by the prime word (i.e., discounting). To discount features optimally, the system needs
to know the probabilities that features are active due to particular sources (i.e., α, β, and γ). However, it is assumed that
the decisional system does not have access to the exact probabilities and therefore uses estimates, α′ , β′ , and γ′ . These
estimates, which reflect the amount of discounting applied to
particular sources, are used to evaluate evidence. These estimates are theorized to be close to their true values, but the
model’s behavior depends critically on the magnitude and direction of the difference between α and its estimate. Underdiscounting (α′ < α) results in a preference for primed choice
words and over-discounting (α′ > α) produces a preference
against primed choice words.
Given the estimated source probabilities, the optimal response among choice words can be computed by combining
feature evidence. Feature evidence takes the form of a likelihood ratio that specifies the probability that a feature is from
the target word over the probability the feature is part of the
foil, given the feature’s current activation state and whether
or not the feature appeared in the prime. Assuming feature
independence, these likelihood ratios can be multiplied together across all word features to produce an overall likelihood that the choice word is the target. The likelihoods of the
two words can then be compared with the larger being identified as the target. In the case of ties, a random selection is
made between the choice words.
The above description of the ROUSE model is only intended as a brief summary, which means a number of details,
large and small, have been left out. For a more comprehensive presentation of the ROUSE model, the reader is referred
to Huber et al. (2001) for the original stochastic version and
Huber (2006) for a later analytic version.

Feature carry-over across eye movements
The ROUSE model has been useful in accounting for and
predicting priming data, but there is still much uncertainty
about how its key components, source confusion and discounting, actually perform their theorized functions. Many
questions remain unanswered regarding what causes or allows both feature confusions and discounting. Source confusion could be the result of a number of candidate causes,
e.g., spatial or temporal proximity between prime and target, or similarity between prime and target on any number
of dimensions. Similarity relations (semantic, orthographic,
etc.) between target and prime have received considerable attention elsewhere and will be set aside for present purposes.
Temporal proximity does appear to be important as increasing
the inter-stimulus intervals (ISIs) between prime and target to
be greater than 250 ms has been shown to disrupt and diminish priming (Hochhaus & Marohn, 1991). In the following
experiment, we chose ISIs to be less than 250 ms so that we
can effectively ignore the temporal dynamics of priming for

the purposes of the present study.
The focus of this research is how spatial proximity effects
priming. We are interested in knowing if feature confusions,
discounting, or both are location dependent. In the present
study, the location at which the prime and target were presented were sometimes spatially separated at a 10◦ visual angle. Visual acuity drops to roughly 25% (of central vision) at
a visual eccentricity of 10◦ (Low, 1951). Given diminished
visual acuity with this spatial separation, we are effectively
enforcing an eye movement between viewing the prime word
and the target word, if both are to be seen. Not only will the
target appear in a different location than the prime, but it will
also appear in a different eye fixation.
The goal of the present experiment is to see if features are
carried over from a prime fixation to a target fixation when the
fixation locations are relatively distant spatially. We would
like to see if features from the prime join with the target percept at the new location (i.e., will there still be source confusion when an eye movement is made). Discounting could
also be affected by our eye movement manipulation. If there
is some source confusion across eye movements, it is conceivable that prime features could be discounted completely
(i.e., little evidence from the prime would be used in making the target identification decision). Then again, given the
presence of some source confusion, it is also possible that better estimates of feature activations due the prime can be made
when the prime and target appear at separate and distinct locations. This would reduce or eliminate under-discounting and
over-discounting of prime evidence. The ROUSE model will
be used to provide an indication of the relative contribution of
source confusion and discounting across eye movement conditions.

Priming Across Eye Movements Experiment
We designed the current experiment to investigate how spatial
separation between prime and target affects priming. The experiment compared an eye movement condition to an appropriately matched control condition in which all words were
presented in the center of the screen (i.e., the stereotypical
short-term priming paradigm). For all trials, the prime word
was presented in the center of the screen. As with our previous studies, prime salience was manipulated by adjusting the
prime presentation duration, which was either short (50 ms)
or long (1000 ms). On any particular trial, the prime word itself could be either the same as the target, the foil, or neither,
corresponding to the prime conditions discussed earlier. The
target word was flashed in the center of the display on half
to the trials and on the other half it appeared equally often in
one of four locations, directly above, below, left or right of
the center. The participant’s task was to identify the flashed
target given a 2-AFC test at the end of each trial.
The experiment was a within-subject design that crossed
the 2 levels of prime presentation duration (short and long)
with 3 levels of prime condition (target, foil, or neither
primed) and crossed both with 5 different target locations split

2303

850 ms

PRIME
PRIME

PRIME
PRIME

50 ms

PRIME
PRIME

@@@@@@
@@@@@@

100 ms

100 ms

@@@@@@
@@@@@@

~100 ms (individually adjusted)
500 ms - target flash

TARGET

@@@@@@
@@@@@@

TARGET

FOIL

2-AFC (untimed)

Figure 1: An example sequence of events in the present experiment. This figure shows both short and long prime duration
conditions for one particular peripheral target location (left of center). The duration for each frame is presented on the right.
The left sequence corresponds to a short prime duration condition, whereas the right sequence shows a long prime duration
sequence where the total time the prime is presented is 1000 ms (850 ms+100 ms+50 ms). Both sequences were preceded by a
500 ms presentation of a fixation cross in the center of the screen (not shown). The positions of the target and foil word on the
last frame were randomized.
into 2 general categories (center and peripheral [top, bottom,
left, and right]). A schematic of two example trials is presented in Figure 1. A more detailed description of our exact
experimental procedure is below.

Methods
Participants Fifty one undergraduate students volunteered
to participate for partial credit in an introductory psychology
course at Indiana University.
Materials and Apparatus We used two pools of 1,100
five-letter and 1,300 six-letter words with a written-language
frequency of at least 4 per millions as defined by Kučera and
Francis (1967). All words were presented in uppercase using
the fixed-width “Courier Bold” 17-point font. Throughout the
experiment, stimulus words were sampled randomly without
replacement with the only constraint being that 5 and 6 letter
word never appeared together in the same block of trials. All
masking was done with two rows of six “@” signs presented
in “Arial Narrow Bold” 13-point font. This ensured dense
coverage of the prime and target. The stimulus words were
presented in white against a black background.
All stimuli were displayed on 16-in. (40.6 cm) PC CRT
monitors with vertical refresh rates of 120 Hz and a screen

resolution of 800 × 600 pixels. The experiment was programmed using the Vision Egg library for the python programming language (Straw, 2008). The display was synchronized to the vertical refresh of the monitor providing display
increments of 8.33 ms.
Participants sat individually in a dimly lit, ventilated,
sound-dampened booth. Participants were asked to sit up
straight to keep the distance from their eyes to the monitor
at approximately 50 cm., but no head restraint was used to
enforce this viewing distance. This viewing distance ensured
that peripheral targets would appear at least a 10◦ visual angle away from the center of the screen. Participant responses
were collected using a standard computer keyboard. In a
2-AFC test, participants were asked to press the “F” key to
choose the left alternative or the “J” key to choose the right.
Procedure The procedure used in the present experiment
was carefully designed as to compare an experimental condition involving eye movements to an appropriate control that
maintained important aspects of the experimental condition
(namely timing and perceptual masking), while not requiring a eye movement. The experiment was designed based
on some knowledge of the timing of eye movements or saccades. A 10◦ saccade would take less than 50 ms to complete

2304

once initiated, but takes more than 150 ms to plan and initiate (Irwin, Brown, & Sun, 1988). As such, having the target flash appear in the periphery immediately after the prime
would make it impossible to see. To remedy this, we preceded the target with a cue that indicated the correct location
where the target would appear. This target indicator cue appeared 250 ms before the target flash. We left a 100 ms interval between the prime offset and the target onset. During
this 100 ms interval the prime was post-masked while the target was pre-masked. This timing is reflected in the example
sequences presented in Figure 1.
Each trial began with a fixation cross appearing in the center of the screen for 500 ms. In long prime duration conditions, the prime is presented (in duplicate) for 850 ms then
the prime and target indicator appear together for 150 ms. In
trials with short prime durations, the target indicator appears
first by itself for 100 ms, then the prime and the target indicator appear together for 50 ms. Participants should not be able
to plan and initiate a saccade in under 100 ms, therefore the
prime will be viewed; the prime is ‘snuck-in’ before the eyes
have a chance to move. After the prime and the 100 ms intervening mask, the target is flashed. The target is post-masked
and then the 2-AFC options are presented to the immediate
left and right of the location where the target appeared. A
peripheral target word can appear at the top, bottom, left, or
right of the screen. Center target location trials have the same
timing as peripheral target trials. Besides the actual target
location, the only differences between center and peripheral
trials are that the target indicator appears in the center of the
screen (surrounding the prime) and the prime post-mask and
the target pre-mask are one in the same. On each trial, once a
2-AFC selection is made, feedback is provided.
Each participant went though 672 priming trials broken
into 7 blocks of 96. The first 32 trials were neither-primed
practice trials with long target durations (150 ms) to get participants used to the task. These practice trials were followed
by 64 neither-primed calibration trials. Target word durations
were individually adjusted for each subject such that accuracy was roughly 75% on neither primed conditions. This
calibration was done separately for the center and peripheral
target locations using a staircase method. As with previous
studies (e.g., Huber et al., 2001; Weidemann et al., 2005),
there were large individual differences. For center target trials, target flash times ranged from 25 ms to 91.7 ms with a
median of 50 ms. For peripheral targets, flash times ranged
from 33.3 ms to 200 ms (the maximum allowed) with a median of 91.7 ms. The increased variance in target flash times
for peripheral locations is likely due to individual differences
in saccade latency on top of individual differences in target
processing time, i.e., some participants may have fixated on
the target later and took longer to process the target.

Results
Data from all peripheral target locations were combined for
the purposes of analysis, creating two target location conditions, central and peripheral, that initially had equal sample

sizes. Reaction times were collected and used to eliminate
deviant trials in the data. Trials in which the participant responded in less than 100 ms or took more than 3-s to respond were eliminated. Approximately 1% of the data was
thrown out by this criterion. The first block of trials, which included practice and calibration trials, were not included in the
analysis. Remaining experimental data were analyzed with a
3 × 2 × 2 (Priming Condition × Prime Duration × Target Location) repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA).
There were large main effects of prime condition,
F(2, 100) = 167.6, p < .001, and prime duration, F(1, 50) =
135.5, p < .001. Also, these two variables interacted,
F(2, 100) = 121.37, p < .001. The main effect of target location was not significant, however this variable had a significant interaction with both prime condition, F(2, 100) =
20.43, p < .001, and prime duration, F(1, 50) = 8.637, p <
.005. Finally, there was a significant 3-way (Priming Condition × Prime Duration × Target Location) interaction,
F(2, 100) = 48.57, p < .001.
Average accuracy across all conditions is shown graphically in Figure 2. The dots in the figure give ROUSE model
predictions which will be discussed in the next section. As
can be seen from Figure 2, the typical priming effect was
found when the target and a short prime were both presented
in the center of the screen. When the prime was presented for
a longer duration this prime preference disappeared. When
the target was presented in the periphery after a centrally presented prime, the trend remained largely the same, although
the magnitude of the priming effect decreased.

Applying the ROUSE model
Fitting the ROUSE model to the current experiment involved
estimating the following eight parameters:
1. the probability that a choice word feature is activated by
the prime (α),
2. the estimated probability that a feature is activated by a
short prime when the prime and target are located in the
center (α′S.C ),
3. the estimated probability that a feature is activated by a
long prime located in the center (α′L.C ),
4. the estimated probability that a feature is activated by a
short prime from a previous fixation (α′S.P ),
5. the estimated probability that a feature is activated by a
long prime from a previous fixation (α′L.P ),
6. the probability that a feature is activated due to the target
flash (β),
7. the probability that a feature is activated due to noise
given a short prime presentation (γS ), and
8. the probability that a feature is activated due to noise
given a long prime duration (γL )1
1 Two separate noise parameters were included to account for
trend in the data that performance is better on neither-primed trials
when prime duration is long compared to when the prime duration is
short. The γ values from the to-be-discussed model fit indicate there
is higher noise in the short prime conditions when compared to long
prime conditions. This is somewhat sensible given the erratic na-

2305

B: Peripheral Target

0.6

Accuracy

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6
0.4
0.0

0.2

Accuracy

neither−primed
target−primed
foil−primed

0.8

1.0

neither−primed
target−primed
foil−primed

0.8

1.0

A: Central Target

Short Prime (.05s)

Long Prime (1s)

Short Prime (.05s)

Long Prime (1s)

Figure 2: Forced choice performance and corresponding ROUSE predictions (represented by the dots). The bar heights show
the mean proportions of correct target identification choices (error bars show ±95% confidence intervals) within each condition.
Panel A shows accuracy for centrally located targets and Panel B shows accuracy when the target was presented in a peripheral
location. Each panel is further subdivided by prime duration and priming condition. The dashed horizontal line indicates 75%
performance; the accuracy participants should roughly achieve on neither-primed trials due to the target duration calibration
procedure.
As in previous work (e.g., Huber et al., 2001; Weidemann et
al., 2005), it is assumed that estimates of feature activations
due to targets and noise are equal to the actual values (i.e.,
β′ ≡ β and γ′ ≡ γ).
The parameters listed above were estimated to generate the
ROUSE model fit that appears in Figure 2. The parameter
estimates used were: α = .12, α′S.C = .032, α′L.C = .65, α′S.P =
.10, α′L.P = .20, β = .064, γS = .067, and γL = 0.011. It is
important to stress that exact values of these parameters are
relatively immaterial, especially the exact values of the α and
α′ parameters, as it is their relative magnitudes that dictate
the behavior of the model. Multiple model fits were done
with both more and less parameters free to vary, but this fit
provided the most satisfying account to the data. The large
number of parameters (8 parameters for 12 data points) and
possible over-fitting should be somewhat of a concern here,
but since the model is largely descriptive, these complexity
concerns are left unaddressed in the present context.
As can be seen in Figure 2, the ROUSE model provides a
very good qualitative and quantitative description of the priming data we collected. Interpretation of the fit parameter values can be a tricky, because attending to the exact magnitude
can be deceptive. For example, the same α value was used
to fit all conditions. When the 2 target location conditions
ture of short duration priming trial (i.e., the target indicator, prime,
mask, and target all appear in rapid succession) which could induce
noise in the system. This seems especially true in neither-primed
trials where all prime features presented are effectively noise. Increasing noise (γ) in the model decreases accuracy and uniformly
translates all performance predictions down. Separate β parameters
could be used similarly to selectively increase and decrease performance across short and long prime duration conditions, but saying
that there is an increased probability of target features being activated for long prime durations provides a much less sensible explanation of the results.

were allowed to have separate freely estimated α parameters
it produced virtually no fit improvement. This could be taken
as evidence that source confusion was the same at peripheral
locations as at the center. However, α′ was fit separately for
each condition and changes in these values can compensate
for possible underlying differences in source confusion (α).
Given the relationship between the fit α′ values, it does
appear that the magnitude of discounting decreased when the
target was moved to a novel location. The estimates of primed
feature intrusion contracted closer to optimal in the peripheral conditions (i.e., α′S.C < α′S.P < α (optimal) < α′L.P <
α′L.C ), which means there was less under-discounting for short
primes and less over-discounting for long primes when the
prime and the target did not appear in the same spatial location.

Discussion
In the present research, we investigated whether spatial proximity of prime and target was necessary to find priming effects, particularly when there was a large spatial distance
between the two requiring an eye movement. Our findings
indicated that even after a relatively large eye movement (a
10◦ visual angle), participants showed similar priming preferences as when they viewed all stimuli in one location. More
specifically, in both eye movement and control conditions,
participants showed a preference to choose the prime word
when the prime duration was short. Further, this prime preference was undetectable when the prime was made more salient
by increasing its presentation duration.
The ROUSE model provided an excellent account of our
experimental data. The model’s success, the resulting best fitting parameters, and data themselves all provide evidence that
across eye movements (a) source confusion is still present,

2306

and (b) discounting of evidence regarding prime features persists. The evidence that source confusion endures after an eye
movement to a novel location implies that prime features appearing in one eye fixation are carried over to the next and join
with the target precept at the new location. Further, source
confusion from two spatially distinct locations does not appear to be substantially different from what it is when all feature sources are in the same spatial location.
The presence of discounting across eye movements implies
that the decisional system is, in some sense, aware that features are not tied to particular locations and therefore must
continue to estimate the likelihood that feature activations in
choice words are the result of the prime in an effort to produce optimal responses. Even when the prime was in a previous eye fixation, the estimation process evidently succumbs
to the same biases that are present without an eye movement,
i.e., short, difficult to detect primes are under-discounted and
long, salient primes are over-discounted. Since evidence for
the prime is only discounted to the extent that features are
known to exist in the prime, it is conceivable that the distinct spatial location of the prime provides some additional
information to the decisional system that helps it better estimate the actual probability that a feature activation is due to
the prime. Consequently, spatially separating the prime and
target would make discounting slightly more optimal. Our
modeling results hint that this is the case as the model estimates of feature intrusions from the prime better match the
actual intrusion probabilities in the peripheral condition.
Our study suggests that the offsetting mechanisms of
source confusion and discounting operate on features that
are in general not tied to specific locations. Eye saccades
are thought to effectively erase iconic memory, which is a
visual store with high capacity but with a very limited duration (Irwin, 1992). There are a few visual items (3 to 4)
that are retained from one eye fixation to the next in what is
termed trans-saccadic memory, which has a limited capacity
compared to iconic memory but has a longer duration (at least
750 ms). Nevertheless, an enforced eye movement will eliminate most low-level visual features from the previous fixation.
After a saccade, the features that remain are presumably more
high-level and location-independent. If source confusion and
discounting operate with such features then an eye movement
would not eliminate priming effects. This conforms to the
findings of the present study. It is possible that source confusion and discounting operate on low-level features as well,
and this may provide some explanation as to why eye movements slightly degrade the effectiveness of priming. The extent to which priming involves low-level features, and if it
is indeed their suppression during saccades that produce the
minor differences across eye movement conditions, are topics
for future research.

References
Hochhaus, L., & Marohn, K. M. (1991). Repetition blindness depends on perceptual capture and token individuation failure. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 17(2), 422–432.
Huber, D. E. (2006). Computer simulations of the ROUSE
model: An analytic simulation technique and comparison
between the error variance–covariance and bootstrap methods for estimating parameter confidence. Behavior Research Methods, 38(4), 557–568.
Huber, D. E. (2008). Immediate priming and cognitive aftereffects. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
137(2), 324–347.
Huber, D. E., Shiffrin, R. M., Lyle, K. B., & Quach, R.
(2002). Mechanisms of source confusion and discounting
in short-term priming 2: Effects of prime similarity and target duration. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28(6), 1120–1136.
Huber, D. E., Shiffrin, R. M., Lyle, K. B., & Ruys, K. I.
(2001). Perception and preference in short-term word priming. Psychological Review, 108(1), 149–182.
Huber, D. E., Shiffrin, R. M., Quach, R., & Lyle, K. B.
(2002). Mechanisms of source confusion and discounting in short-term priming: 1. effects of prime duration and
prime recognition. Memory & Cognition, 30(5), 745–757.
Irwin, D. E. (1992). Memory for position and identity
across eye movements. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18(2), 307–317.
Irwin, D. E., Brown, J. S., & Sun, J.-S. (1988). Visual
masking and visual integration across saccadic eye movements. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
117(3), 276–287.
Kučera, H., & Francis, W. (1967). Computational analysis
of present-day American English. Providence, RI: Brown
University Press.
Low, F. N. (1951). Peripheral visual acuity. Archives of
Ophthalmology, 45, 577–593.
Straw, A. D. (2008). Vision egg: An open-source library for
realtime visual stimulus generation. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 2(4), 1–10. (doi: 10.3389/neuro.11.004.2008)
Weidemann, C. T., Huber, D. E., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2005).
Confusion and compensation in visual perception: Effects
of spatiotemporal proximity and selective attention. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human, Perception, and
Performance, 31(1), 40–61.
Weidemann, C. T., Huber, D. E., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2008).
Prime diagnosticity in short-term repetition priming: Is
primed evidence discounted, even when it reliably indicates
the correct answer? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 34(2), 257–281.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NSF Grant 6804643 awarded
to the second author.

2307

