UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Similarity judgments reflect both language and cross-language tendencies: Evidence from
two semantic domains

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/25k5z6wt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Khetarpal, Naveen
Majid, Asifa
Malt, Barabara
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Similarity judgments reflect both language and cross-language tendencies:
Evidence from two semantic domains
Naveen Khetarpal (khetarpal@uchicago.edu)a
Asifa Majid (asifa.majid@mpi.nl)b
Barbara Malt (barbara.malt@lehigh.edu)c
Steven Sloman (steven_sloman@brown.edu)d
Terry Regier (terry.regier@berkeley.edu)e
a

Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637 USA
Max-Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 6500 AH Nijmegen, The Netherlands
c
Department of Psychology, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA
d
Department of Cognitive and Linguistic Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912 USA
e
Department of Linguistics, Cognitive Science Program, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
b

Although the starting point for this debate is linguistic –
namely the observation of semantic diversity across
languages – a natural means of testing it is by probing nonlinguistic cognition. The Whorfian view predicts that
speakers of languages with different semantic systems
should conceive of the world differently, each group in line
with their own language’s semantic system. The universalspace view in contrast predicts that speakers of different
languages should conceive of the world similarly.
One source of support for the universal-space view comes
from pile-sorting. In the first large-scale quantitative study
of its kind, Malt et al. (1999) asked speakers of English,
Chinese, and Spanish to name a set of household containers
– e.g. a jar, a juice-box, an ice-cream carton, etc. – and to
pile-sort pictures of these items on the basis of their overall
similarity. They found that while naming patterns differed
substantially across languages, sorting patterns did not.
The same view is indirectly supported by recent studies
that explain differing patterns of semantic structure in the
world’s languages as optimal or near-optimal partitions of
an underlying and presumably universal similarity space.
Regier et al. (2007) demonstrated that color naming in the
world’s languages is consistent with this idea, assuming a
standard perceptual color space, CIELAB. This account
explains universal tendencies in color naming while also
accommodating some deviation from those tendencies, as is
observed empirically. Khetarpal et al. (2009) showed that
the same idea can account for semantic variation in the
spatial domain. In the spatial case, however, no standard
independent assessment of a universal similarity space
exists. Therefore, inspired by the Malt et al. (1999) results,
Khetarpal et al. (2009) based their analysis on similarities
derived from pile-sorting of spatial scenes by speakers of
Dutch and English. Critically, while they assumed that
these similarities would be universal or near-universal, and
while their results were consistent with that assumption,
they did not directly test the assumption. We test it here.
To preview our results, we find that pile-sorting of spatial
stimuli, according to the data of Khetarpal et al. (2009), is
broadly similar across languages – but does nonetheless

Abstract
Many theories hold that semantic variation in the world’s
languages can be explained in terms of a universal conceptual
space that is partitioned differently by different languages.
Recent work has supported this view in the semantic domain
of containers (Malt et al., 1999), and assumed it in the domain
of spatial relations (Khetarpal et al., 2009), based in both
cases on similarity judgments derived from pile-sorting of
stimuli. Here, we reanalyze data from these two studies and
find a more complex picture than these earlier studies
suggested. In both cases we find that sorting is similar across
speakers of different languages (in line with the earlier
studies), but nonetheless reflects the sorter’s native language
(in contrast with the earlier studies). We conclude that there
are cross-culturally shared conceptual tendencies that can be
revealed by pile-sorting, but that these tendencies may be
modulated to some extent by language. We discuss the
implications of these findings for accounts of semantic
variation.
Keywords: Language and thought; semantic universals;
linguistic relativity.

A universal basis for semantic variation?
The semantic systems of the world’s languages vary
considerably. This observation has suggested two opposed
accounts of the relation between language and thought. The
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis holds that such cross-language
differences cause corresponding differences in cognition,
leading speakers of different languages to think about and
perceive the world substantially differently (Lucy, 1992;
Majid et al., 2004; Roberson et al., 2000). In contrast, many
other theories accommodate such variation by positing a
universal conceptual space that is partitioned in different
ways by different languages (Berlin & Kay, 1969; Croft,
2003:139; Levinson & Meira, 2003; Majid et al., 2008; Malt
et al., 1999; Regier et al., 2007). On this view, the
significant point about the variation is that many logically
possible semantic configurations are never attested – thus,
the
constrained
variation
illuminates
underlying
commonalities in human cognition.

358

differ as a function of language. These results were
obtained using an analysis different from that of Malt et al.
(1999) – thus the question arises whether Malt et al.’s
(1999) container data would yield similarly mixed results
under our analysis. We show that they do. We conclude
that on one analysis at least, pile-sorting reveals not just
shared cross-language tendencies, but also apparent
influence of the sorter’s native language, suggesting an
interesting combination of the universalist and Whorfian
positions (Regier & Kay, 2009).

similarities are universal – since they help to explain the
spatial semantic systems of unrelated languages. But is this
assumption in fact correct – or do these similarities reflect
the sorters’ native language? A natural means of testing this
question is to compare the sorts produced by speakers of
English and Dutch to the naming systems of the same two
languages.1 The Whorfian prediction is that speakers of
each language should sort in a manner that reflects their
native language, more than the other language. The
universalist prediction is that speakers of the two languages
should sort identically.

Spatial language and cognition
Methods

Khetarpal et al. (2009) demonstrated a commonality
underlying the diversity of spatial naming in the world’s
languages. They based their study on a set of 71 spatial
scenes that were originally designed by Melissa Bowerman
and Eric Pederson. Figure 1 shows a sample of 10 of these
scenes, as categorized in 2 languages.

Naming data. For both English and Dutch, separately, we
recorded the modal spatial term for each of the 71 spatial
scenes — i.e. the spatial term that was used by the largest
number of speakers of the language to name that scene.
Ties were broken by random choice. The resulting labeling
of the 71 scenes was taken to be that language’s spatial
naming system.
Sorting data. We analyzed the English and Dutch sorting
data in 3 ways. First, we measured the correlation of
sorting behavior across languages. Second, we measured
how well sorts matched the semantic systems of English and
Dutch, using edit distance. Third, we examined the height,
or coarse-grainedness, of the sorts and of the English and
Dutch semantic systems, since this quantity is helpful in
interpreting other analyses, as will be seen below. Here, we
describe each analysis in turn.
Correlation analysis. Following Malt et al. (1999), we
compared sorts produced by English and Dutch speakers as
follows. For each of Dutch and English, for each pair of
scenes, we counted the number of times those two scenes
were placed in the same pile by speakers of that language.
This yielded, for each of the two languages, a vector of
(71×70)/2 = 2485 co-sorting counts. We determined the
correlation of the Dutch vector with the English vector.

Figure 1: 10 spatial scenes, as categorized in 2 languages:
Tiriyó and Yélî-Dnye. Source: Levinson & Meira (2003).
Khetarpal et al. (2009) had native speakers of Dutch and
native speakers of American English sort pictures of these
71 spatial scenes into piles on the basis of the similarity of
the spatial relation portrayed. Afterwards, they also elicited
names for these spatial relations from each sorter in his or
her native language.
They then derived similarity
judgments from sorting behavior: the similarity between any
two scenes x and y was taken to be the proportion of all
participants (American and Dutch pooled together) who
sorted x and y into the same pile. Finally, they assessed the
spatial semantic systems of 9 unrelated languages (one
language was Dutch but the rest were unrelated to Dutch
and English; Levinson & Meira, 2003) relative to these
similarities. They found that these 9 attested spatial
semantic systems maximized similarity within categories,
and minimized it across categories (Garner, 1974), more
than did a reasonable set of competitor systems of
comparable complexity; in this sense these attested spatial
semantic systems are near-optimal.
This finding is
consistent with the assumption that the sorting-derived

Edit-distance analysis. We took a pile-sort of the 71 scenes
to be a partition of those stimuli into groups; we similarly
took a language’s names applied to those scenes to be a
partition of the same set of stimuli into groups. We
quantified the dissimilarity between two such partitions by
measuring the edit distance between them. The edit distance
between two partitions A and B is the minimum number of
operations required to change A into B, where each
operation involves moving a single item from one group to
another (possibly empty) group.
We computed edit
distances via the Hungarian algorithm for bipartite graph
1

We collected new English data analogous to that of Khetarpal
et al. (2009), since their English naming data were incomplete. We
report here the comparison of Khetarpal et al.’s (2009) complete
Dutch data with our complete English data. Comparison of
Khetarpal et al.’s (2009) Dutch and English data yield qualitatively
the same results as those we report here.

359

matching (Deibel et al., 2005).2 For each pile sort produced
by a speaker of either Dutch or English, we determined its
edit distance to the partition defined by the Dutch language,
and its edit distance to the partition defined by the English
language.

system minus the edit distance of that person’s pile sort to
the Dutch naming system. The difference scores for both
groups were significantly greater than 0 (Dutch: M=4.5,
t(23) = 4.83, p < .0002; English: M=1.92, t(23) = 3.81, p <
.002), indicating that speakers of both languages sorted
more in line with Dutch than with English. The Dutch mean
difference score was greater than the English one (t(46) =
2.44, p < 0.05; all p values Bonferroni-corrected), indicating
that Dutch speakers showed this preference for Dutch over
English more strongly than English speakers did. Thus
there appears to be both a cross-language tendency to sort
more in line with Dutch than with English (a universalist
finding), and a tendency to sort in line with one’s native
language (a Whorfian finding); these two forces pull in the
same direction for Dutch speakers, but in opposite
directions for English speakers.
What is it about the Dutch naming system such that
speakers of both languages sort more in line with it than
with English? It may be relevant that Dutch appears to be
semantically finer-grained than English in this domain. For
example, the English spatial term on covers a broad range of
spatial meanings, including a cup on a table, and a picture
on a wall – whereas these two spatial configurations are
named differently in Dutch (as op vs. aan, respectively).
Thus a possible explanation for the privileged status of
Dutch in our results above is that people may tend to sort in
a manner that is finer-grained than either language, and
therefore more like the finer-grained language – in this case
Dutch.
Figure 3 shows that this is the case. The height quantity
measures the coarseness of a partition; thus, comparison of
the two vertical lines shows that Dutch naming is indeed
finer-grained than English naming with respect to these
spatial scenes. Moreover, the bulk of sorts produced by
speakers of both languages is finer-grained than the finergrained language, Dutch.

Height analysis. The height of a partition is a measure of
how coarse-grained it is: greater height indicates coarser
grain, while lower height indicates finer grain. Height is
defined as the sum, over all groups in a partition, of the
number of pairs of items in each group (Coxon, 1999):
g 
height = ∑  i  = ∑ g i ( g i − 1) / 2
i  2 
i
where gi is the number of items in group i. We measured
the height of the partitions corresponding to the English and
Dutch naming systems, and the height of each pile-sort.

Results and discussion
Correlation. The correlation of the Dutch and English cosorting vectors was 0.87. This correlation is fairly high, and
is greater than the agreement between halves of the same
group (Dutch or English): the mean within-group split-half
reliability was 0.80. This result suggests that speakers of
the two languages sorted quite similarly.
Edit distance. Edit distance gives us a means of measuring
the dissimilarity between pile-sorts and naming systems.
Figure 2 shows the average edit distance of sorts produced
by Dutch speakers and those produced by English speakers,
to the Dutch and English naming systems.

36
35
34
33
32
31
30
29
28
27
26

Proportion of Sorters

Edit Distance

Distance to Dutch names
Distance to English names

Dutch speakers

English speakers

0.4

Dutch names

English names
Dutch sorts

0.3

English sorts

0.2
0.1
0
100

300

500

700

900

1100

Sort Height

Figure 2: Edit distance of sorts, produced by Dutch and
English speakers, to the Dutch and English naming systems.

Figure 3: The height (coarse-grainedness) of the Dutch and
English naming systems, and sorts produced by speakers of
these two languages.

We analyzed these data as follows. For each sorter from
each of the two languages, we created a difference score: the
edit distance of that person’s pile sort to the English naming

Thus, it seems likely that Dutch emerges as privileged in
our edit-distance results at least in part because it is finergrained than English in this domain. But are these results
attributable to fine grain per se, or to the particular finegrained partition that Dutch represents? To test this, we

2

See http://psych.uchicago.edu/~khetarpal/code/edit-distance
for our code, which extends an implementation written by Gary
Baker and released under GPLv3.

360

also compared the pile-sorts to Dutch-like partitions which
are as fine-grained as Dutch but group the items differently.
The set of Dutch-like partitions was sampled repeatedly
(n=3.5x106) by randomly grouping items such that the total
number of groups equaled the number of Dutch spatial
terms and the sizes of these groups matched the number of
items associated with the Dutch spatial terms. We then
measured the average edit distance from English speakers’
sorts to each of these sampled hypothetical Dutch-like
partitions (Min=46.79, Mean=52.09, Max=55.13), and the
average edit distance from Dutch speakers’ sorts to each of
these sampled hypothetical Dutch-like partitions
(Min=46.04, Mean=51.48, Max=54.29). In both cases the
average edit distance of the sorts to actual Dutch (shown in
Figure 2) was less than to any of the sampled hypothetical
Dutch-like partitions of equally fine grain.3 This finding
suggests that the privileged status of Dutch in our editdistance results is a function not just of its fine grain, but
also of the similarity relations it captures.
Taken together, these reanalyses of the Khetarpal et al.
(2009) spatial data suggest that spatial similarity judgments
as gauged by pile-sorting are quite similar and fine-grained
across languages – a universalist finding – but that they
nonetheless vary in line with the sorter’s native language – a
Whorfian finding.

al. (2009). Specifically, we (1) identified each language’s
semantic partitioning of the space by determining the modal
term applied to each stimulus in each language, and
conducted (2) correlation, (3) edit-distance, and (4) height
analyses of the sorting and naming data.

Results and discussion
Correlation. The correlation of the Chinese and English cosorting vectors was 0.91, as Malt et al. (1999) had found.
This correlation is quite high, and is comparable to the
agreement between halves of the same group (Chinese or
English): the mean within-group split-half reliability was
0.90. This result suggests that speakers of the two
languages sorted quite similarly.
Edit distance. Figure 4 shows the average edit distance of
sorts produced by Chinese speakers and those produced by
English speakers, to the Chinese and English naming
systems.
Distance to Chinese names
Distance to English names
35
34

Edit Distance

Container names and cognition
Our present analysis of the Khetarpal et al. (2009) spatial
data revealed a mixed picture, in contrast with the purely
universalist results of Malt et al. (1999) on containers. But
our result was obtained through an edit-distance analysis
that Malt et al. (1999) did not use. This raises the question
whether the Malt et al. (1999) data would also exhibit an
effect of language if analyzed using edit distance. We
sought to test this question.
Malt et al. (1999) based their study on 60 pictures of
simple containers, such as cartons, boxes, bottles, and the
like. They asked speakers of 3 different languages –
American English, Mandarin Chinese, and Argentinean
Spanish – to name the containers shown in these pictures
and to sort them into piles, on several different bases. Here,
we re-examine their data from English and Chinese, for
which data were readily retrievable, and we focus on pilesorting based on overall similarity of the containers, rather
than functional or perceptual similarity, which Malt et al.
(1999) also probed. Importantly, while the semantic
categories for the various containers differed across
languages, the overall sorts showed no effect of language in
their analyses.

33
32
31
30
29
28
27
26

Chinese speakers

English speakers

Figure 4: Edit distance of sorts, produced by Chinese and
English speakers, to the Chinese and English naming
systems.
We analyzed these data as before. For each sorter from
each of the two languages, we created a difference score: the
edit distance of that person’s pile sort to the Chinese naming
system minus the edit distance of that person’s pile sort to
the English naming system. The mean difference score for
Chinese speakers was 0.0 (SD = 5.99), indicating that
Chinese speakers sorted in a manner equally similar to the
Chinese and English naming systems. In contrast, the mean
difference score for English speakers was significantly
greater than 0 (M=3.43; t(55) = 6.17, p < .0002), indicating
that English speakers sorted in a manner more like the
English than like the Chinese naming system. The English
mean difference score was greater than the Chinese one
(t(36.64) = 2.64; p < .05; all p values Bonferroni-corrected),
indicating that English speakers sorted in line with English

Methods
We analyzed Malt et al.’s (1999) container naming and
sorting data from Chinese and English using the same
methods we had applied to the spatial data of Khetarpal et
3
The actual Dutch naming system is also by definition a Dutchlike partition.

4

361

Heteroscedasticity corrected using Welch’s method.

results is a consequence not just of its fine-grainedness, but
also of the specific groupings of referents that it represents.
Taken as a whole, these reanalyses of the Malt et al.
(1999) container data present a picture similar to the one
that emerged from our examination of the Khetarpal et al.
(2009) spatial data. Similarity judgments as assessed by
pile-sorting are fine-grained and quite similar across
languages, but also reflect the sorter’s native language to
some extent. Thus, there is again evidence both for crosslanguage and for language-specific forces – and thus for
both the universalist and Whorfian positions.

more than Chinese to a greater extent than Chinese speakers
did. As in the spatial case, a natural interpretation of these
data is that there is a cross-language tendency to sort more
in line with English than with Chinese, and also a tendency
to sort in line with one’s native language. For Chinese
speakers these two forces cancel each other out, whereas for
English speakers they reinforce each other.
Given our earlier discussion, a general tendency to sort
more in line with English than with Chinese naming would
make sense if English were more fine-grained than Chinese
in this domain, and if people sorted more finely than either
language. Figure 5 shows that this is the case.

Proportion of Sorters

Conclusions
0.4

English names

Chinese names

Different languages exhibit different systems of semantic
categories. It is often assumed that this semantic variation
is constrained by, and can be explained by, a universal
conceptual space that is partitioned in different ways by
different languages. Malt et al. (1999) found evidence
consistent with such a language-invariant space, and
Khetarpal et al. (2009) assumed such a space existed. In
both cases conceptual similarity was assessed through pilesorting.
We reanalyzed data from these two earlier studies, with a
view to reassessing whether pile-sorting on the basis of
similarity does or does not reflect language. In both cases
we found the same overall picture: pile-sorting was very
similar across speakers of different languages (in agreement
with the findings and assumptions of the earlier studies), but
it also tended to reflect the sorter’s native language (in
contrast with those studies). Moreover, pile-sorting tended
to be semantically finer-grained than any of the languages
we considered. These findings suggest several conclusions.
First, they suggest a particular view of the relation of
language and thought, namely that: (a) there is a set of finegrained and potentially cross-cutting conceptual distinctions
that may be made, and some languages will happen to mark
more of these distinctions than will other languages; (b)
distinctions that are unmarked in a language are nonetheless
conceptually available to speakers of that language – this is
suggested by the fine-grained sorting; and (c) a distinction
becomes more salient if it is marked linguistically in one’s
native language (Hespos & Spelke, 2004) – this is suggested
by the effect of language we find. This interpretation is
consistent with the general view that “Whorf was half right”
and correspondingly half wrong, as has been argued
elsewhere (Regier & Kay, 2009).
Second, our results are compatible with the possibility
that language may influence cognition in relatively subtle
ways that are detectable by some analyses and not by others.
Edit distance applied to pile-sorting may be a useful
analytical tool, when used in tandem with others, in
pursuing this question more generally.
Finally, our results suggest that caution is needed when
basing accounts of semantic variation on an ostensibly
universal similarity space derived from pile-sorting (e.g.
Khetarpal et al., 2009) – because universality cannot be
assumed. Similarity judgments are likely to be similar but

Chinese sorts
0.3

English sorts

0.2
0.1
0
200

400

600

800

1000

Height

Figure 5: The height (coarse-grainedness) of the Chinese
and English naming systems, and sorts produced by
speakers of these two languages.
Whereas English was coarser-grained than Dutch in the
spatial domain, it is finer-grained than Chinese in the
container domain. And the bulk of the sorts produced by
speakers of both languages is finer-grained yet. This is
consistent with the reasoning proposed above for the
apparently privileged status of English in our edit-distance
analysis of the container data. Still, as before, we wished to
ascertain whether the results are attributable to fine grain
per se, or to the particular fine-grained partition that English
represents. To test this, we also compared the pile-sorts to
English-like partitions of the container items which are as
fine-grained as English but group the items differently –
analogously with our creation of Dutch-like partitions of
spatial relations, described above. The set of English-like
partitions was sampled repeatedly (n=3.5x106) by randomly
grouping items such that the total number of groups equaled
the number of English container terms and the sizes of these
groups matched the number of items associated with the
English container terms. We then measured the average edit
distance from English speakers’ sorts to each of these
sampled hypothetical English-like partitions (Min=41.54,
Mean=45.67, Max=48.02), and the average edit distance
from Chinese speakers’ sorts to each of these sampled
hypothetical
English-like
partitions
(Min=44.23,
Mean=48.01, Max=50.31). In both cases the average edit
distance of the sorts to actual English (shown in Figure 4)
was less than to any of the sampled hypothetical Englishlike partitions of equally fine grain. This finding suggests
that the privileged status of English in our edit-distance

362

not identical across languages, as was the case in our
analyses. This highlights an unavoidable tension. A
universal conceptual space is a useful theoretical construct
for explaining semantic variation, but we have no guarantee
that such a thing actually exists – nor, if it does, do we have
a completely reliable means of assessing it. Instead, we
have somewhat language-colored approximations to such a
space, and these should be treated as such. A reasonable
treatment may be to average together similarity judgments
obtained from speakers of different languages in an attempt
to better approximate a universal similarity space, as
Khetarpal et al. (2009) did. But any interpretation of results
based on such an approximation should be tempered by the
awareness that it is merely an approximation.
At the same time, our results leave a number of questions
open. The first concerns the contrast between our findings
and those of Malt et al. (1999). They found that language
was not reflected in sorting by overall similarity, and we
found that it was, based on the same data. One possibility,
as mentioned above, is that our edit distance analysis is
more sensitive than some others, such that it picks up on
differences that are missed by other analyses. Is this
conclusion correct? Or is our analysis itself inappropriately
biased in some respect? Which set of results should be
believed? Answering this question is critical to placing our
present findings in their proper context.
A second question raised by our findings is the extent to
which they generalize to other languages. If we were to
examine a new language that partitions semantic space more
finely than the languages we have examined here, we would
expect to find that pile-sorts produced by people of all
backgrounds tend to align more closely with this new finegrained language than they do with the more coarse-grained
languages we have already examined. Is this the case? This
question provides a straightforward means of further testing
these ideas.
There is also the question of whether these results
generalize to other semantic domains. While we have
restricted ourselves to the two domains of spatial relations
and containers, this was simply a matter of convenience, as
the data were readily available. The reasoning behind these
ideas however is general in scope, and we would expect to
find supporting evidence in other semantic domains as well.
Finally, while these results demonstrate a correlation
between language and sorting behavior, they do not
demonstrate the causal link claimed by the Whorf
hypothesis. It remains an open question whether the
observed correlation is attributable to an effect of language
on cognition, or to other factors, such as culture influencing
both language and cognition.
Regardless of how these questions are eventually
answered, we hope that our present initial findings help to
make plausible the central idea we have promoted here: a
fine-grained conceptual space, largely shared in structure
across speakers of different languages, but nonetheless also
reflecting the speaker’s native language.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NSF under grant SBE0541957, the Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center
(SILC).

References
Berlin, B. & Kay, P. (1969). Basic color terms: Their
universality and evolution. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Coxon, A. (1999). Sorting data: Collection and analysis.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Croft, W. (2003). Typology and universals, 2nd edition.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Deibel, K., Anderson, R., & Anderson, R. (2005). Using
edit distance to analyze card sorts. Expert Systems, 22,
129-138.
Garner, W. R. (1974). The processing of information and
structure. Potomac, MD: L. Erlbaum Associates
Hespos, S. J. & Spelke, E. S. (2004). Conceptual precursors
to language. Nature, 430, 453 - 456.
Khetarpal, N., Majid, A., & Regier, T. (2009). Spatial terms
reflect near-optimal spatial categories. In N. Taatgen et al.
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Levinson, S. C. & Meira, S. (2003). Natural concepts in the
spatial topological domain—adpositional meanings in
crosslinguistic perspective: An exercise in semantic
typology. Language, 79, 485-516.
Lucy, J. (1992). Grammatical categories and cognition: A
case study of the linguistic relativity hypothesis.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Majid, A., Boster, J., & Bowerman, M. (2008). The crosslinguistic categorization of everyday events: A study of
cutting and breaking. Cognition, 109, 235-250.
Majid, A., Bowerman, M., Kita, S., Haun, D., & Levinson,
S. (2004). Can language restructure cognition? The case
for space. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 108-114.
Malt, B. C., Sloman, S. A., Gennari, S., Shi, M., & Wang,
Y. (1999). Knowing versus naming: Similarity and the
linguistic categorization of artifacts. Journal of Memory
and Language, 40, 230-262.
Regier, T., Kay, P., & Khetarpal, N. (2007). Color naming
reflects optimal partitions of color space. PNAS, 104,
1436-1441.
Regier, T., & Kay, P. (2009). Language, thought, and color:
Whorf was half right. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13,
439-446.
Roberson, D., Davies I. & Davidoff, J. (2000). Color
categories are not universal: Replications and new
evidence from a stone-age culture. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 129, 369-398.

363

