UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Simplifying the Mapping from Referring Expression to Referent in a Conceptual Semantics of
Reference

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5hj0n138

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Ball, Jerry

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Simplifying the Mapping from Referring Expression to Referent in a Conceptual
Semantics of Reference
Jerry Ball (Jerry.Ball@mesa.afmc.af.mil)
Air Force Research Laboratory

Abstract
In Jackendoff’s Conceptual Semantics, reference to objects,
situations, places, directions, times, manners, and measures is
supported, but reference is limited to instances of these
conceptual categories. This paper proposes an extension of
Jackendoff’s referential types along an orthogonal dimension
of reference which is cognitively motivated in suggesting the
possibility of referring to types, prototypes and exemplars in
addition to instances, as well as classes and collections of all
referential types and vacuous instances and collections. The
paper also introduces a bi-partite distinction between a
situation model and the mental universe which helps to
explain apparent non-referential uses of referring expressions.
The primary motivation for expanding the ontology of
referential types and distinguishing the situation model from
the mental universe is to simplify the mapping from linguistic
expressions to corresponding representations of referential
meaning. The viability of this approach hinges on adoption of
the mentalist semantics of Jackendoff. There is no direct
reference to actual objects in the external world.
Keywords: referring expression; Conceptual Semantics

Introduction
In Jackendoff’s Conceptual Semantics (Jackendoff, 1983,
1990, 2002, 2007), reference to places, directions, times,
manners, and measures in addition to situations and objects
is supported, but reference is limited to tokens or instances
of these conceptual categories, adhering to the basic notion
that reference is to individuals. This paper proposes an
extension of Jackendoff’s referential types along an
orthogonal dimension of reference which is cognitively
motivated in suggesting the possibility of referring to types,
prototypes and exemplars in addition to instances.
Reference to classes and collections of referential types and
vacuous instances and collections is also considered.
The primary motivation for expanding the ontology of
referential types is to simplify the mapping from referring
expressions to corresponding representations of referential
meaning. Hobbs (2003) pursues a similar strategy in
arguing for logical representations that are as close to
English as possible. Jackendoff’s (1983, p. 13-14)
grammatical constraint makes a related claim:
…one should prefer a semantic theory that explains
otherwise arbitrary generalizations about the syntax
and the lexicon…a theory’s deviations from efficient
encoding must be vigorously justified, for what
appears to be an irregular relationship between
syntax and semantics may turn out merely to be a
bad theory of one or the other (italics added)

Taking the grammatical constraint seriously, we assume
that if a linguistic expression has the grammatical form of a
referring expression, then it is a referring expression. For
example, a nominal like “a man” which contains the
referential marker “a”, indicates that the expression can be
used to refer. Unless there is a very strong reason to assume
that any use of this referring expression is non-referential, it
is assumed to refer. Further, the referential marker “a”
indicates reference to a single referent as does the head
noun “man” (i.e. both are grammatically singular). This
expression cannot be used to refer to multiple individuals.
Where other approaches argue for the non-referential use
of referring expressions or for a complicated mapping from
referring expression to possible referents (see discussion
below), it is argued instead that referring expressions may
refer to something other than an individual, and that the
notion of reference is complicated by a secondary
relationship between the referents in a situation model and
objects in the mental universe. By expanding the ontology
of referential types to include types, prototypes and
exemplars, and classes and collections of these, it is
possible to retain a simplified mapping from referring
expression to referent—one which is consistent with the
grammatical features of the referring expression. By
introducing a bi-partite relationship between a situation
model and the mental universe it is possible to explain
apparent non-referential uses of referring expressions. The
viability of this approach hinges on adoption of the
mentalist semantics of Jackendoff. Reference is to mental
encodings of external experience and these encodings can
provide alternative construals of reality. There is no direct
reference to actual objects in the external world.

Theoretical Background
Ball (2007) presents a linguistic theory of the grammatical
encoding of referential and relational meaning which is
implemented in a computational cognitive model of
language comprehension (Ball, Heiberg & Silber, 2007;
Ball et al., 2010) within the ACT-R cognitive architecture
(Anderson, 2007). The basic structure and function of
nominals and clauses is bi-polar with a specifier functioning
as the locus of the referential pole and a head functioning
as the locus of the relational pole—where relational pole
encompasses objects (noun, proper noun, pronoun) and
relations (verb, adjective, preposition, adverb). If the head
of the relational pole is a relation, one or more complements
or arguments may be associated with the relation. Modifiers
may surround the specifier and head and may be

1577

preferentially attracted to one pole or the other. A specifier
and head (or reference point, specifier and head) combine to
form a referring expression. A determiner functioning as an
object specifier combines with a head to form an object
referring expression or nominal (ORE  Obj-Spec ObjHead). A possessive nominal (e.g. “John’s” in “John’s
book”) or possessive pronoun (e.g. “his” in “his book”)
functioning as a combined reference point and specifier
may also combine with a head to form an object referring
expression (ORE  Ref-Pt/Obj-Spec Obj-Head). In this
case the object referring expression contains two referring
expressions: 1) the reference point, and 2) the referring
expression as a whole.
Ball (2010) extends the theory of referential and
relational meaning to a consideration of grammatical
features like definiteness, number, animacy, gender and
case in object referring expressions. These features provide
important grammatical cues for determining the referents of
object referring expressions.
The referring expressions in a text instantiate and refer to
objects, situations, locations, etc. in a situation model which
is a representation of the evolving meaning of the text. The
term “situation model” originates in the research of van
Dijk & Kintsch (1983). Originally a situation model was
viewed as a collection of propositions extracted from a text
and elaborated with additional propositions introduced by
schemas activated by the text and resulting from inference
processes operating over the text. However, situation
models have evolved away from being purely propositional
(or relational) representations towards encoding referential,
spatial, imaginal and even motor aspects of meaning (cf.
Zwann and Radvansky 1998). We view the situation model
as the cognitive locus of Jackendoff’s Conceptual
Semantics. Jackendoff has adopted similar extensions in his
recent work (Jackendoff, 2002, 2007).
A situation model is a mental scratchpad for maintaining
information about the referents of the referring expressions
in a text. However, referents can also be implicit in the text,
inferred from background knowledge or encoded from the
environment. The situation model is constructed in the
context of a mental universe. The mental universe is the
experience of the real world filtered through the perceptual
and cognitive apparatus of an individual over the course of
a lifetime. Like situation models, the mental universe may
be full of counterfactual objects and situations. An
individual may have a long history of experience of
unicorns, both perceptual (e.g. from movies and picture
books) and linguistic, despite the fact that unicorns only
exist as figments of imagination in objective reality. The
mental universe may also have well established and distinct
referents for the morning star and the evening star, despite
the fact that these referents map to the same planet in
objective reality.
The combination of the mental universe and the situation
model provide the basic sources for grounding the meaning
of referring expressions. A referring expression may be
bound to a referent in the situation model which may or

may not be ground in the mental universe. If the referent is
ground in the mental universe then the individual has
personal experience of the referent. If the referent is not
ground in the mental universe, then the individual has only
limited information about the referent and it may appear
that the referring expression is non-referential. But as
Lyons (1977) notes, allowing referring expressions to be
non-referential is problematic for co-reference. “Two
expressions cannot have the same reference, if one of them
is not a referring expression at all” (Ibid, 191). In “John’s
murderer, whoever he is…”, “he” co-refers with “John’s
murderer”. The attributive use of a referring expression like
“John’s murderer” is a type of reference which instantiates
a referent into the situation model that is not grounded in
the mental universe, but which supports co-reference.
The ontology of referential types presented in this paper
follows from basic principles of Cognitive Linguistics (cf.
Langacker, 1987; Lakoff, 1987) and Cognitive Psychology
(Rosch, 1975; Collins and Quillian, 1969). There is
extensive empirical evidence supporting the existence of
conceptual categories corresponding to types, prototypes
and exemplars. This paper takes the small step of
suggesting that such conceptual categories can be referred
to by linguistic expressions and explores the consequences.
The representation of referents in the situation model
parallels the representation of referring expressions. Both
are represented in ACT-R as chunks—i.e. frames with
collections of slot-value pairs. Chunks are organized into an
inheritance hierarchy which supports default inheritance
and a distinction between chunk type and chunk instance.
The value of a slot may be a chunk, supporting complex
representations of structure needed for linguistic and
Conceptual Semantic representation. With respect to object
referring expressions which are the focus of this paper, a
chunk representing an object referring expression is bound
to a corresponding referent via a matching value in an index
slot. Depending on the object referring expression, situation
model and mental universe, the referent may be an instance,
type, prototype, exemplar, class or collection.

An Expanded Ontology of Referential Types
First Order Predicate Calculus (FOPC) is typically
grounded in a model theoretic semantics with an ontology
limited to atomic individuals. The model consists of a
domain and a set of individuals in that domain and nothing
else. Typically these individuals are assumed to correspond
to objects (or individuals) in the real world being modeled.
In FOPC, a relation is modeled in terms of the set of
individuals (for 1-ary relations or properties) or set of
ordered sets of individuals (for n-ary relations, n>1) for
which the relation is true. A relation with its arguments
bound to individuals in the domain is either true or false of
those individuals and it is said that the reference of the
proposition is one of the values true or false.
Situation Semantics (Barwise and Perry, 1983) extends
FOPC by allowing situations to be individuals. Not only are
situations true or false of sets of individuals in the domain

1578

being modeled, but they are themselves individuals in the
domain. We may say that situations have “first-class” status
in situation semantics, whereas they are a second-order (or
derived) notion in standard FOPC.
Situation Semantics is a step in the right direction.
Whereas it might make reasonable sense to suggest that a
predicate like “dog” denotes the set (or class) of individuals
that are dogs (although psychologically humans cannot
quantify over such a large set), it makes little sense to
suggest that the predicate “run” denotes the set of all
individuals who run, or that “kick” denotes the set of
ordered sets of kickers and kickees, as is typical in FOPC
treatments with a set-theoretic model limited to individuals
that are essentially objects of various types (and sets of such
individuals). (It is this sleight of hand in FOPC that
collapses the distinction between nouns and verbs, treating
both as predicates corresponding to sets of individuals.) It is
much more reasonable to suggest that “run” denotes the set
of all running events and that “kick” denotes the set of all
kicking events. And if “run” denotes a set of running events
and “kick” a set of kicking events, then allowing “run” to
be used in an expression that refers to an instance of a
running event, and allowing “kick” to be used in an
expression that refers to an instance of a kicking event,
follows quite naturally and is cognitively plausible.
However, Situation Semantics stops short. What is needed
is a referential ontology which supports a mapping from the
types of referring expressions which are linguistically
attested to the types of referents which are cognitively
motivated.
With an ontology of referential types limited to
individuals and sets of individuals, it is often assumed that a
referring expression like “a car” in an expression like “a car
is a vehicle” quantifies over the set of all individuals for
which the predicate “car” is true (i.e. the set or class of
objects of type “car”). In FOPC, this can be represented as
x

(car(x)  vehicle (x))

However, from a grammatical perspective, “a car” is clearly
singular, and from a cognitive perspective, quantifying over
all individuals is cognitively implausible. The need to
quantify over all individuals in the FOPC representation of
the linguistic expression stems from the limited ontology
available in FOPC for representing the meaning of
indefinite referring expressions. Only the universal and
existential quantifiers—which fail to capture the full range
of quantification in natural language—are available.
Similarly, one FOPC representation for the expression
“every man owns a car” is given by
x (y

(man(x) and car(y)  own(x,y)))

However, in English “every man” is grammatically
singular, and a mapping to the universal quantifier is
problematic. Johnson-Laird (1983) introduced mental
models as a way of overcoming the limitations of
quantification in FOPC (among other things). He suggests
that the expression “a car” in the sentence “every man owns

a car” maps to some representative subset of cars. This
representative subset of cars corresponds to the
representative subset of individuals referred to by “every
man”, plus a subset of cars that are not owned. He (1983, p.
421) represents this as
man  car
man  car
(car)
But if “every man” and “a car” are singular and not plural,
then “every man” does not refer to multiple men and “a
car” does not refer to multiple cars. Johnson-Laird’s
treatment is cognitively plausible, but inconsistent with the
grammatical form of the referring expressions. From a
perspective which assumes that the number feature of a
referring expression corresponds closely to the number
feature of the referent of the expression, there are several
cognitively motivated referents for expressions like “every
man” and “a car” which do not violate the singular status of
the linguistic expressions:




Type
Prototype/Exemplar
Indefinite/Definite Instance

“A car” may refer to a type of object, namely the type of
object that is a car. “A car” may also refer to a prototype
that represents what is common to most cars, or it may refer
to an exemplar which is an instance that is a representative
car. Further, “a car” may refer to an indefinite instance with
the determiner “a” marking the indefinite status of the
referent of “a car”. Note that “indefinite instance” is used
here as a referential type and not a type of referring
expression. In all but a few cases, the type of the referring
expression is an indefinite, singular object referring
expression when grammatically marked by the determiner
“a” and a singular head noun (“a few cases” being a notable
exception where “a” combines with a plural head noun).
Given the occurrence of the indefinite, singular determiner
“a” and the singular noun “car” in this expression, “a car”
cannot be used to refer to a definite instance of a car, or to a
class or collection, but all the other referential types are
potential referents of indefinite, singular object referring
expressions. Likewise, “every man” may refer to a
representative but indefinite, singular instance of a man as
is suggested by the singular status of “every man”.

Reference to Definite and Indefinite Instances. The
determiner “the” marks reference to definite instances.
Consider the definite object referring expression “the car”.
This definite expression indicates that there is already a
referent in the situation model that is being referred to or
that there is a salient “car” object in the mental universe
that is being referred to and this object should be
instantiated into the situation model. For a more complex
example, consider:
A car is in the driveway. The car is red.

1579

In the first sentence, the expression “a car” is indefinite and
instantiates a new referent into the situation model—one
that is not (known to be) ground in the mental universe. In
the second sentence, the expression “the car” is definite and
refers to the referent instantiated into the situation model by
“a car”. Note that this referent is ungrounded in the sense
that it has not been identified with any object in the mental
universe, although it could be (e.g. “Oh, it’s your car”). It is
the mental universe which ultimately grounds referents. In
the first sentence, the expression “the driveway” is definite.
In this case, the definiteness of “the driveway” indicates
there is (or should be) a salient object in the mental
universe that should be instantiated into the situation model.
There are three primary types of definite reference: 1)
reference to an existing referent in the situation model
which is grounded in the mental universe, 2) reference to an
existing referent in the situation model which is ungrounded
in the mental universe, and 3) reference to a object in the
mental universe which is not in the situation model, but is
(or should be) salient. There are two primary types of
indefinite reference: 1) reference to an object which is
being introduced and should be instantiated into the
situation model—this object is not known to correspond to
any object in the mental universe, and 2) reference to a
generic instance or type which exists in the mental universe
and should be instantiated into the situation model.

Reference to Types. Type hierarchies are common in
systems of knowledge representation and making types first
class objects allows expressions like “a sedan is a (type of)
car” or “a (type of) car I like is a sedan” to be represented
as relating two types “a sedan” and “a car”. “A sedan” and
“a car” refer to instances of a type. The suggested reference
to a type rather than a class of instances is based on the
singular status of these referring expressions (i.e. “a sedan”
vs. “all sedans”). A type is a reified class. From a referential
perspective, the type is atomic with no subparts and
singular reference is appropriate. An instance is added to
the situation model which is grounded in a type in the
mental universe. From a relational perspective, “is”
establishes a relationship of equality between the two
arguments “a sedan” and “a car”. However, from a
referential perspective, there are two basic possibilities: 1)
both “a sedan” and “a car” may refer to types of objects
which are equated, or 2) the occurrence of “a car” within
the context of “is” suppresses the normal referential
behavior of “a car” such that “is a car”—a predicate
nominal—is treated as a non-referential expression which is
ascribed to the subject “a sedan”. The typical treatment of
predicate nominals suggests that they are non-referential
(cf. Jackendoff, 2002). In a sentence like “John is a fool”,
“is a fool” is treated as a predicate nominal that says
something about the individual that “John” refers to and
this sentence is often considered synonymous with “John is
foolish”. From the perspective of the grammatical
constraint, there is a problem with this treatment.
Grammatically, “a fool” has the form of an indefinite,
singular object referring expression and all object referring

expressions are capable of referring, regardless of context.
In the case of a predicate nominal, the referent of the
embedded object referring expression, if it is identified, is
the same as the referent of the subject—they are coreferential. The assumption that “is a fool” is nonreferential rests on the availability of a referring expression
“John”, the referent of which the predicate nominal “is a
fool” is predicated. In the absence of a separate referring
expression, it is unclear how to treat the predicate nominal.
For example, in “I wonder who is a fool”, if “who” is nonreferential as Huddleston & Pullum (2002, p. 401) suggest,
then what does “is a fool” get predicated of? An obvious
suggestion is that “who” functions as an unbound variable
(or variable bound via a lambda expression) which
instantiates a referent whose grounding is yet to be
determined, but which supports predication of “is a fool”
and can be referred to subsequently as in the follow up “he
better be careful”. In fact, it may turn out that nobody is a
fool since “wonder” is non-factive (i.e. doesn’t entail the
existence of its complement). Or it may be the case that the
hearer can provide the grounding as in “It’s John”. In
general, Huddleston & Pullum discuss a range of “nonreferential” object referring expressions (they prefer to use
the term NP) in which there is no object in the real world to
which the expressions refer, overlooking the possibility of a
more flexible notion of reference within a situation model
embedded in a mental universe.
In Jackendoff (2002), types are treated as lacking an
indexical feature. While this treatment is attractive in
providing a simple distinction between types and tokens
(i.e. tokens have an indexical feature, types don’t), the lack
of an indexical feature implies an inability to refer to types.
Yet, Jackendoff acknowledges the existence of NPs which
describe types. These NPs are necessarily non-referential.
When an NP occurs as a predicate nominal and functions as
a kind (or type) as in “a professor” in “John is a professor”,
this approach coheres. There is an object in the situation
model to which the expression refers. But what happens
when an NP describing a type occurs as the subject or
object as in “A new kind of car is passing by” or “He wants
a special kind of dog”? If the object referring expressions
don’t refer, then it is unclear how the situation model can
represent the meaning of these expressions. At a minimum,
Jackendoff needs to allow reference to generic instances
and argue that apparent references to types are really
generic instance references. However, since there is strong
evidence that types exist as mental constructs (cf. Collins &
Qullian, 1969), we see no good reason to preclude reference
to them.

Reference to Generic Instances. The plural variant of
the expression “a sedan is a car” is “sedans are cars”. This
variant suggests a representation based on a collection of
generic instances rather than a type.
The generic instance category generalizes over prototypes
and exemplars. It is difficult to distinguish reference to
prototypes from reference to exemplars since they have
much in common. A prototype may be viewed as a washed

1580

out exemplar (some cognitive approaches treat prototype
and exemplar as essentially synonymous). It is a washed out
exemplar in that it is a generalization over the experience of
particular instances of the type. In this respect, a prototype
is more like a type than an instance, making the distinction
between types and instances less clear cut than is typically
assumed. The use of specific lexical items may help to
make the distinction. Consider the sentence “the
prototypical car is a sedan”. If the expression “the
prototypical car” actually picks out a prototype for a
referent, and the expression “a sedan” picks out a type, then
equating a prototype with a type has the effect of defining
the prototype to be of a particular type.
Allen (1986) discusses the semantics of generic NPs
noting that “there is no marking for the generic within NP
morphology” and that generics have “to be inferred from
context”. Grammatically a singular object referring
expression is either definite or indefinite. If the referent of
the expression is a prototype or exemplar, then the
reference is generic. In the expression “the sedan is a car”
where there is no existing referent in the situation model for
“the sedan” to refer to, “the sedan” presumably picks out a
generic instance or type.
The motivation for distinguishing prototypes and
exemplars is a cognitive one, although there is
disagreement within the cognitive community as to whether
or not both notions are needed. It may be sufficient to
distinguish generic instances from types in the situation
model without distinguishing prototypes and exemplars.

Reference to Classes, Collections and Masses.
Classes, collections and masses complicate reference in
interesting ways. Classes and types are two sides of the
same coin. The type is atomic and has no subparts.
However, the elements of a class are salient and a plural
nominal is used to refer to classes as in “all men”.
Collections are also referred to by plural nominals as in “the
men/all the men” where “the men/all the men” refers to
some salient collection of men, and not to the entire class.
In these expressions, the noun head “men” denotes the type,
and the specifier and plural grammatical feature determine
the nature of the referring expression (i.e. class or
collection). Masses differ from classes and collections in
that the elements of a mass are not salient. Singular
nominals are used to refer to masses.
Mass and plural nouns, but not singular count nouns,
may function as referring expressions without separate
specification. In “ rice is good for you”, “rice” does not refer
to any specific instance of rice and in “books are fun to
read”, “books” does not refer to any specific collection of
books. Both expressions are indefinite. They refer to
something non-specific: a type or generic instance for
“rice” and a generic collection for “books”. Reference to a
specific mass or collection requires a definite determiner as
in “the rice is ready” and “the books are fun to read”.
The use of a plural nominal to refer to a class or
collection suggests that the members of the class or
collection are cognitively salient and may be separately

represented. This opens up the possibility of either referring
to the class or collection as a whole or referring to the
elements of the class or collection. However, for cognitive
reasons having to do with the limited capacity of humans to
attend to multiple chunks of information (e.g. Miller, 1956),
it is assumed that any linguistic expression may only
introduce a small number of referents into a situation model
(cf. Johnson-Laird, 1983). In the “sedans are cars” example,
the instantiation of a sedan collection and two generic
instances of a sedan, and a car collection and two generic
instances of a car is the minimal number consistent with the
plurality of the object referring expressions. Given these
referents, it is possible to refer to the collections as a whole,
and it is also possible to pair the members of one collection
with the members of the other collection. These alternatives
correspond to the collective and distributive readings
discussed in Lyons (1977). Lyons presents the example
“those books cost $5” which is ambiguous between a
distributive—each book is $5—and collective—all the
books are $5—reading. Distributive and collective readings
involve inferential processes operating over collections and
instances which are not part of the grammatically encoded
meaning. However, addition of “each” to “those books cost
$5 each” imposes a distributive reading.
We can now see that Johnson-Laird’s representation of
“every man owns a car” corresponds closely to a
distributive reading (constrained to a small number of
referents). We are also in a better position to consider the
representation of “every man”. Although expressions with
“every” are singular, suggesting selection of an arbitrary
instance of a collection, in “Everyone left. They went to
eat.”, subsequent references are plural. Further, “Everyone
left. He went to eat” is infelicitous. There are two
implications of these examples: 1) “every” instantiates or
references a collection in the situation model, and 2) the
arbitrary referent of “every” is not salient for subsequent
reference. Even referring expressions with singular “a” as
in “Everyone owns a car. They are indispensable.” support
subsequent plural reference, although in this case
“Everyone owns a car. It is indispensable.” is also
felicitous. This may result from the flipping of the
type/class coin. Subsequent singular reference is to the type
(or generic instance), subsequent plural reference is to the
class.

Reference to Vacuous Instances and Collections.
The empty set is a useful notion in set theory. The null
symbol (or empty list) is a useful symbol in the Lisp
programming language. In both set theory and Lisp, these
are actual objects that can be referred to and manipulated.
The grammatical and lexical structure of English strongly
suggests the possibility of referring to a corresponding
empty or vacuous object whose existence is taken for
granted. Yet Martinich (1985, p. 3) argues that the existence
of nothing is an “absurd view” which rests on “a
misunderstanding of how language works”. However, not
only does grammar suggest the existence of objects

1581

References

corresponding to nothing, but it suggests that nothingness
comes in lots of different types and collections. Consider
Nothing
No one, nobody
Nowhere, Never
No man, No dog
No men, No dogs
It is true that a logical representation for expressions like
“no man” which requires quantifying over every individual
in the model makes little practical sense


x (~man(x))

but this is taken to be a problem for the logical
representation of the meaning of negative expressions,
rather than as a criticism of negative referring expressions
in language. Allowing negative object referring expressions
to refer to empty or vacuous objects and collections in the
situation model which do not map to any objects or
collections in the mental universe is perhaps the clearest
demonstration of how to simplify the mapping from
referring expression to referent, relative to other
approaches.

Summary and Conclusions
This paper presents and supports an expanded ontology of
referential types consistent with Jackendoff’s Conceptual
Semantics, basic principles of cognitive linguistics and
empirical evidence from cognitive psychology. By
expanding the ontology of referential types and introducing
a distinction between situation model and mental universe,
it is possible to simplify the mapping from referring
expression to referent, relative to approaches with a more
limited ontology and single semantic space.
We propose a bi-partite semantic space consisting of a
situation model and mental universe that explains apparent
non-referential uses of referring expressions, along with the
existence of two partial orderings:
Universal (e.g., x ) >
Class (e.g.,  x (man(x)) or “all men”) >
Collection (e.g. “some/the/all the men”) >
Mass (e.g. “mankind”) >
Instance (e.g. x (man(x)) or “a/the man”) >
Null (e.g. “no man”)
Type > Prototype > Exemplar > Token (Individual)
The partial orderings are motivated by the linguistic
expression of referring expressions, cognitive theory and a
computational interest in simplifying the mapping from
referring expressions to corresponding objects and
situations. The partial orderings are not definitive. They
capture important aspects of the mapping from referring
expressions to referents, but there are more dimensions of
meaning involved in this mapping than these two orderings
can accommodate.

Allen, K. (1986). Linguistic Meaning. London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul.
Anderson, J. (2007). How Can the Human Mind Occur in the
Physical Universe? NY: Oxford University Press.
Ball, J. (2007). A Bi-Polar Theory of Nominal and Clause
Structure and Function. Annual Review of Cognitive
Linguistics, 27-54. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Ball, J. (2010). Projecting Grammatical Features in Nominals:
Cognitive
Processing
Theory
&
Computational
Implementation. Proceedings of the 19th Annual Conference on
Behavior Representation in Modeling and Simulation.
Ball, J., Heiberg, A. & Silber, R. (2007). Toward a Large-Scale
Model of Language Comprehension in ACT-R 6. Proceedings
of the 8th International Conference on Cognitive Modeling,
173-179. Edited by R. Lewis, T. Polk & J. Laird. NY:
Psychology Press.
Ball, J., Freiman, M., Rodgers, S. & Myers, C. (2010). Toward a
Functional Model of Human Language Processing.
Proceedings of the 32nd Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society.
Barwise, J. & J. Perry (1983). Situations and Attitudes.Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.
Collins, A. & M. Quillian (1969). “Retrieval time from semantic
memory.” Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 8,
pp. 240-248.
Hobbs, J. R. (2003). Discourse and inference. Retrieved from
http://www.isi.edu/~hobbs/disinf-tc.html
Huddleston, R. & Pullum, G. (2002). The Cambridge Grammar of
the English Language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Jackendoff, R. 1983. Semantics and Cognition. Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press,
Jackendoff, R. (1991). Semantic Structures. Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press.
Jackendoff, R. (2002). Foundations of Language. Oxford
University Press, New York, NY.
Jackendoff, R. (2007). Language, Consciousness, Culture, Essays
on Mental Structure. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. (1983). Mental Models. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Kintsch, W. 1998. Comprehension, a Paradigm for Cognition.
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Langacker, R. (1987). Foundations of Cognitive Grammar,
Volume 1, Theoretical Prerequisites. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
Lakoff, G. 1987. Women, Fire and Dangerous Things. Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press.
Lyons, J. (1977). Semantics, Volumes 1 & 2. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press
Martinich, A (ed) (1985). The Philosophy of Language. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Miller, G. A. (1956). “The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus
Two.” Psychological Review, 63, pp. 81-94.
Rosch, E. (1975). “Cognitive Representations of Semantic
Categories.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
104, pp. 192-233.
Van Dijk, T. and Kintsch, W. (1983). Strategies of discourse
comprehension. New York: Academic Press.
Zwann, R., and Radvansky, G. (1998). Siutation models in
language comprehension and memory. Psychological Bulletin,
123, 162-185.

1582

