UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Simulating individual differences in language ability and genetic differences in FOXP2 using
a neural network model of the SRT task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6xh5g88f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Toscano, Joseph
Mueller, Kathryn
McMurray, Bob
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Simulating individual differences in language ability and genetic differences in
FOXP2 using a neural network model of the SRT task
Joseph C. Toscano (joseph-toscano@uiowa.edu)
Dept. of Psychology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242 USA

Kathryn L. Mueller (kathryn-mueller@uiowa.edu)
Dept. of Communication Sciences and Disorders, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242 USA

Bob McMurray (bob-mcmurray@uiowa.edu)
Dept. of Psychology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242 USA

J. Bruce Tomblin (j-tomblin@uiowa.edu)
Dept. of Communication Sciences and Disorders, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242 USA
Abstract

The aim of the current paper is to investigate the relationship between individual differences (both differences in language ability and genetic differences) and functional properties of language processing using a computational model of
the serial reaction time (SRT) task. The SRT task measures
participants’ ability to learn pattern sequences. Variation in
performance on the SRT task has been associated with both
language ability (Tomblin, Mainela-Arnold, & Zhang, 2007b)
and genetic differences (Tomblin, Christiansen, Bjork, Iyengar, & Murray, 2007a). Given this, and the fact that sequence
processing is a critical component of language use, this task
provides a useful paradigm for studying these relationships.

Recent work has shown that individual differences in language
development are related to differences in procedural learning,
as measured by the serial reaction time (SRT) task. Performance on this task has also been shown to be associated with
common genetic variants in FOXP2. To investigate what these
differences can tell us about the functional properties of language processing, we present a computational model of the
SRT task. We varied parameters in the model to observe their
effects on performance in the task. We found that the combined effect of several model parameters produced changes in
the learning trajectory that were similar to those observed behaviorally.
Keywords: language processing; specific language impairment; FOXP2; procedural learning; serial reaction time task;
computational modeling; simple recurrent networks

Individual differences in language abilities

Introduction
The mechanisms that underlie language use emerge over the
course of development through the integration of multiple
biological and environmental factors (Elman et al., 1997).
Much previous research has focused on whether these mechanisms are language-specific or domain-general (Christiansen
& Chater, 2008). Regardless of which is the case, we must
specify how different factors interact to give rise to language.
One way to study the mechanisms involved in language is
to look at individual differences in language ability. Recently,
the use of molecular genetics has emerged as a tool for investigating these differences. However, the use of genetics to
study complex cognitive processes, like language, presents a
challenge: how do we address questions regarding the role of
genes when they are so far removed from language processing? Similarly, how do we assess the role of individual genes
when it is unlikely that there is a one-to-one correspondence
between genes and specific characteristics of language?
As a first step, we need a way to observe the effects of functional properties of language processing on behavior. Computational models offer a tool for doing this. The units in a
neural network model, for instance, correspond to functional
(rather than structural) units in the system. Thus, computational models may be useful for examining how genetic factors relate to the functional organization of cognitive systems.

One area in which differences in language ability have been
extensively studied is specific language impairment (SLI).
SLI is a relatively common developmental disorder characterized by difficulty acquiring language in the absence of gross
cognitive or sensory impairments, and despite adequate experience and educational opportunities (Tomblin, Records,
& Zhang, 1996). Typically, research criteria for SLI classification require that the individual falls 1.15 SD below the
mean on a range of standardized assessments of language
while falling in the normal range for non-verbal intelligence
(Tomblin et al., 1996).
Children with SLI have deficits in various language abilities, such as mopho-syntactic processing, phonological
processing, word learning, and spoken word recognition
(Leonard, 1998; McGregor, Newman, Reilly, & Capone,
2002; McMurray, Samelson, Lee, & Tomblin, 2010). In many
ways, these children demonstrate language abilities associated with typically developing younger peers. They have
smaller vocabularies, use shorter, simpler syntactical constructions, and make more morphological errors than would
be expected for children their age (McGregor, Friedman,
Reilly, & Newman, 2002).
A range of possible hypotheses for SLI have been proposed, and include deficits in temporal-perceptual processing,
generalized slowing, problems with phonological processing,
and deficits in working memory (Bishop, North, & Donlan,

2230

Average R T (ms )

1996). Thus, the underlying causes remain unclear, though it
is likely that SLI is multiply determined.

Genetic factors and language
Genetics is now commonly employed as a tool for investigating differences in language development. Initial molecular studies centered on the KE family, a multigenerational
pedigree that appears to show an autosomal dominant pattern
of language impairment (Hurst, Baraitser, Auger, Graham,
& Norell, 1990). Affected individuals have been characterized as having apraxia of speech, as well as expressive and
receptive language problems (Vargha-Khadem, Watkin, Alcock, Fletcher, & Passingham, 1998). They also have a rare
genetic mutation in the FOXP2 (forkhead box P2) gene (Lai,
Fisher, Hurst, Vargha-Khadem, & Monaco, 2001). More
recently, Mueller, Bjork, Tomblin, and Murray (in preperation) investigated the role of more common genetic variants
in FOXP2. These variants were single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), which represent differences in a single base
pair in the genome. They examined multiple SNPs in a population with a range of language abilities and found an association between SNPs in the promoter region and language ability as a discrete phenotype. This suggests that these common
variants of FOXP2 also play a role in language development.
FOXP2 is expressed in multiple species as well as several
different organs, including the lungs and brain (Shu et al.,
2007; Fujita et al., 2008). This has led some to argue that the
link between FOXP2 and language is weak. However, the fact
that FOXP2 is neither species- nor domain-specific means it
is likely to play a role in multiple cognitive processes. In
addition, since FOXP2 is a transcription factor (i.e., encodes a
regulatory protein that affects gene expression), it is possible
to identify other elements of the gene pathway (and therefore
the systems) in which it exists (Vernes et al., 2008).
A more general role for FOXP2 fits with the hypothesis
that language itself is shaped by domain-general processes
(Christiansen & Chater, 2008). Statistical learning plays
an important role in language acquisition (Saffran, Aslin, &
Newport, 1996), and it is closely related to procedural learning (Perruchet & Pacton, 2006). FOXP2 remains a candidate
gene involved in language because of its association with procedural learning and the basal ganglia (Enard et al., 2009).

Procedural learning and the SRT task
Given the links between language ability, FOXP2, and procedural learning, researchers have examined sequence learning to better understand these relationships and mechanisms
associated with language. The SRT task is a sequence learning task designed to measure participants’ ability to implicitly
learn sequences. Participants are presented with blocks of trials that are either random or repeat in a particular sequence.
As sequence processing is fundamental to language and statistical learning provides a useful mechanism for learning language (Saffran et al., 1996), this task allows us to measure
some of the key functional properties of language.

S LI
NL

440
420
400
380

(A)
CC
CT
TT

440
400
360

(B )

S NP : rs 1916988

CC
CG
GG

440
400

360

(C )
2

S NP : rs 7785701

4

6
P attern block

8

10

Figure 1: Behavioral data for pattern trials in the SRT task.
(A) Data from Tomblin et al. (2007b) comparing SLI and NL
groups. (B & C) Data from Tomblin et al. (2007a) for individuals with different genotypes of SNPs rs1916988 and
rs7785701.

Tomblin et al. (2007b) used an SRT task to examine differences between children with normal language (NL) and
children with SLI. In their task, participants were shown four
boxes on a computer screen. On each trial, a picture of a
cartoon creature appeared in one of the boxes, and the participant’s task was to choose the box containing the picture as
quickly as possible.
For the first 100 trials, stimuli were presented randomly.
Then, 200 trials were presented in which the sequence [1, 3,
2, 4, 4, 2, 3, 4, 4, 2, 4] was repeated (pattern trials). Finally, 100 additional random trials were presented. Participants were not informed which trials were random and which
were pattern trials during the course of the experiment. The
experiment was divided into blocks of 20 trials each for data
analysis (blocks 1-5 were the first set of random trials, blocks
6-15 were pattern trials, and 17-20 were random trials).
Tomblin et al. found that, overall, the SLI group had longer
RTs than the NL group (Fig. 1A). During the pattern trials,
performance of both groups improved, indicating that they
learned something about the sequence. However, the learn-

2231

ing trajectory differed for the two groups. For the NL group,
RT decreased rapidly after the first few blocks of pattern trials and then leveled off. In contrast, for the SLI children, RT
remained flat (or increased slightly) during the first few pattern blocks before decreasing. The difference between these
two learning trajectories can be approximated by a quadratic
function (small differences between the two groups at the first
and last blocks; large differences in the middle blocks).
In another study, Tomblin et al. (2007a) examined the relationship between multiple SNPs and performance in this SRT
task. They found that the CC genotype of SNP rs1916988
(Fig. 1B) and the CC genotype of SNP rs7785701 (Fig. 1C)
were associated with slower RTs over the course of the pattern trials. The CC genotype of SNP rs1916988) was also
associated with a learning curve that was similar to the SLI
children.
These results suggest that both language impairment and
genetic variation in FOXP2 have similar effects on performance in the SRT task. Given previous work showing a link
between FOXP2 and language, these effects may be related
to common functional differences evident in language impairment and some variants of FOXP2.

Computational model
We used a neural network to examine whether some of the
functional properties of procedural learning are related to the
differences observed with human participants. In particular, we would like to capture the difference in the shape of
the learning trajectory observed between some of the fast RT
groups (children with NL [Fig. 1A] and the CC and CT genotypes of SNP rs1916988 [Fig. 1B]) and slow RT groups (SLI
children and the CC genotype of that SNP). By exploring the
parameter space of the model, we can determine which functional properties are associated with these differences in the
learning trajectories.

Model architecture
The model is a simple recurrent network (SRN; Elman, 1990;
c.f. Misyak, Christiansen, & Tomblin, 2009, for an adaptation to the SRT task). The network has three layers: an input
layer, an output layer, and a hidden layer with recurrent connections. The input and output layers each have four units
(corresponding to the four possible stimulus locations). The
hidden layer’s recurrent connections provide it with information about the state of the hidden units on the previous trial
(context units). This allows the network to learn sequences,
like those in the pattern trials of the SRT task. Connection
weights are updated using backpropagation (Rumelhart, Hinton, & Williams, 1986). Logistic activation functions are used
for the hidden and output units.

Simulation procedure
The network was trained on a task based on the one used by
Tomblin et al. (2007b). On each trial, a stimulus was presented to the network by activating a particular input unit and
setting the rest to zero, and activation flowed to the output

units. Luce choice ratios were computed by dividing each
output unit’s activation by the total activation. These values
were then used to compute an RT for the network according
to the equation
1
RT =
(1)
∑I
C − n−1
where C is the activation of the correct output unit, I is the
activation of each of the three other output units, and n is
the number of output units (four for these simulations). This
gives an estimate that is analogous to RT; a lower value corresponds to a lower RT in the SRT task. Thus, when one unit is
significantly more active than all the others (i.e., the network
is confident in a single response) the RT will be low. When
all the units are similarly active (the network is unsure what
the response is) the RT will be high.
The correct unit on each trial is the output unit that corresponds to the one that was activated at the input layer. This
corresponds to the SRT task in which participants respond by
selecting the location containing the stimulus.
For the first 100 trials, a random location was chosen and
presented as input. Then, for 200 trials, the sequence [1, 3,
2, 4, 4, 2, 3, 4, 4, 2, 4] was repeated. Finally, an additional
100 random trials were presented. Only trials on which the
correct output unit had the highest activation were included
in the analysis. The entire simulation run was divided into 20
blocks of 20 trials.

Simulation 1
In the first simulation, we varied several parameters individually to gauge their effect on performance in the SRT task:
context strength, input strength, learning rate, number of hidden units, and temperature.
Context strength determines the strength of the connections
from the hidden to context units (i.e., hidden unit activations
are multiplied by this amount when setting context unit activations). A lower context strength may have an effect on the
network’s ability to learn sequences, which could influence
learning in the SRT task.
Input strength controls the fidelity of the stimulus presented to the network. The input unit corresponding to the
chosen location is set to the value of the input strength and
the others are set to zero. A lower input strength makes the
stimulus location less distinct from the others.
Learning rate is the value that the weight change term is
multiplied by each time the weights are updated. Models with
lower learning rates require more trials to learn the task, but
may have more stable learning. This could affect the network’s ability to learn over the course of the pattern trials.
Number of hidden units affects the amount of information
the network can hold about the sequence. If the network has
too few, its ability to encode the sequence will be impaired.
Temperature corresponds to the temperature parameter of
the logistic activation function. This activation function constrains the hidden and output units to have activations between zero and one. A higher temperature makes the logistic

2232

16
Model R T

more nonlinear. Thus, if the correct output unit has the highest activation, a high temperature parameter will make this
value more distinct from the values of the incorrect units, resulting in a lower model RT. The temperature parameters for
the hidden and output units were varied separately.
Five hundred repetitions of each condition were run.

C ontext s trength
0.4

12

0.8

8

(A)

Results

4

The network was able to learn the SRT task and showed an
overall learning trajectory similar to the ones observed in the
behavioral data. The network’s performance improved over
the course of the simulation and was faster during the pattern
trials than the random trials.
Fig. 2 shows the performance of the model on the SRT
task for different values of each parameter. A range of values
for the parameters were tested to find a set that produced responses similar to those observed for the fast RT groups in the
behavioral data. Each parameter was then varied individually,
holding the others constant at those values. For example, in
Fig. 2A, context strength was varied. The other parameters
were held constant for both context strength conditions at the
baseline values (i.e., learning rate = 0.10, hidden units = 12,
input strength = 1.0, hidden unit temperature = 1.0, output
unit temperature = 1.0).
Context strength (Fig. 2A) had very little effect on on the
network’s RT. This suggests that the network can still perform
the task with limited information from the previous trial.
Input strength (Fig. 2B) had an effect on overall RT and
an effect on the shape of the learning trajectory. Models with
a lower input strength showed a small increase in RT at the
beginning of the pattern trials, but this did not persist to the
middle blocks.
Learning rate (Fig. 2C) also had an effect on the shape
of the learning trajectory. This was due to the fact that the
network initially shows an increase in RT at the beginning of
training. By decreasing the learning rate, this increase was
pushed forward in time into the pattern trials. Thus, one reason that some groups show an increase during the pattern trials in the SRT task might be that they are still in this initial
learning phase.
Number of hidden units (Fig 2D) had an effect similar to
input strength. Fewer hidden units resulted in longer overall
RTs and a small increase at the beginning of the pattern trials.
Temperature (Figs. 2E & 2F) had an effect on the overall
RT at the beginning of the pattern trials, but did not capture
the change in the shape of the learning curve.

Input s trength

8

(B )
4
Learning rate
0.05

12

0.10

8

(C )
4
Hidden units
4

12

12
8

(D)
4
T emperature
(hidden units )

12

0.5

1.0

8

(E )
4
T emperature
(output units )

12

0.6

1.0

8

(F )

Discussion

4

Several parameters produced changes in the network’s median RT and learning trajectory. Changes in input strength,
learning rate, and number of hidden units can account for
some of the changes in the shape of the learning trajectory
observed behaviorally. As discussed above, however, specific
SNPs and individual differences in language ability are likely
to have multiple functional effects. Thus, we may find a better

1.0

0.5

12

2

4

6

8

10

P attern block

Figure 2: Results of Simulation 1. For each simulation, the
set of parameters producing effects similar to those seen in the
fast RT groups was used as a baseline (solid lines in figures),
and individual parameters were varied (dashed lines).

2233

16
Model R T

fit to the behavioral data by examining the combined effects
of multiple parameters. This was done in Simulation 2.

Simulation 2
In the second set of simulations, we varied multiple parameters in the model simultaneously, allowing us to explore the
parameter space of the network further. Five values were
tested for the number of hidden units, and four were tested
for each other parameter, yielding a total of 5,120 combinations. The simulation procedure was the same as Simulation
1, except that 50 repetitions of each combination were run.

S low R T
F as t R T

12

8

(A)
4
S low R T
F as t R T

12

Results
In order to determine which parameter sets reflected the fast
and slow RT groups in the behavioral data, pairwise comparisons were made and the difference scores were fit to
quadratic functions (the pattern of the differences in the learning trajectories). Thus, for each comparison there was a set
of parameters corresponding to the slow RT groups and a set
corresponding to the fast RT groups.
Several pre-processing criteria were used to exclude sets
that did not show correct performance on the SRT task (i.e.,
better performance over the course of the pattern trials) and
comparisons that would not yield a pattern consistent with
the difference between groups in the behavioral data (i.e.,
quadratic). The remaining pairs were then fit to quadratic
functions using the least squares method, and R2 was used to
determine the goodness of fit.
R2 values greater than 0.9 were found for 0.47% of the
pairs. To determine which parameters drove the effect, we
computed the mean parameter values for the slow and fast RT
groups for these pairs. The mean values for each parameter
for the two groups are shown in Table 1. Some parameters
did not differ between the groups, whereas others differed
greatly. We found that the parameters in Simulation 1 that
produced changes in the learning trajectory (learning rate,
number of hidden units, and input strength) had similar effects when varied in conjunction with temperature. Fig. 3A
shows the responses of the model when these parameters are
varied simultaneously.
Adjusting the parameters by hand allowed us to distill the
set of parameters down to two, learning rate and temperature,
that accounted for the difference in learning trajectories for
the first half of the pattern trials, but not the second half (the

Table 1: Simulation 2 results.
Parameter
Context strength
Input strength
Hidden units
Learning rate
Temperature (hidden)
Temperature (output)

Slow RT
0.48
0.83
5.9
0.13
0.39
0.38

Fast RT
0.53
0.90
9.5
0.18
0.52
0.44

8

(B )
4
2

4

6
P attern block

8

10

Figure 3: Results of Simulation 2. (A) Responses of the
model when learning rate, input strength, number of hidden
units, and temperature are varied simultaneously. (B) Responses when learning rate and temperature are varied simultaneously. Five hundred repetitions of each condition were
run to produce the figures.
slow RT model did not reach the same RT by the end of the
pattern trials). Fig. 3B shows the responses of the model
when these parameters are varied together.

Discussion
The results of this simulation show that the combined effects
of several parameters together can better approximate the difference in learning trajectories. This suggests that this approach can be used to determine which combinations of parameters mirror the behavioral data. Additional exploration
of the parameter space (i.e., testing a larger range of values)
may allow us to find a better fit.

General discussion
The results of these simulations suggest that several functional aspects of sequence processing contribute to the differences in SRT performance observed behaviorally and that
by examining multiple factors at the same time, we can get
a better estimate of the effects of language impairment and
genetic variation. This fits with the notion that genetic differences are likely to have multiple functional consequences.
Recently, McMurray et al. (2010) used a similar approach
to determine which parameters in TRACE (McClelland & Elman, 1986) corresponded to differences between NL and SLI
children in a spoken word recognition task. They found that
variation in the network’s decay parameter produced differences similar to those between the SLI and NL groups. This
parameter is related to competition. In the SRN used here,

2234

the temperature parameter corresponds to competition (e.g.,
a lower temperature parameter for the output unit activation
function leads to greater activation for the competitor units).
Thus, these two sets of of simulations, modeling different
tasks with different networks, provide converging evidence
that competition between internal representations may be a
critical mechanism in language processing that produces differences between NL and SLI children.
The simulations presented here provide a first step towards
assessing the role of genetic variation and language ability
in procedural learning, and they suggest several functional
properties that may be influenced by these differences. More
broadly, they show that exploring the parameter space of a
computational model may offer an approach to studying the
effects of genetic factors on cognitive systems.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Morten Christiansen and Jennifer Misyak for theoretical discussion of these topics and
Cheyenne Munson for help preparing the figures.

References
Bishop, D. V. M., North, T., & Donlan, C. (1996). Nonword
repetition as a behavioural marker for inherited language
impairment: evidence from a twin study. J Child Psychol
Psychiatry, 37, 391-403.
Christiansen, M. H., & Chater, N. (2008). Langauge as
shaped by the brain. Behav Brain Sci, 31, 489-509.
Elman, J. L. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive
Science, 14, 179-211.
Elman, J. L., Bates, E. A., Johnson, M. H., Karmiloff-Smith,
A., Parisi, D., & Plunkett, K. (1997). Rethinking Innateness: A Connectionist Perspective on Development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Enard, W., Gehre, S., Hammerschmidt, K., Holter, S. M.,
Blass, T., Somel, M., et al. (2009). A humanized version of
Foxp2 affects cortico-basal ganglia circuits in mice. Cell,
137, 961-971.
Fujita, E., Tanabe, Y., Shiota, A., Ueda, M., Suwa, K., Momoi, M. Y., et al. (2008). Ultrasonic vocalization impairment of Foxp2 (R552H) knockin mice related to speechlanguage disorder and abnormality of Purkinje cells. Proc
Nat Acad Sci, 105, 3117-3122.
Hurst, J. A., Baraitser, M., Auger, E., Graham, F., & Norell,
S. (1990). An extended family with a dominantly inherited
speech disorder. Dev Med Child Neurol, 32, 352-355.
Lai, C. S. L., Fisher, S. E., Hurst, J. A., Vargha-Khadem, F., &
Monaco, A. P. (2001). A forkhead-domain gene is mutated
in a severe speech and language disorder. Nature, 413, 519523.
Leonard, L. B. (1998). Children with specific language impairment. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
McClelland, J. L., & Elman, J. L. (1986). The TRACE model
of speech perception. Cognitive Psychol, 18, 1-86.
McGregor, K. K., Friedman, R. M., Reilly, R. M., & New-

man, R. M. (2002). Semantic representation and naming
in young children. J Speech Lang Hear Res, 45, 332-346.
McGregor, K. K., Newman, R. M., Reilly, R. M., & Capone,
N. C. (2002). Semantic representation and naming in children with specific language impairment. J Speech Lang
Hear Res, 45, 998-1014.
McMurray, B., Samelson, V. M., Lee, S. H., & Tomblin, J. B.
(2010). Eye-movements reveal the time-course of online
spoken word recognition language impaired and normal
adolescents. Cognitive Psychol, 60, 1-39.
Misyak, J. B., Christiansen, M. H., & Tomblin, J. B. (2009).
Statistical learning of nonadjacencies predicts on-line processing of long-distance dependencies in natural language.
In N. Taatgen, H. van Rijn, J. Nerbonne, & L. Schomaker
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (p. 177-182). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Mueller, K. L., Bjork, J. B., Tomblin, J. B., & Murray, J. C.
(in preperation). Common genetic variants in FOXP2 are
associated with individual differences in language development.
Perruchet, P., & Pacton, S. (2006). Implicit learning and
statistical learning: One phenomenon, two approaches.
Trends Cognitive Sci, 10, 233-238.
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., & Williams, R. J. (1986).
Learning representations by back-propogating errors. Nature, 323, 533-536.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996). Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274, 19261928.
Shu, W., Lu, M. M., Zhang, Y., Tucker, P. W., Zhou, D., &
Morrisey, E. E. (2007). Foxp2 and Foxp1 cooperatively
regulate lung and esophagus development. Development,
134, 1991-2000.
Tomblin, J. B., Christiansen, M. H., Bjork, J. B., Iyengar,
S. K., & Murray, J. M. (2007a). Association of FOXP2
genetic markers with procedural learning and language.
Poster presented at the Annual Meeting of the American
Society of Human Genetics.
Tomblin, J. B., Mainela-Arnold, E., & Zhang, X. (2007b).
Procedural learning in adolescents with and without specific language impairment. Lang Learn Dev, 3, 269-293.
Tomblin, J. B., Records, N. L., & Zhang, X. (1996). A system for the diagnosis of specific language impairment in
kindergarten children. J Speech Hear Res, 39, 1284-1294.
Vargha-Khadem, F., Watkin, K. E., Alcock, K., Fletcher, P.,
& Passingham, R. (1998). Praxic and nonverbal cognition deficits in a large family with a genetically transmitted
speech and language disorder. Proc Nat Acad Sci, 92, 930933.
Vernes, S. C., Newbury, D. F., Abrahams, B. S., Winchester,
L., Nicod, J., Groszer, M., et al. (2008). A functional link
between distinct developmental language disorders. N Eng
J Med, 359, 2337-2345.

2235

