UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Simulating Cognitive Coping Strategies for Intelligent Support Agents

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5pr1t937

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Aziz, Azizi Ab
Treur, Jan
Klein, Michel

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Simulating Cognitive Coping Strategies for Intelligent Support Agents
Azizi Ab Aziz (mraaziz@few.vu.nl)
Michel C.A. Klein (michel.klein@few.vu.nl)
Jan Treur (treur@few.vu.nl)
Agent Systems Research Group, Department of Artificial Intelligence
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1081a,
1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands

essential ingredient for developing a software agent that is
capable of providing the right intervention towards stressed
individuals (Aziz et al., 2010). Therefore there is a need for
a virtual human agent model that has this capability. In this
paper, virtual human agents are computer model of people
that can be used as substitutes for “the real person” in a
virtual environment, with a specific focus on simulating
human coping behaviors during the formation of stressful
events. Although there has been several work in
computational models of human stress, little work has been
done in modeling coping strategies, with a few exceptions in
(Marsella and Gratch , 2003; Marsella et al., 2009).
This paper focuses exclusively on the formal model for
dynamics in coping process, as it is one of the essential
components in the development of a software agent that is
able to monitor individuals’ conditions during stressful
events (Aziz & Treur, 2009). In the next section, the
underlying principles in coping during stress are discussed
(Section 2). From this perspective, a formal model is
designed and formulated (Section 3). Later, in Section 4,
simulation traces are presented to illustrate how this model
satisfies the expected outcomes in long-term stress. In
Section 5, a detailed mathematical analysis is performed, to
identify equilibria in the model. Finally, Section 6 concludes
the paper

Abstract
People react differently to stress. According to the Cognitive
Motivational Relational Theory by Lazarus and Folkman, the
appraisal of stress and the emotions related to it determine
whether people cope with stress by focussing on altering the
situation (problem focussed) or on changing the emotional
consequences of the events (emotion focussed). These
different coping strategies have different effects on the long
term. The coping process can be described in a formal
dynamic model. Simulations using this model show that
problem focussed coping leads to better coping skills and
higher decrease of long-term stress than emotion focussed
coping. These results also follow from a mathematical analysis
of the model. The presented model can form the basis of an
intelligent support system that uses a simulation of cognitive
processes in humans in stressful conditions.
Keywords: virtual human agent model; stress; cognitive and
behavioral modeling; temporal dynamics.

Introduction
Stress is simply a reality of nature where forces from the
outside world affecting the individual. It comes in many
forms and affects people of all ages and all walks of life.
The individual responds to stress in ways that affect the
individual as well as their environment. Hence, all living
creatures are in a constant interchange with their
surroundings, either physically or behaviorally. In general,
stress is generally considered as being synonymous with
distress and dictionaries defined it as “physical, mental, or
emotional strain or tension” or “a condition or feeling
experienced when a person perceives that demands exceed
the personal and social resources the individual is able to
mobilize” (Beck, 1987; Folkman, 1984).
However, human has its own mechanism to adapt with
this adversity. Through a process known as coping, our
cognitive skill will evaluate the situation mentally. If the
situation is threatening, then the human will decide how to
deal with the situation, and what skills can be used. If the
demands of the situation outweigh the resources human has,
then it will be labeled as “stressful” and he or she will react
with the classical stress response and vice versa (Carver et
al., 1989). It is essential to consider that everyone sees
situations differently and has different coping skills. For this
reason, no two people will respond exactly the same way to
a given situation. Understanding this coping ability is an

Underlying Concepts in Coping
The cognitive theory that governs the underlying principle
of this work is based on Cognitive Motivational Relational
Theory (CMRT) as in Lazarus and Folkman (1984). This
theory explains the role of distinctive positive and negative
emotions in the stress appraisal process. Essentially, it
conceptualized a transactional process in which the person
and the environment are viewed as being in a dynamic and
bidirectional relationship, where the essence of cognitive
appraisal and coping provides a critical mediator between
stressful person-environment and health outcomes.

Dynamics in Cognitive Appraisal Process and
Coping Strategies
The cognitive approach to coping is based on a mental
process of how the individual appraises the situation.
Cognitive appraisal can be viewed as the evaluation of the

435

Several findings showed that the type of coping
strategies can be derived, depending on what was at stake
(primary appraisal) and what the coping options were
(secondary appraisal) (Lazarus, 1991; Ntoumanis et al.
2009). It means, when people feel that they are capable of
changing the situation into something better (high
perception of acceptance and change), and then a problemfocused coping is chosen. In contrast, when the conditions
are considered not amenable to change (high perception in
holdback) then emotion-focused coping is used. In addition
to this, problem focused coping strategies may give an
individual greater perceived control over their problem,
while emotion focused coping strategies may more often
lead to a reduction of control over the perceived events. All
these strategies can be proven useful, but many individuals
feel that problem-focused coping represent a more effective
means of coping in adversities (Uehara, 1999). In addition
to this, in a long run, emotion focused coping is associated
with outcomes that people found unsatisfactory (exhaustion
in coping) that later will increase long-term stress, and
problem focused coping is associated with satisfactory
outcomes (improved coping skills) (Clarke & Tanya, 2009).
Furthermore, in psychological distress, problem focus
coping strategies appear reliably to produce better emotional
adjustment to chronically stressful events than do emotional
focused strategies (Pruchno & Resch, 1989; Uehara, 1999).
In short, the following dynamics can be identified from
the literature; (1) the intensity of the stressful events will
lead to coping appraisal, (2) the perception of event
regulates emotional attribution, (3) the emotional attribution
will trigger a coping strategy, (4) a long-term overwhelming
dependency in emotion-focused coping will lead to the
exhaustion in coping, and (5) a problem-focused coping will
improve the coping ability.

significance of what is happening in the person-environment
relationship (Lazarus, 1991). Normally, it is also related to
the intensity of the stressful events, a condition where
several factors such as situational demands (pressure),
personal resources (i.e; support), and negative events play
important roles (Aziz et al., 2009; Lazarus & Folkman,
1984). Having the stressful events in motion, individual
appraises two types of appraisals; the primary and the
secondary. The primary appraisal is made when the
individual makes a conscious evaluation of the matter at
hand of whether it is a sense of harm or a loss, a threat or a
challenge. It is an evaluation process of what is at stake for a
person’s well being. From this first process, the situation
can be appraised either as harm/loss, threatening,
challenging or benign (Folkman et al., 1986). Harm or loss
refers to a condition where damage has already occurred,
while threat refers to damage, but an anticipated one
(imminence of harm) and it is more to a risk assessment part
(Kessler, 1997). Challenging differs from threat in term of
how persons are viewing it where it has a positive tone
compared to threat. When stressful events were appraised as
irrelevant or as benign, it will offer the chance to preserve or
enhance wellbeing as it does not initiate the stress process as
there is no potential threat to overcome. In addition, this
appraisal process also involves an array of personality
attributes such as values, commitments, and beliefs about
oneself and the environment in defining the condition that
the individuals are facing through (Uehara et al., 1999).
Later this process will determine individuals’ emotion
perception; negative, positive or neutral emotion (Folkman,
1984). Negative emotion is related to perceiving harm and
threat, while position emotion is attributed to perceiving
challenge (Lazarus, 1991). Neutral emotion is triggered
when individual perceives the condition as benign (Noh,
2003).
In the second appraisal, the persons evaluate whether
they have the resources to deal with the incoming stressors.
It is commonly related to the emotional attribution, where a
positive and neutral emotion results in acceptance and
change, while the negative emotion triggers holdback
behavior (Lazarus, 1991). During this stage, several coping
strategies are evaluated. Coping strategies refer to the
specific efforts, both behavioral and psychological, that
people employ to either be in charge of, tolerate, reduce, or
minimize stressful events. According to the CMRT model,
there are two types of coping strategies have been
distinguished, namely; problem-focused coping and
emotion-focused coping. A problem-focused coping is
associated with aggressive interpersonal efforts to alter the
situation, as well as rational efforts to get the problem
solved (Carver et al., 1989). Contrary to this, emotionfocused coping strategies (thinking rather than acting to
change the person-environment relationship) entail efforts to
regulate the emotional consequences of stressful or
potentially stressful events (Pruchno & Resch, 1989). It is
typically include distancing, escape avoidance, and seeking
for social comforts.

The Virtual Human Agent Model
Based on the analysis of the cognitive dynamics in coping
appraisal and strategy as given in the previous section, it is
possible to specify computational properties for the virtual
human agent model. These computational properties are
represented in a way that allows simulating how an
individual is coping when experiencing stressors, and what
are the consequences of that action. All of these concepts
(and their interactions) are discussed in the following
paragraphs in this section.

Formalizing the Cognitive Model Relationships
In the formalization, the dynamic concepts discussed in the
previous section are translated into several interconnected
nodes. Figure 1 depicts the global interaction between these
nodes. The nodes are represented as variables that can have
values ranging from 0 (low) to 1 (high). The interaction will
determine the new value of it, either by a series of
accumulations or an instantaneous interaction for each node.

436

Harm
Imminence
of harm
Personal
resources
Situational
demands
Negative
events

Intensity
of
stressful
event

Exhaustion
Threat

Negative
emotion

Challenge

Positive
emotion

Benign

Neutral
emotion

Acceptance

Emotional
focus

Hold back
Short term
stress
Change

Long term
stress

Problem
focus

Personality
attributes

Skills of
coping with
stress

Figure 1: Global relationships of variables involved in the coping process
The description of these formalizations is described in the
following. Together, this results in a dynamic model. This
model involves a number of instantaneous and some
temporal relations. The dark nodes represent concepts that
have temporal relationships with the incoming nodes, in
which the change is specified for a time interval between t
and t +∆t
Stressor Events, Intensity of Stressful Event, and
Imminence of Harm In the model, the stressor events (e)
(negative events) are generated by simulating potential
effects throughout t time using w weighted sum of three
types of events; life (le), chronic (ce), and daily (de) events.
The role of these factors in the model is to represent a series
of events. The intensity of stressful event (IsE) represents
the degree of stress encountered by a person related to his or
her situational demands (SiD), and stressor events (NeVt),
regulated by the proportion factor β e. In addition, the
intensity of a stressful event will be reduced if the coping
skills (ScS) and personal resources (PeS) are high.
Imminence of harm (ImH) can be measured by combining
both concepts in perceived harm (PeH) (from the
environment), and coping skills (ScS).
NeV(t) = w1.le(t) +w2.ce(t)+w3.de(t), ∑w=1
IsE(t)= [β e.NeV(t)+(1-β e).SiD(t)].(1-ScS(t)).
(1-PeS(t))
ImH(t) = PeH(t).(1-ScS(t))

the proportional factor for both challenge and benign
respectively.
HrM(t) = [ϕh.ImH(t) + (1-ϕh).IsE(t).ImH(t)].
(1-PrA(t))
ThT(t) = IsE(t).(1-PrA(t))
ChL(t) = αc.PrA(t) + (1-αc). (1- IsE(t)).PrA(t)
BnG(t) = ψb.(1-IsE(t)) + (1-ψb).PrA(t)

(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

Negative, Neutral, and Positive Emotion When the harm
and threat is perceived, a fraction from those two parts (by a
proportional factor βn) is contributed as a negative emotion
(NgE). The notion of positive (PsE) and neutral (NuE)
emotion is represented through a proportional factor of τp in
challenge and ρe in benign respectively.
(8)
NgE(t) = β n.HrM(t) + (1-β n ).ThT(t)
(9)
PsE(t) = τp.ChL(t)
(10)
NuE(t)= ρe.BnG(t)
Acceptance, Holdback, and Change Positive and neutral
emotion increases the acceptance (AcP) level by a
proportional factor γa, while negative emotion works in a
opposite way. Holdback (HdB) depends on the relation
between negative and positive emotion. Change (ChG) uses
the same concepts as in holdback but with the opposite
relation.
(11)
AcP(t) = γa.PsE(t) + (1-γa).NuE(t).(1-NgE(t))
HdB(t) = (1-PsE(t)).(NgE(t))
(12)
ChG(t) = PsE(t)).(1-NgE(t))
(13)

(1)
(2)
(3)

Harm, Threat, Challenge, and Benign The level of harm
(HrM) is determined by the proportional contribution ϕh on
the imminence of harm, and intensity of the stressful event.
The intensity of the stressful event also related to threat
(ThT). For both cases, in harm and threat, there is a negative
relation with personality attributes. On the contrary,
challenge (ChL) and benign (BnG) are positively related
with good personality attributes (PrA), and negatively with
the intensity of stress. Here parameters αc and ψb represent

Emotional and Problem Focused Coping Emotional
focused coping (EmF) is determined using the presence of
acceptance, holdback and change. Using this relation,
emotion focused coping decreases when either acceptance
or change increases. However in problem focused coping
(PrF), coupled with personality attributes, those factors

437

provide a positive effect. Parameters ηe and γp regulate the
contribution preferences for both specifications respectively.
EmF(t) = [ηe.(1-AcP(t)).HdB(t) + (1-ηe).
HdB(t)].(1-ChG(t))
PrF(t) = [γp.PrA(t) + (1-γp).AcP(t)].
(1-HdB(t)).ChG(t)

Result # 1: Simulation Trace for Repeated Stressor
Events During this simulation, each type of individual has
been exposed to an extreme stream of stressor events, with a
moderate alteration between each corresponding event.
Figure 2 depicts the comparison between the conditions of
individual A and B during repeated stressors. In this
simulation trace, it is visible that individual A has developed
better coping skills. For this reason, an individual A
recovers much faster from long-term stress compared to
other individuals.

(14)
(15)

Short-term stress, Long-term stress, Exhaustion, and
Coping Skills The notion of short-term stress (StS) models
a relation between coping styles (regulated by µs), and a
combination of exhaustion and intensity in stressful events
(regulated by a proportional rate γs) and will influence the
level of long-term stress (LtS) in a long run. The formation
of exhaustion (ExH) is modelled using the presence of
emotion-focused coping and the intensity of stressful events.
The level of coping skills (ScS) is influenced by the
exhaustion and personality attributes. The rates of change
for all temporal relationships are determined by flexibility
parameters β lts, ψe, and φs respectively.
StS(t)=[1-(µs.EmF(t)+(1-µs).PrF(t))].(γs.ExH(t)+
(1-γs).IsE(t))
LtS(t+∆)t=LtS(t)+β lts.[Pos(StS(t)-LtS(t)).
(1-LtS(t))- Pos(-(StS(t)-LtS(t))).LtS(t)].∆t
ExH(t+∆t)=ExH(t)+ψe.[(Pos((IsE(t)-ExH(t)).(1ExH(t)))- Pos(-(IsE(t)-xH(t)).ExH(t))].EmF(t).∆t
ScS(t+∆t)=ScS(t) + φs.[Pos(ExH(t) - ScS(t)). (1ScS(t))- Pos(-(ExH(t) –ScS(t)).ScS(t) ].PrA(t).∆t

Level
1
0.8

Events
IsE A
ScS A
ExH A
LtS A

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1
Level
1

(16)

Events
IsE B
ScS B
ExH B
LtS B

0.8

(17)

0.6
0.4

(18)

101 201 301 401 501 601 701 801 901
(a )
Time

0.2
0

(19)

1

101 201 301 401 501 601 701 801 901
(b)
Time

Figure 2. Simulation traces for repeated stressor in (a)
individual A (b) individual B
Note that the individual B shows a repeated increasing
pattern that may lead to potential long-term stress. As a
consequence of this condition, an individual B will
experience difficulty if that individual is having constant
exposure towards stressors in a long run

The operator Pos for the positive part is defined by Pos(x) =
(x + |x|)/2, or, alternatively; Pos(x) = x if x≥0 and 0 else.

Example Simulation Traces
In this section, the virtual human agent model of coping has
been executed to simulate a number of scenarios with a
variety of different conditions of individuals. Two example
scenarios are shown: an individual with a tendency to
choose problem focused coping (A), and an individual with
a tendency to choose emotional focused coping (B). The
initial settings for the different individuals are the following
(PrA, PeH, SiD, PeS); A (0.8, 0.5, 0.5, 0.8), and B (0.2, 0.5,
0.8, 0.1). In all cases, the long term stress, exhaustion, and
coping skill value are initialized at 0.3.
Corresponding to these settings, the level of severity is
set at 0.5, defining that any individuals scoring higher than
0.5 in their long-term stress and exhaustion levels will be
considered as experiencing difficulties in coping. These
simulations used the following parameters settings:
tmax=1000 (to represent a monitoring activity up to 42 days),
∆t=0.3, all proportional and flexibility rates are assigned as
0.5 and 0.9 respectively. These settings were obtained from
several systematic experiments to determine the most
suitable parameter values in the model.

Result # 2: Simulation Trace for Fluctuated Stressor
Events This simulation trace shows two types of periods,
one with a very high constant and with a very low constant
stressor event. These events occurred in a constant
behaviour for a certain period of time (approximately within
20 days).

438

Level 1
0.8

Assuming β lts, ψe and φs nonzero, this provides the
following equilibrium equations:

Events
IsE A
ScS A
ExH A
LtS A

0.6
0.4
0.2

Pos(StS-LtS).(1-LtS)-Pos(-(StS-LtS)).LtS = 0 .
[Pos(IsE-ExH).(1-ExH)-Pos(-(IsE-ExH)).ExH].
EmF = 0
[Pos(ExH - ScS). (1-ScS)-Pos(-(ExH - ScS)). ScS].
PrA = 0

0
1
Level
1

101 201 301 401 501 601 701 801 901
(a)
Time

0.6
0.4

Pos(StS-LtS).(1-LtS) = 0
Pos(-(StS-LtS)).LtS = 0

0.2

This provides cases;
(StS ≤ LtS ∨ LtS = 1) ∧ (StS ≥ LtS ∨ LtS = 0)

0
1

101 201 301 401 501 601 701 801 901
Time
(b)

(26)

This can be logically rewritten into;

Figure 3. Simulation traces for fluctuated stressor in
(a) individual A (b) individual B

(StS ≤ LtS ∧ StS ≥ LtS) ∨ (StS ≤ LtS ∧ LtS = 0) ∨
(LtS = 1 ∧ StS ≥ LtS) ∨ (LtS = 1 ∧ LtS = 0)

Also here it can be seen (in Figure 3) that individual B gets
into long-term stress much faster than individual A.
Moreover, even at the end of the simulation time, the long
term stress level of individual B is still slightly higher than
individual A. Furthermore, in contrast with individual B,
individual A has his/her coping skills improved throughout
time.

The latter case cannot exist, and as 0 ≤ StS ≤ 1 the other
three cases are equivalent to StS = LtS. Similarly the cases
for (24) and (25) can be found as shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Equilibrium Equations

Mathematical Verification

(1)

This section addresses the formal analysis of the agent
model and the simulation results presented above by means
of a mathematical analysis of the equilibria of the model.
The equilibria describe situations in which a stable situation
has been reached. Those equilibria are interesting as it
should be possible to explain them using the knowledge of
the domain that is modelled [2]. As such, the existence of
reasonable equilibria is an indication for the correctness of
the model. To analyze the equilibria, the available temporal
and instantaneous equations are filled with values for the
model variables such that the derivatives or differences
between time point t and t + ∆t are all 0. The dynamic part
of the model written in differential equation format is as
follows:
dLtS(t)/dt = β lts.[ Pos(StS(t)-LtS(t)).(1-LtS(t))Pos(-(StS(t)-LtS(t))).LtS(t)]
dExH(t)/dt=ψe.[Pos(IsE(t)-ExH(t)).(1-xH(t))Pos(-(IsE(t)- ExH(t))).ExH(t))].EmF(t)
dScS(t)/dt= φs.[Pos(ExH(t) - ScS(t)). (1-ScS(t))Pos(-(ExH(t) – ScS(t)).ScS(t) ].PrA(t)

(25)

Table 1 shows which cases can be distinguished. For
example, notice that always Pos(x) ≥ 0, so (23) is equivalent
to;

Events
IsE B
ScS B
ExH B
LtS B

0.8

(23)
(24)

(2)
EmF
=0

StS =
LtS

(3)
PrA = 0
ExH =
ScS
PrA = 0

IsE =
ExH
ExH =
ScS

Combined
StS = LtS ,
EmF = PrA = 0
StS = LtS ,
EmF = 0,
ExH = ScS
StS = LtS,
IsE = ExH,
PrA = 0
StS = LtS,
IsE = ExH = ScS

Note that for each of the distinguished cases, further
information can be found about the equilibrium values of
other variables using the other non-dynamic-equations. For
example, from EmF = 0 by (14) it follows that ChG = 1 or
HdB = 0. This condition illustrates the generic condition
that a problem-focused individual that encounters stressful
events will never develop long term stress that typically
caused by a prolonged dependency on emotion-focused
focus coping (Aziz & Treur, 2009; Ntoumanis et al, 2009;
Pruchno & Resch, 1989). From another condition PrA = 0,
by (6) it follows that ChL = 0 represents a condition when
an individual with negative personality attributes tend to
appraise stressful events not as a challenge later will trigger
emotion-focused coping (Clarke & Tanya, 2009; Uehara et

(20)
(21)
(22)

For an equilibrium it has to hold that all of the derivatives
are zero:
dLtS(t)/dt = d ExH(t)/dt = d ScS(t)/dt = 0

439

diabetes patients, Personality and Individual Differences,
Vol. 46, Issue 4, 460-464.
Folkman, S., Lazarus, R. S., Dunkel-Schetter, C., DeLongis,
A., & Gruen, R. J. (1986). Dynamics of a stressful
encounter: Cognitive appraisal, coping, and encounter
outcomes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
50, 992-1003.
Folkman, S.(1984). Personal Control, Stress and Coping
Processes: A theoretical analysis. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 46, 839–852.
Kessler, R.C. (1997). The Effects of Stressful Life Events
on Depression, Annual Review of Psychology 48, 191-214.
Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, Appraisal, and
Coping. New York: Springer.
Lazarus, R.S. (1991). Emotion and Adaptation. NY: Oxford
University Press.
Marsella, S., and Gratch, J. (2003). Modeling Coping
Behavior in Virtual Humans: Don’t Worry, Be Happy,
Proceedings of the 2nd International Joint Conference on
Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 313-320.
Marsella, S., Gratch, J., Wang, N., & Stankovic, B. (2009).
Assessing the Validity of a Computational Model of
Emotional Coping. International Conference on Affective
Computing and Intelligent Interaction, IEEE.
Noh, S., & Kaspar, V. (2003). Perceived Discrimination and
Depression: Moderating Effects of Coping, Acculturation,
and Ethnic Support, Am J Public Health. 93(2), 232–238.
Ntoumanis, N., Edmunds,J., & Duda, J.L. (2009).
Understanding the coping process from a selfdetermination theory perspective, British Journal of
Health Psychology, 14, 249–260.
Pruchno, R.M., & Resch, N.L.(1989). Husbands and Wives
as Caregivers: Antecedents of Depression and Burden.
The Gerontologist 29, 159-165.
Uehara T, Sakado K, Sakado M, Sato T, & Someya T.
(1999). Relationship between Stress Coping and
Personality in Patients with Major Depressive Disorder.
Psychother Psychosom ,68, 26-30.

al. 1999). Both of these conditions can be found in our
simulation results.

Conclusion
In this paper, we have presented a formal temporal model
for the cognitive process of coping with stress as described
in the informal Cognitive Motivational Relational Theory
by Lazarus and Folkman. This theory explains the role of
positive and negative emotions in the stress appraisal
process, which results in either a problem focused coping
strategy or an emotional focused coping strategy. The
theory also describes the effect of the different strategies on
the long term stress.
The resulting model has been used for two simulations of
two persons with different personality characteristics in two
different scenarios that describe the level of external sources
of stress over time. The simulation traces exhibit patterns
that are expected in this domain: problem focused coping
leads to better coping skills and higher decrease of longterm stress than emotion focused coping. These results also
follow from a mathematical analysis of the model, in which
the equilibria of the model are determined to identify the
stable situation in the model.
The resulting model can be considered as a virtual human
agent model, in the sense that it is a computer models of a
person that can be used as a substitute for the real person in
a virtual environment. This could provide the basis for a
intelligent support system, in which the system should be
able to understand the coping process of the persons to
which support is provided.

References
Aziz, A. A., Klein, M.C.A., & Treur, J. (2010). An
Integrative Ambient Agent Model for Unipolar Relapse
Depression. Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Smart
Environments Vol 2 (1), pp. 5-20: IOS Press .
Aziz, A. A., & Treur, J. (2009). Modelling Dynamics of
Social Support Networks for Mutual Support in Coping
with Stress. In: Nguyen, N.T., Katarzyniak, R., Janiak, A.
(eds.). Challenges in Computational Collective
Intelligence, ICCCI' 09, Studies in Computational
Intelligence, pp. 167-179: Springer Verlag
Aziz, A. A., Klein, M.C.A., & Treur, J. (2009). An Agent
Model of Temporal Dynamics in Relapse and Recurrence
in Depression. In: Ali, M., Chen, S.M., Chien, B.C., Hong,
T.P. (eds.), IEA-AIE 2009, pp. 36-45 :LNAI Springer
Verlag.
Beck, A. T. (1987). Cognitive Model of Depression,
Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy 1, pp. 5-37.
Carver, C. S., Scheier, M. F., & Weintraub, J. K. (1989).
Assessing Coping Strategies: A Theoretically Based
Approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
56, 267-283.
Clarke, D., & Tanya, G. (2009). The mediating effects of
coping strategies in the relationship between automatic
negative thoughts and depression in a clinical sample of

440

