UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Simulation from Schematics: Dorsal Stream Processing and the Perception of Implied Motion

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7vh9k9gf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Holmes, Kevin J.
Wolff, Philip

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Simulation from Schematics:
Dorsal Stream Processing and the Perception of Implied Motion
Kevin J. Holmes (kevin.holmes@emory.edu)
Phillip Wolff (pwolff@emory.edu)
Department of Psychology, Emory University
36 Eagle Row, Atlanta, GA 30322

Abstract
Schematic language (e.g., prepositions) and depictions (e.g.,
line drawings) reduce the rich detail of the visual world to a
coarser level of description. We investigated how these
schematic forms may be represented in the brain. Recent neural
evidence suggests that such representations may be computed
in the dorsal pathway of the visual system, the same pathway
involved in processing motion, including simulated motion in
static scenes. Drawing on this association, we examined the
stimulus conditions and mental sets that give rise to simulation,
and by hypothesis, representations in the dorsal stream.
Simulated motion was evident for scenes that were highly
schematic, as opposed to highly realistic (Experiment 1), and
when realistic scenes were processed schematically
(Experiment 2). The results suggest that dorsal stream
representations capture the schematic aspects of visual
experience, rather than more fine-grained information. In
affording simulation, these representations may facilitate
certain types of reasoning and inference.
Keywords: schematic representations; mental simulation;
dorsal stream; implied motion; word meaning.

Introduction
In physics and engineering textbooks, simple line drawings
are often used to illustrate complex physical phenomena.
These drawings tend to be highly schematic, representing
idealized examples of the processes in question. Schematic
depictions of this sort may be useful not only because of
their visual simplicity, but also because they have a
fundamental cognitive basis. In particular, they may map
onto mental representations that are themselves schematic in
nature and that may afford certain perceptual and cognitive
advantages over representations that more veridically
capture the rich detail of the visual world. In this research,
we investigate the nature of these hypothesized schematic
representations and how they might be realized in the brain.
A distinction between representations that are more
detailed or featural and those that are more schematic or
configural has been proposed to underlie the meanings of
words. Landau and Jackendoff (1993) argued that the
representations associated with the meanings of object
nouns, which encode detailed featural information, differ
from those associated with the meanings of prepositions,
which encode coarser configural properties. Moreover, they
hypothesized that these different types of representations are
computed in different processing pathways in the brain. A
highly influential model originally proposed by Ungerleider
and Mishkin (1982) points to two separate streams for the
processing of visual information: a ventral stream,

responsible for the identification of objects on the basis of
visual properties such as shape, size, color, and texture (the
“what” system), and a dorsal stream, responsible for the
localization of objects in space (the “where” system).
Landau and Jackendoff proposed that the meanings of
object nouns are processed in the “what” system and the
meanings of prepositions in the “where” system.
While several of Landau and Jackendoff‟s (1993)
conjectures have been supported by subsequent neural
research, recent work suggests that the dichotomy between
object nouns and prepositions may not adequately capture
processing differences in the two streams. Beyond
localizing objects in space, the dorsal stream appears to be
responsible for certain aspects of object perception. For
example, several areas of the dorsal stream are activated
during the passive viewing of objects. The caudal part of the
intraparietal sulcus (CIP) shows sensitivity to the shapes of
objects even when their location is unspecified (Grefkes &
Fink, 2005). Similarly, activity in the V5/MT complex has
been linked to differences in the shapes of objects in static
images (Chandrasekaran et al., 2006). These findings
suggest that the ventral stream is not the only pathway in
which objects are processed; the dorsal stream is also
sensitive to certain object properties, notably shape.
Nonetheless, the two streams appear to differ in the level
of abstraction at which they process objects. Whereas the
dorsal pathway is primarily concerned with identifying the
principal axes, surfaces, and dimensionality of an object, the
ventral pathway fills in featural details such as size, color,
and texture (Farivar, 2009). Consistent with this
characterization of the two streams, Lehky and Sereno
(2006) observed that neurons in the dorsal area LIP were
sensitive to shape but less able to differentiate shapes than
neurons in the ventral area AIT (see also Chandrasekaran et
al., 2006). These findings suggest that the ventral stream
makes fine-level distinctions, while dorsal stream
processing is at a coarser, more schematic level.
Intriguingly, the dorsal stream is also invoked in the
perception of implied motion; that is, the kind of motion
suggested by frozen-action photographs or speed lines in
cartoons. In an imaging study, Kourtzi and Kanwisher
(2000; see also Senior et al., 2000) observed activation in
V5/MT in response to still photographs of agents or objects
in motion (e.g., an athlete about to throw a discus). These
findings suggest a way in which dorsal stream processing
might be examined behaviorally. When people perceive
implied motion from a static scene, it is highly likely that

2704

they are processing the scene in the dorsal stream. Hence,
the perception of implied motion can be used as an index of
dorsal stream processing, and by hypothesis, of the
schematic representations that support such processing.
A necessary condition for taking advantage of this
association is to find a way to measure the perception of
implied motion. An experimental paradigm developed by
Freyd, Pantzer, and Cheng (1988) offers such a measure. In
Freyd et al.‟s study, participants were presented with a line
drawing of a scene depicting a potted plant supported by a
pedestal. The scene was then replaced by one in which the
pedestal was removed, but the plant was in exactly the same
position as it had been previously. This second scene was
then replaced with a third scene in which the plant‟s
position was shifted slightly (higher or lower) or remained
the same. The participants‟ task was to indicate whether the
plant in the third display was in the same position as in the
second. Freyd et al. reasoned that if people viewed the
pedestal as exerting a force on the pot, they might
(implicitly) expect the plant to move downward due to the
influence of gravity. As predicted, participants were more
likely to report “same” to a downward shift than an upward
one. These results support the hypothesis that motion will
sometimes be perceived when a force acting on an object is
suddenly removed. This phenomenon of implied motion
from disequilibrium is one of several types of displacement,
in which the mental representation of a target‟s location is
displaced in the direction of (implied) target motion (see
Hubbard, 2005, for a review).
Predictions. Based on subsequent neural research, it is
highly likely that the implied motion perceived by
participants in Freyd et al.‟s (1988) study involved
processing in the dorsal stream (in particular, area V5/MT).
If so, it should be possible to modulate displacement by
varying the properties of the visual stimulus. Lobmaier et al.
(2008) employed this technique in an fMRI study of face
processing, observing greater dorsal (V5/MT) activation to
blurred faces (which preserved configural information) than
to scrambled faces (which disrupted configural information
but preserved detailed featural information) and greater
ventral activation to scrambled than to blurred faces. Thus,
changing the properties of the visual stimulus changed
which pathway was primarily used to process the stimulus.
The findings of Lobmaier et al. (2008) suggest that the
perception of implied motion in static scenes will be more
pronounced when stimuli are highly schematic, as opposed
to highly realistic. Highly schematic stimuli are more likely
to be processed in the dorsal stream than in the ventral
stream; processing in the dorsal stream should produce
larger effects of implied motion, and hence a stronger
displacement effect. If this initial prediction is supported,
we might find that displacement can be modulated in other
ways as well. In particular, it might be possible to influence
how a stimulus is processed by varying the observer‟s
mental set. Because relational words like verbs and
prepositions encode the world in a relatively schematic
fashion, describing a scene by using a high proportion of

such words (as opposed to words that encode featural
information, such as adjectives) should engage the dorsal
stream and result in greater displacement. Drawing a scene
might also modulate one‟s mental set, with more schematic
drawings leading to greater displacement. We tested these
predictions in the following two experiments.

Experiment 1
In our first experiment, we investigated whether implied
motion would be perceived in scenes that varied in realism.
We contrasted realistic scenes that resembled photographs
with schematic scenes that resembled line drawings, similar
to those used by Freyd et al. (1988). Our prediction was that
the schematic scenes would engage the dorsal stream more
than the realistic scenes, and hence that there would be
greater displacement for the schematic scenes than for the
realistic ones. Following Freyd et al., we also varied
whether the initial picture in the sequence showed a support
relation (e.g., a pedestal supporting a plant vs. a plant
floating in mid-air), in order to confirm that displacement
was due to the perceived removal of a force rather than
some perceptual bias to infer that unsupported objects will
move downward. Thus, we predicted that displacement
would be more likely when the initial picture depicted a
support relation than when it did not.

Method
Participants. Fifty-nine Emory University undergraduates
received course credit for participating in the experiment.
Materials. We created a set of materials based on the scenes
shown in Figure 1. The scenes depicted a room either rich in
photorealistic detail (Realistic format) or schematically
sketched, as in a line drawing or diagram (Schematic
format). The Schematic scene was a contoured rendering of
the Realistic scene, with all fine detail removed so that only
the basic outline of the objects was visible. All other aspects
of the two display formats were identical. Each display was
27.3 cm x 15.7 cm (45.5° x 28.9° visual angle).

Figure 1: The Realistic (top) and Schematic
(bottom) support displays used in Experiment 1.

2705

There were four variants of each display format. In the
original version shown in Figure 1, a potted plant (height: 2.3
cm / 4.3°) is supported by a marble pedestal at the center of the
room (support display). In the other three versions, the pedestal
was removed and the plant was either in exactly the same
position (no-support display), slightly raised (up display), or
slightly lowered (down display). In the latter two displays, the
plant was 0.15 cm (0.3°) higher or lower, respectively, than its
original position. All displays were created using a graphics
package called Discreet 3D Studio Max, version 7.
Design and Procedure. Participants were randomly
assigned to either the Realistic or Schematic display format
and to either the Support or No Support trial type, in a fully
crossed between-subjects design with four conditions:
Realistic-Support, Realistic-No Support, SchematicSupport, and Schematic-No Support. Figure 2 depicts the
trial structure. In the Support conditions, each trial began
with the presentation of the support display, which remained
on the screen for 250 ms. Following a 250-ms interstimulus
interval (ISI), the no-support display appeared for 250 ms.
Another 250-ms ISI was followed by one of three test
displays: no-support (showing the plant in the same position
as it had been previously), up, or down. The test display
remained on the screen until participants made a response.
The No Support conditions were identical, except that the
first stimulus of each trial was the no-support display.
As in Freyd et al. (1988), participants were asked to
indicate whether the plant in the test display was in the same
position as it had been in the previous (no-support) display.
They were instructed to press the „S‟ key for same and the
„D‟ key for different. The instructions emphasized both
speed and accuracy. Participants were also told that they
should not expect an equal number of same and different
trials, and that they should process the entire display rather
than the plant alone. There were a total of 60 randomly
ordered trials, 20 with each test display.

Figure 3: Accuracy on up and down trials across
conditions in Experiment 1 (error bars are +/- 1 SEM).

Results
The main finding was that displacement occurred only for
schematic scenes that depicted an initial support relation. As
shown in Figure 3, participants in the Schematic-Support
condition were more likely to indicate “same” when the
plant was shifted down than when it was shifted up. No such
asymmetry was observed in the other three conditions.
These findings were supported by a mixed ANOVA on
participants‟ accuracy patterns in which format (realistic vs.
schematic) and support (initial display showed vs. did not
show a support relation) were between-subjects factors and
target position (up vs. down) was a within-subjects factor.
[The data of 3 participants were excluded from analyses for
making same responses on greater than 75% of the trials,
leaving 14 participants in each condition.] There was a
significant main effect of target position [F(1,52) = 7.01, p
< .02], with accuracy lower for down trials (M = 62%) than
for up trials (M = 70%). However, this asymmetry between
up and down depended on both format and support, as
shown by a significant interaction between target position
and format [F(1,52) = 8.78, p < .005] and a significant
three-way interaction [F(1,52) = 7.01, p < .02]. Accuracy
was significantly lower for down than for up trials only in
the Schematic-Support condition (up: M = 77%, down: M =
50%), t(13) = 4.11, p < .005. There was no asymmetry in
the other three conditions, and no other main effects or
interactions were significant (all ps > .2).1

Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 replicate the findings of
Freyd et al. (1988) in confirming that people simulate
1

Figure 2: The structure of individual trials, shown
with stimuli from the Realistic-Support condition of
Experiment 1 and all conditions of Experiment 2.

The RT data showed the same general patterns as the accuracy
data across both experiments, though some analyses did not reach
statistical significance. In this paradigm, as noted by Freyd et al.
(1988), there are often too few correct responses to calculate a
reliable RT for some trial types (e.g., down trials in the SchematicSupport condition of Experiment 1).

2706

motion in static scenes only when there is perceived
removal of a force. However, the results also highlight an
important caveat to this conclusion. The simulation
processes associated with the perception of implied motion
are engaged more when visual stimuli are schematic, as
opposed to realistic. We suggest that displacement varied as
a function of realism because the properties of the schematic
materials reflected the kinds of representations that are
hypothesized to exist in the dorsal stream to a greater extent
than did the properties of the realistic materials.
Although there was no evidence of mental simulation in
the Realistic conditions, this does not imply that realistic
materials cannot lead to the simulation of motion. The
materials in the Realistic conditions consisted of certain
features (e.g., color, texture) that could be processed only in
the ventral stream, but they also included features that could
be processed in the dorsal stream (e.g., shape). Because
schematic language (e.g., prepositions) and depictions (e.g.,
line drawings) reflect a relatively coarse level of description,
activities that promote the use of such forms might induce a
more schematic conceptualization of experience. If
sufficiently biased through such activities, people might
focus on the schematic aspects of realistic materials, in
which case even realistic materials might lead to the
perception of implied motion.2 This possibility was
examined in the next experiment.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 examined whether a prior task prompting
people to focus on the schematic properties of a realistic
stimulus might induce greater simulated motion.
Participants completed the same task as in Experiment 1,
but this time they were shown only the realistic stimuli.
Prior to this task, participants engaged in activities designed
to vary the mental set they used when subsequently
processing the realistic scene. Half of the participants were
asked to describe the scene in writing, while the other half
were asked to draw the scene. Within each of these groups,
half of the participants were asked to describe or draw the
scene in a realistic manner, while the other half were asked
to describe or draw the scene in a schematic manner. The
key prediction was that schematic processing, whether
induced by describing or drawing, would engage the dorsal
stream to a greater extent, and hence lead to greater
displacement, than would realistic processing.

Method
Participants. Seventy-nine Emory University undergraduates
participated in the experiment as part of a course requirement.
Materials, Design, and Procedure. The materials included
the same photorealistic stimuli used in Experiment 1.
Participants were randomly assigned to either the Describe
or Draw condition and to either the Realistic or Schematic
format in a fully crossed between-subjects design with four
2

This prediction is consistent with findings showing that
displacement can be influenced by variables such as observers‟
conceptual knowledge and expectations (see Hubbard, 2005).

conditions: Describe-Realistic, Describe-Schematic, DrawRealistic, and Draw-Schematic.
In all conditions, participants were shown the support
display, in which the plant is supported by the pedestal. In
the Describe-Realistic condition, participants were asked to
describe the room “in rich detail, as if describing the details
of a photograph.” In the Describe-Schematic condition,
participants were asked to describe the room “schematically,
as if describing the details of a diagram.” Similarly, in the
Draw-Realistic condition, participants were asked to depict
the room “in rich detail, as if your drawing were a
photograph,” whereas in the Draw-Schematic condition,
they were asked to depict the room “schematically, as if
your drawing were a diagram.” Participants were given 5
minutes to describe or draw the room. Then they completed
the implied motion task using the materials from the
Realistic-Support condition of Experiment 1 (see Figure 2).

Results
The results showed that varying the mental set of the
observer modulated the perception of implied motion.
Displacement was observed for realistic scenes when a prior
task induced participants to process the scenes
schematically, but not when the task induced them to
process the scenes realistically.
These findings were supported by a mixed ANOVA on
participants‟ accuracy patterns. [The data of 7 participants
were excluded from analyses for making same responses on
greater than 75% of the trials, leaving 18 participants in
each condition.] There was a significant main effect of
target position [F(1,68) = 7.51, p < .01], with lower
accuracy for down trials (M = 62%) than for up trials (M =
72%), just as would be expected if participants were
simulating downward motion. A significant interaction
between target position and format [F(1,68) = 5.13, p < .03]
showed that the asymmetry between down and up trials was
larger in the Schematic conditions than in the Realistic
conditions. Within the Schematic conditions (collapsing
across Describe and Draw), accuracy on down trials (M =
61%) was significantly lower than on up trials (M = 78%),
t(35) = 3.64, p < .001. Within the Realistic conditions, the
difference in accuracy between down (M = 63%) and up (M
= 65%) trials was not significant (p > .7). No other main
effects or interactions were significant (all ps > .09).
The lack of a three-way interaction between target
position, format, and medium [F(1,68) = 1.15, p > .2]
suggests that the down-up asymmetry for the Schematic
format (relative to the Realistic format) was comparable in
both the Describe and Draw conditions. However, the
Schematic format showed a greater asymmetry than the
Realistic format only for participants who had produced
drawings, F(1,34) = 6.12, p < .02 (see Fig. 4). The
difference between the two formats was not significant for
participants who had written descriptions (p > .4).
Post-hoc analysis indicated that the magnitude of
displacement correlated positively with the proportion of
relational terms (prepositions and verbs describing spatial
relations) in participants‟ descriptions (r = .45, p < .01), but

2707

of visual stimuli and influence how they are processed.
Schematic processing may cause the visual world to be
represented more like a line drawing than a photograph, and
this format of representation may invoke simulation
processes in the dorsal stream.

General Discussion

Figure 4: Accuracy on up and down trials across
conditions in Experiment 2 (error bars are +/- 1 SEM).
did not correlate with the proportion of adjectives (r = -.26,
p > .1). In addition, descriptions from the DescribeSchematic condition had a significantly higher proportion of
relational terms [t(35) = 3.02, p < .005] and a marginally
lower proportion of adjectives [t(35) = 1.74, p = .09] than
descriptions from the Describe-Realistic condition. Ratings
of participants‟ drawings (by a separate group, N = 15) on a
1-to-9 Likert scale of “realism,” defined as the extent to
which a drawing included cues to 3D properties such as
depth and texture, were also collected. On average, raters
assigned significantly higher realism ratings to drawings
from the Draw-Realistic condition (M = 5.0) than drawings
from the Draw-Schematic condition (M = 4.7), t(14) = 2.32,
p < .04. Thus, participants who showed greater
displacement were those who had used more schematic
language or produced more schematic drawings.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 provide further support for
the idea that implied motion is more likely to be perceived
when a scene is conceptualized in a schematic fashion.
When conceptualized schematically, the scene may be
processed primarily in the dorsal stream, which is largely
responsible for the mental simulation of motion. While we
found clear effects of drawing on simulation, the effects of
verbal description were less compelling. However, an
association between simulation and relatively schematic
aspects of language in participants‟ descriptions suggests
that verbal description can in fact modulate processing. In
particular, the positive correlation between relational terms
and the displacement effect is exactly what would be
predicted if relational language leads people to process
visual stimuli in a schematic fashion, presumably in the
dorsal stream. Further, the lack of correlation with
adjectives is not surprising, as adjectives encode
information presumably processed in the ventral stream.
In sum, the results suggest that everyday activities such as
writing and drawing can direct attention to different aspects

The results from this research suggest that the mental
simulation of motion in static scenes depends on the realism
of the scenes and the observer‟s mental set when processing
them. Experiment 1 showed that simulation occurred during
the processing of highly schematic scenes resembling line
drawings, but not highly realistic scenes resembling
photographs. Experiment 2 showed that simulation can
occur even for highly realistic scenes when they are
processed schematically; that is, when prior activities induce
the observer to focus on their schematic properties. Because
the simulation of motion is strongly associated with
processing in the dorsal visual pathway, the conditions
under which implied motion is perceived offer a window
into the kinds of representations associated with dorsal
stream processing. Consistent with previous evidence
indicating that the dorsal stream operates at a relatively
coarse level in the perception of objects, our findings are
suggestive of a format of representation in which the rough
contour of objects and the spatial relations among them are
preserved, but detailed featural information is lacking. The
sparseness of such representations, much like the line
drawings in physics textbooks, may be especially suited for
the mental operations at work in the simulation of motion.
This link between schematic representations and simulation
highlights the potential utility of such representations for
reasoning. In particular, reasoning about physical systems
sometimes involves forming a mental image of a system and
then “running” it (Hegarty, 2004). For example, when solving
problems involving interlocking sequences of gears, people
often mentally rotate the gears before discovering the abstract
rule that governs how they turn, namely that odd and even
gears turn in different directions (Schwartz & Black, 1996).
Our findings suggest that more schematically rendered or
imagined gears may be easier to mentally rotate, which could
influence the tendency to re-represent the problem in terms of
a rule. Thus, the use of schematic representations may be
beneficial for certain types of problem solving and inference.
One key question concerns exactly what visual properties
constitute a “schematic” representation, as opposed to a
“realistic” one. In future work, we plan to employ the same
behavioral paradigm used in the present experiments to
specify which aspects of visual stimuli give rise to simulation,
and hence reflect properties of schematic representations in
the dorsal stream. If, for example, displacement is minimized
or eliminated when visual properties such as depth cues or
surface gradients are absent, it would imply that schematic
representations include such information. Similarly, if
displacement persists even when the stimuli are primitive 3D
shapes (e.g., spheres, cylinders), it would imply that
schematic representations need not have any shape detail
beyond simple geometric forms.

2708

Although we found no evidence of simulated motion with
realistic materials under neutral conditions, other studies
(e.g., Kourtzi & Kanwisher, 2000; Senior et al., 2000) have
used realistic materials specifically to identify the neural
correlates of simulated motion. However, these studies used
single static stimuli in which motion was strongly implied
(e.g., frozen-action photographs), whereas our stimuli
invoked more subtle forms of motion (slight changes in
spatial position) solely through the sequential nature of their
presentation. Our findings suggest that the use of schematic
stimuli in the former paradigm might lead to even greater
simulated motion. Interestingly, displacement effects in a
handful of studies using realistic stimuli have been regarded
as validating the widespread use of more impoverished
stimuli (Hubbard, 2005), but to our knowledge, the current
study is the first to manipulate realism directly. Our findings
caution against the assumption that simulation for schematic
materials will carry over to more ecologically rich contexts.
Together with recent neural work, our findings have
implications for models of the neural bases of word meaning.
While Landau and Jackendoff (1993) argued that the dorsal
and ventral streams map onto different grammatical
categories (preposition vs. noun), it is likely that certain
aspects of the meanings of object nouns are represented in the
dorsal stream as well. Processing differences in the two
streams may be better accounted for by a distinction often
made in lexical semantics between structural and
idiosyncratic aspects of word meaning (Levin & Rappaport
Hovav, 2009). Words for spatial relations, for example, can
be divided into a structural component, which specifies the
abstract geometry of a spatial relation, and a more
idiosyncratic component, which distinguishes spatial terms on
the basis of more fine-grained geometric information. We
suggest that schematic representations computed in the dorsal
stream may reflect structural components of word meaning.
Our findings also suggest a novel perspective on the
interface between language and thought (Wolff & Malt,
2010). Recent research has focused on how language might
augment thought by putting in place representational systems
essential for certain kinds of abstract thinking (e.g., reasoning
about exact quantities; Gordon, 2004; see Wolff & Holmes,
in press, for a review). In our second experiment, more
schematic language was associated with greater simulation,
suggesting instead that language may serve as a vehicle to
abstraction, promoting the use of schematic representations
rather than directly instantiating them. Importantly, however,
language may be just one of many vehicles to abstraction.
Other types of processing (e.g., drawing) may be just as likely
to induce a schematic conceptualization of experience. Thus,
it may be the schematic representations themselves, rather
than the means by which they are recruited, that offer
especially powerful tools for thinking.

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank Larry Barsalou, Stella Lourenco,
Laura Namy, Marjorie Pak, and Grace Song for helpful
discussion, and Tonia Davis, Savina Nikolova, Seho Park,

Sam Ritter, and Meredith West for assistance with data
collection. This research was supported by a William Orr
Dingwall Foundation Neurolinguistics Fellowship to KJH.

References
Chandrasekaran, C., Canon, V., Dahmen, J. C., Kourtzi, Z.,
& Welchman, A. E. (2006). Neural correlates of disparitydefined shape discrimination in the human brain. Journal
of Neurophysiology, 97, 1553-1565.
Farivar, R. (2009). Dorsal-ventral integration in object
recognition. Brain Research Reviews, 61, 144-153.
Freyd, J. F., Pantzer, T. M., & Cheng, J. L. (1988).
Representing statics as forces in equilibrium. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 117, 395-407.
Grefkes, C., & Fink, G. R. (2005). The functional
organization of the intraparietal sulcus in humans and
monkeys. Journal of Anatomy, 207, 3-17.
Gordon, P. (2004). Numerical cognition without words:
Evidence from Amazonia. Science, 306, 496-499.
Hegarty, M. (2004). Mechanical reasoning by mental
simulation. TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 280-285.
Hubbard, T. L. (2005). Representational momentum and
related displacements in spatial memory: A review of the
findings. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 822-851.
Kourtzi, Z., & Kanwisher, N. (2000). Activation in human
MT/MST by static images with implied motion. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12, 48-55.
Landau, B., & Jackendoff, R. (1993). “What” and “where”
in spatial language and spatial cognition. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 16, 217-265.
Lehky, S. R., & Sereno, A. B. (2007). Comparison of shape
encoding in primate dorsal and ventral visual pathways.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 97, 307-319.
Levin, B., & Rappaport Hovav, M. (2009). Lexical
conceptual structure. In K. von Heusinger, C. Maienborn,
& P. Portner (Eds.), Semantics: An international handbook
of natural language meaning. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Lobmaier, J. S., Klaver, P., Loenneker, T., Martin, E., &
Mast, F. W. (2008). Featural and configural face processing
strategies: Evidence from a functional magnetic resonance
imaging study. NeuroReport, 19, 287-291.
Schwartz, D. L., & Black, J. B. (1996). Shuttling between
depictive models and abstract rules: Induction and
fallback. Cognitive Science, 20, 457-497.
Senior, C., Barnes, J., Giampietro, V., Simmons, A.,
Bullmore, E. T., Brammer, M. et al. (2000). The functional
neuroanatomy of implicit-motion perception or
„representational momentum‟. Current Biology, 10, 16-22.
Ungerleider, L. G., & Mishkin, M. (1982). Two cortical
visual systems. In J. Ingle, M. A. Goodale, & R. J. W.
Mansfield (Eds.), Analysis of Visual Behavior.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wolff, P., & Holmes, K. J. (in press). Linguistic relativity.
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science.
Wolff, P., & Malt, B. C. (2010). The language-thought
interface: An introduction. In B. C. Malt & P. Wolff
(Eds.), Words and the mind: How words capture human
experience. New York: Oxford University Press.

2709

