UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Social Context Effects on the Impact of Category Labels

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1063k6j5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Stephens, Rachel
Prefors, Amy
Navarro, Daniel

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Social Context Effects on the Impact of Category Labels
Rachel G. Stephens (rachel.stephens@adelaide.edu.au)
Amy Perfors (amy.perfors@adelaide.edu.au)
Daniel J. Navarro (daniel.navarro@adelaide.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of Adelaide
Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia

Abstract
We explore whether social context affects how labels
(relative to other features) affect category learning. We taught
104 participants four novel categories using a feature
inference task. In a between-participants design, we
manipulated: 1) the social context of the task (social context
vs. on the computer); and 2) which dimension of the category
members could be used to perfectly predict the target feature:
the category label, a biased feature (which is salient and
already associated with the target feature in the correct way)
or a non-biased feature (which is less salient and not already
associated with the target feature in any way). Learning
curves were used to assess whether participants assumed that
labels were uniquely helpful compared to other features. The
results suggest that the extent to which labels are privileged
depends on the context in which the category learning task is
presented. When the task is social, people learn quickly
regardless of whether a label or another feature is the most
informative. When the task is not, both novel labels and
biased features are more useful than non-biased features.
Keywords: categorization; feature inference; labels; features;
social context.

Introduction
There is a Chinese proverb that says, “The beginning of
wisdom is to call things by their right names.” Category
labels feel like an important and special part of our
conceptual knowledge. We need labels to communicate
about classes of objects, and labels (often unlike other
features) are a property that all members of a category share.
One might expect that labels help learners pick out the
category members that have important similarities to each
other, and that are different from members of other
categories. However, although this has been the topic of
study for decades, it remains unclear whether there is a
psychological distinction between category labels and other
types of features. It is also unknown (especially for adults)
whether the effect of a label is affected by the socialreferential context in which it is offered.
Work with children broadly supports the notion that labels
have a privileged psychological status, although it is still
debated what the source of that privilege is. Verbal labels
appear to facilitate infant category learning (e.g., Balaban &
Waxman, 1997), with shared names highlighting
commonalties between objects (Waxman & Braun, 2005).
Labels influence the number of categories formed by
infants, overriding the categories that are suggested by
perceptual similarity (Plunkett, Hu & Cohen, 2008).
Additionally, when making decisions about whether a

category feature can be generalized to a new object,
preschool children rely more on category membership
conveyed by a label than they do on perceptual similarity
(Gelman & Markman, 1986; 1987). These experiments
suggest that labels are special in some way, but these studies
do not address whether a single salient feature possessed by
all category members might produce the same effects.
The question is further complicated by the fact that, for
children at least, the social and linguistic context influences
the effects of category labels. Fulkerson and Haaf (2003)
found that labels can help infants to form categories that are
otherwise not formed when only a non-labeling sound or no
sound is used in their place. However, for older infants (15
rather than 9 months) the source of the label matters: these
infants formed categories when the labels were presented
orally, but not when they were presented by a voice
recorder. Consistent with this, Campbell and Namy (2003)
found that infants learned object names only when the label
was presented in a normal social-referential interaction. The
names were learned when the label was verbalized by the
experimenter and embedded in a familiar naming routine,
such as, “Look at what you have! Tillen. That’s what we call
that one.” Learning was unsuccessful when the label was
emitted from a baby monitor and was not timed with the
naming routine.
It is unclear whether we should expect similar effects of
social context in adults, or whether any differences between
adults and children are due to differences in the social
context of label presentation. Unlike for children, most adult
category learning experiments do not incorporate a social
element: category labels are presented in written form on
screen or on paper, or (at most) as a recorded sound. Grice’s
conversational maxims (Grice, 1975) suggest that labels
presented in a social context should especially be presumed
to be relevant and informative to the task at hand.
Alternatively, since educated adults are well practiced at
using labels, social context may not significantly change
how labels are treated.
Labels do seem to play an important role in adult
categorization. Categorical perception research suggests that
learning that stimuli share a label can be sufficient to
increase perceptions of similarity of the stimuli (e.g.,
Goldstone, Lippa & Shiffrin, 2001). In addition, Yamauchi
and Markman (1998; 2000a) have begun to directly address
the issue of whether category labels have a privileged status
over other features for adults. They claimed that people
employ different strategies to make feature inferences or
classifications (i.e., infer labels), and that learning novel

1411

categories through a classification task or a feature inference
task will produce different category representations.
However, the experimental tasks used were unfair as a test
of a general distinction between labels and other features,
because the category structures of the classification and
inference tasks were not equivalent: labels were a diagnostic
feature in the inference task, which seemed to drive the
differences between conditions (see also Johansen &
Kruschke, 2005). However, the studies could suggest that
people expect labels to be useful in a feature inference task
(see also Yamauchi, Love & Markman, 2002).
In a further series of experiments Yamauchi and
Markman (2000b) showed adults a set of labeled exemplars
of two categories and asked them to compare novel stimuli
to the exemplars. Classifications of the novel stimuli were
generally made according to the total number of features
consistent with the appropriate category prototype, but
feature inferences for novel stimuli were strongly influenced
by the observed category label. As a result, when similarity
and category membership were placed in opposition,
participants were more likely to base their inferences on the
label. This effect was decreased when the labels referred to
a feature rather than to category membership, or when the
label was replaced by a perceptual feature. These studies
suggest that to the extent that labels convey category
membership, they are privileged over other features.
However, the experimental tasks used in these experiments
were fairly unnatural, since participants did not have to
learn the categories: they simply compared stimuli on a
sheet in front of them.
This work has two aims. First, it contributes one of the
first explorations in the adult literature focused on the
question of whether social context has an impact on the
status of labels. Second, it investigates whether labels have a
privileged status over other category features for adults. Are
people biased to assume that labels are uniquely helpful
compared to other stimulus features when learning about
novel categories? If so, they should assume that labels are
important to pay attention to and therefore categories should
be easier to learn when the labels are useful predictors.
However, categories should be more difficult to learn when
another feature is the more useful predictor (depending on
the type of feature). Are these effects mitigated or amplified
depending on the nature of the social context in which the
labels are presented? Are labels assumed to be especially
important in a social category learning context, involving
communication with a knowledgeable human teacher?

Method
Participants learned about four novel categories during a
feature inference task. Two between-participants
experimental factors were manipulated to form a 3x2
design. The first factor was which aspect or dimension of
the category members could be used to perfectly predict the
target feature. This diagnostic feature dimension could be
the CATEGORY LABEL, a BIASED FEATURE or a NON-BIASED
FEATURE. The second factor was whether the category

Figure 1: Two sample images used in the category learning
task. The image on the right includes the feedback of the
hammer.
learning task was performed alone on a personal computer
(PC), or in a more social context with the experimenter
(SOCIAL).

Participants
106 adults (either undergraduates at the University of
Adelaide, or people recruited from the general community;
41 males) took part in the experiment. Ages ranged from 18
to 57 years. They received course credit or AU$10. One
participant’s data was removed from the SOCIAL, NONBIASED FEATURE condition because the participant withdrew
from the study before training was completed. An outlier
was removed from the PC, LABELS condition for taking 26
blocks to complete the training task (this was more than 3
SDs above the mean for that condition). 16 to 18 people
remained in each condition.

Materials
The category learning task was designed to be realistic and
engaging, in order to encourage ecologically valid
responses. Participants learned about four novel “alien
people” categories, each of which contained four members.
Images for the categories were created using World of
Warcraft, an online computer game produced by Blizzard.
Examples of the images are shown in Figure 1, and the
category structure used across all conditions is shown in
Table 1.
Participants were asked to predict the nature of a certain
target feature: which item each alien wanted to buy (options
were a timber axe, a dagger, a hammer or a staff). The four
category members varied on five dimensions, which could
each take one of four values. The five dimensions and their
possible values were:
1) category labels, presented as community names: Goloth,
Bragen, Lathor and Durgal
2) clothing: leather warrior-like garb, a robe, tradespersonlike overalls and “lumberjack” attire
3) hair style: long, cropped, bald and ponytail
4) skin color: red, cream, brown and blue-grey
5) facial hair: short square beard, long plaited beard,
medium pointed beard and broad beard with upturned
moustache.

1412

Table 1: Category structure for the feature inference
learning task, for all conditions. The diagnostic feature
dimension perfectly predicts the target feature dimension,
and demarcates the four categories. (F = feature)
Target
features
Timber
axe

Dagger

Hammer

Staff

Diagnostic
features
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4

F1

F2

F3

F4

1
1
2
3
2
2
3
4
3
3
4
1
4
4
1
2

3
1
1
2
4
2
2
3
1
3
3
4
2
4
4
1

2
3
1
1
3
4
2
2
4
1
3
3
1
2
4
4

1
2
3
1
2
3
4
2
3
4
1
3
4
1
2
4

As Table 1 demonstrates, four of the feature dimensions
contributed to a family resemblance category structure, but
one “best predictor” or diagnostic dimension perfectly
predicted the target feature. Thus all conditions had rulebased categories: only a single dimension was needed to
solve the categorization problem. One experimental factor
was which dimension was the best predictor of the target
feature. In the LABEL conditions, the community name was
the diagnostic dimension. Thus participants could learn to
perfectly predict which item an alien wanted to buy using
only its community name. Alternatively, in the BIASED
FEATURE conditions, the clothing was the diagnostic
dimension. In these conditions, the clothing “value”
corresponded to the target item one might expect based on
prior background knowledge: the aliens wearing the robe
wanted the staff, the aliens with the leather garb wanted the
dagger, the aliens in the overalls wanted the hammer, and
the aliens with the “lumberjack” attire wanted the timber
axe. Finally, in the NON-BIASED FEATURE conditions, the
facial hair was the diagnostic dimension, arbitrarily matched
with the target items.

Procedure
Participants were randomly allocated to one of the six
conditions. All participants were asked to imagine they were
a space traveler who began working in a general store on
another planet and needed to learn about the customers of
the store. Participants were told that they needed to learn to
predict which item each of 16 customers wanted to buy.
They learned by trial and error, and the learning task
continued until they made the correct prediction for all 16
customers. This criterion was chosen to encourage optimal
performance: participants knew that the task would continue
until no errors were made.

On each block the 16 trials were presented in random
order. For each trial, participants were presented with an
image of a customer with a label. In the SOCIAL conditions,
the experimenter displayed a card with the image and
verbally presented the label (e.g., “This is a Goloth”). In the
PC conditions, the label was written in bold blue capital
letters above the image on the screen. Participants were then
asked to predict the target feature, either verbally to the
experimenter in the SOCIAL conditions, or by clicking the
appropriate button on the screen in the PC conditions. They
were given immediate corrective feedback after each trial
consisting of an image of the customer holding the correct
item, with the community name written above the image
and the name of the correct target item below the image.
Participants also received additional feedback after each
block of 16 stimuli about their total number of correct
responses for that block.

Design
There were two factors of interest in this experiment. One
factor was whether the target feature dimension was best
predicted by: 1) the community LABEL; 2) the NON-BIASED
feature (facial hair), which participants should not have
expected to be useful a priori; or 3) the BIASED feature
(clothing), which people should have had a prior bias to find
useful for predicting what the creatures wanted to buy, since
the sets of clothing each corresponded to the appropriate
target item. This experimental factor tests whether people
are biased to assume that labels are uniquely useful features,
or whether they are similar to highly salient or useful
features (like the BIASED feature). In each level of the factor,
the diagnostic feature dimension plays an identical role in
the category structure, allowing a fair test of the relative
status of labels and features. If labels are not special, all else
being equal, learning performance should be equivalent
regardless of whether labels or other features are the
diagnostic dimension. However, if labels have a special
status, participants should be quicker to learn to predict the
target feature when the LABEL is the diagnostic dimension.
Learning should be slowest in the NON-BIASED FEATURE
conditions, where labels are less useful and an unexpected
feature is useful. Learning should be more rapid in the
BIASED FEATURE conditions, where an unsurprising feature
is useful, and it is relatively easy to remember which
particular feature value (i.e., particular outfit) matches with
each target item. Of critical importance, then, is whether
learning in the LABEL conditions is closer to learning in the
BIASED or in the NON-BIASED FEATURE conditions.
The other experimental factor was whether the labels
were presented in a social context or not. In the PC
conditions, participants worked on a computer; the labels
and images were presented on the screen. In the SOCIAL
conditions, participants learned by interacting with the
experimenter, who presented the images on cards and
verbally presented the category labels. This manipulation
tests whether people assume labels to be particularly special
when the context is more social and interactive.

1413

M = 5.7 (2.3)

M = 3.0 (1.5)

M = 3.9 (1.6)

M = 3.1 (1.3)

M = 8.0 (5.6)

M = 3.4 (1.6)

Figure 2: Learning curves averaged across sets of 4 trials, and averaged across participants in each condition. Two models
using an exponential function are fit to the error data using BIC: a model with unique parameter values for each condition
(solid line) is preferred over a model with the same two parameter values for all conditions (dashed line). M = the mean (SD)
number of blocks taken to complete the learning task.

Results
Our results suggest that the extent to which labels are
privileged depends on the context in which the task is
presented. When the task is social, people learn quickly
regardless of the nature of the diagnostic dimension. When
it is not, labels are as useful as biased features.
Figure 2 shows the learning curves with error data
averaged across sets of four trials, and across all participants
in each condition (the black dots). Exponential functions of
the form Y = a exp(-bX) (see Heathcote, Brown & Mewhort,
2000) were fit to the data of each condition. Model
parameters were fit using maximum likelihood estimation,
and Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC; Schwarz, 1978)
was used for model selection. BIC is a measure that
considers the data fit, but penalizes models for having
excessive parameters (Myung & Pitt, 1997). The model that
minimizes BIC should be preferred.

Two (of several1) simple models that were fit to the mean
error data are also shown in Figure 2. Both models used the
exponential function, but one model allowed unique
parameter values for each condition, while the other model
used the same two parameter values for all conditions.
These two models were compared, using BIC to estimate
the Bayes Factor (see Myung & Pitt, 1997), which provides
the odds in favor of the model with the lower BIC score.
The model that allowed unique parameter values was
preferred according to this criterion (BIC for unique
parameters model = 186.0 vs. BIC for same parameters
model = 1499.1; according to the Bayes Factor
approximation, a difference between BIC scores of such a
large magnitude translates to extremely strong evidence in
favor of the full model). This suggests that each condition
1

Other models that were compared with the “unique parameter
values” model to test for interaction effects were also found to be
inferior according to BIC. (For instance, a model that allowed the
PC, NON-BIASED FEATURE condition to have different parameter
values to the other five conditions.)

1414

had different learning curves – that is, that participants did
not behave identically in each condition.
As Figure 2 demonstrates, the main effect was that
learning was faster overall when the task occurred in a
social context than when it was presented on a computer.
Presenting the category learning task in a social context led
to improved learning performance overall2. It seems that
participants were much more engaged, and thus solved the
task quite quickly across all three of the SOCIAL conditions.
There was a more pronounced difference between the
LABEL, BIASED FEATURE and NON-BIASED FEATURE
conditions when the stimuli were presented on the PC than
when they were presented in a social context. That said, in
both the SOCIAL and PC conditions, learning was slowest in
the NON-BIASED FEATURE conditions, and fast in the BIASED
FEATURE conditions, as expected. Of primary interest is to
compare performance in the LABEL conditions with that of
the other conditions. For both the SOCIAL and PC conditions,
learning speed in the LABEL condition was closer to that of
the BIASED FEATURE condition than to that of the NONBIASED FEATURE condition. However, while on the PC,
learning in the LABEL condition was slower than learning in
the BIASED FEATURE condition. In contrast, in the SOCIAL
conditions, the learning curves of LABEL and BAISED
FEATURE conditions were very similar. This suggests a weak
effect that labels were more privileged in the social context
than on the computer. Nonetheless, in either context,
diagnostic labels did not help category learning beyond help
that could be given by a diagnostic biased feature.
Why was learning not fastest in the LABEL conditions? Let
us consider the difference in the learning task between the
LABEL and BIASED FEATURE conditions. To successfully
complete the category learning task, participants in all
conditions needed to: 1) notice that one particular feature
dimension was diagnostic (e.g., the labels); and 2) learn the
match between each particular diagnostic feature value and
a target feature value (e.g., that “Bragens” wanted the
dagger, and “Lathors” wanted the hammer). However, the
BIASED FEATURE condition was easier: the diagnostic feature
dimension (clothing) was not only salient and meaningful
(and thus easy to notice), but each outfit also meaningfully
corresponded to an item (e.g., the robe outfit matched with
the staff). Thus, participants could essentially come to the
task already knowing the correct answers. The LABEL
condition was actually a more difficult task, because
although the diagnostic feature dimension was perceptually
salient, people needed to learn an arbitrary match between
the novel names and the target features. It is interesting that
despite the added difficulty, learning in the LABEL

M = 6.7 (4.6)

Figure 3: Learning curve averaged across sets of 4 trials,
and averaged across participants in this condition. The
exponential function is fit to the error data.
conditions was similar to that of the BIASED FEATURE
conditions. However, the added difficulty might explain
why learning in the LABEL conditions was not fastest.
To determine whether this explains the observed
similarity between the LABEL and BIASED FEATURE
conditions, we ran another experimental condition on the PC
with 17 new participants3. The category learning task was
identical4 to that of the PC, BIASED FEATURE condition, with
clothing as the diagnostic feature dimension; however, the
feature values no longer matched with the expected target
feature values. Counterintuitively, the “lumberjack” wanted
the dagger, the “warrior” wanted the hammer, the
“tradesperson” wanted the staff, and the “wizard/priest”
wanted the timber axe. This new condition still had the
salient and expectedly meaningful clothes features as the
diagnostic dimension, but the match between feature values
was arbitrary. As Figure 3 shows, learning was slowed
nearly to the same level as in the PC, NON-BIASED FEATURE
condition. This suggests that the fast learning in the BIASED
FEATURE condition was due to the pre-existing knowledge
of the mapping between outfits and target items. Learning
could be fast in the LABEL condition because the names
were completely novel and “blank”; unlike the clothes in the
new condition, the LABEL condition did not require any
unlearning of associations between the diagnostic dimension
and the target feature dimension.

Discussion
We set out to explore whether social context has an impact
on the status of category labels for adults. We investigated
whether people would pay special attention to labels
presented in a social context, and hence learn quickly when
these labels are most informative. While there was some
suggestion that labels were more privileged in a social
context than they were on a computer, the main result was

2

Exponential functions for LABEL, BIASED FEATURE and NONconditions were Y = 3.75exp(-0.10X), Y =
3.37exp(-0.17X), and Y = 2.76exp(-0.04X) for the PC conditions,
and Y = 2.53exp(-0.20X), Y = 2.90exp(-0.24X), and Y = 4.14exp(0.19X), for the SOCIAL conditions, respectively. Note that the two
parameters vary between conditions; larger a indicates more errors
at the beginning of training and larger b indicates faster learning.
BIASED FEATURE

3
Participants were undergraduates at the University of Adelaide,
or recruited from the general community (9 males). Ages ranged
from 17 to 38 years. Participants received AU$5.
4
Feedback was slightly different in this condition, due to the
availability of images: participants did not see an image of the
correct target item being held by the alien creature.

1415

that people can solve a category learning task much faster
when they are in an engaging, social context, regardless of
whether a label or another feature is actually more
informative. We suspect that the participants were more
motivated to do well in the presence of a human teacher and
with a more enjoyable, interactive task. When the task is not
social, novel labels are privileged over non-salient and
arbitrarily-matched features, but are no more useful than
biased features. Nonetheless, it is interesting that learning in
the LABEL conditions was fast, despite participants having to
learn an arbitrary match between each novel label and the
target feature. Presumably, if the labels were not novel and
were appropriately matched (e.g., “Wizard” and “Warrior”),
the task would become trivially easy and participants would
learn even faster.
The results of this study support an intermediate view
between labels being “just another feature” and having a
unique, privileged status. Novel labels can aid category
learning better than arbitrary (or biased but arbitrarily
matched) features can: labels are salient, and novel labels
permit new associations with features to be learned without
being hindered by knowledge about existing feature
associations. However, context matters: if people are
already fully engaged with the category learning task, there
is less scope for labels to aid learning beyond other features.
One caveat to this finding is that perhaps the influence of
labels in the social context was somewhat hidden by a
ceiling effect, since our rule-based category structure was a
simple one, quickly solved by most participants. More
challenging category structures may reveal a larger
influence of labels within a social context.
Further work is required to determine whether adults
process labels differently to other features, or simply weight
them more heavily. Gliozzi, Mayor, Hu and Plunkett (2009)
contrast an unsupervised feature-based account and a
supervised name-based account of category formation.
According to the latter account, objects given the same
name belong to the same category, and so labels act as
invitations to form categories and highlight commonalities
between objects. The unsupervised feature-based account
says that labels have the same status as other features.
Labels may vary in salience, just like other features, but are
handled with the same statistical inference processes as are
other features. The model by Gliozzi et al. (2009) suggests
that for infants, labels play a mundane but powerful role as
simply additional features. Our study, and the experiments
by Yamauchi and Markman (e.g., 1998; 2000a) are
consistent with this view.
Finally, this experiment has implications for adult
category learning studies that are not presented in an
engaging, social context. We found that presenting a
category learning task in the absence of a social context
does not encourage optimal learning behavior. Category
learning on a computer may not reflect category learning in
the more engaging situations typically encountered in real
life, so it is worth understanding category learning in more
naturalistic, social contexts.

Acknowledgments
RGS was supported by an Australian Postgraduate Award
and DJN was supported by an Australian Research
Fellowship (ARC grant DP-0773794). Thank you to the
reviewers for their helpful suggestions.

References
Balaban, M. T., & Waxman, S. R. (1997). Do words facilitate
object categorization in 9-month-old infants? Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 64, 3–26.
Campbell, A. L. & Namy, L. L. (2003). The social-referential
context in verbal and nonverbal symbol learning. Child
Development, 74, 549–563.
Fulkerson, A. L. & Haaf, R. A. (2003). The influence of labels,
non-labeling sounds, and source of auditory input on 9- and 15month-olds’ object categorization. Infancy, 4, 349–369.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. M. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183–209.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. M. (1987). Young children’s
inductions from natural kinds: The role of categories and
appearances. Child Development, 58, 1532–1541.
Gliozzi, V., Mayor, J., Hu, J-F., & Plunkett, K. (2009). Labels as
features (not names) for infant categorization: A
neurocomputational approach. Cognitive Science, 33, 709–738.
Goldstone, R. L., Lippa, Y., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2001). Altering
object representations through category learning. Cognition, 78,
27–43.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In Cole, P. &
Morgan, J. (Eds.) Syntax and Semantics, 3. New York:
Academic Press.
Heathcote, A. J., Brown, S. D., & Mewhort, D. (2000). The power
law repealed: The case for an exponential law of practice.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 7, 185–207.
Johansen, M. K., & Kruschke, J. K. (2005). Category
representation for classification and feature inference. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
31, 1433–1458.
Myung, I. J., & Pitt, M. A. (1997). Applying Occam’s razor in
modeling cognition: A Bayesian approach. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 4, 79–95.
Plunkett, K., Hu, J-F., & Cohen, L. B. (2008). Labels can override
perceptual categories in early infancy. Cognition, 106, 665–681.
Schwarz, G. (1978). Estimating the dimension of a model. The
Annals of Statistics, 6, 461-464.
Waxman, S. R., & Braun, I. (2005). Consistent (but not variable)
names as invitations to form object categories: New evidence
from 12-month-old infants. Cognition, 95, B59–B68.
Yamauchi, T., Love, B. C., & Markman, A. B. (2002). Learning
nonlinearly separable categories by inference and classification.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 28, 585–593.
Yamauchi, T., & Markman, A. B. (1998). Category learning by
inference and classification. Journal of Memory and Language,
39, 124–148.
Yamauchi, T., & Markman, A. B. (2000a). Learning categories
composed of varying instances: The effect of classification,
inference and structural alignment. Memory & Cognition, 28,
64–78.
Yamauchi, T., & Markman, A. B. (2000b). Inference using
categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 26, 776–795.

1416

