UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Social Cues Support Learning about Objects from Statistics in Infancy

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6106m29z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Wu, Rachel
Gopnik, Alison
Richardson, Daniel
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Social Cues Support Learning about Objects from Statistics in Infancy
Rachel Wu (r.wu@bbk.ac.uk)
Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London
Malet Street, London, WC1E 7HX, UK

Alison Gopnik (gopnik@berkeley.edu)
Institute of Human Development and Department of Psychology, University of California at Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

Daniel C. Richardson (dcr@eyethink.org)
Department of Cognitive, Perceptual and Brain sciences, University College London
Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, UK

Natasha Z. Kirkham (n.kirkham@bbk.ac.uk)
Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London
Malet Street, London, WC1E 7HX, UK
Abstract
In laboratory experiments, infants can learn patterns of
features that co-occur (e.g., Fiser & Aslin, 2002). This finding
leaves two questions unanswered: What do infants do with the
knowledge acquired from such statistical learning, and which
patterns do infants attend to in the noisy and cluttered world
outside of the laboratory? Here, we show that 9-month-old
infants form expectations about co-occurring features
remaining fused, an essential skill for object individuation and
recognition (e.g., Goldstone, 2000; Schyns & Rodet, 1997).
We also show that though social cues may temporarily detract
attention away from learning events, they appear to stimulate
infants to display learning better in complex situations than
when infants learn on their own without attention cues. These
findings suggest that infants can use feature co-occurrence to
learn about objects and that social cues shape such
foundational learning in a noisy environment during infancy.
Keywords: visual statistical learning; eye-tracking; cognitive
development; social cues; eye gaze.

Introduction
Knowing what to learn is fundamental to all aspects of
development. In particular, recognizing important features
in a display and the relationships between them supports
essential skills such as object recognition (Biederman,
1987), categorization (Mareschal, Quinn, & French, 2002;
Rakison & Butterworth, 1998; Schyns & Rodet, 1997;
Younger & Cohen, 1986), and word learning (Smith & Yu,
2008). Fiser and Aslin (2002) showed that 9-month-olds
prefer to look at shapes that have co-occurred previously,
rather than at shapes that did not co-occur. These findings
suggest that infants are sensitive to statistical information
about features in their visual environment, and support a
growing literature showing that infants recognize such cooccurrence information within auditory and visual
modalities (Kirkham, Slemmer, & Johnson, 2002; Kirkham,
Slemmer, Richardson, & Johnson, 2007; Saffran, Aslin, &
Newport, 1996). These findings raise two important

questions. Do infants simply register these statistical
patterns, or do they actually use them in order to make
further predictions and inferences? In the literature on
causal inference (e.g., Gopnik et al., 2004; Sobel &
Kirkham, 2006), there is clear evidence that toddlers, and
even infants, will go beyond the simple detection of
statistical regularities among events and will use that
information to make new predictions about what an object
will do. Will infants similarly use the co-occurrence of
features within an object to make new predictions about
how that object will behave?
Moreover, in noisy natural environments infants are often
presented with multiple co-occurrences. How do infants
know which co-occurrences to attend to and learn from?
Social cues may help infants select appropriate information.
By the first few months of life, infants engage in joint
attention (Butterworth, 2004), elicited by eye gaze, infantdirected speech, initial eye contact, head turn, and gestures
(Carpenter, Nagell, & Tomasello, 1998; Senju & Csibra,
2008). Many investigators suggest that this attentional bias
helps infants develop their social cognition and competence
(e.g., understanding beliefs, desires, goals, and
communicative intent, see Carpenter et al., 1998; Csibra &
Gergely, 2006; Repacholi & Gopnik, 1997). However, these
cues also can help shape basic cognitive development by
helping infants learn what to learn in a noisy and exciting
environment. While the impact of engaging in joint
attention on social competence has been studied extensively
(for review, see Carpenter et al., 1998), fewer studies
investigate how following social cues can shape basic
learning. Some studies have focused on word mapping (e.g.,
Houston-Price, Plunkett, & Duffy, 2006; Pruden, HirshPasek, Golinkoff, & Hennon, 2006) and learning linguistic
structures (Goldstein & Schwade, 2008). Others have shown
that such cues can lead to better recognition of an attended
object (e.g., Striano, Chen, Cleveland, & Bradshaw, 2006)
as well as to encoding an object’s featural or spatial
information (Yoon, Johnson, & Csibra, 2008). Recently, Wu

1228

and Kirkham (in press) showed that social cues produce
better association of audio-visual events than non-social
cues (i.e., flashing squares). These findings suggest that
following social cues could shape early basic learning.
These conclusions, however, require stronger measures of
learning than recognition of cued objects or simple
matching of audio-visual events.
The present study tested whether infants develop
expectations about object integrity based on the cooccurrences of features with and without social attentiondirecting cues. Binding co-occurring features is an essential
skill for developing veridical representations of the visual
world. Previous research shows that adults “chunk” cooccurring features into larger perceptual units (e.g., Orbán,
Fiser, Aslin, & Lengyel, 2008). These larger units help to
identify discrete objects (Baker, Olson, & Behrmann, 2004;
Turk-Browne, Isola, Scholl, & Treat, 2008; for review, see
Scholl, 2001). Co-occurrences can highlight the integral
features of an object, the basis of visual categorization
(Palmeri & Gauthier, 2004).

Methods
Experiment 1
We investigated infants’ learning of shape feature cooccurrences and whether those co-occurrences shaped their
expectations about the behavior of objects (No Cue
condition). Events were presented in a simple spatial layout
(Figure 2, top panel), maintaining the same spatial layout
between familiarization and test trials.
Participants Eighteen 9-month-old infants (9 females, M =
9 months, 1 day, range: 8;14-9;23) participated in this
experiment. Three infants were excluded from final analyses
due to fussiness (i.e., completing only two out of four
blocks). Thirteen infants completed all four blocks; the
remaining 5 infants completed 3 blocks. Infants were
recruited via local-area advertisements and given t-shirts or
bibs to thank them for their participation.

familiarization with a total of 9 shape clusters in each
sequence (3 clusters per pattern, 3 patterns per sequence).
For each pattern, there was a pair of shapes that were always
together and a third shape that varied for each cluster. Each
cluster loomed from a minimum of 4.87° to a maximum of
9.72° for 2 seconds. When a cluster grew to its maximum
size, it disappeared from the screen, and another cluster
appeared. A single sequence appeared in one of two white
frames arranged left and right in the lower half of a black
screen. Infants viewed the looming pattern while the other
frame remained empty.
During the test trials, infants were shown consistent and
inconsistent splitting events. Consistent events showed an
animation of a cluster breaking into two, with the variable
shape moving apart from the other paired shapes.
Inconsistent events showed shapes that had been paired
together splitting up, where one stayed with the variable
shape, and the other moved apart by itself. The same test
events were seen by all infants. The events were labeled as
consistent or inconsistent according to the pattern that each
infant saw during familiarization (i.e., a test event that was a
consistent split for Sequence A was inconsistent for
Sequence B, and vice versa). Thus, differences in looking
time to test events were due to the exposure during
familiarization rather than basic perceptual preferences.
Each splitting event loomed from a minimum of 4.87° to a
maximum of 8.51° for 2 seconds. Then, either a variable or
constant shape split off at either a 45°, 180°, or 270° angle
(relative to the vertical depending on its position in the
cluster) for another 2 seconds until it reached 9.72°. These
test events appeared in the same frame as the familiarization
events in the lower left or right frame. Consistent and
inconsistent test events were shown sequentially in the
frame.

Apparatus Infants’ looks were monitored using a Tobii
1750 eye-tracker (www.tobii.com), and events were
presented on a 17” monitor attached to the eye-tracking unit.
Stimuli were displayed using Tobii’s ClearView AVI
presentation software, and sounds were played through
stereo external speakers. An external video camera on top of
the screen allowed the experimenter to determine whether
the infant was looking at the display. The shape events were
created using Macromedia Director MX 2004, and the
movie clips were assembled using Final Cut Express HD 3
(Apple Inc, CA).
Stimuli During the familiarization trials, infants watched
sequences of looming shapes. Each sequence contained
three patterns (Patterns A, B, and C), and each pattern was
composed of 3 differently colored component shapes (see
Figure 1). Each infant saw one sequence (repeatedly) during

Figure 1: Shape cluster stimuli and patterns during
familiarization and test trials.
Design and Procedure Infants sat in a car seat 50 cm from
the eye-tracker monitor in a small, quiet room, while their
caregivers sat out of their view. The caregivers were
instructed to refrain from commenting on the movies or
interacting with their infant. The experimenter used a 5-

1229

point calibration with a Sesame Street clip on the infants’
looks. For the experiment, infants were shown four blocks
of trials. Each block consisted of 6 familiarization trials (i.e.,
two per pattern) that lasted 6 seconds per trial, and two test
trials (consistent or inconsistent) that lasted 12 seconds per
trial (3 splitting events per trial, one event per pattern).
During each familiarization trial, the three shape clusters in
a given pattern were presented sequentially. The training
sequence (Sequence 1 or 2) and presentation side were
counterbalanced across infants. For each infant, the clusters
in the test trials were presented in four orders, which were
counterbalanced with a Latin Square across all infants.
Whether the first test trial displayed an inconsistent or
consistent pattern also was counterbalanced across infants.
Blocks 3 and 4 repeated all familiarization and test trials
from Blocks 1 and 2. Attention getters (still kaleidoscopic
circles or squares with either a “bling” or “boing” sound)
spliced the familiarization and test trials. The 1-second clip
looped until the infants returned their gaze to the screen for
approximately 1500 ms.

influence infants’ learning of the sequences (Figure 2,
middle panel), infants were either shown the familiarization
sequence by itself (No Cue II condition) or with a face cue
that turned down to the patterns (Social Cue condition).

Coding The Areas of Interest (AOIs) encompassed slightly
larger areas than those of the frames to account for noisy
infant saccades. For the familiarization trials, total looking
time to the AOI containing the target event was calculated
with Tobii’s ClearView analysis software. For the test trials,
a proportional looking time difference score was calculated
by subtracting the percentage of looking to the inconsistent
events (total looking time to the inconsistent divided by the
total looking time to both test stimuli) from that of the
consistent. A negative score reflected a preference for the
inconsistent splits, and a positive for the consistent.

Figure 2. Familiarization and test trials for the four
conditions in Experiments 1 to 3.

Results Infants looked at the familiarization sequence an
average of 67.15 seconds, (SE = 4.28), 46.63% of the entire
presentation time. For the test trials, a one-sample t-test
revealed that there was a mean preference for the
inconsistent splits overall, and that this preference was
significantly higher than chance, t(17) = -2.33, p = .03, twotailed, M = -.11, SE = .05.
Discussion Infants displayed an overall preference for the
inconsistent split. They were sensitive to the internal
statistics of the shapes within each cluster, and when the two
co-occurring shapes separated, this attracted their attention.
One interpretation is that the infants had represented the cooccurring pair of shapes as a single object, and noticed that
object breaking apart. This preference gave us a baseline of
learning that allowed us to investigate how learning under
more difficult conditions can be influenced by social cues.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 increased the difficulty of the test events and
examined the effect of introducing a social cue during
familiarization. At test, splitting events were presented
simultaneously (rather than sequentially) in the lower left
and right frames. In order to explore how a social cue might

Stimuli Experiment 2 used the shape stimuli from
Experiment 1. The familiarization trials in the No Cue II
condition were identical to those from Experiment 1. For the
Social Cue condition, before the onset of the shape pattern,
a female face appeared in the center of the screen, looked
forward, smiled, said “Hi baby, look at this!”, and turned to
look down at a frame. The pattern then appeared in that
frame. The face stayed turned and smiling until the pattern
finished (after displaying three clusters sequentially). The
pattern disappeared, and the face turned back to the center
and changed to a neutral expression as the trial ended. At
the beginning of each familiarization trial, the face clip
lasted for 5 seconds before the onset of the pattern.
In this experiment, we implemented a preferential looking
paradigm by presenting the consistent and inconsistent splits
simultaneously in both the right and left locations to
increase the complexity of the display. Locations of the
splitting events were counterbalanced across infants. To
maintain consistency for presentation time and trial
numbers, there were two test trials per block that showed the
inconsistent and consistent splits simultaneously.
Coding A central AOI was added to the familiarization
trials because of the addition of the central face cue. Since

1230

the test trials now included simultaneous consistent and
inconsistent splits, the difference score was calculated by
subtracting the inconsistent proportional looking time from
the consistent for each trial.
Results In addition to the analyses carried out in the
previous experiment, we also ran a one-way ANOVA to
investigate differences in total looking time during the
familiarization trials between the two conditions. For the
test trials, we ran a one-way ANOVA (in addition to
analyses from Experiment 1) to investigate whether
congruency between familiarization and test presentation
side (whether infants had to switch sides to look at the
inconsistent pattern) affected their preference for the
inconsistent event. Infants in the No Cue II condition looked
at the familiarization sequence an average of 68.39 seconds
(SE = 5.30), 47.49% of the entire presentation time, similar
to infants in Experiment 1. Infants in the Social Cue
condition looked at the pattern for an average of 43.84
seconds, (SE = 5.53), 30.44% of the entire presentation
time, because these infants split their attention between the
face and target shapes. A one-way ANOVA revealed a
significant effect of condition on total looking time to the
target pattern during familiarization, F(1, 32) = 10.25, p =
.003: Infants looked longer to the shapes in the No Cue II
condition than in the Social Cue condition. For the test
trials, a one-way ANOVA revealed an effect of condition
(Social Cue or No Cue II) on the average difference scores,
F(1, 32) = 4.40, p = .04. Thus, we divided the data set by
condition to compare each set of average difference scores
to chance: Infants in the Social Cue condition displayed a
preference for the inconsistent split, t(16) = -2.12, p = .05,
two-tailed, M = -.11, SE = .05, while infants in the No Cue
II condition did not display a significant preference overall,
t(17) = 1.53, p = .15, two-tailed, M = .12, SE = .09 (Figure
3).

Figure 3. Difference scores across conditions (mean
difference between proportional looking times for consistent
minus inconsistent events during test). A negative value
reflects a preference for the inconsistent splits. *p≤.05
A one-way ANOVA on switching sides revealed no
significant effects of switching on the average difference

score for both the No Cue condition, F(1, 16) = .78, p = .39,
and the Social Cue condition, F(1, 15) < .01, p > .90.
Discussion With a noisier test layout, but without a social
cue during familiarization, infants showed no significant
preference for either the consistent or inconsistent splitting
event. Infants who saw social cues during familiarization,
however, exhibited a preference for the inconsistent split,
similar to infants in Experiment 1. This preference
discrepancy between the two conditions was not due to
gross inattention to the target event. Infants in the No Cue II
condition looked longer to the patterns during
familiarization than infants in the Social Cue condition.
Surprisingly, the lesser amount of attention that infants paid
to the sequence in the Social Cue condition resulted in clear
expectations about the objects.

Experiment 3
The learning challenge became more difficult again in this
experiment, as we presented infants with two sequences
simultaneously during familiarization (Social Cue II
condition, Figure 2, bottom panel). This setup is a little bit
closer to the situation an infant encounters in the real world,
where there are many potential sources of statistical
structure that could be learnt. Moreover, as is also often the
case for the infant, there is a social cue present that could
direct and shape learning.
Participants Eighteen 9-month-old infants (10 females, M
= 9 months, 3 day, range: 8;24-9;22) participated in this
experiment. Five infants completed 3 blocks, and 13 infants
completed all four blocks.
Stimuli The stimuli, design, and procedure in this
experiment were the same as those from the Social Cue
condition in Experiment 2 except for the addition of a
distracter sequence in the frame that was previously empty
in Experiment 2. Infants who were directed to look at
Sequence 1 had Sequence 2 as the distracter event, and vice
versa. Therefore, the sequence that was the target for one
infant was the distracter for another. The target and
distracter patterns were displayed simultaneously during
familiarization.
Coding With the introduction of a distracter during
familiarization, we now measured the efficacy of social cues
in directing the infants’ attention to the target shape. A
difference score for the familiarization trials was calculated
in the same manner as for the test trials, except for the
inclusion of the central AOI (face). During the test trials, the
central AOI was disregarded while calculating the
difference score, since there was no visual stimulus in the
center during test.
Results Infants looked at the cued familiarization pattern an
average of 39.14 seconds, (SE = 4.49), 27.18% of the entire
presentation time and the non-cued pattern an average of

1231

14.40 seconds, (SE = 1.65). Difference scores during
familiarization indicated that 17 infants (94.44%) followed
the cue and looked longer to the cued pattern than the noncued pattern, t(17) = 7.67, p < .01, M = .42, SE = .05. For
the test trials, a t-test on the difference score revealed a
preference for the inconsistent splitting events compared to
chance, t(17) = -2.48, p = .02, two-tailed, M = -.09, SE =
.04. A one-way ANOVA on the effect of switching sides
between familiarization and test trials revealed no
significant effects of switching on the average difference
score, F(1, 16) = .55, p = .47.
Discussion Infants in this experiment displayed a preference
for the inconsistent split, similar to the preference in
Experiment 1 (No Cue condition) and Experiment 2 (Social
Cue condition). Interestingly, infants showed this preference
despite a) being exposed to an equally salient pattern in the
other frame during familiarization, and b) looking for a
short amount of time to the target event compared to the
other three conditions. These findings suggest that social
cues elicit rapid learning in a noisy environment. Infants did
not seem to process much of the distracter pattern, as they
otherwise would have preferred the opposite event.

General Discussion
We have shown that 9-month-old infants use visual
feature co-occurrences to form representations of object
integrity, and that with multiple streams of visual
information available in their environment, infants will use
social cues to select the ones that they learn. First, these
findings extend previous work showing that infants
recognize visual feature co-occurrences (Fiser & Aslin,
2002) by demonstrating that infants consider co-occurring
features as a larger perceptual unit that should remain fused.
If this is the case, then infants may consider these larger
perceptual units as integral to an object, as is the case with
adults (see Scholl, 2001). Therefore, it is plausible that
tracking co-occurrences in infants (as in adults) supports
essential skills such as object recognition, categorization,
and word learning. The fact that statistics are useful for
infants in the visual domain echoes findings in the auditory
domain and in studies of causal inference. For example,
infants use speech segments that are statistically consistent
as labels for objects (Graf Estes et al., 2007). Importantly,
these findings support the idea that statistical learning is a
powerful mechanism that is useful and that leads to
inferences beyond detection of the statistical pattern itself.
Social attention cues shaped infants’ learning about
objects, the second finding in our experiments. This effect
remained despite the distraction of the face, change in test
spatial layout, and additional distracter patterns during
familiarization. Again, this finding in the visual domain is
similar to those in the auditory domain showing that infantdirected speech and visual face stimulus facilitates word
segmentation (Sell & Kaschak, 2009; Thiessen, Hill, &
Saffran, 2005). Importantly, this study grounds an emerging
literature showing that social cues mediate infants’ basic

learning via three key aspects: 1) using a complex measure
of learning, 2) comparing learning effects with and without
social cues, and 3) investigating such learning with younger,
prelinguistic infants. Together, these aspects allow for
stronger evidence that social cues mediate learning from the
first year.
One could ask whether the social character of the face
drove the learning effect or whether a non-social cue would
have been equally effective. In this regard, it is noteworthy
that the face appeared equidistant from the target and
distracter frame during familiarization. Hence, it was not
merely the presence of the cue that facilitated learning but
the fact that the cue was a face that turned towards one
stimulus rather than another. Furthermore, our previous
work showed that when cued by flashing squares, 8-monthold infants remember where they were cued to rather than
what they were cued to (Wu & Kirkham, in press). An
attention-directing non-social central cue is an interactive
stimulus: If a stimulus interacts with the infant and then
turns in one clear direction, the infant will follow the
object’s ‘gaze’ (e.g., Johnson, Slaughter & Carey, 1998). A
recent study, however, showed that 18-month-olds do not
map labels onto objects ‘gazed’ on by an interactive nonsocial stimulus, only those gazed on by human faces
(O'Connell, Poulin-Dubois, Demke, & Guay, 2009), and this
interactive stimulus might be argued to itself have social
features. In future studies, we intend to find a suitable (and
effective) non-social cue for this experimental paradigm.
For now, we claim only that social cues facilitate visual
statistical learning. We do not claim, however, that social
cues are the only attention cues that aid learning, nor that
they produce better learning than any other attention cue.
In conclusion, our findings suggest that co-occurrence
information and social cues inform and direct learning in
infancy. In particular, though social cues may temporarily
detract attention away from certain learning events in the
world, they appear to stimulate infants to display the
learning better in complex situations than when infants learn
on their own without attention cues. Investigating how
infants interact with different cues in the environment (see
Goldstein et al., in press) and the developmental trajectory
of the use of such cues (e.g., Hollich, Hirsh-Pasek, &
Golinkoff, 2000) would clarify the extent to which they
shape cognitive development.

Acknowledgments
We thank Paul Quinn, Teodora Gliga, Denis Mareschal,
Richard Aslin, and József Fiser for helpful comments on
this work. This research was supported by a grant to NZK
and RW from the University of London Central Research
Fund and a grant to Mark Johnson from the UK Medical
Research Council, G0701484.

References
Baker, C. I., Olson, C. R., & Behrmann, M. (2004). Role of
attention and perceptual grouping in visual statistical
learning. Psychological Science, 15, 460–466.

1232

Biederman, I. (1987). Recognition-by-components: A
theory of human image understanding. Psychological
Review, 94, 115-147.
Butterworth, G. (2004). Joint visual attention in infancy. In
G. Bremner & A. Slater (Eds.), Theories of Infant
Development. (pp. 317-354). Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Carpenter, M., Nagell, K., & Tomasello, M. (1998). Social
cognition, joint attention, and communicative competence
from 9 to 15 months of age. Monographs of the Society
for Research in Child Development, 63 (4, Serial No.
255).
Csibra, G. & Gergely, G. (2006). Social learning and social
cognition: The case for pedagogy. In Y. Munakata & M.
H. Johnson (Eds.), Processes of Change in Brain and
Cognitive Development. Attention and Performance XXI
(pp. 249-274). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fiser, J., & Aslin, R. N. (2002). Statistical learning of new
visual feature combinations by infants. Proceedings in the
National Academy of Sciences, 99, 15822-15826.
Gopnik, A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D., Schulz, L. E., Kushnir,
T., & Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal learning in
children: Causal maps and bayes nets. Psychological
Review, 111, 3-32.
Goldstein, M. H., & Schwade, J. A. (2008). Social feedback
to infants' babbling facilitates rapid phonological learning.
Psychological Science, 19, 515-523.
Goldstein, M. H., Waterfall, H., Lotem, A., Halpern, J.,
Schwade, J., Onnis, L., Edelman, S. (in press). General
Cognitive Principles for Learning Structure in Time and
Space. Trends in Cognitive Sciences.
Goldstone, R. L. (2000). Unitization during category
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 26, 86-112.
Graf Estes, K., Evans, J. L., Alibali, M. W., & Saffran, J. R.
(2007). Can Infants Map Meaning to Newly Segmented
Words?: Statistical Segmentation and Word Learning.
Psychological Science, 18, 254-260.
Hollich, G., Hirsh-Pasek, K., & Golinkoff, R. M. (2000).
Breaking the language barrier: An emergentist coalition
model for the origins of word learning. Monographs of
the Society for Research in Child Development, 65 (3,
Serial No. 262).
Houston-Price, C., Plunkett, K., & Duffy, H. (2006). The
use of social and salience cues in early word learning.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 95, 27-55.
Johnson, S. C., Slaughter, V., & Carey, S. (1998). Whose
gaze will infant follow? The elicitation of gaze following
in 12-months-olds. Developmental Psychology, 1, 233238.
Kirkham, N. Z., Slemmer, J., & Johnson, S. P. (2002).
Visual statistical learning in infancy: evidence for a
domain general learning mechanism. Cognition, 83, B35B42.
Kirkham, N. Z., Slemmer, J., Richardson, D. C, & Johnson,
S. P. (2007). Location, location, location: development of
spatiotemporal sequence learning in infancy. Child
Development, 78, 1559-1571.

Mareschal, D., Quinn, P. C., & French, R. M. (2002).
Asymmetric interference in 3- to 4-month-olds’ sequential
category learning. Cognitive Science, 26, 377-389.
O'Connell, L., Poulin-Dubois, D., Demke, T., & Guay, A.
(2009). Can infants use a nonhuman agent’s gaze
direction to establish word–object relations? Infancy, 14,
414–438.
Orbán G., Fiser, J., Aslin, R. N., & Lengyel, M. (2008).
Bayesian learning of visual chunks by human observers.
Proceedings in the National Academy of Sciences, 105,
2745–2750
Palmeri, T. J., & Gauthier, I. (2004). Visual object
understanding. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 5, 291-303.
Pruden, S. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R. M., &
Hennon, E. A. (2006). The birth of words: Ten-montholds learn words through perceptual salience. Child
Development, 77, 266-280.
Rakison, D. H., & Butterworth, G. (1998). Infants’ use of
object parts in early categorization. Developmental
Psychology, 34, 49-62.
Repacholi, B., & Gopnik, A. (1997). Early reasoning about
desires: Evidence from 14- and 18-month-olds.
Developmental Psychology, 33, 12-21.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274,
1926–1928.
Scholl, B. J. (2001). Objects and attention: The state of the
art. Cognition, 80, 1-46.
Schyns, P. G., & Rodet, L. (1997). Categorization creates
functional features. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 681–696.
Senju, A., & Csibra, G. (2008). Gaze following in human
infants depends on communicative signals. Current
Biology, 18, 1-4.
Smith, L., & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics.
Cognition, 106, 1558-1568.
Sobel, D. M., & Kirkham, N. Z. (2006). Blickets and
babies: The development of causal reasoning in toddlers
and infants. Developmental Psychology, 42, 1103-1115.
Striano, T., Chen, X., Cleveland, A., & Bradshaw, S.
(2006). Joint attention social cues influence infant
learning. European Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 3, 289-299.
Wu, R., & Kirkham, N. Z. (in press). No two cues are alike:
Depth of learning is dependent on what orients attention.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology.
Yoon, J. M. D., Johnson, M. H., & Csibra, G. (2008).
Communication-induced memory biases in preverbal
infants. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
105, 13690 - 13695.
Younger, B. A., & Cohen, L. B. (1986). Developmental
change in infants’ perception of correlations among
attributes. Child Development, 57, 803–815.

1233

