UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial Factors in Social and Asocial Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0bf3r7bs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Metz, Alex
Shultz, Thomas

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial Factors in Social and Asocial Learning
Alexander Metz (alexander.metz@mail.mcgill.ca)
Department of Psychology, McGill University, 1205 Avenue Docteur Penfield
Montreal, QC H3A 1B1 Canada

Thomas R. Shultz (thomas.shultz@mcgill.ca)
Department of Psychology and School of Computer Science, McGill University, 1205 Avenue Docteur Penfield
Montreal, QC H3A 1B1 Canada

Abstract
Asocial learning is a mechanism by which innovations
develop, and social learning is a mechanism by which
innovations spread. Penetration of an innovative behavior
through a population is measured by the proportion of the
population that possesses the innovation. Via agent-based
modeling, we examine innovation diffusion with agents
learning and interacting in space. Simulations show that
innovation spread systematically deviates from differential
equations of the proportion of the population that has the
innovation. Mediation analysis confirms that boundary
surface length of groups having the innovation accounts for
these spatial effects. Proportion of asocial innovative learners
increases surface length which, in turn, increases social
imitative learning.
Keywords: Social learning; asocial learning; imitation;
innovation; spatial simulation; surface length; mediation
analysis; agent-based modeling.

Introduction
Since Darwin’s theory of evolution, researchers have sought
to understand how organisms adapt to their environment to
maximize their reproductive potential. In addition to
biological evolution, some lasting adaptations manifest
themselves through animal phenotypes with no genetic
changes. Innovative behaviors allow relatively quick
adaptation to rapidly changing environments, and can
spread and persevere (Laland, Boyd, & Richerson, 1996;
Reader & Laland, 2003). For our purposes, innovation
refers to an adaptive behavior pattern with relative novelty.
Innovative behaviors can be acquired through either
asocial or social learning. In asocial learning, an innovation
is acquired through individual experience. In social
learning, an innovation is acquired from a conspecific
demonstrator (Heyes, 1994). Because individual discoveries
are costly, they may occur in only a few key individuals
through asocial learning and then diffuse through a
population via social learning (Laland, Boyd, & Richerson,
1996). The dynamics of innovation diffusion and imitation
are an important aspect of collective social cognition and
behavior, and thus relevant to integrative cognitive science
(Goldstone & Gureckis, 2009).
However, patterns of sequential spread in a population
resembling those predicted by some models of social
learning can result from asocial processes alone. It is not
always clear which type of learning drives innovative
acquisitions, so it is thus important to disentangle social

from asocial learning. One useful method is diffusion curve
analysis, or DCA (Reader, 2004; Franz & Nunn, 2009).
Diffusion is the change in frequency of an innovative
behavior in a population over time. In DCA, the shape of
the curve is used to infer whether social or asocial learning
is the mechanism of diffusion.
Our purpose is to simulate the spatial diffusion of
innovation and compare the results to DCA predictions.
Although there is a rich literature on learning in laboratory
experiments, understanding of how social learning occurs in
the wild is limited.
S-shaped logistic curves are predicted by DCA to
characterize social learning. If the amount of social learning
at a given time step is proportional to both the number of
possible demonstrators and the number of possible learners,
then it can be obtained as the product of the proportion of
the population that knows the innovation and the proportion
of the population that does not know the innovation (Laland,
Boyd,
&
Richerson,
1996).
This
corresponds
mathematically to the differential equation:
Δu = RS u (1 − u )
(1)
where RS is a constant rate of social learning, and u is the
variable proportion of the population with the innovation.
In a population of only innovators, assuming no social
learning, the following differential equation applies:
Δu = R I (1 − u )
(2)
where RI is the rate of innovation. As more innovators learn,
the number of naïve innovators decreases in a decelerating
curve (Franz & Nunn, 2009).
Social and asocial learning are not mutually exclusive. In
an analysis of data from research by Hinde and Fisher
(1949) on innovation spread in birds, Lefebvre (1995)
concludes that milk-bottle-opening likely spread by some
form of social learning from many unique points of origin.
This is supported by evidence that some birds open bottles
spontaneously without any prior experience with bottles or
demonstrators (Sherry & Galef, 1984). Thus, asocial
learning can occur alongside social learning, and Equations
1 and 2 can be summed to accommodate this:
Δu = RS u (1 − u ) + RI (1 − u )
(3)
Equation 3, however, applies only to a population where
every member is capable of being an innovator and a social
learner. It may be more realistic to assume that only a
certain proportion of the population is capable of either of

1685

Results
Figures 1-6 plot the change in the proportion of the
population that knows the innovation over time, averaged
across five runs. Figures 1 and 2 depict the results from
varying the proportion of the population with the asocial
learning allele when the whole population has the social
learning allele. Figure 1 shows predictions of the DCA
equation, and Figure 2 presents simulation results.
1
Proportion of pop. knowing
innovation

We refer to Equation 4 as the DCA equation. Based on
the proportion of social learning compared to asocial
learning, this differential equation generates a curve with
either a logistic shape (greater social learning) or a
decelerating shape (greater asocial learning). The DCA
equation has been applied in various experimental contexts,
including the diffusion of innovations in humans from peer
and media influences (Lekvall & Wahlbin, 1973) and
bystander effects in the diffusion of foraging techniques in
pigeons (Laland, Boyd, & Richerson, 1996).
The DCA equation relies on one key variable: the
proportion of the population that knows the innovation. This
proportion thus serves as both the dependent and
independent variable in the differential equation. Here we
test the results of spatial simulations against the predictions
of the DCA equation. The diffusion of innovation is in part
a spatial process, a fact captured by the simulations, but not
by the DCA equation. We answer several questions. What
are the essential differences between asocial and social
learning and how can these two types of learning be
identified in wild populations? Does the DCA equation
account for all aspects of these issues, or are other
approaches required? Are these features realistic, or are they
artifacts of abstract simulations?
To explore the spatial diffusion of an innovation, our
simulations create a two-dimensional space containing
agents. Depending on their genotype, agents can be
innovators and/or social learners. Parameters of the
simulation include the proportions of innovators and social
learners, just as the DCA equation uses these factors as
variables. Comparing the rate of learning in the simulation
to the rate of learning predicted by the DCA equation could
provide insight into any potential spatial factors affecting
innovation diffusion.

requires more resources than social learning, it should occur
at a slower rate than social learning. The simulation
experiment assigns genes to individual agents
probabilistically depending on the proportion of social and
asocial learners specified in simulation parameters. The
simulation runs for 80 learning cycles, recording agent
behavior, the times at which agents learn, and the neighbors
from whom they learn if the learning is social.
The effect of number of innovators was investigated in
simulations with the proportion of innovators ranging from
.05 to 1.0, holding the proportion of social learners at 1.0.
The effect of number of social learners was studied with
simulations varying proportion of social learners ranging
from 0 to 1.0, holding the proportion of innovators at 1.0.

0.6
0.4
0.2

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

Time step
0.05

0.1

0.25

0.5

0.75

1

Figure 1: Diffusion curves predicted by DCA equation
with asocial learning rate = .025, social learning rate = .25,
proportion of social learners = 1, and the proportion of
asocial learners varying from .05 to 1.
1

Methods
The simulation is set on a torus, a 25 by 25 lattice in which
each edge touches the opposite edge. Each of the 625 tiles
contains one agent with on/off genes for innovation and
social learning.
Agents with an activated innovation allele can
spontaneously discover the innovation at a fixed innovation
rate of .025. Agents with an activated social-learning allele
can copy the innovation from their neighbors: for every
adjacent neighbor that knows the innovation, a social
learner’s chance of learning the innovation increases by .25.
The ten-fold difference between the success of social and
asocial learning is based on an assumption of differential
learning costs: if asocial learning has a greater cost and

0.8

0

Proportion of pop. knowing
innovation

these things. No explanatory power is lost in making this
assumption as these proportions can be set to 1, and the
resulting model is only slightly less parsimonious. To
accommodate this variation in ability, Equation 3 can be
modified by multiplying the innovation and social learning
parts of the equation by their corresponding proportions, I
and S, respectively:
Δu = SRS u (1 − u ) + IRI (1 − u )
(4)

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

Time step
0.05

0.1

0.25

0.5

0.75

1

Figure 2: Simulations with asocial learning rate = .025,
social learning rate = .25, proportion of social learners = 1,
and proportion of asocial learners varying from .05 to 1.
These results reveal subtle but noticeable differences
between the DCA equation and the simulations. For Figures
1 and 2, the whole population is capable of social learning;

1686

asocial learning in simulations. Thus we can infer that this
increase in maximum slope across number of innovators is
due to social learning. This implies that increasing the
proportion of the population with the asocial learning allele
speeds innovation spread in the simulation, which is exactly
what we see in Figures 1 and 2.
Analogously, Figures 4 and 5 depict results from
adjusting the proportion of the population with the social
learning allele when the whole population has the asocial
learning allele. Figure 4 shows predictions of the DCA
equation while Figure 5 presents simulation results. Again,
the curves produced from the simulations have a greater
maximum learning slope than the curves predicted by the
DCA equation, and these discrepancies increase with the
proportion of the population that is capable of social
learning.

Proportion of pop. knowing
innovation

1

0.6
0.4
0.2

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

Time step
0

0.1

0.25

0.5

0.75

1

Figure 4: Diffusion curves predicted by DCA equation
with asocial learning rate = .025, social learning rate = .25,
and proportion of social learners varying from 0 to 1.
1

0.18
0.16
0.14
Maximum slope

0.8

0

Proportion of pop. knowing
innovation

what changes across curves is the proportion of the
population capable of asocial learning. In Figure 1, the
curves determined by the DCA equation appear more
parallel than they do in the simulation results of Figure 2.
We can understand these differences by considering the
DCA equation itself. This equation (4) has a social learning
component (left half) and an asocial learning component
(right half). Recall that the DCA equation’s key variable is
the proportion of the population that knows the innovation.
At the beginning, the innovative behavior is introduced into
the population by asocial learning, so the proportion of the
population that can do asocial learning has a large effect as
seen in Figure 1. Because this proportion of asocial learners
is different in every curve, the curves differentiate quickly.
However, as the proportion of the population that knows the
innovation increases, the social learning component of the
DCA equation has a greater effect. Because all of the curves
in Figure 1 have the same social learning settings, with the
proportion of social learners S set to 1 and the rate of social
learning RS set to .25, their learning rates are very similar
after this original differentiation, causing the observed
parallelism. Thus, the parallel nature of the equationproduced curves in Figure 1 is a direct consequence of using
the proportion of the population that knows the innovation
as the key independent variable.
The lack of parallelism in simulation curves can be
quantified by examining the maximum learning slope for
each curve, which represents the amount of learning when u,
the proportion of the population that knows the innovation,
equals .5. This is the point that maximizes the product u(1u) and thus also maximizes innovation spread according to
the DCA equation. Figure 3 presents mean maximum slopes
of diffusion curves as a function of the proportion of the
population with the innovation allele.

0.12
0.1

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0.08

0

10

20

30

0.06

40

50

60

70

80

Time step

0.04
0.02

0

0
0.05

0.1

0.25

0.5

0.75

Proportion of population with innovation gene
DCA equation

0.1

0.25

0.5

0.75

1

Figure 5: Simulations with asocial learning rate = .025,
social learning rate = .25, proportion of social learners
varying from 0 to 1, and proportion of asocial learners = 1.

1

Simulation

Figure 3: Maximum slope of curves (where u = .5) from the
DCA equation and the simulations.
Figure 3 indicates that the maximum slope of each curve
from the DCA equation is relatively stable across variation
in number of innovators, consistent with a constant social
learning component in the DCA equation. The
corresponding simulations, however, do not follow this
pattern; rather than being stable, the maximum slope
increases with the proportion of innovators.
As Figure 6 indicates, there is no discrepancy between the
asocial learning component of the DCA equation and

With purely asocial learning (S = 0), the DCA equation
closely tracks simulation results. The absolute differences
between the equation and simulations averaged below .01
across all time steps. The lowest navy blue curves in Figures
4 and 5 are nearly identical. These two curves are re-plotted
in Figure 6 to emphasize the overlap. This is the only
simulation curve that the DCA equation successfully
predicts. This predictive success makes sense because
asocial learning in the simulation occurs as a random event
based on a fixed probability, just as in the equation.
Therefore, discrepancies between all other DCA and

1687

Proportion of pop. knowing
innovation

simulation curves must result from social learning or
possible interactions between social and asocial learning.
A possible cause of the increase in social learning as the
proportion of innovators increases (Figure 3) is boundary
surface length, the length of the perimeter surrounding
groups of agents that know the innovation. These
boundaries mark the area where naïve agents can learn the
innovation. Thus, increasing this area should increase the
speed of innovation spread.
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

Time step
DCA equation

Simulation

Figure 6: Diffusion curve predicted by the DCA equation
compared to simulation results. Asocial learning rate = .025
and proportion of asocial learners = 1.
According to this analysis of the simulations, the spatial
distribution of the agents that know the innovation affects
social learning. Consider each innovator as a start point for
an island of social learners. There will be more such islands
when there are more initial innovators. More innovation
islands generate more surface length and therefore more

social learning. This suggests an interaction effect with the
proportion of innovators in the population: when there are
multiple initial innovators, there is a higher likelihood that
more social learning will occur as a result of greater surface
length. When there are fewer initial innovators, less social
learning will occur as a result of less surface length.
Figure 7 shows two plots from simulations exemplifying
this argument. These two tori present simulation outputs,
each depicting the point where one-half the population
possesses the innovation. In 7A, where the proportion of
innovators = .05, there are two islands, resulting from a few
early innovators. In 7B, where the proportion of innovators
= 1, there are upwards of nine islands due to more
innovators. Although the proportion of the population
possessing the innovation is the same in both worlds,
surface length is much greater for the simulation that was
initialized with a higher proportion of innovators.
Thus, an explanation for the discrepancies between the
predictions of the DCA equation and the simulation results
is that asocial learning increases the number of start points
for social learning, and therefore the emerging amount of
surface length. Because surface length determines the
amount of social learning that can take place, social learning
and innovation spread increase substantially as surface
length increases. Thus, increasing asocial learning increases
social learning in the simulation (Figure 2) but not in the
DCA equation (Figure 1; see Figure 3 for direct
comparison). This explanation can be further validated by a
mediation analysis (MacKinnon et al, 2007).

A: Few innovators

B: Many innovators

Figure 7: Two worlds with innovator proportions of .05 (A) and 1.0 (B). Time of acquisition is indicated by color saturation.
Innovators are outlined in pink.

1688

Mediation analysis is a type of linear regression that
evaluates the relative effects of an independent variable
(here, proportion of asocial learners) and a mediating
variable (here, surface length) on a dependent variable
(here, amount of social learning). The idea is that the
independent variable affects the dependent variable, not
only directly, but also indirectly via a mediating variable.
A mediation analysis of the simulation data across the six
increasing proportions of asocial learners shows that 90.2
percent of the variance in the amount of social learning
caused by variance in the proportion of asocial learners is
mediated by surface length (total effect = 19.233 [β = .945],
mediation effect = 17.351 [β = .912 * .934 = .852], p <
0.0001). As shown in Figure 8, the direct effect of the
proportion of asocial learners on the amount of social
learning becomes non-significant after controlling for the
mediating variable of surface length, implying full
mediation. This mediation analysis lends statistical support
to the idea that surface length is the mechanism through
which asocial learning causes social learning to speed up.
M
Surface
length
.912*
X
Proportion of
asocial learners

.934*

.945* (.093)

Y
Amount of
social learning

** p < .001
* p < .01

Figure 8: Standardized regression (beta) coefficients for
meditational analysis. The path from X to Y falls to nonsignificance after controlling for the mediating variable of
surface length (as indicated by the small coefficient in
parentheses).
In summary, the simulations indicate that increasing
social learning by adding more asocial learners increases
surface length, and therefore increases the speed of social
learning. This goes beyond the DCA equation which takes
only the proportion of the population that knows the
innovation as its independent variable. Also, speed of
innovation spread is reduced as the number of agents with
the social learning allele decreases.

Discussion
Our results show a difference between the DCA equation
and the simulations, and this difference derives from the
spatial factor of surface length. In the simulation, surface
length is causally related to both social and asocial learning.
Asocial learning increases surface length and surface length,
in turn, increases social learning. The DCA equation, whose
only independent variable is the proportion of the
population that knows the innovation, does not capture this
spatial factor. It is possible that the DCA equation could be

improved on by a more sophisticated mathematical model
that incorporates surface length.
A fundamental question is whether or not these results
apply to the real world. After all, the results are a
consequence of the design of the simulations. There is a
high viscosity in the design, meaning that agents can only
learn from their directly adjacent neighbors. This
characteristic is presumably the cause of the spatial effect. If
an agent could learn from any other randomly-selected
agent, then the spatial arrangement of agents would have no
bearing on the results. Therefore, the results are only
applicable to real-world scenarios where social learning
depends highly on spatial proximity. With tools like the
telephone and internet, which allow social learning to take
place across oceans, these results may not apply to diffusion
of innovation for many human populations. This is not to
say that diffusion in humans is random, but rather that these
present simulations may be too constrained to model it.
However, the current results do seem applicable to
populations where social learning is heavily dependent on
proximity, which would include a lot of human learning
based on face-to-face interactions.
This consideration points to a distinction between
geographic and social-network analysis. The simulations we
present here are examples of geographic analysis, with
agents learning from their immediate neighbors. Social
networks can transcend spatial proximity by using
communication technologies to cover great distances. This
difference is not just one of viscosity but also of structural
complexity, because social networks are often more
complicated than geographic relationships.
Franz and Nunn (2009) developed a method of social
network analysis called network-based diffusion analysis, or
NBDA. NBDA uses the social network of a population and
the times at which they learn innovations to probabilistically
determine whether the learning mechanism is social or
asocial. Their method of social network analysis seems
promising, although it requires the researcher to determine
the social network of a population. Such specification may
not be feasible in excessively large populations. There are
also cases where a geographic analysis may be more
appropriate because some environments are in fact viscous
(e.g., Lefebvre, 1995).
Also, Franz and Nunn’s main interest was in detecting
social or asocial learning when one such learning method
was exclusively present. In contrast, our research used
various, systematic combinations of these two learning
mechanisms. Model sensitivity to such combinations of
social and asocial learning is more interesting and important
than detection of pure cases. Studying such combinations is
critical to discovering interactions between social and
asocial learning, as highlighted in our results.
A lattice structure permitting interaction only between
immediately adjacent neighbors is actually a special case of
a network that provides only those links (or edges). Thus, a
generalization of our results would entail testing whether an
analog of surface length would facilitate information

1689

diffusion in networks of various topologies. Such an
analogy might be the number of directed links between
agents who possess, and agents who lack, an innovation. If
such links indicate direction of causal influence, then it
would be important to count the links from knowledgeable
to naïve agents; if links indicate friendship choice, then
count the links from naïve to knowledgeable agents,
because agents are likely to be influenced by those they
consider to be friends.
The original aim of this project was to look for ways to
disentangle social learning from asocial learning through a
spatial analysis of the diffusion of innovative behavior. The
results suggest that a greater proportion of asocial learners
results in more innovation islands and greater surface
length. Although it may be difficult to determine surface
length in wild populations, counting islands in a topographic
analysis of observations of innovative behavior would seem
feasible.
The spatial effect of surface length provides a mechanism
to disentangle social and asocial learning that is not
available in diffusion curve analysis. This kind of spatial
analysis could become another valuable tool to measure and
understand the differences between social and asocial
learning. One next step is to apply the ideas developed from
this simulation to real biological data. In doing so, we may
be able to contribute new understanding of how adaptive
innovations spread and how they interact with evolution.
Another planned thrust is to study how evolution selects the
best proportions of social and asocial learning alleles under
different environmental conditions (Laland et al., 1996;
Shultz, Hartshorn, & Hammond, 2008; Shultz, Hartshorn, &
Kaznatcheev, 2009). In such research, faster learning cycles
can be nested within slower evolutionary cycles.

Heyes & B. G. Galef (Eds.), Social learning in animals:
The roots of culture. San Diego: Academic Press.
Lefebvre, L. (1995). The opening of milk bottles by birds:
Evidence for accelerating learning rates, but against the
wave-of-advance model of cultural transmission.
Behavioural Processes, 34, 43-54.
Lekvall, P., & Wahlbin, C. (1973). A study of some
assumptions underlying innovation diffusion functions.
The Swedish Journal of Economics, 75 (4), 362-377.
MacKinnon, D. P., Fairchild, A. J., & Fritz, M. S. (2007).
Mediation analysis. Annual Review of Psychology, 58,
593-614.
Reader, S. M. (2004). Distinguishing social and asocial
learning using diffusion dynamics. Learning and
Behavior, 32 (1), 90-104.
Reader, S. M., & Laland, K. N. (Eds.). (2003). Animal
innovation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sherry, D. F., & Galef, B. G. Jr. (1984). Cultural
transmission without imitation: milk bottle opening by
birds. Animal Behaviour, 32, 937-938.
Shultz, T. R., Hartshorn, M., & Hammond, R. A. (2008).
Stages in the evolution of ethnocentrism. In B. C. Love,
K. McRae, & V. M. Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of the
30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 1244-1249). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Shultz, T. R., Hartshorn, M., & Kaznatcheev, A. (2009).
Why
is
ethnocentrism
more
common
than
humanitarianism? In N. A. Taatgen & H. van Rijn (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2100-2105). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by a fellowship from the McGill
Faculty of Science to AM, and operating grants to TRS
from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada and a Dean’s Excellence Award from the
McGill Faculty of Science. We are grateful to Simon
Reader, Louis Lefebvre, Artem Kaznatcheev, Stuart Wright,
and Charles Garfinkle for ideas and insights on our project.

References
Fisher, J., & Hinde, R. A. (1949). The opening of milk
bottles by birds. British Birds, 42, 347-357.
Franz, M., & Nunn, C. L. (2009). Network-based diffusion
analysis: A new method for detecting social learning.
Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 276 (1663), 18291836.
Goldstone, R. L., & Gureckis, T. M. (2009). Collective
behavior. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1 (3), 412-438.
Heyes, C. M. (1994). Social learning in animals: Categories
and mechanisms. Biological Reviews, 69, 207-231.
Laland, K. N., Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. J. (1996).
Developing a theory of animal social learning. In C. M.

1690

