UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial Representations with Conflicting Intrinsic Frames of Reference

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9zf904q8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Tamborello, Franklin
Sun, Yanlong
Wang, Hognbin

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial Representations with Conflicting Intrinsic Frames of Reference
Franklin P. Tamborello, II (franklin.tamborello@uth.tmc.edu),
Yanlong Sun (yanlong.sun@uth.tmc.edu), &
Hongbin Wang (hongbin.wang@uth.tmc.edu)
School of Health Information Sciences,
University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
7000 Fannin, Ste. 600
Houston, TX 77030 USA

Abstract
Establishing and updating spatial relationships between
objects in the environment is vital to maintaining situation
awareness. Wang et al. (2005) found that updating of spatial
representations in the intrinsic frame of reference (IFOR) can
be prioritized based on salience of task demands. But their
study used a task environment with only one IFOR. Often a
task environment has several objects in it which may be taskrelevant, and they may conflict with each other in one or more
ways such as by being oriented in differing directions. Two
experiments manipulated relative spatial orientation and task
salience of two task-relevant objects such that the objects’
orientations conflicted with each other and the task
probabilistically demanded response based on the orientation
of one or the other object. It was found that spatial updating in
the IFOR was constrained by the limits of human attentional
processes. Furthermore those constraints can be relaxed with
practice.
Keywords: prioritized representation updating; conflicting
spatial representations; spatial cognition; intrinsic frame of
reference.

Introduction
Spatial cognition is crucial to our everyday interactions with
our environment and other people including, for instance,
maintaining awareness of one’s task environment. A large
body of evidence suggests that people organize spatial
representations and reason about spatial relationships using
frames of reference (FORs,
(Levinson, 1996; Wang,
Johnson & Zhang, 2001). FORs can be based on our own
viewpoints, expressing spatial representations that are
centered on ourselves (the egocentric FOR, “EFOR”).
EFORs represent spatial affordances within our immediate
vicinity, such as a pencil that is within reach. FORs based on
navigable environments (the allocentric FOR, “AFOR”),
such as rooms, buildings, or cities, represent the shapes of
those environments and what affordances they give to
wayfinding (Klatzky, 1998; Mou & McNamara, 2002; Wang
& Spelke, 2002).
Most research in spatial cognition has focused on the
EFOR and AFOR (May & Klatzky, 2000; Shelton &
McNamara, 2001) though it is possible to distinguish a third
type of FOR, the intrinsic (IFOR), so named because it is
intrinsic to the person or object of focus (Mou &
McNamara, 2002; Wang, Sun, Johnson & Yuan, 2005). The
IFOR is a unique FOR that brings the spatial representation
affordances of the EFOR outside the observer’s body. The
IFOR enables us to imagine spatial relationships from
positions other than the one we currently occupy, including
the positions of other people. This is important for action

planning, interpersonal communication of specific spatial
representations, and even theory of mind. For instance,
spatial relationships such as, “John is sitting to Mary’s
right.” are represented in the IFOR. Here Mary is the
reference anchor around which the framework for the spatial
relationship of John’s position is based (Levinson, 1996).
Given the importance of IFOR-based spatial
representations in everyday tasks, one fundamental question
is how easily IFOR representations can be updated within
the context of a changing environment. It has been shown
that egocentric representations can be updated fairly easily
whereas updating allocentric representations other than selflocations often requires effort. Wang, Sun, Johnson, and
Yuan (2005) studied IFOR spatial representations and how
they may be updated to reflect changes in the task
environment, particularly as a function of a target object’s
task salience. They found that updating of spatial
representations in the IFOR can be prioritized based on
salience to task demands and that IFOR updating is often,
but not always, easy for those salient objects. However their
study used a task environment with only one IFORsupporting object. Often a task environment has several
such objects in it which may be task-relevant and they may
conflict with each other in one or more ways such as by
being oriented in differing directions. In the above example
regarding John and Mary, we may also notice that “John is
sitting to Sam’s left.” In this case, John’s spatial location is
represented in an IFOR centered on Sam and that spatial
relationship to John is not the same for Mary and Sam.
When John moves, both Mary’s and Sam’s spatial
representations should be updated.
Presumably increasing the number of task relevant IFORsupporting objects would increase task complexity and
consequently demand more attentional resources. At a
certain point people will have to prioritize not only their
updating of spatial representations of the targets of their
actions but also the reference anchors of those spatial
representations. In other words, if there are multiple IFORsupporting objects that must be attended in a task
environment then people will need to prioritize their
updating not only of the action-target objects but also of the
IFOR-supporting objects.
A “Two Cannons” pointing task was designed to test
hypotheses regarding updating priority in a two-IFOR
spatial task environment. In this task participants needed to
determine which way a depicted cannon should turn to point
at a designated target. Salience of the two cannons varied so
as to make one or the other more important to the
completion of the task. If people can attend to only one

2512

IFOR at a time then in a an environment where multiple
IFORs may exist updating those representations must be
prioritized somehow. If priority of updating between IFORs
goes according to salience, as Wang et al. (2005) found for
updating target priority within one IFOR, then response time
should vary with the targeted IFOR’s relative salience. That
is, when two IFORs conflict the conflict should be resolved
most easily in favor of the more salient IFOR. Furthermore,
if people can only form one IFOR at a time they may wait to
see which IFOR to use before they invest the time in
forming it. Then we would expect an effect of conflict as
they wait to see which IFOR to use but no effect of relative
IFOR anchor angle since anchor angle would be irrelevant
to IFOR selection. On the other hand if people can form and
maintain multiple IFORs simultaneously then when the
IFOR anchor objects conflict with each other on some
dimension (e.g., orientation) there should be an effect of
relative IFOR orientation angle such that at one angle the
irrelevant IFOR may be easier to inhibit than at another
angle.

Experiment 1
We designed a “two cannons” turning response task to
investigate how people represent spatial information with
multiple conflicting IFORs and how they resolve the
conflicting attentional demands of updating spatial
relationships involving multiple IFORs. The task required
participants to determine the location of a designated target
relative to a matching-color IFOR anchor, one of the two
cannon stimuli. Orientation of the cannon stimuli varied so
that turning direction responses dependent upon those
orientations would conflict based on the orientations of the
two IFOR anchors, the cannons, with respect to the
indicated target. Task salience of the two anchors also varied
so as to weight the conflict in favor of one IFOR or the
other. If IFOR updating tends to be prioritized according to
salience as Wang et al. (2005) found, then response time for
each IFOR should be a function of that IFOR’s relative
salience. That is, when two IFOR spatial relationships
conflict, the conflict should be resolved most readily for the
more salient IFOR.

Figure 1. Experiment displays depicting 0° relative cannon
angle (A, left), 90° cannon angle (B, center), and 180°
cannon angle (C, right). Here blue is depicted as dark gray
and red is light gray. In A both cannons (depicted as half
red, half blue) are at 270° orientation. The highlighted blue
dot indicates the target. In this case the correct response
would be to punch the up arrow key to indicate that no turn
is required. In B the correct response would be to punch the
left arrow key, indicating that the blue cannon would have to
turn to its left to face the target. In C the correct response
would be to punch the right arrow key, indicating that the
red cannon would have to turn to its right to face the target.

Method
Participants Ten graduate students and postdoctoral fellows
were paid to participate in Experiment 1. Subjects had a
mean age of 32.1 years (SD = 7.75) and five were female.
Design Table 1 enumerates the conditions for Experiment 1.
We established conflict in the cannon IFORs by
manipulating relative angle between the two cannons so that
the two cannons either were on top of each other as in
Figure 1A, at 90° to each other (Figure 1B), or 180° to each
other (Figure 1C). We used 90° & 180° to compare degree
of conflict. The ratio of blue dots to red dots varied
sequentially within each trial block, always starting at 8 blue
to 0 red and transitioning in increments of 2 dots to 0 blue to
8 red. Color ratio conditions occurred as sub-blocks of eight
trials, each of which exhausted the set of eight possible
target locations. Thus each block of 40 trials exhausted each
of five color ratio conditions once and each of eight target
location conditions five times for one combination of
relative cannon angle and cannon orientations. Relative
cannon angle and cannon orientations varied randomly by
block.
Materials The experiments ran on a PC in E-Prime version
1.2. The two cannons subtended a viewing angle of

Table 1. Combinatorial table of conditions of Experiment 1. All factors varied within-subjects, except color ratio.
Relative
Cannon Orientation
Target Position
Target Color
Cannon Angle (specific to each cannon (all cannon angle
(all cannon angle
angle condition)
conditions)
conditions)
0°
90°(blue & red)
0° – 315°, with 0° being up
270°(blue & red)
and incrementing
red or blue, varied
90°
45° (blue) & 315° (red) clockwise in steps of 45°. 8randomly within each
positions total. Varied
color ratio cycle,
135° (red) & 225° (blue)
randomly, without
constrained by color ratio
replacement, within each condition.
180°
90°(blue) & 270°(red)
color ratio cycle.
90°(red) & 270°(blue)

2513

Dot Color Ratio
(all cannon angle
conditions)
8 blue : 0 red – 0 blue : 8
red, in increments of 2
dots. 5 color ratios total.
Varied sequentially within
each trial block.

Results and Discussion
Data from both experiments were filtered for subject error
and outliers, outliers being outside the subject’s mean ± 3
standard deviations. This removed approximately 5% of
observations. Figure 2 depicts effects on response time of
the interaction of target color and dot color ratio. Again, in
Experiment 1 color ratio sequence began with all blue dots

1200
1100
RT (ms)

approximately 6° while the entire display of cannons and
surrounding dots subtended a viewing angle of
approximately 12°. The cannon stimuli were constructed
such that they each had an obvious intrinsic orientation
(Figure 1). They appeared as though viewed from above,
with wheels at their rear and a barrel in the middle,
extending far forward.
Procedure Upon onset of the stimulus display, the
experiment paused for one second before it flashed a yellow
ring around one dot to indicate that it was the target. The
matching-color cannon thus became task-salient.
Participants were to then respond as quickly and accurately
as possible which way the salient cannon should turn to face
the dot: left, right, or no turn. Responses had the stipulation
that the turn was to be the shortest way round. Participants
indicated their responses with the left, right, and up arrow
keys, respectively. In the case wherein the target was
directly behind the indicated cannon, participants could
respond either left or right as turning either way would
result in a change in cannon orientation of 180°. The
experiment played a “zap” sound as feedback for a correct
trial. In the case of incorrect trials the experiment paused for
two seconds to discourage random guessing and it played a
distinctive “uh oh” sound. Subjects erred on fewer than 5%
of trials on average.

1000
900
800
0

Target Color
Blue

8:0

4:4

2:6

0:8

Color Ratio Condition (B : R)
Figure 2. Experiment 1 response times as a function of the
interaction of target color and dot color ratio. Within-block
color ratio sequence progressed left-to-right along the xaxis. Error bars depict standard error of the mean.
and transitioned gradually to all red dots (i.e., from 8 blue :
0 red to 0 blue : 8 red, hereafter abbreviated #blue:#red for
Experiment 1). Repeated measures ANOVA found that
target color by color ratio linear by linear interaction
contrast was reliable, F (1, 9) = 39.25, p < .001, meaning
that the RT function of blue targets and red targets over
color ratio differed. In addition, Color ratio’s main effect
was reliable, F (3, 27) = 8.38, p < .001.
The results suggest that for the blue targets as the blue
cannon became less salient as the number of dots
transitioned from blue to red, the ability of subjects to
respond to the blue cannon did not fall off, it stayed the
Red Targets

Blue Targets
Cannon Angle

1400

6:2

Red

1400

0°
90°

1300

1300

180°

1200
Mean RT (ms)

Mean RT (ms)

1200
1100
1000

1100
1000

900

900

800

800

700

700

0

0
8:0

6:2
4:4
Color Ratio Condition (B : R)

2:6

6:2

4:4
2:6
Color Ratio Condition (B : R)

0:8

Figure 3. Experiment 1 RTs by target color, cannon angle, and color ratio condition. Error bars depict SEM.

2514

1200

Mean RT (ms)

1100
1000
900
800
0

0

45
90
135 180 225 270
Target Bearing (angular degrees)

315

Figure 4. Experiment 1 RTs by target bearing at color
ratio 8:0. Error bars depict SEM.
same. This is surprising given that as the blue cannon
decreased in salience subjects should have paid less
attention to it, thus taking longer to recognize and respond
to a rare blue target trial. Additionally, the preservation of
the ability to respond to blue did not come at the cost of
responding to red, as red targets showed a dramatic decrease
in response time across the color ratio condition
progression. This indicates little or no strategic trade-off of
prioritizing one IFOR over the other.
Breaking the interaction down to more specific
experimental conditions, it is clear that IFOR conflict
mattered when interacting with color ratio (Figure 3).
Collapsing across 90° and 180° cannon angles gives an
abstracted conflict versus no conflict (0° cannon angle)
contrast. With five post hoc comparisons for this family of
tests of the target color by color ratio by conflict interaction,
the Bonferroni-corrected α’ = .01. Conflict by target color
was not reliably different for blue targets (t(9) = 3.028, p = .
014), but was for red (t(9) = 3.821, p = .004). This means
that conflict in IFORs was a product of task demands, which
in turn was a combination of IFOR spatial properties and
probabilistic IFOR selection properties. The 90° versus 180°
cannon angle difference was not reliable (for red targets in
the 2:6 color ratio condition, t(9) = 3.095, p = .013).
Furthermore the slope of the conflict versus no conflict by
color ratio interaction function was different for blue targets,
but not for red targets: t(9) = 3.903, p = .004; and t(9) =
-1.779, p = .109, for blue and red respectively. This means
that for blue targets as the color ratio progressed from blue
to red RTs got slightly faster for 0° cannon angle trials but
slower for 90° and 180° cannon angle trials. This indicates
that participants really saw the two overlapping cannons as
one IFOR in the 0° cannon angle condition, whereas the 90°
and 180° cannon angle conditions worked well as a
manipulation to induce IFOR conflict. When the color ratio
was 6:2 the cost to switch attention on the IFORs can be
calculated as the difference between the RTs for the blue and
red targets within the conflict condition. That switching cost
was 257 ms.
The 8:0 condition might be taken as a base case of the two
cannons task in that the color ratio of the dots perfectly

predicts target color, and therefore which cannon
participants should attend. Here, then, we can get a sense for
target bearing’s RT function (Figure 4). It shows that targets
at 135° and 225° bearing took longer to respond to than
targets at other bearings (except 180°, which was subject to
Hick’s Law since participants could respond either direction
to this target bearing), t(9) = -3.848, p = .004.
Kessler & Thomson (2010) used a similar response
scheme in their perspective alignment task. They found a
flat target bearing function except for longer RTs at 135°
rotation in either direction. They speculated that visual
comparisons could be made up to about 90° of rotation but
that greater degrees of rotation required complex imaginal
transformations that took longer. Presumably the same
cognitive and perceptual-motor processes take place with
the two cannons task since it also requires the alignment of
perspectives with the IFOR of the designated cannon.
However, the target bearing function went flat for
conditions where a switch of attended cannon was likely,
namely when the target belonged to the non-salient IFOR.
For instance, when the color ratio was 2:6, a red target was
more likely to appear than a blue target. That probability
difference made the red cannon more task-salient. Subjects
could therefore save some response time by attending the
red cannon during the SOA. But if the target turned out to
be blue then subjects would have to move attention to the
blue cannon and establish a new IFOR around it. When this
happened RTs were not longer for 135° or 225° target
bearing, contrast for blue targets at 2 blue to 6 red t(7) = -.
997, p = .352; contrast for red targets at 6 blue to 2 red, t(7)
= -2.087, p = .075. Note that df = 7 for these two analyses as
two subjects were missing data for these cells, likely due to
subject error or outlier RTs. The 135°/225° target bearing
effect probably went away for these two conditions because
target position would already have been known when it
became clear that the non-salient cannon must form the
basis of the response. Target bearing could then be
integrated during the IFOR attention switch latency rather
than, as in the 8:0 color ratio condition, having all other
representations formed before target onset and being the last
representation left to be formed before responding.
It could be that each piece of the spatial information is
acquired and represented as it becomes available, and that
pieces are retrofitted into the rest of the representation as
needed. This could mean that in 6:2 with a red target, for
example, the potential targets have their representations
built first (maybe in association with the more likely IFOR),
and after the target onset the targeted IFOR is built and
retrofitted to the extant spatial environment representation.

Experiment 2
The asymmetry of the target color interaction with color
ratio found in Experiment 1 was unexpected, and if real,
could imply that people, with practice, may be able to
maintain representation more than one IFOR at a time. As
trial blocks progressed and blue became less salient then
response times for blue targets should have become longer
as the blue cannon reduced in updating priority relative to
the red cannon. Instead a practice effect on the blue IFOR
was apparently sufficient to cancel the expected probability

2515

Experiment 2’s design duplicated Experiment 1’s except that
color ratios incremented from all red to all blue rather than
blue to red as in Experiment 1. Experiment 2 replicated
Experiment 1’s materials and procedures identically.

1200

RT (ms)

1100

Results and Discussion

1000
900
800
0

Target Color
Blue

8:0

6:2

Red

4:4

2:6

0:8

Color Ratio Condition (R : B)
Figure 5. Experiment 2 RTs as a function of the interaction
of target color and dot color ratio. Within-block color ratio
sequence progressed left-to-right along the x-axis. Error
bars depict SEM.
matching effect for the blue IFOR. However, it is also
possible that the interaction effect could be due to sequence
effects of color ratio presentation order. Experiment 2 was
designed to test this possibility by replicating Experiment 1
except that dot color ratios were sequenced in the opposite
order, this time going from red to blue within each block.

Method
Ten graduate students and postdoctoral fellows were paid to
participate in Experiments 2. Subjects had a mean age of
32.1 years (SD = 6.03) and four of them were female.

The target color by conflict by color ratio interaction of
Experiment 1 replicated in Experiment 2 (Figures 5 and 6),
the different color ratio sequence not withstanding (linear by
linear interaction contrast of color ratio with target color F
(1, 9) = 96.6, p < .001). With four post hoc comparisons for
this family of tests, the Bonferroni-corrected α’ = .0125.
Blue targets with conflicting IFORs took longer for subjects
to respond to than blue targets with no conflict, contrast t(9)
= 4.629, p = .001; and likewise for red targets t(9) = 4.119, p
= .003. Also for red targets with conflict RTs got longer as
the color ratio transitioned to more blue dots while the RTs
became shorter for red targets with no conflict (t(9) =
-5.865, p < .001), but the same was not true for blue targets
(t(9) = 3.035, p = .014), all blue target RTs got shorter
regardless of conflict status. This means that when subjects
had to choose between IFORs (conflict), practice effects
interacted with the time costs associated with switching
attention between IFORs and the fact that target color was
selected probabilistically from the set of dots. The time
costs existed in turn because only one IFOR could be
attended at any one time and moving attention from one to
the other cost 215 ms.
As for target bearing, 135° and 255° were again slower
than other target bearings, 180° excluded, in this
experiment’s color ratio and target color “base case,” t(9) =
-2.706, p = .024 (Figure 7). The two target bearings were
not reliably different for blue targets at 2 blue to 6 red (t(6)
Blue Targets

Red Targets
Cannon Angle
1400
0°

1400

90°
1300

1300

180°

1200
Mean RT (ms)

Mean RT (ms)

1200
1100
1000

1100
1000

900

900

800

800

700

700

0

8:0

6:2
4:4
Color Ratio Condition (R : B)

0

2:6

6:2

4:4
2:6
Color Ratio Condition (R : B)

0:8

Figure 6. Experiment 2 RTs by target color, cannon angle, and color ratio condition. Error bars depict SEM.

2516

Future work should clarify the computational mechanisms
underlying spatial salience and people’s capacity to
effectively process spatial relationships in multi-IFOR task
environments.

1100

Mean RT (ms)

1000
900

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Office of Naval Research Grant
#N000140110132 and a training fellowship from the Keck
Center NLM Training Program in Biomedical Informatics
of the Gulf Coast Consortia (NLM Grant #T15LM007093).

800
700
0

0

45

90

135 180 225
Target Bearing

270

315

Figure 7. Experiment 2 RTs by target bearing at color
ratio 0:8. Error bars depict SEM.
= -1.193, p = .278), nor for red targets at 6 blue to 2 red (t(9)
= -1.721, p = .119). So again, having to switch IFORs
precludes the kind of processing that yields the Kessler and
Thomson (2010) type of target bearing effect.

General Discussion
People use IFORs every day. In social contexts, for
example, we often infer various inter-personal relationships
based on the spatial relations (such as position and distance)
among people. Humans must know how to to prioritize
updating of IFORs so that the most relevant IFORs are
represented sufficiently richly to support the task at hand.
The present study extends the findings of Wang et al. (2005)
to study prioritization and updating among multiple IFORs.
Spatial updating was found to be significantly constrained
by the limits of human attentional processes as evidenced by
a switching cost of approximately 236 ms (averaged across
the two experiments). But those constraints can be relaxed
somewhat with practice, as our interaction effect of target
color with color ratio showed. The results indicated that
subjects engaged in little strategic trade-off of prioritizing
one IFOR over the other, as apparently the cost of attending
one IFOR-supporting object or the other, and engaging the
target bearing representation based on that IFOR, decreased
somewhat with practice. In a larger sense this suggests that
since the cognitive mechanisms supporting IFOR-type
representation are apparently susceptible to practice effects,
that reasoning comes relatively late in the human attentional
stream.
Meanwhile the conspicuous absence of a target bearing
effect for the conditions in which a switch of attended IFOR
was likely hints that the establishment of an IFOR is able to
take advantage of spatial representations already in working
memory. IFORs, therefore, may be limited to one
instantiation at a time as a function of human working
memory capacity, but they may be disbanded and
instantiated dynamically, taking advantage of whatever
spatial representation may be available at the time to be
incorporated into the IFOR to support task performance as
necessary
It is clear that attention plays a central role in mediating
IFOR representational conflicts and in modulating salience.

References
Kessler, K., & Thomson, L. A. (2010). The embodied nature
of spatial perspective taking: Embodied transformation
versus sensorimotor interference. Cognition, 114 (1),
72-88.
Klatzky, R. L. (1998). Allocentric and Egocentric Spatial
Representations: Definitions, Distinctions, and
Interconnections. In Spatial Cognition - An
Interdisciplinary Approach to Representation and
Processing of Spatial Knowledge (Lecture Notes in
Artificial Intelligence 1404).
Levinson, S. C. (1996). Frames of reference and Molyneux's
question: Crosslinguistic evidence. In P. Bloom, M. A.
Peterson, L. Nadel, & M. Garrett (Eds.), Language and
space. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
May, M., & Klatzky, R. L. (2000). Path integration while
ignoring irrelevant movement. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 26(1),
169-86.
Mou, W., & McNamara, T. P. (2002). Intrinsic Frames of
Reference in Spatial Memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 28(1),
162-70.
Shelton, A. L., & McNamara, T. P. (2001). Systems of
spatial reference in human memory. Cognitive
Psychology, 43(4), 274-310.
Wang, H., Johnson, T. R., & Zhang, J. (2001). The mind's
views of space. In Proceedings of the Third International
Conference of Cognitive Science.
Wang, H., Sun, Y., Johnson, T. R., & Yuan, Y. (2005).
Prioritized Spatial Updating in the Intrinsic Frame of
Reference. Spatial Cognition & Computation, 5(1),
89-113.
Wang, R. F. W., & Spelke, E. S. S. (2002). Human spatial
representation: insights from animals. Trends in Cognitive
Science, 6(9), 376 – 382.

2517

