UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Speaker's choice of frame based on rarity information

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2t90d4t5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Honda, Hidehito
Matsuka, Toshihiko

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Speaker’s choice of frame based on rarity information
Hidehito Honda (hito@muscat.L.chiba-u.ac.jp)
Department of Cognitive & Information Science, Chiba University
1-33, Yayoi-cho, Inage-ku, Chiba-shi, Chiba, 263-8522, Japan

Toshihiko Matsuka (matsukat@muscat.L.chiba-u.ac.jp)
Department of Cognitive & Information Science, Chiba University
1-33, Yayoi-cho, Inage-ku, Chiba-shi, Chiba, 263-8522, Japan
Abstract
Previous studies have discussed how speakers select a frame
(e.g., “half full,” or “half empty”), and have proposed a hypothesis such as reference point hypothesis (e.g., Sher &
McKenzie, 2006, 2008). In this paper, we propose a new hypothesis, frame choice based on information about rarity.
This hypothesis predicts that speakers tend to select a frame
denoting a rare event. Four studies provide evidence that
speakers’ choice of frame is consistent with the prediction
from our hypothesis. Furthermore, our hypothesis is reconciled with the positive bias in frame choice, which cannot be
accounted for by the reference point hypothesis. We discuss
the possibility that linguistic behaviors are widely explained
from people’s sensitivity to rarity information.
Keywords: Framing effect; speaker’s choice of frame; reference point hypothesis; sensitivity to rarity; positive bias in
frame choice

Introduction
Since Tversky and Kahneman (1981) documented the original research, many researchers have studied framing effect
(for reviews, see Levin, Schneider, & Geath, 1998; Soman,
2004). One example of the framing effect is the “Asian disease problem” proposed by Tversky and Kahneman (1981):
Imagine that the US is preparing for the outbreak
of an unusual Asian disease, which is expected to
kill 600 people. Two alternative programs to
combat the disease have been proposed. Assume
that the exact scientific estimates of the consequences of the programs are as follows:
If Program A is adopted, 200 people will be
saved.
If Program B is adopted, there is a 1/3 probability that 600 people will be saved and a 2/3 probability that no people will be saved.
For this problem, a majority of the participants preferred
Program A to Program B. Another group was presented
with the same cover story, but with the two programs rephrased:
If Program C is adopted, 400 people will die.
If Program D is adopted, there is a 1/3 probability that nobody will die, and a 2/3 probability that
600 people will die.

Although Program C is only a rewording of Program A and
Program D is a rewording of Program B, a majority of the
participants preferred Program D to Program C. Thus framing effect refers to the effects such that the framing of a
problem influences decision making.
Many studies on the framing effect have examined
how listeners, or those presented with frames, behave based
on the frames. Various models have been proposed to explain the framing effect. However, relatively few studies
have been conducted on how speakers frame a problem. For
instance, what influences speakers to describe the Asian
disease problem with the “save” frame or “die” frame?
Some researchers have recently discussed how speakers frame outcomes (Keren, 2007; McKenzie & Nelson,
2003; Sher & McKenzie, 2006, 2008; Teigen & Karevold,
2005; van Buiten & Keren, 2009; Wang, 2004). For example, McKenzie and his associates have examined problems
such as “Which do speakers select to describe a 4-ounce cup
with 2 ounces of water, half full or half empty?”, and have
proposed the reference point hypothesis (McKenze & Nelson, 2003; Sher & McKenzie, 2006, 2008). This hypothesis
assumes that a speaker tends to use a frame that corresponds
to the label that has increased. In the above example, the
reference point hypothesis predicts that a speaker uses the
full frame when a cup has been previously empty, and that a
speaker uses the empty frame when a cup has been full of
water. Therefore, the reference point influences speaker’s
choice of frame.
The reference point hypothesis is intriguing in that it
not only predicts how a speaker selects a frame, but also
explains why decision makers are influenced by framing
(Sher & McKenzie, 2006, 2008). However, we point out
that the reference point hypothesis does not predict one of
the interesting findings of frame choice, positive bias, which
has been repeatedly reported in the previous studies. The
positive bias refers to the tendency that in choosing from
two frames which have positive and negative valenced
meanings such as “gain”-“loss” or “success”-“failure,”
people tend to prefer the positive valenced frame (e.g., Keren, 2007; Sher & McKenzie, 2006; van Buiten & Keren,
2009; Wang, 2004). For example, Sher and McKenzie
(2006) showed that in describing results of the last 50
projects in which 20 projects have succeeded and 30
projects have failed, participants generally used a positive
frame (e.g., 20 out of the last 50 projects have succeeded)
rather than a negative one (e.g., 30 out of the last 50 projects
have failed). In Wang (2004), participants were presented
with probabilistic life-death or monetary problems by pie

772

charts, and asked to complete sentences that summarized the
problems. It was found that participants tended to complete
sentences with positive frames (e.g., save, help) rather than
negative ones (e.g., killed, die).
These findings suggest that psychological mechanisms
other than those explained from the reference point hypothesis exist when speakers select a frame.

Choice of frame based on rarity information
We propose a new hypothesis, frame choice based on rarity
information. We predict that information about rarity influences choice of frame, and that the speakers frame outcomes
in terms of rarity. Consider the following problems: There is
a die colored both black and white. One of the 6 sides of this
die is black, and the other 5 sides are white. In rolling this
die, the occurrence of black side is rare. In contrast, the occurrence of white side is common. We predict that when
speakers describe results of rolls of this die, they prefer using the black frame because the occurrence of black side is
expected to be rare. Imagine that someone rolls this die 6
times and the black side came up once, and the white sides
came up 5 times. We predict that s/he will describe the results, “With 6 rolls, black came up once”, rather than “white
came up 5 times.” Hence, our hypothesis states that speakers focus on the rarity and prefer using the frame describing
rare events rather than those describing common events.
This hypothesis is based on the findings about hypothesis testing. Previous studies on hypothesis testing have
shown that people are very sensitive to information on rarity,
and that they adaptively use such information in hypothesis
testing (e.g., Klayman & Ha, 1987; McKenzie & Mikkelsen,
2000; Oaksford & Chater, 1994). Furthermore, the finding
in McKenzie, Ferreira, Mikkelsen, & McDermott (2001) is
more relevant. They examined the people’s sensitivity to
rarity in the context of how to phrase a conditional hypothesis. Imagine the conditional hypothesis, “If X1, then Y1,”
where each variable, X and Y, has two levels (X1 and X2,
Y1 and Y2). In this case, this hypothesis can be denoted
with another form, “If X2, then Y2.” McKenzie et al. (2001)
showed that when participants observed rare X1 & Y1 and
common X2 & Y2, they tended to phrase the conditional
hypothesis “If X1, then Y1” rather than “If X2, then Y2,”
suggesting that people phrase a conditional hypothesis in
terms of rarity. Although this finding in McKenzie et al.
(2001) was limited to how to phrase conditional hypothesis,
other linguistic behaviors such as frame choice might be
explained from the same perspective. That is to say, speakers choose a frame in terms of information about rarity.
In this paper, we conducted 4 studies, and examined
our hypothesis regarding to the speaker’s choice of frame.
In Study 1, we conducted an experimental study to examine
our hypothesis. In Studies 2-A, 2-B, 2-C, we discussed the
positive bias in frame choice, and examined whether our
hypothesis is reconciled with the positive bias.

Study 1
In study 1, we examined our hypothesis using a frame
choice task. We predict that frame choice is influenced by
information about rarity. In particular, participants will
choose a frame describing a rare event.

Method
Participants. The participants were 614 Aoyama Gakuin
University students, who received partial course credit.
There were from 64 to 72 participants in each of nine conditions (see Table 1).
Task and experimental conditions. We conducted a frame
choice task that was analogous to that in McKenzie and
Nelson (2003) using a questionnaire. In one of the 9 conditions, participants read the following story:
There is a die that is painted black on one
side and painted white on the other five sides.
You have rolled this die 6 times, and the results are as follows:
Side of the die
Black
White

Frequency
1
5

Which is the most natural way to describe
these results, “The die came up black 1 out of
6 times” or “The die came up white 5 out of 6
times”?1
In this question, participants were required to choose one of
two frames (i.e., “black” frame or “white” frame) to describe the outcomes.
There were 9 experimental conditions. Three dies differed in the color (i.e., black rare, white rare, black-white
equal), and there were three patterns of outcomes from the
roll of die. These three dies and three outcomes were varied
orthogonally with respect to one another (see Table 1).

Results and discussion
Figure 1 shows proportions of black frame choice for 9 conditions. It was found that in describing the 3 outcomes (i.e.,
Black1-White5, Black3-White3, Black5-White1), participants in the Black-rare condition significantly preferred the
black frame than those in the White-rare condition in each
of the 3 outcomes (p<.0001, Fisher’s exact test). We also
found general preference for the rare side frame. 67.6% of
participants in the three Black-rare conditions significantly
chose the black frame, and 62.4% of those in the three
White-rare conditions significantly chose the white frame
(p<.001, binomial test).
In the Equivalent conditions, wherein explicit information about rarity was not available to participants, 52.2% of
participants in the 3 Equivalent conditions chose the black
frame. This result indicated that participants did not have a
1
The order of these options was reversed for half of the participants in each condition in each experiment (Studies 1 and 2-C).

773

Table 1. 6 conditions in Experiment 1.
Die
(number of side)

Outcome
(Black, White)
(1,5; n=71)
(3,3; n=68)
(5,1; n=71)
(1,5; n=64)
(3,3; n=72)
(5,1; n=66)
(1,5; n=71)
(3,3; n=64)
(5,1; n=67)

Black-rare
(Black1-White5)
White-rare
(Black5-White1)
Equivalent
(Black3-White3)

and this belief influences frame choice. In other words,
speakers tend to prefer a positive frame because of its rarity.
Therefore, if people explicitly know that a negative frame
describes a rare event and a positive frame describes a
common event, preference for the positive frame will disappear.
In order to examine this hypothesis, we conducted
three studies. In study 2-A, we examined whether the positive bias observed in laboratory experiments is also observed in a naturalistic environment. In study 2-B, we examined belief of rarity about what positive and negative
words describe. In study 2-C, we conducted an experimental
study and tested whether the positive bias disappears when
participants explicitly know that a negative frame denotes a
rare event and a positive frame denotes a common event.

Study 2-A
The positive bias in frame choice reported in the previous
studies suggests that people generally prefer using positive
expressions rather than using negative ones. Study 2-A examined whether a positive bias is observed in a naturalistic
environment. Specifically, we counted a number of articles
in a Japanese newspaper that contains positive or negative
words. If positive bias is to be observed, there ought to be
more articles containing positive words than those containing negative words.

Method

Figure 1. Proportion of black frame choice in Study 1
specific preference between the two frames (p=.574, binomial test).
Taken together, these results show that information
about rarity of side of a die influenced participants’ choice
of frame. In particular, participants preferred the rare side
frame. In addition, when the information about rarity was
not available, participants were indifferent between the two
frames. Hence, these results supported our hypothesis about
frame choice based on information about rarity.

Study 2
In Study 2, we discuss whether the hypothesis about frame
choice based on rarity information is reconciled with the
positive bias in frame choice (e.g., Keren, 2007; Sher &
McKenzie, 2006; van Buiten & Keren, 2009; Wang, 2004).
Why do people prefer a positive frame? Our hypothesis is that the positive bias derives from belief of rarity
about what positive or negative words describe. We predict
that people generally have the belief that what positive
words describe are rarer than what negative words describe,

We used 26 positive-negative Japanese pairs of antonyms
for this study. Table 2 illustrates 5 examples of positivenegative pairs of antonyms. These 26 pairs were selected
using the following procedure. First, one rater, who did not
know the hypothesis of the current study, randomly picked
out 35 pairs of antonyms that he thought had positivenegative valenced meanings from Japanese dictionary of
antonyms (Kitahara & Togo, 1989). Then two other raters,
neither of whom knew the hypothesis, judged whether each
of the 35 pairs had positive-negative meanings. We adopted
26 pairs (i.e., 52 words) that these theree two raters regarded
as having positive-negative meanings.
Then we counted a number of articles in a Japanese
newspaper. We used Yomidasu as the search system. This
search system includes the data-base of Yomiuri shibun,
which is one of the most subscribed newspapers in Japan.
Using this system, we counted the number of articles that
had been published from January 1990 to December 2007.
We conducted this search using each of the 52 words.

Results and discussion
We calculated the positive bias index (P-Bias index) for
each of 26 pairs. In a certain positive-negative antonym pair,
when the numbers of articles in which the positive or negative word is mentioned are Np and Nn respectively, the PBias index is defined by the following equation:

774

P-Bias index=Np/(Np+Nn)
For example, when number of articles is 400 for a positive
word and 100 for a negative word in a certain pair, the calculated P-Bias index is 0.8. Therefore, when the P-Bias index is more than 0.5, a positive word is used more often
than a negative word in a positive-negative antonym pair.
Figure 2 illustrates the P-bias index for 26 positive-negative
antonym pairs. The mean value of the P-bias for the 26 pairs
was 0.678 (SD=0.240, maximum=0.997, minimum=0.065),
and this value was significantly higher than 0.5 (t(25)=3.78,
p<.001). These results suggest that in positive-negative antonym pairs, people tend to use positive words more often
than negative words in a naturalistic environment.

Table 2. Examples of positive-negative pairs of antonyms used in Studies 2-A and 2-B.
positive words
best
success
rich
safety
usefulness

-

negative words
worst
failure
poor
danger
uselessness

Study 2-B
In Study 2-B, we examined belief of rarity about what positive and negative words describe. We predicted that people
generally have the belief that what positive words describe
is rarer than what negative words describe.

Method:
Participants. The participants were 116 Aoyama Gakuin
University students, who received partial course credit.
Task and materials. Participants were asked about their
belief of rarity on what positive and negative words describe
using a questionnaire. The question was as follows:

Figure 2. P-Bias index for 26 pairs in Study 2-A.

There are 26 pairs in this booklet. Two words
in each of pairs have opposite meanings. Imagine “people,” “things,” or “outcomes” that
are described by each of the words in a pair.
Then which do you think is more unusual to
become such people, to make such things, or
to achieve such outcomes?
For this question, participants were required to choose either
a positive or negative word from a pair. We used the same
26 pairs that were used in Study 2-A. If it is unusual to become, make, or achieve what a word describes, what the
word describes must be rare. Hence we assume that a selected word in a pair is judged to refer to something rarer
than the reference of the other word in the pair.

Results and discussion
We calculated the proportion of positive word choice for
each of the 26 pairs. Figure 3 shows the proportions for the
26 pairs. In 21 out of 26 pairs, participants significantly
chose positive words rather than negative words (p<.05,
binomial test), and no negative words were chosen with
more than 50%. Hence these results suggest that people
have the belief that what positive words describe are generally rarer than what negative words describe are.

Figure 3. Proportion of positive word choice for 26 pairs
in study 2-B.

Study 2-C
Studies 2-A and 2-B indicated that positive bias in frame
choice is observed in a naturalistic environment, and that
people generally have the belief that what positive words
describe are rarer than what negative words describe. We
hypothesize that positive bias in frame choice derives from
this belief about rarity, and that speakers tend to select a
positive frame because of its rarity. Hence, our hypothesis

775

predicts that when people explicitly know that a negative
frame describes a rare event and a positive frame describes
a common event, they will choose the negative frame rather
than the positive frame. We examined this prediction conducting an experiment.

Table 3. 6 conditions in Experiment 2.
Die
(number of side)
Winning-rare
(Winning1-Losing5)

Method

Losing-rare
(Winning5-Losing1)

Participants. The participants were 689 Aoyama Gakuin
University undergraduate students, who received partial
course credit. There were from 70 to 81 participants in each
of nine conditions (see Table 3).
Task and experimental conditions. Task and experimental
conditions were the same as those in Study 1 with the exception of the labels of dies. In place of the black-white
labels, we used winning-losing2 labels, which have positive
and negative meanings. In one of the 9 conditions, participants read the following story:
There is a die that is described “winning” on one
side and described “losing” on the other five sides.
You have rolled this die 6 times, and results are as
follows:
Side of the die
Winning
Losing

Equivalent
(Winning3-Losing3)

Outcome
(winning, losing)
(1,5; n=75)
(3,3; n=70)
(5,1; n=76)
(1,5; n=79)
(3,3; n=79)
(5,1; n=73)
(1,5; n=76)
(3,3; n=80)
(5,1; n=81)

Frequency
1
5

Which is the most natural way to describe these results, “The die came up winning 1 out of 6 times” or
“The die came up losing 5 out of 6 times”?
As in the Study 1, participants were required to choose one
of two frames (i.e., “winning” frame or “losing” frame) to
describe the outcomes.
For this task, there were 9 experimental conditions as
in Study 1. Three dies differed in the description (i.e., winning rare, losing rare, winning-losing equal), and there were
three patterns of outcomes from roll of die. These three dies
and three outcomes were varied orthogonally with respect
to one another (see Table 3).

Results and discussion
Figure 4 shows proportions of winning frame choice for 9
conditions. If the positive bias is observed in the frame
choice, the winning frame will be chosen irrespective of
rarity of sides in a die. However, the observed choice patterns were not consistent with this prediction. In each of the
three outcomes, participants in the Winning-rare condition
significantly preferred the winning frame than those in the
Losing-rare condition (p<.0001, Fisher’s exact test). Thus,
the rarity of sides in a die influenced frame choice. As a
general preference of frame, 78.7 % of the participants in
the three Winning-rare conditions significantly preferred the
winning frame (p<.0001, binomial test). However, only
50.6 % of the participants in the three Losing-rare conditions preferred the winning frame, and this preference was
not significant (p=.90, binomial test). These results show
2
Original Japanese labels were “atari” and “hazure.” “atari”
means winning lotteries, and “hazure” means losing lotteries.

Figure 4. Proportion of winning frame choice in Study 2-C.
that positive bias did not prevail irrespective of information
about rarity, and that participants’ frame preference shifted
from the winning frame to the losing frame when they explicitly knew that the losing frame denoted a rare event.
According to the frame choice based on rarity information, participants in the Losing-rare conditions will prefer
the losing frame. However, only 49.4% of participants in the
three Losing-rare conditions preferred the losing frame. This
result implies that choice of positive frame is a robust bias,
and that even when explicit information about rarity was
available, participants may have preferred the positive frame.
In the Equivalent conditions, wherein explicit information about rarity was not available to participants, positive
bias was observed. In all of the three Equivalent conditions,
71.7% of participants preferred the winning frame (p<.0001,
binomial test).
Taken together, our hypothesis about positive bias in
frame choice was corroborated. Although participants generally preferred the positive frame, participants’ preference
shifted to the negative frame with the explicit information
about rarity. In particular, positive bias disappeared with the

776

explicit information that the negative frame denotes a rare
event and the positive frame denotes a common event.

General discussion
Through the 4 studies, we examined our hypothesis that
people choose a frame based on the information about rarity.
It was found that information about rarity influenced speakers’ choice of frame. In particular, participants tended to
prefer a frame denoting a rare event.
The reference point hypothesis (e.g., McKenzie & Nelson, 2003; Sher & McKenzie, 2006, 2008) argues that
speakers are sensitive to an increase in proportion relative to
a reference point, and use a frame that corresponds to the
label that has increased. In short, the reference point hypothesis assumes that speakers select a frame based on a reference point. In contrast, our hypothesis assumes that speakers
select a frame based on rarity information. It should be
noted that our hypothesis does not necessarily contradict the
reference point hypothesis. For example, our hypothesis
does not make any predictions about speakers’ choice of
frame based on a specific reference point. It is mute as to
which frame people use to express a content of a cup when a
cup has been previously empty (or full of water). On the
other hand, when a reference point adopted by speakers is
not clear, the reference point hypothesis does not predict
specific patterns of frame choice. For instance, the reference
point hypothesis does not explain why speakers show the
positive bias in frame choice. Therefore, the two hypotheses
can be regarded as providing explanations for different psychological mechanisms on frame choice.
We indicated in Studies 2-A and 2-B that usage of positive and negative words in a naturalistic environment is
also related to belief about rarity. McKenzie et al. (2001)
showed that participants tended to phrase a conditional hypothesis in terms of rarity. These findings suggest that
speakers are very sensitive to information about rarity, and
that linguistic behaviors are widely explained from the perspective of sensitivity to rarity.
Furthermore, previous studies have suggested that
people are very sensitive to rarity information in hypothesis
testing (e.g., e.g., Klayman & Ha, 1987; McKenzie & Mikkelsen, 2000; Oaksford & Chater, 1994). The findings on
linguistic behaviors and hypothesis testing imply that people
have the strong intuition that information about rarity is
very informative, and this intuition influences various behaviors as well as linguistic behaviors and hypothesis testing.
Hence, reconsideration from the perspective of sensitivity to
rarity will provide insightful findings for various human
behaviors.

Acknowledgements
This work was in part supported by the Japan Society for
the Promotion of Science KAKENHI (Grant No. 20700235)
and the Support Center for Advanced Telecommunications
Technology Research (SCAT).

References
Keren, G. (2007). Framing, intentions, and trust-choice incompatibility. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 103, 238-255.
Kitahara, Y., & Togo, Y. (Eds.). (1989). Hantaigo, Taishogo,
Ziten. Tokyo: Tokyodo Shuppan.
Klayman, J., & Ha, Y.-W. (1987). Confirmation, disconfirmation, and information in hypothesis testing. Psychological Review, 94, 211-228.
Levin, I. P., Schneider, S. L., & Geath, G. J. (1998). All
frames are not created equal: A typology and critical analysis of framing effects. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 76, 149188.
McKenzie, C. R. M., Ferreira, V. S., Mikkelsen, L. A.
McDermott, K. (2001). Do conditional hypotheses
target rare events? Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 85, 291-309.
McKenzie, C. R. M., & Mikkelsen, L. A. (2000). The psychological side of Hempel's paradox of confirmation. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 7, 360-366.
McKenzie, C. R. M., & Nelson, J. D. (2003). What's a
speaker's choice of frame reveals: Reference points,
frame selection, and framing effects. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 10, 596-602.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (1994). A rational analysis of
the selection task as optimal data selection. Psychological Review, 101, 608-631.
Sher, S., & McKenzie, C. R. M. (2006). Information leakage from logically equivalent frames. Cognition,
101, 467-494.
Sher, S., & McKenzie, C. R. M. (2008). Framing effects and
rationality. In N. Chater & M. Oaksford (Eds.), The
probabilistic mind: Prospects for bayesian cognitive science (pp. 79-96). New York: Oxford University Press.
Soman, D. (2004). Framing, loss aversion, and mental accounting. In D. J. Koehler & N. Harvey (Eds.),
Blackwell handbook of judgment and decision
making (pp. 379-398). Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Teigen, K. H., & Karevold, K. I. (2005). Looking back versus looking ahead: Framing of time and work at
different stages of a project. Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, 18, 229-246.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice. Science, 211,
453-458.
van Buiten, M., & Keren, G. (2009). Speaker-listener incompatibility: Joint and separate processing in
risky choice framing. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 108, 106-115.
Wang, X. T. (2004). Self-framing of risky choice. Journal
of Behavioral Decision Making, 24, 1-16.

777

