UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Structure Awareness in Action-Outcome Learning Eradicates the Detrimental Effect of
Reinforcement Delays

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4q48q4nf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Greville, William
Cassar, Adam
Johansen, Mark
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Structure Awareness in Action-Outcome Learning Eradicates the Detrimental Effect
of Reinforcement Delays
W. James Grevile (GrevilleWJ2@Cardiff.ac.uk), Adam Cassar (AdCas43@Googlemail.com)
Mark Johansen (JohansenM@Cardiff.ac.uk), Marc J. Buehner (BuehnerM@Cardiff.ac.uk
School of Psychology, Cardiff University,
Tower Building, Park Place, Cardiff, CF10 3AT, Wales, UK
Abstract
Many studies of Action-Outcome Learning have
demonstrated that reinforcement delays exert a detrimental
influence on learning performance. Different theoretical
perspectives offer varying explanations for this effect. A
rational perspective suggests that as long as action-outcome
pairings can be clearly recognized, delays should not interfere
with the inductive process. Here we tested this idea by
manipulating whether action-outcome contingencies were
clearly identifiable as such by providing structural
information in real time. In the absence of such information,
we replicated the familiar detrimental effects of delay.
Providing structural markers, and thus allowing easy
identification of action-outcome pairings, eradicated this
effect. Importantly, two additional experiments indicate that
these results cannot be attributed to alternative explanations
involving outcome salience or better awareness of timing. We
conclude that when the environment allows Action-Outcome
Learning to be conceptualized as a contingency learning task,
learners are capable of covariation computation and immune
to variations of response-outcome timing.
Keywords: Causality, Contiguity, Reinforcement, Structure,
Computation

Introduction
The detrimental effect of a cause-effect delay on the
learning of a causal relation is well established. However,
the precise reason for this effect is still the subject of some
debate. While it seems fairly intuitive that delayed causal
relations might be more difficult to detect, and judged as
weaker, compared to more immediate relations, this raises
the question of how we ever manage to infer delayed causal
relations of more than a few seconds. Yet we manage to do
so routinely in day-to-day life. At the same time, laboratory
experiments using basic stimuli have demonstrated that
delayed causal relations of more than a few seconds could
not be distinguished from non-contingent alternatives
(Shanks, Pearson, & Dickinson, 1989). It therefore follows
that in real-world causal induction, some other tangible
source of information must be brought to bear that enables
us to correctly identify delayed causal relations.
There have been a plethora of studies investigating the
ability of humans to judge event contingencies (e.g. Shanks,
1987; Wasserman, Chatlosh, & Neunaber, 1983). A longstanding paradigm is the instrumental free-operant
procedure (FOP), whereby participants evaluate the
effectiveness of their responding (for instance pressing a
key on a keyboard) in producing an outcome (such as a
flash or a tone). These experiments are typically

programmed with an invisible underlying trial structure,
whereby the condition timeline is divided into several
temporal segments. If a response is made during a particular
segment, then an outcome will be scheduled to occur (with a
certain probability) at the end of that segment. A key
consideration that is often overlooked in such experimental
designs is whether this trial structure is apparent. This may
play a critical role in the mediation of empirical cues such as
delay.
Several potential explanations for the effect of delay have
been offered stemming from different theoretical
motivations. Traditional associative accounts argue that
causal induction is simply an extension of associative
learning, and is as a consequence governed by the same
principles as other forms of learning such as Pavlovian and
instrumental conditioning. This perspective adopts the
Humean assertion that temporal contiguity is necessary for
learning to occur. Degradation of this contiguity leads to
weaker increments of associative strength and thus
universally attenuates learning.
Cognitive perspectives on causal learning, on the other
hand, tend to focus on event contingencies. Most proponents
of this view agree that the sensory input available to us, in
the form of presence or absence of events, is computed to
provide an assessment of the covariation between candidate
causes and effects. In the simplest terms, the possible event
combinations are as follows: Both cause and effect occur
(c,e), the cause occurs without the effect (c~e), the effect
occurs without the cause absent (~c,e), and neither cause nor
effect occur (~c,~e). These event frequencies are often
represented in a 2x2 contingency matrix, and form the basis
for many different computational models of learning (see,
e.g., Hammond & Paynter, 1983). Provided that this
information can be discerned from the available evidence,
contiguity is not essential.
The role of contiguity from this perspective is instead
limited to determining whether or not events are classed as
contingent. Longer intervals increase the likelihood of
intervening events to occur between action and outcome,
which compete for explanatory strength and place greater
demands on processing and memory resources.
Accordingly, where there is some temporal separation
between cause and effect, the crucial decision revolves
around deciding whether this constitutes a case of c,e, or
separate cases of c,~e and ~c,e. The greater the delay, the
more likely the latter becomes, and the effect will not be
attributed to the cause. This is therefore known as the
attribution shift hypothesis (Buehner & May, 2009).

1709

Experiments by Buehner & May showed that by
appealing to higher level knowledge, the detrimental effect
of delay can be modulated (2002) and abolished completely
(2004). Participants were presented with action-outcome
learning tasks in different thematic scenarios. By
manipulating the context using cover-stories, a delay
between cause and effect was made to seem plausible by
providing explicit information regarding the expected
timeframe of the causal mechanism. In a scenario where
participants evaluated the effectiveness of pressing a switch
on the illumination of a lightbulb, one group of participants
were told that the bulb was an ordinary bulb that should
light up right away, while another group of participants was
instructed that the bulb was an energy-saving bulb that
lights up after a delay. For this latter group there was no
decline in ratings with delay; delayed and immediate causal
relations were judged as equally effective.
These findings were consistent with the knowledgemediation hypothesis (Einhorn & Hogarth, 1986): reasoners
have pre-existing ideas about specific mechanisms by which
causes produce their effects, which in turn enables flexible
interpretation of incoming evidence, including appraisal of
delayed causal relations. However, a problem with this
approach is circularity: if causal learning is governed by
top-down assumptions regarding causal mechanisms, where
does this knowledge come from in the first place?
Perhaps some causal knowledge is innate. Stimulus
selectivity in rats (Garcia & Koelling, 1966) demonstrates
that animals indeed have pre-existing conceptions about the
types of stimuli that can elicit particular physiological
reactions. It is therefore not unreasonable to suggest that
animals (including humans) may likewise have some prior
expectation about certain potential mechanisms, which may
well include non-contiguous causal relations. Nevertheless,
it seems appropriate to search for other means by which the
connection between a proximal candidate cause and a distal
effect may be bridged. Are there cues that can mitigate the
impact of delay without recourse to knowledge of
mechanism?
Our goal here was to create a paradigm by which the
underlying trial structure could be made evident without
appealing to prior knowledge, or manipulation of
expectations using cover stories or thematic contexts.
Instead, we aimed to convey this information using stimuli
that are directly observable in the learning environment and
thus demonstrate that empirical cues can be used to infer
delayed causal relations without any prior cognitive bases.
This was achieved by using a brief auditory tone to signal
the end of each trial. This tone occurred regardless of
whether an effect occurred or not, and if an effect was
scheduled it occurred simultaneously with the tone. The
tone thus marked the point at which an effect could
potentially occur.
Our hypothesis represents a convergence of two
traditionally opposing perspectives on causal learning. In
accordance with associative learning theory, we predict a
decline in causal ratings as delay increases and no additional

information is provided. However, when the tone is
introduced, providing markers that effectively reveal the
delineation into trials, then contiguity becomes unimportant.
The task will reduce to a simple contingency judgment, and
we should see no delay-induced decline in ratings, as
predicted by a computational account of causal learning.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants
33 undergraduate students from Cardiff University were
recruited via an online participation panel. Participants
included both males and females, with a modal age of 19
years. Either course credit or £3 payment was awarded for
completion of the experiment. One participant failed to
make any responses during two of the experimental
conditions and thus was dropped from the analysis.
Design
The factors trial length (2s/5s) and trial structure
(apparent vs. not) combined to produce four experimental
conditions .Previous studies have found manipulation of
trial length as an effective determinant of action-outcome
delay, thus 2s and 5s were classed as short delay and long
delay conditions respectively. For the apparent conditions,
the end of each trial was signaled by an auditory tone, with
the commencement of the next trial coinciding with tone
offset. Meanwhile no additional cues were provided for the
not apparent condition. Effectively, each trial ran
seamlessly into the next, with no markers delineating one
trial from the next (other than the occurrence of an effect).
All participants experienced all four conditions, providing a
2x2 within-subjects design. The conditions were blocked
such that the two apparent conditions were always
presented one after the other, likewise for the two not
apparent conditions. The order of which apparent or not
apparent condition was presented first, or whether the
apparent or not apparent block was presented first, was
counterbalanced. At the end of each condition, participants
were presented with the following question: “Please enter a
rating from 100 to -100 to indicate the effect you think the
button had on the triangle's behavior. 0 means it had no
effect, +100 means it always made it light up, and -100
means it always prevented it from lighting up.” The rating
provided by participants constituted the dependent measure.
Apparatus, Materials & Procedure:
The experiment was conducted on an Apple “Mac Mini”
computer running Microsoft Windows XP and Python 2.4.1,
with a 17” LCD display, with standard headphones used to
deliver the auditory stimulus. The stimuli consisted of an
outline of an equilateral triangle and an image of a red
circular button situated directly beneath it. Participants were
free to click on this button with the mouse at any point. On
doing so, the button stimulus ‘depressed’ for 500ms.
An effect constituted the triangle ‘lighting up’ (the
transparent background became bright yellow and a ‘glow’
effect appeared around the triangle border) for 500ms. The

1710

occurrence of the effect was determined probabilistically. If
a response was made during the trial, P(e|c) was 0.7; if no
response was made, P(e|~c) was 0.2. Only the first response
in each trial altered the probability from 0.2 to 0.7, with
subsequent responses having no influence.
For the apparent conditions, at the end of each trial, an
auditory tone of 1000Hz was played for 500ms. This tone
signaled the end of the trial, with the next trial beginning on
termination of the tone. If an effect was scheduled, it
occurred at this point of the trial to coincide precisely with
the tone. For not apparent conditions, an equivalent 500ms
was added to the end of each trial and the effect (if
scheduled) occurred during this period. This ensured
identical trial lengths and reinforcement delays between
apparent and not apparent conditions. Each condition
comprised 60 consecutive trials; total condition lengths were
thus 150s and 330s for 2s and 5s conditions.
Participants were instructed to determine to what extent
pressing the button caused or prevented the triangle from
lighting up. Apparent conditions included the following
additional instructions: “Each problem is divided into a
series of trials. The end of each trial is marked by a beep.
The triangle can only light up once per trial, and if it does
so, it will light up at the end of the trial (i.e. to coincide with
the beep).”

Results & Discussion
Causal Ratings
All analyses adopted a significance level of 0.05. One
participant failed to make any responses during two of the
experimental conditions and thus was dropped from the
analysis altogether. One additional data point which was
more than two standard deviations from the mean was also
removed from the analysis for causal ratings. Figure 1
shows that ratings fell sharply in the not apparent
conditions as trial length (and resultant action-outcome
delay) was increased. However, a corresponding decline is
not seen for the apparent conditions; there appears to be no
difference between 2s and 5s. This suggests that the
provision of trial structure information nullified the
deleterious impact of delay.
A 2x2 within-subjects ANOVA corroborated these
impressions, finding significant main effects of delay (F(1,31)
= 7.276), trial structure (F(1,31) = 4.322), and a significant
delay x structure interaction (F(1,31) = 4.719). This supports
the original hypothesis. However we must exercise caution
in the interpretation of these results. Because we employed a
free-operant paradigm, it is possible that participants’
response behavior differed between conditions, resulting in
different objective response-outcome contingencies (cf.
Buehner & May, 2003). If any such differences occurred
were between the apparent and not apparent conditions,
then manipulation of trial structure would be confounded
with contingency and our results compromised. In addition,
because participants were free to respond at any given time,
there is no guarantee that increasing trial length will produce
a concomitant increase in the action-outcome delay. A

participant could respond at any point during the trial and
therefore it is perfectly possible that contiguous cause-effect
pairings will be experienced in both the 2s and 5s
conditions. A closer inspection of the behavioral data is
therefore warranted.
Behavioral Data
Response rate was calculated as the total number of
responses, both reinforced and unreinforced, produced by
participants across the entire duration of the condition and
including all responses made during each trial. Mean actionoutcome interval was calculated as the time between the
first response in a given trial and the subsequent effect (if
one occurred). If the response was unreinforced then this
was not included in the calculation.
An analysis of behavioral data using 2x2 within-subjects
ANOVAs on response rate and action-outcome interval
revealed that, as expected, action-outcome intervals were
significantly longer for trials of 5s length than for 2s (F(1,32)
= 84.942) confirming that controlling trial length was
effective in manipulating reinforcement delay. We also
found an effect of trial length on response rate (F(1,32) =
28.437), which replicates earlier findings (e.g. Buehner &
May, 2003). The important comparisons, however, were
those involving trial structure. Specifically, if actionoutcome intervals were significantly shorter for apparent
than not apparent conditions, then our case for structural
insight would be weakened by a mediation through
experienced delay. Likewise, differences in response rate
would entail different objective contingencies experienced
across these conditions.
However, there was no significant main effect of trial
structure on either response rate (F(1,32) = 0.814) or actionoutcome interval (F(1,32) = 1.495); neither was there
significant interaction between trial length and trial structure
for response rate (F(1,32) = 0.026) or action-outcome interval
(F(1,32) = 0.033). We can thus have confidence that our
results concerning causal ratings are purely driven by
structure information, and are not mediated by behavioral
differences.

1711

Figure 1: Mean causal ratings for Experiment 1. Error
bars show standard error.

This finding suggests that causal learning in real time can,
under certain conditions, be approached as a contingency
learning task. When trial structure is apparent, contingency
information can easily be discerned, and events accurately
assigned to the cells of the contingency matrix. Under such
circumstances, delays do not interfere with learning, as
predicted by contingency-based or covariational models.
Indeed in this case, judgments closely matched actual ΔP.
Reinforcement delays thus are only detrimental to causal
learning when they introduce ambiguity concerning
response-outcome pairings.
It is important to note that our structural manipulation
presented a tone simultaneously with the outcome. The tone
therefore cannot act as a signal, bridging the temporal gap
(Reed, 1992). There are however some other potential
alternative explanations that must be ruled out.

Experiment 2A
Research in classical conditioning has demonstrated that
increasing outcome salience increases the associative
strength gained on each successive trial (e.g. Rescorla &
Wagner, 1972). It could be argued that the tones marking
the end of trials in the apparent conditions served to increase
the saliency of the outcome, which coincided with them. If
the causal learning process is subject to this property of
associative learning, it might be responsible for alleviating
the effect of delay. It could therefore be that our results are
in fact driven by salience rather than structural insight.
To explore the effect of outcome salience, we modified
the original paradigm such that under one set of conditions,
outcome salience was increased, but without providing trial
structure information. Accordingly, in one set of conditions,
the triangle flash was accompanied by the same auditory
tone used to provide structural markers in Experiment 1,
adding to the salience of the outcome. The crucial
distinction between this and the first experiment was that
that here, the tone did not sound on occasions where there
was no outcome, and thus did not convey trial structure
information.

apparent conditions in the previous experiment. This and
the following experiment were conducted in a small
computer lab using Windows XP machines, and testing
multiple participants at once. Partitions between machines
and use of headphones ensured that each participant could
focus exclusively on their own task.

Results & Discussion
Causal Ratings
Two data points which were more than two standard
deviations from the mean were removed from the analysis.
Figure 2 shows that causal ratings declined as trial length
increased from 2s to 5s for both standard and enhanced
conditions. There also appeared to be a slight positive
influence of enhanced outcome salience. Most importantly
there appeared to be little difference between 5s-salient and
5s-standard conditions, suggesting that increasing outcome
salience alone cannot replicate the observed effect from
Experiment 1.
A 2x2 within-subjects ANOVA found the expected
significant main effect of delay (F(1,30) = 5.634). There was
no significant effect of salience (F(1,30) = 1.705) nor was the
salience x delay interaction significant (F(1,30) = 0.036).
Behavioral Data
We found the expected main effects of delay on both
response rate (F(1,32) = 33.512) and action-outcome interval
(F(1,32) = 355.372). The effect of salience was nonsignificant on both response rate (F(1,32) = 0.199) and actionoutcome interval (F(1,32) = 1.361). The interaction between
salience and delay was non-significant for both response
rate (F(1,32) = 1.779) and action-outcome interval (F(1,32) =
1.643).
The non-effect of increasing outcome salience was not
wholly anticipated; the literature suggests that this
manipulation might have enhanced learning (although such
a trend, albeit non-significant, was seen). More importantly
however, the decline from 2s and 5s remains for the salient
condition, while there is no real difference between the 5s-

Method
Participants
32 participants, recruited as those in Experiment 1,
completed the experiment to receive either £3 payment or
course credit.
Design
Trial Length was either 2s or 5s as in the previous
experiment, and Salience was either standard (no tone) or
enhanced (tone present). Accordingly this gave four
conditions which were presented in a blocked
counterbalanced design as in the previous experiment.
Apparatus, materials & procedure
As before, except that in the enhanced conditions, the
outcome was accompanied by the auditory tone, and
participants received the following extra instructions:
“When the triangle flashes, it will be accompanied by a
tone.” The standard conditions were identical to the not

1712

Figure 2: Mean causal ratings for Experiment 2A. Error
bars show standard error.

salient and the 5s-standard conditions. We can thus rule out
increased outcome salience as an alternative explanation for
the effects observed in Experiment 1. We turn next to
examine another potential confound, the presence of an
auditory pulse.

Experiment 2B
In Experiment 1, the tone sounding at regular intervals (at
the end of each trial) effectively produced a metronomic
pulse that might have influenced participants’ perception of
time. In Experiment 1, the meter of this auditory pulse
changed in line with trial length, such that there was either a
relatively quick pulse occurring every 2s, or a slower pulse
every 5s. Importantly, although trial length was different,
there was one beat per trial in each case, so the marking of
the passage of time was consistent for both conditions. Thus
there was an imposed degree of perceptual similarity which
could have accounted for the lack of difference between 2s
and 5s when the tone was present.
To test this alterative explanation, we modified
Experiment 1 in a fairly simple manner that would retain the
auditory pulse, without necessarily providing information
regarding trial structure. The tone was thus moved so that it
did not occur at the end of each trial, thus demarcating one
trial from the next, but rather occurred midway through each
trial. Each tone was separated by the exact same interval,
thus still providing a regular pulse, but was now no longer
contiguous with the end (or beginning) of each trial, and
therefore did not convey (useful) trial structure information.

Method
Participants
34 psychology students from Cardiff University received
either £3 payment or course credit for participation.
Design
As for the previous experiments, four experimental
conditions were produced by combining the factors Trial
Length (2s or 5s) and Pulse (present/not present) and
presented in a blocked counterbalanced design.
Apparatus, Materials & Procedure:
The apparatus, location and procedure was identical to the
previous experiment, except that participants in the pulse
conditions received the following extra instructions: “You
will hear a tone sounding at regular intervals. This is a pulse
to help you keep track of time.”

by a temporal oscillator, the frequency of which can be
altered by interference from an imposed rhythm (Treisman,
Faulkner, Naish & Brogan, 1990). Slowing the frequency
means time seems to pass more quickly and the subjective
duration of intervals is shortened. As a result, the perceived
delay between cause and effect could have been decreased
by the presence of the auditory pulse.
A within-subjects ANOVA found significant main effects
of both pulse (F(1,31) = 4.413) and delay (F(1,31) = 5.523), but
importantly no significant pulse x delay interaction (F(1,31) =
0.988). These results suggest that the effect in Experiment 1
is not attributable to the presence of the auditory pulse
alone, and is due to our manipulation of trial structure
information. However, one has to be cautious in the
interpretation of a null result. While the interaction indeed
falls considerably short of significance, one can notice from
Figure 3 that the slope from 2s to 5s for the pulse condition
is less steep than that for the no pulse condition. One might
therefore suggest that a more powerful experiment may also
have elicited a significant interaction.
These slight concerns can be alleviated by an inspection
of the behavioral data. The bisection of the trial by the tone
had the potential to induce a change in the behavior of
participants. Some significance may have been attached to
the tone, for instance being perceived as marking the start of
the trial, or a point at which they should respond.
Participants may therefore only have responded at or after
the tone, and by doing so, effectively cutting the trial in half,
and significantly reducing the action-outcome delay. This
would account for the increase of 5s relative to 2s – if trial
length is indeed truncated in this fashion, it will have been
shortened by approximately 2.5s compared to 1s.
Behavioral Data
An analysis of the behavioral data reflected these
suspicions. While the main effect of pulse on response rate
was non-significant (F(1,34) = 2.760), there was indeed a
significant effect of pulse on action-outcome interval (F(1,34)
= 25.983). Mean action-outcome intervals where no pulse

Results & Discussion
Causal Ratings
Figure 3 suggests that the auditory pulse did not alleviate
the effect of delay. Interestingly however, it does seem that
the presence of the pulse did improve judgments of
causality across the board; both for 2s and 5s, although it
did not noticeably improve judgments at 5s relative to 2s.
This general effect could be due to a slowing down of the
internal pacemaker by the auditory pulse. Studies have
provided evidence that human time perception is determined

1713

Figure 3: Mean causal ratings for Experiment 2B. Error
bars show standard error.

was present were 1.38s and 3.46s at trial lengths of 2s and
5s respectively; with the inclusion of the pulse, these were
shortened to 1.11s and 2.78s This can explain both the main
effect of pulse, through the overall reduction in delay, and
also the smaller decline in ratings from 2s to 5s (when the
pulse was present) as there is a smaller discrepancy in delay.
Consistent with the previous experiments, we also found the
expected main effects of trial length on both response rate
(F(1,34) = 13.819) and action-outcome interval (F(1,34) =
546.072). The interaction between pulse and trial length was
significant for action-outcome interval (F(1,34) = 5.477) but
not for response rate (F(1,34) = 1.054).
We can therefore be confident in our assessment that
auditory pulse is not the determinant of the interaction
observed in Experiment 1; when trial structure was present,
5s conditions received significantly higher ratings than
when it was not, despite a lack of difference in actual
action-outcome interval. If this effect were driven by the
pulse, then in the present experiment, coupled with the
behavioral shift, a significant interaction should have been
even more likely, yet was not obtained.

General Discussion
This paper has demonstrated that by providing structural
information in a real-time causal judgment task, the
detrimental effect of temporal separation between action and
outcome can be abolished. When cause and effect pairings
are clearly delineated, the learning process appears to
reduce to a simple contingency assessment which is
unaffected by delay. Two follow-up studies ruled out
potential alternative explanations for this effect, thus we can
have confidence in the validity of the trial-structure
manipulation.
These findings are consistent with a rational perspective
on causal induction and could be regarded as a step towards
overcoming the problem of circularity that hampers the
causal mechanism view. It may well be that in the absence
of clear structural information, other sources of knowledge
(such as expectations based on previously acquired
mechanistic beliefs) serve to divide the event stream into
meaningful patterns of event co-occurrence. Importantly, we
have shown that such beliefs are not necessary when
structural information is apparent in the input, and
furthermore, that such information serves to overcome the
well-established detrimental effects of reinforcement delay.

Buehner, M. J., & May, J. (2004). Abolishing the Effect of
Reinforcement Delay on Human Causal Learning.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 57B(2),
179-191.
Buehner, M.J. & May, J. (2009). Causal Induction from
Continuous Event Streams: Evidence for Delay-Induced
Attribution Shifts. Journal of Problem Solving, 2(2).
Einhorn, H. J., & Hogarth, R. M. (1986). Judging probable
cause. Psychological Bulletin, 99(1), 3-19.
Garcia, J., & Koelling, R. A. (1966). Relation of cue to
consequence in avoidance learning. Psychonomic
Science, 4(3), 123-124.
Reed, P. (1992). Effect of a Signaled Delay Between an
Action and Outcome On Human Judgment of Causality.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 44B(2),
81-100.
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A theory of
Pavlovian conditioning: Variations in the effectiveness of
reinforcement and nonreinforcement. In A. H. Black &
W. F. Prokasy (Eds.), Classical Conditioning II: Current
theory and research (pp. 64-99). New York: AppletonCentury Crofts.
Shanks, D. R., Pearson, S. M., & Dickinson, A. (1989).
Temporal Contiguity and the Judgment of Causality By
Human Subjects. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 41B(2), 139-159.
Treisman, M., Faulkner, A., Naish, P. L., & Brogan, D.
(1990). The internal clock: evidence for a temporal
oscillator underlying time perception with some estimates
of its characteristic frequency. Perception, 19(6), 705743.
Wasserman, E. A., Chatlosh, D. L., & Neunaber, D. J.
(1983). Perception of Causal Relations in Humans.
Learning and Motivation, 14, 406-432.

References
Buehner, M. J., & May, J. (2002). Knowledge mediates the
timeframe of covariation assessment in human causal
induction. Thinking and Reasoning, 8(4), 269-295.
Buehner, M. J., & May, J. (2003). Rethinking temporal
contiguity and the judgement of causality: effects of prior
knowledge, experience, and reinforcement procedure.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 56A(5),
865-890.

1714

