UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Temporal Chunk Signal Reflecting Five Hierarchical Levels in Writing Sentences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0bg1189v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Van Genuchten, Erlijn
Cheng, P.C-H.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Temporal Chunk Signal Reflecting Five Hierarchical Levels in Writing Sentences
Erlijn van Genuchten (e.genuchten@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40
72072 Tübingen, Germany

Peter C-H. Cheng (p.c.h.cheng@sussex.ac.uk)
School of Informatics, University of Sussex
Brighton, BN1 9QJ, UK

Abstract
Previous research on the temporal chunk signal has focused
on the use of pauses in behaviour to probe chunk structures in
working memory. On the basis of some of these studies, a
hierarchical process model has been proposed, which consist
of four hierarchical levels describing different kind of pauses.
In this model, the lowest level consists of pauses between
strokes within letters. On higher levels, there are pauses
between letters, words, and phrases. Each level is associated
with a larger amount of processing when retrieving these
chunks from memory. The main aim of the present study is to
test whether the temporal chunk signal can distinguish a fifth
level, the sentence level. A secondary goal is to replicate the
findings which were used to construct the hierarchical process
model in a manner that overcomes some of the limitations of
the earlier experiments.
Keywords: Temporal chunk signal, graphical protocol
analysis, writing, working memory, sentences.

Introduction
Chunks have a fundamental role in information processing
in the human cognitive architecture. Chunks are individual
pieces of information grouped into larger units that increase
our information retention (Caroll, 2004). It is widely
accepted in Cognitive Science that the hierarchical storage
and processing of chunks in working memory provides a
fruitful basis for explaining a substantial range of the
behavioural phenomena, such as recall from long-term and
working memory and expert performance. This acceptance
comes in part from various established methods that have
been developed to infer the particular structure of chunks
possessed by individuals from their behaviours. Such
methods have made an important contribution to developing
accounts of cognition in complex tasks. One method is
computational modelling. Another method, on which this
research focuses, provides information about the structure of
chunks in memory by measuring pause lengths that occur in
verbal or motor actions, the inter response latency. Chase
and Simon’s (1973) work on chess expertise and Reitman’s
(1976) work on Go experts are classic examples of the uses
of pause lengths during the recall of a board containing
chess pieces or Go discs. There are many other studies that
have also exploited pause lengths in actions in order to
define chunks. In one of the earliest studies using this
approach, McLean and Greg (1967) studied the chunking of
arbitrary letter sequences. Later on, Buschke (1976)

examined the gradual acquisition of chunks comprising
clusters of every day words originally presented in
unstructured lists. Egan and Schwartz (1979) showed how
electronics experts chunked components of electrical
circuits in terms of their functioning. In all these studies, the
duration of a pause preceding an action that generated an
element of the domain (in these studies letters, words, and
components respectively) is taken as an indication of
whether the element is within a putative chunk or at the
boundary between chunks. The term temporal chunk signal,
TCS, is used in order to refer to the basic phenomenon that
underpins the use of pause lengths to probe chunk
structures. Typically, the TCS is often used in a binary
fashion, which includes setting some threshold (e.g., 500
ms) as a criterion upon which to classify successively
produced elements as intra-chunk if the pause length is less
than the threshold, or as inter-chunk if the pause length is
greater than the threshold.
The present experiment is a continuation of our studies on
the nature and application of the TCS that is manifest in the
process of writing and drawing, or more general graphical
production. We call our general approach to using the TCS
to study chunk related behaviour in writing and drawing
tasks, graphical protocol analysis, GPA. A standard
graphics tablet is used to record pen strokes. Pause lengths
are computed by finding the difference in time between the
lift of the pen from the tablet at the end of one stroke and
the time at which the pen touches the tablet at the beginning
of the stoke of interest: pauseitem = timepen-down-current-item –
timepen-up-previous-item. In our previous experiments, tasks with
known hierarchical structures have been used, such as ‘to be
or not to be’, so that each pause could be coded as intrachunk or inter-chunk. For sentences and language-like
stimuli identified pauses have included: intra-chunks pauses
between strokes within a letter (e.g., second stroke of a ‘t’,
level 0 or L0); inter-chunk pauses between letters within a
word (e.g., between ‘t’ and ‘o’, L1); and inter-chunk pauses
between words within a phrase (e.g., between ‘to’ and ‘be’,
L2).
Our previous experiments have shown that the TCS is a
richer source of information about chunk structure than just
a binary signal. We consider that TCS within GPA has
potential to be used as general technique for the study of
various cognitive phenomena. In the domain of copying
mathematical formulae, the TCS was able to distinguish

1922

participants who had four different levels of expertise in
mathematics (Cheng & Rojas-Anaya, 2007). The TCS has
also been used to distinguish between children with and
without dyslexia (van Genuchten et al., submitted). Cheng,
McFadzean, and Copeland (2001) have shown that the TCS
reflects three distinct levels of processing when drawing
geometric figures. That experiment showed the TCS to be
present when drawings are made with pen on paper or with
a mouse on a computer screen. Obaidellah and Cheng
(2009) used the TCS to reveal the role of perceptual chunks
and spatial schemes in different modes of drawing complex
abstract diagrams. In Cheng & Rojas-Anaya (2005)
participants wrote number sequences that had been
memorized with different chunk structures. The TCS
showed the existence of three levels corresponding to:
pauses between strokes within a digit (e.g., second stroke in
‘7’, L0, ≈90 ms); digit level chunks (e.g., between ‘1’ and
‘2’, L1, ≈280 ms); and digit group level chunks (e.g.,
between ‘111’ and ‘222’, L2, ≈440 ms). In Cheng & RojasAnaya (2006) the TCS again showed the existence of the
same three levels of pauses when writing familiar and
jumbled sentences (≈90, ≈270, ≈400 ms respectively).
Finally, moving beyond three hierarchical levels, Cheng &
Rojas-Anaya (2008) devised an artificial sentences copy
task with four hierarchical levels (e.g., ‘ITH* ITH* ITH*,

ITH* ITH* ITH*’) and found the same pattern of stroke,
letter, word and phrase level pauses (≈90, ≈250, ≈440 and
≈600 ms respectively). On the basis of these studies, a
hierarchical process model has been proposed (see Figure 1)
to explain these patterns in terms of the depth first serial
processing. In this model, the hierarchical structure of
chunks corresponds to the amount of processing associated
with different branch lengths of the hierarchy, with longer
branches indicating longer pause lengths.
The main aim of the present experiment is to test whether
the TCS can distinguish more than four hierarchical levels,
by adding a fifth level of pauses between sentences, and
thereby extend the previous findings. Is it simply the case
that this fifth level in the chunk hierarchy will merely result
in an additional amount of processing and a corresponding
increment of pause duration? If so, will the increase in
magnitude of the pause length be linear as is the case
between the other levels? A secondary goal of the
experiment is to replicate the previous findings in a manner
that overcomes some of the limitations of the earlier
experiments. In particular, the found significant effects
existed at the level of individuals using pairwise
comparisons of the pauses between levels, but typically
involved relatively small numbers of participants. Hence, a
subsidiary aim of the present experiment is to test whether

Figure 1: Hierarchical process model including the sentence level, reflecting relations between chunk structure, processing
steps, and pause levels (adapted from Cheng & Rojas-Anaya, 2008).

1923

the differences between the hierarchically levels is a robust
effect by using multilevel analysis to simultaneously
compare all the levels from the data of a large number of
participants.

Method
Participants
Participants in this study were 32 adults, 19 female and 13
male, between 18 and 33 years old, working or studying at a
large university in the UK. The participants (M = 22.99
years, SD = 3.98 years) were all native English speakers.

Measures and Materials
In order to answer the research question, pause lengths
between sentences, phrases, words, letters, and strokes in
paragraphs were compared. These five measures were
calculated for each stimulus. The eight English sentence
stimuli were specially written to obtain these five
hierarchical levels. Each stimulus comprised of three or four
sentences (L4), which were made up of two or three phrases
(L3), which in turn were comprised of between 4 and 8
words (L2), which contained letters (L1) that may have
required more than one stroke (L0) to write. This
hierarchical structure was emphasized by including
punctuation marks (periods between sentence and commas
between phrases). Example stimuli are:
‘You just signed up for a trip, from your favourite society,
because you like visiting different places. You paid with
some money, which you got from your mum, because you
did shopping for her. You have never been to Holland, so
you would like to visit Amsterdam, and have a great time.’
(3 sentences, 3 phrases)
‘We like swimming, in the pool next door. You like to
cycle, to towns far away. They like to play football, on the
top of the hill. As they play all day, they should eat enough.’
(4 sentences, 2 phrases)
The median per level was calculated in order to reduce the

influence of outliers, which could only occur in the direction
of longer pause lengths, and which would consequently
severely distort the mean, rendering it unsuitable as a
measure in this study (Stavig & Gibbons, 1977).
All sentences were written on a piece of paper attached to
a graphics tablet containing horizontal rows of rectangles.
One letter had to be written in each rectangle (width: 6 mm,
height: 8 mm), so that participants were encouraged to lift
their pen from the paper and to put it down again for the
next letter, and allowing the distance between each letter to
be approximately equal (see Figure 2). The equal distance
between rectangles rules out the possibility that differences
in hand movements account for the different pause lengths.
Therefore, pauses between the last letter of a line and the
first of the next were ignored, because of increased hand
movement.

Design and Procedure
The administering of the test had a duration of 45 to 75
minutes per participant. A quiet room was used to minimize
disturbing background noises. The session began with an
acclimatization period which allowed the participants to
become familiar with writing on a tablet by having them
write their names on the tablet. The actual experiment did
not start until the participant was considered to have
followed all instructions. Participants were asked not to
write any punctuation in order to make sure that increased
pause lengths were not due to writing an extra symbol. The
task itself consisted of remembering and writing down the
eight visually presented target stimuli.
All stimuli were presented in turn in random order. After
presenting a stimulus, participants were allowed to apply
any strategy and take as long as needed to rehearse the
stimulus. When participants finished rehearsing, the
experimenter tested recall accuracy by asking participants to
recite the stimulus sentences without errors twice. Once this
was accomplished, participants were allowed to start
writing. A hash (#) had to be written at the beginning of
each sentence to ensure that the writing process was well
underway before the first letter was generated (Cheng &
Rojas-Anaya, 2006).

Figure 2: Example part of a written stimulus in equally spaced rectangles.
1924

Table 1: Parameter estimates for multilevel models.
Intercept only model
Par.
SE
Fixed effects
Intercept
Predictors:

488

306818
20726

Robust standard errors b
Par.
SE

90*
273*
374*
567*
1134*

37.9
37.9
37.9
37.9
37.9

90*
273*
374*
567*
1134*

3.1
13.6
19.8
41.3
96.0

175177
24016

7012.7
7101.0

175177
24016

7012.7
7101.0

29.8

L0 (pauses between strokes)
L1 (pauses between letters)
L2 (pauses between words)
L3 (pauses between phrases)
L4 (pauses between sentences)
Random effects
Predictor level variance
Participant level variance

Model with predictors a
Par.
SE

7105.5
12282.6

Deviance
19846
19146
19146
Notes: a The constant has been left out of the model with predictors, because a complete set of dummy variables was used.
b
Robust standard errors were used, because the assumption of linearity of residuals was not met.
* p < .001.

Data and Analysis
A specially written program, TRACE, was used to record
the writing actions and to extract the pen positions, times of
points and pause lengths (Cheng & Rojas-Anaya, 2003). All
files generated by TRACE were analysed using a
specialized computer programme (Pause Level Extraction
Tool, PLET, van Genuchten, 2009). Automatic detection of
letters and automatic calculation of pause lengths had to be
applied, because of the large amount of data (at least 1200
measures per participant). This involved identifying the
horizontal position of strokes making up a letter within a
rectangle and the horizontal separation between these
strokes between rectangles. The written input was specified
for each stimulus, so that errors (e.g., wrongly spelled or
omitted words) were taken into account. Only in those cases
where no automatic detection of letters was possible (e.g.,
when strokes of subsequent letters were written relatively
close together), manual calculation of the pause lengths was
applied.
To test whether there were differences between pause
lengths of different pause types, a multilevel analysis was
performed. On the lowest level, data of pause lengths of
each stimulus for each pause type were used as predictors
and were measured within participants. This data was
gathered on the highest level, the participant. It is expected
that the correlation between measures is higher within a
participant than between participants. By performing a
multilevel analysis, the dependency between data measures
within individuals is controlled. Dummy variables were
created for each of the five pause types.

Results
The comparison between the model-fit of the one-level and
two-level intercept only models, indicates that there is

significant variance at the participant level (χ²(1) = 41.78,
p < .01). This means a two-level multilevel analysis is
appropriate. Parameter estimates for the intercept only
model and model with predictors are presented in Table 1.
A difference between the different pause types was
expected, which was confirmed by the model with
predictors. However, plots of standardized residuals against
normal scores indicated that the assumption of linearity of
residuals was not met. Therefore, robust standard errors
were calculated using the Sandwich method (Hox, 2002).
The resulting model indicates that a distinction can be made
between pause lengths on the basis of pause type.
Specifically, the regression coefficients show that pause
lengths between sentences are longest, and that pause
lengths become successively shorter when considering
pauses between phrases, words, letters, and strokes
(sentences: B = 1134, SE = 96.0, p < .001; phrases: B = 567,
SE = 41.3, p < .001; words: B = 374, SE = 19.8, p < .001;
letters: B = 273, SE = 13.6, p < .001; strokes: B = 90,
SE = 3.1, p < .001). This means that pause lengths can be
very well predicted when it is known which type of pause is
concerned.

Discussion
One aim of the present experiment was to replicate the
findings of previous experiments concerning the temporal
chunk signal, TCS, using a more rigorous methodology.
These earlier studies showed that the TCS reflects a
hierarchical chunk structure as increasing durations of pause
lengths between written elements. In this research,
differences between every pause level within this structure
were also found to be significantly different in a single
multilevel statistical test. Although the outcomes of the
previous experiments had to be carefully qualified, it does

1925

Table 2: Pauses (ms) for various stimulus levels over different stimulus types (rounded to 10 ms).
Experiment
Cheng & Rojas-Anaya (2005)
Cheng & Rojas-Anaya (2006)
Cheng & Rojas-Anaya (2008)
Present

Stimuli
Number sequences
Familiar and jumbled phrases
Artificial sentence
Natural language paragraphs

appear that the effects found are genuine, because of the
consistency with the present experiment.
Regarding the primary aim of this experiment of adding a
fifth level to the structure, the results show that when a
rehearsed stimulus that possesses five hierarchical levels is
written, the TCS, which is based on the pauses between
written elements, reflects the ordering of the levels. The
stroke level pause lengths are the shortest and the duration
increases for each successive increment of level, through
letter, word, phrase and sentence level. The increase of the
pause with the addition of the fifth sentence level is
consistent with the proposal that in graphical production of
well rehearsed stimuli each successive chunk level requires
specific processing to deal with the particular information
associated with that level (Cheng & Rojas-Anaya, 2008).
The direct comparison of the approximate absolute values
of the pauses associated with each level for this and the
previous experiments reveal some interesting patterns (see
Table 2). The three prior experiments noted in this table
involved graphical production using the same experimental
task methodology: specifically, the writing of sequences
from memory after rehearsal with one character in one
rectangle. The experiments differ in the important respect
that each used a different type of stimulus, as indicated in
Table 2. The similarity of the absolute values of the pauses
over each level across the different experiments is
noteworthy, because it suggests that the same underlying
processes are responsible for the pattern of pauses
irrespective of the nature of the stimulus. The differences
between the pauses on successive levels range between 100
and 200 ms, with mean values of L1-L0=178, L2-L1=145
and L3-L2=180 ms. Taking Newell’s (1990) estimate of the
time scale for elementary deliberated operations as circa 100
ms, this suggest that there is at least one additional
operation occurring when preparing to graphically produce
an element that is one level higher in the hierarchy. One
such operation will be a process to select the next chunk at a
particular level. At the beginning of a new phrase this will
involve selection of a phrase, a word, a letter and a stroke.
The increase in time suggests that this selection occurs
serially and is therefore consistent with the predictions of
the hierarchical process model (Cheng & Rojas-Anaya,
2008).
The increase in pause length up to the sentence level from
the phrase level is more than three times greater than the
increase between any of the other levels. As this is new data
from just one experiment, some caution must be taken with
its interpretation. It seems to suggest that additional
operations that occur at this level do not occur at the levels
below. The additional time may be an indication that

L0
90
90
90
90

L1
280
270
250
270

L2
440
400
440
370

L3

L4

600
570

1130

working memory is fully loaded when complex stimuli
comprising multiple sentences with several sub phrases are
being processed. Furthermore, the additional time may
indicate that retrieval from long-term memory is required as
the complete stimuli cannot all be held in working memory
despite the rehearsal. As there are approximately ten times
as many letters in each of the present stimuli as there were
in the stimuli of the previous experiments and as the number
of chunks is larger than Miller’s magical number 7 ± 2
(Miller, 1956), this is a likely interpretation. In future
research, verbal working memory measures, such as the
digit span task (Wechsler, 1985) and the listening span task
(Daneman & Carpenter, 1980), could be used to gain insight
into how pause lengths are related to working memory
capacity and the possible involvement of long-term
memory. However, it should be noted that as there were 19
pauses on the sentence level at the most, the actual value
might be less robust than for the other levels, because
outliers have a larger influence with a small number of
measurement points. For comparison, there were 33 phrase
level, 238 word level, and about 1148 letter level pauses
(the number of strokes depended on whether cursive of
block letters were used).
Another possible interpretation of this large increase in
pause length is that, in addition to retrieving a sentence,
inhibiting processes take place to suppress the inclination of
writing punctuation. A possibility to overcome this problem
is to require participants to write punctuation in a separate
rectangle. However, in this case, it is unclear whether the
pause between the last letter of for example, the sentence
and the period (full stop) or the pause between the period
and the first letter of the next sentence, should be taken as
an indication of pause length. An alternative for future
experiments would be to require participants to write
punctuation marks in the same rectangle right after the last
letter of the sentence or phrase.
In summary, other processes than selection and retrieval
processes might also underpin this pattern of pause lengths.
Therefore, empirical and modelling studies are conducted to
unravel which processes contribute to the increase in pause
length accompanied with each level.
Irrespective of the precise explanation for the increase in
duration between each hierarchical level, the results of this
experiment reconfirms the claim that there is a temporal
signal. This signal may be associated with chunking
processes and is a source of high resolution information
concerning participants’ task performance. With
appropriately designed tasks, the TCS could provide
valuable evidence to probe the relations among the subprocesses that underpin cognitive phenomena.

1926

A logical next step is to investigate whether a sixth level,
the paragraph level, can be added to the hierarchical process
model. However, as the demands on working and long-term
memory will increase even more, such an experiment has to
be designed carefully in order to be feasible.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Keith Smith of the University of
Sussex for his assistance with the recruitment of participants
for this study. We would also like to thank Cora Maas of
Utrecht University for her assistance in performing the
multilevel analysis.

References
Buschke, H. (1976). Learning is organized by chunking.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 15,
313-324.
Carroll, D. W. (2004). Psychology of language. Belmont,
KY: Thomson Wadsworth.
Chase, W., & Simon, H. A. (1973). The mind eye's in chess.
In W. Chase (Ed.), Visual information processing. New
York, N.Y.: Academic press.
Cheng, P. C-H., McFadzean, J., & Copeland, L. (2001).
Drawing out the temporal structure of induced perceptual
chunks. In J. D. Moore & K. Stenning (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twenty Third Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 200-205). Mahwah,
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Cheng, P. C-H., & Rojas-Anaya, H. (2005). Writing out a
temporal signal of chunks: Patterns of pauses reflect the
induced structure of written number sequences. In B. G.
Bara, L. Barsalou & M. Bucciarelli (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 27th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 424-429). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Cheng, P. C-H., & Rojas-Anaya, H. (2006). A temporal
signal reveals chunk structure in the writing of word
phrases. In R. Sun, & Miyake (Eds.), Proceedings of the
28th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 160-165). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Cheng, P. C-H., & Rojas-Anaya, H. (2007). Measuring
Mathematical Formula Writing Competence: An
Application of Graphical Protocol Analysis. In D. S.
McNamara & J. G. Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of the
Twenty Ninth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 869-874). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.

Cheng, P. C-H., & Rojas-Anaya, H. (2008). A Graphical
Chunk Production Model: Evaluation Using Graphical
Protocol Analysis with Artificial Sentences. In B. C.
Love, K. McRae & V. M. Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of
the Thirtieth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 1972-1977). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Daneman, M., & Carpenter, P. A. (1980). Individual
differences in working memory and reading. Journal of
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 19, 450-466.
Egan, D. E., & Schwartz, B. J. (1979). Chunking in recall of
symbolic drawings. Memory and Cognition, 7, 149-158.
Hox, J. (2002). Multilevel analysis: Techniques and
applications. London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
McLean, R. S., & Gregg, L. W. (1967). Effects of induced
chunking on temporal aspects of serial recitation. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 74, 455-459.
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven plus or
minus two: Some limits on our capacity for information
processing. Psychological Review, 63, 81-97.
Newell, A. (1990). Unified theories of cognition.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Obaidellah, U. H., & Cheng, P. C-H. (2009). Graphical
production of complex abstract diagrams: drawing out
chunks and schemas. In N. Taatgen & H. v. Rijn (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Thirty-first Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2843-2848). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Reitman, J. S. (1976). Skilled perception in Go: Deducing
memory structures from inter-response times. Cognitive
Psychology, 8, 336-356.
Stavig, G. B., & Gibbons, J. D. (1977). Comparing the mean
and the median as measures of centrality. International
Statistical Review / Revue Internationale de Statistique,
45, 63-70.
van Genuchten, E. (2009). Pause Length Extraction Tool
(PLET), Computer Software, University of Sussex.
Brighton, UK.
van Genuchten, E., Cheng, P. C-H., Leseman, P. P. M., &
Moerland, J. (submitted). Detection of a Working
Memory Deficit in Dyslexia: Children Writing from
Memory. Dyslexia.
Wechsler, D. (1958). The measurement and appraisal of
adult intelligence. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.

1927

