UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
“That’s what she said”: The effect of emotional prosody on the interpretation of intent.
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/42g7p098
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)
Authors
Roche, Jennifer M.
Dale, Rick
Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                  Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                     University of California

       ”That’s what she said”: The effect of emotional prosody on the
                                         interpretation of intent.
                                                 Jennifer M. Roche
                                                The University of Memphis
                                                       Rick Dale
                                                The University of Memphis
Abstract: Nygaard and Lunders (2002) have shown that emotional prosody impacts the resolution of lexical ambi-
guity during spoken language, yet sentential meaning is often ignored (Snedeker, 2008). The integration of linguistic
and non-linguistic cues to speech is vital for successful interpretation of intent. Experiment 1 evaluated the perception
of sentential contexts with emotional prosody (e.g., irritation, disgust, neutral, compassion, sarcasm and innuendo).
Results suggested that listeners have the ability to differentially categorize the intent behind statements, based on
emotional prosody. Experiment 2 evaluated the online process of categorizing sentences with emotional prosody,
via systematic curvatures in the arm using the Wii remote. Results of Experiment 2 suggest that a perceiver’s
arm curvatures are reflective of the differentially interpreted categorized emotional information when the sentences
remained stable. This supports the notion that emotional information plays a large role in the interpretation of
sentential meaning, as it sharply influences the interpretation of intent.
                                                             594

