UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Influence of Within-Category Structure on Stimulus Similarity and Stimulus
Generalization

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2f72x0t7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Close, James
Hahn, Ulrike
Honey, Robert

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Influence of Within-Category Structure on Stimulus Similarity
and Stimulus Generalization
James Close (james_close@eva.mpg.de)
Department of Developmental and Comparative Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology,
Deutscher Platz 6, 04103 Leipzig, Germany

Ulrike Hahn (hahnu@cardiff.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Tower Building,
Park Place, Cardiff, CF10 3AT, UK

R. C. Honey (honey@cardiff.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Tower Building,
Park Place, Cardiff, CF10 3AT, UK
generalization are found between them (see Honey, Close,
& Lin, 2010). In other words, categorization can warp
psychological similarity space (Nosofsky, 1989).
While interesting, almost all studies to date that have
indexed an influence of categorization on later judgments
of similarity and stimulus generalization (commonly
termed categorical perception (CP)) have employed
supervised training procedures (but see Gureckis &
Goldstone, 2008). Consequently, as Gureckis and
Goldstone have noted, “it remains a somewhat opaque
question if learned CP effects are restricted to cases where
subjects make a differential response to each category or
if other aspects of category organization, such as the
similarity structure or distribution of items within a
category, may also exert an influence on perception”
(2008, p. 1876). This is important because although one
may presume that the mechanisms of supervised
categorization drive all classification, evidence has shown
that this is unlikely to be the case (Pothos & Chater,
2002). To fully assess categorization’s influence on later
behavior, therefore, one needs to look to unsupervised
categorization – that is, categorization that occurs in the
absence of any external feedback.
Fundamentally, unsupervised categorization tasks
afford an assessment of the principles that underlie
categorization in an unconstrained manner, allowing
greater insight into people’s natural categorization biases
(or preferences). However, much of the unsupervised
categorization that occurs in the laboratory has been
considered very different to that which occurs naturally
(see Clapper & Bower, 1994; Love, 2002). Crucially,
whereas any natural unsupervised category formation will
have unlikely been the primary purpose of an interaction
(meaning that any category formation is incidental), in
laboratory investigations of unsupervised categorization,
explicit instruction to categorize is generally given,
meaning that any category formation is intentional (Love,
2002). Unlike the majority of laboratory-based
unsupervised categorization, then, natural incidental
categorization requires that a person first realize there is

Abstract
In Exp. 1, the authors report an influence of temporal
contiguity in stimulus exposure on later judgments of
similarity. Exposure to transformational information – that
is, information that ‘connects’ two similar, but perceptually
distinct stimuli – was found to have no influence on later
judgments of similarity. In Exp. 2, exposure to
transformational information was also found not to
influence later property generalization; however, exposure
to within-category structure that promoted a sense of
‘surprise’ (i.e., contained clear discontinuity) led to a
reduction in later property generalization between two
similar, but perceptually distinct stimuli. This latter effect
was confirmed in Exp. 3 while ruling out any influence of
temporal factors.
Keywords: Spontaneous categorization; within-category
structure; similarity; generalization; transformational
knowledge; temporal dynamics; perceptual learning;
sensory preconditioning.

Introduction
Similarity and categorization are intimately intertwined:
stimulus similarity is assumed to form the basis for many
of our natural categories (Hampton, 2001), but
categorization can also alter perceived similarity (Harnad,
1987). When taught that stimuli are members of the same
category, participants will perceive these stimuli to be
more similar than participants who are not (e.g.,
Livingston, Andrews, & Harnad, 1998). The reverse is
also true: when taught that stimuli are members of
contrasting categories, participants will perceive these
stimuli to be more different (e.g., Goldstone, 1994).
Moreover, given the lawful relationship that exists
between similarity and stimulus generalization (Shepard,
1987), it is not surprising that many studies have shown
that stimulus generalization is directly influenced by the
‘classificatory status’ of stimuli: when stimuli are
‘classified together’ (or acquire equivalence), increased
levels of stimulus generalization are found between these
stimuli. In contrast, when stimuli are ‘classified apart’ (or
acquire distinctiveness), decreased levels of stimulus

1619

some structure present, and then utilize this structure to
guide their classifications 1 . The experiments presented in
this paper, therefore, sought to assess how the similarity
structure (i.e., the distribution of items) within a category
influences incidental categorization, as indexed by the
later perceived similarity of category items, and the level
of generalization between category items.
What aspects of within-category structure might
influence whether stimuli are incidentally classified
together or apart? Zaki and Homa (1999) have proposed
that the acquisition of an object concept will be facilitated
by exposure to that object’s successive changes (that is,
exposure to transformational information). Based on this
hypothesis, it seems plausible to suppose that
transformational information should encourage the
incidental ‘classification together’ of similar, but distinct
stimuli (but see the categorical perception effects of
Newell & Bülthoff, 2002). Another factor that might also
encourage the ‘classification together’ of stimuli is
temporally contiguous stimulus exposure (see, e.g.,
Bateson & Chantrey, 1972). Empirical investigation into
the phenomenon of perceptual learning has shown that the
temporal dynamics of stimulus exposure influence
whether an increase or decrease in later perceived
stimulus similarity (and stimulus generalization) is found
(see Goldstone, 1998; Hall, 1991). More specifically,
when two similar stimuli are exposed in close temporal
contiguity, the perceived similarity of (and the level of
generalization between) these stimuli should increase,
relative to situations where no stimulus exposure is given
and where stimulus exposure is not particularly
temporally contiguous (see Bateson & Chantrey, 1972;
Bennett & Mackintosh, 1999). Finally, a number of
theories of spontaneous category learning link the
formation of new categories (or clusters) to unexpected
changes in stimulus structure. For example, Clapper and
Bower (1994, 2002; see also SUSTAIN, Love, Medin, &
Gureckis, 2004) propose that if a novel stimulus is
perceived as sufficiently ‘surprising’ (sufficiently
dissimilar) to previously stored stimulus encounters, then
a new category (cluster) will be invented to accommodate
that stimulus. Consequently, if a strong set of norms has
been established about, for example, Category A
membership (i.e., through a number of exposures to
Category A exemplars), then it is more likely that a
Category B exemplar will be accommodated in a newly
invented category (cluster). Exposure to only a single
Category A exemplar before exposure to a Category B
exemplar, by contrast, will likely not lead to these stimuli
being ‘classified apart’ (Clapper & Bower, 1994, 2002;
Love et al., 2004).
In summary, much evidence has shown that
categorization (using supervised training procedures) can
1

alter the perceived similarity of stimuli, and
concomitantly, the level of generalization between
stimuli. While there is some preliminary evidence that
similar alterations in perceived stimulus similarity can be
found following unsupervised categorization (Gureckis &
Goldstone, 2008), little research has directly assessed how
the similarity structure (i.e., the distribution of items)
within a category influences incidental categorization.
Moreover, the discrimination based studies that have
indexed an influence of categorization on stimulus
similarity and stimulus generalization have typically
employed designs in which participants engage in
hundreds of experimental trials. However, it seems
reasonable to suppose that people’s sensitivity to category
structure (if sufficiently obvious) should be immediate.
This means that under certain conditions, incidental
categorization should be a rapid process that can occur
following only minimal stimulus exposure.

Experiment 1
In Exp. 1, we were interested in investigating those
factors that should encourage incidental ‘classification
together’ under conditions of minimal stimulus exposure.
Specifically, we sought to test the hypotheses that
transformational information and temporally contiguous
stimulus exposure should encourage the ‘classification
together’ of two similar, but distinct stimuli, as indexed
by a later increase in their perceived similarity to one
another.

Method
Participants 48 Cardiff University undergraduate
students took part either for partial fulfillment of course
credit or a small payment of ₤2, with 16 participants in
each condition (see Table 1).
Table 1: The three conditions employed to assess withincategory structure in Exp. 1.

Cond ition

Preexposure

Test

Base line
Sys_ trans
Conti guous

A/-/-/-/-/F
A/B/C/D /E/F
A/F

A-F
A-F
A-F

Stimuli The stimuli were individually rendered images
taken with permission from Hahn, Close and Graf (2009).
They were basic level objects from six biological
categories (bird, fish, head, mushroom, starfish, turnip)
and one artifact category (light bulb; see Figure 1). For
every category, two objects formed the endpoints of each
morph continuum (the 1% and 100% morph stimuli),
from which 20%, 40%, 60% and 80% morph images were
rendered (here, the 1%, 20%, 40%, 60%, 80% and 100%
images are referred to as A, B, C, D, E and F,
respectively). All morph images had a size of 256 × 256
pixels and were presented in gray scale on a 15-in.

This contrasts with laboratory-based unsupervised
categorization where the explicit instruction to categorize
will likely promote a belief in participants that their task is to
find some experimenter defined category structure.

1620

computer monitor. Participants were seated approximately
arms length from the monitor for the duration of the
experiment.

categories. Figure 2 displays the results of interest:
participants’ overall mean similarity rating, split by
preexposure condition. Inspection of this figure reveals
that similarity ratings in condition Contiguous were
higher than in the Baseline condition and condition
Sys_trans. Similarity ratings in condition Sys_trans
differed little from those in the Baseline condition. A oneway ANOVA revealed a significant effect of exposure
condition, F(2, 45) = 7.31, p < .003, η² = .25. Tukey HSD
post-hoc tests revealed that, overall, participants in the
Contiguous condition reported significantly higher ratings
of similarity than participants in the Baseline condition (p
< .05) and Sys_trans condition (p < .002). Overall
similarity ratings did not differ significantly between the
Baseline and Sys_trans conditions (p > .05).

Figure 1. Illustration of the morph stimuli employed.
The stimuli shown here are the 1%, 20%, 40%, 60%,
80%, and 100% morph images, respectively.
Design and Procedure Exposure condition was
manipulated as a between-participants factor and
participants in all conditions were exposed to the seven
different object categories. On a given trial, participants
were sequentially preexposed to a set of morph stimuli
from one of the object categories. Within each of the three
exposure conditions, half of participants received
presentations of the morph stimuli in the order A to F, and
half of participants received presentations of the morph
stimuli in the order F to A. Each stimulus was presented
for 3000 ms, and the temporal spacing between
presentation of stimulus A and stimulus F was held
constant in the Baseline condition and condition
Sys_trans by introducing a fixation cross when no morph
(object) stimulus was scheduled to be presented in the
Baseline condition, relative to condition Sys_trans.
Following stimulus preexposure, a 1000 ms inter-stimulus
interval (blank screen) separated presentation of the test
screen, on which was presented stimulus A and stimulus
F. Within the subconditions created in each exposure
condition following the previous counterbalancing
operation, half of participants saw stimulus A surrounded
by a red border on the test screen, and half of participants
saw stimulus F surrounded by a red border on the test
screen. Within each of the subconditions created by the
previous counterbalancing operations, half of participants
received presentations of stimulus A on the left-hand side
of the test screen and presentations of stimulus F on the
right-hand side of the test screen, and half of participants
received the reverse. On the test screen, participants were
simply asked to rate how similar they thought the object
framed in red was to the object not framed in red, using a
1 (very dissimilar) to 9 (very similar) rating scale
presented at the bottom of the test screen. Responses were
made using the keys “1” through “9” on a standard
keyboard. Following a response, a 1000 ms inter-trial
interval (blank screen) separated participants’ exposure to
the next object category. Exposure to the seven object
categories was random for all participants in each of the
three exposure conditions.

9

Mean similarity rating

8

*

7

*

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Baseline

Sys_trans

Contiguous

Preexposure condition

Figure 2. Results of Exp. 1: overall mean similarity
rating, plotted by preexposure condition. Error bars
indicate the standard error.

Discussion
In Exp. 1, the perceived similarity of stimuli A and F was
influenced only by the temporal contiguity of preexposure
to these stimuli. One interpretation of this result is that
only the Contiguous condition was sufficient to encourage
the ‘classification together’ of stimuli A and F. This
‘classification together’ can be conceptualized in a
number of ways: one way of conceptualizing such is in
terms of the formation of a blended representation of
stimulus A and stimulus F (i.e., AF; see Hall, 1991).
Alternatively, an account can be considered with respect
to the assumption that temporally contiguous stimulus
exposure provides the optimal conditions under which an
excitatory association can form between two similar
stimuli (Hall, 1991). Formation of such an A–F
association would dictate that stimulus A will evoke a
representation of stimulus F, creating a situation in which
these stimuli will come to be perceived (somewhat)
equivalently. Such acquired equivalence would lead to a
concomitant increase in the perceived similarity of stimuli
A and F (see Hall, 1991).
Interestingly, the results of Exp. 1 do not support the
proposal of Zaki and Homa (1999). A number of
possibilities exist for this failure: first, Zaki and Homa’s
(1999) proposal may simply be wrong. Second, the
within-category similarity structure of condition

Results
For the purpose of analyses, participant similarity
judgments were averaged over the seven object

1621

Sys_trans may have resulted in both associationistic and
comparator processes operating (Honey, Bateson & Horn,
1994). If one assumes that the influence of these two
processes was relatively balanced in condition Sys_trans,
then this would have resulted in little change in the
perceived similarity of stimuli A and F, relative to their
baseline similarity.
In Exp. 2, we sought to further assess the influence of
within-category structure using a property generalization
task at test. Here, we were interested in investigating
whether we could find evidence for ‘classification apart’ –
driven by a surprise-driven category invention mechanism
(Clapper & Bower, 1994, 2002) – under conditions of
minimal stimulus exposure. To this end, we compared a
skewed stimulus structure (condition Surprise) to the
Baseline and Sys_trans conditions of Exp. 1, and a further
scrambled transformational information condition
(condition Scram_trans).

Scram_trans. Within the subconditions created by the
previous counterbalancing operation applied in each
preexposure condition, following a 1000 ms interstimulus interval (blank screen), half of participants were
then presented with stimulus A, and half of participants
were then presented with stimulus F. Situated above the
stimulus was a sentence that informed participants about a
particular property that the stimulus had: for example,
“This person comes from a small, remote island in the
Pacific Ocean”. This information remained on the screen
until the space bar was pressed, at which point
participants were immediately presented with the test
screen. On the test screen, participants were simply asked
to rate on a scale from 1 (very unlikely) – 9 (very likely)
how likely they thought it was that the stimulus now
presented to them shared the property of the previously
seen stimulus. If participants had previously been
presented with stimulus A, then at test, they were
presented with stimulus F, and if they had previously been
presented with stimulus F, then at test, they were
presented with stimulus A. The 1 – 9 rating scale was
continuously presented beneath the test stimulus, and
responses were made using the 1 – 9 keys on the top of a
standard computer keyboard. A 1000 ms inter-trial
interval (blank screen) separated participants’ likelihood
ratings and their exposure to the next object category.
Exposure to the seven object categories was random for
all participants in each of the four preexposure conditions.

Experiment 2
In Exp. 2, we sought to assess the hypothesis that the
Surprise condition – in which participants were exposed
to a skewed stimulus structure – would lead to the
‘classification apart’ of stimuli A and F, as indexed by a
later reduction in the level of property generalization
between them. Such a finding would provide support for a
surprise-driven category invention mechanism operating
in incidental categorization (Clapper & Bower, 1994,
2002).

Results
Again, for the purpose of analyses, participant similarity
judgments were averaged over the seven object
categories. Figure 3 shows the results of the
generalization test: the overall mean likelihood ratings
that the test stimulus shared the property of the previously
seen stimulus, split by preexposure condition. Inspection
of this figure reveals that participants in the Surprise
condition reported lower mean likelihood ratings than
participants in the other three preexposure conditions;
likelihood ratings in the other three conditions were all
very similar.
A one-way ANOVA 2 confirmed that there was an
overall effect of preexposure condition, F(3, 40.51) =
2.85, p < .05, η² = .12. Dunnett T3 post-hoc tests (equal
variances not assumed) 3 revealed that, overall,
participants in the Surprise condition reported
significantly lower mean likelihood ratings than
participants in the Baseline condition (p < .05, r = .35).
No other post-hoc comparisons were significant (all ps >
.05).

Method
Participants 64 Cardiff University students took part for
partial fulfillment of course credit, with 16 participants in
each condition (see Table 2).
Table 2: The four conditions employed to assess withincategory structure in Exp. 2.
Condition

Preexposure

Conditioning

Test

Baseline
Surprise
Sys_trans
Scram_trans

A/-/-/-/-/F
A/B /C /-/-/F
A/B /C /D/E/F
A/E/C /D/B /F

A+
A+
A+
A+

F
F
F
F

Stimuli, Design and Procedure The same stimuli used in
Exp. 1 were employed. As for Exp. 1, on a given trial,
participants were sequentially preexposed to a set of
morph stimuli from one of the object categories. Within
each of the four exposure conditions, half of participants
received presentations of the morph stimuli in the order A
to F, and half of participants received presentations of the
morph stimuli in the order F to A. Each stimulus was
presented for 3000 ms, and the temporal spacing between
presentation of stimulus A and stimulus F was held
constant across conditions by introducing a fixation cross
when no morph (object) stimulus was scheduled to be
presented, relative to conditions Sys_trans and

2

Due to a lack of homogeneity of variances between
conditions, the Brown-Forsythe correction was applied.
3
Tukey HSD post-hoc tests were not performed (as in Exp. 1)
due to the lack of homogeneity of variances between
conditions.

1622

the Surprise condition of Exp. 2 was critical in producing
the significant difference between the Baseline and
Surprise conditions, the stimuli in condition Surprise_2
were preexposed with even temporal spacing.

9
8

Mean likelihood rating

7
6

*

5
4

Method

3

Participants 32 Cardiff University students took part for
a small payment of £2, with 16 participants in each
condition (see Table 3).

2
1
0
Baseline

Surprise

Sys_trans

Scram_trans

Preexposure condition

Table 3: The two conditions employed to assess withincategory structure in Exp. 3.

Figure 3. Results of Exp. 2: overall mean likelihood
ratings, plotted by preexposure condition. Error bars
indicate the standard error.

Condition

Preexposure

Conditioning

Test

Baseline
Surprise_2

A/-/-/-/-/F
A / B / C / F

A+
A+

F
F

Discussion
The results of Exp. 2 are broadly consistent with the
predictions of a surprise-driven category invention
mechanism operating in incidental categorization
(Clapper & Bower, 1994, 2002; also Love et al., 2004).
This assumes that only the within-category similarity
structure of the Surprise condition encouraged
participants to invent an extra category (cluster) in which
to accommodate the lone distinct stimulus, meaning that
stimuli A and F were ‘classified apart’. As a consequence
of this, property generalization between A and F in the
Surprise condition was reduced (Harnad, 1987).
In line with the results of Exp. 1, it is apparent that
transformational information did not encourage the
‘classification together’ of stimuli A and F and a
concomitant increase in the level of property
generalization between A and F (condition Baseline vs
condition Sys_trans). Moreover, there is no evidence to
suggest that systematic transformational information
influenced participants’ response behavior differently to
non-systematic transformational information (condition
Sys_trans vs condition Scram_trans; cf. Zaki & Homa,
1999).
What aspect of the within-category structure of the
Surprise condition encouraged the assumed ‘classification
apart’ of stimuli A and F? Inspection of this structure
reveals that not only does it have a similarity structure
likely to engage a surprise-driven category invention
mechanism, but also a distinct temporal structure. That is,
while the three stimuli with the highest perceptual
similarity were presented in a temporally contiguous
manner, a temporal gap of six seconds separated
presentation of the distinct stimulus from the highly
similar stimuli. It is possible, therefore, that it was this
temporal discontinuity, rather than the perceived
perceptual discontinuity, that engendered the assumed
invention of a new category (cluster) in which to
accommodate the distinct stimulus.

Stimuli, Design and Procedure The only difference to
Exp. 2 was that during the preexposure phase of the
Surprise_2 condition, presentations of the morph stimuli
were separated by a 2000 ms long fixation cross. This
maintained the equivalent temporal spacing between
presentations of the object category endpoints (A and F)
across the two conditions.

Results
Figure 4 shows the results of interest: the overall mean
likelihood ratings split by preexposure condition.
Inspection of Figure 4 shows that, overall, participants in
the Surprise_2 condition reported significantly lower
likelihood ratings than participants in the Baseline
condition, F(1, 30) = 6.14, p < .02, η² = .17 4 .
9

Mean likelihood rating

8
7
6

*

5
4
3
2
1
0
Baseline

Surprise_2

Preexposure condition

Figure 4. Results of Exp. 3: overall mean likelihood
ratings, plotted by preexposure condition. Error bars
indicate the standard error.

General Discussion
The method of these studies provides a fast and effective
way of assessing the influence of within-category
structure (i.e., the distributional properties of the stimuli)

Experiment 3

4

Exp. 3 replicated Exp. 2 with one exception: in order to
determine if the temporal discontinuity contained within

1623

Due to a violation of normality in the data (Shapiro-Wilk
test of normality, p < .007), we confirmed this result using
the non-parametric Mann-Whitney U test, U(16, 16) =
56.50, p < .008, r = .49.

on people’s incidental categorization behavior, as indexed
by their later judgments of stimulus similarity and
stimulus generalization. Indeed, one particularly notable
feature of the designs of Experiments 1 – 3 is that
participants only received a single presentation of each
scheduled stimulus during preexposure.
Two main findings were made: First, transformational
information did not encourage ‘classification together’,
which would have resulted in a later increase in the
perceived similarity of stimuli A and F (Exp. 1) and an
increase in the level of property generalization between
these stimuli (Exp. 2). Second, when perceptual
discontinuity existed in the presented within-category
structure, this resulted in a reduction in the level of later
property generalization between stimuli A and F (Exp. 2
and Exp. 3). This result is consistent with the assumption
of a surprise-driven category invention mechanism
operating in human incidental categorization (Clapper &
Bower, 1994, 2002; also Love et al., 2004), and supports
previous work by Gureckis and Goldstone (2008).
Importantly, the results of Exp. 2 demonstrate that this
reduction in stimulus generalization was not simply a
product of the amount of stimulus preexposure.
In conclusion, the present results support the idea that
perceived discontinuity in the environment (be this
temporal or perceptual) guides people’s incidental
categorization behavior, as indexed by their later
judgments of stimulus similarity and stimulus
generalization (Anderson, 1991; Rosch & Mervis, 1975).
Finally, one of the particularly nice aspects of the design
of Exps 2 and 3 is that it can be readily transposed to
assessments of incidental categorization in nonhuman
animals and prelinguistic children.

Goldstone, R.L. (1994). The role of similarity in
categorization: Providing a groundwork. Cognition, 52,
125-157.
Goldstone, R.L. (1998). Perceptual Learning. Annual
Review of Psychology, 49, 585-612.
Gureckis, T.M., & Goldstone, R.L. (2008). The effect of
internal structure of categories on perception.
Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive
Science
Society
(pp.
1876-1881).
Washington, D.C.: Cognitive Science Society.
Hall, G. (1991). Perceptual and associative learning.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Harnad, S. (1987). Categorical Perception: The
Groundwork of Cognition. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Hahn, U., Close, J., & Graf, M. (2009). Transformation
direction influences shape similarity judgments.
Psychological Science, 20, 447-461.
Hampton, J.A. (2001). The Role of Similarity in Natural
Categorization. In U. Hahn & M. Ramscar (Eds.),
Similarity and Categorization. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Honey, R.C., Bateson, P., & Horn, G. (1994). The role of
stimulus comparison in perceptual learning: An
investigation with the domestic chick. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 47B, 83-103.
Honey, R.C., Close, J., & Lin, T.E. (2010). Acquired
distinctiveness and equivalence: A synthesis. In C.J.
Mitchell & M.E. Le Pelley (Eds.), Attention and
learning. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Livingston, K.R., Andrews, J.K., & Harnad, S. (1998).
Categorical Perception Effects Induced by Category
Learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24, 732-753.
Love, B.C. (2002). Comparing supervised and
unsupervised category learning. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 10, 190-197.
Love, B.C., Medin, D.L., & Gureckis, T.M. (2004).
SUSTAIN: A Network Model of Category Learning.
Psychological Review, 111, 309-332.
Newell, F.N., & Bülthoff, H.H. (2002). Categorical
perception of familiar objects. Cognition, 85, 113-143.
Nosofsky, R.M. (1989). Further tests of an exemplarsimilarity approach to relating identification and
categorization. Perception & Psychophysics, 45, 279290.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C.B. (1975). Family Resemblances:
Studies of the Internal Structure of Categories.
Cognitive Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Shepard, R.N. (1987). Toward a universal law of
generalization for psychological science. Science, 237,
1317-1323.
Zaki, S.R., & Homa, D. Concepts and Transformational
Knowledge. Cognitive Psychology, 39, 69-115.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a Cardiff University,
School of Psychology studentship to J. Close.

References
Anderson, J.R. (1991). The adaptive nature of human
categorization. Psychological Review, 98, 409-429.
Bateson, P.P., & Chantrey, D.F. (1972). Retardation of
discrimination learning in monkeys and chicks
previously exposed to both stimuli. Nature, 237, 173174.
Bennett, C.H., & Mackintosh, N.J. (1999). Comparison
and contrast as a mechanism of perceptual learning?
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 52B,
253-272.
Clapper, J.P, & Bower, G.H. (1994). Category invention
in unsupervised learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20,
443-460.
Clapper, J.P., & Bower, G.H. (2002). Adaptive
categorization in unsupervised learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 28, 908-923.

1624

