UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Event Knowledge in Comprehending Synesthetic Metaphors

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4bx3480b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Nakamura, Tetsuaki
Sakamoto, Maki
Utsumi, Akira

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Event Knowledge in Comprehending Synesthetic Metaphors
Tetsuaki Nakamura (tatnakac@edu.hc.uec.ac.jp)
Department of Human Communication, The University of Electro-Communications
1-5-1, Chofugaoka, Chofushi, Tokyo 182-8585, Japan

Maki Sakamoto (sakamoto@hc.uec.ac.jp)
Department of Informatics, The University of Electro-Communications
1-5-1, Chofugaoka, Chofushi, Tokyo 182-8585, Japan

Akira Utsumi (utsumi@se.uec.ac.jp)
Department of Informatics, The University of Electro-Communications
1-5-1, Chofugaoka, Chofushi, Tokyo 182-8585, Japan
Abstract
A synesthetic metaphor (e.g., “sweet touch”) is a metaphor
that results from a combination of a modifier and a head,
where they express different perceptual qualities. Most of the
existing studies examine how the acceptability of synesthetic
metaphors can be explained by the pairing of adjective
modifier’s and head noun’s modalities. However, little
attention has been paid to how people comprehend
synesthetic metaphors. This paper explores how people
comprehend Japanese synesthetic metaphors. In our
psychological experiment we collected 10388 words
associated with 62 synesthetic metaphors and classified them
into the following four kinds of features: common (features
listed for the metaphor, the vehicle and the topic), vehicleshared (features listed for both the metaphor and the vehicle,
but not listed for the topic), topic-shared (features listed for
both the metaphor and the topic, but not listed for the vehicle),
and emergent (features listed for the metaphor, but not listed
for either the vehicle or the topic). The result showed that
there were significantly more emergent features than the other
kinds of features in the comprehension of synesthetic
metaphors. This result suggests that we do not so directly
comprehend synesthetic metaphors based on salient features
of the vehicle or the topic. In this paper we focus on event
knowledge which is assumed to play a crucial role in
comprehending synesthetic metaphors. We analyzed how
many words associated with synesthetic metaphors could be
classified into those based on event knowledge. The results
showed that there were significantly more words based on
event knowledge than those which could not be classified as
words based on event knowledge. This result suggests that
event knowledge play an important role in comprehending
synesthetic metaphors.
Keywords: synesthetic metaphors; Japanese language; event
knowledge; words association; emergent features.

Introduction
Synesthetic metaphors such as “sweet touch” or “sweet
voice” are one kind of adjective metaphor, in which an
adjective denoting the perception of some sense modality
modifies a noun’s modality. Metaphor studies in the domain
of cognitive science have paid little or no attention to
adjective metaphors. Many existing studies have paid much
attention to nominal metaphors such as “My job is a jail”
(e.g., Bowdle & Gentner, 2005; Glucksberg, 2001; Jones &

Estes, 2006; Utsumi, 2007) and predicative metaphors such
as “He shot down all of my arguments” (e.g., Lakoff &
Johnson, 1980; Martin, 1992).
Many studies focusing on synesthetic metaphors,
including Werning et al. (2006), have examined how the
acceptability of synesthetic metaphors can be explained by
the pairing of adjective modifier’s and head noun’s
modalities. Ullmann (1951), in a very early study on
synesthetic metaphors, proposes a certain hierarchy of lower
and higher perceptual modalities. He claims that qualities of
lower (e.g., tactile) senses should preferentially occur in the
source domain (i.e., adjective), while qualities of higher
(e.g., optic) senses should be preferred in the target domain
(i.e., noun). After Ullmann, Williams (1976) makes a more
differentiated claim of directionality, in which a similar
order of sense modalities is proposed. Werning et al. (2006)
explores the factors that enhance the cognitive accessibility
of synesthetic metaphors for the German language. Very
few studies, however, have attempted to explore how people
comprehend synesthetic metaphors.
Utsumi & Sakamoto (2007a) is one of the few studies to
have explored how people comprehend synesthetic
metaphors. They proposed a two-stage categorization theory
and argued that the comprehension process of adjective
metaphors including synesthetic metaphors could be
explained as a two-stage categorization process. The
intuitive idea behind two-stage categorization is that
correspondences between the properties literally expressed
by the adjective and the properties to be mapped onto the
noun would be indirect, mediated by an intermediate
category. In the case of “red voice”, for example, the
adjective “red” first evokes an intermediate category “red
things,” to which “blood,” “fire,” “passion,” “apple” and
“danger” typically belong. Then exemplars relevant to the
noun “voice” are selected and they evoke a final abstract
category of property like “scary,” “screaming” and
“dangerous.” However, they did not mention the
relationship between the intermediate category and the noun
and the detailed process in which certain exemplars are
selected as those relevant to the noun was left unexplored.

1898

In this study we focus on experience-based event
knowledge to explain how people comprehend synesthetic
metaphors.
Event knowledge has been recognized to be important for
metaphor comprehension process by many scholars. For
instance, Lakoff & Johnson (1980) argue that metaphors
like HAPPY IS UP as in “She is in high spirits” and
ANGER IS HEAT as in “boil with anger” are grounded in
correlations in our experience. The HAPPY IS UP metaphor
is grounded in the experience that a person in a positive
emotional has an erect posture, and the ANGER IS HEAT
metaphor is grounded in the experience that the angry
person feels hot.
As for synesthetic metaphors, Taylor (2003) argues that
they cannot be reduced to correlations. He argues that
synesthesic metaphors are based on perceived similarity
across different domains. Unlike Taylor (2003), Sakamoto
& Utsumi (2008) point out that there are a number of
synesthetic metaphors which seem to be based on
correlations in experience. For example, a metaphor “sweet
smell” (“amai nioi” in Japanese) is based on correlations in
experience. “Sweet smell” is the smell you feel when you eat
something sweet. A metaphor “delicious autumn” (“oishii
aki”) is also based on correlations in experience because you
can eat lots of delicious meals in autumn (especially in
Japan). However, Sakamoto & Utsumi (2008) did not verify
their argument based on psychological experiment.
To sum up, we propose the following comprehension
process: an intermediate category is evoked by the adjective
to which various things belong. Then exemplars correlated
in experience with the noun are selected as those mapped
onto the noun and they evoke a final abstract category of
property. The experience-based event knowledge plays an
important role in the process of relating the intermediate
category evoked by the adjective to the concept expressed
by the noun.

Experiment
Participants
Participants were recruited through Macromill, Inc., an
organization that maintains a panel of more than 533579
people who have agreed to participate in web-based online
survey research. 3266 Japanese males and females, aged 2078, agreed to participate in our experiment.

Materials
Materials used for our experiment (i.e., 62 Japanese
synesthetic metaphors) were made by combining 24
Japanese adjectives with 5 Japanese nouns. The adjectives
were “light” (“karui” in Japanese), “hot”(in temperature)
(“atsui”), “cold” (“tsumetai”), “hard” (“katai”), “soft”
(“yawarakai”), “tasty” (“oishii”), “sweet” (“amai”), “sour”
(“suppai”), “bitter” (“shibui”), “hot”(in taste) (“karai”),
“fragrant” (“koubashii”), “smelly” (“namagusai”), “sweetsmelling”
(“kaguwashii”),
“stinking”(1)
(“kusai”),
“stinking”(2) (“kinakusai”), “red” (“akai”), “blue” (“aoi”),

“yellow” (“kiiroi”), “white” (“shiroi”), “black” (“kuroi”),
“quiet” (“shizukana”), “noisy”(1) (“urusai”), “noisy”(2)
(“yakamashii”), “noisy”(3) (“sawagashii”). The nouns were
“color” (“iro”), “touch” (“tezawari”), “voice” (“koe”),
“taste” (“aji”), “smell” (“nioi”) .

Procedure
3266 participants were classified into 20 groups. 3-8
linguistic expressions were assigned to each group. The
linguistic expressions assigned to one group were randomly
assigned to each participant in that group (e.g., linguistic
expressions assigned to group 1 were randomly assigned to
each participant belonging to group 1).
Participants of group 1-4 were each assigned 7-8
adjectives or nouns, and the remaining 16 groups were
assigned 3-4 metaphorical expressions per participant. They
were asked to list 3 words associated with each linguistic
expression.
Japanese is written with a mixture of hiragana, katakana,
and kanji. Hiragana, katakana, and kanji of the same
concept (e.g., rose can be written as “ばら,” “バラ,” or “薔
薇 ”) were regarded as the same feature. This feature
combination procedure was completed by three judges.
Features regarded as the same by at least two judges were
unified into one expression, and we got 8594 features. After
this combination procedure, all features listed by at most 1
participant were dropped. The following analyses were
based upon these amended feature lists.

Analysis 1
According to Becker (1997), when a person interprets a
novel metaphor such as “A child is a sponge,” that
interpretation has the potential to contain information from
four logically possible sources. The first is a feature which
is salient only for the vehicle (i.e., “sponge”). Thus, this
feature appears in the interpretation for the vehicle and the
metaphor. She refers to such a feature as a “vehicle-shared
feature.” The second is a feature which is salient only for
the topic (i.e., “child”). Thus, this feature appears in the
interpretation for the topic and the metaphor. She refers to
such a feature as a “topic-shared feature.” The third is a
feature which is salient for both the vehicle and the topic.
Thus, this feature appears in the interpretation for the
vehicle, the topic and the metaphor. She refers to such a
feature as a “common feature.” The fourth is a feature which
is not salient either for the vehicle or for the topic. Thus, this
feature appears in the interpretation only for the metaphor.
She refers to such a feature as an “emergent feature.”
Becker (1997) conducted a psychological experiment for
“A is a B” metaphors. Participants were divided into two
groups. One group of participants listed features of
metaphors. The other group of participants listed features of
the topic or the vehicle presented alone. Features from
metaphor interpretations were compared with features listed
for vehicle interpretations and topic interpretations in order
to identify the four kinds of features: common, vehicle-

1899

shared, topic-shared, or emergent. These features are shown
in Table 1.

90
80

Table 1: Features.

vehicleshared
topicshared
emergent

detail
features listed for the metaphor, the
vehicle and the topic
features listed for both the metaphor
and the vehicle, but not listed for the
topic
features listed for both the metaphor
and the topic, but not listed for the
vehicle
features listed for the metaphor, but not
listed for either the vehicle or the topic

The result of her experiment showed that metaphor
interpretations contained larger numbers of vehicle-shared
and emergent features than either common or topic-shared
features. In Particular, there were significantly more
vehicle-shared features than the other kinds of features.
Furthermore, she found that altering a metaphor’s vehicle
produced greater changes in emergent content than did
altering the topic and suggested that emergent features were
influenced primarily by salient features of the vehicle.
In Analysis 1 we compare what Becker (1997) says for
the comprehension of nominal metaphors with the
comprehension of synesthetic metaphors.
Features listed by participants were classified into one of
the four kinds as in Table 1. For each metaphor, the
frequency of each of the four kinds was counted. Features
were counted both as types (i.e., counted only once no
matter how often the feature was listed) and as tokens (i.e.,
counted as often as the feature was listed). The result was
1198 types and 10388 tokens.
The mean value of common, vehicle-shared, topic-shared,
and emergent features are presented in Figure 1 (type
counts) and Figure 2 (token counts).
30

MEAN (counts)

25

20

15

10

5

0
COMMON

VEHICLE-SHARED

TOPIC-SHARED

MEAN (counts)

features
common

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
COMMON

VEHICLE-SHARED

TOPIC-SHARED

EMERGENT

Figure 2: The mean value of the four kinds of features
(token counts).
As can be seen from the two figures, regardless of
whether one counts features as types or as tokens,
participants produced more emergent features than the other
kinds of features.
Analyses of variance (ANOVAs) among the four kinds
(common, vehicle-shared, topic-shared, emergent) were
conducted for both type and token counts. The type count
analysis revealed a significant feature type main effect, F(3,
183) = 456.82, p < .001. Post hoc analyses (Ryan’s method)
to explore the interaction revealed that significantly more
emergent features were produced than the other kinds of
features (p < .05) and significantly less common features
were produced than the other kinds of features (p < .05).
The token count analysis also produced a significant main
effect, F(3, 183) = 74.79, p < .001. Post hoc analyses
(Ryan’s method) to explore the interaction revealed that
significantly more emergent features were produced than the
other kinds of features (p < .05) and significantly less
common features were produced than the other kinds of
features (p < .05). In the type count analysis significantly
more vehicle-shared features were produced than topicshared features (p < .05), but in the token count analysis this
difference was not significant.
These results are different from the results of Becker
(1997) which analyzed nominal metaphors. According to
Becker (1997), in the interpretation of nominal metaphors
there were significantly more vehicle-shared features than
the other kinds of features, and nominal metaphors were
influenced primarily by salient features of the vehicle. Our
results show that in the interpretation of synesthetic
metaphors there were significantly more emergent features
than the other kinds of features. Thus, our results suggest
that we do not so directly comprehend synesthetic
metaphors based on salient features of the vehicle or the
topic.

EMERGENT

Analysis 2
Figure 1: The mean value of the four kinds of features
(type counts).

If, as shown in Analysis 1, synesthetic metaphors were not
so directly comprehended by salient features of the vehicle

1900

or the topic, where do the emergent features come from? We
address this question based on the assumption that the
influence of salient features of the vehicle or the topic in the
comprehension process of synesthetic metaphors is indirect,
mediated by experience-based event knowledge. As we
described in the introduction, Sakamoto & Utsumi (2008)
suggest that synesthetic metaphors such as “sweet smell”
(“amai nioi” in Japanese) is based on correlations in
experience. Thus, in Analysis 2 we explore whether features
listed for synesthetic metaphors could be explained by
experience-based event knowledge.
Considering experience-based event knowledge and the
fact that the vehicle and the topic of a synesthetic metaphor
are an adjective and a noun, respectively, we can elaborate
the claim of Sakamoto & Utsumi (2008) as follows:
[Hypothesis]
Synesthetic metaphors are interpreted based on event
knowledge in which we typically perceive a property
denoted by the vehicle (i.e., adjective) and an object denoted
by the topic (i.e., noun) simultaneously.
According to this hypothesis, words associated with
synesthetic metaphors reflect the process shown in Figure 3;
we understand the metaphorical expression as “an object of
perception readily evoked by an event in which an entity
characterized by the adjective figures prominently.” Then
we evoke a concrete event in which we typically perceive a
property denoted by the adjective and an object denoted by
the noun simultaneously. Therefore, words associated with
the synesthetic metaphor reflect the evoked concrete event.
That is, words associated with the synesthetic metaphor are
either feature 1 (hereafter, F1), feature 2 (F2) or feature 3
(F3) in Figure 3.
a synesthetic metaphor
↓
an object of perception readily evoked by an event in
which an entity characterized by the adjective figures
prominently
↓
a concrete event in which we typically perceive a
property denoted by the adjective and an object denoted
by the noun simultaneously
↓
feature 1: an entity with a property denoted by the
adjective
feature 2: an object denoted by the noun
feature 3: other salient entities or objects in the event

Figure 3: comprehension process of synesthetic
metaphors
For example, in the comprehension of “red taste” (“akai
aji” in Japanese), as shown in Figure 4, an event in which
we eat chili peppers is evoked as an event in which we
perceive “red” and “taste” simultaneously. This
comprehension process is verified when features such as

“chili peppers (F1),” “hot (F2)” and “sweat (F3)” are listed
for “red taste” in the experiment.
“red taste”
↓
taste in events including red things
↓
an event in which we eat chili peppers
↓
feature 1: “chili peppers”
feature 2: “hot”
feature 3: “sweat”

Figure 4: comprehension process of “red taste”
If this hypothesis is valid, the ratio of features
corresponding to either F1, F2 or F3 against all the features
collected in the experiment will be very high. Therefore, in
Analysis 2, we explore the ratio of features corresponding to
either F1, F2 or F3 against all the features collected in the
experiment. This exploration is based on the following
procedure.

Step 1: Labeling features
This step is a preparation for Step 2 and Step 3. Step 2 and
Step 3 are procedures for identifying features corresponding
to either F1 or F2.
In this step, features satisfying either of the condition
shown in Table 2 are labeled either X or Y. This labeling
procedure is conducted based on majority decision of three
judges. Hereafter, WXs denote features labeled X and WYs
denote features labeled Y. For example, features such as
“chili peppers” or “tomato” listed for “red taste” are WXs,
and features such as “hot” listed for “red taste” are WYs.
Notice that at this step we cannot yet determine whether
WXs and WYs correspond to either F1 or F2.
Table 2: Labels and Conditions.
label
X
Y

condition
an entity with a property denoted by the
adjective
an object denoted by the noun

Step 2: Identifying F1
One situation (hereafter, S1) in which we perceive
properties denoted by the adjective (hereafter, PA) and
objects denoted by the noun (hereafter, ON) simultaneously
is one situation in which there is an entity satisfying both a
PA and an ON. In S1, if an entity satisfying both a PA and
an ON is a WX, the expression “the ON of a WX” is natural.
For example, since “chili peppers” for “red taste” is a WX,
“the ON of a WX” is “the taste of chili peppers.” This
expression is natural.
In this step, therefore, the three judges mentioned in Step
1 consider whether “the ON of a WX” is natural for each
synesthetic metaphor. If two or more judges find this

1901

expression natural, the WX is regarded as F1. So, “chili
peppers” for “red taste” is regarded as F1.

Step 3: Identifying F1 and F2
If an entity satisfying both a PA and an ON is evoked as
shown in Step2, a possibility, in which our participants will
very likely list not only WXs but also a concrete ON of a
WX as a feature, is very high. Features corresponding to
concrete ONs of WXs are WYs.
Another situation in which we perceive a PA and an ON
simultaneously (hereafter, S2) is one situation in which an
entity with a PA is different from an object of a category
ON. In S2, if an entity with a PA is listed as a feature, the
entity is a WX. In S2, if an object of a category ON is listed
as a feature, the object is a WY.
If a synesthetic metaphor evokes S1 or S2 for our
participants, that will indicate that WXs are strongly
connected with WYs. This in turn will make it easy for the
three judges mentioned in Step 1 to imagine a concrete
event based on the closely associated WXs and WYs.
In this step, the three judges combine all WXs with all
WYs for each synesthetic metaphor. If two or more judges
can easily imagine concrete events, a WX and a WY
comprising the combination are regarded as F1 and F2
respectively.
For example, the features “chili peppers” and “hot” are
listed for “red taste.” “Chili peppers” and “hot” are a WX
and a WY respectively. The judges make a pair “chili
peppers, hot.” Then, they consider whether they can easily
imagine an event on the basis of the pair. Since they can
imagine an event easily (e.g., eating chili peppers), “chili
peppers” and “hot” are regarded as F1 and F2 respectively.

Step 4: Identifying F3
In this step, we identify F3. Features unlabeled in Step 1
may correspond to F3. If unlabeled features correspond to
F3, concrete events are most likely to have already been
evoked. Thus, there is a strong possibility that F1 and F2 are
included in the features listed by our participants.
In this step, based on this line of reasoning and the
rationale presented in Step 3, we conduct the following
procedure; the three judges mentioned in Step 1 combine
features regarded as either F1 or F2 in Step 2 and Step 3
with unlabeled features. If two or more judges can imagine
concrete events easily, the unlabeled feature included in the
combination is regarded as F3.
For example, “chili peppers”, “hot” and “sweat” are listed
for “red taste.” “Chili peppers” and “hot” are F1 and F2,
respectively, in Step 3. Thus, the judges combine “sweat”
with the pair “chili peppers, hot.” Since the judges can
imagine an event easily (e.g., eating chili peppers), “sweat”
is regarded as F3.

Result of Analysis 2
All the features regarded as either F1, F2 or F3 are those
based on experience-based event knowledge. Table 3 shows
the total number of token counts and the mean value of

token counts when the features are classified into either
those based on event knowledge or those not based on event
knowledge. The proportion of the token counts classified as
the features based on event knowledge was significantly
higher than those which could not be classified as the
features on event knowledge, χ2 (1, N = 10388) = 804.01, p
< .01. Furthermore, the T-test using the mean value of token
counts revealed that there were significantly more features
based on event knowledge than those which could not be
classified as features based on event knowledge, t(61) =
3.28, p < .01.
This result shows that synesthetic metaphors tend to be
understood based on event knowledge.
Table 3: Classification Result.
total
mean

event knowledge
6639 (63.91%)
107.08

not event knowledge
3749 (36.09%)
60.47

General Discussion
Indication for the theory of metaphor
Analysis 1 showed that in the interpretation of synesthetic
metaphors there were significantly more emergent features
than the other kinds of features. The result of Analysis 1
suggests that we do not so directly comprehend synesthetic
metaphors based on salient features of the vehicle or the
topic.
Utsumi & Sakamoto (2007a, 2007b) proposed a two-stage
categorization theory. In the two-stage categorization theory,
correspondences between the properties literally expressed
by the adjective and the properties to be mapped onto the
noun would be indirect, mediated by an intermediate
category. Utsumi & Sakamoto (2007a, 2007b) tested their
argument by means of computer simulation in which the
meanings of adjective metaphors including synesthetic
metaphors are computed in a multidimensional semantic
space. In the simulation, three theories for adjective
metaphor comprehension, i.e., two-stage categorization
theory, categorization theory (Glucksberg, 2001;
Glucksberg & Keysar, 1990) and comparison theory
(Bowdle & Gentner, 2005), were compared in terms of how
well they mimic human interpretation of adjective
metaphors. The simulation result was that the two-stage
categorization theory is a more plausible theory of adjective
metaphors than the other kinds of theory.
As for the fact that we do not so directly comprehend
synesthetic metaphors based on salient features of the
vehicle or the topic, the result of Analysis 1 is consistent
with the two-stage categorization theory. Thus, our results
support the arguments by Utsumi & Sakamoto (2007a,
2007b). Furthermore, while Utsumi & Sakamoto (2007a,
2007b) left unsolved the detailed process in which certain
exemplars are selected as those relevant to the noun, the
result of Analysis 2 showed that experience-based event
knowledge played an important role in that process.

1902

Importance of Event Knowledge
We showed that experience-based event knowledge play an
important role in the comprehension process of synesthetic
metaphors. How we use knowledge to interpret new
experiences is an important topic in cognitive science. Since
1970’s many studies have been conducted based on the
concepts of “frame” (Minsky, 1975), “schema” (Rumelhart,
1980) and “script” (Schank & Abelson, 1977). Recent
studies such as Bicknell & Rohde (2009) also argue the
important role of real-world event knowledge in processing
linguistic expressions. Our study showed that experiencebased event knowledge also play an important role in the
comprehension process of metaphorical expressions.

Conclusion
This paper explored how people comprehend synesthetic
metaphors, to which previous studies had paid little
attention. The results of psychological experiments showed
that there were significantly more emergent features than
the other kinds of features. This suggests that we do not so
directly comprehend synesthetic metaphors based on salient
features of the vehicle or the topic. We argued that
experience-based event knowledge played an important role
in the comprehension process of synesthetic metaphors.
In our future work we are planning to confirm this finding
by different psychological experiments. Since the tendency
of synesthetic metaphors to evoke negative images was
pointed out by Sakamoto and Utsumi (2009), it would also
be interesting for further work to investigate how those
negative images were evoked in the comprehension process
of synesthetic metaphors using experience-based event
knowledge.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Grant-in-Aid for Scientific
Research (C) (No. 20520350) from Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science. The authors wish to thank Yoshiki
Nishimura and the anonymous reviewers for their very
helpful suggestions.

References
Becker, A. H. (1997). Emergent and common features
influence metaphor interpretation. Metaphor and Symbol,
12(4), 243–259.
Bicknell, K., & Rohde, H. (2009). Dynamic integration of
pragmatic expectations and real-world event knowledge
in syntactic ambiguity resolution. In Proceedings of the
31st annual meeting of the cognitive science society (pp.
1216–1221).
Bowdle, B. F., & Gentner, D. (2005). The career of
metaphor. Psychological Review, 112(1), 193–216.
Glucksberg, S. (2001). Understanding figurative language:
From metaphors to idioms. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Glucksberg, S., & Keysar, B. (1990). Understanding
metaphorical
comparisons:
Beyond
similarity.
Psychological Review, 97(1), 3–18.
Jones, L. L., & Estes, Z. (2006). Roosters, robins, and alarm
clocks: Aptness and conventionality in metaphor
comprehension. Journal of Memory and Language, 55,
18–32.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Martin, J. H. (1992). Computer understanding of
conventional metaphoric language. Cognitive Science, 16,
233–270.
Minsky, M. (1975). A framework for representing
knowledge. In P. H. Winston (Ed.), The psychology of
computer vision (pp. 211–277). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Rumelhart, D. E. (1980). Schemata: The building blocks of
cognition. In R. J. Spiro, B. C. Bruce, & W. F. Brewer
(Eds.), Theoretical issues in reading comprehension:
Perspectives from cognitive psychology, linguistics,
artificial intelligence, and education (pp. 33–58).
Philadelphia, PA: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Sakamoto, M., & Utsumi, A. (2008). Semantic diversity
revealed by a comparison between two types of adjective
metaphors: Correlation vs. resemblance. In Proceedings
of the 6th international conference of cognitive science
(pp.309–393).
Sakamoto, M., & Utsumi, A. (2009). Cognitive effects of
synesthetic metaphors evoked by the semantic interaction.
In Proceeding of the 31st annual meeting of the cognitive
science society (pp. 1593–1598).
Schank, R. C., & Abelson, R. P. (1977). Scripts, plans,
goals and understanding. Philadelphia, PA: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Taylor, J. R. (2003). Linguistic categorization. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Ullmann, S. (1951). The principles of semantics. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Utsumi, A. (2007). Interpretive diversity explains metaphorsimile distinction. Metaphor and Symbol, 22(4), 291-312.
Utsumi, A., & Sakamoto, M. (2007a). Computational
evidence for two-stage categorization as a process of
adjective metaphor comprehension. In Proceedings of the
2nd european cognitive science conference (p. 77-82).
Utsumi, A., & Sakamoto, M. (2007b). Predicative
metaphors are understood as two-stage categorization:
Computational evidence by latent semantic analysis. In
Proceedings of the 29th annual meeting of the cognitive
science society (pp.1587–1592).
Werning, M., Fleischhauer, J., & Beşeoğlu, H. (2006). The
cognitive accessibility of synaesthetic metaphors. In
Proceedings of the 28th annual conference of the
cognitive science society (pp. 2365–2370).
Williams, J. M. (1976). Synesthetic adjectives: A possible
law of semantic change. Language, 52(2), 461–478.

1903

