UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Active Role of Partial Knowledge in Cross-Situational Word Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7630b2rw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Yurovksy, Daniel
Fricker, Damian
Yu, Chen
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Active Role of Partial Knowledge in Cross-Situational Word Learning
Daniel Yurovsky, Damian Fricker, Chen Yu, and Linda B. Smith
{dyurovsk, dfricker, chenyu, smith4} @indiana.edu
Department of Psychological and Brain Science, and Cognitive Science Program
1101 East 10th Street Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Abstract
A number of modern word learning theories posit statistical
processes in which knowledge is accumulated across many
exposures to a word and its potential referents. Accordingly,
words do not go directly from unknown to known, but rather
pass through intermediate stages of partial knowledge. This
work presents empirical evidence for the existence of such
partial knowledge, and further demonstrates its active driving
role in cross-situational word learning. Subsequently, an
incremental model which leverages its partial knowledge of
word-object mappings from trial to trial is shown to account
well for the data. In contrast, models which do not do so
cannot explain the data. These results confirm crucial
assumptions made by statistical word learning models and
shed light on the representations underlying the acquisition of
word meanings.
Keywords:
word
learning;
language
computational modeling; statistical learning

acquisition;

Introduction
We have a tendency to characterize word learning as an
all-or-none process: either a child knows a given word, or
she has not yet learned it. This is apparent in our
methodology (e.g. forced-choice tests, preferential looking),
and assessment of vocabulary size via MCDI (Fenson, Dale,
Reznick, Bates, Thal, & Pethick, 1994), as well as some
theoretical claims. But this implicit all-or-none
characterization may stymie our thinking about potential
word-meaning representations.
For almost a century we have known that human learning
and memory are not binary phenomena (Ebbinghaus, 1913).
In learning lists of paired associates, for instance, a failure
to recall the correct pair for a prompt does not imply no
knowledge of the mapping. Evidence of this knowledge can
be recovered using a different test paradigm (e.g.
recognition or savings). The knowledge is not absent, but
rather partial or sub-threshold. The central idea motivating
this work is that such sub-threshold knowledge may play a
profound in the course of language acquisition.
Several recent theoretical and computational approaches
to word learning have made explicit use of partial
knowledge. For instance, McMurray (2007) modeled the
learning of a word’s meaning as the acquisition of partial
meaning tokens. Yu and Smith (2007) argued that early
word learning can be thought of as the accumulation of cooccurrence statistics between words and objects across
multiple situations. These theories suggest that a word can
be learned in bits rather than in a single perfect moment.
Other models make an even stronger claim: not only can
one build lexical knowledge by accumulating parts; this

partial knowledge is an active driver of the learning system
(Blythe, Smith, & Smith, in press, McMurray, Horst,
Toscano, & Samuelson, in press, Fazly, Alishahi, &
Stevenson, in press, Yu, 2008). These models have been
tested predominantly on large corpora, reproducing
qualitative patterns found in children’s word learning. If
they are correct about the presence and role of partial
knowledge, however, then we should be able to find
empirical evidence for the role of partial knowledge in
human word learners.
Yurovsky and Yu (2008) presented indirect evidence of
the active role of partial knowledge in cross-situational
learning. They exposed participants to a series of
individually ambiguous learning trials consisting of multiple
words and multiple objects. At the end of each trial,
participants were asked to indicate how sure they were (110) that they knew the correct label for each object.
Yurovsky and Yu showed that a given object’s rating could
be predicted from the ratings given to the other objects on
the same trial, even after the object’s rating on its previous
exposure was taken into account. Thus, participants seemed
to be using partial knowledge of word-object mappings to
reduce the set of candidates for other labels.
This analysis, while promising, was performed on
participants’ subjective knowledge ratings. In the present
work, we propose to offer stronger and more direct evidence
that partial knowledge plays an active role in word learning.
To this end, we expose participants to two consecutive
blocks of cross-situational learning. Crucially, half of the
words and objects in the second block are those which
participants failed to learn in the first block. Comparing the
results of block 2 to those of several control conditions, we
can determine the role of partial knowledge in crosssituational learning. First, we can ask whether partial
knowledge exists in the system, whether learners are really
accumulating bits of sub-threshold knowledge.
At a deeper level, we pursue a more interesting question:
does partial knowledge of individual word-referent pairs –
interacting in a system with partial knowledge of other
word-referent pairs – facilitate the acquisition of new words.
To answer this question, a set of computational models are
fit to the data to understand the underlying learning
mechanisms which give rise to the empirical results. We
compare a simple associative model, a biased associative
model which increments associations in proportion to their
current strength, and a competitive associative model which
adds within-trial competition. In the simple associative
model, partial knowledge is not used in learning. In the
biased associative model, partial knowledge of a word-

2609

referent pair drives learning of that individual pair. Finally,
in the competitive associative model, partial-knowledge of
multiple word-referent pairs interacts and, by so doing,
facilitates the learning of other pairs and thus the whole
system of words and referents.

Experiment 1
To demonstrate the role of partial knowledge in word
learning, we used the cross-situational word learning
paradigm (Yu & Smith, 2007). In this task, participants are
exposed to a series of individually ambiguous learning
trials, each of which contains multiple co-occurring words
and potential referents. While each trial is individually
unambiguous, words always co-occur with their correct
referent, and thus participants who correctly track cooccurrence between words and objects across trials can
learn the correct pairings.
In Experiment 1, participants were exposed to two
consecutive blocks of cross-situational word learning. At the
end of block 1, participants were asked to select the correct
referent for each of the trained words. For participants in the
unlearned condition, half of the stimuli in block 2 were
word-object pairs from block 1 for which they selected
incorrect referents. For participants in the new condition, all
stimuli in the second block were new.
If participants encoded nothing about words for which
they selected incorrect referents in block 1, participants in
the unlearned and new conditions should learn equally well
in block 2. Alternatively, since no feedback is provided at
test, if participants who selected incorrect referents did so as
the result of binary hypotheses, and carried these wrong
hypotheses to block 2, we might expect participants in the
unlearned condition to underperform those in the new
condition. However, if participants who selected incorrectly
possess sub-threshold knowledge of the correct referent, we
would expect participants in the unlearned condition to
perform better than new participants in block 2. Most
interesting would be if sub-threshold knowledge of one pair
interacted with sub-threshold knowledge of other wordreferent pairs to facilitate learning new pairs in block 2.

Method
Participants.
Ninety-two
Indiana
University
undergraduates participated in exchange for course credit;
50 in the unlearned condition and 42 in the new condition.
However, to ensure a fair comparison across conditions,
data from only a subset were analyzed (criteria explained in
procedure). The final analysis was conducted on 23
participants in the unlearned condition, and 10 participants
in the new condition.
Stimuli. Referents were represented by pictures of unusual
objects which were easy to distinguish from each other, but
difficult to name. Words were 1-2 syllable synthesized
nonsense words constructed to be phonotactically probable
in English. All words and objects have been used in
previous cross-situational learning experiments (Yu &

Smith, 2007, Yurovsky & Yu, 2008). Forty-two unique
words and objects were used in total – 24 in block 1 and 18
in block 2.
Training slides for block 1 presented two pictures – one
on each side of the screen – and played two labels,
following Yu and Smith’s (2007) 2x2 condition. Training
slides for block 2 presented four objects – one in each
corner of the screen – and played four labels, following Yu
and Smith’s (2007) 4x4 condition. Test slides for each block
displayed all of the objects from that block (24 for block 1,
18 for block 2) in random positions and played one label.
Procedure. Each participant was exposed to two blocks of
cross-situational learning – first a 2x2 block and then a 4x4
block. Each block consisted of a training phase followed by
a test phase. The training phases consisted of a series of
trials each displaying a set of objects and playing an equal
number of words. Screen position and word order were
randomized, such that they provided no information about
which word labeled which object.
Following training, participants were given a series of
alternative forced choice tests in which they were asked to
select the correct referent for each label. Each word was
tested once, and all objects from a block were presented on
each test trial, so the content of test trials was uninformative
as to correct mappings.
Block 1 contained 24 novel words, each of which
occurred 5 times with its correct referent and less often with
other objects. This resulted in 60 2x2 trials in total. Block 2
contained 18 words, each of which occurred with its correct
referent 4 times and less often with other objects. This
resulted in 18 4x4 trials. Word-object pairings and trial
orders were selected randomly for each participant.
Block 1 was identical for participants in both the new and
unlearned groups. The stimuli for block 2 differed across
conditions. In the new condition, block 2 consisted entirely
of novel stimuli – 18 words and their associated objects. For
participants in the unlearned condition, however, 9 of the
words and objects in the second block were those for which
they had selected the incorrect response at test in block 1
(see Figure 1). Thus, for participants in the unlearned group,
half of the stimuli in block 2 were words and objects for
which they had not successfully learned correct
associations. We will refer to the words and referents
carried over from block 1 as old and those which are seen
for the first time in block 2 as new.
Since participants could complete block 2 of the
unlearned condition only if they had selected incorrect
referents for at least 9 words in block 1, we could analyze
participants who learned at most 15 of the 24 possible
mappings. However, this could produce a skewed measure
of average learning performance in block 2 since we would
be rejecting data from those who learned “too much” in
block 1. To help compensate, we also excluded participants
who learned less than 9 correct pairings. Thus, only
participants who learned between 9 and 15 correct pairings
in block 1 continued on to block 2 of either condition.

2610

cross-situational learning. Partial knowledge of some pairs
may influence the learning of other pairs on a trial-to-trial
basis by constraining the pairs that are associated within a
trial. An alternative explanation, however, is that
participants in this experiment are benefitting from
knowledge of which of the stimuli in block 2 had been seen
previously in block 1. This could allow participants in block
2 of the unlearned condition to actively reduce the
ambiguity of each training trial by mapping old words to old
objects and new words to new objects. Some evidence for
this second hypothesis comes from the errors made by
participants in block 2 of the unlearned condition. When
participants made errors in selecting referents for new
words, they selected new referents at a probability
significantly different from chance (M = .70, t = 3.73, p <
.01, chance = .44). To provide further insights into the
nature of the partial knowledge and its role in learning novel
items, we constructed a new condition that was designed to
assess the influence of sub-threshold mappings over and
above possible knowledge of old/new.

Figure 1: Selection of stimuli for block 2. In the unlearned
condition, half of the items on each trial of block 2 were
those for which the participant had given the incorrect
response in block 1. The other half were new. In the new
condition, all stimuli were new.

Experiment 2

Results and Discussion

In Experiment 1 we tested the role of partial knowledge in
word-referent mapping by exposing participants to two
consecutive trials of cross-situational learning. Crucially,
half of the pairings in block 2 were pairings for which
participants failed to learn correct mappings in block 1.
Learning results in block 2 showed that partial knowledge of
these word-object pairings allowed participants to perform
more than twice as well as participants exposed to a second
block consisting of all new pairings. One possibility is that
this benefit is entirely due to participants preferentially
mapping old words to old objects and new words to new
objects because they categorized them into two groups by
mere exposure.

Referent Learning by Condition
Proportion Correct at Test

As described above, only a subset of the participants run in
block 1 of either condition proceeded on to block 2.
Importantly, the proportion of words learned in block 1 did
not differ between the selected subset and the set of all
participants in the unlearned condition (Ms = .51, Ma = .50,
t = .234, n.s.) nor in the new condition (Ms = .47, Ma= .43, t
= .470, n.s.). Neither was there a significant difference
between the proportion of words learned in block 1 by the
selected participants in the unlearned vs. the new condition
(Mu = .51, Mn= .47, t = 1.62, n.s.). This is to be expected
given that block 1 was identical across conditions. Thus, all
further analysis will be performed on selected participants.
In the second block, participants in both the unlearned
and new conditions learned a significant proportion of wordobject pairings (Mu = .56, tu = 9.74, p < .001, Mn= .27, tn=
6.62, p < .001, chance = .056). However, as shown in
Figure 2, participants in the unlearned condition
successfully mapped more than twice as many words to
their correct referents as those in the new condition (t =
3.63, p = .01). Further, this benefit was not only for the 9
old pairings carried over from block 1 (Mu = .6, Mn = .26, t
= 3.69, p < .001), but for the 9 new pairings as well (Mu =
.51, Mn = .27, t = 2.48, p < .05).
Thus, partial knowledge of word-object pairings in block
1 allowed participants in the unlearned condition to learn
significantly more mappings in block 2 than participants in
the new condition. Further, the benefit was not just for the
pairings for which participants had partial knowledge, but
for novel pairings as well. This suggests that partial
knowledge plays an active role in organizing crosssituational learning. Even though knowledge of word-object
pairings was below threshold in block 1, it was sufficient to
drive learning of novel pairings in block 2.
These findings provide initial support for the idea that
sub-threshold knowledge of word-object mappings drives

0.7
0.6

new
unlearned

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Block 1 (2x2)

Block 2 (4x4)

Figure 2: Proportion of word-referent pairings learned by
participants in each condition across Blocks 1 and 2. Dotted
lines indicate chance levels.

2611

To establish a more stringent baseline for comparison, in
Experiment 2 we constructed a control condition in which
participants were exposed to the same word and object
stimuli as participants in the unlearned condition, but
without any opportunity to learn their associations. These
same stimuli then appeared again in block 2. The control
condition allows us to determine a second baseline – the
effect of mere exposure to the stimuli of block 1.

Proportoin Correct at Test

Referents Learned in Block 2

Method
Participants. Ten Indiana University undergraduates
participated in exchange for course credit. None had
previously participated in Experiment 1.
Stimuli. Stimuli for Experiment 2 were identical to those
for Experiment 1.
Procedure. The procedure for the control condition was
similar to that used in the unlearned condition of
Experiment 1. The crucial difference, however, was in the
co-occurrence statistics of the words and objects of block 1.
Whereas all words co-occurred with their correct referents 5
times in Experiment 1, in Experiment 2 half of the words
occurred at most one time with each possible referent. Thus,
there was essentially no correct referent for these 12 words.
These unlearnable words and objects were matched for
frequency of occurrence with those in block 1 – only cooccurrence statistics changed.
After the test phase of block 1, participants were exposed
to a second cross-situational learning task as before. This
time, however, 9 of the words and objects in block 2 were
drawn randomly from the set of 12 unlearnable words and
objects of block 1. In the second block these words each
occurred 4 times with a single correct referent just like the 9
novel words. Thus, participants could distinguish the old
words from the new words by their appearance in block 1,
but they could not use potential partial knowledge of wordreferent mappings to bootstrap their learning in block 2.

0.7

control

new

unlearned

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

All

Old

New

Figure 3: Proportion of word-referent pairings learned by
participants in each condition. Old words are those which
have been carried over to block 2 from block 1. In the new
condition there are no old words, so the old words are those
which fill the same slots in the training trials as the old
words in the unlearned and control conditions. Dotted lines
indicate chance.
precisely the condition experienced by participants in the
control condition. However, counter to this hypothesis,
participants in the control condition did not outperform
those in the new condition (Mc = .27, Mn = .26, t = .16, n.s.).
They did, however, significantly underperform those in the
unlearned condition (Mc = .27, Mu = .56, t = -3.22, p < .01).
This difference was separately significant for old (Mc = .2,
Mu = .6, t = -4.06, p < .001) and trending in the right
direction for new (Mc = .34, Mu = .51, t = -1.55, p = .13)
words. Figure 3 shows these results. This weighs against the
hypothesis of mere exposure and lends credence to the
hypothesis that partial knowledge is an active driver of
cross-situational learning.

Results and Discussion
Because half of the words in block 1 of the control
condition were unlearnable, it is unsurprising that these
participants learned less words in block 1 than those in
Experiment 1 (M1 = .5, M2 = .28, tu = 7.21, p < .001).
However, when only those words for which there was a
correct answer in both Experiments are considered,
participants performed equally well in both Experiment 1
and 2 (M1 = .49, M2 = .48, t = 0.19, n.s.). It is thus
reasonable to compare block 2 performance across
conditions.
In Experiment 2, we test the hypothesis that the benefit
experienced due to participants in the unlearned condition
of Experiment 1 was due not to partial knowledge, but to the
ability to partition stimuli into two sets: old and new. If this
is the case, mere exposure to the stimuli of block 1 –
without the underlying co-occurrence statistics – should
have been sufficient to reproduce this benefit. This is

Computational Models
To more fully analyze the role of partial knowledge of
word-referent mappings in driving cross-situational
learning, we implemented three incremental associative
models that were exposed to simulated trials identical to
those seen by experimental participants. The three models
allow us to explicitly test hypotheses about how partial
knowledge is used.
The first model – the simple associative model –
maintains a word x object co-occurrence matrix and simply
increments the cell corresponding to a word-object
association each time the pair appears on a trial. This model
thus learns the pure frequency of each of the possible wordobject pairs.
The second model – the biased associative model –
similarly maintains a word x object co-occurrence matrix.
However, instead of incrementing the association strength

2612

Modeling Learning in Block 1
Proportion Correct at Test

0.6

Data
Biased

Simple
Competetive

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

control

new

unlearned

Figure 4: Proportion of word-referent pairs learned in block
1 by experimental participants and each of the three models
across all experimental conditions.

Modeling Learning in Block 2
0.7

Prportion Correct at Test

between a word and object by one whenever they co-occur,
it increments their association by the strength of the current
association. Whereas the simple model produces linear
growth, the biased model produces geometric growth. This
rich-get-richer scheme capitalizes on partial knowledge of a
pairing in order to learn that pairing.
The final model – the normalized associative model –
adds a competitive process to the biased model. On each
trial, the increase in association between words and objects
are computed as in the biased model, but the increment for a
given word-object pair is normalized by the sum of all
increments made for that object on that trial. This
implements competition between all of the words in one
trial. Intuitively, as one word accounts better for the
presence of an object, the association between other words
and that object are depressed. This mechanism is similar to
the alignment mechanism used by Fazly et al.’s (in press)
iterative version of the IBM Machine Translation Model
(Brown, Pietra, Pietra, & Mercer, 1994).
The models are each tested for their knowledge of wordobject associations in the same way as experimental
participants. At the end of training, they are exposed to a
series of alternative-forced choice tests and make their
selections using the Shepard-Luce Choice Rule (Luce, 1959,
Shepard, 1957). The simulated participant selects each
alternative with a probability proportional to the exponential
function of the strength of its association with the tested
word.
Each model has only one parameter: a sensitivity
parameter (λ) which weights each of the exponentiated
probabilities in the Shepard-Luce Choice rule. Higher
values of λ indicate that participants are more sensitive to
differences in associative strengths between alternatives. To
simulate Experiments 1 and 2, we exposed simulated
participants to exactly the same stimuli as real participants.
For instance, simulated participants in the unlearned
condition were exposed to all of the training trials of the
first block one at a time. Then, each simulated participant
made selections at test using the Shepard-Luce Choice Rule.
Nine of the items for which the model gave the wrong
answer were then carried over to block 2, which were once
again presented to the participant one trial at a time. Finally,
the same decision rule was used to select a referent for each
tested word. One thousand simulated participants were run
in each of the three conditions using each model.
As can be seen in Figure 4, all of the models make
essentially the same predictions for block 1. However, they
make differing predictions for block 2 – the block during
which partial knowledge may play a role. Figure 5 shows
that the simple associative model is unable to produce the
trend found in the data at even a qualitative level. It predicts
that participants in the unlearned condition should
underperform those in the control and new conditions. The
other two models produce qualitatively similar trends. The
competitive model, however, performs quantitatively better
than the biased model (SSEc = .0071, SSEb = .0191, Bayes
Factor = 2.69). As both have an equal number of

0.6

Data
Biased

Simple
Competetive

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

control

new

unlearned

Figure 5: Proportion of word-referent pairs learned in Block
2 by experimental participants and each of the three models
across all experimental conditions.
parameters, we can conclude that the competitive model is
the better model for this empirical data. This supports the
hypothesis that partial knowledge plays an active role in
cross-situational learning, with partial-knowledge of
multiple word-object associations interacting to support the
acquisition
of
new
word-object
associations.

2613

General Discussion
Whereas many methods for measuring word learning treat it
as if it were binary – either the correct referent of a word is
known or it is not – recent theoretical and computational
models have argued that it is a gradual, accumulative
process. Rather than learning a word’s referent from a single
perfect moment, learners may hone in on the correct referent
through exposure to environmental statistics.
Empirical work has demonstrated that co-occurrence
statistics alone are sufficient for learning word-object
pairings (Yu & Smith, 2007). Furthermore, Vouloumanos
(2008) showed evidence that learners are not only sensitive
to the most frequently associated object for a given word,
but also show deep knowledge of the statistical structure.
Still, these results probed statistically acquired word-object
knowledge only in its final state – producing a binary
learned/unlearned data point for each potential pairing.
Empirical evidence of graded states of partial knowledge
has been indirect at best (Yurovsky & Yu, 2008).
The present work provides direct empirical evidence of
not only the presence of such partial knowledge, but also its
active role in driving word learning from exposure to
exposure. The compared incremental models of statistical
word learning show that partial knowledge may be
leveraged on a trial-to-trial basis to bootstrap learning.
Crucially, the better quantitative fits of the competitive
model suggest that partial knowledge of a word-object
association does not merely facilitate learning of that one
association, but also combines with partial knowledge of
other word-referent pairs to bootstrap learning of the whole
system of words and referents. When words are learned as
an interacting system, partial knowledge of one component
gives a learner a leg up on acquiring others (Landuaer &
Dumais, 1997).
While there is no denying the importance of word
learning models at the computational level (Frank,
Goodman, & Tenenbaum, 2009, Xu & Tenenbaum, 2007,
Yu, 2008), this work again underscores our need to
understand the continuous interaction of knowledge and
learning on a moment-to-moment basis. Word learning is a
constructive process, with initial successes cascading on
themselves to empower even more successful learning
(Smith, 1999). By digging deeper into word learning –
understanding the latent representations that drive the
system – we can hope to come to terms with its incredible
complexity.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a National Science Foundation
Graduate Research Fellowship to the first author and
National Institute of Health Grant R01HD056029.

References
Brown, P. F., Pietra, S., Pietra, V., & Mercer, R. L. (1994). The
mathematics of statistical machine translation: parameter
estimation. Computational Linguistics, 19, 263–311.

Blythe, R. A., Smith, K., & Smith, A. D. M. (in press).
Learning times for large lexicons through crosssituational learning. To appear in Cognitive Science.
Ebbinghaus, H. (1913). Memory. A Contribution to
Experimental Psychology. New York: Teachers College,
Columbia University.
Fazly, A., Alishahi, A., & Stevenson, S. A probabilistic
computational model of cross-situational word learning.
To appear in Cognitive Science.
Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., Bates, E., Thal, D. J., &
Pethick, S.J.(1994). Variability in early communicative
development. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 59. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Frank, M. C., Goodman, N. D., & Tenenbaum, J. (2009).
Using speakers’ referential intentions to model early
cross-situational word learning. Psychological Science,
20, 579-585.
Landauer, T. K. & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to
Plato’s problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of
acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review, 104, 211-240.
Luce, R. D. (1959). Individual choice behavior. New York: Wiley.
McMurray, B. (2007) Defusing the childhood vocabulary
explosion. Science, 317, 631.
McMurray, B., Horst, J., Toscano, J., & Samuelson, L. (in
press). Towards an integration of connectionist learning
and dynamical systems processing: case studies in speech
and lexical development. In J. Spencer, M. Thomas, & J.
McClelland (Eds.), Toward a new grand theory of
development? Connectionism and Dynamic Systems
Theory reconsidered.
Shepard, R. N. (1957). Stimulus and response
generalization: A stochastic model relating generalization
to distance in psychological space. Psychometrika, 22,
325-345.
Smith, L. B. (2000). Learning how to learn words: An
associative crane. In R.M. Golinkoff, K. Hirsh-Pasek, L.
Bloom, L. Smith, A. Woodward, N. Akhtar, M.
Tomasello, & G. Hollich (Eds.), Becoming a word
learner: A debate on lexical acquisition (pp. 51-80). New
York, NY: Oxford Press.
Vouloumanos, A. (2008). Fine-grained sensitivity to
statistical information in adult word learning. Cognition,
107, 729-742.
Xu, F., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). Word learning as
Bayesian inference. Psychological Review, 114, 245–272.
Yu, C. (2008). A Statistical Associative Account of
Vocabulary Growth in Early Word Learning. Language
Learning and Acquisition, 4, 32-62.
Yu, C. & Smith, L. B. (2007). Rapid Word Learning under
Uncertainty
via
Cross-Situational
Statistics.
Psychological Science, 18, 414-420.
Yurovsky, D. & Yu, C. (2008). Mutual Exclusivity in
Cross-Situational Statistical Learning. In B. C. Love, K.
McRae, & V.M. Sloutsky (Eds.). Proceedings of the 30th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
715-720). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.

2614

