UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The online processing of modal verbs: Parallel activation of competing mental models

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/15s724hw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Huette, Stephanie
Matlock, Teenie
Spivey, Michael

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The online processing of modal verbs:
Parallel activation of competing mental models
Stephanie Huette (shuette@ucmerced.edu),
Teenie Matlock (tmatlock@ucmerced.edu),
and Michael J. Spivey (spivey@ucmerced.edu)
School of Social Sciences, Humanities & Arts, University of California, Merced, Merced, CA, 95344, USA

Abstract
A simple audio-visual two-alternative forced-choice task was
conducted to examine processing differences between the
modal verbs should and must. Unambiguous propositions
were either agreed with or disagreed with, and participants’
eye movements were monitored as they heard and read the
sentence. Reaction times reveal no differences in processing.
However, closer time course analyses revealed a divergence
in fixations to the target for should. These results suggest two
mental models are simultaneously activated, entailing both
agreement and disagreement with the statement in question.
Keywords: Language understanding, semantics,
modal auxiliaries, eyetracking

Introduction
Modal verbs are a central part of modality, the part of
language that broadly concerns the factual status of affairs
(Frawley, 1992). These verbs are often used to express how
the world should be (deontic modality) or how the world
must be because of some inference (epistemic modality)
(Sweetser, 1990; Nuyts, 2006). The primary semantic
function of modals is to deintensify the meaning of what is
stated, by indicating some degree of uncertainty (Close,
1975). Humans are uniquely equipped to think and
communicate states of affairs that are ideal, that have never
been witnessed first-hand, or that can only exist if some past
action were different. For instance, the epistemic use of the
modal must, as in “You must be bored” indicates an
inference (e.g., somebody is nodding off or appears
inattentive), while its deontic use, as in “You must pay your
taxes” indicates an obligation to perform a series of actions
that are ideal according to customs and laws. This initial
line of research focuses on the perception of deontic
modality. Spoken language is processed incrementally
(Marslen-Wilson, 1975), and thus the parallel processing
and certainty differences of should and must may be
accessible when temporally sensitive metrics are used.
Modals are of interest to developmental psychologists
who investigate reasoning. In one study, children predicted
the outcome of a scenario in which a character used a phrase
such as “You can’t go outside” directed toward a fictitious
character (Byrnes & Duff, 1989). Statements including
might, have to, can, and can’t, were used. The results
revealed that children ages 3-5 are able to combine negation
(can’t) and modal auxiliary intensity to infer future actions
in a story, specifically performing more accurately with
have to, and less accurately with might. Children often
responded with the opposite of the correct prediction with a

negated modal (i.e. “You can’t go outside” was often
interpreted as “Johnny went outside”), indicating some early
competition in affirmative and negated reasoning. Even at
an early age, children know how to make concrete,
dichotomous decisions when modal verbs are used. (See
also Bliss, 1988; Green, 1979; Hirst & Weil, 1982; Moore,
Bryant & Furrow, 1989; Moore, Pure & Furrow, 1990.)
Adults also reason proficiently, in some cases facilitated
by the use of modal verbs. In a Wason card selection task,
participants made more errors with traditional if-then logic
trials, when they were phrased as “if p then q” compared to
those phrased with the deontic modal must, as in “if p then
must q” (Cheng & Holyoak, 1985; see also Cosmides, 1989
and Girotto, Light, & Colbourn, 1988). These studies are
offered as evidence for pragmatic constraints influencing
decisions more than syntactic constraints. Thus, it is crucial
to use natural stimuli one may hear in everyday
conversation. This result also points to an amplification of
certainty when must is used as compared with non-modal
sentences.
These studies are informative because they provide
insights into accuracy, but there remains a large gap
between these and recent findings in decision-making and
incremental, online speech perception. McKinstry, Dale &
Spivey (2008) used computer-mouse tracking to study
people’s responses to phrases varying in degree of truth.
They found that as uncertainty increases in a statement,
deviations from a straight computer-mouse trajectory show
up as a spatial attraction toward the competing response.
For example, “You should brush your teeth everyday”, rated
as being completely true, showed a direct path to the “yes”
response (with little curvature toward the “no” response),
whereas the ambiguous phrase “Murder is sometimes
justifiable” elicited substantially curved computer-mouse
trajectories. Thus, making a decision about truth appears to
be a process that unfolds over time, and is not made in terms
of absolutes. Measurements of an ongoing response that
begins while stimulus comprehension is still in progress can
thus reveal subtleties in processing and brief considerations
of alternative responses, which are not revealed in
identification data (see Magnuson, 2005).
Some have referred to modal verb use as being indicative
of degree of certainty, where deontic modal uses range from
uncertain to certain (Close, 1975, p. 273). However, this
hypothesis has not been tested perceptually, and it is
unknown when or how this uncertainty is dealt with when a
discrete response is required. Eyetracking can reveal
probabilistic activations of two or more possible responses

1154

unfolding over time, as eye fixations are closely time-locked
to speech input. Studies that use this method have yielded
much evidence for the idea that speech perception is
incrementally processed (Allopenna, Magnuson &
Tanenhaus, 1998; Altmann & Kamide, 1999; Spivey,
Tanenhaus, Eberhard & Sedivy, 2002; Knoeferle, Crocker,
Scheepers & Pickering, 2005), and that context is integrated
continuously as a statement is unfolding (Sedivy,
Tanenhaus, Chambers & Carlson, 1999). Thus, if modal
verbs are simply contextual cues as to the intended strength
of certainty, the process of coming to agreement or
disagreement with a modal phrase should be quantifiable in
terms of proportions of fixations over time.
Given that modal verbs presumably mitigate the truth of
statements (Frawley, 1992), and that decisions about the
truth appear to be probabilistically weighted according to
degree of truth (McKinstry et al., 2008) it is reasonable to
predict that different modal verbs will exert different forces
on agreement dynamics. We predicted that should and must
exert their influences differently, allowing for a temporary
phase of considering an incorrect response. That is, the
modal verb should may more readily allow the parallel
consideration of both agreeable and disagreeable mental
models of a given statement (or perceptual simulations of
the possible states of affairs). If this uncertainty follows the
Close (1975) scale, should will trigger more eye movements
to the competing response than must because should is
marking greater uncertainty.
The process of agreeing with a statement in an abstract
sense may be made in terms of committing to reality, while
simultaneously considering alternate, possible states of
reality. We propose that predicates with modal verbs are
processed as contingent statements, which are gradually
resolved into one of the mental models, as they are being
perceived.
The alternative hypothesis neglects interstitial stages of
processing, and would be consistent with traditional
linguistic definitions of modality. These grades of certainty
hint at a probabilistic output, but make no predictions of
competition being an intermediary mechanism in this
decision-making process. Specifically, this would appear as
a weakening or strengthening of looks to a target, with
random looks to a competitor. This would be in line with
certainty being a component, but the lack of competition
would also predict reaction times to must statements would
be faster than those to should. A lack of differences in
looks to the competing response would also indicate a
decision in terms of absolutes. In this case, the outcome
could be modeled with traditional logical operations, which
incorporate some degree of truth and/or certainty.

Methods
Participants. A total of 39 participants were run, 20 in the
Should condition, and 19 in the Must condition. Each was
right-handed or ambidextrous, native English speaking, and
had normal or corrected to normal vision. Participants
received course credit for participation. The study adhered

to the university’s IRB standards, and included a debriefing
session.
Stimuli. Thirty-one sentences were created, once using the
modal should and then replicated for must, yielding 62
sentences. All were written in the second person (directed
at the reader), for instance, “You must/should brush your
teeth everyday” where 15 of each set were unambiguously
agreeable, and 16 were unambiguously disagreeable as in
“You must/should eat from a dirty plate”. All stimuli are
available from the first author upon request. A male speaker
recorded these sentences in a quiet room multiple times, and
each recording was selected on the basis of being similar
and least variant in pitch, loudness and timbre. Silences
were cut off the beginning and end of the recording at zero
crossings to avoid audible pops, so there was no silence at
the beginning or end of each file. All files were amplitude
normalized. Final wav files were sampled at 44kHz in
stereo sound, to be presented binaurally over headphones.
Text versions of the stimuli were rated by 100
undergraduate students at UC Merced. Survey participants
were excluded from eligibility to participate in the main
experiment. Each rated the sentences on a Likert scale of 1
to 7 on agreement-disagreement. For Disagree statements, 7
was the most disagreement, and 1 was the least
disagreement, and for Agreement statements 7 was most
agreement, and 1, least. All stimuli were on the high end of
the scale for must (Agree: M=6.1, SD=1.1; Disagree: M=6.1,
SD=1.7) and should (Agree: M=6.1, SD=0.9; Disagree:
M=5.7, SD=1.5). Differences between Agree and Disagree
were insignificant for each condition (p>.1).
Procedure. A screen displayed Agree or Disagree
response boxes on the right and left side of the screen, with
stimulus text presented in the middle approximately 200
pixels below the choices. In a drift correction before each
trial, participants were required to press the spacebar on a
keyboard while looking at a marker on the screen. This
marker also functioned as a fixation point, to control eye
position at the beginning of each trial. The left and right
response boxes were 250x250 pixels, and contained the
word “Agree” or “Disagree,” with their relative positions
randomized across trials. Simultaneous with the onset of
the written sentence, a matching auditory file was played.
The spoken instructions that were given to the participants
in advance of the experiment informed them about the kinds
of sentences they would encounter, and asked them to
respond with either the left or right arrow key to indicate
which side of the screen contained their chosen
Agree/Disagree response. Modal verb (should/must) was a
between subjects variable to disguise the key manipulation
of the study.
Participants wore a head mounted Eyelink II eyetracker,
sampling at 500 Hz. In addition to eyemovements, the
response, reaction time, and side of screen were collected.

Results
Responses were extremely accurate, with an average of
30 correct responses (SD: 2.6) and with 14 of the total 39

1155

participants responding accurately to all stimuli. The Should
and Must accuracy averages were similar, with Should at
about 95% correct (SD: 1%) and Must at about 96% correct
(SD: 5%). Incorrect responses are excluded from all
analyses.
The final response occurred at an average of 2534ms (SD:
799ms). Reaction times by condition are presented with
standard deviations in parentheses here in Table 1.
Table 1: Reaction times by condition

Should
Must

Positive

Negative

2503ms (542ms)
2645ms (797ms)

2454ms (565ms)
2535ms (1178ms)

A 2x2 mixed ANOVA was conducted to explore
differences, with Should versus Must as a between-subjects
variable, and Positive versus Negative as a within-subjects
variable. Should and Must did not differ as well as Positive
and Negative showing no difference or any interaction (all
tests: p>.1). To further explore if one condition may contain
differences, separate paired-samples t-tests were conducted.
Both conditions contained no significant difference between
Positive and Negative statements (p>.1).

Eyetracking. One participant in the Should condition was
excluded from all eyetracking analyses due to experimenter
error. Fixations were coded in a binary fashion over time to
1 of 4 areas of the screen: target, competitor, text, or blank
regions. Each port was extended 100 pixels in each
direction to allow for error in the track. Graphs of the time
course for each condition can be found in Figure 1.
Overall proportions of fixations were subjected to
independent samples t-tests, to examine differences between
looks to the target, competitor, text and blank regions of
screen between the two conditions, for both Positive and
Negative stimuli. In a comparison of Should and Must for
Positive trials only, looks to target, text and blank regions of
screen did not reliably differ (p>.1).
Looks to the
competitor reliably differed (t(36)=2.4, p=.02), with more
fixations to the competitor for the Should condition (M:
0.097, SD: 0.044) than for Must (M: 0.064, SD: 0.065). A
similar trend is seen for Negative trials, with fixations to the
target and blank regions no different from one another
(p>.1), fixations to the competitor greater in the Should
condition (t(36)=2.9, p=.006), and fixations to text
marginally significant with more looks to text for Must
(t(36)=-1.8, p=.08). Thus, the prominence of the competitor
is greater for should than for must regardless of response
type, but not at the cost of looking to the target in particular.

Figure 1: Timecourse by condition – Each panel represents one of four conditions, where Must and Should are betweensubject conditions, and Negative (where the target is Disagreement) versus Positive (target Agreement) stimuli. Each line
represents the probability of fixating on that particular region of the screen at that moment in time.

1156

To test whether looks to the competitor in the Must
condition were negligible or not, a one-sample t-test against
a value of zero was performed. Positive Must was
significant for the competitor against a value of zero
(t(18)=7.61, p<.001) as was Negative Must (t(18)=9.68,
p<.001). This analysis shows that there are still some looks
to the competitor and thus, that processing statements with
must is not likely to be an all or nothing process.
Because these tests examine positive and negative stimuli
separately, it can be useful to look at the differences
between Positive and Negative trial fixations over time.
There may be a window of time during which there are
more fixations to a certain region when Positive stimuli are
heard, and another window during which a region is more
prominent for a Negative stimulus. By pooling all time in
previous analyses, there is a risk of averaging and washing
out these differences. Graphically we can examine this by
subtracting fixations in Negative trials from the Positive for
each time step. Thus, the y-axis becomes a kind of valence
scale, where 0 indicates no difference between looks for
Positive and Negative stimuli. Positive y means a bias
toward that particular port in Positive trials, and negative y
is bias during Negative trials. Figure 2 shows that in the
Should condition, between 1244ms and 2200ms there is a
bias toward looking at the Negative Target, and a bias
during this same time window toward looking at Positive
Text. These differences were also mapped out for the Must
condition, but were uninformative and will not be
investigated further here.

Figure 2: Difference in average fixations over time – This
graph is constructed by subtracting average fixations on
Disagree trials from Agree trials. Divergence from no
difference was observed at 900ms through 1799ms for Text
and Target areas of the screen.
Time was binned into Beginning (0-899ms), Middle (9001799ms) and Final (1800ms-3000ms). These time bins
were analyzed in a similar way to the previous fixation
analyses, where average proportions of fixations to each
port were output for each subject in each condition, and then
compared across the Positive / Negative dimension in a
paired samples t-test.
As predicted, there were no
differences in looks to any regions of the screen in the
Beginning time window or the Final window (p>.1).

Fixations to the Target in the Middle time window were
greater for the Negative stimuli (Positive: M=0.28,
SD=0.11; Negative: M=0.322, SD=0.14; t(18)=2.17, p.043). Other ports revealed no differences (p>.1).

Discussion
For the Should condition, the increased looks to the
competitor seemed to indicate that the competing response
is more active throughout the trial than in the Must
condition. A lack of differences in looks to the target where
the competitor is prominent indicates that this increase is not
competition, but rather an increase that comes at the cost of
no particular region of the screen. Although there are very
few looks to the competitor in the Must condition, a test
against a value of 0 revealed that there are still some
occasional looks here. However, because of the random
assignment of side of response, we cannot rule out the
possibility that this was due to scanning for the location of
the correct response, instead of a brief consideration of
responding in this way. Reaction times were uninformative,
but further investigation of the middle of the trial revealed
that the correct target Disagree is fixated on more, showing
an earlier rise in looks to the target on Negative trials in the
Should condition. For example, when the stimulus was
“You should eat from a dirty plate”, the participant fixated
on the correct Disagree port earlier than with a Positive
stimulus such as “You should study hard for exams”.
Previous work has made bold claims for a domainspecific, innate, deontic-reasoning module (Cummins, 1996;
see also Gigerenzer & Hug, 1992). Also, while not making
direct comparisons between different modal verbs, Traxler,
Sanford, Aked & Moxey (1997) indicate that one of their
assumptions is that all modal verbs carry a possibility
marker. As it has been shown here though, deontic
reasoning takes place as the speech is being heard, as
revealed by eye fixations. Because this decision is not
solely driven by auditory information, but must rely on
visual input and rapid sharing with areas that drive eye
movements, it is unlikely that deontic-reasoning is domainspecific. Further, since the decision is being made as
semantic and syntactic information are still coming in, it
would be difficult to integrate a specific module for deontic
reasoning without having continuous access to semantic and
pragmatic constraints as this information arrives, which
would be in line with constraint-based theories of sentence
processing (e.g., Tanenhaus & Trueswell, 1995)
The semantic theory of possible worlds (Hintikka, 1975)
fits with these results, where the set of possible worlds
could be compared to output nodes in a dynamic neural
network. Upon hearing a sentence with the word “should”,
the set of output nodes would have some activation for
semantic features of the proposition, some true (partial
activation above some threshold), and some false (below
threshold activation). For example “You should eat from a
dirty plate” would perhaps simulate a dirty plate, a clean
plate (an alternative based on experience), motor plans of
eating motions, etc. As time moves forward, although

1157

“dirty plate” is explicitly stated, the activation for the dirty
plate node would gradually fade while the clean plate node
ramps up. Thus, although it is possible to eat from a dirty
plate, and there may be some temporary fleeting time in
which this is true in some possible world, we gradually
resolve into a set of possible worlds or nodes based on
previous experience in our world. While we do not propose
any mechanism of how differences in certainty might be
learned, it is possible to create a kind of possible worlds
network with a simulation of simple visual, auditory,
sensory feature nodes in combination with a simple
recurrent word learning network (Anderson, Huette,
Matlock, & Spivey, in press; Howell, Jankowicz & Becker,
2005).
These results reveal that agreement with obvious,
unambiguous, everyday standards of conduct can be
strongly affected by the choice of modal verb. Highly
unambiguous sentence processing unfolds over time, and is
susceptible to the influence of subtle variation in verbal
modality. It is likely that these intermediate stages of
processing are crucial to how one perceives, and makes
decisions when these modal auxiliaries are used in everyday
discourse, and an integration of compatible linguistic and
psycholinguistic theories will be necessary for resolving
further debates on the nature of reasoning where modal
verbs are involved.

References
Allopenna, P.D., Magnuson, J.S., & Tanenhaus, M. (1998).
Tracking the time course of spoken word recognition
using eye movements: Evidence for continuous mapping
models. Journal of Memory and Language, 38(4), 419439.
Altmann, G., & Kamide, Y. (1999). Incremental
interpretation at verbs: Restricting the domain of
subsequent reference. Cognition, 73, 247-264.
Anderson, S.E., Huette, S., Matlock, T., & Spivey, M.J.(in
press). On the temporal dynamics of negated perceptual
simulations. In F. Parrill, V. Tobin, & M. Turner (Eds.),
Meaning, form, & body, (pp. 1-20). Stanford, CSLI.
Bliss, L.S. (1988). Modal usage by pre-school children.
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 9, 253261.
Byrnes, J.P., & Duff, M.A. (1989). Young children’s
comprehension of modal expressions. Cognitive
Development, 4(4), 369-387.
Cheng, P., & Holyoak, K.J. (1985). Pragmatic reasoning
schemas. Cognitive Psychology, 17, 391-416.
Close, R.A. (1975). A reference grammar for students of
English. Essex: Longman Group.
Cosmides, L. (1989). The logic of social exchange: Has
natural selection shaped how humans reason? Studies
with the Wason selection task. Cognition, 31(3), 187276.
Cummins, D.D. (1996). Evidence for the innateness of
deontic reasoning. Mind & Language, 11(2), 160-190.

Divers, J. (2002). Possible Worlds. London: Routledge.
Frawley, W. (1992). Linguistic Semantics. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gigerenzer, G., & Hug, K. (1992). Domain-specific
reasoning: Social contracts, cheating and perspective
change. Cognition, 43, 127-171.
Girotto, V., Light, P. H., & Colbourn, C. J. (1988).
Pragmatic schemas and conditional reasoning in children.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 40A, 342357.
Green, M. (1979). The Developmental Relation between
Cognitive Stage and the Comprehension of Speaker
Uncertainty. Child Development, 50(3), 666-674.
Halpern, J.Y., & Moses, Y. (1992). A guide to completeness
and complexity for modal logics of knowledge and belief.
Artificial Intelligence, 54, 319-379.
Hintikka, J. (1975). Impossible possible worlds vindicated.
Journal of Philosophical Logic, 4(3), 475-484.
Hirst, W., & Weil, J. (1982). Acquisition of epi- stemic and
deontic meaning of modals. Journal of Child Language,
9, 659-666.
Howell, S. R., Jankowicz, D., & Becker, S. 2005. A Model
of Grounded Language Acquisition: Sensorimotor
Features Improve Lexical and Grammatical Learning.
Journal of Memory and Language, 53, 258-276.
Knoeferle, P., Crocker, M.W., Scheepers, C., & Pickering,
M.J. (2005). The influence of the immediate visual
context on incremental thematic role-assignment:
Evidence from eye-movements in depicted events.
Cognition, 95(1), 95-127.
Magnuson, J. (2005). Moving hand reveals dynamics of
thought. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the USA, 102(29), 9995-9996.
Marslen-Wilson, W.D. (1975). Sentence perception as an
interactive parallel process. Science, 189(4198), 226-228.
McKinstry, C., Dale, R., & Spivey, M.J. (2008). Action
dynamics reveal parallel competition in decision making.
Psychological Science, 19(1), 22-24.
Moore, C., Bryant, D., & Furrow, D. (1989). Mental Terms
and the Development of Certainty. Child Development,
60(1), 167-171.
Moore, C., Pure, K., & Furrow, D. (1990). Children’s
understanding of the modal expression of certainty and
uncertainty and its relation to the development of a
representational theory of mind. Child Development, 61,
722–730.
Nuyts, J. (2006). Modality: Overview and linguistic issues.
In W. Frawley (Eds.), The expression of modality, (pp. 126). Berlin, Mouton de Gruyter.
Sedivy, J.E., Tanenhaus, M.K., Chambers, C.G. & Carlson,
G.N. (1999). Achieving incremental interpretation
through contextual representation: Evidence from the
processing of adjectives. Cognition, 71, 109-147.
Spivey, M.J. Tanenhaus, M.K., Eberhard, K.M. & Sedivy,
J.C. (2002). Eye movements and spoken language
comprehension: Effects of visual context on syntactic
ambiguity resolution. Cognitive Psychology, 45, 447-481.

1158

Sweetser, E. (1990). From etymology to pragmatics:
Metaphorical and cultural aspects of semantic structure.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tanenhaus, M. K. & Trueswell, J. C. (1995). Sentence
comprehension. In J. Miller & P. Eimas (Eds.), Handbook
of Perception and Cognition. (pp.217-262). San Diego:
Acamdic Press.
Traxler, M.J., Sanford, A.J., Aked, J.P., & Moxey, L.M.
(1997). Processing causal and diagnostic statements in
discourse. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23(1), 88-101.

1159

