UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Origins of Collective Overvaluation: Irrational exuberance emerges from simple, honest
and rational individual behavior

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/033866m7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Anderson, Michael
Aktipis, C. Athena

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Origins of Collective Overvaluation:
Irrational exuberance emerges from simple, honest and rational individual behavior
Michael L. Anderson (michael.anderson@fandm.edu)
Department of Psychology, Franklin & Marshall College
Lancaster, PA 17604 USA

C. Athena Aktipis (aktipis@alumni.reed.edu)
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721 USA
Abstract
The generation of value bubbles is an inherently
psychological and social process, where information sharing
and individual decisions can affect representations of value.
Bubbles occur in many domains, from the stock market, to
the runway, to the laboratories of science. Here we seek to
understand how psychological and social processes lead
representations (i.e., expectations) of value to become
divorced from the inherent value, using asset bubbles as an
example. Using an agent-based model we explore whether a
simple switching rule can generate irrational exuberance, and
systematically explore how communication between decision
makers influences the speed and intensity of overvaluation.
We show that rational and simple individual level rules
combined with honest information sharing are sufficient to
generate the collective overvaluation characteristic of
irrational exuberance. Further, our results demonstrate that
simple noise in the exchange of value information leads to
rapidly increasing expectations about value, even when no
one is engaged in exaggerating their expectations for the
assets they own.
Keywords: decision making;
modeling; rationality; emergence.

valuation;

agent-based

Introduction
Chances are, your savings are invested in one or more kinds
of assets—stocks, bonds, real estate, etc. Moreover, if you
are an individual investor, or are planning on becoming one
soon, you probably discuss the markets with various other
investors, including friends, family, colleagues and
investment professionals. You might also listen to one of
the many market watch programs, or read the business
section of your daily newspaper. In short, you are probably
engaged in both soliciting and offering opinions on how
various market sectors will perform in the future. Once in a
while, this information will cause you to make a change in
your portfolio. Imagine, for instance, that someone you
trust shares with you their expectation for the performance
of one of their investments. Imagine further that this
expectation exceeds the expectation that you yourself have
for your own investments. Surely there is some chance that
you would sell (some of) your own portfolio, and invest in
the asset with the higher expected return. Whether you
would do this naturally depends on myriad other factors—
your tolerance for risk, the perceived balance of your

current investments, the liquidity of this new asset class, etc.
But there remains some chance that you will make the
switch. This is natural, and even—assuming that one of
your financial goals is to maximize return consistent with
other priorities—rational. But if we are right, this natural,
rational behavior is sufficient to spark irrational exuberance.
Asset bubbles are among the most fascinating and
puzzling phenomena in economic markets.
Decision
makers frequently drive up prices and demand to levels that
seem completely divorced from the underlying value.
Bubbles are common, and far from innocuous. Post-bubble
market “corrections” have led to financial ruin for many, as
occurred in the great depression and in the current real
estate and financial crises. And there seem to be some
important similarities between asset bubbles and other sorts
of collective behavior, including clothing fashions, popular
music trends and perhaps even the trajectory of science
(with processes such as paper acceptances and grant funding
being based on the expectations of reviewers about the
future value of the work). Thus, bubbles are important to
understand, to say the least. In the current paper, rather than
seeking to understand these events through analyzing or
modeling the complex historical and economic factors that
lead to a specific instance of collective overvaluation, we
have instead focused on formulating some simple and
general individual rules that we hypothesize are sufficient to
generate the phenomenon of irrational exuberance. We
have isolated what we believe to be a key underlying cause
of collective overvaluation / irrational exuberance across
many contexts, and have constructed a simple model to
explore whether it generates the predicted outcomes.
Here we model the genesis of collective overvaluation as
a general phenomenon, using decision making about asset
classes as an example. We aim to make this model as
general as possible, making it potentially applicable to other
domains.

Model Description
The model description offered below follows the
standardized ODD protocol for describing individual and
agent based models (Grimm and Railsback 2005; Grimm et
al. 2006). This protocol for describing agent based models
has been developed with input from modelers across the
disciplines and is in wide use.

1517

Purpose
A commonly observed behavior in markets of many kinds is
continually increasing expectations about the future value of
certain commodities/asset groups. Here we used agent
based techniques to model a simple decision rule that we
predict to be sufficient to generate both increasing
expectations and overexploitation of certain assets
(absorption of all individuals into a small number of asset
groups). We also explore the impact of communication
fidelity on the outcomes.

Table 1. Overview of state variables associated with each
type of entity in the simulation. Bold indicates manipulated
independent variables and arrows indicate dependent
variables.
Entity
Global

•

State variable
Transmission
fidelity

State variables and scales
In this model, time and space are both represented
discretely. During each time period, all agents execute the
commands described in the schedule. The simulation is
constructed in a spatial environment for the purposes of
visualizing interactions between asset groups.

Process overview and scheduling
This model proceeds in discrete time steps, and entities
execute procedures according to the following ordering:
1. Individual A identifies random partner B to be recipient
of information about asset value expectations.
2. Individual A communicates current expectation of value
for A’s current asset class to individual B with some
fidelity
3. Individual B adopts expectation of individual A with
some probability (opportunism) if A and B come from
different groups, and A’s expectation is higher than B’s.
4. If B has adopted A’s expectation then B switches to A’s
group.

•

Expectation
distribution

•

Opportunism

¾

Number of
groups
Number of
agents
Communication
target

•
•
¾
¾
¾
¾

¾

Change in
expectation per
step
SD change in
expectation
Volatility

•
•

Location
Group size

•

Expectation

•

Partner
expectation

•

ID number

•

Partner ID
number

¾

Figure 1: Two screen shots showing the initial conditions and
the state of the simulation after 150 time steps under the
default parameters (see Table 2). Left: The run begins with 10
groups of uniform size with an average expectation of 100.
Right: After 150 time steps, there is one large group and the
expectations of agents have increased to 131.5 (as indicated
by the darker red shade of the agents).

Groups
(Asset
classes)
Agents

1518

Switches per
step
SD switches
per step
Average
expectation

Description
Accuracy of communication of
expectation. This is modeled
by communicating to the
partner not the agent’s actual
expectation, but an expectation
taken randomly from a normal
distribution
with
the
transmission fidelity as its
standard deviation and the
agent’s actual expectation as its
average.
Initial variability (expressed as
Standard
Deviation)
of
expectations among individuals
in the population
Probability of changing groups
given a higher expectation
communicated from partner
The number of groups (asset
classes)
The number of individuals
included in the model
Binary,
either
random
individual or individual in
another group
The number of agents that
change groups each step
The standard deviation in the
number of switches per step
The average expectation of all
individuals regarding the future
value of their investment
The average change in the
average expectation each step
The standard deviation of the
change in expectation per step
A combined measure of the SD
switches per step and the SD
change in expectation per step.
This is an indication of the
unpredictability of the changes
from step to step.
Coordinates of the group
Number of individuals in asset
class
The future value the individual
assigns to the current asset
The information the individual
has about their current partner’s
expectation in their asset class
The identification number of
the individual
The identification number of
the current partner

Design Concepts

Agents

Emergence Irrational aggregate behavior emerged from
individual-level rational decision making processes.
Prediction Agents did not have a complex function for
predicting the future value of asset classes. They simply
adopted information from partners if the information met
the conditions described above.
Sensing Individuals have an initial expectation of the value
of their asset class based on the expectation distribution.
From this point forward, individuals’ expectations change
only from information transmission from other agents.
Interaction Individuals can transfer information about their
expectation of the value of their asset class to partners (with
some fidelity). Individuals can move to a new group (asset
class), if the partners communicated expectation is higher
than the current expectation.
Stochasticity Initial distribution of expectations is randomly
distributed around the inherent value of a particular asset
class.
Opportunistic
switching
is
implemented
probabilistically and so has a stochastic element.
Collectives Agents were parts of groups (asset classes) and
could transfer information to a ‘partner’ (from the same or
other group). Partners were reset each time period and
information transfers were unidirectional (i.e., A might
transfer information to B, and B to C)
Observation Simulations were run for 2000 time steps or
until only a single group remained. Each combination of
independent variables (see Experiments, below) was run 10
times. The dependent variables were measured at the end of
each run. Reported results are averages over 10 runs.

Initialization
Table 2 lists the variables associated with various entities in
the simulation. All runs were initialized according to default
parameters in the table.
Table 2. Initial and default values for all instance variables
and independent variables (bold).
Entity
Global

State variable
•
•
•
•
•

Groups
(Asset
classes)

Transmission
fidelity
Expectation
distribution
Opportunism
Number of
groups
Number of
agents

Initial/Default
Value
Perfect (SD of
0)
SD of 10

Units

•

Expectation

•

Partner
expectation
ID number
Partner ID
number

•
•

Assigned from
expectation
distribution

Input
This model is designed as a general model of irrational
exuberance and collective overvaluation. We did not
initialize this model with real world data.

Experiments
We ran three simple and three complex experiments. In the
three simple experiments, we used only a single
independent variable, while in the three complex we used
two, to look for interactions between the effects.
As noted above, all runs were initialized with 10 groups,
each containing 100 agents, with an overall average
expectation of 100. The three independent variables of
interest were: initial expectation distribution, opportunism,
and transmission fidelity.

Experiment 1, expectation
This experiment varied only the initial expectation
distribution, setting it so the initial distribution of
expectations had a standard deviation of 10, 20 and 30.
Opportunism was fixed at 5%, and transmission fidelity was
perfect.

Experiment 2, fidelity
This experiment varied only transmission fidelity, setting it
at 0, 5 and 10. Recall that transmission fidelity is modeled
by communicating to the partner not the agent’s actual
expectation, but an expectation taken randomly from a
normal distribution with the transmission fidelity as its
standard deviation and the agent’s actual expectation as its
average. Thus 0 equals perfect fidelity. Opportunism was
fixed at 5% and the initial expectation distribution was fixed
at 10.

Experiment 3, opportunism

5%
10

count

This experiment varied only opportunism, setting it at 5%,
10%, and 15%. The initial expectation distribution was
fixed at 10 and transmission fidelity was perfect.

1,000

count

Experiment 4, expectation x fidelity
This experiment varied both expectation distribution (10,
20, 30) and fidelity (0, 5, 10). Opportunism was fixed at
5%.

•

Group size

100

count

•

Average
expectation

100

Expected
future
value

1519

Experiment 5, fidelity x opportunism
This experiment varied both fidelity (0, 5, 10) and
opportunism (5%, 10%, 15%). The initial expectation
distribution was fixed at 10.

Experiment 6, expectation x opportunism
This experiment varied both expectation distribution (10,
20, 30) and opportunism (5%, 10%, 15%). Fidelity was
perfect.

Dependent variables
The dependent variables measured in these experiments
were:
A. The average expectation at the end of the run,
representing the average agent expectation of the value
of the asset class(es).
B. The number of groups remaining at the end of the run,
representing the number of asset classes with investors
C. The number of switches per step, corresponding to the
number of agents that switched groups each time step
D. The average change in expectation per step,
corresponding to the change in expectation that occurs
as agents switch and adopt the expectations of others
E. The volatility of the system, measured as the summed
standard deviations of the number of moves per step
and the average change in expectation per step.

Results
Descriptive statistics for experiment 1, expectation, are
listed in Table 3. Increasing the distribution of expectations
lead to a higher average expectation at the end of the run
(ANOVA, F(2, 27) = 112.45, p <<.01, see Figure 2) a larger
change in expectation each time period (ANOVA, F(2, 27)
= 58.31, p<<0.01), and higher overall volatility (ANOVA,
F(2, 27) = 34.34, p<<0.01).

Figure 2: Increase in average expectation as a function
of initial expectation distribution. Error bars represent
± 1 S.E.
Table 4. Descriptive statistics for experiment 2, fidelity.
Transmission
fidelity:
Groups at end
Average
expectation at end
Number of moves
per step
Δ-expectation per
step
Volatility

0
1.0 (0.0)
133.84
(2.86)
12.67
(1.23)
0.11
(0.02)
10.94
(0.51)

5
3.3 (0.48)
375.31
(107.04)
17.88
(0.68)
0.25 (0.01)
5.68 (0.17)

10
2.7(0.48)
682.72
(146.98)
17.90
(1.30)
0.49
(0.02)
6.57
(0.40)

Table 3. Descriptive statistics for experiment 1, expectation.
Expectation
distribution:
Groups at end
Average
expectation at end
Number moves per
step
Δ-expectation per
step
Volatility

10

20

30

1.0 (0.0)
131.55
(4.34)
11.65
(2.25)
0.09
(0.02)
10.81
(0.52)

1.0 (0.0)
165.99
(10.44)
12.18
(0.92)
0.21
(0.04)
12.21
(0.47)

1.0(0.0)
199.95
(13.57)
12.13
(1.31)
0.29
(.0.6)
12.85
(0.68)

Descriptive statistics for experiment 2, fidelity, are listed in
Table 4. Greater noise (low transmission fidelity) led to
much higher average expectations at the end of the runs F(2,
27) = 68.66, p <<.01 (see Figure 3); to more groups at the
end of the simulation F(2, 27) = 91.5, p<< 0.01; and to less
overall volatility F(2, 27) = 521.56, p<<0.01.

Figure 3: Increase in average expectation as a
function of transmission fidelity.
Error bars
represent ± 1 S.E.
Note the increase in expectation is driven in part by the fact
that with high noise, the number of groups never drops to
one, as it always does when fidelity is perfect. Thus the

1520

simulations when fidelity was > 0 lasted for all 2,000 steps,
rather than stopping after around 300 steps, as is typical
when fidelity is perfect. Even so, there was also a
significant increase in the average change in expectation per
step, indicating that the effect is not simply a matter of
running the simulation for longer.
Descriptive statistics for experiment 3, opportunism, are
listed in table 5. Greater opportunism increases the number
of moves per step F(2, 27) = 657.16, p<< 0.01; increases the
amount by which expectations change each step F(2, 27) =
657.16, p<< 0.01; and increases volatility F(2, 27) =
1531.22, p<<0.01. In addition, there was a decrease in the
number of steps it took to achieve one group, and thus for
the simulation to end F(2, 27) = 260.41, p<<0.01. That is,
the more opportunistic the agents are, the faster the
collective converges on a single asset. This explains why,
despite a significant increase in the change in expectation
each step, there was no main effect on average expectation
at the end.
Table 5. Descriptive
opportunism.
Opportunism:
Groups at end
Step when one
group reached
Average
expectation at end
Number of moves
per step
Δ-expectation per
step
Volatility

statistics
5%
1.0 (0.0)
298.80
(30.68)
133.45
(4.71)
12.71
(1.07)
0.11
(0.02)
11.09
(0.41)

for

experiment

10%
1.0 (0.0)
162.30
(14.86)
132.21
(2.49)
25.33
(1.83)
0.20
(0.01)
21.02
(1.22)

3,

15%
1.0(0.0)
98.70
(6.46)
133.76
(3.35)
38.73
(1.80)
0.34
(0.04)
31.95
(0.69)

Interactions
The three complex experiments revealed the same main
effects, which won’t be repeated here. Instead we’ll simply
summarize some of the significant interactions.
Experiment 4, Expectation x Fidelity reveals a significant
interaction between expectation distribution and fidelity on
volatility F(4,81) = 3.42 p = 0.012. Whereas the general
effect of fidelity on volatility is to decrease it when going
from 0 to 5, and increase it slightly when going from 5 to
10, this latter effect disappears at higher levels of
expectation distribution.
Experiment 5, Fidelity x Opportunism reveals an
interaction between fidelity and opportunism on the number
of moves per step F(4,81) = 21.66, p<<0.01; the change in
expectation per step F(4,81) = 341.86, p<<0.01; and
volatility F(4,81) = 256.84, p<< 0.01. Both fidelity and
opportunism increase the number of moves per step, and
increase the change in expectation per step, and together the
higher values increase the magnitude of the effect. As noted
above, the change in fidelity tends to decrease volatility

initially, then increase it slightly. These effects are greater
as opportunism increases.
Experiment 6, Expectation x Opportunism reveals an
interaction between
expectation distribution
and
opportunism on the change in expectation per step F(4,81) =
15.40, p < 0.01 and on volatility F(4,81) = 10.71, p << 0.01.
In each case the tendency of the independent variables to
increase volatility and change in expectation per step is
enhanced at higher levels of the other variable.

Discussion
On December 5, 1996, after nearly fifteen years of steady
growth in the S&P 500 and Dow Jones Industrial Average
(and just before the record-breaking bull market to follow),
Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan expressed his
concern that the behavior of the stock market was
characterized by “irrational exuberance”. Whether he was
right or not, it is certainly true that the price to earnings ratio
had by then surpassed 27, a level that hadn’t been seen since
1929, and was on its way to the record high of 47 it
achieved in March of 2000. What leads to this sort of
(apparent) disregard for underlying real value? There are
several possible explanations. Some favor accounts based
on individual irrationality—e.g. “animal spirits” like (over-)
confidence and our tendency to be influenced by nominal
amounts of money—that can be amplified under certain
market and social conditions (Akerloff, 2005; Akerloff &
Shiller, 2009). Others favor “herd behavior” models in
which individuals allow their choices to be guided by other
people’s choices, on the (reasonable, but by no means
certain) assumption that there is wisdom in crowds
(Surowiecki, 2004). On these models, observations of early
choices create an information cascade that causes late
choosers to follow early ones, rather than following their
own signal (Banerjee, 1992; Bikchandri, Hirshleifer &
Welch, 1992). Finally, there is currently a great deal of
discussion of the role of deception in the recent real-estate
bubble (Bitner, 2008).
Here we consider the alternate possibility that irrational
exuberance is driven by neither irrationality nor deception,
nor requires individuals to ignore their own information and
preferences, but instead emerges from simple, honest and
rational individual-level behavior. To explore this
possibility we created an agent-based model where agents
have simple and seemingly rational individual-level rules
for switching between asset classes and updating their
representations of asset value based on information from
others. Our results show that a simple rule—when another
agent’s expectation for the performance of their investment
exceeds your own expectation for your own investment,
consider switching investments—can generate collective
behavior resembling irrational exuberance.1 In particular,
1

Although communication partners were chosen at random,
agents adopted new expectations only when the partners
represented different asset classes. Restricting communication to
partners from other groups greatly speeds the dynamics outlined
here, because members of smaller groups are bombarded with

1521

we see rapidly increasing expectations for the value of
commodities and the overexploitation of a single asset class.
Further, our model shows that this collective overvaluation
can occur even when there is no individual deception or bias
in favor of exaggerating value when communicating to
others about it. This suggests that surprisingly simple and
rational individual level rules can generate some of the
complex and irrational aggregate outcomes associated with
market bubbles.
One especially interesting finding was the massive effect
that transmission fidelity had on overvaluation. Here is a
system in which increasing noise increases the rapidity and
magnitude of overvaluation, and the interactions
demonstrate that this effect can be magnified by other
factors.
Ironically, then, Alan Greenspan’s infamous
opacity could itself have been a contributor to the irrational
exuberance he warned against. Although we do not explore
this possibility explicitly here, it is clear that combining
noise with even a few agents intent on deception would
cause even greater overvaluation than we demonstrated in
these experiments. This is perhaps part of the combination
that led to the recent real-estate bubble.
This model has both specific implications for the
phenomenon of market bubbles as well as general
implications for the phenomenon of collective overvaluation
across domains. Because this model simulates individual
decision making processes (as is typical of agent based
models) rather than simply aggregate dynamics, it is able to
capture important effects of interactions among individuals
(in terms of information sharing and switching). Models
such as this can be used to improve our understanding of the
psychological and social components of decision making
behavior by allowing us to explore the generative
sufficiency of individual rules as well as the sensitivity of
the system to alterations in parameters such as those
explored here (i.e., transmission fidelity, initial expectation,
opportunism in switching). The model presented here
demonstrates that representations/expectations of value can
become dissociated from inherent value when individuals
use simple and rational decision rules combined with wellintentioned communication. The emergence of increasing
expectation from these simple and general decision making
and communication processes may be the fundamental
principle that gives rise to irrational exuberance, not just in
the market place, but in any domain in which individuals
switch from their current option when they hear about better
opportunities elsewhere.
Thus, in addition to the potential relevance of this model
for market phenomena, there are more general implications
that can be drawn as well. The emergence of collective
overvaluation from a simple switching rule could occur in a
wide range of domains, making this model applicable to a
wide range of phenomena. In fact, this model is sufficiently
abstract that it can be applied to a variety of other situations
in which individuals’ assessments of value are based on

social information. For example, clothing fashions, popular
music, and even current trends in areas of scientific study
might be subject to similar processes. These may be fruitful
avenues for future research.
Future work will also explore market dynamics in greater
depth and detail. For instance, we will explore the effect that
broadcast information (e.g. announcements from the Fed,
ratings agencies, etc) might have on the creation of asset
bubbles. We will also allow for the dynamic creation of new
asset classes, and allow agents to decide to temporarily opt
out of the market. Finally, we will explore what can be done
to reverse such overvaluation in a more controlled fashion
than is typical in a market crash, or prevent high degrees of
overvaluation from occurring in the first place.

Acknowledgments
This paper was prepared while M.L.A. was on junior faculty
research leave from Franklin & Marshall College. He
gratefully acknowledges the support. C.A.A. was supported
by grants F32CA144331 and R01CA140657 from the
National Cancer Institute.

References
Akerloff, G.A. & Shiller, R.J. (2009). Animal spirits: How
human psychology drives the economy, and why it matters
for global capitalism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Banerjee, A.V. (1992). A simple model of herd behavior.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(3): 797-817.
Bikhchandani, S., Hirshleifer, D. & Welch, I. (1992). A
theory of fads, fashion, custom, and cultural change as
informational cascades. Journal of Political Economy,
100 (5):992-1026.
Bitner, R. (2008). Confessions of a subprime lender: An
insider’s tale of greed, fraud, and ignorance. New York:
Wiley.
Grimm, V. & Railsback S. F. (2005). Individual-based
modeling and ecology. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ.
Grimm, V., Berger, U., Bastiansen, F., Eliassen, S., Ginot,
V., Giske, J., Goss-Custard, J., Grand, T., Heinz, S. K.,
Huse, G., Huth, A., Jepsen, J. U., Jørgensen, C., Mooij,
W. M., Müller, B., Pe'er, G., Piou, C., Railsback, S. F.,
Robbins, A. M., Robbins, M. M., Rossmanith, E., Rüger,
N., Strand, E., Souissi, S., Stillman, R. A., Vabø, R.,
Visser, U. & DeAngelis. D. L. (2006). A standard
protocol for describing individual-based and agent-based
models. Ecological Modelling, 198 (1-2): 115-126.
Shiller, R.J. (2005). Irrational exuberance. New York:
Broadway Books.
Surowiecki, J. (2004). The wisdom of crowds: Why the
many are smarter than the few and how collective wisdom
shapes business, economies, societies and nations. New
York: Doubleday.

messages from members of larger groups, thus increasing their
likelihood of switching to the larger group.

1522

