Two main findings with respect to the influence of intentions
on the behaviour of the second player are worth mentioning.
First, if the allocation of the first player is determined by a
computer and hence cannot be ascribed an intention, the rejection rates for “unfair” offers are significantly lower (Falk,
Fehr, & Fischbacher, 2008). Second, the rejection rates of
unequal offers strongly depend on the allocator’s set of possible alternatives (McCabe, Rigdon, & Smith, 2003). The
acceptability of an action is hence evaluated with respect to
the choice set and an unequal offer more readily accepted
if the allocator could not have been kinder. In order to accommodate these findings, economists have moved from fairness theories that only considered outcomes (Fehr & Schmidt,
1999) to theories based on intentions (Dufwenberg & Kirchsteiger, 2004) and theories incorporating both intentions and
outcomes (Falk et al., 2008).
As demonstrated by the moral luck example in “Naked
Gun”, there is another factor beyond intentions and outcomes
that is relevant when it comes to considerations about fairness or attributions of responsibility: the control an agent has
over the outcomes he brings about. Our environment is fundamentally noisy and, most of the time, we only have partial
control over the effects of our actions. While it is true that
the valence of intention and outcome are correlated in everyday life, this relationship is imperfect. Good intentions can
sometimes lead to bad outcomes and bad intentions to good
ones. For example, a careful driver might cause the death of
a careless child. In order to understand the complex relationship between intentions, outcomes and control it is necessary
to create experimental situations in which these factors can
be dissociated.
In a recent study, Cushman et al. (2009) investigated the
effects of intention versus outcome on perceived fairness in a
two-player, allocater-responder game. Similar to the ultimatum game, the allocator proposed how a pot of $10 should be
shared. Allocations were either stingy (player 1: $10, player
2: $0), fair ($5, $5) or generous ($0, $10). The responder
could punish or reward the allocation of player 1 by subtracting or adding up to $9 to her account. Importantly, in one condition of the experiment, the allocator only had partial control
over the outcome. She had to choose which one of three possible dice she wanted to roll. These dice differed in terms of
the probability with which they led to stingy, fair or generous
outcomes. Following a strategy format, responders had to indicate for each of the 9 possible combinations (e.g. generous
die, stingy outcome) how much money they wanted to add
or subtract from the allocator. The results revealed that participants were much more influenced by actual outcomes than
by intentions. Responders tended to subtract money for selfish outcomes for all three dice, whereas they added money for
fair and generous outcomes. The choice of die exerted only a
small effect on this general pattern. Surprisingly, the results
of a condition in which the allocator had perfect control were
virtually identical. Hence, the study provides further support
for the finding that people can be so sensitive to outcomes

that they sometimes disregard the underlying intention that
lead to that outcome. However, Cushman et al. (2009) admit that methodological limitations might have contributed to
their findings. Importantly, since the responder is part of the
game it is the outcome and not the intention that is the most
relevant to him. In order to validate their findings, it is important to investigate how an independent judge would have
decided.
The current experiment addressed this limitation. We created a setting in which an external observer evaluated the behaviour of agents participating in an experimental game. The
following scenario helps to exemplify the main components
of our experiment: Sarah is running for the position of student
representative. Three friends are helping her campaign by
distributing flyers. Tom puts in a lot of effort and distributes
100 flyers. John puts slightly less effort into the campaign
and only distributes 50. Finally, Alex thinks that Tom’s and
John’s contributions are probably already enough to win the
campaign and he only distributes 30 flyers. As it turns out,
20 of Tom’s, 20 of John’s and 25 of the people who received
their flyer from Alex voted for Sarah. As a result, Sarah won
the election. Assuming that Sarah knows about both the number of distributed flyers and the votes she received, how much
is she going to praise each of her three friends for their contribution to her win?
Two aspects of the outlined scenario are important with respect to the current study. First, it shows how intention and
outcome can sometimes mismatch in situations over which
agents exercise only partial control. Despite Tom’s good intention and effort he contributed no more to the collective outcome than John and even less than Alex. Second, the scenario
entails a component that is characteristic of social dilemmas
(see e.g. Hardin, 1968). Each individual agent has to weigh
the cost of the effortful process of distributing flyers with the
potential gain of an election won. Alex’s thought process
indicates each person’s motivation to free-ride on the effort
of the others. Assuming the spoils of a victory are equally
shared, the person who put in the least effort will have the
highest net benefit.
The current study investigated the effects of intended and
actual contributions on responsibility attribution in a group
context in which agents had only partial control over their
contributions. How well can intended contributions, actual
contributions, or their combination explain participants’ responsibility attributions?

Experiment
The aim of the experiment was to generate a situation in
which intended versus actual contributions could dissociate.
Participants took the perspective of an external observer and
judged the behaviour of computer players engaging in an experimental game (see Figure 1). Hence, participants did not
actively engage in the game themselves. In each round of
the game, three computer players were randomly selected to
form a group. Each player chose one of three available dice to
roll. The dice differed in terms of their underlying probabil-

1698

Figure 2: Underlying structure of the paradigm. Numbers 1.
- 4. indicate the different components of each round.

Method
Figure 1: Screenshot of the game depicting a won round.
ity distributions (see top part of Figure 1). The white die had
a higher probability of smaller values, the grey die was fair,
and the black die was skewed towards higher values (in the
experiment, the colours were bronze, silver and gold). The
group of players won a round if the sum of their outcomes
was greater than 10. If the group won a round, 30 pence were
equally distributed between the players. If the group lost, no
money was distributed. Importantly, the players had to pay
different amounts for the dice before they rolled them. The
white die cost 1 pence, the grey die 3 pence, and the black
5 pence. Each individual player’s payoff was a function of
the group’s result, that is, whether they won or lost, and the
money he had to pay for the die of his choice. The task of the
participants as independent judges was to indicate how much
they thought each player was responsible for the group’s result in each round.
The computer players chose each of the dice with an equal
probability. The chosen payoff function created a social
dilemma. The overall probability of winning was 50%. The
probabilities of winning given that a player had chosen the
white, grey or black die were 33%, 50% and 68%, respectively. This led to an expected payoff of 2.3 pence per round
for the white die (33% × 9 − 67% × 1 = 2.3). The expected
payoffs for the grey and black die were 2 and 1.8 pence.
Hence, there was an incentive for each player individually to
choose the white die. However, if all of the players chose that
die, the probability of the team winning was only 2%, and the
expected payoff -0.8 pence.
Figure 2 shows the underlying structure of the experiment.
The choice of die reflected the intended contributions of the
players while the team’s result was a function of the actual
contributions. We predicted a main effect of intention: the
same outcome of roll will elicit different responsibility attributions dependent on the choice of die. We also predicted a
main effect of outcome: responsibility attributions for a given
die will vary with the outcome of rolling this die. Finally,
previous research suggested that outcomes will affect participants’ responsibility ratings more strongly than intentions
(Cushman et al., 2009).

Participants and Materials 80 participants from the UCL
subject pool participated for the chance of winning one of six
amazon vouchers worth £150 in total. 55 participants were
female and the mean age was 23.2 (5.94). With the second part of the experiment added at a later stage (see Procedure), 35 participants performed only the first part of the
experiment, whereas the remaining 45 participants performed
both. The study was conducted online and programmed with
Adobe Flash.
Procedure Participants were informed that the experiment
would take 20 minutes and that their task was to evaluate
the behaviour of players engaged in an experimental game
by attributing credit for wins and blame for losses. Participants read a description of the three dice which made it clear
that they differed in terms of both probability distribution and
price. A practice round served to familiarize participants with
the structure of the game. After the practice round, participants had to answer questions to ensure that they had understood the rules of the game correctly. The game was then
played for 20 rounds.
On each round, participants saw a table that showed for
each player which die she had chosen, the outcome of having
rolled that die and the amount won or lost in that round. In
Figure 1, Player C chose the grey die and rolled a 5. Her payoff was 7p since she paid 3p for rolling the grey die and each
player received 10p for winning this round. Players were indicated by capital letters which changed in each round. This
was done to prevent participants from forming an overall impression about individual players. The header above the table
showed the sum of points and changed its colour from green
to red according to whether the round was won or lost. For
each player, participants attributed blame for losses or credit
for wins, by moving a slider ranging over a scale from 0-10.
Its endpoints were labelled ‘low’ and ‘high’. In line with the
result of the round (loss/win), the label (blame/credit), color
(red/green) and position of sliders (middle to left/ middle to
right) of the last column changed.
45 of the 80 participants also completed a second stage of
the experiment. Those participants were informed after the
20th round that they would see 14 novel situations that could

1699

1

white
grey

6

black

routcome−based

Blame

Loss
8
4
2
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Win

Credit

8

0.5

0

−0.5

6

−0.5

4

0

2
0

0.5

1

rintention−based
1

2

3

4

5

Figure 4: Scatterplot of correlations with outcome-based
model and intention-based model. Black circles indicate participants classified as intention-based (N = 29), white circles
indicate participants classified as outcome-based (N = 16).

6

Figure 3: Mean responsibility ratings for each combination of
die and outcome for both losses and wins. Lines represent the
different dice and values on the x-axes indicate the outcome
of rolling each die.

ratings data points):
intention-based model: responsibility = β0 + β1 die
outcome-based model: responsibility = β0 + β1 roll
mixture model: responsibility = β0 + β1 die + β2 roll

have occurred in the game and which were of special interest
to the researchers. As explained below, the test cases were
chosen so as to enable a fine assessment of the weight assigned to intentions and outcomes. The order of these test
cases was randomized. Finally, participants were asked to indicate in a textbox whether they had focused on the choice of
die, the outcome, or both.

All three regression models accounted for a significant
amount of the variance in the data (see Table 1).

Evaluation of Test Cases

Results
Mean Responsibility Ratings
In order to evaluate the effects of choice of die and outcome
of roll for the first stage of the experiment, we ran separate
3 (Die) x 6 (Roll) ANOVAs for both wins and losses. Figure
3 shows the mean responsibility attributions as a function of
choice of die and outcome of roll. For wins, there was a significant main effect of Die F(2, 2472) = 87.10, p < .001, η2
= .066 and of Roll F(5, 2472) = 9.53, p < .001, η2 = .019,
as well as an interaction effect F(10, 2472) = 1.91, p < .05,
η2 = .008. For losses, there was a significant main effect of
Die F(2, 2327) = 31.62, p < .001, η2 = .027 and of Roll F(5,
2327) = 15.31, p < .001, η2 = .032, but no interaction effect
(p > .05).
To qualify these results, we ran linear contrasts on Die and
Roll for both wins and losses. For wins, there was a significant positive linear trend of Die as well as for Roll. For losses,
there was a significant negative linear trend of both Die and
Roll (all p’s < .001).
These analyses show that overall, both the choice of die
and the outcome of its rolling influenced participants’ responsibility ratings. However, the results cannot reveal how
individual participants weighted these two factors. To find
out, we conducted individual regression analyses, and report
them below.

To break the results down even further, we ran the regression models for each individual participant. Based on the
magnitude of the correlation with the intention-based regression model versus the outcome-based regression model, we
grouped the 45 participants who completed the second stage
of the experiment in two groups. We used this grouping to
predict how participants would attribute responsibility for the
chosen test cases (described below). Figure 4 shows how well
the behaviour of the classified participants was predicted for
the test cases.
The test cases were constructed to enable a fine analysis
of the relative weights assigned by participants to intentions
versus outcomes. It should be noted that in the first 20 rounds
of the experiment the choice of die and outcome of roll were
highly correlated due to the chosen probability distributions
(r = .68, p < .001). In contrast, for the test cases the choice
of die and outcome of roll were uncorrelated (r = 0). This
shows that these test cases indeed created situations that could
Table 1: Results of overall regression analyses.
Model

R2

intention- .268
based
outcome- .219
based
mixture .303

Regression Analysis
First, we ran the following three separate regression analyses
based on the overall data (80 participants x 20 rounds x 3

(1)
(2)
(3)

a = βdie , b = βroll

1700

F

p<

β

t

p<

1757.70

.001

0.518a

41.93

.001

1346.33

.001

0.468b

36.69

.001

1042.31

.001

0.370a
0.238b

24.02
15.48

.001
.001

Figure 5: Mean responsibility ratings of intention-based participants for 14 test cases. The top row shows losses and the
bottom row wins. The values on the x-axes indicate the outcome. The colours of the bars indicate the dice.
be used to distinguish between intention-based and outcomebased participants.
Figure 5 shows how the 29 intention-based participants attributed responsibility in the test cases. Figure 6 shows the
responsibility attributions for the 16 participants who had
been classified as outcome-based. The test cases can be categorized into 4 groups: a) different dice, same roll; b) same
dice, different rolls; c) congruent; d) incongruent. ‘Congruent’ means that the quality of die and outcome of roll corresponded (i.e. the expensive die led to a high and the cheap
die to a low outcome); ‘incongruent’ means that the quality
of die and the outcome of roll mismatched.
Inspection of the graphs validates the original partition.
First, in the congruent test cases (‘c’) - which serve as a
manipulation check - both groups show the same pattern of
attributions, with that for the intention group being steeper
than that for the outcome group. For the intention test cases
(‘a’), the differences in attributions are large for participants
in the intention group and small for participants in the outcome group. An opposite pattern of attributions is evident
with the outcome test cases (‘b’): there the intention group
exhibits small differences and the outcome group exhibits
large differences. Finally, and most interesting, the pattern of
attributions reverses in the incongruent cases (‘d’). Despite
the fact that in these situations the expensive die led to the
lowest outcome, the intention-based participants attribute the
least blame to this player for the loss (Figure 5, top) and the
most credit for the win (bottom). In contrast, the attributions
of the outcome-based participants for these cases closely follows the number rolled, independent of the choice of die (Figure 6).

Discussion

The current study investigated the influence of intended versus actual contribution on the attribution of responsibility in a
group context. We found that both intention and outcome exerted a significant influence on participants’ attributions. Fur-

Figure 6: Mean responsibility ratings of outcome-based participants.
thermore, we provided evidence that individuals differ in the
extent to which they base their attributions on intentions or
outcomes.
Our experimental procedure allowed us to dissociate intentions from outcomes and created a situation in which participants played the role of an external judge. We found that the
majority of participants were better explained as having focused on intended rather than actual contributions. Methodologically, the current experiment shows that it is important to
analyse the data on the level of individual participants. While
on an aggregate level, it seems that participants are weighting
both choice of die and outcome of roll to determine their responsibility attribution (see Figure 3), more careful analyses
reveal that most participants actually tend to either focus on
the intention or the outcome (see Figure 4).
At this point, we can only speculate about the factors driving these interindividual differences. Different interpretations
of the notion of responsibility could have influenced participants’ behaviour. Outcome-based participants might have
endorsed a causal conception of responsibility. Accordingly,
players that rolled high numbers were credited higher since
their contributions caused the win. Intention-based participants, on the other hand, might have used a moral conception of responsibility. Hence, players were judged for their
choice of die which reflected their underlying attitude towards
the team. Alternatively, the results could reflect interindividual differences in the ability or motivation to mentalize. We
would assume that people who find it hard to take another person’s perspective are more likely to focus an the actual outcome rather than the underlying intention. We are planning to
use a simplified version of the employed paradigm to test this
hypothesis on a patient group. Finally, outcome-based participants’ ratings might have been influenced by beliefs about
the gambling-competence of players. On this view, rolling a
high number with the cheap die reflects a special ability deserving credit. Some of the participants’ written comments
confirm the influence of such arguably non-normative considerations.

1701

Why did we find a relatively stronger effect of intentions
when previous studies postulated the existence of an outcome
bias (Cushman et al., 2009)? Several differences between
studies that draw their conclusions from economic games,
such as the ultimatum game, and our study could potentially
explain these divergent results. First of all, most of the studies
in the economic literature were interested in exploring perceived fairness and not directly in responsibility attributions.
Although we presume that these notions are tightly linked, it
might be that considerations about fairness and responsibility
can lead to different results. Second, the participants in those
studies directly experienced the outcomes, while inferring the
intentions of the other player was not incentivised. In our
study, in contrast, participants acted as independent external
judges. It is, hence, less likely that their attention was biased
towards outcomes. In a future study, we aim to explore how
the patterns of attribution change when participants actively
take part in the game.
An important feature of the employed experimental
paradigm is its potential to explore different combination
functions between the individuals in the group. Gerstenberg
and Lagnado (2010) have shown that the way in which individual contributions are translated into group outcomes significantly influences people’s responsibility attributions. Accordingly, an identical individual contribution can lead to
very different responsibility attributions as a function of the
group context. While the current experiment used an additive
combination function for the contributing players, we will investigate in future experiments how attributions change when
the rule of the game reflects a minimum function (i.e., the
group wins if no player rolls a 1) or a maximum function
(i.e., the group wins if at least one player rolls a 6). Are participants more likely to focus on the actual rather than the
intended contribution when the combination function is noncompensatory?
Finally, our paradigm can be used to explore how uncertainty affects responsibility attributions. In everyday life, we
do not have direct access to other people’s intentions. Rather,
we try to infer the intention from a person’s behaviour. Our
paradigm allows us to model this situation. Instead of revealing all the information to the participant, we will only
show the outcomes of rolling the dice but not which dice the
players have chosen. We can then compare participant’s ability to infer the underlying intentions from observed outcomes
with an ideal Bayesian learner and evaluate in how far their
attributions can be explained by their knowledge about the
players.
In conclusion, the current study explored the influences of
intentions versus outcomes on responsibility attributions in a
group context. We found that a majority of our participants
focussed on the intention rather than on the outcome. We
introduced a novel experimental paradigm which is flexible
enough to lend itself to the investigation of future questions
that will help to disentangle the complex relationship between
control, intention, outcome and responsibility attributions.

Acknowledgments
TG is the beneficiary of a doctoral grant from the AXA Research Fund. DL & TG were supported by the ESRC Centre
for Economic Learning and Social Evolution; YK by the Israel Science Foundation 539/07.

References
Alicke, M. (2000). Culpable control and the psychology of
blame. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 556–574.
Baron, J., & Hershey, J. (1988). Outcome bias in decision
evaluation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
54, 569–579.
Cushman, F., Dreber, A., Wang, Y., & Costa, J. (2009). Accidental outcomes guide punishment in a trembling hand
game. Plos One, 5, 1–7.
Dufwenberg, M., & Kirchsteiger, G. (2004). A theory of
sequential reciprocity. Games and Economic Behavior, 47,
268–298.
Falk, A., Fehr, E., & Fischbacher, U. (2008). Testing theories of fairness: Intentions matter. Games and Economic
Behavior, 62, 287–303.
Fehr, E., & Schmidt, K. (1999). A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
114, 817–868.
Fischhoff, B. (1975). Hindsight ∕= foresight: The effect of
outcome knowledge on judgment under uncertainty. Journal ol Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 1, 288–299.
Gerstenberg, T., & Lagnado, D. (2010). Spreading the blame:
The allocation of responsibility amongst multiple agents.
Cognition, 115, 166–171.
Güth, W., Schmittberger, R., & Schwarze, B. (1982). An
experimental analysis of ultimatum bargaining. Journal of
Economic Behavior & Organization, 3, 367–388.
Hardin, G. (1968). The tragedy of the commons. Science,
162, 1243–1248.
Hart, H. (1985). Punishment and Responsibility. Wadsworth
Publ. Co.
Knobe, J. (2003). Intentional action in folk psychology: An
experimental investigation. Philosophical Psychology, 16,
309–324.
Lagnado, D., & Channon, S. (2008). Judgments of cause
and blame: The effects of intentionality and foreseeability.
Cognition, 108, 754–770.
McCabe, K., Rigdon, M., & Smith, V. (2003). Positive reciprocity and intentions in trust games. Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization, 52, 267–275.
Mitchell, T., & Kalb, L. (1981). Effects of outcome knowledge and outcome valence on supervisors’ evaluations.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 66, 604–612.
Shaver, K. (1985). The Attribution of Blame: Causality, Responsibility, and Blameworthiness. Springer-Verlag New
York.
Williams, B. (1981). Moral luck. Cambridge University
Press.

1702

