UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Dynamic Visualizations and Spatial Layout of Static Visualizations for
Learning How to Classify Locomotion Patterns

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5jk3c9np

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Imhof, Birgit
Scheiter, Katharina
Gerjets, Peter
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Dynamic Visualizations and Spatial Layout of Static Visualizations for
Learning How to Classify Locomotion Patterns
Birgit Imhof (b.imhof@iwm-kmrc.de)a
Katharina Scheiter (k.scheiter@iwm-kmrc.de)a
Peter Gerjets (p.gerjets@iwm-kmrc.de)a
Jörg Edelmann (edelmann@gris.uni-tuebingen.de)b
a

Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany
Wilhelm Schickard Institute, University of Tuebingen, Sand 14, 72076 Tuebingen, Germany

b

In two studies the effectiveness of dynamic and multiple static
visualizations was investigated for a highly perceptual
learning task, namely locomotion pattern classification. In
Study 1a, seventy-five students viewed either dynamic, staticsequential, or static-simultaneous visualizations. For tasks
with intermediate difficulty dynamic visualizations led to
better recognition of the locomotion patterns than staticsequential visualizations, but not than static-simultaneous
visualizations. To test whether the presentation of the staticsimultaneous visualizations in rows or their permanent
visibility was accountable for this effect, three additional
static-simultaneous conditions were investigated in Study 1b.
Seventy-five students viewed the static-simultaneous
visualizations either presented in columns, in matrices, or in
circles. The dynamic condition outperformed all three
additionally investigated static-simultaneous conditions in the
intermediate tasks. Accordingly, for learning how to classify
locomotion patterns dynamic visualizations are better suited
than most static presentation formats. Nevertheless,
presenting static-simultaneous visualizations appropriately
can achieve equal results at least for tasks with intermediate
difficulty.

Similarly, the current study focuses on a task that
explicitly requires identifying the continuity of the depicted
dynamics and involves a strong perceptual component,
namely recognizing biological locomotion patterns of fish
as a basis of species classification. To accomplish this task,
it is important that learners correctly perceive the underlying
kinematics, for instance, to decide whether a fin moves in a
wave-like or a paddle-like manner. The continuity of these
dynamics can be shown explicitly only in dynamic
visualizations. However, one can argue that multiple static
visualizations may also foster the understanding of
continuity, but that this is likely to depend on how they are
presented. In particular, to foster the understanding of
continuity static pictures have to be presented in a way that
they facilitate mental animation (e.g., Paas, Van Gerven, &
Wouters, 2007). Mental animation is the process of inferring
movements from static pictures based on knowledge about
relevant components and their causal relations to other
components (Hegarty, 1992). We assume that both,
temporal as well as spatial aspects of presenting static
pictures affect how well they support mental animation.

Keywords: learning; dynamic visualizations; multiple static
visualizations; spatial ability

Temporal Aspects of Presenting Static Pictures

Abstract

Learning with Visualizations
Dynamic visualizations have not always been found to lead
to better learning than static visualizations (Tversky, BauerMorrison, & Bétrancourt, 2002). Bétrancourt and Tversky
(2000) have suggested that dynamic visualizations should
be superior only for specific tasks. In particular, they will
aid learning if understanding the content explicitly requires
understanding of its dynamic aspects like trajectory or
continuity of changes. These dynamic aspects can be
conveyed directly through a dynamic visualization. Thus, in
many studies in which dynamic visualizations failed to be
beneficial, a direct depiction of the contents’ dynamic
aspects may not have been necessary (e.g., Byrne,
Catrambone, & Stasko, 1999). On the other hand, tasks that
require a profound understanding of continuous changes
often benefit from dynamic visualizations (e.g., hand
manipulation tasks, Ayres et al., 2009; Wong et al., 2009).

The main difference concerning temporal aspects of
presenting multiple static pictures is their sequentiality.
They can be depicted either sequentially or simultaneously.
In a sequential presentation one picture is shown after
another at the same position, whereby later pictures replace
former ones. In a simultaneous presentation all pictures are
shown next to each other on a single screen. The temporal
alignment of visual elements is easier in a sequential
presentation because elements that are identical across the
pictures are depicted at identical spatial positions (unless
they change their position over time). However, to make
comparisons between relevant objects the information of
earlier pictures has to be memorized until later pictures are
shown (Paas et al., 2007). Hence, integrating information
across the pictures may be challenging for learners. In
contrast, in a simultaneous presentation the depicted
information remains visible on the screen and therefore
comparisons among discrete steps are enabled. Moreover, in

2039

static-simultaneous visualizations learners can regulate the
pacing of their cognitive processing by deciding when to
look at a picture and for how long. This all suggests that a
simultaneous presentation of static pictures may be better
suited to foster mental animation than a sequential one.
This assumption was confirmed by Boucheix and
Schneider (2009), who found that static-simultaneous
visualizations were as good for understanding a mechanical
system as dynamic ones and that they outperformed staticsequential ones. This was especially true for learners with
low spatial ability (but see Kim et al., 2007). For the
locomotion pattern classification task used in the current
study, we found a very similar result pattern, namely that
dynamic visualizations outperformed static-sequential ones,
whereas static-simultaneous visualizations reached the same
performance as dynamic ones (Imhof, Scheiter, Gerjets,
2009). These findings suggest that dynamic visualizations
may not be the only solution to convey knowledge about
dynamic changes. The first part of the current study (Study
1a) focused on replicating the findings of Imhof et al.
(2009) with more standardized visualizations and a broader
range of classification tasks at different levels of difficulty.

Spatial Aspects of Presenting Static Pictures
When using static-simultaneous visualizations the question
arises of how to arrange the static pictures on the screen to
facilitate mental animation. In the study by Imhof et al.
(2009) as well as in Study 1a the static pictures were
represented in two rows of five pictures each. A row
representation requires comparisons between different
pictures to be made from left to right or vice versa. This
should be advantageous for several reasons: Firstly, it
corresponds to the reading order for texts (in Western
cultures) and is also common for other static-simultaneous
visualizations (e.g., comics). Secondly, eye tracking
research has shown that irrespective of the depicted stimulus
horizontal eye movements are more likely to occur than
vertical ones (Tatler & Vincent, 2008). Finally, arranging
multiple visualizations of an object that is moving from left
to right in a row corresponds to the moving direction of this
object. Taken together, a row presentation should facilitate
mental animation, because it better corresponds to the
nature of the depicted movement as well as to our typical
viewing behavior. This may be why it is also the common
presentation format for static-simultaneous visualizations
used in former studies (Boucheix & Schneider, 2009; Imhof
et al., 2009; Kim et al., 2007). However, it is unclear
whether the static-simultaneous presentation formats used
so far yield similar performance as dynamic visualizations,
because the pictures remain visible all the time or because
their spatial arrangement facilitates mental animation.
Hence, in Study 1b we compared dynamic visualizations to
three additional variants of static-simultaneous ones, namely
to column, matrix, and circle presentations (Figure 1).
When depicting pictures in columns comparisons have to
be made from upper to lower positioned pictures or vice
versa. This spatial layout may yield the advantage that at

least for pictures presented in a landscape format the
distance between to-be-compared elements in two pictures
is smaller. Hence, shorter saccades are required. Moreover,
for the current task the elements that need to be compared to
each other to determine their relative position (i.e., the fins)
and thus to infer the locomotion pattern from it are
vertically aligned. Hence, only few visual search processes
are needed. On the other hand, this arrangement corresponds
neither to the reading order nor to the objects’ moving
direction. In Study 1b we additionally implemented a
matrices presentation of the pictures, where horizontal as
well as vertical processing was needed. Finally, the circle
presentation took into account that the depicted locomotion
patterns are cyclic (i.e., reiterating) so that the last picture of
one movement cycle automatically leads to the beginning of
a new cycle without forcing the learner to skip back to the
beginning of the row or column.
The question of how different spatial layouts of staticsimultaneous visualizations influence their effectiveness
compared to dynamic visualizations was investigated in
Study 1b. If dynamic visualizations were superior to these
static-simultaneous variants, this would indicate that the row
presentation format used earlier is advantageous because of
its specific spatial layout and not just because the pictures
are permanently visible, which is also true for the other
static-simultaneous variants.

The Role of Spatial Ability
In line with prior research we considered learners’ spatial
ability as a possible moderator of the effectiveness of
dynamic and static visualizations during learning (e.g.,
Boucheix & Schneider, 2009; Hays, 1996). Hegarty (1992)
proposed that learners’ spatial ability plays a role for the
process of mental animation. Moreover, Hegarty and Sims
(1994) showed that high spatial ability learners
outperformed low spatial ability learners in mechanical
mental animation tasks. Furthermore, Hays (1996) showed
that low spatial ability learners particularly benefited from
learning with dynamic visualizations compared to static
ones or no visualizations suggesting that these learners have
fewer abilities to mentally animate the dynamics based on
static pictures (Hegarty & Waller, 2005). Whereas low
spatial ability learners suffer from “poor” instructions, high
spatial ability may compensate for such instructions (cf.
ability-as-compensator hypothesis, Mayer & Sims, 1994;
see also Boucheix & Schneider, 2009). Accordingly, for the
current study benefits in favour of dynamic visualizations
(and potentially, static-simultaneous-rows visualizations)
should be more pronounced for low rather than for high
spatial ability learners.

Hypotheses
For Study 1a, in which we addressed the temporal aspects of
static visualization formats, we assumed that dynamic
visualizations would be superior to static-sequential
visualizations, but not to static-simultaneous visualizations
presented in rows, thereby replicating findings form earlier

2040

studies with a broader range of recognition tasks and more
standardized visualizations (see below). In Study 1b we tried
to further disentangle temporal and spatial aspects of
presenting multiple static pictures by testing whether
dynamic visualizations would be superior to other staticsimultaneous presentation formats. We assumed that
dynamic visualizations would show stronger advantages in
this case, thereby suggesting that the benefits of staticsimultaneous visualizations presented in rows are not just
due to temporal aspects but also due to their spatial layout.
For both studies, we assumed that higher spatial ability
would be associated with better learning outcomes than
lower spatial ability. Moreover, we proposed that learners
with lower spatial ability would benefit stronger from
learning with dynamic visualizations compared to static
visualizations than those with higher spatial ability.

Study 1a
Method
Participants and Design. We randomly assigned 75
university students (average age: 24.48 years, SD = 4.34; 53
female) to one of three visualization conditions: dynamic vs.
static-sequential vs. static-simultaneous-rows.

extracted from these animations by an expert and
represented the key states in the movement cycles.
In the dynamic condition the movement cycles of the
locomotion patterns were presented in loops in the
animations (72 s per locomotion pattern). In the staticsequential condition the nine static pictures were presented
twice successively for 4 s each. In the static-simultaneousrows condition the same pictures were presented in parallel
for 72 s. They were arranged in two rows corresponding to
the two phases of the locomotion patterns (cf. Figure 2,
upper left part). To facilitate the transition from the first to
the second row, the fifth picture was depicted twice, once as
the last picture of the upper row and once as the first picture
of the lower row. The pictures’ size was half of the size of
the dynamic and the static-sequential conditions. There was
no need for the subjects to scroll the page.
During learning the participants saw visualizations for
each of the four to-be-learned locomotion patterns in a
predefined order. The presentation was system-controlled
and accompanied by narration. The narration explained the
locomotion pattern in terms of typical fish using this
locomotion pattern, body parts involved, kind of movements
executed (undulation versus oscillation), parameters of the
movements (e.g., amplitude), and maximum velocity.

Figure 1: The four to-be-learned locomotion patterns
(relevant movements indicated by arrows).
Materials. Participants were asked to learn how to classify
fish according to their locomotion patterns based on
visualizations that illustrated four different locomotion
patterns. These locomotion patterns differed in terms of the
used body parts that generate propulsion (i.e., the body itself
or several fins) and also in the manner of how these body
parts are moving (i.e. wave-like or paddle-like; cf. Figure 1).
One of the major challenges in identifying these locomotion
patterns is that fish may deploy a variety of other
movements in addition, for instance, for navigation. These
navigational movements used by a fish displaying a specific
propulsion locomotion pattern can easily be confused with
movements used for propulsion in another locomotion
pattern.
We varied the presentation format of the visualizations as
independent variable. Dynamic representations were
compared to nine either sequentially or simultaneously (in
rows) presented static visualizations.
We developed highly realistic 3D-models of fish
performing the four to-be-learned locomotion patterns based
on which 2D-animations were rendered that were
standardized in terms of the perspective, the background and
the position of the fish. These animations were used as
dynamic learning materials. The static pictures were

Figure 2: Static-simultaneous presentation formats.
Measures. Learners’ spatial abilities were assessed with
two different tests, namely the mental rotation test (MRT,
Vandenberg & Kuse, 1978), and a short version of the paper
folding test (PFT, Ekstrom et al., 1976). Both spatial ability
measures were used in the analyses as continuous factors.
To assess learning outcomes a locomotion pattern
recognition test consisting of pictorial multiple-choice items
was administered. Underwater videos of real fish
performing one of the four locomotion patterns were used as
test stimuli. The number of test items was constrained by a
number of aspects (e.g., resolution, visibility of the fish
from a certain perspective, clear depiction of the respective
locomotion patterns). For each of the four locomotion
patterns seven videos were identified. To choose for each
item the kind of locomotion pattern that was depicted,
learners had to identify the body parts relevant for

2041

propulsion and their way of moving. Possible answers were
the correct terms of the four locomotion patterns and the
additional answer “I don’t know” (see Figure 3). Each item
was awarded one point for the correct answer (max. 28
points). The recognition test items were categorized by two
independent domain experts into items with low,
intermediate, and high task difficulty. Their decisions were
based on the visibility of the relevant parts used for
propulsion as well as on the absence or presence of
miscellaneous movements of the fish’s body parts that could
have been mistaken as being relevant for propulsion (e.g.,
movements only necessary for navigational purposes).
Videos that showed the pattern relevant for propulsion
continuously and contained no other movements were
assigned a low task difficulty (8 items). Videos that showed
the pattern relevant for propulsion continuously, but
contained movements similar to another locomotion pattern
were assigned an intermediate task difficulty (11 items).
Videos that either showed the pattern relevant for
propulsion continuously, but contained additional
movements similar to at least two other locomotion patterns
or videos that did not show the relevant propulsion pattern
continuously or that did show it in a non-salient manner
(whereby all of these videos contained movements similar
to at least one other locomotion pattern) were assigned a
high task difficulty (9 items). Five cases of disagreement
between the two experts were resolved by negotiation.

Figure 3: Screenshot of a recognition test example item.
Procedure. After completing paper-based the MRT, PFT,
and a demographic questionnaire, participants read an
introduction, which was followed by the computer-based
learning phase. Finally, learners worked on the computerbased pictorial recognition test.

visualizations. Higher performance in the PFT was
associated with better recognition for tasks with low (F =
7.52, p < .01) and intermediate difficulty (F = 9.18, p < .01).
Table 1: Adjusted means (and standard errors) for
recognition performance (in % correct) as a function of
presentation format and task difficulty (Study 1a).
Presentation Format
staticstaticsequential
simultaneous(n = 25)
(n = 25)
rows (n = 25)
92.65
84.58
86.43
(3.90)
(3.88)
(3.93)
87.83
71.85
74.30
(4.33)
(4.30)
(4.36)
71.80
72.67
74.36
(4.57)
(4.55)
(4.61)

dynamic
Task
Difficulty
low
intermediate
high

Discussion of Study 1a
The results confirmed that dynamic visualizations are better
suited to convey knowledge about the continuity of
locomotion patterns compared to static-sequential
visualizations, but not to static-simultaneous visualizations
presented in rows – at least for recognition tasks with an
intermediate difficulty level. These findings hence replicate
those of a former study, where digital underwater videos as
well as black-and-white animated line drawings were used
as dynamic visualizations (Imhof et al., 2009). Hence, the
results obtained by Imhof et al. were not an artefact of either
low visibility of important kinematical aspects in the
underwater videos or their potentially oversimplified
representation in the animated line drawings, because the
visualizations in the current study were of high quality in
terms of the visibility and fidelity of important features.
In sum, the results suggest that dynamic visualizations as
well as static-simultaneous-rows presentations allow for the
construction of an adequate mental representation of
kinematics; however, it is yet not clear whether the relative
good performance of the latter condition is due to its
temporal (permanent visibility) or its spatial aspects (rows),
which is why Study 1b was conducted.

Study 1b

Results

Method

Performance in the three recognition subtests was analyzed
by a MANCOVA with presentation format (dynamic vs.
static-sequential vs. static-simultaneous-rows), the MRT,
and the PFT as independent variables (Table 1).
There was an overall effect for presentation format (F =
2.28, p = .04) and for the PFT (F = 3.62, p = .02), but no
other main effect or interactions. There was an effect for
presentation format only for recognition tasks with an
intermediate difficulty (F = 4.00, p = .02). Dynamic
visualizations
were
superior
to
static-sequential
visualizations, but not to static-simultaneous-rows

Participants and Design. We randomly assigned 75
university students (average age: 23.35 years, SD = 3.71, 57
female) to three static-simultaneous conditions, namely a
static-simultaneous-columns,
a
static-simultaneousmatrices, and a static-simultaneous-circles condition, to
compare their performance to that of students in the
dynamic visualization condition of Study 1a.
Materials. The learning domain, the measures as well as the
procedure were identical to Study 1a. In the staticsimultaneous-columns condition the single pictures were

2042

arranged in two columns corresponding to the two phases of
the locomotion patterns (cf. Figure 2, upper right part). To
facilitate the transition between the left and the right column
the fifth picture was depicted twice, once as the last picture
of the left column and once as the first picture of the right
column. In the static-simultaneous-matrices condition the
nine pictures were presented in 3x3 matrices, ordered
primarily from left to right and secondarily from top to
bottom (cf. Figure 2, lower left part). Contrary to the staticsimultaneous-rows and the static-simultaneous-columns
condition no pictures were depicted twice. In the staticsimultaneous-circles condition the single pictures were
presented in a clockwise arrangement with the first picture
at the 12 o’clock position (cf. Figure 2, lower right part). In
this condition the ninth picture was not presented, because it
depicted the same state in the locomotion pattern as the first
picture. The pictures in all conditions had the same size as
those in the static-simultaneous-rows condition in Study 1a.

Results
Performance in the three recognition subtests was analyzed
by a MANCOVA with presentation format (staticsimultaneous-columns vs. static-simultaneous-matrices vs.
static-simultaneous-circles vs. dynamic), the MRT, and the
PFT as independent variables (Table 2).
There was an overall effect for presentation format (F =
2.64, p = .01), for the MRT (F = 4.93, p < .01) and for the
PFT (F = 2.82, p = .04), but no interactions. There was an
effect for presentation format for recognition tasks with low
(F = 4.01, p = .01) and intermediate difficulty (F = 6.41, p =
.001). Dynamic visualizations led to better recognition for
tasks with low difficulty compared to the staticsimultaneous-matrices visualizations as well as for tasks
with intermediate difficulty compared to all three staticsimultaneous conditions. Moreover, higher performance in
the MRT was associated with better recognition
performance for tasks with low (F = 4.55, p = .04) and
intermediate difficulty (F = 14.59, p < .001). Furthermore,
higher performance in the PFT was associated with better
recognition for tasks with low difficulty (F = 4.63, p = .03).

Discussion of Study 1b
None of the additionally tested spatial layouts of the staticsimultaneous visualizations achieved the same recognition
performance as the dynamic visualizations for tasks with an
intermediate level of difficulty. For recognition tasks with a
low level of difficulty we found dynamic visualizations to
be superior to static-simultaneous visualizations presented
as matrices, showing that this presentation format bears the
fewest of all advantages for the task at hand.
The possible advantage of a circular presentation that it
adequately represents the cyclic nature of the locomotion
patterns might have been cancelled out by the fact that with
this presentation format the orientation of the pictures
interfered with the swimming direction of the fish. That is,
for pictures presented in-between the 3 o’clock and the 9
o’clock position, the next picture is depicted to the left of its

previous picture, whereas the swimming direction of the
fish still indicates a movement from left to right. Moreover,
contrary to the assumption that the spatial contiguity in a
column supports the visual alignment of to-be-compared
elements and hence might facilitate mental animation, this
condition was not any better than the dynamic condition.
In sum, the results suggest that dynamic visualizations are
superior to different static-simultaneous presentation
formats as long as the spatial layout of the static pictures
does not support mental animation processes in a way that
corresponds to our reading/viewing behavior and that is in
line with the moving direction of the depicted object.
Table 2: Adjusted means (and standard errors) for
recognition performance (in % correct) as a function of
presentation format and task difficulty (Study 1b).

Task
Difficulty
low
intermediate
high

Presentation Format
static-simultaneous
columns matrices
circles
(n = 25) (n = 25)
(n = 25)
83.85
72.40
79.21
(4.13)
(4.47)
(4.07)
70.26
63.65
66.90
(4.20)
(4.55)
(4.14)
66.69
62.58
61.52
(4.76)
(5.16)
(4.70)

dynamic
(n = 25)
92.78
(4.36)
88.36
(4.43)
71.77
(5.02)

General Discussion
The superiority of dynamic visualizations over most static
presentation formats for learning tasks that explicitly require
the identification of the continuity of movements and
involve a strong perceptual component was supported in
Studies 1a and 1b. However, consistent with prior findings
(Boucheix & Schneider, 2009; Imhof et al., 2009) a staticsimultaneous presentation of multiple pictures in rows led to
the same performance as the dynamic visualizations.
Accordingly, for this specific case where the moving
direction of the depicted object and the spatial layout of the
pictures correspond to each other, learners seem to be well
able to mentally animate the sequence of pictures and hence
to infer the kinematics from it (Hegarty, 1992). However,
this result pattern holds true only for tasks of intermediate
difficulty. The fact that we did not find the same results for
tasks of low difficulty can be explained in terms of a ceiling
effect. The items are maybe so clearly identifiable that
learners from all experimental conditions (except for the
matrices condition in Study 1b) achieved very good results.
According to the expert opinions there were always at least
two concurring patterns visible in items with high task
difficulty. Which one of these is used for propulsion cannot
be answered only on the basis of perceptual input. Rather
conceptual knowledge acquired from the spoken
explanations, which were identical in all experimental
conditions, had to be used to answer these items. Additional
design techniques like cueing (De Koning et al., 2009) or
enriching static displays (Münzer, Seufert, & Brünken,

2043

2009) could further enhance the effectiveness of staticsimultaneous presentation formats.
Astonishingly, there was no moderating effect of spatial
ability concerning the effectiveness of different presentation
formats of visualizations. Therefore, the assumed ability-ascompensator hypothesis could not be confirmed. In further
studies this issue should be addressed in more detail,
because there is an ongoing discussion about the separate
components that make up the construct spatial ability (for an
overview see Hegarty & Waller, 2005). Especially, the
dynamic spatial ability component might be a relevant
dimension for mental animation in dynamic tasks
(D’Oliveira, 2004; Hunt et al., 1988). Hence, it might be
that the tests used here may not have addressed those spatial
ability components that might be most relevant to mental
animation, even tough they are commonly used in
visualization research. Despite of these doubts concerning
the validity of the measures used, we were nevertheless able
to show that irrespective of visualization format higher
spatial ability was associated with better learning outcomes
than lower spatial ability for tasks with low and
intermediate difficulty, thereby replicating the findings of
Hegarty and Sims (1994). Hence, we can at least conclude
that spatial abilities are relevant to the task at hand.
Nevertheless, further studies need to address the question of
how
mental
animation
from
static-simultaneous
visualizations supports learning.

Acknowledgments
The study is part of a research project on the “resourceadaptive design of visualizations for supporting the
comprehension of complex dynamics in the Natural
Sciences” funded by the Leibniz-Gemeinschaft.

References
Ayres, P., Marcus, N., Chan, C., & Qian, N. (2009).
Learning hand manipulative tasks: When instructional
animations
are superior to equivalent
static
representations. Computers in Human Behavior, 25, 348353.
Bétrancourt, M., & Tversky, B. (2000). Effect of computer
animation on users' performance: A review. Le Travail
Humain, 63, 311-329.
Boucheix, J.-M., & Schneider, E. (2009). Static and
animated presentations in learning dynamic mechanical
systems. Learning and Instruction, 19, 112-127.
Byrne, M. D., Catrambone, R., & Stasko, J. T. (1999).
Evaluating animations as student aids in learning
computer algorithms. Computers and Education, 33, 253278.
De Koning, B. B., Tabbers, H. K., Rikers, R. M. J. P., &
Paas, F (2009). Towards a framework for attention cueing
in instructional animations: Guidelines for research and
design. Educational Psychology Review, 21, 113-140.
D’Oliveira, T. C. (2004). Dynamic spatial ability: An
exploratory analysis and a confirmatory study.
International Journal of Aviation Psychology, 14, 19-38.

Ekstrom, R., French, J., Harmon, H., & Derman, D. (1976).
Manual for Kit of Factor-Referenced Cognitive Tests.
Princeton: Educational Testing Service.
Hays, T. A. (1996). Spatial ability and the effects of
computer animation on short-term and long-term
comprehension. Journal of Educational Computing
Research, 14, 139-155.
Hegarty, M. (1992). Mental animation: Inferring motion
from static diagrams of mechanical systems. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 18, 1084-1102.
Hegarty, M., & Sims, V. K. (1994). Individual differences
in mental animation during mechanical reasoning.
Memory and Cognition, 22, 411-430.
Hegarty, M., & Waller, D. (2005). Individual differences in
spatial ability. In P. Shah, & A. Miyake (Eds.), Handbook
of Visuospatial Thinking. Cambridge University Press.
Hunt, E., Pellegrino, J. W., Frick, R. W., Farr, S. A., &
Alderton, D. (1988). The ability to reason about
movement in the visual field. Intelligence, 12, 77-100.
Imhof, B., Scheiter, K., & Gerjets, P. (2009). Realism in
dynamic, static-sequential, and static-simultaneous
visualizations during knowledge acquisition on
locomotion patterns. In N. A. Taatgen, & H. van Rijn
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2962-2967). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Kim, S., Yoon, M., Whang, S., Tversky, B., & Morrison, J.
(2007). The effect of animation on comprehension and
interest. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 23, 260270.
Mayer, R. E., & Sims, V. K. (1994). For whom is a picture
worth a thousand words? Extensions of a dual-coding
theory of multimedia learning. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 86, 389-401.
Münzer, S., Seufert, T., & Brünken, R. (2009). Learning
from multimedia presentations: Facilitation function of
animations and spatial abilities. Learning and Individual
Differences, 19, 481-485.
Paas, F., Van Gerven, P. W. M., & Wouters, P. (2007).
Instructional efficiency of animation: Effects of
interactivity through mental reconstruction of static key
frames. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 21, 783-793.
Tatler, B. W., & Vincent, B. T. (2008). Systematic
tendencies in scene viewing. Journal of Eye Movement
Research, 2, 1-18.
Tversky, B., Bauer-Morrison, J., & Bétrancourt, M. (2002).
Animation: Can it facilitate? International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, 57, 247-262.
Vandenberg, S. G., & Kuse, A. R. (1978). Mental rotations,
a group test of three-dimensional spatial visualization.
Perceptual and Motor Skills, 47, 599-604.
Wong, A., Marcus, N., Smith, L., Cooper, G. A., Ayres, P.,
Paas, F., & Sweller, J. (2009). Instructional animations
can be superior to statics when learning human motor
skills. Computers in Human Behavior, 25, 339-347.

2044

