UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Interaction of Age and Skill for Recognition of Chess Positions
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7dt85753
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)
Authors
Moxley, Jerad H.
Ericsson, K. Anders
Towne, Tyler J.
et al.
Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                    Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                     University of California

   The Interaction of Age and Skill for Recognition of Chess Positions
                                               Jerad H. Moxley
                                              Florida State University
                                             K. Anders Ericsson
                                              Florida State University
                                                 Tyler J. Towne
                                              Florida State University
                                                   Ryan Best
                                              Florida State University
Abstract: Even young chess players display superior recall for chess positions (Chi, 1978; Horgan & Morgan, 1990;
Schneider, Gruber, Gold, & Opwis, 1993), which has been attributed to their greater chess knowledge and available
patterns and chunks (Chase & Simon, 1973). Controlling for skill no effect of age has generally been found in youth
chess players on chess tasks. This study demonstrates, a strong effect of age, where older children are better able
to recognize chess positions. Additionally this study uncovered an interaction between age and skill whereby older
children who are better at chess do much better then other groups. We propose that older children use deeper
processing techniques to scaffold the complex memory structures that support chess playing, which may not be
automatically applied to an unfamiliar task.
                                                        2421

