UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Cognitive Cost of Ethnocentrism

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2q37226k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Kaznatcheev, Artem

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Cognitive Cost of Ethnocentrism
Artem Kaznatcheev (artem.kaznatcheev@mail.mcgill.ca)
Department of Physics and School of Computer Science,
McGill University, 3600 University Street, Montreal, QC H3A 2T8 Canada
Abstract

participants. Agents can either defect against, or cooperate with, other in- or out-group agents, permitting
four strategies: (1) a humanitarian strategy of universal cooperation, (2) an ethnocentric strategy of in- but
not out-group cooperation, (3) a traitorous strategy of
cooperation exclusively with the out-group, and (4) a
selfish strategy of constant defection. Hammond and
Axelrod (2006) showed that, after a transient period,
ethnocentric agents dominate the population. Shultz et
al. (2008) examined the transient period to uncover evidence for early competition between the ethnocentric
and humanitarian strategies. More recently, Shultz et
al. (2009) focused on explaining the mechanism behind
ethnocentric dominance over humanitarians. In particular, they introduced the direct and free-rider-suppression
hypotheses. The direct hypothesis is that ethnocentric
clumps of agents directly suppress contacted clumps of
humanitarian agents from different groups. The contrasting free-rider-suppression hypothesis is that ethnocentrics are more effective than humanitarians at suppressing groups of free riders — selfish and traitorous
agents from the same group.
This paper extends beyond previous work by closely
examining the cognitive mechanisms required for ethnocentrism. In particular, we measure the cost in fitness
an agent is willing to pay in order to have the higher (yet
still simple) cognitive processes required to discriminate
between in- and out-groups. By varying the cost of cognition we also eliminate ethnocentric agents and confirm
the direct hypothesis as the mechanism of ethnocentric
dominance over humanitarians. Tracking the proportion
of cooperation also reveals a novel and important role
for the free-rider-suppression hypothesis — maintaining
cooperative interactions.

Recent computational studies suggest that ethnocentrism, commonly thought to rely on complex social cognition, may arise through biological evolution in populations with minimal cognitive abilities. We use the
methods of evolutionary game theory and computational modelling to examine the evolution of ethnocentrism. Since ethnocentric agents differentiate between
in- and out-group partners, and adjust their behavior
accordingly, they are more cognitively complex than humanitarian or selfish agents that always cooperate or defect, respectively. We associate a fitness cost with this
complexity and test the robustness of ethnocentrism,
concluding that ethnocentrism is not robust against increases in cost of cognition. Our model confirms that
humanitarians are suppressed largely by ethnocentrics.
Paradoxically, we observe that the proportion of cooperation is higher in worlds dominated by ethnocentrics.
We conclude that suppressing free-riders, such as selfish
and traitorous agents, allows ethnocentrics to maintain
higher levels of cooperative interactions.
Keywords: Ethnocentrism; humanitarianism; cooperation; agent-based simulation; minimal cognition; Prisoner’s Dilemma; evolution; free-rider-suppression hypothesis

Introduction
Seeing ones own group (in-group) as superior and other
groups (out-groups) as inferior is a widespread syndrome
of discriminatory behaviors (LeVine & Campbell, 1972).
This perspective is associated with behavior including
in-group favoritism (ethnocentrism) and out-group hostility (xenophobia) (Cashdan, 2001; Hewstone, Rubin,
& Willis, 2002; Brown, 2004). Although the behavior is
commonly thought to involve substantial cognitive ability (Sherif, 1966; LeVine & Campbell, 1972; Hewstone
et al., 2002), extensive psychological evidence suggests
that the presence of a strong in-group bias can be observed in individuals with minimal cognition and highly
abstract social input (Tajfel, 1970; Tajfel, Billig, Bundy,
& Flament, 1971). This is supported by observed ethnocentrism in human placenta (Haig, 1996), ants (Keller &
Ross, 1998), and microbes (Lenski & Velicer, 2000), and
suggests that ethnocentrism may have a basis in biological evolution. Cognitively, the ability to distinguish inand out-group members and adjust behavior accordingly
may be sufficient to foster this effect.
Recent computational studies (Hammond & Axelrod,
2006; Shultz, Hartshorn, & Hammond, 2008; Shultz,
Hartshorn, & Kaznatcheev, 2009) have focused on the
emergence of in-group favoritism through agent-based
simulations of individuals with minimal cognitive ability. Agents interact via a one-time prisoners dilemma
(PD) game that affects the reproductive potential of the

Cognitive Complexity
An easy way to understand the complexity of reasoning
carried out by simple abstract agents is to represent their
decision procedure by finite state machines (FSMs). To
use FSMs, it is important to understand what information agents receive and what actions they perform based
on that information. During an interaction the agent
receives some information about its partner and then
makes a decision to cooperate or defect. In particular,
the agent receives a signal S if the agent’s partner is
from the same abstract group (in-group) and N otherwise (out-group). In response, the agent outputs a D to
defect in the PD interaction, and C to cooperate. Note
that the agent does not receive any direct information

967

Agent 1
(a) Humanitarian

(c) Ethnocentric

C
D

Agent 2
C
D
b − c −c
b

0

Table 1: Payoff matrix for one agent (agent 1) interacting
with another (agent 2).

(b) Selfish

with each other, or not. In evolutionary game theory
such interactions are usually modelled by the Prisoner’s
Dilemma (PD). In PD, two agents independently decide
whether to cooperate with or defect against the other.
When cooperating, an agent pays a cost c to provide
a greater benefit b to its partner. When defecting, an
agent pays no cost and provides no benefit, but can still
receive benefit if its partner cooperates. Table 1 shows
the payoff for one agent (agent 1) interacting with another (agent 2). The payoff matrix reveals that an agent
can always receive a higher payoff by defecting instead of
cooperating. In game theoretic terminology, mutual defection is the Nash equilibrium. However, if both agents
manage to coordinate cooperation, then they are both
better of than if they had mutually defected — mutual
cooperation Pareto dominates mutual defection. Due to
this paradox, the PD game is regarded as a paradigmatic
example of the problem of achieving mutual cooperation (Axelrod & Hamilton, 1981). The game provides a
simple model of an environment where one action (defection) is better for the individual and the other (cooperation) is better for the population.
The simplest approach to studying the evolutionary
dynamics of the PD is in a well mixed population. If
agents are paired randomly from a mixed population
and interaction results modify individual reproductive
potential, eventually defectors will dominate the population. To allow cooperation to emerge it is essential to
introduce positive correlations between the strategies of
paired agents. To study the emergence of cooperation,
researchers explore various ways to create these correlations. In our model we consider an interplay of spatial
structure and arbitrary tags.

(d) Traitorous

Figure 1: Finite state machines representing the 4 possible strategies. Transitions are represented by arrows,
with label S corresponding to an input of same-tag and
N to different-tag. The agent’s action is represented in
the center of the state, C for cooperate and D for defect.

on its partner’s strategy, and instead relies on potential
correlations of a partner from the same group having the
same strategy.
The four strategies are represented by FSMs in figure 1. Circles correspond to states, that are labeled by
their output, either C or D. Arrows represent transitions, labeled by S or N . The initial state is signified
by the smaller arrow with no pre-state. Humanitarian
agents that always cooperate, and selfish agents that always defect are easy to represent. In particular, they
are single state machines that output C or D (respectively) regardless of the input they receive. These two
strategies are shown schematically in figures 1a and 1b.
Ethnocentric and traitorous agents, however, require two
states as shown in figures 1c and 1d. The extra state
represents the greater complexity in making a decision
based on input received, compared to not making a decision at all (the single state agents). Since implementing
this rudimentary decision-making requires extra energy
expenditure on the part of the agents, we represent this
extra cost as a small fitness decrement k for ethnocentric
and traitorous agents. This cost is especially important
for studying the co-evolution of cooperation and ethnocentrism. To follow an ethnocentric strategy the agents
have to invest a bit of their fitness into developing more
sophisticated cognitive processes.

Model
Our model, and the Hammond and Axelrod (2006)
model it is based on, expand beyond random interactions to facilitate the emergence of cooperation. Instead
of randomly choosing interaction pairs, agents populate
a toroidal square lattice (50 by 50 cells) and interact with
their four adjacent neighbors. Each individual is simple,
only perceiving whether it shares a common tag with
neighbors (from a total of 4 tags), allowing for two interaction strategies: an in-group (igs) and an out-group
(ogs) strategy. The four strategies are summarized in
figure 1 and table 2. The outcomes of PD interactions

Method
Prisoner’s Dilemma
In virtually any competitive social situation, interacting agents have a basic decision to make: cooperate

968

Name
Humanitarian
Ethnocentric
Traitorous
Selfish

igs
C
C
D
D

ogs
C
D
C
D

Figure
1a
1c
1d
1b

Table 2: The four possible strategies. The igs column
correspond to the in-group strategy, ogs to out-group
strategy.

(with b = .025 and c = .01) are added to the agents potential to reproduce (ptr, which is reset to .1 at the start
of each cycle). At the end of a cycle, each agent has a
chance equal to its ptr to clone itself (with a constant
mutation rate (.005)) and a constant probability (.1) of
dying. If an agent expires its location is vacated until
habitation by a new agent. Regardless of the agent’s
survival, if the agent cloned itself the child is placed in
one empty cell adjacent to the parent (potentially including the parent’s cell if the parent expired after cloning
itself). To start the world, and if the population ever
reaches zero, the world is seeded with 80 individuals distributed randomly across the torus and uniformly across
the 16 strains (4 possible tags, 2 possible igs, 2 possible
ogs). The simulation runs for 3000 cycles.

Figure 2: Number of ethnocentric and humanitarian
agents vs. cost of cognition. The points represent the
mean number of agents over the last 500 cycles of the
simulations: red is ethnocentric agents, blue is humanitarian. The error bars represent standard error from
averaging over 30 different worlds.

Results
Our primary result is the variation in the number of ethnocentric and humanitarian agents and the proportion
of cooperation for different values of the cost of cognition, k. As in previous studies (Hammond & Axelrod,
2006; Shultz et al., 2008, 2009) the number of selfish
and traitorous agents is negligible, and hence we concentrate our presentation on the number of humanitarians and ethnocentrics in the population. Figure 2 shows
the number of ethnocentrics (in red) and humanitarians
(in blue) in simulations with increasing costs of cognition. Unsurprisingly, as the cost of cognition increases
the number of ethnocentric agents decreases, and humanitarians take their place. This is consistent with the
assessment of Shultz et al. (2009) that humanitarians are
directly suppressed by ethnocentrics. A surprising result, is how low the cost of cognition (.004 ≤ k ≤ .0045)
is at the point where the humanitarian strategy becomes
fitter. In particular, this transition point is more than an
order of magnitude lower than the default ptr (.1) and
less than half of the cost of cooperation (.01). The third
interesting result, is the quick phase transition from ethnocentric to humanitarian dominance. With k ≤ .0035
the number of humanitarian agents is relatively stable
around 200, from k = .004 to k = .0065 we observe
quick change, and then for k ≥ .007 the humanitarian
population stabilizes around 1000 individuals. Together,
these results suggest that ethnocentrism is not very robust against variance in the cost of cognition. In particular, for widespread ethnocentrism to emerge, the cost
of differentiating between in- and out-groups needs to be

To account for the potential cost of extra cognitive
abilities we introduce a new parameter k. This parameter is varied in different simulations from 0 to .01 to
show the impact of cognitive costs on the evolution of
ethnocentrism. The effect of the cost of cognition is to
lower the base ptr of ethnocentric and traitorous agents.
In particular, at the start of every cycle the ptr is reset
to .1 for humanitarian and selfish agents and to .1−k for
ethnocentric and traitorous agents. The rest of the simulation is unmodified. By adjusting k we can quantify
how much the extra cognitive powers of ethnocentrics
are worth in terms of the currency of evolution — reproductive fitness.
During the simulation we collect two primary types
of data. We record the distribution of agents by strategy, and track the number of cooperative and noncooperative interactions. If an agent chooses to cooperate during its interaction, we increment the number of
cooperations for the cycle. The proportion of cooperation is then the number of cooperations divided by twice
the number of interactions (to account for both agents
having to make a decision during each interaction).When
comparing simulations with different values of k we take
the mean data from the last 500 cycles, since the dynamics stabilize by then. To account for the stochastic
nature of our model, we present all results with standard error from averaging over 30 worlds (a world is a
single instance of the simulation with specific parameter
setting and initial random seed).

969

Figure 3: Proportion of cooperative interactions vs. cost
of cognition. The points represent the mean proportion
of cooperative interactions over to last 500 cycles. The
error bars represent standard error from averaging over
30 different worlds.
(a) k = .002

extremely low in comparison to other relevant parameters (default ptr, cost and benefit of cooperation, etc.).
In figure 3 we show the proportion of cooperative interactions as the cost of cognition increases. Although
the change in cooperation is not as drastic as the changes
in strategy distribution, it is still statistically significant.
In particular, we observe the same phase transition, with
proportion of cooperative interactions stable around .955
while k ≤ .0035 and stable around .915 when k ≥ .0065.
The counter-intuitive result in figure 3 is that as humanitarian agents start to dominate the population, the
proportion of cooperation decreases. This raises the important question of what is more important: overall cooperation or the individual fairness of predominantly humanitarian agents?
For contrast, we also present two figures of strategy
distribution by cycle. In figure 4a we show a cost of
cognition k = .002, a bit before the phase transition.
In figure 4b we examine a point after the phase transition, k = .007. The drastic change from ethnocentric
(green) dominance to humanitarian (blue) dominance
is self-evident. Further, in the humanitarian-dominated
world of k = .007 selfish (red) agents perform around 5
times better than in the ethnocentric dominated world.
This supports the intuition that ethnocentrics are better
at suppressing selfish agents.

(b) k = .007

Figure 4: Number of agents of various strategies vs. evolutionary cycle. The lines represent the number of agents
of each strategy: blue — humanitarian; green — ethnocentric; yellow — traitorous; red — selfish. The width of
the line corresponds to standard error from averaging 30
different worlds. The two figures correspond to different
costs of cognition, k.

For other nearby choices of basic parameters (b, c, base
ptr, and death rate) the qualitative results are similar,
although the exact quantitative aspects change. As in
reports (Shultz et al., 2008, 2009), we omit them for
brevity.

970

Discussion

hope that this paper highlights the importance of considering possible fitness investment in even the simplest
forms of cognition. By exploring further we hope to gain
a better understanding of the evolution and potential social effects of simple information processing.

The relatively low cost of cognition (around .004 ≤ k ≤
.0045) required to transition from ethnocentric to humanitarian dominance suggests that ethnocentrism is
not very robust. In particular, the emergence of ethnocentric cooperation is unlikely to have caused significant
investment of fitness in cognitive development. Alternatively, the mechanisms for differentiating between inand out-groups and making basic decisions would need
to be already in place by other means, and are unlikely
to have co-evolved with cooperation. Making the distinction between in- and out-groups does not require fitness investment for humans, but for more rudimentary
organism, it is likely that it would. Although the cognitive abilities required for ethnocentrism are as simple
as distinguishing in- and out-groups, this simplicity can
be deceiving. Our results stress that for ethnocentrism
to evolve, these simple cognitive abilities must also be
extremely cheap in terms of fitness invested.
The results in figure 3 suggest that displacing ethnocentric agents by humanitarian ones can lead to a decrease in overall proportion of cooperative interactions.
In particular, it is important to reexamine the negative
perception of ethnocentrism. Although unfair from the
individual point of view, ethnocentrism might be essential to sustain the levels of cooperation required for complex structures such as multi-cellular organisms or human society. Thus, a tempting answer to the question of
Shultz et al. (2009): “why is ethnocentrism more common than humanitarianism?” is that humanitarianism
cannot maintain as high levels of cooperation.
A further connection to previous work (Shultz et al.,
2009) is a reevaluation of the direct and free-ridersuppression hypothesis. Although Shultz et al. (2009)
ruled out the free-rider-suppression hypothesis in favor
of the direct hypothesis, they did not examine the proportion of cooperation. The direct hypothesis provides a
good explanation of why ethnocentrics dominate humanitarians, but the free-rider-suppression hypothesis explains the increased levels of cooperation in largely ethnocentric populations. When humanitarians replace ethnocentric as the dominant strategy, significantly higher
levels of selfish agents evolve in the population. The
decrease in cooperation caused by higher levels of selfish agents exceeds the increase in cooperation caused by
humanitarians cooperating across groups. This results
in an overall reduction in the cooperative interactions.
Thus, ethnocentric agents ability to better suppress freeriders is important for maintaining higher levels of cooperative behavior.
Although the decision making employed by our abstract agents is extremely simple, it is not beyond the
scope of what contemporary cognitive science regards as
cognition. Our research explores rudimentary cognition
in a social and evolutionary context. In particular we

References
Axelrod, R., & Hamilton, W. (1981). The evolution of
cooperation. Science, 211 , 1390-1396.
Brown, D. E. (2004). Human universals, human nature,
and human culture. Daedalus, 133 (4), 47-54.
Cashdan, E. (2001). Ethnocentrism and xenophobia: A
cross-cultural study. Current Anthropology, 42 , 760765.
Haig, D. (1996). Gestational drive and the green-bearded
placenta. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 93 , 6547-6551.
Hammond, R., & Axelrod, R. (2006). The evolution
of ethnocentrism. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 50 ,
926-936.
Hewstone, M., Rubin, M., & Willis, H. (2002). Intergroup bias. Annual Review of Psychology, 53 , 575604.
Keller, L., & Ross, K. (1998). Selfish genes: a green
beard in the red fire ant. Nature, 394 , 573-575.
Lenski, R., & Velicer, G. (2000). Games microbes play.
Selection, 1 , 51-57.
LeVine, R. A., & Campbell, D. T. (1972). Ethnocentrism. New York: John Wiley.
Sherif, M. (1966). Group conflict and co-operation:
Their social psychology. London: Routledge Kegan
Paul .
Shultz, T. R., Hartshorn, M., & Hammond, R. A.
(2008). Stages in the evolution of ethnocentrism. In
B. Love, K. McRae, & S. V.M. (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 30th annual conference of the cognitive science society (p. 1244-1249). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Shultz, T. R., Hartshorn, M., & Kaznatcheev, A. (2009).
Why is ethnocentrism more common than humanitarianism? In N. Taatgen & H. van Rijn (Eds.), Proceedings of the 31st annual conference of the congnitive
science society (p. 2100-2105). Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Tajfel, H. (1970). Experiments in intergroup discrimination. Scientific America, 223 , 96-102.
Tajfel, H., Billig, M. G., Bundy, R. P., & Flament, C.
(1971). Social categorization and intergroup behavior.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 1 , 149-178.

971

