UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Specificity of Non-Arbitrary Sound-to-Meaning Correspondences in Spoken Language
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/79n6s3v4
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)
Authors
Tzeng, Christina Y.
Nygaard, Lynne C.
Namy, Laura L.
Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

  The Specificity of Non-Arbitrary Sound-to-Meaning Correspondences
                                           in Spoken Language
                                               Christina Y. Tzeng
                                                  Emory University
                                               Lynne C. Nygaard
                                                  Emory University
                                                 Laura L. Namy
                                                  Emory University
Abstract: Sound symbolism, or non-arbitrary correspondences between the sound of a word and its meaning, is an
inherent property of natural language. Although previous research suggests that listeners are sensitive to sound-to-
meaning correspondences, little is known about the specificity of these mappings. The present study investigated
whether sound symbolic properties correspond to specific meanings, or whether these properties aid mappings to other
semantic dimensions as well. English-speaking adults heard sound symbolic foreign translations of four adjective pairs
(big-small, pointy-round, fast-slow, still-moving), and for each foreign word, chose which of two English antonyms
(matched or mismatched with word dimension) was its correct translation. Participants reliably matched foreign
words to their correct meanings, as well as to related semantic dimensions, suggesting not only that listeners utilize
sound-to-meaning correspondences to infer the meanings of unfamiliar words, but also that sound-symbolic properties
facilitate word-to-meaning mappings within a range of associated and co-varying semantic dimensions.
                                                          518

