UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Impact of Syntax on the Interpretation and Graphical Depiction of Underspecified
Propositions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4zv1k88r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Kalb, Aaron
Barber-Plummer, Dave
Cox, Richard
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Impact of Syntax on the Interpretation and Graphical Depiction of
Underspecified Propositions
Aaron Kalb, Dave Barker-Plummer1 ,
Deonne Castaneda, Christopher Potts2
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA
{kalb,dbp,deonne,cgpotts}@stanford.edu

Richard Cox
School of Informatics, University of Sussex
Falmer, E. Sussex, BN1 9QJ, UK
richc@sussex.ac.uk

Robert Dale
Center for Language Technology, Macquarie University
Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia
rdale@science.mq.edu.au

Abstract

The second observation we take as a starting point is that
natural language affords multiple ways of realizing the same
semantic content. This is often exemplified by reference to
the fact that active and passive sentences, such as Fred wrote
the book and The book was written by Fred, describe the
same state of affairs. There may be contextual, or pragmatic,
reasons for choosing one realization over the other, as commonly discussed under the heading of information packaging (Vallduvi, 1992); but the common view is that the semantics of the two sentences, in terms of propositional content, is
the same.

Different representational systems permit differing degrees
and forms of ambiguity and underspecification in the content
they represent. Independently of this observation, a notable
feature of natural language as a representational system is that
it allows the same content to be expressed in different ways.
In this paper, we examine the interaction of these two observations; in particular, we explore a number of linguistic forms
involving underspecified content, and look at how subjects express the content of these linguistic forms both in logic and in
diagrams. Our analysis demonstrates that variations in syntactic realization of the same semantic content lead to different
interpretations of that content.
Keywords: logic; natural language; syntactic structure; diagrams; representations; negation.

We are interested in how these two phenomena interact. Our interest is motivated by an effect found in an
earlier study (Cox, Dale, Etchemendy, & Barker-Plummer,
2008), in which the specificity of participants’ responses to
NL sentences containing negation differed markedly between
their FOL translations and their diagrammatic interpretations.
Specifically, it was found that in their FOL translations of the
sentence d is not a small dodecahedron, participants overwhelmingly treated the predicates small and dodecahedron
symmetrically, whereas their diagrams of the sentence tended
to make d a dodecahedron that isn’t small, rather than a small
shape other than a dodecahedron. However, contextual confounds made the source of this effect hard to establish.

Introduction
This paper takes as its starting point two widely-made observations. First, different representational systems permit
different abstractions, and consequently, they permit underspecification on different dimensions. In particular, natural language (NL) and first-order logic (FOL) are two representational systems that permit underspecification of aspects of meaning that must be made explicit in diagrammatic representations. Direction is a case in point: consider
the natural language statement The house is adjacent to the
park; neither this sentence, nor a typical FOL rendering such
as AdjacentTo(house, park), specifies the direction of adjacency, but a picture or diagrammatic rendering of the sentence
must make this explicit. We will say that the NL representation of the state of affairs is underspecified with respect
to the diagrammatic representation. This makes it clear that
underspecification as defined here is a relational notion; however, for convenience in the remainder of this paper we will
simply refer to representations as being underspecified when
the relatum is obvious from the context.
1 Center

In this paper, we report on an experiment which sought
to elucidate the effects of different possible factors on this
phenomenon. In particular, we ask: if we have a number of
natural language forms that express the same underspecified
semantic content, what happens when subjects are asked to
draw diagrams that require them to be more explicit? If the
NL sentences truly express the same meaning, then we might
expect to see similar distributions of the possible diagrammatic renderings, regardless of the NL surface form used.
Alternatively, syntax or semantics may make some diagrammatic renderings more salient or available than others, This
paper sets out to determine which of these alternatives hold.

for the Study of Language and Information.
of Linguistics.

2 Department

808

Hypotheses
We explore two hypotheses in particular.

¬(Striped(q) ∧ Circ(q))

¬Striped(q) ∧ Circ(q)

q is not striped-and-circular

q is not-striped and circular

A DJ P

Hypothesis 1: When asked to translate from one representation into another that permits underspecification to be
maintained, then in the absence of any contextual factors
that encourage a more specific reading in the target representation, subjects will maintain the underspecification.
Hypothesis 2: When asked to translate from one representation into another that requires underspecification to be
made specific, and there are a limited number of ways of
doing this, we expect to see similar distributions across
these solutions irrespective of superficial variations in the
way the content is expressed in the source representation.
To test Hypothesis 1, we ask subjects to translate from
NL to FOL . We make use of syntactic variations that represent the same semantic content; for example, the three
sentences below all are expressions of the FOL statement
¬(Striped(q) ∧ Circ(q)):
(1)
(2)
(3)

q is not a striped circle
q is not a circle with stripes
q is not striped and circular

N EG

not

A DJ P

A DJ

A DJ

A DJ

C ONJ

A DJ

N EG

A DJ

striped

and

circular

not

striped

C ONJ

A DJ

and

A DJ

circular

Figure 1: Two parse trees for q is not striped and circular
1. diagrams in which q is a circle that isn’t striped (i.e. only
the predicate Striped is realized-as-negated);
2. diagrams in which q is a striped object other than a circle
(i.e. the predicate Circ alone is realized-as-negated); and
3. diagrams in which q is neither circular nor striped (i.e. both
predicates are realized-as-negated).
Each of these realizations commits to some information left
unspecified in the FOL sentence.
Our hypothesis predicts that the distribution of different diagrammatic realizations should be roughly similar irrespective of which surface NL form is being translated.

P RE M OD
P OST M OD
C OORD

The first two sentences are syntactically and semantically
unambiguous. It is possible, with appropriate contextual
cues, to encourage a more specific reading than the widescoped FOL statement above. For example, in spoken form,
emphasis on either striped or circle, as in q is not a striped
circle or q is not a striped circle, may encourage a narrowscoped reading, corresponding to ¬Striped(q) ∧ Circ(q) and
Striped(q) ∧ ¬Circ(q), respectively. However, in the absence
of any such cues, Hypothesis 1 predicts that subjects will provide the wide-scoped reading.3
The third sentence is syntactically ambiguous (see Figure 1). Each parse corresponds to a different semantics, one
of these being the wide-scoped reading, and the other the
narrow-scoped-left reading. We would expect to find a distribution across these two readings in the FOL renderings.
To test Hypothesis 2, we ask subjects to translate from
NL into diagrammatic realizations. We focus our analysis on
those subjects who maintained underspecification in our test
of Hypothesis 1, i.e., we leave aside any subjects who produce a narrow-scope reading for C OORD sentences. We set
up the diagram task conventions in such a way that there are
only a limited number of possible ways of making the underspecified content specific. In particular, the wide-scope FOL
above can be realized by three classes of diagrams:

Methodology
The Subjects
Forty-one students enrolled in an introductory logic class at
Stanford University took part. The experiment was conducted
in the final weeks of the term. All of the background material
necessary to complete the experimental task was presented
within the first two weeks of the term. A key aim of the course
is to teach the ability to distinguish the propositional content
of sentences from their implicatures. The subject pool had
therefore been primed to consider different possible interpretations of sentences and whether those interpretations depend
on factors external to the sentence, such as common knowledge. Further, the students knowledge of FOL allows us to
test for an unambiguous reading of sentences with multiple
interpretations.
The class used (Barwise, Etchemendy, Allwein, BarkerPlummer, & Liu, 1999) as the textbook, and used the Tarski’s
World computer program for teaching the semantics of FOL.
Tarski’s World presents a system similar to the diagrammatic
representation used in this experiment. In general, the materials were designed to parallel the structure of materials in
the course, both in terms of the diagrammatic representations
that were used, and the names used to refer to the distinct
activities within the experiment.

3 There is an extensive literature on scope ambiguity and its effects on human sentence processing (see, for example, (Kurtzman
& MacDonald, 1993)) and on how discourse factors and lexical frequency impact on the processing of syntactic ambiguities (see, for
example, (Trueswell, 1996; Spivey & Tanenhaus, 1998)); however,
the focus of the former tends to be on quantifier scoping, and the
latter is not obviously relevant to the kind of data we explore here.
We are not aware of any existing work that looks at the processing
of negated conjunctions of verbal complements, as explored here.

Materials Administered
Subjects were given workbooks consisting of: (a) a page of
study information; (b) a sheet consisting of 18 declarative
natural language sentences to be translated; (c) a page of instructions; and (d) a half-page description with illustrative ex-

809

gram of a situation making the sentence true. We call these
diagrammatic realizations of the sentences. We devised
a highly constrained diagrammatic representation system in
which objects have exactly three properties: shape, size, and
pattern, with each of these properties having only two possible values (circle/triangle, small/large, striped/dotted). The
students were asked to draw such objects in prepared spaces.4
Since the sentences have different readings, they may be
realized in different ways, but the wide-scoped reading itself has multiple equally valid realizations. In the example
above, q can be either a dotted circle, a striped triangle, or a
dotted triangle. For such multiply realizable readings, each
of the three possible realizations are equally valid, but the
response requirement of a single diagram forces subjects to
choose one.

Table 1: Experimental Sentences in P RE M OD Formulation
d is not a large dotted object
k is not a small circle
h is not a small dotted object
l is not a striped triangle
p is not a small striped object n is not a dotted triangle
b is not a large triangle
q is not a striped circle
c is not a large circle

amples of the diagrammatic representation and the first-order
language to be used in the task. Following these were pages
describing four activities to be completed. Three of these
were presented as ‘You Try It’s (YTIs), and are described
further below; these would be familiar to the subjects from
(Barwise et al., 1999) as activities for becoming familiar with
a concept. The final page of the workbook contained a more
complex exercise in translation and realization, the contents
of which are not discussed here.
Subjects were asked to complete all four activities with
no time-limit and with no supervision. Only data from the
second and third YTIs—translating the sentences into FOL
and drawing realizations, respectively—are analyzed as part
of this experiment; the remaining activities were included
in order to format and embed the experimental tasks within
an exercise form that the participants were familiar with
from (Barwise et al., 1999). More importantly, they were
designed to encourage subjects to submit spontaneous, naturalistic realizations.

The Conditions
The sentences of interest share the common property that they
can be read as expressing the negation of a conjunction. Sentences (1)–(3), introduced earlier, are examples of such sentences. Each corresponds to one of three different conditions.
In a between-groups design, subjects were randomly allocated to one of these three conditions, named P RE M OD (prenominal modifier, N = 14), P OST M OD (post-nominal modifier, N = 11) and C OORD (coordination, N = 16). Subjects
in each condition were presented with negated conjunctions
expressed in one of these three forms.5 Within each condition, subjects were randomly assigned to one of three random
sentence orderings in order to control for possible priming
effects within the stimulus sentences.

The Tasks
As noted, subjects were given 18 natural language sentences
in English. Nine of these were negated logical conjunctions,
expressed in a form determined by the different conditions
described below. The remainder of the sentences were fillers,
also varying by condition, such as m is a triangle that’s not
dotted. The filler sentences all use the same vocabulary as the
experimental sentence; some involve negation and others do
not. All have unique readings.
The complete set of sentences (shown for condition P RE M OD in Table 1) was counterbalanced such that each predicate is mentioned an equal number of times. In particular, of
the nine experimental sentences, three mention size and pattern, three mention pattern and shape, and three mention size
and shape; and each of the words large, small, circle/circular,
triangle/triangular, striped/stripes, and dotted/dots are mentioned three times.
Subjects were asked to perform two tasks. The first
task was to translate each sentence into a formal language
of FOL, as discussed above. For the negated logical conjunctions, three FOL readings were possible, which we refer to as wide-scope, narrow-scope-left, and narrow-scoperight; for the example sentences introduced at the outset of
the paper, these FOL readings are ¬(Striped(q) ∧ Circ(q)),
¬Striped(q) ∧ Circ(q), and Striped(q) ∧ ¬Circ(q) respectively.
The second task was to draw, for each sentence, a dia-

Data Collection and Encoding
Each worksheet was encoded independently by two coders.
The FOL sentences and features of the diagrams6 were
recorded for each subject along with the condition that they
were in. We also encoded which of the random sentenceorderings the subjects saw, but this information was not used
for this study, as no systematic ordering effects were observed. Where they differed, the independent codings were
4 These included guide lines for distinguishing large objects from
small ones.
5 The P OST M OD condition included an even mix of sentences
with pattern expressed as a prepositional phrase (as above) and as
a relative clause, as in q is not a circle that’s striped In the C OORD
condition, the order of the predicates was varied, with some sentences of the form q is not striped and circular and others of the
form q is not circular and striped. For the three sentences in the
P RE M OD and P OST M OD conditions which mention size and pattern
but not shape, the word object is used as the noun (see the sentences
describing d, h, and p in Table 1). Finally, in the P OST M OD condition, pattern is expressed post-nominally, but size is expressed as
a pre-nominal adjective, as in the P RE M OD condition, because the
formulation k is not a circle with small is ungrammatical.
6 These were encoded as large/small,
striped/dotted,
circle/triangle or as ‘unclear’ (if, for instance, a medium sized
object were drawn), ‘unspecified’ (if, for instance, a shape were
drawn with neither stripes nor dots), or ‘other’ (if, for instance, a
square were drawn instead of a triangle or a circle).

810

and narrow-scoped readings. In short, participants were systematic, with 50.0% always translating with narrow-scopeleft, and 43.7% (almost) always translating with wide scope.
Thus, the results are consistent with Hypothesis 1: When
subjects are asked to translate from one representation (NL)
into another (FOL) that permits underspecification to be maintained, then the underspecification is indeed maintained. This
is almost universally the case in the P RE M OD and P OST M OD
conditions, and also the case in around half of the C OORD
condition sentences, consistent with the fact that the latter are
syntactically ambiguous, and one of the two parses is consistent with an underspecified reading.

Table 2: Readings: FOL scope by negation sentence condition
C ONDITION
P RE M OD (N = 126)
P OST M OD (N = 99)
C OORD (N = 132)

Wide
100%
99%
42%

S COPE
Left Right
0%
0%
1%
0%
50%
0%

Table 3: Realizations of sentences with ‘negatable heads’
C ONDITION
P RE M OD (N = 68)
P OST M OD (N = 38)

R EALIZED A S N EGATED
Both Head Only Mod. Only
34%
25%
41%
21%
21%
58%

Diagrammatic Realizations
Tables 3 and 4 show the results of encoding the realizations
that students produced in the diagramming task. We recorded
the predicates in the sentence that were realized as negated
in each diagram. If the sentence is q is not a striped circle
and the drawing was of a dotted circle, the predicate Striped
is realized as negated and Circle is not.
Table 3 shows the results for sentences which are expressed
syntactically with a head and modifier.9 This pattern only
arises in conditions P RE M OD (q is a striped circle), and
P OST M OD (q is a circle with stripes) in which the shape predicate is the head and the other is the modifier. The columns
record whether both predicates, just the head predicate, or just
the modifier predicate are realized as negated.
In the P RE M OD and P OST M OD conditions, the sentences
which do not mention shape (such as d is not a large, dotted object) contain a head predicate (object) which cannot be
realized as negated. In C OORD, all of the sentences lack a
‘negatable’ head (q is striped and circular). We will call such
sentences headless, although this is not literally true in the
P RE M OD and P OST M OD conditions. Table 4 give the results
for these sentences, with the columns indicating which modifier appears lexically first in the sentence.

Table 4: Realizations of modifier-only (headless) sentences
C ONDITION
P RE M OD (N = 32)
P OST M OD (N = 18)
C OORD (N = 52)

R EALIZED A S N EGATED
Both First Only Second Only
47%
18%
35%
50%
17%
33%
71%
14%
15%

arbitrated by a third coder, who resolved disagreements.7

Results
Translations into FOL
We can measure the accuracy with which subjects completed
the task of translating into FOL by considering their success
in expressing an expected reading of each sentence. In the
case of filler sentences, there is a unique expected FOL sentence, while for experimental sentences there are three possible readings for each. 78.6% of translations were expected.
92% of unexpected sentences were produced by four of the
participants. Table 2 shows the proportions of each reading
obtained for the experimental sentences.
Participants in the P RE M OD and P OST M OD conditions almost universally wrote wide-scoped readings: only one sentence out of 225 was translated with a narrow-scoped reading. Subjects in the C OORD condition displayed markedly
different behavior. Table 2 gives the breakdown by condition, but the results are interesting when broken down by
subject. 43.7% of subjects produced a wide-scoped reading
for all (25%) or all but one (18.7%) of the nine sentences.
50.0% of these subjects always produced a narrow-scoped
reading, and all of these were narrow-scoped-left.8 The subjects who produced wide-scoped reading for all but one of the
sentences were the only subjects to produced a mix of wide-

Correspondence between Readings and Realizations
Recall that approximately half of the subjects in the C OORD
condition wrote FOL sentences corresponding to the narrowscoped-left reading of the sentences. These subjects universally drew diagrams consistent with this reading.
This suggests a strong alignment of readings with realizations, perhaps because the subjects referred to their FOL while
producing the realizations, or because they arrived at the same
mental representation on reading the sentence in preparation
for translation into FOL and again in preparation for drawing
their realization.
Similarly, subjects with wide-scoped readings in all three
conditions drew diagrams consistent with this reading, although there are fewer possible incorrect realizations for
these readings.10 While variation in the narrow-scoped case

7 The workbooks for all three conditions, an exemplar subject
response, and the complete encodings can be downloaded from
http://openproof.stanford.edu/readingsandrealizations.
8 One subject (6.3%) wrote on the packet that the sentences were
ambiguous, and submitted both a narrow-scoped left translation and
a wide-scoped translation for each. Data for this subject was discarded.

9 For convenience we talk from here on of ‘sentences with heads
and modifiers’, although of course this refers to the heads and modifiers used in the descriptions of the objects.
10 Subjects could only incorrectly realize q is not a striped circle

811

NP

NP

A DJ

N

N

PP

striped

N

N

with stripes

circle

circle

the other sentences (those with heads), both predicates are
realized as negated only 35% of the time. This is a highly
significant difference (χ2 = 14.656, p < .001).
It seems that when both predicates are expressed as modifiers, subjects are likely to realize them both as negated (perhaps because they must negate at least one and there is no
obvious means of deciding which), while if one is expressed
as a head, its identity is likely to be preserved.
It is worth noting, as well, that the tendency to realize both
predicates as negated is most pronounced for sentences in the
C OORD formulation: both predicates are realized as negated
in 71% of the realizations in this condition (N = 52), compared with 47% and 50% of the realizations of headless P RE M OD and P OST M OD sentences, respectively. This may be because, in wide-scoped parses of a C OORD formulation, the
conjunction attaches to both arguments symmetrically (see
Figure 1, left), so there are no structural differences whatsoever between the expressions of the two predicates.

Figure 2: Asymmetric Parse Trees for Head-Modifier Constructions
would represent error (or at least inconsistency), variation in
the wide-scoped case is expected.

Realizations of Wide-Scoped Readings
Subjects who obtained wide-scoped readings of the sentences
have a choice of the realization that they can draw while remaining consistent with their reading. We focus on these
subjects and that variability for the remainder of the analysis. Hence, we consider only the realizations for sentences
with wide-scoped readings (N = 100 for P RE M OD, N = 63
for P OST M OD, and N = 60 for C OORD).

Discussion
The results just discussed suggest that Hypothesis 2 does not
hold. When subjects are asked to translate from one representation (NL) into another (a diagram) that requires underspecification to be made specific, the way in which this is done
depends on the syntactic form used in the source representation. In particular, if a property is expressed via a syntactic
nominal head, it is less likely to be realized as negated than
when it is expressed via as a modifier.
There are other possible explanations for the observed behaviour, which we consider briefly below.

Heads vs. Modifiers
We first discuss the sentences that have heads that could have
been realized as negated. These are just those sentences in
conditions P RE M OD and P OST M OD that mention the shape
properties circle and triangle. For these sentences, the predicate which is expressed by a modifier is significantly more
likely to be realized-as-negated than the predicate expressed
by the head: In the P RE M OD condition, the modifier is realized as negated 75% of the time while the head is realized as
negated 59% of the time (χ2 = 6.752, p < .01). In the P OSTM OD condition the modifier is realized as negated 79% of the
time while the head is realized as negated 42% of the time
(χ2 = 10.794, p < .01). Note that in some realizations both
predicates are realized as negated.
This result mirrors that reported in (Cox et al., 2008). Our
sentences analogous to d is not a small dodecahedron are
those in the P RE M OD and P OST M OD conditions which do
not mention pattern. In our subjects’ diagrams for these sentences, size was realized as negated significantly more often
than shape. In 53.4% of the realizations of the 53 readings
of the three sentences of the form b is not a large triangle, the size alone takes the negation. By contrast, participants negated just the shape or negated both predicates in
only 22.3% and 24.3% of the realizations, respectively.

Ontological Primacy: Perhaps shape as a concept is less
readily negate-able than the other predicates.
Since the only heads occurring in our sentences are the
shape nouns circle and triangle, perhaps the phenomenon is
due to some ontological primacy accorded to shape, but not
to the other predicates. In our materials, shape is primarily
seen as a type of object, whereas the other predicates are attributes of objects. If shape were protected because of its ontological status, rather than because of the way it is expressed,
we would see these same results in conditions P RE M OD and
P OST M OD, since the only heads appearing in our sentences
are the shape predicates. However, if it were the ontological
status of shape that were protected, we would expect it to be
protected in the C OORD condition as well, even though in that
condition shape is expressed as a modifier.
Among sentences in the C OORD condition, however, shape
is realized as negated 77.0% of the time (N = 39) (Figure 3)—
just as much (more, in fact) than the other predicates. This
strongly suggests that shape, as a concept, is not protected.

Modifier Choice
We now turn our attention to those sentences that only express properties via modifiers. All sentences in the C OORD
condition belong in this category, as do the sentences from
the other two conditions which do not mention shape (e.g. d
is not a large object with dots).
In 57% of the 105 realizations of these sentences, both
predicates are realized as negated. In the 156 realizations of

Surface Proximity: Perhaps participants simply tend to
negate the predicate closest to the word not.
In sentences such as q is not a striped circle, striped is
closer to not and perhaps this accounts for the preference for
realizing this predicate as negated.

by drawing a striped circle.

812

POSTNOM
POSTNOM
COORD
COORD

34
34
14 15
14 15

36
36

only the first
only the first

71
71

30
30

only the second
only the second

both
both

For sentences including shape (top: negates shape,
For
sentences
shape
(top: negates shape,
bottom
negatesincluding
size/pattern
averaged):
bottom negates size/pattern averaged):
PREMOD
PREMOD
POSTMOD
POSTMOD
COORD
COORD

38
38

PREMOD
PREMOD
POSTMOD
POSTMOD
COORD
COORD

59
59

62
62

77
77
75
75
72
72
69
69

The evidence from our experiment supports the first hypothesis. This allowed us to go on to test our second hypothesis, where the results turned out to be surprising: we
demonstrated that the same semantic content, expressed in
natural language in different ways, leads to different interpretations when subjects are asked to express that information in
diagrams which require them to choose a more specific representation.
This is unexpected. Of course, it is not suprising that the
particular form of an utterance has an impact on how that
utterance is interpreted; but such variations are usually considered to be in the realm of pragmatics, and more concerned
with connotation than with denotation. The results here, however, indicate that how something is expressed has an impact
not only in terms of the pragmatic aspects of interpretation,
but also in terms of the state of affairs in the world the utterance is taken to describe.
If we characterize shape via a noun, then it is less likely
to be negated than if it is expressed via an adjective or other
modifier. It would appear that it is how things are described,
or how, in Langacker’s terms (Langacker, 1991), they are
construed, that governs our interpretation; not what they are.

41
41

23
23
25
25
28
28
31
31

Figure 3: Among realizations of sentences which mention
shape, % which negate shape (T OP) vs. % which negate the
other predicate—size or pattern (B OTTOM)
only the first

35

PREMOD
POSTMOD
COORD

20
11

only the second

24

40

55
18

both

25
71

Figure 4: % of realizations of sentences which mention pattern and shape in which — predicate is negated.

e 1st predicate
e 2nd predicate
oth predicates

riped and circular

P RE M OD
P OST M OD
C OORD

q is not a striped circle
q is not a circle with stripes
q is not striped and circular

Acknowledgements

N = 33
N = 24
N = 19

This work was supported by funds from the office of the
Provost at Stanford University. Emma Pease, Michael Murray, and Sommer Panage assisted with the experimental sessions and encoding the data. Students in Stanford’s Fall 2009
Philosophy 150 course served as the subject pool.

5%

%

71%

Looking at the readings of the three sentences which mention the predicates pattern and shape (Figure 4), we see that
students are somewhat (though not significantly) more likely
to negate just pattern than just shape in the P RE M OD condition, where the pattern predicate occurs closest to the word
not. However, when phrased so that the pattern predicate occurs farthest (in the P OST M OD condition with sentences like
28
39
q is not a circle with stripes), we find that pattern continues to
36
30take the negation—this time, 2.8 times as often as just shape
71
(more, in fact, than when it occurs in closer proximity to not).
The
only the second
both difference in likelihood to realize-as-negated just the first
vs. just the second predicate across the P RE M OD and P OSTM OD conditions is significant (χ2 = 3.979, p < .05). Moree (top: negates shape,
over, we see no tendency whatsoever toward negating the
averaged):
closer predicate in the C OORD condition, for any sentence.11

References
Barwise, J., Etchemendy, J., Allwein, G., Barker-Plummer,
D., & Liu, A. (1999). Language, proof and logic. CSLI
Publications and University of Chicago Press.
Cox, R., Dale, R., Etchemendy, J., & Barker-Plummer, D.
(2008). Graphical revelations: Comparing students’ translation errors in graphics and logic. In Diagrams 2008, fifth
international conference on the theory and application of
diagrams. (Herrsching, Germany, September 2008)
Kroch, A. (1974). The semantics of scope in English. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.
Kurtzman, H., & MacDonald, M. (1993). Resolution of quantifier scope ambiguities. Cognition, 48, 243-279.
Langacker, R. (1991). The foundations of cognitive grammar.
Stanford University Press.
Spivey, M. J., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (1998). Syntactic ambiguity resolution in discourse: Modeling the effects of referential context and lexical frequency. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24(6),
1521–1543.
Trueswell, J. (1996). The role of lexical frequency in syntactic ambiguity resolution. Journal of Memory and Language, 35, 566–585.
Vallduvi, E. (1992). The informational component. New
York: Garland.

41

Conclusion and Future work

62

23 set out to test two hypotheses, one of which suggested that
We
subjects would maintain underspecification in their represen25
tations if this were possible, and a second which suggested
28
that, if subjects had to translate into a representation that re31quired more specificity than the source representation, then
the results would be the same for semantically-equivalent
source representations.
11 (Kroch,

1974) proposes ‘a general surface ordering principle
that fixes the initial scope order of the operator words in an English
sentence according to their surface order’; however, in line with our
findings, this claim is refuted by (Kurtzman & MacDonald, 1993).

813

