UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Influence of Route Planning and its Execution on Spatial Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8qz5f1bj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Ohtsu, Kayoko
Ouchi, Yoshihiro

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Influence of Route Planning and its Execution on Spatial Learning
Kayoko Ohtsu (id-ant@moegi.waseda.jp)
Graduate School of Education, Waseda University, 1-6-1, Nishi Waseda, Shinjuku-ku Tokyo, Japan

Yoshihiro Ouchi (oouchi@teikyo-gjc.ac.jp)
Teikyo-Gakuen Junior College, 615-1, Kobutizawa-cho, Hokuto City, Yamanashi, Japan
Abstract
We propose that spatial inferences made during planning and
executing a route influence the learning of relative locations
through wayfinding. In Experiment 1, separate and combined
route plans were compared. The results suggest that inferring
multiple directions during the initial stage of planning leads to
more accurate representations of relative locations than
planning a single route. In Experiment 2, regular and irregular
updating modes during the execution phase were compared.
The results suggest that irregular updating, which involves
multidirectional self-to-object updating, also leads to more
accurate representations than regular updating. We conclude
that the requirement to make spatial inferences about multiple
multidirectional metric interconnections in egocentric
reference frames during wayfinding facilitates spatial learning.
Keywords: spatial learning; route planning; wayfinding;
egocentric reference frames

Introduction
The means by which humans and animals develop
knowledge about their surrounding environments has been a
controversial topic for a long time. One theory of the
development of spatial knowledge assumes a qualitative
change from route knowledge to survey-type knowledge
over time (Siegel & White, 1975), and thus the knowledge
should become more elaborate as experiences of traveling
increase. It is also thought that the qualitative change could
occur by automatic and unconscious reorganization of the
route knowledge (Thorndyke & Hayes-Roth, 1982).
However, there are studies that showed that experiences of
an environment do not facilitate spatial learning
automatically (Moeser, 1988; Rossano & Reardon, 1999),
and repetitive learning does not always efficiently promote
the accurate development of knowledge (Ishikawa &
Montello, 2006).
The present study examines the relationship between
human spatial learning and route planning during
wayfinding. Though wayfinding includes a wide range of
cognitive activities and behaviors (Gärling, Böök, &
Lindberg, 1984), after a destination has been set the basic
process of wayfinding is planning and executing of a route
in which one decides on and follows between a point of
origin and a destination (Golledge, 1999). Specifically, we
focused on route planning when moving through
environmental spaces such as cities or the interior of
buildings. In previous studies, route planning, which
incorporates factors such as “short cuts”, is often used as a
dependent variable that changes with the development of
spatial cognition. However, to our knowledge, no study has

yet examined the effects of route planning on spatial
learning.
Here we assume that spatial inferences during planning
and executing a route facilitate the learning of relative
locations. This might sound paradoxical because knowledge
of relative locations is often thought to be a precondition for
planning. Spiers & Maguire (2008) pointed out that when
planning a route, the relative direction from the origin to the
destination is determined before a specific path can be
chosen. In the case when very little is known about a
particular environment, how is it possible to find the way to
a destination that is out of sight? Given that, to facilitate
wayfinding, spatial knowledge of a particular environment
is manipulated using rules of inference (Kuipers, 1978). A
relative direction must be inferred by representing and
manipulating the incomplete knowledge that has already
been acquired. For example, when one is not sure which
path to take at a four-way intersection in an unfamiliar
environment, he or she can express a vague direction to a
destination by pointing a finger, which is a spatial inference
that people make routinely in their daily lives. The core idea
in this study is that the inference of this type will be
effective to develop spatial knowledge.
The relationship between relative locations can be
described in either an environmental reference frame
(object-to-object relations) or an egocentric reference frame
(self-to-object relations). However, when deciding on a
direction of movement within an environment during
wayfinding, it is necessary for a traveler to represent one’s
body and the destination in an egocentric reference frame
(Sholl, 1996) in order to translate one’s spatial knowledge
into action. On theoretical grounds, self-to-object relations
can be represented in a number of ways, for example, as
location-dependent reference direction (Poucet, 1993) or in
a network of reference frames (Meilinger, 2008). However,
the representations commonly contain metric information,
defined as the direction and distance from one place to
another.
Our expectation was that spatial inferences about self-toobject metric relations would have a facilitating effect when
planning a route and updating self-position and orientation
at the decision point (e.g. intersections). Gärling et al.
(1984) suggested that metrical relations only between
important reference points are represented for travel.
Naturally, an origin and a destination are such reference
points for determining a route at the initial stage. In addition,
the decision point should also be the key reference point for
following the route. Unlike on-line-type spatial inferences
such as narrowly defined path integration, which are based

2494

on continuous updating, people pay attention to metric
relations during wayfinding mostly when the need arises
such as when one chooses a path at the decision point.
Two experiments were conducted to compare incidental
learning outcomes when planning and executing different
types of the routes using a direction estimation post-test that
reflects the structure of self-to-object representations.
In Experiment 1, separate and combined route plans were
compared. We assumed that number of the goal directions
that participants were required to infer at the start would
affect their learning of relative locations within an
environment. When a traveler is visiting multiple places, if
he or she makes separate route plans (i.e. plan a route to the
first place, move to that place, and then plan the route to the
next one), one will just compute one direction each time. In
contrast, to make a combined route plan for the complete
round of visits, the traveler would have to consider multiple
interconnections between the origin and the destinations at
the same time and effectively learn the interconnections.
In Experiment 2, two types of order of visiting, which led
to regular or irregular updating, were compared. In regular
updating one constantly updated one’s position to
destinations situated in the same self-to-object relation. In
irregular updating the destinations were situated in
multidirectional self-to-object relations. We assumed that a
requirement for different types of directional inference when
updating would also affect learning relative locations. If a
traveler has to infer multidirectional self-to-object relations
through the updating process, rather than constantly
updating, they would be able to utilize egocentric reference
frames over a wide range of the environment.

of the four targets, which corresponded to computer displays
that showed illustrations of the four residents in the story
(Appendix A) and instructions for the wayfinding task. No
two displays could be seen at the same time. We developed
two programs that were written in Visual Basic for
Applications: one controlled the task and recorded the
responses, and the other was used for the post-test. The left
panel in figure 3 is an example of the operation screen used
in the post-test to record the judgments of the participants.

Figure 1: Images of the Labyrinth
Target D
Target A
Target C

Target B
Entrance

Figure 2: Layout of Labyrinth 1

The Environments and Settings
A real environment was used to observe spontaneous spatial
inferences. Additionally, to achieve a natural response from
the participants, we set up the wayfinding task as a roleplaying game that involved stories (Appendix A). The
experiments took place on the campus of Waseda University
with participants aged 18 and older attending a school
festival and agreeing to participate in the experiments.

Experiment 1

An example of operation screen

Figure 3: An operation screen and correct angles
Order of Visiting The orders were devised so that the
participants did not encounter the same positional relations
(Table 1).
Table 1: Orders of Visiting
First round
Second round
1. Target A→B→C→D→A and A →D→C→B→A
2. Target A→D→C→B→A and A →B→C→D→A
3. Target A→B→D→C→A and A →C→D→B→A
4. Target A→C→D→B→A and A →B→D→C→A
5. Target A→C→B→D→A and A →D→B→C→A
6. Target A→D→B→C→A and A →C→B→D→A

Method
Participants Out of a total of fifty-six participants, who
were randomly assigned to each group (Single-Goal or
Multiple-Goals), fifty people (mean age 22.0) were included
in the analyses. Three women in the Multiple-Goals group
made errors in the wayfinding task and were excluded from
the analyses. Thus the last three female participants in the
Single-Goal group were also excluded, so that both groups
contained 25 people with the same male-to-female ratio
(9:16).
Materials Labyrinth 1 (7 by 7 meters) was built in a
classroom using identical fiberboard sheets (Figure 1, left
panel; each panel was 2 meters long and 1 meter wide).
Figure 2 shows the layout of the labyrinth and the locations

Three correct angles

Procedure The wayfinding task consisted of two phases: (i)
exploring and (ii) visiting (two rounds). The participants
were escorted individually from an anteroom to the
labyrinth by an experimenter, who monitored the progress
of the task from outside the labyrinth.
During the exploring phase, the participants walked
around freely and found the four computer displays. When
they found a display, they pressed a keypad that was placed
in front of each display (Figure 1, right panel). The visiting
phase started when the participant found the last display.

2495

A T test revealed there was no significant difference
between the mean total required times for the two groups.
Next, we conducted a two-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) on the required time using the following factors:
(F1) the number of goals and (F2) sections (see Figure 5).
An effect of F2 (F (11,528) =76.40, p<0.01) was observed,
together with an interaction between the two factors (F
(11,528) =3.05, p<0.01). Student–Newman–Keuls test
revealed that among the comparisons between all possible
pairs of factor levels, there was only a significant difference
between the groups for Section 5 (the first section of the
visiting phase).
There was no correlation between
individual values for v (using 12 judgments per person) and
those for the total required time (r=0.13 in Single-Goal and 0.33 in Multiple-Goals).
Single

[

v=0.71**

[6.56]
n=300

[-0.60]
n=300

: Correct angles
*p<.05 **p<.01
]: mean angles (degree)
plus—counterclockwise direction minus—clockwise direction

Figure 4: Frequency distribution graphs
Single

Results
To analyze the 12 relative directions for each group as one
data set for each condition, all judgments were adjusted
such that the correct angle was 0 degrees. The twelve
judgments by each person were analyzed individually to
avoid cases where the mean angle corresponded to the
correct angle fortuitously (for instance, if two judgments
were +120 degrees and –120 degrees, the mean angle would
be 0 degrees, the correct angle). Figure 4 shows the mean
angles, values for v (a measure of the clustering around a
correct direction that decreases as the dispersion increases
and varies from –1 to 1), and the results of the V-tests that
revealed each data set clustered around the correct angle.
The Watson–Williams test revealed that there was no
significant difference between the mean angles for the two
groups. The accuracy of the judgments was represented by
the amount of dispersion, because a greater degree of
dispersion meant that more data departed from the correct
angle than for a lower value. We compared the dispersions
of the two groups by the Mann–Whitney Test, as suggested
by Batschelet (1981), and found that the dispersion of
Multiple-Goals was smaller than that of Single-Goal (Z=2.29, p<0.05).

Multiple

v=0.57**

Mean required time (sec)

This formed the point of origin of the visiting phase; the
point of origin varied depending on how the individual had
explored, but because the labyrinth was fully symmetric,
each order of visiting involved similar components
regardless of the location of the origin. The participants
were asked by the resident in the last display to revisit the
other residents. In the Single-Goal procedure, only the first
target goal was given at the point of origin, and when the
participants reached that goal they received the next one. In
contrast, in the Multiple-Goals procedure, all three target
goals and the order in which they should be visited were
given at the point of origin. When the participants reached a
target, they pressed the keypad. The task ended after two
rounds of revisiting.
After the task, the participants were escorted to another
room and took the post-test. They were informed that the
experiment included “easy quizzes about your memory and
sense of direction”. After five filler questions that asked
about the story, they were asked to indicate 12 relative
directions in the following manner: “if you were standing
and facing the target X, indicate the direction of target Y”.
A computer display used in the test was placed horizontally
on a table. The participants viewed the operation screen
(Figure 3, left panel) from above and indicated the
directions by turning the arrow clockwise or
counterclockwise using keypads. The graphic shows a birdseye view of a participant standing in front of a computer
display. Instructions of 12 combinations of X and Y were
presented one by one randomly at the top of the screen.
Three solid lines in the right panel of Figure 3 shows 3
correct angles for 12 relative directions (there were four
groups of 3 directions that had the same correct angle).

Multiple

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Sections

The exploring phase
Section 1: from the start of the task, until a keystroke at 1st target
2: until a keystroke at 2nd target
3: until a keystroke at 3rd target
4: until a keystroke at 4th target (instructions)
The visiting phase
(First round)
Section 5: until a keystroke at the first target visited
6: until a keystroke at the second one
7: until a keystroke at the third one
8: until a keystroke at the 4th target (instructions)
(Second round)
Section 9, 10, 11 and 12: the same as 5, 6, 7 and 8

Figure 5: Mean required time for 12 sections

Discussion
The result that the participants in the Multiple-Goals group
performed better in the post-test than those in the SingleGoal group supported the hypothesis that combined route
planning facilitates the learning of relative locations. We
conclude that inferences about multiple interconnections
that were made when planning the route improved the
accuracy of the judgments made in the post-test. Detailed
analysis of the required time showed that participants
assigned to the Multiple-Goals group spent more time on
Section 5, during which the participants received their first
instructions for the visiting phase and reached the first target.

2496

Presumably, this was because the participants in MultipleGoals had to recall the relative locations of three targets to
make a combined-route plan, as well as having to absorb
instructions that contained the next three target goals and
the order of visiting. Simultaneously, they had to infer three
self-to-object relations from their current position to the
targets. In contrast, those in the Single-Goal group had to
infer just one direction to the next goal. Thus, the difference
in time taken shows the complexity in processing the
additional directional inferences in Multiple-Goals as
compared with Single-Goal.
In both groups a large proportion of clockwise errors
appeared (Figure 4) because angles A and C tended to be
considered just in front of and on the right hand side
respectively from the imagined standing points of the
participants. Though there was no difference between mean
angles for the two groups, the angle in Single-Goal
containing clockwise error shows that more participants in
the group had this tendency than in Multiple-Goals.
After the participants became aware of the position of the
target at the initial stage of the planning, they could revisit
the targets relatively easily and without taking the wrong
path because the shape of the labyrinth gave them a
reasonably good view of the access aisles and there were
multiple accessible paths. Although the specific pathways
that were taken during the task were not recorded in
Experiment 1, both conditions involved a similar amount of
walking because there was no difference in the total
required times between the two groups.

Experiment 2

Non-Circle-Order procedure in which the participant turned
right and left turns and going straight ahead at decision
points.
Procedure The basic procedure was the same as that of
Experiment 1, except that all participants were informed of
the three target goals with their visiting order at the point of
origin and they carried camcorders during the wayfinding
task.
Target D

4

8
3

5
6

10

Target C

7

2 1
Entrance

Target B

Value for leg 1= 0.5, leg 2=1.5, leg 3, 4, 5, 6=1

Figure 6: Layout of Labyrinth 2

Results
All the judgments were analyzed in the same way as
Experiment 1. Figure 7 shows the mean angles, values for v
(refer to results of Experiment 1), and the results of the Vtests that revealed each data set clustered around the correct
angle. The Watson–Williams test revealed there was no
significant difference between the mean angles for the two
conditions. The result of the Mann–Whitney Test showed
that the Non-Circle-Order group had a smaller degree of
dispersion than the Circle-Order group (Z=-3.13, p<0.01).

Method

[

Circle

Non-Circle

v=0.68**

v=0.79**

[-16.00]
n=300

[-9.30]
n=300

: Correct angles
*p<.05 **p<.01
]: mean angles (degree)
plus—counterclockwise direction minus—clockwise direction

Figure 7: Frequency distribution graphs
Mean required time (sec)

Participants Out of the forty-four participants who were
randomly assigned to each group (Circle-Order and NonCircle-Order), thirty-eight people (mean age, 20.7; male-tofemale ratio in each condition, 11:8) were included in the
analyses. Three women in each group who made errors in
the wayfinding task were excluded from the analyses.
Materials We partially rearranged Labyrinth 1 into the
format shown in Figure 6 without changing the locations of
the targets and set it up in the same classroom used in
Experiment 1. Camcorders were used to record the paths
taken by the participants. The other basic materials were the
same as those in Experiment 1, except the post-test program
the filler questions were redrafted to correspond to the new
story (Appendix A).
Order of Visiting Visiting orders 1 and 2 (Table 1)
corresponded to the Circle-Order procedure in which the
participants visited three targets in a clockwise or counterclockwise order, for example visiting A→B→C→D→A in
the first round, and then A→D→C→B→A in the second
round, so that they turned constantly to the right or left at a
decision point during each round. The other visiting orders,
for example visiting A→B→D→C→A in first round, and
then A→C→D→B→A in second round, represented the

9

Target A

Circle

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1

2

3

4

5

Non-Corcle

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Sections

Figure 8: Mean required time for 12 sections
A T test revealed that there was no significant difference
between the total required times for the two conditions. We
conducted a two-way ANOVA on the required time using

2497

the following factors: (F1) the orders of visiting, and (F2)
sections (12 levels). We only detected an effect of F2 (F
(11,396) = 43.67, p<0.01) (Figure 8).
The paths that each participant took inside Labyrinth 2
were detailed by video. The aisles of Labyrinth 2 were
divided into 10 legs, and to count and compare the amount
of walking, we assigned a value to each leg (Figure 6) and
summed the values based on the paths taken by each
participant, with the exception of legs 7, 8, 9, and 10, which
no one walked. The averages of the total were 23.97 in
Circle-Order and 23.87 in Non-Circle-Order. T tests
revealed that there was no significant difference between
them. During the exploring phase, one person in each group
seemed to locate the targets first without pressing the
keypads; during the visiting phase 12 people (5 in CircleOrder and 7 in Non-Circle-Order) realized that they had
gone the wrong way and retraced their steps. We did not
exclude these people from the analyses because, during the
exploring phase, only one person in each group did not
press the keypads immediately, and during the visiting
phrase, all the participants remembered the required order
and corrected their course. The other participants took the
shortest paths of which the total was 22.5. There was no
correlation between individual values for v and the
following two values: the total required time (r=0.08 in
Circle-Order and 0.31 in Non-Circle-Order) and the average
of the values based on the paths (r=-0.23 in Circle-Order
and -0.26 in Non-Circle-Order).

Discussion
The result that the participants in the Non-Circle-Order
group performed better in the post-test than those in the
Circle-Order group supported the hypothesis that irregular
updating facilitates the learning of relative locations. We
conclude that multidirectional self-to-object updating at
decision points improved the accuracy of the judgments
made in the post-test.
It is noteworthy that the value for v of the Circle-Order
group was equivalent to that of the Multiple-Goals group in
Experiment 1. This can be interpreted as a replication of the
effect of multiple goals because the participants in both
groups planned combined routes. Unlike Experiment 1, it
was not possible to execute the plan only with an awareness
of the targets’ locations because of the fylfot-shaped
labyrinth. To reach the next target goal, the participants had
to choose one path by updating their positions to the next
target at the decision point. Whereas those in the CircleOrder group inferred the same direction to the targets that
were always to the right or left of their body in a given
round, those in the Non-Circle-Order group had to infer
multiple directions to the targets that were backward right,
to the right and to the left in a given round.
The length of time spent in the labyrinth and the amount
of walking did not show a direct correlation to performance.
There were no differences between the groups with respect
to, total required time, time in each section and the number
of legs that the participants walked during the task.

General Discussion
The results of the experiments revealed that, regardless of
physical experience (e.g. the amount of walking and minor
differences in both the migration pathways taken and the
number of legs walked), the need to infer metric
interconnections between multiple points during the initial
stage of planning and while executing a route plan improves
the accuracy of representations of relative directions within
an environment.
The effect of the initial planning in Experiment 1 is
consistent with spatial theories and models that propose that
the acquisition of representations about spatial structures
through wayfinding involves the integration of local
perspectives and views that a traveler has learned
independently (e.g. Meilinger, 2008; Poucet, 1993; Sholl &
Nolin, 1997). The improved accuracy can be interpreted as
the consequence of profound and extensive integration
because combined route planning involved the
representation of greater amounts of local information and
the computation of more metric relations in egocentric
reference frames at one time than separate route planning.
There are navigational strategies that do not involve
inferring metric relations. However, in the experimental
situations described here the participants were instructed
unexpectedly to revisit three unfamiliar targets in a specific
order in a completely new environment. They had to recall
which display corresponded to which resident and where it
was located. In addition, they had to consider object-toobject positional relations between three targets in order to
plan a combined route. These combined-route plans, which
contained more directional components than those of the
simple plans, appeared to facilitate the integration of the
local perspectives and views.
We have addressed the question of why regular updating
facilitated learning while irregular updating did not in the
discussion of Experiment 2. The effect of irregular updating
was different from the effect of direct directional inferences
to the targets, which was observed in Experiment 1. In
Experiment 2, the participants updated their positions
relative to the targets at the decision point in the center of
Labyrinth 2, and not in front of the displays; however, in the
post-test, they were required to estimate directions from the
displays. Thus it can be interpreted that the inferences
through the updating had a spillover effect on the estimation
of self-to-object directions between the targets. We assume
that this effect was due to strong interconnections between
the decision point and the targets’ locations. During
irregular updating the decision point, which was one of the
key reference points in a spatial structure of Labyrinth 2,
was far more important than that of regular updating (as
discussed in the next paragraph), and thus it would be
strongly interrelated to the other reference points. If we
compare the reference point and path to a node and edge,
respectively, in a graph, the participants in Non-CircleOrder might have recognized the interrelation of the points
as a graph with five nodes and eight edges (e.g. like a square
with diagonal lines), while those in Circle-Order have

2498

recognized that as a graph with four nodes and four edges
(i.e. just a square). Though we do not make a decisive
conclusion here, it seems reasonable that the former
structure of interrelation would have been more
advantageous in representing relative locations in an
egocentric reference frame than the latter.
The ineffectiveness of regular updating might be caused
by a difference in the hierarchical levels of navigational
strategies between the two conditions. Trullier, Wiener,
Berthoz, & Meyer (1997) proposed a classification of
strategies that is based on levels of complexity of required
processing and the information that is perceived,
represented, and processed. According to the classification,
route following that involves regular updating can be
substituted with a lower level strategy that requires the
participant to regularly turn left or right at the decision point
rather than having to compute a metric relation to choose a
path at the decision point each time. Thus, this type of
regular decision-making during wayfinding might be
ineffective at improving representations of relative
directions.
Our findings reflect the natural behavior of humans
because our participants in the game-like experiments did
not know that they were going to be asked the directions in
the post-test. The utilization of inferences for planning and
executing a route might be one of the key mechanisms by
which individuals refine and modify their representations of
relative locations in an environment. Differences in the
inferences made might be one of the reasons why
“individuals with equal levels of exposure to a place will
differ in the extent and accuracy of their spatial knowledge
(Montello, 1998)”.

Montello, D. R. (1998). A new framework for
understanding the acquisition of spatial knowledge in
large-scale environments. In M. J. Egenhofer, & R. G.
Golledge (Ed.), Spatial and temporal reasoning in
geographic information systems (pp. 143–154). New
York: Oxford University Press.
Poucet, B. (1993). Spatial cognitive maps in animals: New
hypotheses on their structure and neural mechanisms.
Psychological Review, 100, 163–182.
Rossano, M. J., & Reardon, W. P. (1999). Goal specificity
and the acquisition of survey knowledge. Environment
and Behavior, 31, 395–412.
Sholl, M. J. (1996). From visual information to cognitive
maps. In J. Potugali (Ed.), The construction of cognitive
maps (pp. 157–186). Netherlands: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Sholl, M. J., & Nolin, T. L. (1997). Orientation specificity
in representations of place. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23,
1494–1507.
Siegel, A. W., & White, S. H. (1975). The development of
spatial representations of large-scale environments. In H.
W. Reese (Ed.), Advances in child development and
behavior vol. 10 (pp. 9–55). New York: Academic Press.
Spiers, H. J., & Maguire, E. A. (2008). The dynamic nature
of cognition during wayfinding. Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 28, 232–249.
Thorndyke, P. W., & Hayes-Roth, B. (1982). Differences in
spatial knowledge acquired from maps and navigation.
Cognitive Psychology, 14, 560–589.
Trullier, O., Wiener, S. I., Berthoz, A., & Meyer, J. (1997).
Biologically based artificial navigation systems: Review
and prospects. Progress in Neurobiology, 51, 483–544.

References
Batschelet, E. (1981). Circular statistics in biology. New
York: Academic Press.
Gärling, T., Böök, A., & Lindberg, E. (1984). Cognitive
mapping
of
large-scale
environments:
The
interrelationship of action plans, acquisition, and
orientation. Environment and Behavior, 16, 3–34.
Golledge, R. G. (1999). Human wayfinding and cognitive
maps. In R. G. Golledge (Ed.), Wayfinding behavior:
Cognitive mapping and other spatial processes (pp. 5–45).
Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Ishikawa, T., & Montello, D. R. (2006). Spatial knowledge
acquisition from direct experience in the environment:
Individual differences in the development of metric
knowledge and the integration of separately learned
places. Cognitive Psychology, 52, 93–129.
Kuipers, B. (1978). Modeling spatial knowledge. Cognitive
Science, 2, 129–153.
Meilinger, T. (2008). The network of reference frames
theory: A synthesis of graphs and cognitive maps. In C.
Freksa, N. S. Newcombe, P. Gärdenfors, & S. Wölfl (Ed.),
Spatial Cognition VI (pp. 344–360). Berlin: Springer.
Moeser, S. D. (1988). Cognitive mapping in a complex
building. Environment and Behavior, 20, 21–49.

Appendix A
Experiment 1 Labyrinth 1 was set in an imaginary town
where a cat and four residents lived: an old lady, an
elementary school girl, a vegetable shop owner, and a
middle-aged lady. The last resident found by the
participants in the exploring phase was determined to be the
cat owner. Participants were told by the owner that their cat
was missing and were asked to revisit the other residents
and get information about the cat.
Experiment 2 Labyrinth 2 was set in an imaginary rural
town in Asia where four residents lived: a village headman,
a Buddhist monk, an elephant driver, and an old lady.
Participants were told by the last resident found that a
hidden gem had been stolen by a monkey. Then, the resident
asked them to revisit the other residents and get information
about the monkey.

2499

