UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Inhibition in Theory of Mind Performance: Evidence for a Non-Modular View of
Theory of Mind

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8qt2v966

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Byom, Lindsey Frederixon
Kaushanskaya, Margarita

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Inhibition in Theory of Mind Performance:
Evidence for a Non-Modular View of Theory of Mind
Lindsey Frederixon Byom (ljfrederixon@wisc.edu)
Department of Communicative Disorders, 1975 Willow Drive
Madison, WI 53706 USA

Margarita Kaushanskaya (kaushanskaya@wisc.edu)
Department of Communicative Disorders, 1975 Willow Drive
Madison, WI 53706 USA
Abstract
As the modularity of Theory of Mind continues to be debated,
the present study sought to investigate the relationship
between inhibitory control and performance on a linguistic
Theory of Mind (ToM) task. Performance on ToM tasks that
relied on inhibitory control was contrasted with performance
on ToM tasks that did not rely on inhibitory control. In
addition, a range of executive function tasks were
administered to all participants. It was hypothesized that if
Theory of Mind shares resources with the executive process
of inhibition, performance on the ToM task would diminish
when inhibition demands were high. Results indicated that
performance on the ToM task was significantly lower when
participants were required to inhibit superficial discrepancies
in the Theory of Mind stories. Moreover, performance on the
ToM task correlated with the ability to resist non-linguistic
interference. These findings challenge the modular views of
Theory of Mind, and suggest that Theory of Mind and
executive functions may rely on common cognitive resources.
Keywords: Theory of Mind; inhibition; executive function;
modularity.

Introduction
Human beings, as the most social of primates, rely
heavily on complex social knowledge or social cognition
(Adolphs, 1999). Social cognition has been described by
Adolphs (1999) as “the processes that subserve behavior in
response
to
other
individuals
of
the
same
species…especially those higher cognitive processes
subserving the extremely diverse and flexible social
behaviors that are seen in primates.” Social cognition, as a
high-order cognitive process, relies on several cognitive
functions for appropriate interaction including goal-directed
planning, emotional control and recognition, arousal,
vigilance, and memory integration, (Adolphs, 2009). One
aspect of social cognition, Theory of Mind (ToM), allows
humans to understand that others have mental states and to
use reason about these mental states in order to predict the
behavior of others (Fletcher, et al., 1995; Frith & Frith,
1999). While the importance of the Theory of Mind for
successful social functioning is not debated, there is
controversy surrounding the degree to which the
development and use of Theory of Mind relies on domaingeneral cognitive processes. A modular approach views
Theory of Mind as a specific and independent cognitive
module (Frith & Frith, 1999). A domain-general approach

sees Theory of Mind as a skill that relies on executive
function (EF) – a collection of complex cognitive processes
that includes inhibitory control (or the ability to resist
interference), updating (or working memory), and task
switching (e.g., Miyake et al., 2000; Smith & Jonides, 1999;
Zelazo, Craik, & Booth, 2004).
The modular view is supported by clinical data, with
certain clinical impairments, such as autism or
schizophrenia, characterized by marked difficulty with
Theory of Mind tasks in the face of relatively spared
intellect (e.g., Frith & Frith, 1999; Happé, 1994). The
modularity of Theory of Mind has also been evaluated in
individuals with traumatic brain injury (TBI), a population
commonly found to demonstrate impairments in Theory of
Mind (Bibby & McDonald, 2005; Channon, Pellijeff, &
Rule, 2005; Turkstra, Dixon, & Baker, 2004). For instance,
Bibby and McDonald (2005) found that individuals with
TBI exhibited impairments in Theory of Mind tasks and that
these difficulties could not be accounted for by inference
abilities or language skills. As further support for the
modular view, functional neuroimaging techniques have
identified specific brain regions that are selectively active
during Theory of Mind tasks (e.g., Adolphs, 2009; Amodio
& Frith, 2006; Fletcher et al., 1995).
In contrast to domain-specific views of Theory of Mind, it
appears that other cognitive domains, most notably the
executive functions (Leslie, German, & Polizzi, 2005;
McKinnon & Moscovitch, 2007), may influence Theory of
Mind performance. For example, McKinnon and
Moscovitch (2007) used a dual-task experiment to examine
whether Theory of Mind and working memory relied on the
same resources. Dual-task experiments assume that when
two cognitive processes compete for shared resources,
performance will be diminished for one or both tasks.
McKinnon and Moscovitch (2007) found that adults’
performance on a Theory of Mind task was significantly
worse when participants were required to simultaneously
perform a working memory task. This finding suggested
that both the working memory and Theory of Mind tasks
rely on common cognitive resources. In another dual-task
study, Theory of Mind performance was shown to decrease
in both older and younger adults when the executive
function demand of the task was increased by requiring
participants to also reason about approach or avoidance

1957

beliefs (German & Hehman, 2006). Similarly, Carlson,
Moses, & Claxton (2004) found that children’s performance
on inhibitory tasks was significantly related to their
performance on Theory of Mind tasks.
The current study sought to evaluate the relationship
between adults’ performance on a linguistic Theory of Mind
Task and inhibitory control – a component of the executive
function. Previous work on the relationship between ToM
and executive function either focused on very young
children (e.g., Leslie et al., 2004), used dual-task
methodology (e.g., McKinnon & Moscovitch, 2007), or
used a purely correlational approach (e.g., Carlson &
Moses, 2001). In the current study, the relationship between
inhibitory control and ToM was examined in two ways.
First, we manipulated the executive function demands of the
ToM task itself. Second, we administered a battery of
Executive Function tasks to all the participants, being
particularly careful to index inhibitory control in both the
linguistic and the non-linguistic domain.
The ToM task designed for the current study presented
participants with pairs of short stories that either matched or
mismatched in the ToM Structure (see Table 1 for examples
of stories). Stories described human behavior that required
understanding of people’s intentions and beliefs (including
engaging in white lie, using sarcasm, etc.). Stories that
matched in ToM structure described situations that shared
the underlying intent (e.g., both were stories about white
lies). Stories that mismatched in ToM Structure described
situations that diverged in the underlying intent (e.g., one
story was about a while lie and another story was about
sarcasm). Participants were asked to make same/different
judgments on pairs of stories that either matched or
mismatched in ToM structure based on the underlying
intentions of the story characters. The key manipulation
involved the Surface Structure of the stories. Half of the
stories matched in superficial contextual elements
(characters had the same names, actions took place in the
same location, etc.), while half of the stories mismatched in
superficial contextual elements (characters had different
names, the actions took place in different locations, etc.).
This design yielded four conditions: Stories that matched in
both the ToM Structure and Surface Structure; stories that
matched in ToM Structure but differed in Surface Structure;
stories that matched in Surface Structure but differed in
ToM Structure; and stories that mismatched in both the
ToM and the Surface Structures. The logic was that making
a “same” decision on stories that matched in ToM but that
mismatched in Surface Structure would require inhibition of
attention to superficial discrepancies. Similarly, making a
“different” decision on stories that mismatched in ToM but
that matched in Surface Structure would require inhibition
of attention to superficial similarities. Conversely,
performance on stories that either both matched or both
mismatched in ToM and Surface Structure would not
require inhibitory control. We hypothesized that if
performance on ToM tasks relies on executive function,
then participants should be less accurate and slower making

judgments of similarity on the conflicting stories than on the
non-conflicting stories, since performance on conflicting
stories would require inhibitory control. If, on the other
hand, performance on ToM tasks relies on domain-specific
mechanisms that are separable from executive function
mechanisms, then participants should show similar
performance on conflicting and non-conflicting stories.
In addition to embedding inhibitory-control manipulation
within the ToM task itself, we also examined the
relationship between executive function and Theory of Mind
by administering a range of executive function tasks to the
participants. We hypothesized that if ToM relies on
executive function, then adults’ performance on the ToM
task would correlate with performance on executive
function measures. Since executive function is a complex
construct that subsumes a number of dimensions, finding
that performance on the ToM task correlates with some
executive function measures, but not others would be
informative with regards to the specific executive function
mechanisms that may underlie performance on Theory of
Mind Tasks in adulthood. Because the ToM task designed
for the current study was linguistic in nature, we were
especially interested in examining the relationship between
ToM performance and performance on linguistic vs. nonlinguistic executive function tasks.
In summary, the goal of the present study was to examine
the modularity of Theory of Mind in adults by testing the
relationship between ToM and inhibitory control. We
theorized that if performance on ToM tasks requires
inhibitory control, then participants should perform less well
on ToM tasks that place increased demands on the
inhibitory control mechanism. We also theorized that if
performance on the ToM tasks is related to executive
function, then measures of executive function should
correlate with ToM performance.

Methods and Procedures
Participants
Twenty-two participants were recruited for this study.
Participants ranged in age from 18.9 to 22.8 years, and all
were native speakers of English. Each participant scored
within the normal range on English receptive vocabulary as
measured by the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-III
(Dunn & Dunn, 1997) (Mean = 108.57; SD = 7.00), and on
reading ability as measured by the Reading Fluency subtest
of the WJ III Tests of Achievement, (Woodcock, McGrew,
& Mather, 2001a) (Mean =110.41 SD = 8.28). Participants
also scored in the normal range on the non-verbal
intelligence measure (Visual Matrixes subtest of the
Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test, Second Edition, K-BIT2;
Kaufman & Kaufman, 2004) (Mean = 101.76, SD = 11.87).

Materials and Procedure
Each participant was tested in one two-hour session.
Theory of Mind tasks, executive function tasks, language
ability tasks, and a non-verbal IQ test were administered in
random order.

1958

Table 1: Examples of Stimuli in Four ToM Conditions
ToM Match
Story A

ToM Mismatch
Story B

Story A

Story B

Surface
Match

Ann and her husband
left their home for work
on a gloomy, rainy day.
Ann said, “What a bright
cheery day.”

Ann and her
husband left their
home for work on a
gloomy, rainy day.
Ann said, “It’s a
good thing I packed
my sunglasses
today.”

Dan attempted to cook
dinner for his sister’s
birthday, but burnt
everything to a crisp. His
sister’s friend Kristy
said, “You’re quite the
chef, Dan.”

Dan attempted to cook
dinner for his sister’s
birthday. His sister’s
friend Kristy said, “Your
dinner was great, I just
wasn’t very hungry
tonight.”

Surface
Mismatch

Jacob’s history
professor assigned six
chapters of reading for the
following day’s class. On
the way out of class,
Jacob said to his friends,
“We’ll have plenty of free
time tonight, huh?”

Joan had to stay
late at work for the
next week while her
boss was out of town.
Her coworker John
said, “Aren’t you the
lucky one this week.”

Ben and Ryan were
walking to class when
Ben said, “Did you see
John’s shoes at track
practice today? They
were awful.” Just then
Ryan turned around and
said, “Oh hi John, I
didn’t see that you were
behind us.”

Karen really wanted to
try out a new café in
town but didn’t want to
go alone. Karen said to
her best friend, Joanne,
“I’ll probably try out that
new café, but I suppose
I’ll have to go alone
since no one will go with
me.”

Theory of Mind Task The ToM task in this study
evaluated participants’ ability to identify Theory of Mind
inferences in the face of varying inhibitory control demands.
The ToM task presented participants with 40 pairs of short
stories to be read silently from a computer screen (see Table
1). Stories ranged from two to four sentences in length and
were constructed using vocabulary and syntax at the sixth
grade level. Five story types, each requiring Theory of Mind
for accurate interpretation were included in the task. Story
types included white lie, deception, faux pas, sarcasm, and
persuasion. Participants were not informed of the story
types. Executive function demands were manipulated
through variation in the Surface Structure or context of each
story. In the low executive function conditions, the story
context and the ToM inference were both similar or both
different across stories. In the high executive function
conditions, the stories either shared the ToM inference, but
differed with regards to story structure or shared story
structure, but differed with regards to the ToM inference.
Participants first completed two practice trials, each of
which was followed by an explanation of the correct
response. The order of presentation of story pairs was
randomized. Participants first saw a screen with only a black
vertical line bisecting the screen at the midline, and then
were presented with one story (Story A) on the left side of
the screen. After reading the story, participants pressed the
space bar and Story A disappeared and Story B was
presented on the right side of the screen. After reading story
B, the participant again pressed the space bar and both
stories appeared on the screen, separated by the vertical
black line. This procedure was implemented in order to
minimize the effect of reading times and of working

memory demands on ToM performance. While both stories
were available on the screen for review, the participant
chose whether the stories required the same inference, (e.g.,
both stories included a faux pas situation) or if they required
different inferences, (e.g., one story included faux pas and
one demonstrated sarcasm). Participants indicated their
decision by pressing the forward slash key if the inferences
were the same across stories, or the “z” key if the inferences
were different across stories. Both accuracy and reaction
times were recorded. Reaction time measurements began as
both stories were presented simultaneously and ended as
soon as a decision key was pressed. Participants were
instructed to respond to each stimulus as quickly as possible
while maintaining response accuracy.
Executive Function Tasks Tasks measuring distinct EF
components were administered to each participant.
Linguistic inhibitory control was measured via the ColorWord Interference Task (a version of the Stroop task,
Stroop, 1935), where participants were asked to name ink
colors and inhibit the more automatic processing of print
(Delis, et al., 2001). Non-linguistic inhibitory control was
measured via the Simon task (Simon & Rudell, 1967),
where participants were presented with either red or green
circles in the center, or on either the left or the right side of
the computer screen and were required to press a left key
when they saw a green circle and a right key when they saw
the red circle. On incongruent trials, the location of the
colored circle conflicted with the response key, and
participants had to inhibit the automatic spatially-based
response. Complex problem solving and planning were
measured via The Towers Task (Delis, et al., 2001), where
participants were presented with disks of different sizes and

1959

three rods, and were required to achieve the target
arrangement of disks on rods in as few moves as possible.
Working Memory was measured using the Numbers
Reversed subtest of the Woodcock Johnson III Tests of
Cognitive Abilities, (Woodcock, McGrew, & Mather,
2001b), where participants heard increasingly-long
sequences of digits, and were required to repeat each
sequence in the reverse order.

Results
Accuracy and Reaction Time data were analyzed using 2
x 2 Repeated-Measures ANOVAs, with ToM Structure
(matching vs. mismatching) and Surface Structure
(matching vs. mismatching) as within-subjects independent
variables. A-priori follow-up paired-samples comparisons
were conducted to examine (1) whether surface mismatch
impaired participants’ ability to identify similar ToM
structure in the stories, and (2) whether surface match
impaired participants’ ability to differentiate distinct ToM
structures in the stories. Finally, correlation analyses were
conducted to examine the relationship between ToM
performance and Executive Function measures. Here, we
were especially interested in comparing the relationships
between ToM performance and language-based EF tasks
and the relationship between ToM performance and nonlinguistic EF tasks.
For accuracy, a 2 x 2 ANOVA with ToM Structure and
Surface Structure as within-subjects Independent Variables
yielded a marginally-significant interaction between the two
independent variables, F (1, 20) = 3.23, p = 0.09, ηp2 = 0.14.
The interaction of ToM and Surface Structure variables
indicates that performance on the ToM task was influenced
by superficial contextual information, and suggests that the
inhibitory-control demands mediated ToM performance. For
RTs, a similar analysis yielded a main effect of ToM
structure, F (1, 19) = 8.10, p = 0.01, ηp2 = 0.30, indicating
that conditions in which ToM matched required shorter
response time than those in which ToM differed.
A-priori pair-wise t-tests were conducted to determine
whether accuracies and reaction times differed across high
and low inhibitory control conditions. For accuracy, a
significant difference was observed between performance
on stories where both ToM and Surface Structure matched
and stories where ToM matched but Surface Structure
mismatched, t (20) = 2.03, p = 0.06. However, there were no
differences in performance on stories where ToM and
Surface Structure both matched and stories where ToM
mismatched but Surface Structure matched, t (20) = 0.83, p
= 0.42. Figure 1 displays average accuracy for each
condition.
For RTs, a significant difference was observed between
performance on the condition in which both ToM and
Surface Structure matched, and the condition in which ToM
Structure differed but Surface Structure Matched, t (19) =
-2.21, p = .04. Figure 2 displays average RTs for each
condition.

Figure 1: Performance Accuracy on ToM Task

Figure 2: Performance RTs on ToM Task
Pearson Correlation analyses were conducted to examine
the relationship between participants’ accuracy and RTs on
the ToM task and their performance on the executive
function tasks.
Performance on the Digits Reversed task did not correlate
with any of the performance measures. This indicates that
the ToM task in the current study did not tax working
memory capacity. Performance on the Stroop task was
positively correlated with accuracy on the ToM task where
both ToM and Surface Structure differed (r = 0.45). The
finding that only one condition of the ToM task correlated
with Stroop performance was unexpected, especially
because this ToM condition did not require inhibition. It
may be that the lack of association was due to the fact that
the Stroop task demanded inhibition of an irrelevant
perceptual dimension (conflicting color word) while the
ToM task required inhibition of an irrelevant response
dimension (response based on surface structure). It may also
be that the lack of association was due to differences in
response modality across the two tasks, with the Stroop task
requiring vocal responses, and the ToM task requiring
button-press responses.
Unlike the Stroop findings, performance on the Simon
task was associated with ToM performance. To measure
non-linguistic inhibitory control, a difference score was
calculated where participants’ RTs on the incongruent
Simon trials (requiring inhibition) were subtracted from the

1960

neutral Simon trials. Small difference scores indexed
successful conflict resolution, and thus, superior inhibitory
control. This measure of conflict resolution was correlated
with ToM performance in each of the four conditions, and
only one analysis yielded a significant correlation. Namely,
successful conflict resolution on the Simon task was
associated with higher accuracy on the ToM task in a
condition where two stories shared the underlying ToM
structure but diverged in Surface Structure (r = -0.51, p =
0.02). This finding suggests that non-linguistic inhibitory
control was associated with ToM performance only in a
condition where participants had to select the “match”
response and inhibit the “mismatch” response based on nonoverlapping superficial structural characteristics.
Interestingly, accuracy scores on the Towers Task were
inversely correlated with accuracy on the ToM condition in
which both ToM and Surface Structure matched (r=-0.55),
and the total time taken to complete the Towers Task was
inversely correlated with RTs for all conditions in the ToM
task (correlation coefficients ranged from -0.51 to -0.58). It
is difficult to interpret these correlations since it is unclear
what cognitive abilities the Towers Task indexes. In our
data, performance on the Tower task did not correlate with
any other executive-function measure, indicating that the
skill(s) it was indexing may not have been related to
executive function. It is possible that these inverse
relationships between performance on the Tower task and
performance on the ToM task are due to the different
modalities tapped by each task: visuospatial in the Towers
and linguistic in the TOM task.

Discussion
Questions regarding the degree to which higher-order
cognitive tasks rely on domain-general processes permeate
every aspect of cognitive science. The goal of the current
study was to inform the debate surrounding the modularity
of Theory of Mind by examining the relationship between
performance on the Theory of Mind task and inhibitory
control. The results indicated that performance on the
linguistic ToM task was associated with inhibitory control
function. This conclusion was supported by three main
findings.
First, higher accuracy was observed on the condition with
similar ToM and Surface Structure compared to the
condition with similar ToM Structure but differing Surface
Structure. Because the condition with divergent Surface
Structure required more inhibitory control than the matching
condition, we interpret this pattern of results to suggest that
ToM and inhibitory control draw on common cognitive
resources.
Second, participants were significantly quicker to respond
to trials in which both ToM and Surface Structure were
similar than when the ToM Structure differed, but the
Surface Structure was similar. This finding suggests that the
inhibitory-control demands imposed by the incongruent
ToM and Surface Structure resulted in prolonged response
times.

Finally, performance on an executive function measure as
assessed by the Simon task correlated with ToM
performance, particularly for the condition where
participants had to detect matching ToM across two
structurally-distinct stories. This finding suggests that
performance on the linguistic ToM task (especially one that
involved inhibition) was associated with performance on the
non-linguistic inhibitory-control task.
While this study included a small sample size and all
participants scored very high on measures of receptive
English vocabulary, the findings of a link between ToM and
executive function support the non-modular view of the
Theory of Mind (e.g., Carlson, et al., 2004; McKinnon &
Moscovitch, 2007). It appears that Theory of Mind
performance in adulthood may in fact draw on the same
complex cognitive processes as inhibitory control.
However, the findings are also consistent with the view of
Theory of Mind proposed by Leslie, Friedman, & German
(2004). Leslie et al. (2004) argued that Theory of Mind is
comprised of an innate, modular ‘Theory of Mind
mechanism’ that generates alternate interpretations of social
situations, and an executive selection process that chooses
one interpretation from those suggested by the Theory of
Mind mechanism. According to this view, the selection
process is inhibitory in nature. This theory has been tested
previously using a false belief task, in which the participant
must correctly identify that a character in the task has a
belief that is different from the actual state of reality (Leslie,
et al., 2004; Leslie, et al., 2005). In the case of a false-belief
task, Leslie (2004) argued that the Theory of Mind
mechanism generates several possible beliefs with the
reality of the situation being the default selection. In a falsebelief task, however, because the character’s belief is false,
the selection process must inhibit the default interpretation
in favor of a belief that is different than the reality of the
situation.
When considering the findings of the present study, it
could be argued that in the condition in which the ToM and
surface structure are incongruent, the irrelevant surface
structure information must be inhibited in favor of the
deeper ToM structure. Therefore, the present data may in
fact support the view of Theory of Mind that construes
performance on ToM tasks as a process that consists of
mechanisms specific to the Theory of Mind, and domaingeneral inhibitory control mechanisms.
Whatever the interpretation of the findings, it is intriguing
that only one ToM condition was taxing for the participants
– the condition with similar ToM and differing surface
structure. The opposite condition, in which the ToM
structures differed, but the surface structure matched did not
seem to incur higher inhibitory demands. Perhaps
suppressing a “no” response requires more inhibitory
control than suppressing a “yes” response, although it is
unclear why this may be so. The degree to which different
ToM tasks require inhibitory control is therefore a crucial
area of further research.

1961

This study provides evidence that performance on Theory
of Mind tasks may rely on domain-general inhibitory
control mechanisms, and more broadly provides insight into
the non-modularity of processes associated with high-order
cognition. It is possible to increase inhibitory-control
demands of the ToM task by pitting similarities in the
underlying intentional structure of the stories (ToM) against
superficial similarities in the linguistic structure of the
stories. Requiring participants to make decisions about ToM
similarities while ignoring structural differences imposes
inhibition demands on performance. Crucially, performance
on the linguistic ToM task correlated most highly with a
measure of non-linguistic inhibitory control, pointing to an
association between ToM and executive function in
particular, and linguistic and non-linguistic performance in
general. This pattern is in line with non-modular views of
Theory of Mind, that construe performance on social
cognition tasks as drawing on the same basic cognitive
mechanisms that underlie performance on complex planning
tasks, i.e., executive function.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Dr. Lyn Turkstra for helpful discussions
of this work. This research was made possible by the
training fellowship to Lindsey Frederixon Byom from the
University of Wisconsin-Madison Department of
Communicative Disorders T32 Interdisciplinary Research
Training Grant.

References
Adolphs, R. (1999). Social cognition and the human brain.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3(12), 469-479.
Adolphs, R. (2009). The social brain: Neural basis of social
knowledge. Annual Review of Psychology, 60, 693-716.
Amodio, D. M., & Frith, C. D. (2006). Meeting of minds:
The medial frontal cortex and social cognition. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 7(4), 268-277.
Bibby, H., & McDonald, S. (2005). Theory of Mind after
traumatic brain injury. NEUROPSYCHOLOGIA, 43(1),
99-114.
Carlson, S. & Moses, L. (2001). Individual differences in
inhibitory control and children's Theory of Mind. Child
Development, 72(4), 1032-1053.
Carlson, S.M. Moses, L.J., & Claxton, L.J. (2004).
Individual differences in executive functioning and
Theory of Mind: An investigation of inhibitory control
and planning ability. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 87(4), 299-319.
Channon, S., Pellijeff, A., & Rule, A. (2005). Social
cognition after head injury: Sarcasm and Theory of Mind.
Brain and Language, 93(2), 123-134.
Delis, D. C., Kaplan, E., & Kramer, J. H. (2001). D-KEFS:
Delis Kaplan Executive Function System San Antonio,
TX: The Psychological Corporation.
Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1997). PPVT-III: Peabody
picture vocabulary test (3rd ed.). Circle Pines, MN:
American Guidance Service.

Fletcher, P. C., HappÈ, F., Frith, U., Baker, S. C., Dolan, R.
J., Frackowiak, R. S. J., et al. (1995). Other minds in the
brain: a functional imaging study of "Theory of Mind" in
story comprehension. Cognition, 57(2), 109-128.
Frith, C., &, & Frith, U. (1999). Interacting minds -- a
biological basis. Science, 286(5445), 1692-1695.
German, T.P., & Hehman, J.A. (2006). Representational and
executive selection resources in 'Theory of Mind':
Evidence from compromised belief-desire reasoning in
old age. Cognition, 101(1), 129-152.
Happe, F., G.E. (1994). An Advanced Test of Theory of
Mind: Understanding of Story Characters' Thoughts and
Feelings by Able Autistic, Mentally Handicapped, and
Normal Children and Adults. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 24(2), 129-154.
Kaufman, A. S., & Kaufman, N. L. (2004). K-BIT2:
Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test (Second ed.).
Minneapolis, MN: NCS Pearson, Inc.
Leslie, A. M., Friedman, O., & German, T. P. (2004). Core
mechanisms in 'Theory of Mind'. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 8(12), 529-533.
Leslie, A. M., German, T. P., & Polizzi, P. (2005). Beliefdesire reasoning as a process of selection. Cognitive
Psychology, 50(1), 45-85.
McKinnon, M. C., & Moscovitch, M. (2007). Domaingeneral contributions to social reasoning: Theory of Mind
and deontic reasoning re-explored. Cognition, 102(2),
179-218.
Miyake, A., Friedman, N.P., Emerson, M.J., Witzki, A., &
Howerter, A. (2000). The unity and diversity of executive
function and their contributions to complex "frontal lobe"
tasks: A latent variable analysis. Cognitive Psychology,
41, 49-100.
Simon, J. R. & Rudell, A. P. (1967). Auditory S-R
compatibility: the effect of an irrelevant cue on
information processing. Journal of Applied Psychology,
51, 300-304.
Smith, E.E., & Jonides, J. (1999). Storage and executive
processes in the frontal lobe. Science, 283, 1657-1666.
Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal
reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18, 643–
662.
Turkstra, L. S., Dixon, T. M., & Baker, K. K. (2004).
Theory of Mind and social beliefs in adolescents with
traumatic brain injury. NeuroRehabilitation, 19(3), 245256.
Woodcock, R. W., McGrew, K. S., & Mather, N. (2001a).
Woodcock-Johnson III Tests of Achievement. Itasca, IL:
Riverside Publishing.
Woodcock, R. W., McGrew, K. S., & Mather, N. (2001b).
Woodcock-Johnson Tests of Cognitive Abilities. Itasca,
IL: Riverside Publishing
Zelazo, P. D., Craik, F. I. M., & Booth, L. (2004). Executive
function across the life span. Acta Psychologica, 115(23), 167-183.

1962

