UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Facilitative Effect of Context on Second-Order Social Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1vw1n40x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Meijering, Ben
Van Maanen, Leendert
Van Rijn, Hedderik
et al.

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Facilitative Effect of Context on Second-Order Social Reasoning
1

Ben Meijering1 (b.meijering@rug.nl), Leendert van Maanen1, Hedderik van Rijn2, & Rineke Verbrugge1
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, University of Groningen
Department of Psychology, University of Groningen
Abstract
This paper is about higher-order social reasoning such as “I
think that you think that I think …”. Previous research has
shown that such reasoning seriously deteriorates in complex
social interactions. It has been suggested that reasoning can
be facilitated greatly if an abstract logical problem is
embedded in a context. This has not yet been tested for
higher-order social reasoning. We presented participants with
strategic games that demand higher-order social reasoning.
The games were embedded in the context of a marble game.
Participants performed really well, that is, almost at ceiling.
We argue that context has a facilitative effect on higher ordersocial reasoning.
Keywords: Theory of Mind; Social Cognition; Higher-order
Social Reasoning; Strategic Game.

Social Reasoning
In many social situations we need to reason about one
another. We do so to plan our actions and predict how our
behavior might affect others. The ability to reason about
another’s knowledge, beliefs, desires and intentions is often
referred to as Theory of Mind (Premack & Woodruff, 1978).
It has been extensively investigated in children and seems to
develop around the age of 4 years (Wimmer & Perner, 1983;
but see Onishi & Baillargeon, 2005). Nevertheless,
reasoning about others is very demanding, even for adults,
which becomes apparent in more complex interactions. So
far, empirical results have shown social reasoning to be far
from optimal (Flobbe, Verbrugge, Hendriks, & Krämer,
2008; Hedden & Zhang, 2002). It has been suggested that
(social) reasoning might be facilitated if it is embedded in a
context (Wason & Shapiro, 1971). In the current study, we
investigate whether social reasoning really is difficult and
whether embedding it in a context can facilitate it.
When we ascribe a simple mental state to someone, we
are applying first-order social reasoning. For example,
imagine a social interaction between Ann, Bob and Carol. If
Bob thinks “Ann knows that my birthday is tomorrow”, he
is applying first-order reasoning, which covers a great deal
of social interaction.
However, first-order reasoning is not sufficient to cover
more complex social situations. The interaction between
Ann, Bob and Carol can easily demand reasoning of one
order higher: If Carol thinks “Bob knows that Ann knows
that his birthday is tomorrow”, she is making a second-order
attribution.
Bob’s first-order attribution and Carol’s second-order
attribution are hierarchically structured: Bob applied firstorder reasoning by attributing a mental state to Ann, and
Carol applied second-order reasoning by attributing firstorder reasoning to Bob. A third-order attribution involves

the reader attributing second-order reasoning to Carol, and
so forth.
The depth of reasoning in humans is constrained by
cognitive resources (Verbrugge, 2009; Flobbe et al., 2008;
Hedden & Zhang, 2002). As the order of reasoning
increases, the demands on cognitive processing increase as
well. Cognitive resources and processing speed seem to
increase with age (Fry & Hale, 1996), and that increase
could allow for the representation of increasingly more
complex mental states. Findings from developmental studies
support that idea. Where first-order social reasoning is
acquired at the age of around 4 years (Wimmer & Perner,
1983), second-order social reasoning seems to develop some
years later, at the age of around 6 to 8 years (Perner &
Wimmer, 1985). However, 6- to 8-year-olds do not
understand all kinds of mental states, and even adults cannot
readily apply second-order reasoning in all kinds of contexts
(Flobbe et al., 2008; Hedden & Zhang, 2002).

Paradigms to Test Social Reasoning
There are a few paradigms to test social cognition. Probably
the most familiar paradigm is the False-Belief task
(Wimmer & Perner, 1983), which has been adapted to test
second-order social cognition (Perner & Wimmer, 1985). In
a typical second-order False-Belief story, two characters,
John and Mary, are independently informed about the
transfer of an object, an ice-cream van, from one location to
another. In the story, both John and Mary know where the
van is, but John does not know that Mary also knows that
the van has moved to a new location. Participants are told
the story and asked where John thinks Mary will go for ice
cream. To answer this question correctly, participants have
to be able to represent the second-order false belief “John
thinks that Mary thinks the van is still at the old location.”.
In Perner and Wimmer’s (1985) study, some children of 6 to
7 years of age were able to make such second-order
attributions, but only under optimal conditions; when the
inference of second-order beliefs was prompted.
Apart from some concerns about the False-Belief task’s
aptness to test for the presence of a Theory of Mind (Bloom
& German, 2000), Perner and Wimmer (1985) expressed
concerns about the generality of their findings as
participants were presented “rather pedestrian problem[s] of
knowing where somebody has gone to look for something”
(p. 469). They stressed that investigations into higher-order
social reasoning will only achieve theoretical importance if
a link with other domains can be established.
Various other language comprehension paradigms have
been used to test social cognition (e.g., Van Rij, Van Rijn,
& Hendriks, to appear; Hollebrandse, Hobbs, De Villiers, &
Roeper, 2008; Hendriks & Spenader, 2006). Hollebrandse et
al. (2008) presented discourse with multiple, recursive

1423

embeddings. In their Experiment 1, no second-order
reasoning was observed in children and adults. Hollebrandse
et al.’s (2008) findings led them to conclude that “secondorder theory of mind is a different milestone than first-order
theory of mind.” (p. 276).
The problem with the paradigms mentioned above is that
they depend heavily on language skills (Apperly, Samson,
Chiavarino, & Humphreys, 2004; Bloom & German, 2000),
and cannot be adapted easily to investigate higher orders of
reasoning. A paradigm that does not depend that much on
language skills is that of strategic games (Verbrugge, 2009;
Flobbe et al., 2008; Hedden & Zhang, 2002). In strategic
games, players have to reason about one another, because a
player’s payoffs depend on what the other players do, and
vice versa. Games are less prone to semantic idiosyncrasies
and are as such easier to control. That allows games to be
presented repeatedly in different variations to acquire a
more accurate measure of second-order reasoning.

Strategic Games
Hedden and Zhang (2002) used a strategic game to study
first- and second-order social reasoning. It is a sequentialmove game, which is played on a 2-by-2 matrix (Figure 1).
In each cell there are separate payoffs for Player 1 and
Player 2, respectively. The goal is to attain the highest
possible payoff. The players take turns; Player 1 begins. At
each turn, a player has to decide whether to stay or to move
to the next cell, as indicated in Figure 1. If a player decides
to stay in a particular cell, the game ends and both players
attain the respective payoffs in that cell. If a player decides
to move, the turn passes to the other player.

Figure 1: Schematic overview of a matrix game (Hedden &
Zhang, 2002). The first number in each cell is Player 1’s
payoff, the second Player 2’s payoff. The goal is to attain
the highest possible payoff. Participants first had to predict
what the other player would do at cell B before making a
decision what to do at cell A. In this example, Player 1
would have to predict that Player 2 will stay, because Player
1 will move if given a choice at cell C, leading to a lower
payoff for Player 2, namely 2 instead of 4. Consequently,
the rational decision for Player 1 is to move to cell B.
Hedden and Zhang (2002) asked participants to (1)
predict what the other player would do (stay or move) at cell
B, and (2) decide whether to stay or to move at cell A. The

first question provides a direct measure of what order of
reasoning participants apply. To answer that question
correctly, participants have to apply second-order reasoning;
think about what the other player (at cell B) thinks that they
think (at cell C). The second question measures whether the
decisions that the participants make are based on the
predictions that they have made. As a consequence of this
procedure in which participants first have to predict what
the other player will do, the application of second-order
reasoning may not be completely spontaneous.
Nevertheless, the proportion of games in which participants
made second-order predictions is not that high, in the range
of 60% – 70% at the end of the experiments 1 and 2,
considering that by chance alone that proportion would be
50%, because there are just two predictions possible: either
Player 2 stays or Player 2 moves.
Poor performance could imply that second-order social
reasoning is difficult or that participants had difficulties
understanding Hedden and Zhang’s (2002) matrix games.
Participants could have had difficulties to comprehend the
task, because the games are very abstract. The matrix games
of Hedden and Zhang (2002) would be less abstract if
embedded in a context. Higher-order social reasoning,
which seems to be very demanding in these games, might
benefit from a context embedding.

Context Effects
Some studies have investigated whether reasoning can be
facilitated if a problem is presented in a (social) context.
The Wason Selection Task (Wason & Shapiro, 1971) is an
example of a task to investigate effects of context on
reasoning. Wason and Shapiro (1971) presented a logical
problem in an abstract form to one group of participants and
in a “thematic” form (i.e., embedded in a social context) to
another group of participants. Ten out of sixteen participants
in the thematic group solved the problem, opposed to two
out of sixteen participants in the abstract group. That finding
implies a facilitative effect of context on reasoning.
However, there is another interpretation of Wason and
Shapiro’s (1971) manipulation, according to which the
abstract and thematic forms are not logically equivalent
(Stenning & Van Lambalgen, 2004; Manktelow & Over,
1991). If the logical problem does differ for these forms,
Wason and Shapiro’s findings do not support the argument
that context has a facilitative effect on reasoning. To really
appreciate facilitative effects of context on (higher-order
social) reasoning, it is important that the context in which
we embed the matrix games of Hedden and Zhang (2002)
does not change their logical form. Then, improved
performance can be attributed solely to context effects.
Not just any context will facilitate (higher-order social)
reasoning. Flobbe et al. (2008) embedded Hedden and
Zhang’s matrix games in a context. Participants played
games in which they, together with the computer, drive a
car. The games are an adaptation of the Centipede game
(Rosenthal, 1981), and are logically equivalent to Hedden
and Zhang’s (2002) matrix games. In second-order games,

1424

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2: A zeroth-order (a), first-order (b) and second-order (c) Marble Drop game. The participant’s payoffs are
represented by a1 – a4, the computer’s by b1 – b4, both in increasing order of value. The goal is to let the white marble
end up in the bin with the highest attainable payoff. The diagonal lines represent trapdoors. At the first set of trapdoors,
the participant decides which of both trapdoors to remove, at the second set the computer decides, and at the third set the
participant again decides. The dashed lines represent the trapdoors that both players should remove to attain the highest
payoff they can get.
the road has three junctions, which correspond with the
transitions, from one cell to another, in Hedden and Zhang’s
matrix games. At each junction either the participant or the
computer decides to move ahead (i.e., continue the game) if
there is a higher payoff to attain further in the game, or to
turn right (i.e., end the game) if there is no higher payoff to
be attained further in the game. The participant and the
computer alternately take seat in the driver’s position; the
one in driver’s seat makes the decision.
The performance of the adult participants in Flobbe et
al.’s experiment was higher than in Hedden and Zhang’s
study: the mean proportion of games in which the adult
participants gave a correct second-order prediction was
more than 70%. It is important to note that this proportion is
an average over Flobbe et al.’s entire experiment, whereas
in Hedden and Zhang’s experiments the proportion of
games in which the participants applied second-order
reasoning did not reach 60% – 70% until the end.
Flobbe et al.’s findings support the idea that context
facilitates reasoning. Their findings also show, as did
Hedden and Zhang’s, that second-order reasoning is not
impossible. However, performance was low, considering
that the participants were explicitly asked to reason about
their opponent. Both Flobbe et al. and Hedden and Zhang
asked participants to first make a prediction before making a
decision. This procedure is expected to scaffold secondorder reasoning, as it prompts the participants to think about
the other player (and what that player might think of them).
We expect that performance can be much further
improved with a simpler context. In Flobbe et al.’s task,
participants alternately change driver’s seat with another
player, which is not common practice in every day life. In
the next section we will present a context that is more
intuitive and will require less explanation.
We argue that second-order reasoning is not that difficult
if it is embedded in an apt context, and that the facilitative
effects of context render the scaffolding effects of making
predictions (before making a decision) obsolete.

Experiment: Marbles and Second-order
Reasoning
We present games, which we will call Marble Drop, in
which the path of a white marble, which is about to drop,
can be manipulated by removing trapdoors (Figure 2).
Experience with world-physics allows players to see easily
how the marble will run through a game. The interface of
the game is very insightful; players can quickly see who can
change the path of the marble, at what point in the game.
Marble Drop games are logically equivalent to Hedden
and Zhang’s (2002) matrix games and Flobbe et al.’s (2008)
Centipede games (which we show with an informal proof in
http://www.ai.rug.nl/~leendert/Equivalence.pdf).
Marble
Drop games only differ in appearance. The payoffs are
color-graded marbles, which can easily be ranked according
to preference, lighter marbles being less preferred than
darker marbles. The ranking makes it possible to have
payoff structures similar to those in matrix and Centipede
games. The sets of trapdoors in Marble Drop games
correspond with the transitions, from one cell to another, in
Hedden and Zhang’s (2002) matrix games.
We used color-graded marbles instead of numbers (of
marbles) to minimize the usage of numeric strategies other
than first- and second-order reasoning. We observed such
alternative strategies in pilot studies in which we presented
Flobbe et al.’s (2008) Centipede games with payoff
numbers. Participants reported to use strategies such as
maximizing the difference in both players’ payoffs,
maximizing the sum of both players’ payoffs, and
obstructing the other player.
Figure 2 depicts example games of Marble Drop. The
goal is to let the white marble end up in the bin with the
darkest color-graded marble. Note, for illustrative purposes,
the color-graded marbles are replaced with codes: a1 – a4
represent the participants’ color-graded marbles and b1 – b4
represent the computer’s color-graded marbles (which are of
another color); 1 – 4 being light to dark grades. (See
http://www.ai.rug.nl/~meijering/MarbleDrop.html for the

1425

original Marble Drop games.) The diagonal lines represent
the trapdoors.
In the example game in Figure 2a, participants need to
remove the right trapdoor to attain the darkest color-graded
marble of their color (a2). The game in Figure 2a is a
zeroth-order game, because there is no other player to
reason about.
In first-order games (Figure 2b) participants need to
reason about another player, the computer. The computer is
programmed to let the white marble end up in the bin with
the darkest color-graded marble of its target color, which is
different from the participants’ target color. Participants
need to reason about the computer, because the computer’s
decision at the second set of trapdoors affects at what bin a
participant can end up.
In the example game in Figure 2b, if given a choice at the
second set of trapdoors, the computer will remove the left
trapdoor, because its marble in the second bin (b2) is darker
than its marble in the third bin (b1). Consequently, the
participant’s darkest marble in the third bin (a3) is
unattainable. The participant should therefore remove the
left trapdoor (of the first set of trapdoors), because the
marble of their target color in the first bin (a2) is darker than
the marble of their target color in the second bin (a1).
In a second-order game (Figure 2c) there is a third set of
trapdoors at which the participants again decide what
trapdoor to remove. They need to apply second-order
reasoning, that is, reason about what the computer, at the
second set of trapdoors, thinks that they, at the third set of
trapdoors, think.

Method
Participants Twenty-two Psychology students participated
in exchange for course credit. Two were excluded because
of not adhering to the instructions.
Stimuli The colors of the marbles were taken from the HSV
(hue, saturation and value) space. A sequential color palette
was computed by varying saturation, for a given hue and
value. This resulted in 4 grades (with saturation from 1 to
.2) for each of the colors orange (hue = .1, value = 1) and
blue (hue = .6, value = 1).
The payoff structures are constructed to be diagnostic of
second-order reasoning. First- and second-order reasoning
should yield opposite predictions and decisions in order to
allow us to see at what order participants are reasoning.
All payoff structures in the experiment demand secondorder reasoning. Consequently, payoff structures in which
Player 1’s first payoff is a marble with a color gradient of 1
or 4 are excluded. It is evident that in the former case
participants should continue the game and in the latter case
participants should end the game, whatever the other player
does. The same holds for Player 2’s second payoff, because
at that bin (underneath the second set of trapdoors), Player 2
decides what to do.
Also, payoff structures in which Player 2’s payoffs in bins
3 and 4 are lower or higher than the payoff in bin 2 are

excluded. Player 2 does not need to consider Player 1’s
payoffs in these structures.
The payoff structures are doubly balanced for the number
of left/right (trapdoor removal) predictions about Player 2
and decisions of Player 1.
Design & Procedure Before the experiment took place,
participants were tested on colorblindness. They had to be
able to distinguish the two colors blue and orange, and the 4
grades of each color. The experiment consisted of 3 blocks:
a training block, an experimental manipulation block, and a
test block.
The training block consists of zeroth-, first- and secondorder Marble Drop games, respectively. In zeroth-order
games, participants do not have to reason about another
player. They have to find out in what bin the darkest colorgraded marble of their target color is, and what trapdoor to
remove to let the white marble end up in that bin. The target
color is either blue or orange, which is counterbalanced
between participants. If a participant’s target color is blue,
the computer’s target color is orange, and vice versa. These
games do not require social reasoning but are presented to
familiarize the participants with the physics of the Marble
Drop game. Participants are presented 4 zeroth-order games.
We assume that in first- and second-order games,
participants reason about the decision of the computer at the
second set of trapdoors. If a participant removes the left
trapdoor of the first set of trapdoors, the white marble will
drop into the first bin. If a participant removes the right
trapdoor of the first set of trapdoors, the white marble will
roll to the second set of trapdoors at which the computer
decides what trapdoor to remove. If the computer removes
the left trapdoor, the white marble will drop into the second
bin. If the computer removes the right trapdoor, the white
marble will drop into the third bin in first-order games, it
will roll to the third set of trapdoors in second-order games.
In the latter case, the turn passes to the participant. If the
participant removes the left trapdoor, the white marble will
drop into the third bin. If the participant removes the right
trapdoor, the white marble will drop into the fourth bin. As
soon as the white marble drops into a bin, participants are
presented feedback (“correct!” or “incorrect!”). If they fail
to let the white marble end up in the correct bin, a green
arrow is depicted underneath the correct bin and participants
are asked to explain verbally why that bin is the correct one.
Participants are presented 8 first-order games and 8 secondorder games.
In the experimental manipulation block, participants play
second-order Marble Drop games. The participants are
asked to decide what to do at the first set of trapdoors. They
immediately receive feedback after making a decision. The
experimental manipulation involves that one half of the
participants is asked first to predict what the computer will
do at the second set of trapdoors, before making a decision
at the first set of trapdoors. This manipulation is included to
investigate scaffolding effects of making predictions. In this
block and the next, the games are not continued after the

1426

participants have made a decision. The experimental
manipulation block consists of 32 trials, all trials diagnostic
of second-order social reasoning.
In the test block, the participants play second-order
Marble Drop games. The participants that made a prediction
before making a decision in the experimental manipulation
block do not have to make predictions anymore. The test
block has the same structure as the experimental
manipulation block, except that none of the participants
have to make predictions anymore.
The participants were randomly assigned to the group that
makes a prediction and a decision in the experimental
manipulation block and only a decision in the test block, the
PD-D group, and the group that makes decisions in the
experimental manipulation and the test block, the D-D
group.

Results
To account for random effects of individual differences and
payoff structures, we performed Linear Mixed-Effects
(LME) analyses (Baayen, Davidson, & Bates, 2008). We
first analyzed the proportion of games in which participants
applied second-order reasoning (Figure 3). The analysis
consists of a (logistic) LME with block (experimental
manipulation and test) and group (PD-D and D-D) as fixed
factors and participants and payoff structures as random
factors.

Figure 3: Mean proportion of games in which participants
applied second-order reasoning, presented separately for the
PD-D and D-D groups in the experimental manipulation
block and the test block. The standard errors are depicted
above and below the means.
The grand mean is 0.94. The factors block and group are
significant: β = .809, z = 2.348, p = .009 and β = 5.721, z =
1.844, p = .033, respectively. The interaction group x block
is also significant: β = -1.024, z = -1.844, p = .033.
Reaction Times The games in the experimental
manipulation block are procedurally different for the PD-D
and the D-D groups. We analyzed the reaction times of the
games in the test block, because these are not procedurally
different for the PD-D and the D-D groups.
After removing the trials in which participants
unsuccessfully applied second-order reasoning, a LME
analysis was performed, with group (PD-D and D-D) as a

fixed factor and participants and payoff structures as
random factors.

Figure 4: Mean reaction times for the PD-D and D-D
groups. The standard errors are depicted above and below
the means.
The grand mean is 7.82 seconds. The factor group is
significant: β = 1.523, t = 3.09, p < .01. On average, the
participants in the D-D group were faster to make a decision
than the participants in the PD-D group (Figure 4).

Discussion
The participants performed really well in the Marble Drop
games (Figure 3). The proportion of games in which they
successfully applied second-order reasoning was very high,
at 94% correct. That proportion is much higher than in
Hedden and Zhang’s (2002) matrix games (60% - 70%) and
Flobbe et al.’s (2008) Centipede games (slightly above
70%). This finding supports the idea that a context can
facilitate reasoning. It matters in what context reasoning is
embedded. Flobbe et al.’s context facilitated higher-order
reasoning, but not as strongly as in our experiment, which
has a simpler context.
The interaction between block and group is significant.
The performance of the participants that made a prediction
before making a decision in the experimental manipulation
block, the PD-D group, is almost at ceiling in both the
experimental manipulation block and the test block (Figure
3). On the other hand, the performance of the participants
that did not make a prediction in the experimental
manipulation block, the D-D group, is not yet at ceiling in
the experimental manipulation block, but reaches ceiling in
the test block (Figure 3). This finding could imply that the
D-D group lacked a scaffolding effect of making predictions
in the beginning of the experiment. However, the D-D
group, which was not explicitly asked to predict what the
other player would do (before making a decision), probably
did learn to make predictions during the experimental
manipulation block. Eventually, there was no difference in
performance anymore in the test block.
The main effect of block can be mainly attributed to the
D-D group. The performance of the participants in the D-D
group increases to ceiling in the test block, whereas the
performance of the participants in the PD-D groups already

1427

reaches ceiling in experimental manipulation block and
remains stable (Figure 3).
The participants not only performed better, they also
responded faster in Marble Drop games than in matrix
games. Mean reaction times of second-order predictions
were approximately 10 seconds in matrix games (Hedden &
Zhang, 2002), whereas mean reaction times of second-order
predictions took less than 7.5 (M = 7.1, SE = .57) seconds in
Marble Drop games for the PD-D group in the experimental
manipulation block. Mean reaction times of second-order
decisions (based on second-order predictions) were
approximately 3.5 second in matrix games, and less than 2.5
(M = 2.2, S = .77) seconds in Marble Drop games for the
PD-D group in the experimental manipulation block.
Although these comparisons with Hedden and Zhang’s
(2002) results are informal, the differences are considerable.
The better performance in Marble Drop games than in
Hedden and Zhang’s (2002) matrix games probably is not
caused by a difference in our participants’ speed-accuracy
tradeoff. Our participants applied second-order reasoning
more often and faster, which supports the idea that our
context facilitated higher-order reasoning.
In the test block, on average, the participants in the D-D
group were faster to make a decision than the participants in
the PD-D group (Figure 4). In the test block, the behavior of
the participants in the PD-D group could still have been
constrained in a stepwise procedure of first making a
prediction, then a decision. The participants in the D-D
group were given more freedom in the experimental
manipulation block to naturally interleave a prediction
between the steps in their decision-making, which could
have caused them to be faster than the participants in the
PD-D group.

General Conclusion
Our findings seem to imply that embedding a logical
problem in a context greatly facilitates (social) reasoning.
Because of the facilitative effects of context embedding,
second-order reasoning did not need to be scaffolded by
explicitly asking participants to predict the behavior of other
players. Second-order reasoning might still be difficult, but
participants were able to apply it in Marble Drop games.
The question remains what strategies participants used to
arrive at second-order decisions and predictions. We intend
to investigate this with computational models (e.g., Van
Maanen & Verbrugge, submitted). These models can help
us to explore the cognitive mechanism involved in higherorder social cognition, and whether higher-order social
cognition will generalize to more complex tasks.

References
Apperly, I. A., Samson, D., Chiavarino, C., & Humphreys,
G. W. (2004). Frontal and temporo-parietal lobe
contributions to theory of mind: Neuropsychological
evidence from a false-belief task with reduced language
and executive demands. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 16(10), 1773-1784.

Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Bates, D. M. (2008).
Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random effects for
subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language,
59(4), 390-412.
Bloom, P., & German, T. P. (2000). Two reasons to
abandon the false belief task as a test of theory of mind.
Cognition, 77(1), 25-31.
Flobbe, L., Verbrugge, R., Hendriks, P., & Krämer, I.
(2008). Children's application of theory of mind in
reasoning and language. Journal of Logic, Language and
Information, 17(4), 417-442.
Fry, A. F., & Hale, S. (1996). Processing speed, working
memory, and fluid intelligence: Evidence for a
developmental cascade. Psychological science, 7(4), 237241.
Hedden, T., & Zhang, J. (2002). What do you think I think
you think?: Strategic reasoning in matrix games.
Cognition, 85(1), 1-36.
Hendriks, P., & Spenader, J. (2006). When production
precedes comprehension: An optimization approach to the
acquisition of pronouns. Language Acquisition, 13(4),
319-348.
Manktelow, K. I., & Over, D.E. (1991). Social roles and
utilities in reasoning with deontic conditionals, Cognition,
39(2), 85-105.
Onishi, K. H., & Baillargeon, R. (2005). Do 15-month-old
infants understand false beliefs? Science, 308(5719), 255.
Perner, J., & Wimmer, H. (1985). "John thinks that Mary
thinks that..." Attribution of second-order beliefs by 5- to
10-year-old children. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 39(3), 437-471.
Premack, D., & Woodruff, G. (1978). Does the chimpanzee
have a theory of mind? Behavioral and Brain sciences,
1(4), 515-526.
Rosenthal, R. W. (1981). Games of perfect information,
predatory pricing and the chain-store paradox. Journal of
Economic Theory, 25(1), 92-100.
Stenning, K., & Van Lambalgen, M. (2004). A little logic
goes a long way: basing experiment on semantic theory in
the cognitive science of conditional reasoning. Cognitive
Science, 28(4), 481-529.
Van Maanen, L., & Verbrugge, R. (submitted). A
Computational Model of Second-Order Social Reasoning.
Van Rij, J., Van Rijn, H., & Hendriks, P. (to appear).
Cognitive architectures and language acquisition: A case
study in pronoun comprehension. Journal of Child
Language.
Verbrugge, R. (2009). Logic and social cognition: The facts
matter, and so do computational models. Journal of
Philosophical Logic, 1-32.
Wason, P. C., & Shapiro, D. (1971). Natural and contrived
experience in a reasoning problem. The Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 23(1), 63-71.
Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs:
Representation and constraining function of wrong beliefs
in young children's understanding of deception.
Cognition, 13(1), 103-128.

1428

