UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Thinking Ahead: How Children Reason About the Future
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9054d5z3
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)
Authors
Prabhakar, Janani
Hudson, Judith
Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

           Thinking Ahead: How Children Reason About the Future
                                                Janani Prabhakar
                                          Rutgers University, New Brunswick
                                                  Judith Hudson
                                          Rutgers University, New Brunswick
Abstract: Episodic future thinking relies heavily on self-projection, i.e., projecting oneself into the future. It involves
the use of episodic and semantic memory in order to plan and anticipate future need. In our study, we focused on
understanding the role of self in episodic future thinking in 3- and 4-year old children. Children were asked to
make choices either for their own future need (self group) or for another individual’s future need (other group).
Including these groups allowed us to directly manipulate the role of self. Participants were shown a 3-D model of
a neighborhood with several locations (houses and stores) and were asked to navigate around the neighborhood to
achieve a future goal requiring a two-step action (go to toy store to buy present and then go to friend’s house to
give present). In one version of the study, children were given only a few choices of locations in the neighborhood
in order to achieve their goal. Preliminary results suggest that both 3- and 4-year-old children demonstrate episodic
future thinking by accurately following the actions to achieve the future goal. In the second version of the study, 2
additional choices of location were added to the neighborhood, while keeping the goal the same. These additional
items served as distracters in the environment. Results show that while 4-year-old children still demonstrate episodic
future thinking skills, 3-year-old children are no long able to accurately follow the actions necessary to achieve the
future goal. Further research on optimal performance by 3-year-old in such visual working memory and episodic
future thinking tasks is necessary.
                                                         2422

