UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Thought, Language and Mental Representation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6f6170nz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Trigg, Jonathan
Kalish, Michael

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Thought, language and mental representation
Jonathan Trigg (jon.trigg@louisiana.edu)
Program in Philosophy, UL Lafayette
Lafayette, LA 70504 USA

Michael Kalish (kalish@louisiana.edu)
Institute of Cognitive Science, UL Lafayette
Lafayette, LA 70504 USA

believe, is not a direction cognitive scientists should be
reluctant to travel in; for it takes us further and further away
from Cartesian conceptions of mentality that can only
hamstring research.

Abstract
We examine the proposal that thinking is a combinatorial
operation on mental representations, and argue that it cannot
be. If the argument is successful it shows that cognitive
science cannot explain intelligent linguistic behavior by
explaining what thinking is. We point out that this does not
impugn the practice of cognitive scientists interested in
human language, which, properly understood, consists in the
framing and testing of hypotheses about the causally
necessary enabling conditions of intelligent linguistic
behavior.
Keywords: Wittgenstein; thought,
representation, language of thought.

language,

Overview of the argument and some preliminary
points.
The argument we present here starts with the premise that to
think that something is so is to perform combinatorial
operations on representations, and it moves to the negative
conclusion that to think that something is so cannot be to
perform combinatorial operations on mental representations.
This should not be taken to imply that thinking is a
combinatorial operation on non-mental representations like
words and sentences. Certain cases of thinking may be that 1,
but there is nothing in the argument which entails the strong
view that to think is to speak silently to oneself in a natural
language. The aim is only to rule out a widely held view
about what thinking is, not to defend a competing one. The
view that is ruled out is that for Sam to judge that ducks run
is for her to perform an operation on representations of a
radically different kind than those on which she would
operate were she to make a corresponding assertion. On
such a view when she asserts that ducks run, operations are
performed on two sorts of representation, one mental one
not; and when she judges that ducks run but asserts nothing
they are performed only on mental representations. On this
sort of view internal mental representing need not be
connected to external spoken representing in any way; so
what a creature can say sets no limits on what it can think.
If the argument of this paper is successful we will have
shown that it can‟t be because linguistic behaviour is linked
with hidden events and processes that it counts as linguistic.
This is liable to upset very widely held assumptions both
about the nature of thinking and about the shape of
cognitive scientific explanations. On these assumptions,
what is important about Sam‟s assertion that ducks run is
how it stands to various items or events in, or states of, her
brain. Illuminating explanations will consist in claims about
this standing. That implies a certain conception of what
makes assertions into meaningful speech acts and
differentiates them from grunts and squawks. On it, for Sam

mental

Introduction
We regard understanding as the essential thing, and signs
as something inessential. (Wittgenstein, 1974)
...the limits of possible thought are the limits of the
possible expression of thought.
(Bennett & Hacker, 2003)
If strong Wittgensteinian cross currents still ran into the
mainstream of contemporary philosophy of mind and
language, these philosophical waters would be much more
turbulent than they now are. Indeed it is not even clear that
they would be running in roughly their present direction. As
things stand the river flows wide and slow, almost
undisturbed by substantial impediments to its progress, and
serious attempts to change its course are liable to seem
naive or over ambitious – uncomprehending of the forces at
work.
The argument we present here, which is Wittgensteinian
in spirit, is meant to push quite hard against the prevailing
drift. It‟s an argument to the conclusion that thinking is not
mental representing and thoughts are not mental
representations. We are not, by any means, the first to make
this sort of argument. Indeed, on a plausible reading of his
two great works, the very theory Wittgenstein (1921/2001)
defends in the Tractatus is the theory he repudiates in the
Philosophical Investigations (Wittgenstein, 1958), and at its
heart is the thesis that thinking is mental representing. Our
aim here is to say precisely what it is about the claim that
thoughts are mental representations (and that thinking is
mental representing) that runs counter to the direction in
which Wittgenstein‟s later arguments lead. This, we

1

Bennett & Hacker (2003) contains an excellent series of
reminders of how many different things we ordinarily call
thinking.

188

to assert that ducks run is for her to make known the
occurrence of a certain sort of mental act – a judgement, and
for her to judge that ducks run is for certain syntactical
operations to be performed (by Sam, or perhaps by a mind, a
brain, or a brain-part) on certain information bearing states
or structures (mental representations), which are themselves
states of, or items/structures in, brains (or are realised in
such states, items or structures). If that is what assertions are
then linguistic behaviour must be an incidental outward
accompaniment of mental representation. It is only because
linguistic behaviour serves to indicate the occurrence of
internal processes that it counts as linguistic (the parrot‟s
squawks may sound like bits of linguistic behaviour but
they aren‟t), but mental representations counts as mental
representations whether or not they happen to be indicated
by observable behaviour. On this view – which is
profoundly Cartesian - the link with mental representation is
an essential feature of linguistic behaviour, but the link with
behaviour is an inessential feature of mental representation.
This conception of the relation between thought and
linguistic behaviour could easily seem an essential feature
of a cognitivist account of language.2 The aim of cognitive
science is precisely to explain intelligent behaviour by
appeal to internal processes, and the distinction between
speaking and thinking looks like a kind of paradigm of the
distinction between intelligent behaviour and internal
process (or processing). If we accept this appearance at face
value, and if we identify mental representation with
thinking, it will seem that a theory of mental representation
will perfectly conform to the basic aim of cognitive science
by providing an explanation of linguistic behaviour by
appeal to internal goings on.
These appearances are deceptive. On our view, cognitive
science can retain its commitment to explain behaviour by
appeal to inner processes, events and states, whilst
abandoning the Cartesian project of explaining linguistic
behaviour by appeal to thought, and giving up the
identification of thinking with mental representation. We
take it that a cognitivist account of linguistic behaviour
should take the form of an attempt to model and identify the
states of and processes in (and around) the brain that are
causally necessary conditions of linguistic behaviour. To
identify such states and processes would be to provide an
explanation of behaviour by appeal to obscure inner states
and processes; so it would conform to the cognitivist brief.
But to discover the causally necessary enabling conditions
of linguistic behaviour is not to discover what thoughts are
and what thinking is – for thoughts are expressed in
behaviour, but a causal condition is not expressed in what it
causally enables (see Trigg & Kalish 2010 (submitted).

It is all too easy to confuse thinking, which speaking and
writing is often expressive of, with the brain events and
processes that are causally necessary conditions for
intelligent linguistic behaviour. A Cartesian conception of
the relation between thought and its linguistic expression
makes such confusion almost inevitable, for in
characterising thought as an inner accompaniment to
observable linguistic behaviour it lumps it in with the
various neural events and processes which are causally
necessary for linguistic behaviour. But, Wittgenstein
reminds us, intelligent speech does not consist in a series of
observable movements of the face and throat on the one
hand, and a series of hidden mental events and processes on
the other. Rather, thought is in intelligent speech in roughly
the way that distress is in an anguished cry and amusement
is in a spontaneous peel of laughter. So, contrary to the
apparently innocent Cartesian intuition, a person‟s thoughts
are typically not hidden behind their words, but precisely
revealed by them. If we remember this we will not so easily
seek to identify thinking with the neural conditions of
speech, for it is obvious that these conditions are not
revealed, as a person‟s thoughts typically are, by the things
they say. Of course these neural conditions are not hidden
behind the linguistic behaviour they causally enable in the
dramatic way Cartesian thoughts are supposed to be hidden
behind some of the noises people make, for they count as
hidden only because they are in the thinker‟s skull, not
because they are in the thinker‟s mind.
Cognitive science, on our view, has the job of framing
and testing hypotheses about the causally necessary
enabling conditions of familiar psychological phenomena
like thinking, imagining, remembering and willing. As long
as these familiar phenomena are not conceived as private,
inner accompaniments to observable behaviour and then
identified with unfamiliar operations on mental
representations, cognitive science can make a substantial
contribution to our understanding of them. There is even a
sense in which it might be appropriate to characterise
neurological states, structures, events and processes which
causally enable familiar phenomena like assertoric thinking
(judgement) as mental representations, since without them it
would be impossible for people to represent the world in the
way that they do.

Initial Clarifications – Mental representation and
the language of thought
If one holds that cognition is mental representation, and that
mental representation consists in combinatorial operations
performed on mental representations, then one seems
compelled to accept that cognition is a quasi-linguistic
operation. The basic idea here is that to combine
representations to form complex ones is to perform syntactic
operations analogous to those involved in combining words
and sentences to form more complex sentences. (Fodor,
1975, 2008) In both cases, it may be supposed, the
representational properties of complex representations will
depend in a systematic way on the representational

2

E.g., Hauser, Chomsky & Fitch (2002) say, “In the varieties of
modern linguistics that concern us here, the term “language” is
used quite differently to refer to an internal component of the
mind/brain (sometimes called “internal language” or “Ilanguage”). We assume that this is the primary object of interest
for the study of the evolution and function of the language
faculty.” p1569

189

properties of the simpler ones. Thus a finite stock of
elemental representations together with a finite number of
syntactic rules for the combination of these, will yield an
unlimited number of possible complex representations. This
picture, which is surely very widely accepted (see, e.g.,
Schneider, 2010), seems to require what Fodor famously
called a „language of thought‟. The thesis that mental
representation, like spoken and written representation, is
linguistic, still plays an important, though poorly defined
role in cognitive science. It is not hard to see why it is so
popular. For one thing it seems to provide a way of
explaining the unlimited number of different intelligent
things intelligent creatures can do in reference to an equally
unlimited number of different representational states their
minds or brains can be in. For another it seems to support a
computational theory of mind or cognition, since the
relevant combinatorial or syntactic operations seem well
suited to be conceived as computational operations of a kind
that might be run by something like an organic equivalent to
a computer.
Whilst the hypothesis that there is a language of mental
representation consisting, not of words and sentences but of
mental representations is a natural way to develop the
concept of mental representation, it is no more than that. It
could be discarded and the notion of mental representation
retained. So it is important to appreciate that the argument
we present is directed at the very idea that there are two
ways to represent, for example, ducks as running, one
mental, the other not. If it tells against this idea it will, as a
matter of course, also tell against formulations of it on
which to think that ducks run is to make an assertion in the
(or a) silent language of thought.

least three sorts of reason. There is no such thing as
translating what is said in a mental language into something
said in a public one, so no such thing as doing it correctly or
incorrectly (try to compare your translation of a mental
representation with the mental representation it is a
translation of so as to check if you‟ve translated it
correctly). Neither is there any such thing as translating – as
opposed to describing – an image. Finally, since any image
can be described in indefinitely many equally faithful ways,
images do not determine what does and doesn‟t count as
faithfully describing them. So being able to say what one is
thinking cannot be a matter of being able to describe a
certain mental image correctly; since any description of a
particular image could count as a correct description of it,
talk of the (or even of a) correct description of an image is
empty.3
If these weighty considerations do not convince thus
baldly presented, we can turn to Wittgenstein‟s celebrated
(misunderstood and neglected) private language argument to
drive them home.
This succeeds in showing, quite
categorically, that when, e.g., Paul says „Ducks run.‟ he
does not perform two types of operation, one on mental
representations and one on verbal representations, but only
one. It shows this by showing that operating on
representations must be a normative or rule-governed affair
(the type of thing that can be done incorrectly or correctly)
and that operations performed on items, events or states
available only to the operator could not be a normative or
rule-governed affair. According to our argument if one
assumes that thinking is a combinatorial operation on
representations one has to deny that thinking is mental
representing; that is interesting, for it is precisely that
assumption that has led so many cognitive scientists to
conclude that it must be mental representing. What follows
then, is an argument to the conclusion that thinking cannot
be an operation on mental representations which exploits
Wittgenstein‟s argument that language cannot be private:

The Mental Representation Argument
On a picture of the relation between thought and language
that deserves to be called the classical picture the purpose of
speech and writing is to make thought, which is essentially
private and psychological, public and perceptible. The basic
problem with this picture, however its details are worked
out, is this: if, when Paul says „Ducks run.‟ there are two
types of operation he is performing (one mental, inner and
private, one physical, outer and public), and two kinds of
item he is operating on (one mental, inner and private, one
physical, outer and public), we will have to explain what the
relation is between these operations and these items. That is,
we will have to explain how, on the one hand, the
combining of mental representations stands to the
combining of words; and on the other, how the combined
mental representations stand to the combined words. It
should be clear, at least with a little reflection, that the
prospects of providing such an explanation look dim. If we
conceive mental representations as components of a nonverbal language we will have to explain how non-verbal
thoughts are to be translated into verbal utterances; if we
conceive mental representations as mental images or
pictures we will have to explain what it is to translate
images into words. But such explanations are hopeless for at

To think, in the sense under discussion, is to think that
something or other is so. To do that is to have a thought or
to make a judgement, such that the thought one has or the
judgement one makes will be the thought or judgement that
things are thus and so. If things are that way the thought one
has will be true, if not, then false.
For the purposes of argument let us assume that to think (or
to judge, doubt or suppose) that something is so is to
perform a certain kind of operation on a certain kind of
representation. This operation must be productive of further
representations that have the characteristic of being
evaluable for truth; so it must be an operation on
representations (that may or may not be of a truth-evaluable
type) that yields representations (that are of a truthevaluable type). So, for example, it could be an operation on
words or sentences that produces sentences. Such operations
must be combinatorial. What other than a combinatorial
operation could produce the type of representation that is
3

190

See e.g. G. McCulloch (1989). pp. 152-163.

evaluable for truth out of representations that are, very
often, not evaluable for truth; and what other than a
combinatorial operation could generate indefinitely many
truth-evaluable representations out of a few non-truth
evaluable ones?
Not every possible combination of representations will
yield representations capable of truth. For example „Green
was a depressing silently were or jam‟ is a combination of
representations, but it is nonsense, so the question of its
truth cannot arise. There are many different ways of
combining representations in such a way as to produce
nonsensical representations not capable of truth. To
combine representations in at least some of these ways that
produce nonsense is to combine representations incorrectly.
What can be done correctly or incorrectly must be a rulegoverned activity. That is to say that for representations to
be combined in the relevant way is not just for a series of
orderly events to occur, but for a rule-governed activity to
be engaged in. When a given process does not unfold as it
usually does we can say that an irregularity has occurred in
it but not that a mistake has been made in carrying it out.
But many nonsensical combinations of representations are
not just irregular; they are wrong. That entails that they run
counter to rules of representation combination that do not
merely capture actual regularities exhibited by
representation combining activities but prescribe how those
activities should be carried out.
Now if a given representation is knowable as the
representation it is only by whatever it is that performs
combinatorial operations on it, the rules determining how it
may be combined with other representations must be private
rules. There can‟t be public rules that determine how private
items, events or states should be manipulated, because it
would be impossible to assess putative observations of such
rules for correctness. If the rule is, “Perform operation p
when y-type items appear, or x-type events occur, or r-type
states are actualised,” and if y-type items, x-type events and
r-type states are knowable only to the performer of p, then
performances of p cannot be publically checked or assessed
for correctness.4 So they can be checked for correctness
only privately.
Now it seems that mental representations must precisely
be representations knowable as what they are only by
whichever thinker or representer is operating on them. To
say that a given representation is a mental representation is
to say that the dealings thinkers have with it are not
perceptual. For a mental representation to be available to a
thinker need not require that a certain publically available
mark be seen or sound heard, but only that thinking be
going on. Thinking is conceived here precisely in contrast to
observable behaviour, as an inner or psychological
operation. Such an operation must be an operation on items,
structures or states knowable as the representations they are
only to the relevant operator.
If that is right, and if there can‟t be public rules for the
combination of private representations, then the rules that
4

determine what it is to combine private mental
representations correctly must be private rules.
Having reached this result, it only remains to be
established that there can be no private rules for the
combination of representations (or anything else), and it will
have been shown that thinking cannot be a combinatorial
operation on mental representations. Wittgenstein showed
how to establish exactly that.
There can be no private rules governing the operations
performed on mental representations because there can be
no difference between its seeming to a thinker or representer
on a given occasion that they are following a private rule
and their really following a private rule on that occasion.
Say Sam‟s putative rule, p, is – “Whenever an item
relevantly similar to this one (pointing inwardly to a
relevant sample) comes before my mind, I will perform
operation r on it (or whenever I am in this sort of state –
pointing inwardly to an appropriate state – perform
operation r on it)”. In these sorts of case there could be no
difference between its seeming to Sam at t that the relevant
item was before her mind, or that she was in the relevant
state, and that item really being before her mind, or her
really being in that state. In that case, Sam cannot have
invented a rule p governing his performance of operation r,
because any future performance that seems to Sam to be a
performance of r in accordance with p, will thereby be a
performance of r in accordance with p. In situations that do
not allow for a distinction between what seems justified and
what is, talk of being justified or unjustified is out of place.
To conclude, if thinking is a combinatorial operation on
representations it must be a rule-governed combinatorial
operation on representations; but now, since private rules
for the combination of representations are impossible, and
rules for the combination of mental representations would
have to be private, thinking cannot be a combinatorial
operation on mental representations. This argument shows
that there is a fundamental conflict between the idea that
thinking is an activity subject to normative constraint, and
the idea that thinking is a private psychological affair: if
thinking can be done incorrectly it cannot consist in
manipulations of private mental representations.
Here is a concise formulation of the argument just given.
1. To think – in the relevant sense – is not just to
think of something but to think that something is
the case.
2. To think that something is the case is to combine
representations that may or may not be the sort of
representations capable of truth, so as to produce
representations that are the sort of representations
capable of truth.
3. It is possible to combine representations so as to
produce representations that are not capable of
truth as well as those that are.
4. To combine representations in such a way as to
produce representations not capable of truth is to
combine representations incorrectly.

See Wittgenstein (1958) e.g. section 258.

191

5.

6.
7.

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

If something, p, can be done incorrectly there must
be rules that determine what counts as doing p
correctly; p must be a rule-governed activity.
By 2, 3, 4 and 5, thinking must be a rule-governed
activity. (Not just a process exhibiting regularities).
Rules for the combination of representations
knowable as what they are by only one representer
would have to be private rules.
Representations that are mental must be knowable
as what they are only by one representer.
So – by 7 and 8 – rules for the combination of
mental representations must be private rules.
There can be no private rules.
The combination of mental representations – by 7,
8, 9 and 10 – cannot be a rule-governed activity.
Thinking – by 6 - must be a rule-governed activity.
Thinking – by 11 and 12 – cannot be a
combinatorial operation on mental representations.

thought, mental representation and language that it is meant
to defend.
Speakers are sometimes wrong about what they are
saying. This is not to say that speakers are sometimes
insincere; it is to say that speakers can think they are saying
one thing when they are really saying another. How shall we
explain the possibility of this sort of mistake?
If we hold that to think is mentally to represent, and that
thoughts are mental representations we will have to hold
that to make a sincere assertion is to translate or otherwise
convert a mental representation into a non-mental one. This
commits defenders of this conception of thinking to the
view that for a speaker to be wrong about what they are
saying is for a speaker to be wrong about the relation
between what they are saying and what they are thinking.
Mistakes of that kind are mistakes made in translating or
converting mental into non-mental representations. Now, on
this conception of how it is possible for a speaker to be
wrong about what they are saying, no conceptual room is
left for the possibility that they could be wrong about what
they are thinking. This is because, on this view, whilst a
speaker has to convert or translate their thoughts into
sentences in order to make an assertion, they do not have to
translate or convert their thoughts into anything in order to
have them. If one can be wrong about what one is saying
because one can translate or convert one‟s thoughts into
words incorrectly, and one does not have to translate or
convert one‟s thoughts into anything in order to have them,
one cannot be wrong about what thought one is having at a
given time.
To see this, consider the following argument. If we
explain what it is for someone to make a mistake about what
they are saying by appeal to the idea that they can be wrong
about the relation between what they are saying and what
they are thinking, we will have to deny that they can be
wrong about what they are thinking, on pain of generating
an infinite regress. For if it were possible for a thinker, Sam,
to be wrong at t about what she is thinking at t, that
possibility would require explanation. Any such explanation
would have to appeal to a difference between what Sam is
thinking at t and what she thinks she is thinking at t – we
will have to say that whilst she thinks she is thinking one
thing she is really thinking another. But as soon as we say
that, we will also have to allow the possibility that there can
be a further difference between what Sam thinks she is
thinking at t and what she thinks she thinks she is thinking
at t, and so on. This regress is by no means benign, for it
requires a thinker to have an infinite number of appropriate
thoughts at t if they are to know what they are thinking at t.
As soon as we open an anti-Cartesian gap between what
Sam is thinking at t and what she thinks she is thinking at t,
for her to know what she is thinking at t it will not be
enough that she thinks it at t. Suppose she thinks that ducks
run at t. If she is to know that she is thinking that ducks run
at t, she has to think that she is thinking that ducks run at t,
and if she is to know that, she has to think that she is
thinking that she thinks that ducks run at t, and so on.

An Objection
Without further ado, let us consider an objection to this
argument. It concerns premise eight - the claim that mental
representations, qua mental, must be private, that is, must be
knowable as the representations they are only by whatever it
is that represents by operating on them. Many cognitive
scientists and philosophers of mind might eagerly reject this
premise on the ground that it depends upon an unacceptably
Cartesian notion of what mental representations are. It will
be said that if we reject this out-dated Cartesianism, and
think of the mental representations in question as states of,
or items in, brains, (or as realised in such items or states),
we can deny that they are private, and so allow room for the
idea that there could be public rules for their combination.
The problem with this objection is that it is inconsistent
with the claim that thinking is mental representing, so can‟t
be used to defend it. The claim that thinking is mental
representing depends on a certain way of conceiving the
distinction between representing done in thought and
representing done in (public) language. On this conception
representing done in thought (mental representing) is what
makes representing done in public language what it is; it is
because Sam‟s assertions do, but his sneezes do not, depend
somehow on his thoughts, that his assertions count as
meaningful utterances rather than mere noises. It turns out,
we will now argue, that this conception allows for the
possibility that a representer may be wrong about the
assertion they are making, but it excludes the possibility
that a representer may be wrong about the judgement they
are making (the thought they are having). We argue that
rejection of premise 8 is incompatible with the Cartesian
view that a thinker cannot be wrong about which judgement
they are making, and that this Cartesian view is an essential
feature of the position rejection of this premise is meant to
defend. Thus, whilst the anti-Cartesian feel of the objection
now under discussion may be congenial in itself, it is quite
inconsistent with the conception of the relation between

192

So if we are to avoid this regress we have to embrace
Cartesianism; we have to say, that is, that Henry‟s
knowledge of what he is thinking is both incorrigible and
evident; incorrigible because if he thinks he is thinking that
p he is thinking that p, and evident because if he thinks that
p he thinks that he thinks that p. If we take thoughts to be
mental representations and assertions to be translations of
mental representations into perceptible signs, we commit
ourselves to an explanation of how a speaker can be wrong
about what they are saying which only Cartesianism will
save from incoherence.
Now of course the relevant point is that this Cartesian
account of the relation between a thinker and the thoughts
they have is flatly incompatible with the proposal that
mental representations are not private. To see this, it is
important to appreciate first that to say that a given mental
representation is publically available is not just to say that it
is identical with certain brain states that are publically
available. It is conceivable that Sam should be acquainted
with a certain brain state, p, which is in fact identical to a
certain mental representation r, but know neither that p is a
mental representation nor that p is mental representation r.
(If I know the butcher, and the butcher is the president, then
I know the president, but I may not know that the butcher is
the president). So what is required is that George and Harry
can come to know that Grace is thinking that p by becoming
acquainted with a certain state of Grace‟s brain.
Now that possibility is rather dramatically incompatible
with the Cartesian conception of thinking to which we have
just shown our opponent to be committed. It makes Grace‟s
way of finding out what thought she is currently having into
just one of many ways of finding that out. So a situation will
be conceivable in which Grace tries to find out what she is
thinking using her introspective method, George and Henry
do the same by observing her brain, and Grace fails whilst
George and Henry succeed. If that is thinkable, then not
only could Grace be wrong, and George right, about what
Grace is thinking at any time, but Grace could be wrong and
George right about what she is thinking at all times!
The problem remember is not just that these possibilities
are absurd in themselves – although the idea that something
could count as a thinker whilst always being wrong about
what it thought is pretty unsatisfying all on its own – but
that they are incompatible with the Cartesian conception of
the relation between thought and language to which our
opponent is committed.
So the thesis that to think is to operate on mental
representations cannot be defended by rejection of premise
8. If mental representations are constitutive of thoughts they
must be private, and if mental representations are private
combining them cannot be a rule-governed operation.

that we have not explicitly considered here, they will have
to turn either on the denial that thinking can be done
incorrectly or on the claim that there can be private rules,
and these responses seem to head off in unpromising
directions. The only plausible option open to the
representationalist is to conceive thinking as a combinatorial
operation on the representations constitutive of a natural
language like English (Malcolm,1973). We have said
nothing either for or against that position here – though it is
perhaps worth noting that anyone attracted to it will have to
hold that it is persons as we ordinarily conceive them and
not minds or brains that think (since it is indubitably human
beings and not minds or brains that know how to use the
words of a natural language).
So thinking is not mental representing, and, for example,
asserting is not converting or translating mental into nonmental representations. Does this result show that a
cognitive scientific account of linguistic behaviour is
impossible? Not at all. It shows that if we identify mental
representing with thinking we cannot explain intelligent
linguistic behaviour by appeal to mental representing. But if
we think of mental representing not as identical to thinking
but as a causally necessary condition on it (Trigg & Kalish,
2010), then the idea that mental representation underlies
intelligent linguistic behaviour is in good shape. It is, of
course, profoundly plausible that if certain very complex
events did not take place in a person‟s brain at t they would
not be able to think or speak at t. Nothing in the argument
just presented is incompatible with this idea, and nothing
suggests that the difficult business of finding out about these
events is not a scientific undertaking of the greatest interest.

References
Bennett, M. & Hacker, P.M.S. (2003). The Philosophical
Foundations of Neuroscience. Oxford, Blackwell.
Hauser, M., Chomsky, N., & Fitch, T. (2002). The faculty
of language: What is it, who has it, and how did it evolve?
Science, 298, 1569-1579.
Fodor, J. (1975). The Language of Thought. Harvard,
Harvard University Press.
Fodor, J. (2008). LOT2: The Language of Thought
Revisited. U.S.A: Oxford University Press.
Malcolm, N (1973). „Thoughtless brutes‟. The Proceedings
and Addresses of the North American Philosophical
Society. 46, 5-20.
Schneider, S. (2010). The language of thought. In J.
Symons & P. Calvo (Eds.) Routledge Companion to
Philosophy o f Psychology. London, Routledge.
Trigg, J. & Kalish, M. (2010). Explaining how the mind
works: on the relation between cognitive science and
philosophy. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Wittgenstein, L. (1921/2001).
Tractatus LogicoPhilosophicus, London, Routledge.
Wittgenstein, L. (1958). Philosophical Investigations,
Oxford, Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, L. (1974). Philosophical Grammar. ed. R.
Rhees, trans. A.J.P. Kenny. Blackwell: Oxford.

Conclusion
We take it that the mental representation argument shows
that thinking cannot be mental representation, that is, that it
cannot be a combinatorial operation on mental
representations. While there are objections to this argument

193

