UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Topical Relevance and Information Quality in Cognitive Models of Web Search Behavior:
Introducing Epistemic Scent into Information Foraging Theory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0ks508zz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Gerjets, Peter
Kammerer, Yvonne

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Topical Relevance and Information Quality in Cognitive Models of Web Search
Behavior: Introducing Epistemic Scent into Information Foraging Theory
Peter Gerjets (p.gerjets@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Yvonne Kammerer (y.kammerer@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany
may be doubtful with regard to their motives or expertise fit
exactly to search terms entered by users, so that they are
listed among the highest-ranked search results on a search
engine result page (SERP). Thus, even the information contained in the top search results of a SERP might turn out to
be biased and one-sided, leading to premature or even
wrong decisions. Accordingly, Web users may not only be
required to critically evaluate the topical relevance of search
results but also their quality (cf. Taraborelli, 2008) - especially when dealing with controversial issues such as the effectiveness of specific medical treatments. Contrary to this
claim, however, most current cognitive models of information search on the Web focus on evaluating the topical relevance of search results, thereby neglecting issues of information quality.
In this paper, we propose an extension of one of the
most influential theories of search and navigation on the
Web – the Information Foraging Theory (IFT, Pirolli, 2007)
– based on the results of two experimental studies. These
results will be reviewed following a theoretical introduction
of Web-search models and quality evaluations.

Abstract
Current cognitive models of Web navigation (e.g., Information Foraging Theory, IFT, Pirolli, 2007) are based on the assumption that users’ behavior is guided by evaluating the topical relevance of information encountered on the Web. This
“information scent” has been successfully used to model Web
search behavior. In this paper, however, we claim that
topicality-oriented theories like IFT need to additionally consider the evaluation of information quality in order to address
a broader class of realistic search tasks. For instance, when
search tasks are complex and the quality of available Web information is highly variable, Web navigation will also depend
on evaluating information quality, in addition to evaluating
topical relevance. In this paper we first provide a theoretical
framework of quality evaluation during Web search. Second,
we review two experimental studies to substantiate this theoretical framework. Finally, we propose an extension of IFT
using the concept of epistemic scent to incorporate evaluations of quality into the theory.
Keywords: information scent; evaluation processes; complex
search tasks; interface design; epistemological beliefs

Web search and information quality
With the exponential growth of information available on the
World Wide Web (WWW), the Web has evolved into one of
the most important information sources. Besides searching
for simple and uncontroversial facts or researching product
purchases, the Web increasingly serves as a rich information
source for conducting research on more complex academic
or science-related topics (cf. Horrigan, 2006). For instance,
in the context of personal concerns of individuals, such as
medicine and health care, using the Web as a supplement to
the interaction with experts has achieved great popularity
(Moharan-Martin, 2004).
However, as anyone can publish virtually any information on the Web, the WWW is characterized by a large variability of information quality with information sources differing dramatically with regard to Web authors’ expertise
and motives. As a result, the trustworthiness of online information on topics like medicine or healthcare varies considerably, with many Web sites containing misleading or
even false information (Eysenbach, Powell, Kuss, & Sa,
2002). Despite this variability, different Web sources (e.g.,
scientific and other institutions, journalists, lay people, or
companies) are usually interspersed in the results lists returned by search engines. Moreover, in many cases popular
commercial or social Websites (e.g., shops or forums) that

Topicality-oriented models of Web navigation
In the last decade, various computational cognitive models
of Web navigation have evolved. These models are based on
concepts like semantic similarity and topical relevance, such
as SNIF-ACT by Fu and Pirolli (2007), CoLiDeS by Kitajima, Blackmon, and Polson (2000), MESA by Miller and
Remington (2004), and CoLiDeS+ by Juvina & Van Oostendorp (2008). Although several models exist, they have all
ignored the evaluation of information quality.
In this paper we will focus on the SNIF-ACT model,
which is based on IFT. IFT postulates that the selection of
hyperlinks (e.g., from a SERP or Web page) is determined
by the strength of a so called “information scent”. Information scent reflects the perceived semantic similarity between
proximal cues (i.e., keywords or trigger words available in
link labels or search results) and the current search goal of
the user, which is defined by a desired distal information
source (e.g., a Web page). A strong information scent of a
hyperlink indicates a high likelihood that the source accessible via the hyperlink contains the desired information and
thus increases the likelihood that the hyperlink will be selected. As IFT explains Web searching behavior based on
this notion of information scent, the theory presupposes that
Web searching is exclusively guided by the topical rele-

2278

vance of Web information. The computational modeling of
information search in SNIF-ACT uses spreading activation
in semantic memory as a mechanism for determining semantic similarity. A strong information scent occurs when
the encoding of proximal cues in semantic memory results
in a substantial spread of activation to the representation of
the current search goal. Activation spread according to the
associative strength between concepts in memory is a standard measure to represent semantic similarity in the underlying ACT-R architecture. Figure 1 illustrates the concept of
information scent (IS) for a user pursuing the goal of finding
information about “medical treatments for cancer” (this is
the desired distal information defining the search goal). It is
assumed that the user encounters a search result like the one
depicted in Figure 2, which includes the terms “cell, patient,
dose, beam” (these are the available proximal cues). The
arrows represent the spread of activation from the search
result to the goal representation, which is used to calculate
the information scent of the search result.
Proximal cues

quality. For these types of task, quality evaluations are not
an important issue. Moreover, previous studies used search
environments that provided users with more or less salient
topicality cues but not with salient cues pointing to the quality of search results.

Preconditions for quality evaluations on the Web
Given the search tasks and search environments used in previous studies on information scent, it seems plausible that
users’ Web navigation in these tasks was mainly a function
of the perceived topical relevance of available information
(i.e., its information scent), because quality evaluation are
neither required nor supported. However, we hypothesize
that the role of quality evaluations on search behavior might
change considerably when certain preconditions are given
with regard to task characteristics, user prerequisites, and
search interface. The hypothesized interplay of these preconditions, which is illustrated in Figure 3, will be used as a
theoretical framework throughout this paper.

Desired distal information

cell
medical
patient
treatments
dose

IS

cancer

beam
Figure 1: Illustration of information scent (IS), example
adapted from Pirolli (2007).

Figure 3: Preconditions of quality evaluations

Figure 2: Example of a search result link.
Topically-oriented computational models like SNIF-ACT
have been able to predict Web search and link selection in a
wide range of different tasks. Thus, at first sight they seem
to allow for a successful and precise modeling of Web navigation of any kind. However, we claim that all tasks that
were used for modeling forced users to focus their attention
on the topical fit of available information: Users either had
to engage in simple fact-finding tasks or they had at their
disposal a selection of Web information that was restricted
to uncontroversial and consistent information of established

Task complexity and variability of information quality
We assume that the evaluation of information quality (e.g.,
in terms of credibility, accuracy, and completeness) becomes of major importance (1) when the search task is sufficiently complex and, even more important, (2) when the
available information is highly variable with regard to its
quality. Search tasks loading high on these two task dimensions have become an increasingly important activity on the
Web, for instance, when users search for controversial science-related topics or personal concerns like medical or
health issues. In such search tasks, inconsistent and potentially contradictory Web information of variable quality is
often encountered, so that searchers should not take the accuracy of the available information for granted. Despite the
growing popularity of research on Web information quality
in the last decade (for a review see Rieh & Danielson,
2007), to the best of our knowledge, the fit of topicality-

2279

oriented models of Web navigation with users’ search behavior in tasks that require the evaluation of information
quality has not yet been investigated.
User prerequisites: Personal epistemology
Once the user is confronted with a search task that requires
quality evaluations, both the probability and the complexity
of these quality evaluations will strongly depend on the
searcher’s cognitive prerequisites, for instance on his or her
personal epistemology. In line with dual-process theories
(e.g., Chen & Chaiken, 1999), quality evaluations can range
from simple, non-elaborated, intuitive, and spontaneous
"heuristic" evaluations, on the one hand, to complex, cognitively elaborated, conscious, and reflected "systematic" evaluation processes on the other hand. In order to systematically evaluate the quality of Web information, searchers
need to consider how credible a source of information is,
how certain and consistent with other sources the information itself is, and how strongly the information might be influenced by the motives of the information provider. According to Hofer (2004) this kind of reasoning is closely
connected to a person’s epistemological beliefs (EBs), that
is, to one’s personal beliefs about the nature of knowledge
and knowing. EBs have been shown to guide users’ cognitive and metacognitive activities during Web search (Hofer,
2004). For instance, it has been demonstrated that users with
naïve EBs are less critical Web searchers and that EBs influence search techniques and the ability to recognize authority (Hofer, 2004; Whitmire, 2003). Certainly, there exist
other important cognitive prerequisites beyond EBs that
support systematic quality evaluations of Web information,
such as domain expertise or Web expertise. These prerequisites were, however, not investigated as factors in the studies reviewed in this paper and will therefore not be discussed in greater detail.
Search interface: Salience of topicality and quality
A third precondition for quality evaluations – beyond task
requirements and user prerequisites – is related to the affordances and information provided by the search interface.
We assume that even if a user is able to engage in quality
evaluations required by a search task, the concrete enactment of these processes during Web search might depend on
two aspects of the search interface: first, whether the search
interface affords quality evaluations and second, whether it
comprises quality-related information. In our opinion, the
interface of popular search engines usually does not support
quality evaluations with regard to these two aspects.
First, search engines usually present search results in a
list, with the most topically relevant and most popular Web
pages being the highest-ranked ones (cf. Cho & Roy, 2004).
This list format provides a strong affordance for users to
start reading at the top of the list and to follow the strict and
non-ambiguous order when reading and selecting the search
results presented. Thus, no affordances are provided for users to take over the responsibility for evaluating and selecting search results on their own. Rather, searchers’ aware-

ness of the ongoing selection process is hindered by the
SERP layout.
Second, search engines usually display only very little
information for each search result (e.g., a title, an excerpt
from the respective Web page, a URL) on which evaluation
processes aimed at deciding which search results to select
for further inspection must be based. Moreover, the search
result descriptions are typically confined to topical information, whereas quality-related source information is sparse
and non-salient. Accordingly, the interface design of standard search engines does not support users to engage in
quality-related evaluation processes on their own.
It can be expected that (1) the salience of topicality rankings of search results and (2) the salience of proximal cues
in search results pointing to the quality of information are
two important factors that determine whether quality evaluations take place or not. We assume that a search interface
that provides salient proximal cues for information quality
and refrains from making the topicality ranking of search
results the most salient feature will stimulate more quality
evaluations than a search interface without these characteristics. Thus, within the limits of users’ individual cognitive
prerequisites, a proper search interface might lead to navigational decisions that are based to a substantial degree on
evaluating information quality in addition to evaluating
topical relevance.

Hypotheses and review of experimental studies
Based on the framework describing the preconditions of
quality evaluations during Web search (Figure 3), a couple
of hypotheses were derived and tested in two studies reviewed in this section. In both studies, fine-grained process
data (combination of eye-tracking methodology and log file
data) were used to test the relationship between the probability and complexity of quality evaluations in a sciencerelated search task and the design of the search interface and
users’ EBs. The task of both studies addressed a controversial medical topic. The collection of Web pages made available in the studies represented the variability of information
quality on the Web and included Web pages provided by
official institutions, scientific authorities, journalists, companies, and lay people (e.g., discussion pages). All Web
pages were topically relevant to the respective search topic.
We hypothesized that a search task with these characteristics would cause users to engage in quality evaluations, at
least when their cognitive prerequisites and the search interface used would allow for these processes. Users’ EBs were
measured to test whether users with naïve and sophisticated
EBs differ in the quality evaluations they engage in.
Two different interface design approaches were implemented to test whether they stimulate quality-related evaluation processes. In study 1 (Kammerer, Wollny, Gerjets, &
Scheiter, 2009) participants either used a standard Google
search result list or an augmented search result list additionally containing source categories for each search results (cf.
http://www.clewwa.de/). This approach aimed at providing
salient quality-related cues. In Study 2 (Kammerer & Ger-

2280

jets, 2010) a standard list format was compared to a grid
format with search results arranged in multiple rows and
columns (cf. www.viewzi.com). This approach aimed at decreasing the salience of the topicality ranking and at increasing users’ awareness of the selection process.
We hypothesized that both experimental interfaces would
lead to more and better quality evaluations than a standard
search interface with a high salience of the topicality ranking and a low salience of information quality.
Study 1: Display of search results with source categories
In this study (for details see Kammerer et al., 2009) participants were confronted with a fictitious request from an
overweight friend, who wants to loose weight by changing
her diet. Participants were asked to conduct a 20-minute
Web search to make an informed decision between low fat
and low carb diets in order to recommend one of the two
diet methods. Participants were provided with three prearranged Google-like SERPs with ten search results each.
Method. Thirty university students participated in the experiment by either using a standard Google search result list
or an augmented search result list (15 participants per
group). The augmented list additionally contained source
category labels printed in bold next to the URL. The labels
indicated to which of five different source categories a
search result belonged. The five source categories were Science/Institutions, Portals/Advisors, Journalism/TV, Readers’ Comments, and Shops/Companies. We assumed that
these source categories provided users with cues regarding
the quality of the respective Web pages without changing
the topical information available for each search result. Furthermore, searchers’ EBs were obtained with the Epistemic
Beliefs Inventory (EBI; Schraw, Dunkle, & Bendixen,
1995). In order to study participants’ evaluation processes,
their eye movements and mouse clicks during Web search
were captured. We assumed that the amount of attention
(i.e. total fixation duration) spent on a search result reflected
evaluative processes with regard to this search result. As the
topical information did not differ between the experimental
conditions we assume that group differences in the amount
of attention indicate differences in quality evaluations. Similarly, selection differences between groups cannot be traced
back to differences in topicality but indicate that searchers
evaluated the quality of sources differently.
Results and discussion. The results showed various differences between the two search interfaces and between naïve
and sophisticated users with regard to the attention distribution on SERPs and the selection of search results. First,
augmenting SERPs with source categories resulted in less
linear viewing sequences than standard SERPs. Second, the
availability of source categories influenced students’ evaluation and selection behavior, such that they gave less attention to commercial search results (“Shops/Companies”) and
were more likely to select search results from the category
Portals/Advisors. Third, beyond these effects of the interface design, the results revealed that source categories
stimulated users with sophisticated EBs to pay more atten-

tion than naïve users to search results that were rather ambiguous with regard to their information quality (Portals/Advisors, Journalism/TV, and Readers’ Comments)
compared to the remaining categories Science/Institutions
(high quality) and Shops/Companies (low quality). Fourth,
with regard to EB effects on standard SERPs, the results indicated that sophisticated users paid less attention than naïve
users to search results linked to social or commercial Websites. A possible explanation is that searchers with sophisticated EBs might be able to identify such search results as
being of rather low quality by having only a quick look on
the search result descriptions (e.g., the URLs). To conclude,
Study 1 revealed several effects of (1) enriching search interfaces with salient quality-related cues and (2) of the personal epistemology searchers bring to the task. These two
factors would be difficult to model with topicality-oriented
theories of Web navigation like the IFT because the differences in attention distribution and selection behavior were
not associated with differences in topical relevance.
Study 2: List interface versus grid interface
In this study (for details see Kammerer & Gerjets, 2010) users had to decide between two competing therapies for
Bechterew’s disease. They were given eight minutes to conduct a Web search regarding the pros and cons of both
therapies and to make an informed decision between them.
Participants were provided with two prearranged SERPs,
one for each therapy, with nine search results each.
Method. Eighty university students participated in the experiment by either using a standard Google search result list
or a grid interface with search results arranged in three rows
and three columns. Furthermore, the trustworthiness order
of search results on a SERP was experimentally manipulated in order to test participants’ sensitivity to information
quality (cf. Pan et al., 2007). The trustworthiness order of
the search results presented in this study was obtained empirically in a pilot-study. Based on these data, the nine
search results per SERP, which were all of high topical relevance, were either presented in an optimal order, with the
most trustworthy search results presented first and the least
trustworthy ones presented last, or in a reversed order, so
that the least trustworthy search results were presented first.
For the grid interface, trustworthiness of search results was
arranged line-by-line, that is, from left to right in each of
three rows. Twenty participants were assigned to each of the
four conditions with trustworthiness order (optimal vs. reversed) and search interface (list vs. grid) varied as between-subjects factors. Searchers’ epistemological beliefs
were obtained with the Internet-Specific Epistemology
Questionnaire (ISEQ, Strømsø & Bråten, 2010). Searchers’
eye movements and mouse clicks were captured during Web
search. Additionally, retrospective verbal protocols were
obtained by asking participants post-hoc to think aloud
while watching a replay of their own eye movements during
search.
Results and discussion. The results showed numerous differences between the two search interfaces, between the two

2281

trustworthiness orders, and between naïve and sophisticated
users with regard to the attention distribution on SERPs, the
selection of search results, and the occurrence of qualityrelated verbal utterances. First, the grid interface caused less
homogenous and less linear viewing sequences on SERPs
than did the list interface (for both trustworthiness order
conditions). Second, when using the list interface most attention was given to the search results on top of the list –
independent of their trustworthiness. In contrast, with a grid
interface, nearly all search results on a SERP were attended
for equivalent durations. Consequently, when search results
were presented in a reversed order, participants using the
list interface attended significantly longer to the least trustworthy search results and selected the most trustworthy
search results significantly less often than participants using
the grid interface. Third, with regard to verbal utterances,
the grid interface stimulated quality-related utterances compared to the list interface, although these utterances mostly
reveal simple and heuristic quality evaluations rather complex and systematic ones. Fourth, EB results showed that,
with regard to searchers’ selection behavior, sophisticated
users better identified trustworthy sources than naïve users.
With regard to verbal data, naïve users reflected less on the
type of sources they had encountered. With regard to attention distribution, naïve users paid less attention to the URLs
of the search results. To conclude, Study 2 revealed several
effects of (1) the presentation format and presentation order
implemented in the search interface and (2) of searchers’
personal epistemology. These factors influenced verbal behavior, attention distributions, and selection behavior, providing evidence that at least sophisticated searchers using an
interface with a low salience of the topicality ranking (i.e.,
the grid interface) substantially engaged in quality evaluations to guide their web navigation. Again, because the
search results displayed in all experimental conditions were
equivalent with regard to topical relevance, the findings obtained would be difficult to model with topicality-oriented
theories of Web navigation like the IFT.

search results remained unaffected by the manipulations.
We propose to extend IFT in three ways to account for the
data we obtained. Our suggestions are illustrated in Figure
4, which refers to the example introduced in Figures 1 and 2
(medical treatments for cancer).

Extending Information Foraging Theory

Tasks that require quality evaluations. IFT claims that
Web search is guided by a topical goal, namely the goal of
finding topically relevant information irrespective of its
quality. In order to account for our data, however, it is necessary to introduce more complex goal structures that comprise an additional epistemic goal component (e.g., find
trustworthy information of topical relevance). In order to
decide which tasks require an epistemic goal component
leading to quality evaluations, additional procedural knowledge is necessary to trigger the epistemic goal component
(e.g., in cases in which contradictory information or information of variable quality is encountered during Web
search).
Epistemic scent as a guiding parameter. When an epistemic goal component is active due to the characteristics of
the search task and the nature of the search results encountered, a second scent parameter becomes available, namely
the spread of activation from proximal cues for information

Based on the theoretical framework illustrated in Figure 3
we predicted that – given certain preconditions – Web navigation would be substantially guided by quality evaluations
in addition to topicality evaluations. The two experimental
studies reviewed confirmed these expectations. Searchers in
different experimental conditions were presented with
search results that were equivalent with regard to topical
relevance. Experimental manipulations involved the presentation format (list versus grid), the trustworthiness order
(optimal versus reversed) and the availability of qualityrelated proximal cues (source categories). Additionally, we
distinguished searchers with naïve and sophisticated EBs.
The results yielded various effects of quality-related manipulations and of searchers’ EBs on attention distribution,
selection behavior, and verbal utterances. IFT and other
topicality-oriented models of Web search would not have
predicted these effects, because the topical relevance of

Proximal cues

Desired distal information
Topical Goal

cell
medical
patient
treatments
dose

IS

cancer

beam
Epistemic Goal
.org
expertise
scientific
trustworthy
journal
reliable

ES
Figure 4: Extension of Information Foraging Theory

2282

quality (e.g., the words “scientific”, “journal” or “.org” in a
search result description) to the representation of the current
epistemic goal component (e.g., reliable and trustworthy information provided by experts). This epistemic scent (ES)
based on information quality, can be taken into account in
addition to the topicality-based information scent for guiding Web navigation. An open issue might relate to the integration of information scent with epistemic scent (e.g., by
summing up activations, applying “metacognitive” rules).
Epistemic knowledge: Concepts and rules. To account for
effects of EBs and quality-related cues on SERPs we suggest not only to model searchers’ domain knowledge but
also their epistemic knowledge. Epistemic knowledge comprises conceptual knowledge (e.g., knowing that information
in a scientific journal provided by experts is trustworthy, see
the lower part of Figure 4). Conceptual epistemic knowledge is necessary to interpret quality cues on SERPs and to
judge the epistemic scent of search results. Epistemic
knowledge also comprises procedural rules that guide systematic quality evaluations (e.g., recognizing good and unbiased Web information) and allow to handle information of
variable quality (e.g., selection and attention behavior).
These procedural rules will, however, strongly depend on
whether search interfaces provide the information necessary
for their application. Conceptual and procedural components
of epistemic knowledge together can be used to model the
influence of searchers’ EBs on Web navigation. The proposed extensions of IFT would broaden its scope to include
search tasks that require quality evaluations. Based on these
extensions, IFT could be used to model aspects of users’
Web navigation behavior that are not determined by topicality alone. Furthermore, these extensions are in line with the
general assumptions of IFT and with our framework on the
preconditions of quality evaluations (Figure 3). Moreover,
they are consistent with the pattern of results obtained in the
two experimental studies reviewed in this paper. Finally,
they would allow for novel predictions on how domain and
epistemic knowledge in combination can affect quality
evaluations due to their associations in semantic memory.

References
Chen, S., & Chaiken, S. (1999). The heuristic-systematic
model in its broader context. In S. Chaiken & Y. Trope
(Eds.), Dual-Process Theories in Social Psychology (pp.
73-96). New York: Guilford Press
Cho, J., & Roy, S. (2004). Impact of search engines on page
popularity. In Proceedings of the 13th international conference on World Wide Web. WWW 2004. ACM Press,
New York, NY, 20-29.
Eysenbach, G., Powell, J., Kuss, O., & Sa, E.-R. (2002).
Empirical studies assessing the quality of health information for consumers on the World Wide Web. A systematic
review. Journal of the American Medical Association,
287, 2691-2700.
Fu, W-T.F., & Pirolli, P. (2007). SNIF-ACT: a cognitive
model of user navigation on the World Wide Web. Human Computer Interaction, 22, 355-412.

Hofer, B. K. (2004). Epistemological understanding as a
metacognitive process: Thinking aloud during online
searching. Educational Psychologist, 39, 43-55.
Horrigan, J. (2006). The internet as a resource for news and
information about science. Pew Internet & American Life
Project. Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.org/ Reports/2006/The-Internet-as-a-Resource-for-News-andInformation-about-Science.aspx
Juvina, I. & Van Oostendorp, H. (2008). Modeling semantic
and structural knowledge in Web navigation. Discourse
Processes, 45, 346-364.
Kammerer, Y., & Gerjets, P. (2010). How the interface design influences users’ spontaneous trustworthiness evaluations of Web search results: Comparing a list and a grid
interface. In C. Morimoto, & H. Instance (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2010 Symposium on Eye Tracking Research &
Applications ETRA ’10 (pp. 299-306). New York, NY:
ACM.
Kammerer, Y., Wollny, E., Gerjets, P., & Scheiter, K.
(2009). How authority-related epistemological beliefs and
salience of source information influence the evaluation of
Web search results – An eye tracking study. In N. A.
Taatgen & H. van Rijn (Eds.), Proceedings of the 31st
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
2158-2163). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Kitajima, M., Blackmon, M.H., & Polson, P.G. (2000). A
Comprehension-based Model of Web Navigation and Its
Application to Web Usability Analysis. Proceedings of
CHI 2000, ACM Press, 357-373.
Miller, C. S., & Remington, R. W. (2004). Modeling information navigation: Implications for information architecture. Human-Computer Interaction, 19, 225-271.
Moharan-Martin, J. M. (2004). How internet users find, evaluate, and use online health information: A cross-cultural
review. CyberPsychology & Behavior, 7, 497-510.
Pan, B., Hembrooke, H., Joachims, T., Lorigo, L., Gay, G.,
& Granka, L. (2007). In Google we trust: Users’ decisions
on rank, position, and relevance. Journal of ComputerMediated Communication, 12, 801–823.
Pirolli, P. (2007). Information Foraging Theory. Adaptive
interaction with information. New York: Oxford University Press.
Rieh, S. Y. & Danielson, D. R. (2007). Credibility: A multidisciplinary framework. In B. Cronin (Ed.), Annual Review of Information Science and Technology (Vol. 41, pp.
307-364). Medford, NJ: Information Today.
Strømsø, H.I., & Bråten, I. (2010). The role of personal
epistemology in the self-regulation of Internet-based
learning. Metacognition and Learning, 5, .91-111.
Taraborelli, D. 2008. How the Web is changing the way we
trust. In A. Briggle, K. Waelbers, P.A.E. Brey (Eds.),
Current Issues in Computing and Philosophy. IOS Press,
Amsterdam.
Whitmire, E. (2003). Epistemological beliefs and the information-seeking behavior of undergraduates. Library & Information Science Research, 25, 127-142.

2283

