UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Understanding the Brain as an Endogenously Active Mechanism

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/89c1x2jh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Bechtel, William
Abrahamsen, Adele

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Understanding the Brain as an Endogenously Active Mechanism
William Bechtel (bill@mechanism.ucsd.edu)
Department of Philosophy, University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093-0119 USA

Adele Abrahamsen (aabrahamsen@ucsd.edu)
Center for Research in Language, University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

The investigation of endogenous activity, though less influential, has historical roots nearly as deep as those of the
reactive approach. It was promoted by Thomas Graham
Brown (1914), for example, who studied decerebrate and
deafferented cats in Sherrington’s laboratory at Liverpool
from 1910 to 1913. He found that the isolated spinal cord,
even when not receiving inputs, generates patterns of activity comparable to those exhibited during motor behavior
elicited by stimuli. Brown’s emphasis on endogenous activity initially was largely ignored (for discussion, see Stuart &
Hultborn, 2008) but was revived several decades later when
biologists recognized a class of neural circuits—central
pattern generators—whose self-sustaining patterns of activity generated rhythmic motor behavior even in the absence
of sensory input. After Wilson and Wyman (1965) pioneered this construct in their account of locust flight, others
identified central pattern generators in the brain stem and
spinal cord for walking, swimming, respiration, circulation,
and other behaviors for which oscillatory control was crucial (Grillner, 2003). Endogenous activity has received far
less attention from those studying sensory processing and
central cognition rather than motor control, despite indications of endogenous oscillatory activity in cerebral cortex
using techniques ranging from single cell recording to EEG
and fMRI. In the next section we describe highlights from
this research and in the subsequent section briefly explore
the implications for reconstruing how we understand cognitive activity. Most important, if the conception of the brain
as endogenously active is taken seriously, it profoundly
challenges the reactive perspective that has dominated much
of cognitive science as well as neuroscience: stimuli or tasks
must be regarded not as initiating activity in an inactive system, but rather as perturbing endogenous dynamic behavior.
The slow pace at which these fields are achieving a
change of perspective is unsurprising considering the history of other sciences. Although Max Planck was exaggerating when he said “A new scientific truth does not triumph
by convincing its opponents . . . but rather because its opponents eventually die . . .,” the considerable costs and uncertain benefits of change make it a tough sell. Uneven acceptance of Einstein’s revolutionary proposals is a familiar example. Less remarked upon is the delayed impact of
changes in the sciences on philosophy of science. For example, this young field (which did not even have a journal until
1934) did not exhibit acute concern with the epistemological
foundations of science until it was confronted with Ein-

Abstract
Although a reactive framework has long been dominant in
cognitive science and neuroscience, an alternative framework
emphasizing dynamics and endogenous activity has recently
gained prominence. We review some of the evidence for endogenous activity and consider the implications not only for
understanding cognition but also for accounts of explanation
offered by philosophers of science. Our recent characterization of dynamic mechanistic explanation emphasizes the coordination of accounts of mechanisms that identify parts and
operations with computational models of their activity. These
can, and should, be extended to incorporate attention to
mechanisms that are not only active, but endogenously active.
Keywords: philosophy of science; mechanistic explanation;
dynamics; endogenous brain activity, resting state fMRI,
brain default network

Introduction
Observe a living organism, from a bacterium to a fellow
human being, and you see an endogenously active system.
Introspect and you will observe, as did William James, a
continual flow of thoughts. If pressed, most cognitive scientists will acknowledge that neural systems—from individual
neurons to the brain as a whole—exhibit endogenous activity. That is, some of the activity is internally (Greek endo)
produced (German gennan); the causes and control of this
activity is inside the system rather than reactive to inputs
from outside the system. But cognitive scientists tend to
disregard this when designing studies. Those in psychology
present discrete stimuli in structured tasks designed to permit statistical analysis of the behavioral effects of independent variables. Those in neuroscience, following the tradition
of Charles Scott Sherrington (1923), commonly treat the
brain as a reactive system in which sensory inputs initiate
neural processing that results ultimately in motor responses.
They may stimulate specific neurons or provide sensory
inputs with specific properties so that recorded neural activity can be analyzed in terms of responses to inputs. In both
fields, variations in activity that cannot be associated with
an input are treated as random fluctuations (noise). There is
no doubt that this reactive framework in psychology and
neuroscience has been enormously productive in identifying
the parts, operations, and organization of the mechanisms
responsible for cognition. It soon reaches its limits, though,
in seeking accounts of the orchestrated functioning of those
components: their dynamics and coordination in real time.

31

development of digital EEG and of powerful statistical
techniques for decomposing complex EEG signals into
component waveforms brought further discoveries; notably,
very high-frequency (25-100 Hz) gamma waves were
prominent in addition to beta waves when people performed
various cognitive tasks. Moreover, synchronized oscillations
at all of these frequencies were found in both active and
passive conditions, but at different amplitudes.
Thus, both single-cell recording and EEG studies have
provided evidence for endogenous brain activity. In this
paper we will focus on yet another line of evidence offered
by recent work on resting-state fMRI. The BOLD (blood
oxygen level dependent) signal employed in fMRI research
registers the oxygen concentrations in the brain within areas
that can be as small as 2 mm. Until recently fMRI research
focused nearly exclusively on finding higher values in the
BOLD signal when a task condition is compared to a control
or resting state condition.1 For example, semantic processing of words (task condition) would be contrasted to reading
words aloud (control condition) or to lying still in the scanner with eyes closed (resting condition). The interest in
neuroimaging during a resting state, rather than during task
performance, developed from researchers’ occasional observations that a number of brain areas routinely exhibited
less activity in task situations than in the resting state. To
explore further these intriguing observations, Shulman et al.
(1997) conducted a meta-analysis of studies in which a task
condition was compared to a non-task condition in which
the same stimulus was present. They found that the areas
commonly less active in task situations included posterior
cingulate cortex (PCC), precuneus, inferior parietal cortex
(IPC), left dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex (left DLPFC), and
a medial frontal strip that continued through the inferior
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), left inferior frontal cortex,
and left inferior frontal gyrus to the right amygdala. Turning
the focus from the fact that these areas are less active during
tasks to the fact that they are more active in the absence of
task requirements, Raichle and his collaborators (Raichle et
al., 2001) suggested that together these areas constitute a
default network.
A major advance in understanding the default network resulted from analyzing the temporal dynamics of the BOLD
signal. A pioneering dynamical analysis of fMRI data was
provided by Biswal, Yetkin, Haughton, and Hyde (1995),
who obtained BOLD signal values every 250 msec after a
hand movement and identified spontaneous low frequency

stein’s proposals and their aftermath—a response that necessarily involved at least a short delay. However, delays in
uptake have been far greater for developments in sciences
other than physics, notably the biological and cognitive sciences. Philosophers of science did not even recognize the
dominant mode of explanation in these sciences—
mechanistic explanation—until the 1990s and especially
after 2000. More recently, we have argued that such developments as computational modeling of the dynamics of
cognitive and neural mechanisms require philosophers of
science to extend their notion of mechanism to include dynamic mechanistic explanation. In the last section of this
paper we will briefly characterize these two explanatory
frameworks and consider how the philosophical understanding of dynamic mechanistic explanation can incorporate the
implications of scientific work on endogenous activity.

Evidence that the Brain is Endogenously
Active
Although lesion and stimulation techniques have been important in identifying brain regions involved in different
cognitive activities, since the mid-20th century the greatest
insights have come from techniques in which researchers
record brain activity of individual neurons (single or multicell recording) or brain regions (EEG and fMRI). Most
commonly these techniques have been employed within the
reactive framework in which stimuli are presented or tasks
are assigned, responses within the brain recorded, and these
responses pooled for analysis to remove variability not associated with the intervention.
Each of these techniques, though, also has been employed
in ways that reveal endogenous brain activity. Notably,
Rodolfo Llinás employed intracellular recordings to identify
systematic variations in the conductance of calcium ions
across neural membranes. He showed how the manner in
which these conductances varied through time enabled neurons in the inferior olive, a brainstem nucleus, to function as
single-cell oscillators “capable of self-sustained rhythmic
firing independent of synaptic input” (Llinás, 1988, p.
1659). (For a review of evidence and models showing how
these intrinsic oscillations when combined with synaptic
processes can generate synchronous thalamocortical oscillations, see Destexhe & Sejnowski, 2003.)
A second line of evidence for endogenous brain activity,
consistent with that of single-cell recording, emerged from
earlier studies by Hans Berger (1929) pioneering the identification of distinctive waveforms in electroencephalograph
(EEG) recordings of brain activity. When he presented no
stimuli or task demands but simply had subjects sit awake
with their eyes closed, he obtained high-amplitude oscillations between 8 and 12 Hz that he dubbed alpha waves.
When subjects instead viewed a stimulus or solved a problem, alpha waves were supplanted by lower-amplitude,
higher-frequency beta waves (12-30 Hz). Soon thereafter it
was determined that the EGG signal captured, not action
potentials, but rather synchronized sub-threshold electrical
potentials across a population of neurons. In the 1960s, the

1

In referring to resting states, the assumption is not that the subject’s brain is resting, but that he or she is not engaged in a specific
task or responding to a specific stimulus. Often the subject is asked
to fixate on a cross-hair or lie still in the scanner with eyes closed
but not asleep. Fluctuations in activity that can be linked to physiological activity (cardiac or respiratory activity) are eliminated from
the data through linear regression. In a critique of this research,
Morcom and Fletcher (2007) focused on the privileging of the
resting state. The insights into the default network on which we
focus, however, do not rely on the resting state being privileged
but simply as revealing ongoing activity in brain networks not
employed in cognitive tasks.

32

work showed positive correlations with amplitude in alpha
and beta band oscillations while the attention network exhibited negative correlations in these frequency bands.
These correlations may reflect systemic coherence in brain
functioning. In the cortex of mammals, the amplitude
(power density) of EEG oscillations has been found to be
inversely proportional to their frequency (1/f). Even more
interesting, the phase of lower-frequency oscillations seems
to modulate the amplitude of those at higher frequencies,
which results in a nesting relation between the frequency
bands. (Lakatos et al., 2005, refer to this as "oscillatory hierarchy hypothesis") In addition, oscillations at lower frequencies tend to synchronize over more widely distributed
areas of the brain than those at higher frequencies (Buzsáki
& Draguhn, 2004). Such coupling can be particularly important when the brain is perturbed by a stimulus, since a
modulation in low-frequency oscillations can, through
phase-locking with higher-frequency oscillations, yield
rapid changes at those frequencies.

(less than 0.1 Hz) fluctuations in sensorimotor cortex. These
fluctuations were synchronized across the left and right
hemispheres and with those in other motor areas, which was
interpreted as evidence of functional connectivity among all
these areas. Accordingly, the approach is referred to as functional connectivity MRI (fcMRI).
Employing fcMRI, Greicius, Krasnow, Reiss, and Menon
(2003) demonstrated that if they used the PCC as a seed for
statistical analysis, they could identify synchronized fluctuations in a large cluster of areas: medial prefrontal cortex
(including inferior ACC and orbitofrontal cortex), left
DLPFC, inferior parietal cortex bilaterally, left inferolateral
temporal cortex, and left parahippocampal gyrus. Taking
instead the inferior ACC as the seed area, they found correlated fluctuations in the PCC, medial prefrontal cortex/orbital frontal cortex, the nucleus accumbens, and the
hypothalamus/midbrain. Since these regions were virtually
the same as those showing activity in Shulman’s resting
state data, Greicius et al. construed this as evidence for “a
cohesive, tonically active, default mode network” (p. 256)
with two subnetworks.
While the default network exhibits greater activity in the
resting state than in task conditions, the areas showing
greater activity in task conditions still generate a BOLD
signal in the resting state and one can find correlations in
the dynamics across these areas (synchronized oscillations).
These synchronized oscillations are, however, out of phase
with those in the default network. Comparing the default
network with one that exhibited greater activation in an attention-demanding task (intraparietal sulcus, frontal eye
field, middle temporal region, supplementary motor areas,
and the insula), Fox et al. (2005) described oscillations in
the two networks as anticorrelated, whereas oscillations for
different areas within each network were positively correlated. This shows that both the default network and the network involved in attention-demanding tasks are coordinating their activities within themselves in the absence of external stimulation or task demands.
Researchers subsequently identified additional networks
using this strategy. That is, a set of areas with correlated
dynamics (synchronized oscillations) under resting state
conditions were posited to constitute a network, further evidenced by negative correlations with other networks (e.g.,
Mantini, Perrucci, Del Gratta, Romani, & Corbetta, 2007,
differentiate six anticorrelated networks). Fox and Raichle
(2007) concluded: “A consistent finding is that regions with
similar functionality—that is, regions that are similarly
modulated by various task paradigms—tend to be correlated
in their spontaneous BOLD activity.”
Although the oscillations revealed in fMRI are of a much
lower frequency (< 0.1 Hz) than those usually reported in
EEG (1-80 Hz), researchers have found ways to relate them.
Mantini et al., for example, found that “Each brain network
was associated with a specific combination of EEG
rhythms, a neurophysiological signature that constitutes a
baseline for evaluating changes in oscillatory signals during
active behavior” (p. 13170). For example, the default net-

The Significance of Endogenous Brain Activity
for Understanding Cognition
One might acknowledge endogenous activity in various
brain networks, but deny that it is of any cognitive significance. Perhaps it merely reflects basic metabolic activity
and bears no implications for cognition. However, the fact
that each network oscillates at a characteristic frequency,
,rather than fluctuating randomly, suggests that endogenous
activity has implications for understanding brain activity
generally—including activity during cognitive functioning.
We briefly explore different ways in which endogenous
activity may be important for understanding the brain as a
system for cognition.
First, if a mechanism responds to a stimulus by increasing
its activity, and that activity already is oscillating, response
to the stimulus will vary depending on the phase of the oscillation when the stimulus arrives. This is true of individual
neurons. If the membrane voltage of a neuron oscillates
endogenously in a range below zero mV, as the evidence
developed by Llinás and others indicates, then it will require
stronger input to exceed the threshold for generating an action potential when it happens to be at its most negative
phase. The same principle applies to populations of neurons
whose oscillations are synchronized. In a variety of tasks in
which a stimulus evokes a behavioral response, it is known
that the response correlates with the magnitude of the
BOLD signal. Fox, Snyder, Zacks, and Raichle (2005)
therefore investigated whether these effects could be explained by synchronized spontaneous fluctuations in neuronal activity detectable with fMRI. Subjects were instructed to press a button with the right hand when a stimulus was detected, resulting in evoked activity in the left
somatosensory cortex. The researchers hypothesized that the
ongoing spontaneous fluctuations in the right somatosensory
cortex provided an accurate measure of the spontaneous
contribution to activity in the left somatosensory area at
each timestep and succeeded in showing that these sponta-

33

network itself exhibits a small-world architecture with hubs.
An important question is how such organization might arise.
Rubinov, Sporns, van Leeuwen, and Breakspear (2009) advanced the intriguing possibility that oscillatory neurons,
developing connections when synchronized, might self organize into a small world network with hubs. In support of
this proposal they described a model by Gong and van
Leeuwen (2004) that employs a logistic map activation
function for individual units that endogenously exhibit chaotic behavior. This enables the emergence of temporary
patterns of synchronized oscillations even in the absence of
external stimulation. A Hebbian learning procedure establishes new connections between pairs of units whose activity is synchronized and prunes those between unsynchronized units. Even when these networks begin with random
connectivity, they develop clusters linked to each other
through hubs. However, in real brains the initial state already involves local regions with interconnections and experience further shapes the emerging organization such that
the outcome is a highly correlated brain capable of maintaining multiple anticorrelated networks. That is, the architecture of the information processing system may be shaped
by both endogenous and exogenous activity.
In this section we have considered three suggestions as to
how endogenous activity in the brain may contribute to its
functioning as a cognitive system. Although it is too early to
judge which will prove most fruitful, clearly the time for
dismissing endogenous activity as mere noise has passed.

neous fluctuations contributed significantly to the amplitude
of blood flow in the left somatosensory areas after each
stimulus. In fact, the task-related increased blood flow could
be analyzed as a linear addition to the current amplitude of
the spontaneous fluctuation. From this they inferred that the
underlying spontaneous fluctuations affected perception and
behavior. They supported this conclusion more directly in a
subsequent study, in which they determined that spontaneous fluctuations accounted for variability in the force with
which subjects pressed the button (Fox, Snyder, Vincent, &
Raichle, 2007). When subjects were instructed as to how
forcefully they should press the button, the pattern of neuronal activity was very different than that which arose when
they were not instructed, allowing the investigators to discount the possibility that what they took to be spontaneous
variability was in fact an evoked response. Thus, their study
can be taken as initial evidence that the variability in endogenous brain activity is one source of the variability in
measures of cognitive activity.
Second, endogenous activity in the brain’s default network is the most obvious candidate for the neural underpinnings of mindwandering (Antrobus, Singer, Goldstein, &
Fortgang, 1970). In one of the early fMRI studies using the
resting state, Andreasen et al. (1995) queried subjects about
what they were doing and elicited reports of being engaged
in “a mixture of freely wandering past recollection, future
plans, and other personal thoughts and experiences.” Since
these activities involve episodic memory, and episodic
memory tasks are among those which do not lead to lower
activity in the default network, Andreasen et al. and subsequent researchers (e.g., Buckner & Carroll, 2007) have suggested that the default network is involved in recalling personal experiences and anticipating future ones. Intriguingly,
Li, Yan, Bergquist, and Sinha (2007) correlated trials on
which subjects failed to detect stop signals in behavioral
tasks with increased activity in the default network, as one
would expect if that network were involved in a person
thinking distracting thoughts about past and future experiences. One factor that renders problematic such a characterization of the activity of the default network is that the
oscillatory behavior of the default network is maintained as
well in sleep (Fukunaga et al., 2006) and under anesthesia
(Vincent et al., 2007), when presumably spontaneous
thoughts are not occurring.
Third, endogenous brain activity might be crucial for
building and maintaining certain types of organization in the
nervous system required for cognitive activity. There is
growing evidence that the brain exhibits small-world organization (Watts & Strogratz, 1998) in which most connections link neighboring neurons, creating clusters that can
collaborate in processing specific information, but a few
long range connections enable overall coordination (Sporns
& Zwi, 2004). There also is evidence that while most brain
areas have connections to only a few other areas, some have
a large number of connections, thereby constituting hubs.
Such an architecture provides a highly efficient organization
for information processing, and it is notable that the default

Endogenously Activity and Mechanistic
Explanation
The evidence for endogenous activity in brains presents
challenges not only to the ways in which cognitive scientists
understand cognitive activity but also to philosophers’ construal of the explanatory frameworks used in science. We
mentioned above that these construals lag behind the sciences, often far more than necessary. Until recently, philosophical accounts of explanation focused primarily on
laws and construed explanation as the subsumption of phenomena to be explained under these laws. While such an
approach might work in physics, where there are many well
established laws, it does not characterize explanations in the
life sciences, where there are few laws but an abundance of
phenomena to be explained (Cummins, 2000). What form of
explanation is appropriate? In the past 20 years a number of
philosophers of science have finally paid attention to biologists and, following their lead, construed explanation as the
characterization of the mechanism responsible for a phenomenon of interest (Bechtel & Richardson, 1993; Bechtel
& Abrahamsen, 2005; Machamer, Darden, & Craver, 2000;
Thagard, 2006).
Although there are minor differences among these various
accounts of mechanistic explanation, they concur in construing a mechanism as consisting of component parts, each of
which performs one or more operations. Each operation
produces change in another part that triggers or affects the
operation of that part, and so forth. Cognitive psychologists,

34

A self-sustaining oscillatory mechanism can account for
the endogenous activity found in the brain, but now new
explanatory tasks arise. First, the phenomenon of interest is
typically not generated by a single oscillatory mechanism
but by the coordinated behavior of multiple oscillators.
Since Huygens we have known that if a signal can be passed
between oscillators, they can synchronize their oscillations.
However, depending on the particular ways in which oscillators are organized into a system, a population of oscillators can come to exhibit extremely complex behavior. Second, even a single oscillator can be perturbed by external
inputs and the resulting change in its functioning can be
complex. Complexity is even greater when a population of
oscillators already exhibiting complex behavior is perturbed. These are the sorts of challenges faced in understanding how the brain, viewed as an endogenously active
system, is presented with stimuli or tasks. Philosophical
accounts of explanation must also reflect these challenges
confronted in neuroscience and cognitive science.

traditionally have posited operations that transform, copy, or
move representations without localizing them in parts of the
brain. Cognitive neuroscientists (and growing numbers of
cognitive psychologists) emphasize localization and choose
operations at the appropriate grain for their brain recording
technology (Bechtel, 2008).
Given the focus on specifying a mechanism to explain a
given phenomenon, it is natural to conceive of the mechanism as having a specific beginning condition and continuing its operations until its task is completed. This sequential
conception of mechanism is most clearly captured in the
definition offered by Machamer, Darden, and Craver
(2000): “Mechanisms are entities [parts] and activities [operations] organized such that they are productive of regular
changes from start or set-up to finish or termination conditions.” If the start or set up conditions involve a stimulus or
task originating from outside the mechanism, we arrive at
the construal of a mechanism not only as sequential but also
as reactive.
This reactive conception of a mechanism accords well
with the accounts offered in many areas of biology and cognitive science, but it is not adequate to characterize endogenously active systems as discussed in the previous sections.
A sequentially organized mechanism will not exhibit endogenous activity. A minimal first step towards a mechanism capable of endogenous activity retains the general sequential conception of the overall functioning of the mechanism but allows operations that are viewed as later in the
sequential order to feed back, either negatively or positively,
on operations thought of as earlier. With even a single negative feedback loop it is possible to generate oscillatory behavior. It has long been known (Goodwin, 1965) that if the
operations are appropriately non-linear and the system is
open to sources of energy, these oscillations may be selfsustained and not dampen to a steady state over time. The
same is true of mechanisms employing positive feedback or
cyclic organization (see Bechtel & Abrahamsen, 2010).
Accommodating these organizational principles requires
dropping the sequential characterization of a mechanism and
instead coordinating accounts of parts and operations with
accounts of their dynamics. The conception of mechanism
hence becomes more dynamic: “A mechanism is a structure
performing a function in virtue of its component parts, component operations, and their organization. The orchestrated
functioning of the mechanism, manifested in patterns of
change over time in properties of its parts and operations, is responsible for one or more phenomena” (Bechtel
& Abrahamsen, in press). Accounts that utilize this conception exemplify what we have recently called dynamic
mechanistic explanation. Often such accounts incorporate
computational modeling of the real-time dynamics produced
by feedback loops and other forms of cyclic organization.
Moreover, a dynamic conception of mechanism and mechanistic explanation is compatible with the non-sequential
organization, non-linear interactions, and openness to energy required for endogenous operation.

References
Andreasen, N. C., O'Leary, D. S., Cizadlo, T., Arndt, S.,
Rezai, K., Watkins, G. L., et al. (1995). Remembering the
past: two facets of episodic memory explored with positron emission tomography. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152 (11), 1576-1585.
Antrobus, J. S., Singer, J. L., Goldstein, S., & Fortgang, M.
(1970). Mindwandering and cognitive structure. Transactions of the New York Academy of Sciences, 32, 242-252.
Bechtel, W. (2008). Mental mechanisms. London:
Routledge.
Bechtel, W., & Abrahamsen, A. (2005). Explanation: A
mechanist alternative. Studies in History and Philosophy
of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 36, 421-441.
Bechtel, W., & Abrahamsen, A. (2010). Complex biological
mechanisms: Cyclic, oscillatory, and autonomous. In C.
A. Hooker (Ed.), Philosophy of complex systems. Handbook of the philosophy of science, Volume 10. New York:
Elsevier.
Bechtel, W., & Abrahamsen, A. (in press). Dynamic
mechanistic explanation: Computational modeling of circadian rhythms as an exemplar for cognitive science.
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A.
Bechtel, W., & Richardson, R. C. (1993). Discovering complexity: Decomposition and localization as strategies in
scientific research. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Berger, H. (1929). Über daas Elektroenkephalogramm des
Menschen. Archiv für Psychiatrie und Nervenkrankheiten,
87 (527-570).
Biswal, B., Yetkin, F. Z., Haughton, V. M., & Hyde, J. S.
(1995). Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of
resting human brain using echo-planar MRI. Magnetic
Resonance in Medicine, 34 (4), 537-541.
Brown, T. G. (1914). On the nature of the fundamental activity of the nervous centres; together with an analysis of
the conditioning of rhythmic activity in progression, and a

35

Li, C.-S. R., Yan, P., Bergquist, K. L., & Sinha, R. (2007).
Greater activation of the "default" brain regions predicts
stop signal errors. Neuroimage, 38 (3), 640-648.
Llinás, R. R. (1988). The intrinsic electrophysiological
properties of mammalian neurons: Insights into central
nervous system function. Science, 242 (4886), 1654-1664.
Machamer, P., Darden, L., & Craver, C. F. (2000). Thinking
about mechanisms. Philosophy of Science, 67, 1-25.
Mantini, D., Perrucci, M. G., Del Gratta, C., Romani, G. L.,
& Corbetta, M. (2007). Electrophysiological signatures of
resting state networks in the human brain. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 104 (32), 1317013175.
Morcom, A. M., & Fletcher, P. C. (2007). Does the brain
have a baseline? Why we should be resisting a rest.
Neuroimage, 37 (4), 1073-1082.
Raichle, M. E., MacLeod, A. M., Snyder, A. Z., Powers, W.
J., Gusnard, D. A., & Shulman, G. L. (2001). A default
mode of brain function. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 98
(2), 676-682.
Rubinov, M., Sporns, O., van Leeuwen, C., & Breakspear,
M. (2009). Symbiotic relationship between brain structure
and dynamics. BMC Neuroscience, 10 (1), 55.
Sherrington, C. S. (1923). The integrative action of the
nervous system. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Shulman, G. L., Fiez, J. A., Corbetta, M., Buckner, R. L.,
Miezin, F. M., Raichle, M. E., et al. (1997). Common
blood flow changes across visual tasks. II. Decreases in
cerebral cortex. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9 (5),
648-663.
Sporns, O., & Zwi, J. D. (2004). The small world of the
cerebral cortex. Neuroinformatics, 2 (2), 145-162.
Stuart, D. G., & Hultborn, H. (2008). Thomas Graham
Brown (1882-1965), Anders Lundberg (1920-), and the
neural control of stepping. Brain Research Reviews, 59
(1), 74-95.
Thagard, P. (2006). Hot thought: Mechanisms and applications of emotional cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Vincent, J. L., Patel, G. H., Fox, M. D., Snyder, A. Z.,
Baker, J. T., Van Essen, D. C., et al. (2007). Intrinsic
functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain.
Nature, 447 (7140), 83-86.
Watts, D., & Strogratz, S. (1998). Collective dynamics of
small worlds. Nature, 393 (440-442).
Wilson, D. M., & Wyman, R. J. (1965). Motor output patterns during random and rhythmic stimulation of locust
thoracic ganglia. Biophysical Journal, 5 (2), 121-143.

theory of the evolution of function in the nervous system.
The Journal of Physiology, 48 (1), 18-46.
Buckner, R. L., & Carroll, D. C. (2007). Self-projection and
the brain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11 (2), 49-57.
Buzsáki, G., & Draguhn, A. (2004). Neuronal oscillations in
cortical networks. Science, 304 (5679), 1926-1929.
Cummins, R. (2000). "How does it work?" versus "what are
the laws?": Two conceptions of psychological explanation. In F. Keil & R. Wilson (Eds.), Explanation and cognition (pp. 117-144). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Destexhe, A., & Sejnowski, T. J. (2003). Interactions between membrane conductances underlying thalamocortical slow-wave oscillations. Physiological Reviews, 83 (4),
1401-1453.
Fox, M. D., & Raichle, M. E. (2007). Spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity observed with functional magnetic
resonance imaging. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 8 (9),
700-711.
Fox, M. D., Snyder, A. Z., Vincent, J. L., Corbetta, M., Van
Essen, D. C., & Raichle, M. E. (2005). The human brain
is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated
functional networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 102 (27),
9673-9678.
Fox, M. D., Snyder, A. Z., Vincent, J. L., & Raichle, M. E.
(2007). Intrinsic fluctuations within cortical systems account for intertrial variability in human behavior. Neuron,
56 (1), 171-184.
Fox, M. D., Snyder, A. Z., Zacks, J. M., & Raichle, M. E.
(2005). Coherent spontaneous activity accounts for trialto-trial variability in human evoked brain responses.
Nature Neuroscience, 9, 23-25.
Fukunaga, M., Horovitz, S. G., van Gelderen, P., de Zwart,
J. A., Jansma, J. M., Ikonomidou, V. N., et al. (2006).
Large-amplitude, spatially correlated fluctuations in
BOLD fMRI signals during extended rest and early sleep
stages. Magnetic Resonance Imaging, 24 (8), 979-992.
Gong, P., & van Leeuwen, C. (2004). Evolution to a smallworld network with chaotic units. Europhysics Letters,
67, 328-333.
Goodwin, B. C. (1965). Oscillatory behavior in enzymatic
control processes. Advances in Enzyme Regulation, 3,
425-428.
Greicius, M. D., Krasnow, B., Reiss, A. L., & Menon, V.
(2003). Functional connectivity in the resting brain: A
network analysis of the default mode hypothesis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 100 (1), 253-258.
Grillner, S. (2003). The motor infrastructure: from ion
channels to neuronal networks. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4 (7), 573-586.
Lakatos, P., Shah, A. S., Knuth, K. H., Ulbert, I., Karmos,
G., & Schroeder, C. E. (2005). An oscillatory hierarchy
controlling neuronal excitability and stimulus processing
in the auditory cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology, 94
(3), 1904-1911.

36

