UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Unique and Additive Effects of Self-Explaining and Contrasting Cases on Learning Fraction
Division
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/41r3f1h5
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)
Authors
Hattikudur, Shanta
Sidney, Pooja G.
Alibali, Martha W.
Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                  Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

 Unique and Additive Effects of Self-Explaining and Contrasting Cases
                                   on Learning Fraction Division
                                              Shanta Hattikudur
                                          University of Wisconsin - Madison
                                                Pooja G. Sidney
                                          University of Wisconsin - Madison
                                              Martha W. Alibali
                                          University of Wisconsin - Madison
Abstract: Studies show that both contrasting cases and self-explanation are useful in promoting procedural and
conceptual knowledge when learning from worked examples. It is not clear whether these instructional tools draw on
similar problem-solving skills or provide unique support for learning. The purpose of this study is to assess whether
self-explanation and contrasting cases are more effective when combined than when applied separately. To the extent
that these processes can be manipulated separately, we hypothesize that the effects of both instructional techniques
are unique, and together will lead to greater knowledge gains.
   Participants completed a pretest, assessing their ability to divide fractions, before engaging in a problem study
session and procedural lesson about fraction division. Participants then completed the posttest, which included
procedural and conceptual transfer measures. Pilot data suggest that there are differences between the benefits of
self-explanation and contrasting cases on procedural and conceptual learning.
                                                          584

