UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Using the Social of Tagging: The Interplay of Social Tags and the Strength of Association
in Navigation and Learning Processes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7gz8r73s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Held, Christoph
Cress, Ulrike

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Using the Social of Tagging: The Interplay of Social Tags and the Strength of
Association in Navigation and Learning Processes
Christoph Held (c.held@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40
72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Ulrike Cress (u.cress@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40
72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Abstract
When people navigate through the World Wide Web they
choose their path of navigation based on their prior
knowledge. This may be problematic when users have a
deficient knowledge leading them to suboptimal information.
In this study we examined how the externalized knowledge of
social tags can be used to change navigation behavior and to
trigger learning processes. In an online experiment with 531
participants we investigated the effect of the individual
strength of association on navigation processes, and how the
collective strength of association, visualized in tag clouds,
may affect individual navigation and the strength of
association. Results showed the effect of individual strength
of association on navigation behavior, selection time and
recognition. Furthermore, we found that the collective
strength of association affects navigation behavior and
triggered incidental learning processes, leading to a change of
individual strength of association.
Keywords: social tagging; tag clouds; social software;
information foraging; web search; incidental learning

Introduction
People frequently use the World Wide Web for information
and product search. In some topic domains, Web users may
only possess deficient prior knowledge and an incomplete
view of relevant aspects. A user’s knowledge may, however,
be critical for the search process and the information which
is retrieved from the Web. The Web offers enormous
quantities of heterogeneous information and products, and
each user will have to select between different links and
keywords for finding relevant resources. When users follow
navigation links based on their deficient prior knowledge
these may lead to information which will confirm or even
reinforce the deficient knowledge of that user. For example,
users might associate the treatment of a disorder with some
specific medication. Instead of considering other treatments
or medications a user may quickly select a navigation path
leading to information which reinforces potentially deficient
knowledge saying, for instance, that a specific medication is
the only reasonable treatment. This might happen when
navigating to a website from a pharmaceutical company.
So, on the one hand, the mass and the diversity of
resources available on the Web is combined with the risk
that people might select suboptimal information or products.
On the other hand, new tools may provide the opportunity to
use the mass of available information on the Web to

improve individual navigation and to adjust and change the
users’ previously deficient prior knowledge. In this paper
we address the research question how social tags, as
emerging collective information, can affect the individual
process of navigation and how social tags trigger learning
processes during navigation. In particular, we focus on
situations in which the externalized knowledge of social
tags contradicts the prior knowledge of users.
The next chapter will provide a theoretical overview on
Web navigation and its interrelation with spreading
activation, followed by an overview on social tagging and
how it may interact with cognitive processes. As a next step
we will present an experimental study on the effects of
social tags and the strength of association on navigation and
knowledge acquisition.

Theoretical Background
Information Foraging Theory
A pivotal cognitive theory of Web navigation is the
Information Foraging Theory (Pirolli, 2007; Pirolli & Card,
1999). It explains selection processes of links and
navigation paths on the Web, the so-called “information
foraging”. Taking for granted that many search tasks on the
Web require browsing activities in order to find a desired
resource (Marchionini, 2006), users will have to select
between different links and navigation paths. They will have
to decide which link may lead to a desired – and not directly
accessible – distal resource, say, a piece of information on
some Web site. When navigating the Web users have to
make judgments based on proximal cues (e.g., links) and
assess which of these cues have the highest likelihood of
leading to a desired distal resource. One of the core concepts
of the Information Foraging Theory is the so-called
“information scent” of links. The information scent
describes the subjective usefulness of links for navigation.
Links with a subjectively high probability of leading to a
desired distal resource have a high information scent and are
very likely to be selected in the search process. How will
users estimate the information scent of links?
Spreading Activation Understanding how people evaluate
the information scent of a link is closely related to models of
semantic memory and spreading activation (e.g., Anderson,

784

1983; Collins & Loftus, 1975). Cognitive models of
semantic memory assume that memory is based on a
collection of cognitive structures, so-called “chunks”. These
are organized as nodes in a large network in memory. Each
of the chunks is connected to other chunks with a different
strength of association. The strength of association derives
from the respective individual’s previous learning
experiences. When two chunks frequently co-occur in a
meaningful context, the association between these chunks
becomes stronger. For example, when Valium is often
mentioned in the context of anxiety disorders, a high
strength of association will be established. The strength of
association is important in the process of retrieving chunks
from memory. To retrieve a chunk from memory, it must be
activated by other chunks. The activation spreads from one
chunk to another, and the stronger the association, the
higher is the likelihood of exceeding a certain level of
activation for a chunk. For instance, the activation of
Valium in the context of anxiety disorders is facilitated by a
high strength of association.
In a search process a desired distal goal activates
connected chunks in semantic memory. Based on the
strength of association of connected chunks and the
resulting strength of activation, users estimate the
information scent of links: when a chunk receives a high
spreading activation through a search goal, the
corresponding link receives a high information scent, too.
For example, when the chunk Valium is highly activated by
a search goal, e.g., treatment for anxiety disorder, then the
corresponding Web link Valium would also have a high
information scent for a user.
Research on Navigation Processes Several studies have
demonstrated the effect of the information scent on Web
navigation (e.g., Blackmon, Polson, Kitajima & Lewis,
2002; Fu & Pirolli, 2007; Pirolli, Fu, Reeder & Card, 2002).
These studies have mainly used cognitive modeling of Web
navigation and validated them against actual user data.
In these studies, differences in prior knowledge were not
considered for the modeling process. In some studies, for
instance, the simulation of strengths of association and the
resulting information scents were based on the same large
text corpora and the co-occurrence of words within these
texts (Fu & Pirolli, 2007; Pirolli et al., 2002). So the focus
of these studies did not lie in investigating the effects of
differing prior knowledge, but rather in modelling the
general search process for specific search tasks. Another
aspect which has not been investigated in more detail within
the (non-social) context of these studies is learning
processes during navigation, i.e. incidental learning as a byproduct of navigation. When navigating the Web, users
process information in order to assess the information scent
of links. But the choice of the navigation path is not only a
means to an end. It may also be of importance what happens
“along the path”. Except for one study showing incidental
category learning during navigation (Pirolli, 2004) it
remains unclear how navigation itself could change the

strength of association of chunks through incidental learning
processes.
The question of learning is particularly interesting in a
social Web context, in which large numbers of other users
contribute information and, in particular, in which this
information can be used for navigation processes. New Web
technologies, like social software tools, provide this
opportunity. Social tagging systems make it possible to
learn from the externalized knowledge of a community. In
the next section we will give an overview on social tagging
and relevant studies that have been conducted in this field of
research.

Social Tags
Social tagging is the activity of annotating digital resources,
e.g. bookmarks, pictures or products, with keywords, the socalled “tags”. Tags represent metadata on resources. For
most applications each user can choose individual tags for
stored resources. Tags reflect individual associations with
resources and are based on the specific meaning or
relevance to that user. At the individual level, tags will help
users to structure, organize and find their own stored Web
resources. In a social context, tags offer the opportunity to
use other users’ navigation links for search processes.
Moreover, social tagging systems can aggregate the tags of
individual users. In this way, resources are described by the
community in a “folksonomy”, developed in a bottom-up
process of individual tagging. The aggregated tags represent
an emerging collective knowledge of Web users. These
aggregated tags can also be used as links for individual
search processes. In a social tagging system, the community
creates a network of connections between resources and
tags. The connection between a resource and a tag becomes
stronger when tags for that resource are used more
frequently by many users. The connection between two tags
becomes stronger when both tags are used together for one
resource: the more often two tags co-occur with the same
resources, the stronger they are related to each other. When
aggregating all tags from a community, a representation of
the connections between related tags and their strength of
association will emerge. Typically, tag clouds visualize
these associations and their specific strength: The font size
of tags illustrates the strength of association of tags to a
related tag or a resource (see Figure 1).

Figure 1: A tag cloud representing tags related to “red
wine” (from vinorati.com). The font size visualizes the
strength of association between “red wine” and the tag.

785

Social tagging systems may be regarded as shared
external knowledge structures of communities (Fu, 2008).
They can externalize the connections of tags and their
specific strength of association in tag clouds. Because these
associations are based on the collective tagging behavior of
a community, they can also be considered to be the
externalized associations of a particular community. The
structure of social tagging systems even constitutes an
analogy to spreading activation processes in semantic
memory models, in which tags represent the nodes of a
large network. When a tag is selected – or activated –, the
activation spreads from this tag to others, and the related
tags and their strengths of association can be visualized in
tag clouds.
So far, research on social tagging has mainly focused on
the description of regularities of tagging systems (e.g.,
Golder & Huberman, 2006) or the use of tagging systems
(e.g., Millen, Yang, Whittaker & Feinberg, 2007). But, as
stated by Fu (2008), surprisingly little is known about how
these new technologies, like social tagging systems, may
directly interact with individuals at the knowledge and
cognitive level. Some studies have investigated the
influence of tag clouds on visual attention, recognition and
tag selection (Bateman, Gutwin & Nacenta, 2008;
Rivadeneira, Gruen, Muller & Millen, 2007). But these
studies focused primarily on the visual features of tag
clouds and did not address aspects of collective knowledge,
as it is externalized in social tagging systems and tag clouds.
A study investigating the interplay between the collective
knowledge of a tagging system and the individual cognitive
level was presented by Fu in 2008. He presented a rational
model of social tagging and provided evidence for the
interaction of social and cognitive systems. That study
showed the impact of externalized knowledge structures on
individual learning processes, especially the formation of
mental categories, but did not focus on the effects of the
representation of knowledge, externalized in the form of tag
clouds, on individual navigation behavior and the strengths
of associations. A further study, which also investigated the
knowledge exchange within tagging systems dealt with the
question of how social tags affect tag choice (Kang,
Kannampallil, He & Fu, 2009). This study also showed that
the externalized knowledge of social tags will influence
individual behavior: users adapted their tag choice to the
collective structure of the social tagging system.

Research Questions and Hypotheses
Models of Information Foraging (Pirolli, 2007) assume that
processes of spreading activation are crucial for the
navigation behavior of users. So the strength of association
between a search goal and available links plays a critical
role in the selection of navigation paths. We assume that
users with deficient prior knowledge are likely to choose
navigation links that lead to suboptimal resources. So we
manipulated the users’ prior knowledge and investigated the
impact of individual strength of association on navigation
processes.

The main goal of this study is to investigate how the
collective knowledge of a community affects individual
learning and navigation processes. Can social tags be used
to change the navigation behavior of users? Will users learn
from the collective knowledge during navigation, and will
they improve the deficits of their prior knowledge
accordingly? Apart from the variation of the users’ prior
knowledge we also manipulated the strength of association
of tags. In our experiment we created a situation in which
the individual strength of association contradicts the
collective strength of association. We examined the effect of
collective strength of association on the change of
individual navigation and strength of association.
We expected (1) a main effect for both the individual
strength of association and the collective strength of
association on navigation behavior. Secondly, we expected
(2) an incidental learning process and a change of individual
strength of association during navigation through the
collective strength of association. Thirdly, we expected that
(3) in a situation of highly contradicting individual and
collective strengths of association, users will perceive a
conflict and process all tags more thoroughly and spend
more time on their selection of tags.

Experiment
Method
Participants 531 participants (179 female, 352 male; mean
age 28.94 years, SD = 9.36) were recruited on Amazon
Mechanical Turk (mturk.com), an Internet marketplace for
engaging users in online micro-tasks. The participants were
paid US-$1.20 for the experiment. The participants came
from 52 different countries. Most of the subjects lived in the
United States (41.1%) and India (36.7%).
Materials and Procedure In order to ensure that we could
actually manipulate the prior knowledge of subjects, we
selected a topic which was very likely to be mainly
unfamiliar to the subjects: wine from the Asian country of
Georgia, in particular from various wine regions of Georgia.
The experiment was set up online and all participants could
perform the task from a computer with Internet access. On
average, the experiment took about 8 minutes for each user.
We instructed the subjects that our aim was to receive
feedback on the design of Web sites dedicated to wine. The
actual goal of the task in the experimental context was not
transparent to the subjects. We did not inform them before
or during the task that we were actually measuring
navigation and learning processes.
The task consisted of two parts. In the first part subjects
had to provide feedback on design features of a wine list
from “a pilot user who is a wine lover of Georgian wines”.
The list was presented to the subjects for 30 seconds,
followed by five questions on the design of this list in order
to direct attention to it. The first independent variable - the
individual strength of association - was manipulated by this
wine list (see Figure 2).

786

The second part was a navigation task. In this part,
subjects were asked to use tag clouds as navigation links.
The subjects were told that the tags originate “from different
sources of the Internet, like online wine communities and
wine retailers”. After a basic introduction to social tags,
subjects were presented tag clouds and were asked to click
on one tag of each tag cloud that was most appropriate to
direct them to a typical Georgian wine. Overall, we
presented four tag clouds. The first and the third tag cloud
were used as case examples. Only the second and fourth tag
cloud were relevant to the experiment. In each condition
these two tag clouds were identical. These tag clouds
represented related tags (wine regions) to Georgia (see
Figure 3). After having clicked on a tag, it was colormarked and two seconds later the next tag cloud appeared.
The next tag cloud was independent of the previous
selection. Only tag clouds were presented, no corresponding
resources were displayed. After the navigation task we
presented tests measuring the dependent variables
“decision” and recognition.
Independent Variables and Design A 5 x 4 betweensubjects design was used. Subjects were randomly assigned
to one of the 20 conditions. As a first independent variable
we experimentally manipulated the individual strength of
association by varying the content of the wine list, which
was presented to the subjects in the first part of the task. We
manipulated how strongly users associate the wine region
“Kakheti” with Georgian wine. Users were presented a wine
list with five Georgian wines. In the different conditions the
number of wines coming from the region “Kakheti” was
varied. The independent variable had five continuous levels:
wines from the region “Kakheti” were either (1) not part of
the list (see Figure 2a); or (2) one time; (3) two times; (4)
three times; or (5) four times in the list (see Figure 2b).

a)

b)

Figure 2: Wine lists manipulating the individual strength of
association for the “Kakheti” region, representing the lowest
and highest levels: a) “Kakheti” is not part of the list b) 4 of
the 5 wines come from “Kakheti”.

As a second independent variable we experimentally
manipulated the collective strength of association by
varying the tag size in the tag clouds. Except for the tag
“Kakheti” none of the regions presented in the wine list
reappeared in the tag clouds. We manipulated how strongly
the fictitious tagging community associates the wine region
“Imereti” with Georgian wine by varying the tag size of
“Imereti”. The other tags did not vary in size. The
independent variable had four continuous levels: (1) the tag
“Imereti” had the same size as the tag “Kakheti” with both
tags representing the biggest tags in the tag cloud (see
Figure 3a); (2) the tag “Imereti was 33% bigger than in the
first condition; (3) the tag “Imereti” was 67% bigger than in
the first condition; (4) the tag ”Imereti” was 100% bigger
than in the first condition (see Figure 3b).
a)

b)

Figure 3: Tag clouds manipulating the collective strength
of association for “Imereti”, representing the lowest and
highest levels: a) “Imereti” has the same size as “Kakheti”
b) “Imereti” is twice as big as “Kakheti”.
Dependent Measures As dependent variables we measured
the navigation behavior of users for the two relevant tag
clouds (wine regions) by analyzing the logfiles. It was
assessed how often users clicked the tag “Kakheti” (for
which the individual strength of association was
manipulated in the wine list) or the tag “Imereti” (for which
the collective strength of association was manipulated in the
tag cloud). Accordingly, the number of clicks for navigating
the two tag clouds could range between 0 and 2 for either of
the dependent variables “Navigation Kakheti” and
“Navigation Imereti”. We also measured how much time
users spent for the selection process. We added the time
which was used for navigating each of the two tag clouds.
For the assessment of the dependent variable “decision”,
users were asked which Georgian wine region they would
select if they had to buy a typical wine from Georgia. They
had to choose between the alternatives “Kakheti” and
“Imereti”. Referring to the fluency heuristic (e.g., Schooler
& Hertwig, 2005) it is assumed that if one of the two
alternatives has a higher strength of association and is more
fluently processed, then users will infer that this alternative
has a higher value regarding to the criterion – in this case,

787

the decision which wine region is more typical of Georgia.
We assume that the decision in favor of one of the
alternatives will be based on the higher individual strength
of association for that alternative. This dependent variable
was coded (-1) for the selection of “Kakheti” and (1) for the
selection of “Imereti”.
Another dependent variable was the recognition of tags.
This measure was assessed in a multiple choice test
consisting both of tags that were presented in the tag clouds
(seven items) and tags which were not contained in the tag
clouds (nine items). The task of the subjects was to correctly
identify those tags which were presented in the tag clouds.
The score was calculated as the sum of correctly identified
items minus incorrectly marked items. Tags which were part
of the manipulation (“Kakheti” and “Imereti”) were not
considered for the recognition score.

Results
To test the impact of individual and collective strength of
association on the dependent variables, multiple regression
analyses were conducted with the predictors individual
strength of association, collective strength of association
and the individual x collective strength of association
interaction, and the dependent variables as criteria. The
predictor variables were centered, and the interaction term
was computed by a multiplication of both variables.
It was predicted that a higher individual strength of
association would lead to a higher probability of selecting a
tag corresponding to this association, whereas the
contradicting collective strength of association is assumed
to attenuate this tendency. To test these predictions, a
regression with the criterion “Navigation Kakheti” was
computed. The predictions were confirmed: the individual
strength of association for “Kakheti” significantly increased
the selection rate of the tag “Kakheti” (β = .34, p < .001),
whereas the contradicting collective strength of association
significantly decreased it (β = -.12, p < .01), adjusted R² =
.12, F(2, 528) = 38.50, p < .001. No significant interaction
was found (β = .05, p = .21).
We also predicted that a higher collective strength of
association would lead to a higher probability of selecting
the corresponding tag, whereas a contradicting individual
strength of association would lead to an opposite effect. To
test these predictions, a regression with the criterion
“Navigation Imereti” was computed. The predictions were
confirmed: the collective strength of association for
“Imereti” significantly increased the selection rate of the tag
“Imereti” (β = .24, p < .001), whereas the contradicting
individual strength of association significantly decreased it
(β = -.08, p < .05), adjusted R² = .06, F(2, 528) = 18.29, p <
.001. No significant interaction was found (β = -.03, p =
.56).
It was assumed that users would show incidental learning
when navigating through tag clouds that represent collective
strengths of associations. We predicted that users would
change their individual strength of association and adapt to
the collective strength of association. The strength of

association for either “Kakheti” or “Imereti” was assessed in
the dependent variable “decision”. On the one hand, we
assumed that a higher individual strength of association for
“Kakheti” would also lead to a higher probability of
choosing “Kakheti”. On the other hand, we predicted that
the collective strength of association for “Imereti” would
increase the individual strength of association for “Imereti”,
leading to a higher probability of deciding in favor of this
contradicting alternative. To test these predictions, a
regression with the criterion “decision” was computed. Both
predictions were confirmed: The strength of association for
“Kakheti” significantly increased the tendency to choose
this alternative (β = -.30, p < .001). The collective strength
of association for “Imereti” significantly increased the
tendency to decide in favor of the contradicting alternative
“Imereti” (β = .24, p < .001), adjusted R² = .14, F(2, 528) =
43.38, p < .001. No significant interaction was found (β =
.01, p = .82).
Furthermore, we predicted an interaction between
individual and collective strength of association for the
dependent variables recognition and selection time: we
assumed that for users with a high individual strength of
association (e.g., for “Kakheti”) a high contradicting
collective strength of association (e.g., for “Imereti”) would
lead to a cognitive conflict, and that this conflict leads to a
higher level of processing regarding all presented tags and
to a longer duration of tag selection. To test the first of these
predictions, a regression with the criterion recognition was
computed. The prediction could not be confirmed: no
significant interaction was found (β = .00, p = .95). What we
did find, however, was that increasing individual strength of
association significantly decreased performance in the
recognition test (β = -.12, p < .01). The analyses did not
reveal a significant effect for the collective strength of
association (β = .03, p = .52), adjusted R² = .01, F(2, 528) =
3.96, p < .05. To test the second of these predictions, a
regression with the criterion selection time was computed.
This prediction could not be confirmed: no significant
interaction was found (β = -.01, p = .83). But the individual
strength of association significantly decreased the time used
for the selection process: a high individual strength of
association led to a faster tag selection (β = -.16, p < .001).
The analyses did not reveal a significant effect for the
collective strength of association (β = .00, p = .96), adjusted
R² = .02, F(2, 519) = 6.51, p < .01.

Discussion
The aim of this study was to investigate the potential of
emerging collective structures of the Web, such as social
tags, on individual processes of navigation and learning. We
addressed the research question how the collective
externalized knowledge of a social tagging community
could interact with individual knowledge, and if the
navigation process per se – without the explicit intention to
learn something – is sufficient for changing individual
knowledge representations. In an experiment we
investigated how the externalized representation of the

788

associations of a community in a tag cloud affects the
individual strength of association. Through the experimental
manipulation we were able to create continuous levels for
each of the two independent variables, the individual and
collective strengths of associations.
The results showed that both the individual and the
collective strength of association affect navigation. In the
context of a Web search, these results suggest that, on the
one hand, a user’s prior knowledge is an important factor
when choosing a navigation path. On the other hand, our
results suggest that the collective knowledge of other Web
users may help to open up better navigation paths,
especially if a user’s prior knowledge is deficient or biased.
The results also show that users learn from the collective
strengths of associations and, in the case of contradicting
knowledge, that they will change their own individual
strength of association by adapting it to the collective one.
In this way, users will learn incidentally how a large
community evaluates the relevance of certain information or
concepts, and they can change their own strengths of
associations accordingly.
Furthermore, the results revealed that a high individual
strength of association leads to a faster and – as far as the
perception of other available links is concerned – to a less
thorough selection process. When a user has a strong, but
incorrect strength of association, this could lead to a fast
selection of a suboptimal navigation path. Especially in this
unfavorable case social tags may be helpful: if the collective
knowledge of a community was able to provoke a strong
cognitive conflict, this could lead to a highly improved
navigation process by that user. In this study, however, we
could not find any interactions that suggest effects of
cognitive conflicts caused by a highly contradicting
individual and collective strength of association. A possible
explanation could lie in the limitations of the scenario of
this experiment, e.g. the rather static and simple navigation
process, the small relevance of the task to the users, or the
highly unfamiliar topic domain (which had only been
selected for the purpose of manipulating the prior
knowledge of users). So future research could focus on
larger and more dynamic scenarios, combined with a variety
of topic domains with a higher degree of relevance to the
respective users. In addition, it would be interesting to
create a setting which combines both tags as metadata and
actual information resources or products.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1983). A spreading activation theory of
memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behaviour, 22, 261-295.
Bateman, S., Gutwin, C., & Nacenta, M. (2008). Seeing
things in the clouds: the effect of visual features on tag
cloud selections. Proceedings of the 19th ACM
Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia, 2008 (pp.
193-202). New York: ACM Press.
Blackmon, M. H., Polson, P. G., Kitajima, M., & Lewis, C.
(2002). Cognitive walkthrough for the web. Proceedings

of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems: Changing our world, changing
ourselves (pp. 463-470). New York: ACM Press.
Collins, A., & Loftus, E. (1975). A spreading activation
theory of semantic processing. Psychological Review, 82,
407-428.
Fu, W. (2008). The microstructures of social tagging: a
rational model. In Proceedings of the ACM 2008
conference on Computer supported cooperative work (pp.
229-238). San Diego, CA, USA: ACM.
Fu, W., & Pirolli, P. (2007). SNIF-ACT: a cognitive model
of user navigation on the world wide web. HumanComputer Interaction, 22(4), 355-412.
Golder, S., & Huberman, B. A. (2006). Usage patterns of
collaborative tagging systems. Journal of Information
Science, 32(2), 198-208.
Kang, R., Kannampallil, T., He, J., & Fu, W. (2009).
Conformity out of Diversity: Dynamics of Information
Needs and Social Influence of Tags in Exploratory
Information Search. In D. Schmorrow, I. Estabrooke, M.
Grootjen, (Eds.), Foundations of Augmented Cognition.
Neuroergonomics and Operational Neuroscience.
Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer.
Marchionini, G. (2006). Exploratory search: from finding to
understanding. Communications of the ACM, 49(4), 4146.
Millen, D., Yang, M., Whittaker, S., & Feinberg, J. (2007).
Social bookmarking and exploratory search. In
L. Bannon, I. Wagner, C. Gutwin, R. Harper, &
K. Schmidt (Eds.), Proceedings of the 10th European
Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work.
London: Springer.
Pirolli, P. (2004). InfoCLASS model: Conceptual richness
and inter-person conceptual consensus about information
collections. Cognitive Studies: Bulletin of the Japanese
Cognitive Science Society, 11(3), 197-213.
Pirolli, P. (2007). Information foraging theory: Adaptive
interaction with information. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Pirolli, P., & Card, S. K. (1999). Information foraging.
Psychological Review, 106(4), 643-675.
Pirolli, P., Fu, W., Reeder, R., & Card, S. K. (2002). A usertracing architecture for modeling interaction with the
world wide web. Proceedings of the Working Conference
on Advanced Visual Interfaces (pp. 75-83). Trento, Italy:
ACM.
Rivadeneira, A. W., Gruen, D. M., Muller, M. J., & Millen,
D. R. (2007). Getting our head in the clouds: toward
evaluation studies of tagclouds. Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, 2007 (pp. 995-998). New York: ACM Press.
Schooler, L. J., & Hertwig, R. (2005). How Forgetting Aids
Heuristic Inference. Psychological Review, 112(3), 610628.

789

