UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Using analogical learning in science curricula to improve conceptual understanding
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0c0774f2
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)
Authors
Richey, J. Elizabeth
Chang, Alicia
Nokes, Timothy J.
et al.
Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                   Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                     University of California

   Using analogical learning in science curricula to improve conceptual
                                                understanding
                                               J. Elizabeth Richey
                        Learning Research and Development Center, University of Pittsburgh
                                                   Alicia Chang
                        Learning Research and Development Center, University of Pittsburgh
                                                Timothy J. Nokes
                        Learning Research and Development Center, University of Pittsburgh
                                              Christian D. Schunn
                        Learning Research and Development Center, University of Pittsburgh
Abstract: The goal of the 21st Century Center for Research and Development in Cognition and Science Instruction
(CaSE) is to improve middle school students’ science learning by systematically applying cognitive science principles
in the revision of instructional materials and teacher professional development. In this presentation we focus on
the application of analogical learning principles to two popular middle school science curricula. Analogical learning
through comparison is a powerful activity for facilitating the acquisition of critical features and concepts underlying
concrete examples and preparing students for future learning. We instantiated these principles by creating ”con-
trasting cases” to introduce abstract science concepts in conceptually driven lessons that could easily be inserted
into existing curricula. We assessed the effectiveness of this intervention with tests targeting both the concepts that
were covered in the cases as well as transfer concepts taught later in the curriculum. We will present preliminary
data from pilot teachers.
                                                           662

