UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Virtually accommodating: Speech rate accommodation to a virtual interlocutor.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3vg3g1ds

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Casasanto, Laura Staum
Jasmin, Kyle
Casasanto, Daniel

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Virtually accommodating:
Speech rate accommodation to a virtual interlocutor.
Laura Staum Casasanto1
(laura.casasanto@mpi.nl)
1

Kyle Jasmin1
(kyle.jasmin@mpi.nl)

Daniel Casasanto1,2
(daniel.casasanto@mpi.nl)

Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Neurobiology of Language Group, Nijmegen, NL
2
Donders Center for Brain, Cognition, and Behavior, Radboud University, Nijmegen, NL
Abstract

But are immediate social motivations necessary to make
speakers accommodate? Or might speakers accommodate
even in the absence of a desire to achieve direct
interactional goals? Mechanistic theories of dialogue
(Pickering & Garrod, 2004) offer one possible alternative.
Automatic alignment processes could account for
convergence in linguistic behavior. That is, speakers might
use similar linguistic forms to those used by their
interlocutors because these forms are highly active and thus
have an advantage over alternatives in the selection process.
On another alternative, accommodation could be a
consequence of a speaker’s attempt to achieve longer-term
social goals: accommodation could be part of how speakers
develop the linguistic styles that they use to communicate
social information about themselves to others and to
indicate their membership in social groups. This could occur
in tandem with or independent of interaction-specific social
goals.
Distinguishing these alternatives is difficult because in
real-world conversations, interactional motivations are
ubiquitous; in any conversation between two real people, the
interlocutors may have social goals and relationships that
could be influencing their linguistic behavior.
Experimenters have attempted to deal with this complexity
in a few ways. Experiments using pre-recorded speech in
repetition paradigms have uncovered alignment between a
speaker and a recording (Babel, 2009). However, because
these experiments do not involve conversation, it’s difficult
to know whether the same mechanisms underlie speakers’
production in these tasks and their accommodation in
conversations.
In other experimental paradigms, the conversational
setting is retained by using a confederate (Hannah &
Murachver, 1999). However, no human confederate can
entirely prevent his or her speech from being influenced by
the naïve participant’s speech. Introducing a confederate
means losing experimental control over precisely those
social and linguistic variables that might matter the most.
This makes it difficult to assess the extent to which
accommodation on the part of the participant depends upon
their own interactional motivations, and to what extent it is a
response to their interlocutor’s behavior.
Virtual Reality (VR) provides an opportunity to engage
participants in a conversational interaction with an
interlocutor whose speech is not influenced by their speech,
and can be varied systematically along a single dimension.

Why do people accommodate to each other’s linguistic behavior?
Studies of natural interactions (Giles, Taylor & Bourhis, 1973)
suggest that speakers accommodate to achieve interactional goals,
influencing what their interlocutor thinks or feels about them. But
is this the only reason speakers accommodate? In real-world
conversations, interactional motivations are ubiquitous, making it
difficult to assess the extent to which they drive accommodation.
Do speakers still accommodate even when interactional goals
cannot be achieved, for instance, when their interlocutor cannot
interpret their accommodation behavior? To find out, we asked
participants to enter an immersive virtual reality (VR) environment
and to converse with a virtual interlocutor. Participants
accommodated to the speech rate of their virtual interlocutor even
though he could not interpret their linguistic behavior, and thus
accommodation could not possibly help them to achieve
interactional goals. Results show that accommodation does not
require explicit interactional goals, and suggest other social
motivations for accommodation.
Keywords: Conversation;
alignment; virtual reality.

interaction;

accommodation;

Introduction
Why do people accommodate to each other’s linguistic
behavior? Studies of multi-party interactions both in the
laboratory and in natural conversation have suggested that
two or more speakers in a conversation tend to align their
linguistic behavior along several dimensions: lexical choice
(Barr & Keysar, 2002; Bortfeld & Brennan, 1997;
Niederhoffer & Pennebaker, 2002), phonetics (Alim, 2004;
Pardo, 2006), and syntactic constructions (Gries, 2005),
among others. The fact that accommodation occurs is well
accepted, but the motivations for this convergence between
speakers have been a matter of debate.
Studies of natural conversational interactions have
identified social/interactional factors that influence how
much speakers accommodate (Giles, Taylor & Bourhis,
1973). Based on these studies, it appears that a speaker
accommodates towards or away from their interlocutor to
achieve interactional goals: to make one’s interlocutor do,
think, or feel things. This can involve conveying social
information, such as information about their social stances
toward their interlocutor or toward a group that their
interlocutor belongs to (Coupland, 1985). Accommodation
could also help to coordinate joint actions being negotiated
through conversation (Brennan & Clark, 1996).

127

Moreover, a virtual interlocutor cannot feel or think at all,
so participants cannot hope to influence the thoughts or
feelings of the virtual interlocutor by accommodating to
him. What happens in a conversational situation where
interactional goals cannot be achieved? Do speakers still
accommodate when their interlocutor cannot interpret their
accommodation behavior? And if so, are they motivated by
other, longer-term social goals, or is it a fully automatic
process that is independent of social factors?
To find out whether speakers accommodate in a
conversation with someone who cannot interpret their
accommodation, we asked participants to enter an
immersive VR environment and to converse with a virtual
interlocutor, VIRTUO. While accommodation could
theoretically occur along many dimensions at once, this
experiment focused on the single dimension of speech rate,
because this was easily manipulated in the virtual
interlocutor. We varied VIRTUO’s speech rate between
participants to see whether participants would adjust their
own speech rate to better match the rate at which their
virtual conversational partner was speaking.
If immediate interactional goals motivate accommodation,
then speakers in a conversation with VIRTUO should not
accommodate to his speech rate, because they cannot hope
to influence his thoughts, feelings or behavior by
accommodating to him. If speakers do accommodate to
VIRTUO by adjusting their speech rate towards his, there
are two possible explanations: either accommodation occurs
entirely automatically, or it can be motivated by social goals
with a locus outside the current interaction (i.e., long-term
social goals). To distinguish between these possibilities, we
administered a post-experiment questionnaire investigating
how participants judged VIRTUO on relevant social
dimensions. If participants’ judgments of VIRTUO correlate
with their degree of accommodation to him, then this
suggests that social goals beyond the level of the individual
conversation influence accommodation.

heard these recordings sped up by 12%, and those in the
SLOW condition heard them slowed down by 12%. Both
sets of recordings remained within the range of possible
speaking rates of a Dutch speaker, but the two rates were
noticeably different.
The virtual environment (VE) was a supermarket, which
was custom-designed for this experiment using Adobe 3ds
Max 4. The virtual supermarket consisted of a single long
aisle with shelves on both sides, stocked with products,
providing a variety of items for VIRTUO to inquire about.
The experiment was programmed and run using
WorldViz’s Vizard software. Participants wore an NVIS
nVisor SX60 head-mounted display (HMD), which
presented the VE at 1280x1024 resolution with a 60 degree
monocular field of view. Mounted on the HMD was a set of
8 reflective markers linked to a passive infrared DTrack 2
motion tracking system from ART Tracking, the data from
which was used to update the participant’s viewpoint as he
moved his head. Sounds in the VE, including the voice of
the avatar, were rendered with a 24-channel WorldViz
Ambisonic Auralizer System. The sound system was
supplemented by 4 floor shakers mounted on a raised
platform. These produced vibrations that contributed to an
illusion of motion as participants were driven through the
supermarket by VIRTUO in a specially modified virtual
golf cart.
VIRTUO was represented by a stock avatar produced by
WorldViz. The avatar’s appearance suggested that he was a
Caucasian male in his mid-twenties (the average age
guessed by participants in debriefing was 26 years old),
which matched the age of the Dutch speaker who recorded
his speech.

Methods
Participants
Members of the Radboud University community (N=62, 30
male) participated in exchange for payment. Participants
were all native speakers of Dutch between the ages of 17
and 28.

Materials
VIRTUO’s speech was pre-recorded by a male native Dutch
speaker reading in a conversational tone from a script of
statements and questions designed to simulate a
conversation about products in a grocery store. The speed of
the original recordings was manipulated without changing
the pitch of the recordings using the “change speed”
function in the audio manipulation software package
Audacity, which removes or replicates short intervals of the
acoustic signal in order to extend or shorten the overall
length of a sound clip. Participants in the FAST condition

Figure 1. VIRTUO in the virtual supermarket, from the
perspective of a participant. The arrow indicates the next
item that VIRTUO and the participants should discuss (here,
ketchup). The steering wheel of the virtual golf cart is
visible in the bottom left corner.

Procedure
Prior to entering the VE, participants were told that they
would be having a conversation with VIRTUO, a virtual

128

agent who wanted to learn more about the human world.
They entered the VE by putting on the HMD, which showed
them a virtual supermarket. When participants moved their
heads, the display changed, so they could explore the virtual
world by looking around. Participants remained seated on a
chair throughout the experiment. They traveled through the
virtual supermarket in a virtual golf cart with VIRTUO in
the drivers’ seat, so there was no need for participants to
walk in order to move down the aisle of the grocery store.
Participants were randomly assigned to the Fast or Slow
speech condition automatically by the experiment program,
so that the experimenter was not aware of which condition
participants would be in until the experiment had begun.
This minimized the possibility of experimenter expectancy
effects influencing participants’ speech rate before they
spoke with VIRTUO. Once the experiment began, all
instructions were written; therefore participants did not have
any verbal interaction with the experimenter, which could
have influenced their speech rate.
The experiment consisted of a Baseline block of trials
followed by a Conversation block. During the Baseline
trials, participants were alone in the VE, and had an
opportunity to get accustomed to their surroundings. We
collected a sample of speech during this time to use as a
Baseline speech rate. To elicit speech, we gave participants
written instructions (via the HMD) to look at 4 of the
products on the shelves in front of them, one at a time, and
describe each product briefly.
After the four Baseline trials, participants met VIRTUO,
who introduced himself in a few sentences. VIRTUO then
took participants on a tour of the grocery store, stopping at
six products (bananas, ketchup, light bulbs, toothpaste, cat
food, and beer) to ask them three or four questions about
each one. Participants responded with information about the
identity of the products, what they were made of, how they
are used in the human world, etc. Participants’ speech was
recorded through a microphone suspended from the HMD.
VIRTUO’s speech behavior created a conversational
setting, but he did not have the ability to understand or
flexibly respond to participants’ utterances. The
experimenter listened to participants’ responses from a
control booth, and pressed a button to advance VIRTUO to
the next utterance in his script. VIRTUO’s speech began
after a random delay between 150 and 400 ms, so that the
experimenter’s button-pressing (i.e., turn-taking behavior)
could not directly influence the speech rate of the
participant. If the next item in VIRTUO’s script did not
constitute a sensible response to something a participant
said, the experimenter pressed a button that caused
VIRTUO to say that he did not understand, and that they
should move on.
Speech rate (in words per second) was calculated by
transcribing participants’ speech and marking the
boundaries of their utterances as intervals in the audio and
video transcription and coding software ELAN, then
dividing the number of words transcribed by the number of
seconds in the interval. Each participant’s speech rate during

the Conversation block was compared to their own Baseline
rate.

Results and Discussion
Participants were assigned randomly to the two speed
conditions, resulting in 33 participants in the Fast condition
and 29 participants in the Slow condition. Mean speech
rates during Baseline and Conversation periods are shown
for participants assigned to the Fast and Slow conditions in
Figure 2. Results indicate that VIRTUO’s speech rate
influenced how fast the participants spoke during their
Conversation with him. Participants in the Fast condition
spoke significantly faster during their Conversation with
VIRTUO than during their Baseline measurement
(t(1,32)=4.02, p=.0003), and significantly faster than
participants in the SLOW condition (t(1,60)=2.24, p=.03),
whose Conversational speech rate did not differ from their
Baseline rate (t<1). This resulted in the predicted interaction
between Condition (Fast, Slow) and Measurement
(Baseline, Conversation; F(1,60)=4.36, p=.04; Figure 2).

Figure 2. Experimental results. Speech rate differed
between the Fast and Slow conditions during the
Conversation period but not during the Baseline period.
The fact that the Baseline speech rate did not differ
between conditions confirms that speaking with the
experimenter prior to the experiment did not differently
influence the speech of the Fast and Slow groups; rather, the
differences that appeared in the Conversation period were a
result of speaking to VIRTUO.
Participants in the SLOW condition did not speed up
significantly, but there was a trend toward speaking faster in
the Conversation condition than in the Baseline condition
among these participants. This occurred despite the fact that
their virtual interlocutor spoke slower than even their
Baseline rate on average throughout their Conversation
(VIRTUO spoke at 3.31 words per second on average in the
Slow condition, and 4.20 words per second in the Fast
condition). The slight increase in speed from Baseline to
Conversation even among participants in the Slow condition
suggests that while participants were influenced by
VIRTUO’s speech rate, they also may have been influenced

129

by other factors, such as increasing “immersion” in the
virtual world (Heeter, 1992). This may have counteracted
the effects of VIRTUO’s speech rate on participants in the
Slow condition. Importantly, the critical interaction between
Condition and Measurement indicates that VIRTUO’s
speech rate affected participants’ speech rate above and
beyond any unexpected task-related effects.
To find out how early in the Conversation period
accommodation could be detected, we first conducted an
analysis comparing participants’ speech rate in the Baseline
period to their speech rate during their responses to
VIRTUO’s questions about the first item they discussed in
their Conversation.
Results of this analysis suggest that speech rate can be
adjusted quite quickly; a comparison of the Baseline speech
rate with participants’ speech in just the first item yields a
significant interaction between Measurement and Condition
(F(1,58)=4.82, p=.03), indicating that speakers in the Fast
condition had already sped up more than speakers in the
Slow condition over the course of the first 4 questionanswer pairs. These results suggest that accommodation
occurred rapidly and did not develop slowly over the course
of the experiment.
This might seem surprising given the widespread
assumption that accommodation is a process that occurs
gradually over time. However, there are many respects in
which speakers adjust to their interlocutors in the beginning
of a conversation quite immediately; for example, when a
Spanish-English bilingual speaker is approached by a
stranger who begins to speak English to them, they are very
likely to speak English in response immediately. There is no
period of gradual adjustment in choice of language.
Similarly, if someone begins a conversation with a friend in
a sorrowful tone of voice, the friend is unlikely to respond
back in a chipper tone; they will adjust to the emotional tone
of the conversation immediately, without requiring a period
of gradual change.
Participants’ speech rate in response to VIRTUO’s
questions did not relate to the position in the experiment
where the question appeared. This is consistent with rapid
change immediately after meeting VIRTUO; perhaps speech
rate accommodation does not occur gradually over time, but
instead happens early in a conversation and is maintained
fairly consistently throughout the interaction. However, the
fact that accommodation did not increase over time in this
experiment must be interpreted with caution, because the
order of VIRTUO’s questions was fixed rather than
counterbalanced across subjects. Differences in content
between the questions might have influenced participants’
speech rate, which could have obscured any possible effects
of the passing of time.
According to the questionnaire participants filled out after
they finished the VR portion of the experiment, speakers
accommodated more to VIRTUO when they judged
themselves to be more similar to him (r=.25, p=.05). This
correlation suggests that in addition to whatever automatic
mechanisms might cause accommodation, people

accommodate more to an interlocutor they identify with for
longer-term social reasons (a point we will return to below).

General Discussion
The results of this experiment indicate that participants
accommodated to the speech rate of their virtual
interlocutor. Participants who spoke to a fast-talking
VIRTUO sped up significantly from their Baseline speech
rate, and spoke significantly faster than their counterparts in
the Slow condition. This was true even though VIRTUO
could not interpret participants’ linguistic behavior, and thus
accommodation could not possibly help them to influence
VIRTUO’s thoughts or behavior. Why, then, did
participants accommodate to VIRTUO?
On one possibility, participants accommodated to
VIRTUO through fully automatic mechanisms, without any
social component. This would be consistent with studies
showing alignment between a speaker and nonconversational speech (Babel, 2009; Goldinger, 1998), and
might suggest that social motivations are unnecessary to
cause accommodation in conversation.
However, results of the post-test support the idea that
long-term social goals may be a factor that drives
accommodation. Speakers may have social goals that
extended beyond their current interaction. For example,
some participants may have been motivated to
accommodate to VIRTUO by a general tendency to speak
similarly to other speakers, especially those that they can
identify with to some extent.
Accommodation to certain interlocutors may be one of the
mechanisms by which speakers develop a coherent
linguistic style over a longer time scale, perhaps even
playing a critical role in sound change (Niedzielski & Giles,
1996; Auer & Hinskens, 2005). Selective accommodation,
to people with the right social characteristics, may help
speakers speak in a way that reflects the way their in-group
members speak.
The tendency to speak more like someone who one
identifies with is fundamental to the organization of
linguistic variation. Linguistic behavior at many levels,
including phonetics, word choice, and choice of syntactic
constructions, is subject to variation – there are many
possible ways for a speaker to communicate approximately
the same thing. Although this variation can seem random,
these choices can often be predicted by a speaker’s
membership in various social groups. These groups can
correspond to macrosociological categories (e.g. gender,
age, ethnicity), or they can be locally defined (e.g.
communities of practice) (Eckert & McConnell-Ginet,
1992). But how do these relationships between social group
membership and linguistic behavior get established?
Individuals’ linguistic behavior must be influenced by the
behavior of others whom they consider to be in-group
members in order for social groups to become correlated
with linguistic behavior. The mechanisms underlying this
process of sociolinguistic differentiation and identification
are not entirely well-understood; however, they must

130

operate on the level of actual language use, i.e. individual
conversations.
There is another way that social motivations could have
influenced accommodation even in a virtual interaction.
Perhaps people accommodated to VIRTUO because
participants were somehow confused into thinking that he
can interpret their social behaviors. VIRTUO does, after all,
resemble a human interlocutor in many ways; perhaps
speakers do not realize his limitations? It seems unlikely
that participants were truly confused about this, given the
restrictions in how VIRTUO could respond to them in this
experiment. However, the principle that humans might
interact with VIRTUO as though he were a real human even
though he is not could still explain their accommodation
behavior.
Some social behaviors seem to be so automatic that they
do not disappear in human-computer interaction even when
they are totally illogical in these scenarios. For example,
humans have been shown to exhibit politeness and
reciprocity to computers (Nass & Moon, 2004), in what
Nass and colleagues have called “overlearned social
behaviors.” If accommodation is such an overlearned social
behavior, then people might accommodate to VIRTUO not
because they think that they will influence his beliefs about
them or behavior toward them, but because this behavior is
applied automatically regardless of its applicability in a
specific situation.
If this is in fact the reason why speakers accommodate to
VIRTUO, then it suggests a reinterpretation of the
accommodation we see in natural conversation as well. That
is, interactional motivations may underlie linguistic
accommodation, but in an automatic, overlearned way. If so,
then speakers may not have specific intentions about the
interaction they are engaged in, and they may have very
little control over their accommodation behavior. This is
consistent with the idea that accommodation can be
motivated by general social goals, even in the absence of
short-term social motivations.

and interactional factors may combine with automatic
factors to produce linguistic accommodation.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Albert Russel, Gerd Klaas, and Jeroen Derks for
technical assistance in setting up the VR lab and
programming the virtual world; to Sanne Berends, Daphne
van Moerkerken, Merel van Rees Vellinga, and Tomas
Bergvelt for help with data collection and coding; and to
Pieter Seuren and Matthias Sjerps for help creating the
verbal materials.

References
Alim, H. S. (2004). You Know My Steez: An Ethnographic
and Sociolinguistic Study of Styleshifting in a Black
American Speech Community. Durham, NC: Duke Univ.
Press, 303 pgs.
Auer, P. & Hinskens, F. (2005). The role of interpersonal
accommodation in a theory of language change. In P.
Auer, F. Hinskens & P. Kerwswill (eds). Dialect change:
The convergence and divergence of dialects in European
languages. Cambridge University Press.
Babel, M. (2009). Phonetic and Social Selectivity in Speech
Accommodation. Doctoral dissertation, Department of
Linguistics, UC Berkeley.
Barr, D. & Keysar, B. (2002). Anchoring comprehension in
linguistic precedents. Journal of Memory and Language,
46, 391-418.
Bortfeld, H. & Brennan, S. E. (1997). Use and acquisition of
idiomatic expressions in referring by native and nonnative speakers. Discourse Processes, 23, 119-147.
Brennan, S., & Clark, H. (1996). Conceptual Pacts and
Lexical Choice in Conversation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22(6),
1482–1493.
Coupland, N. (1985). ‘Hark, Hark, the Lark’: Social
motivations for phonological style-shifting. Language &
Communication, 5(3):153-171.
Eckert, P. & McConnell-Ginet, S. (1992). Think practically
and look locally: Language and gender as communitybased practice. Annual Review of Anthropology 21:461–
90.
Giles, Howard, Donald M. Taylor, and Richard Bourhis.
(1973). Towards a theory of inter- personal
accommodation through language: some Canadian data.
Language in Society 2:177–192.
Goldinger, Stephen D. 1998. Echoes of echoes? An episodic
theory of lexical access. Psychological Review 105:251–
279.
Hannah, A. & Murachver, T. (1999). Gender and
Conversational Style as Predictors of Conversational
Behavior. Journal of Language and Social Psychology,
18(2):153-174.
Heeter, C. (1992). Being There: The Subjective Experience
of Presence. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments, MIT Press.

Conclusions
In real-world conversations, accommodation may often be
motivated by efforts to achieve interactional goals: people
accommodate to make others do, think and feel things. But
the present data show that this is not the only reason that
people accommodate. Since people accommodate to a
virtual interlocutor, we can conclude that accommodation is
not necessarily driven by immediate attempts to influence
social relationships or convey social messages. Yet, social
motivations at a broader level may motivate
accommodation, which may be a tool by which people
develop linguistic styles, over the long term. The finding
that the degree to which people accommodate correlates
with how much they identify with their interlocutor suggests
that accommodation is not merely a reflex. However, these
results do not rule out some role for alignment processes
that are engaged automatically. In real conversations, social

131

Nass, C. & Moon, Y. (2000). Machines and Mindlessness:
Social Responses to Computers. Journal of Social Issues
56(1):86-103.
Niederhoffer, K. and Pennebaker, J. (2002). Linguistic Style
Matching in Social Interaction. Journal of Language and
Social Psychology, 21(4).
Niedzielski, N., Giles, H., 1996. Linguistic accommodation
(Essay no. 39). In: Goebl, H., Nelde, P.H., Stary, Z. and
Wolck, W. (Eds.), Contact Linguistics: An International
Handbook of Contemporary Research. De Gruyter,
Berlin, pp. 33-342.
Pardo, Jennifer S. 2006. On phonetic convergence during
conversational interaction. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 119:2382–2393.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2004) Toward a mechanistic
psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
27(2), 169-226.

132

