UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
When Comparison Helps: The Role of Language, Prior Knowledge and Similarity in
Categorizing Novel Objects

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9vh703sf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Sims, Clare
Colunga, Eliana

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

When Comparison Helps: The Role of Language, Prior Knowledge and Similarity
in Categorizing Novel Objects
Clare E. Sims (clare.holtpatrick@colorado.edu)
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, 345 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309 USA

Eliana Colunga (eliana.colunga@colorado.edu)
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, 345 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309 USA
Abstract
Research suggests a developmental shift from forming
categories based on perceptual features, to recognizing
deeper characteristics and relationships. One process found
to highlight deeper properties is comparison between items.
The bulk of the research on comparison, however, has been
done with familiar items or familiar relationships. An open
question remains: under which conditions will comparison
help children attend to the deeper properties of novel
objects? In two experiments we explore the effect of
comparison in a word learning task and its interaction with
prior knowledge, language support, and the perceptual
features of the compared items. Our results suggest that
comparison only highlights deeper similarities when
children are given some support to counteract or reduce the
influence of surface level features. These results have
implications for how to best teach children depending on the
amount of prior knowledge that they bring to the task.
Keywords: word learning; comparison; superficial vs.
relational similarity

Introduction
The ability to look beyond surface similarities and make
deeper connections between items is an important
achievement in cognitive development. Although
perceptual feature similarities (e.g., shape, material) are
often a useful basis for grouping objects together, some
categories may be better characterized by more abstract
qualities. In analogy-making tasks and in categorization
tasks, children seem to shift from attending to surface
properties to being able to attend to relational or
conceptual similarity at around age 5 (Gentner & Namy,
1999; Loewenstein & Gentner, 2005). The evidence also
suggests that even young children who would not
spontaneously attend to deeper similarities will do so with
enough support. In two studies we examine the
circumstances in which comparison is helpful in
highlighting deeper similarities for novel categories for
which children have no preexisting knowledge, even when
the objects share perceptual features as well.

Comparison and deep similarities
A large body of research suggests that comparison is a
mechanism that works to highlight deeper features. The
evidence suggests that although a child may seem to only

399

attend to surface, perceptual features when presented with
a single item, being presented instead with two or more
items to compare has the effect of highlighting deeper,
relational features shared by those items. Researchers have
found this effect in tasks such as word extension and
analogical mapping. In these analogy tasks, children are
typically shown a standard card showing three items that
share some relational property. For example, Figure 1
shows a target card and two possible matches. The card on
the left matches the target in superficial properties (they
are three squares), whereas the card on the right matches it
in relational similarity (two same-color figures flanking a
different-color figure). Research using this sort of task
indicates that without extra support, 4-year-olds will attend
to properties of the specific items, rather than to the
relational structure. However, when allowed to view two
examples of the relational structure (say a second card with
two white triangles flanking a black triangle) and compare
it with the original target, the similarity in relational
structure will be highlighted, allowing the child to abstract
away from unimportant details such as the shapes of the
items (Gentner, Rattermann, Markman, & Kotovsky,
1995).

Figure 1: Example of an analogical mapping task.
A similar effect of comparison has been found in word
learning tasks. Gentner and Namy (1999) taught 4-yearolds new names for known objects. For example, they
showed children a picture of an apple and informed them
that a toy dog had a special name for it: “blicket”. Then
children were offered a choice between a picture of a
banana and a picture of a balloon and asked which of those
would also be called a blicket. Surprisingly, four-year-olds
chose the superficially similar balloon, rather than the
taxonomic match, the banana, also a fruit. However, when
allowed to see more than one standard (e.g., a pear and a
bunch of grapes), children chose more taxonomic matches.
More recently Gentner, Loewenstein, and Hung (2007)
found that four-year-olds were similarly able to use

comparison to learn novel names for specific parts of novel
animal and object drawings. The process of comparison is
thought to highlight deeper relations between items by
promoting structural alignment (Gentner & Namy, 1999).
Structural alignment refers to how considering two or more
items together can focus attention on common relational
structure that would not be readily apparent from only a
single item. But how would comparison work if novel
objects were used?

Comparison of Novel Objects
A first step in investigating whether comparison of novel
objects can help children see beyond surface properties to
deep features is to determine what these terms mean in the
context of novel stimuli. A definition of surface properties
can be transferred fairly straightforwardly from previous
comparison research involving familiar items. That is,
surface properties consist of perceptual features such as the
shape, material, texture, and color of an object. Defining
deep characteristics of novel objects is more complicated,
for exactly the reason that such objects were chosen for
this research: there is no prior knowledge or history
associated with them. For example, in some previous work
the deep features that are highlighted in comparison are
defined as conceptual representations (Gentner & Namy,
2006). However, in other contexts, particularly analogical
mapping studies, deep characteristics consist of the higher
order relations or structures shared across items (Gentner et
al., 1995). Gentner and Rattermann (1991) refer to this
deeper level of similarity as analogy, and define it as
“similarity in relational structure, independently of the
objects in which those relations are embedded” (p. 226).
For example, Figure 1 shows a sample analogical mapping
involving a structure of two identical darker figures
flanking a lighter figure. Understanding this structure at the
analogy level means understanding that such a relation can
encompass a flanking structure in various dimensions, such
as darkness or size, and despite dissimilarities in other
features like shape or texture (Gentner et al., 1995).
Drawing from this research on analogy, in the current
experiments deep characteristics of novel objects are
defined as the structure of the objects. Specifically, we
designed the novel objects in these experiments such that
the connections and relations betweens parts of individual
objects conform to a generalizable structure. Figure 2
shows an example set of the novel object stimuli created
for these experiments. The structure shared by the
exemplars and structure choice test item in this set is one
of three identical shapes, arranged vertically, and
decreasing in size from bottom to top. While there is
variation in surface level features, such as shape, color,
material, and texture, the underlying structure is
maintained. In this way, the novel objects created for the
current experiments were carefully manipulated to have
certain surface properties and deep features, in particular
relational structure.

400

Exemplars

Test Items

Comparison
Structure
Choice

Superficial
Choice

Non-Comparison
Figure 2: Sample item set from Experiment 1. Materials
used include green foam and orange yarn.
Prior Knowledge Another key issue to consider in relation
to the comparison of novel objects is the role of prior
knowledge about the items that are compared. Much of the
research cited so far supports the hypothesis that the
development from categorization based on surface
similarities to categorization based on higher order
relations is driven by increases in domain knowledge. For
example, understanding of higher order analogical
relations has been found to develop between the ages of 4
and 8 years, but 4-year-olds can learn to appreciate and
correctly use such relations through explicit teaching or
over the course of targeted training (Kotovsky & Gentner,
1996). Experiments with novel objects offer a new way to
test, and possibly further support, this hypothesis by
controlling the amount of domain knowledge that
participants have available. As will be shown in the first
experiment, our novel object stimuli allowed us to directly
explore the question of the role of prior knowledge in
comparison. Using novel objects ensured that participants
were not familiar with the stimuli, and we also manipulated
the labels used (novel vs. known) to further control the
amount of prior knowledge brought into the task. The label
manipulation relates to the next issue as well.
Language Use Another guiding question of our design of
the current experiments has to do with the role of language.
Specifically, in the first experiment we explore an
intriguing finding on the role of language in analogical
mapping. Previous research shows that children as young
as three years old can map familiar relational labels, like
“top,” “middle,” and “bottom” onto spatial relations
between presented items, and use those mappings to make
correct relational choices, even in the face of tempting
perceptual choices (Loewenstein & Gentner, 2005). We
wondered whether the use of familiar structure related
labels could have a similar influence on children’s
comparison processes with novel objects. Such labels
would offer children some support in linking familiar
structural representations with the novel objects to be
learned; the first experiment tests whether they can
effectively use this support to aid task performance.
Perceptual Features Our final guiding question about the
role of perceptual features influenced our overall task

design and is the focus of the second experiment. To
address this question we drew on research from the word
learning literature. Our task has many parallels to the novel
noun generalization (NNG) paradigm, in which a child is
presented with a novel object that is labeled with a novel
name, and is subsequently asked whether he or she would
apply that label to various other novel objects that vary
from the original in specific dimensions such as shape,
size, color, or texture, while matching in other dimensions.
Research using the NNG task has provided many
interesting findings about the kinds of object properties
that children use to guide their learning and labeling of
different kinds of items. For example, from a young age
children consistently and preferentially use the shape of an
object, as opposed to other features like size, color, or
material, to guide their labeling and categorization of
artifact-like items (Jones, Smith, & Landau, 1991). On the
other hand, the material of an item is treated as more
important than other features in guiding children’s novel
noun generalization of non-solid substances (Soja, Carey,
& Spelke, 1991). Because the novel objects created for the
current experiments are artifact-like, we were concerned
that having a shape match between exemplars and test
items would strongly influence our results. To avoid the
possible confound of a shape match, we minimized the
degree of shape matching and manipulated other features
known to be less influential in artifact-like object naming,
particularly material and color. The second experiment in
particular explores how the manipulation of these
perceptual features influences comparison.
In two experiments we explored the effect of comparison
on preschooler’s learning about novel objects. We used
previous work on comparison as well as word learning to
guide our experimental task design. The current
experiments explore the roles of prior knowledge, of
language, and of perceptual features in children’s
comparisons of novel objects. The first experiment
explores the role of prior knowledge and language, and the
second experiment focuses on the role of perceptual
features.

Experiment 1

structural characteristics of novel objects. We manipulated
the surface level features of material, color, and shape to
create exemplar objects that strongly matched the
superficial choice test object. We manipulated the
relationships between the parts of these objects to create
structural similarities between the exemplar objects and the
structural choice test object, which was perceptually
dissimilar to the exemplars (see Figure 2). In this way we
believe our experimental task is an accurate translation of
the Gentner and Namy (1999) task from familiar item
drawings to novel physical objects.
The other goal of Experiment 1 was to test two of our
guiding questions: what is the role of prior knowledge and
what is the role of language in novel object comparison?
We included two labeling conditions: a novel label
condition and a known label condition consisting of
structurally related familiar words. The combination of
novel objects and novel labels ensured that children in that
condition had no prior knowledge of the task items. In the
known label condition, we used familiar words that related
to structure to see whether children could effectively use
language support to make connections to known structural
relationships.
If children treat novel objects similarly to how they treat
familiar items, then we should see similar results in our
novel label condition as those of Gentner and Namy
(1999); that is, children will make more perceptual choices
when there is non-comparison between exemplars, and will
make more structural choices when there is comparison. In
other words, comparison of novel objects will function as it
does with familiar items, highlighting the deeper relations
present between them. On the other hand, because children
have no prior knowledge of novel objects given novel
labels, comparison might not function in the same way,
perhaps instead highlighting surface rather than deep
features. Additionally, we expected the use of known
labels to be effective in highlighting object structure in
both the comparison and non-comparison conditions, and
thus act to increase children’s structural choices in both
comparison conditions.

Method

The first goal of Experiment 1 was to create and test an
experimental task that paralleled those used in the
comparison literature but that involved only novel objects.
To this end, we modeled our task after one designed by
Gentner and Namy (1999, Experiment 2) in which children
were presented with either one or two standard items (noncomparison and comparison conditions) and then decided
which one of two test items best matched the standard, a
perceptual choice or a taxonomic choice. The authors used
drawings of familiar items, and carefully chose the stimuli
such that each standard item was more strongly
perceptually similar to the perceptual choice than the
taxonomic choice. The design of our stimuli aimed to
capture similar relations between the perceptual and

401

Participants. Fifty-two 4-year-olds (M = 4;6) were
assigned to the comparison or non-comparison condition,
and to the novel label or known label condition in a 2 x 2
design.
Materials. The stimuli consisted of 16 novel objects
created in the lab (8 exemplars and 8 test items). There
were four sets of test items consisting of a structure choice
and a superficial choice. For each set of test items there
were two exemplars (see Figure 2 for a sample set). All
exemplars were structural matches with the structure
choice for their group, and also matched in material and
color with the superficial choice. Due to the extent of
surface similarity between the pairs of exemplars, this set
is referred to as “high similarity” throughout this paper.

Results
The dependent variable was the average number of
structure match choices that participants made across all
test trials. Average numbers of structure choices were
submitted to a 2 (comparison or non-comparison) x 2
(label type: novel or known) between-subjects analysis of
variance (ANOVA). There was a main effect of label type
such that children made more structure choices when
objects in the task were given familiar, relational labels,
F(1, 48) = 12.43, p < .001. There was also a significant
interaction between comparison condition and label type,
F(1, 48) = 4.72, p = 0.03 (see Figure 3). In the novel label
condition, children made fewer structure choices after
comparing two exemplars compared to viewing only one
exemplar. This relationship was reversed in the known
label condition, with more structure choices made in the
comparison condition than the non-comparison condition.
Post hoc t-tests were conducted to further explore this
interaction. Within the novel label condition, structure

402

choices were marginally lower in the comparison than noncomparison condition, t(24) = -1.77, p = 0.089. This
difference did not reach significance in the known label
condition (p = 0.17), however looking across labeling
conditions, structure choices following comparison were
significantly higher with known compared to novel labels,
t(29) = 4.46, p < .001.
Average Number of Structure Choices

Both of the exemplars were used for the comparison
condition, and the exemplar that matched the superficial
choice somewhat on shape was used for the noncomparison condition.
Two types of labels were also used in two labeling
conditions: novel and known. For the novel labeling
condition four pseudoword labels were created, one for
each set of objects. For the known labeling condition, four
real, structurally related words were selected to go with
each set of objects. The words selected were intended to be
familiar to four-year-olds; for example, the items in Figure
2 were given the familiar label “stairs.” The other known
labels were “see-saw,” “bumps,” and “spiral.”
Procedure. Participants sat at a table across from the
experimenter. Participants were randomly assigned to one
of four conditions: novel label comparison, novel label
non-comparison, known label comparison, and known
label non-comparison.
In the comparison conditions, the experimenter showed
the participant two exemplar objects and labeled each with
either the same novel label or with the same known label.
For example, in the novel label comparison condition, the
experimenter would say, “This is a tink. This is also a tink.
See how they are both tinks?” The participant was able to
examine the objects before the experimenter put them out
of sight. Then the experimenter brought out two test items
on a tray and asked the participant to “Get the tink.” The
experimenter then recorded whether the participant chose
the structure match or superficial match. The noncomparison condition proceeded in a similar manner but
with only one exemplar shown and labeled, for example
“This is a tink. See how it is a tink?” In all conditions
participants completed four trials with the order of trials
counterbalanced across participants. In the novel label
conditions the novel nouns used to label the four stimuli
sets were also counterbalanced.

4

Comparison
Non-Comparison

3

2

1

0
Novel Label

Known Label

Figure 3: Experiment 1 results; all stimuli were high
similarity.

Discussion
Overall the results of Experiment 1 show that the
availability of prior knowledge in a task influences how
comparison functions. Comparing the novel label condition
to the Gentner and Namy (1999) experiment on which it
was modeled, we found the opposite pattern of results.
Rather than highlighting deeper relations between items,
comparison in the novel label condition seemed to very
strongly cue children’s attention to the perceptual
similarities between novel objects. The results of the novel
label condition add support to the hypothesis that the
capacity of comparison to highlight deeper features
depends on the amount of relevant domain knowledge that
participants have. In the novel label condition participants
had no prior knowledge of the objects to help them identify
the deeper structural similarities, and instead focused on
surface level features to guide responses. Overall, the novel
label condition of Experiment 1 shows that comparison of
objects about which children have no prior knowledge
functions differently than comparison of familiar items.
On the other hand, the results of the known label
condition show that if there is some conceptual support,
such as familiar labels that highlight the structure of
objects, comparison seems to work in a way similar to that
seen in studies using familiar items. This result is also
consistent with previous work showing that young children
can use language to guide performance in analogical
mapping tasks (Loewenstein & Gentner, 2005). The role of
language in this context seems to be to situate the novel
objects in terms of familiar representations, allowing for
recognition and use of structural properties in the task.
In the next experiment we explore the role of perceptual
similarity in novel object comparison.

The goal of Experiment 2 was to test the role of perceptual
features in comparison of novel objects. This experiment
also allowed for further exploration of how comparison
operates in a context of low prior knowledge, that is, our
task involving novel objects with novel labels. The first
experiment showed that the process of comparison was
only conducive to making structural choices when
supported by familiar structure-related labels. In the second
experiment we set out to investigate another way in which
comparison of novel objects would highlight their deeper
shared structure. To this end we used the same general
procedure as in the novel label condition of Experiment 1,
but varied the perceptual features of the novel objects. In
Experiment 2, the stimuli were designed such that there
was a lower degree of surface feature similarity between
the exemplars in relation to each other as well as in relation
to the test items (see Figure 4). With this manipulation, the
results of the task using the low surface similarity novel
object set can be directly compared to the results of the
Experiment 1 novel label condition, which used a high
surface similarity object set.
We predicted that the number of structure choice
responses would increase overall when the task involved
low surface similarity novel objects as compared to the
high similarity objects of Experiment 1. Comparison of the
high similarity objects seemed to more strongly highlight
the perceptual feature overlap than the common structure
of the objects. Therefore we reasoned that reducing the
degree of that overlap should reduce the amount that
comparison highlights surface features, and allow children
to see the deeper relational match of the structure choice.

Method
Participants. Twenty-four additional four-year-olds (M =
4;4) were recruited for the second experiment, and were
randomly assigned to the comparison and non-comparison
conditions.
Materials. The stimuli consisted of 16 novel objects
created in the lab (8 low similarity exemplars and the 8 test
items from Experiment 1). As in the first experiment, there
were four sets of test items consisting of a structure choice
and a distractor choice, and four corresponding pairs of
exemplars. All exemplars were structural matches with the
structure choice for their group. For the low similarity
exemplars, one object matched the distractor choice
somewhat in shape only, and the other object did not match
the distractor choice in shape, material, or color. For each
pair of exemplars, both objects were used for the
comparison condition, and the exemplar that matched the
distractor choice somewhat on shape was used for the noncomparison condition.
Procedure. The procedure was the same as that used for
the novel label condition of Experiment 1. Participants
were randomly assigned to one of two conditions:

403

comparison or non-comparison. As in the first experiment,
each participant completed four trials; trial presentation
order as well as the novel nouns used to label the four
stimuli sets were counterbalanced.
Exemplars
Test Items

Comparison
Structure
Choice

Distractor
Choice

Non-Comparison
Figure 4: Sample item set from Experiment 2. Materials
used include yellow cellophane, blue clay, orange yarn,
and green foam.

Results
As in Experiment 1 the dependent variable was the average
number of structure match choices that participants made
across all test trials. Average numbers of structure choices
from both Experiment 2 (low similarity) as well as the
novel label condition of Experiment 1 (high similarity)
were submitted to a 2 (surface similarity: high or low) x 2
(condition: comparison or non-comparison) ANOVA.
There was a main effect of surface similarity such that
number of structure match choices was higher when
surface similarity was low, F(1, 46) = 26.36, p < 0.001.
There was also a significant interaction between surface
similarity and comparison condition, F(1, 46) = 6.07, p =
0.02 (see Figure 5). As shown in the results of Experiment
1, in the high surface similarity condition (novel label
condition of Experiment 1) children made fewer structure
choices after comparing two exemplars compared to
initially viewing only one exemplar. The interaction here
shows that this relationship reversed for the low surface
similarity objects used in Experiment 2: children made
more structure choices in the comparison condition than
the non-comparison condition.
Average Number of Structure Choices

Experiment 2

4

Comparison
Non-Comparison

3

2

1

0
High Similarity

Low Similarity

Figure 5: Experiment 2 results; all labels were novel.
Note high similarity data is from the novel label condition
of Experiment 1.

Post hoc t-tests were conducted to further explore this
interaction. Participants were able to make significantly
more structure match choices in the comparison condition
when the exemplars had low surface similarity rather than
high surface similarity, t (30) = 5.51, p < 0.001.
Additionally, there was not a significant difference in
number of structure choices in the non-comparison
condition between high and low surface similarity, p =
0.28.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 help to shed some light on the
role of perceptual feature similarities in comparison
processes involving novel objects. In this experiment we
varied the extent to which the exemplar objects shared
surface feature similarities with the distractor choice test
item. As shown in Experiment 1, when the exemplars were
highly similar to the superficial choice in several
dimensions, specifically material, color, and shape,
comparison actually seemed to highlight surface
similarities especially strongly. However when children
performed the same task but with the low surface similarity
exemplar objects of Experiment 2, comparison seemed to
better highlight the deeper, structural relations between the
exemplars and the structure choice test item. While this
increase in number of structure choices in the comparison
condition for low similarity as compared to high similarity
objects was predicted, what is surprising is the magnitude
of the increase. Specifically, administering this task with
low surface similarity novel objects increased
performance, in terms of number of structure choices, to
the same extent as labeling objects with familiar structure
related words.

General Discussion
In the current experiments we set out to explore the role of
prior knowledge, language, and perceptual features in
making comparisons of novel objects. We wondered
whether the act of comparison highlights deeper relations
rather than surface similarities, as has been found with
studies using familiar items. In Experiment 1 we found
that, in line with previous research in analogy making,
prior knowledge of the items being compared does indeed
matter: comparison hindered performance when novel
objects and novel labels were used, that is, when prior
knowledge of items was low. In the first experiment we
also found that the use of known, structure-related labels
led to increased identification of structural matches
between novel objects. This indicates that language plays a
role of supporting the integration of prior knowledge with
new category information. In Experiment 2 we found that
perceptual features also impact the comparison of novel
objects. Reducing the degree of surface similarity between
exemplar and test objects improved performance to the
same extent as using familiar labels. Together these

404

experiments show that in order for comparison to be
beneficial, support has to be provided through links to prior
knowledge. In the absence of prior knowledge that can be
brought to bear, it is important to ensure that the possibility
of mistakenly highlighting surface is minimized by
comparing items of low similarity.
These results have implications for educational practices
related to teaching new categories and concepts. Linking
newly introduced items to familiar concepts, particularly
with language, helps children make deeper connections
between new items, and perhaps aids them in creating rich
representations of new categories. Additionally,
introducing new objects by presenting items that are more
variable in surface features (i.e., share less surface
similarity) further helps children by reducing the tendency
to attend only to the superficial, especially when those
feature similarities run counter to the deeper relationships.

References
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., & Hung, B. (2007).
Comparison facilitates children’s learning of names for
parts. Journal of Cognition and Development, 8, 285307.
Gentner, D. & Namy, L.L. (1999). Comparison in the
development of categories. Cognitive Development, 14,
487-513.
Gentner, D., & Namy, L.L. (2006). Analogical processes in
language learning. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 15, 297-301.
Gentner, D. & Rattermann, M.J. (1991) Language and the
career of similarity. In S.A. Gelman & J.P. Brynes (Eds.)
Perspectives on Language and Thought: Interrelations
in Development. London: Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M.J., Markman, A.B., &
Kotovsky, L. (1995). Two forces in the development of
relational similarity. In T.J. Simon & G.S. Halford
(Eds.), Developing cognitive competence: New
approaches to process modeling. Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
Jones, S.S., Smith, L.B., & Landau, B. (1991). Object
properties and knowledge in early lexical learning. Child
Development, 62, 499-516.
Kotovsky, L., & Gentner, D. (1996). Comparison and
categorization in the development of relational
similarity. Child Development, 67, 2797-2822.
Loewenstein, J., & Gentner, D. (2005). Relational
language and the development of relational mapping.
Cognitive Psychology, 50, 315-353.
Soja, N.N., Carey, S., & Spelke, E.S. (1991). Ontological
categories guide young children’s inductions of word
meanings: Object terms and substance terms. Cognition,
38, 179-211.

