UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
When Two Plus Two Does Not Equal Four: Event-Related Potential Responses to
Semantically Incongrous Arithmetic Word Problems

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6h32m8mp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Fisher, Kristie
Bassok, Miriam
Osterhout, Lee

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

When Two plus Two Does Not Equal Four: Event-Related Potential Responses to
Semantically Incongruous Arithmetic Word Problems
Kristie J. Fisher (kjfisher@uw.edu)
University of Washington, Department of Psychology, Box 351525
Seattle, WA 98105 USA

Miriam Bassok (mbassok@uw.edu)
University of Washington, Department of Psychology, Box 351525
Seattle, WA 98105 USA

Lee Osterhout (losterho@uw.edu)
University of Washington, Department of Psychology, Box 351525
Seattle, WA 98105 USA
Abstract
Extensive research measuring event-related brain potentials
(ERPs) shows that semantic incongruity is indexed by the
N400 effect and syntactic/structural incongruity is indexed by
the P600 effect. We used these indices to examine how people
coordinate their semantic and arithmetic knowledge when
they read simple addition and division word problem
sentences (e.g., “Twelve roses plus three daisies equals
fifteen”). Prior work in problem solving has shown that wordproblem solutions are modulated by analogical alignment of
semantic and arithmetic relations, such that people avoid or
commit errors on misaligned problems (e.g., Aligned:
“Twelve roses plus three daisies equals fifteen”; Misaligned:
“Twelve cookies plus three jars equals fifteen”). Here, we
found that such analogical alignments modulate the
comprehension of word-problem sentences. Specifically, we
found that analogically Misaligned semantic relations elicited
a P600 effect. Furthermore, an N400 effect was elicited by the
last number word of Misaligned problem sentences, even
when it was a mathematically correct answer. These results
show that analogical alignment between semantic and
arithmetic relations can be indexed with the P600 effect and
provide a foundation for future ERP work on analogical
reasoning.
Keywords: ERP; analogy; mathematical cognition; N400
effect; P600 effect

Introduction
A common task facing the cognitive system is conceptual
integration of individual items into a meaningful whole. For
example, language comprehension requires conceptual
integration of consecutive words into meaningful sentences.
Similarly, comprehension of arithmetic problems requires
conceptual integration of numbers and arithmetic operators
into correct mathematical expressions. In this paper, we
explore the conceptual integration of simple arithmetic word
problems, which are unique in that they require conceptual
integration of language and of mathematics.

Conceptual Integration & ERPs
The process of conceptual integration, and the conditions
under which it can be disrupted, have been investigated in a

variety of domains using event-related potential (ERP)
methodology, which measures the electrical brain activity
elicited by a particular stimulus. Work in this area has
shown that two key aspects of conceptual integration,
meaning and structure, are indexed by two distinct and
highly reliable ERP components—the N400 and P600
components, respectively.
The N400 component is negative-going and peaks around
400ms after presentation of the stimulus. This component is
highly sensitive to contextual semantic meaning. The
magnitude of this component is larger for semantically
incongruous compared to congruous items—a difference
known as the N400 effect. The N400 effect was first
documented in sentence processing. For example, the
italicized word in the sentence, “The cat will bake the food”
will elicit an N400 effect relative to, “The cat will eat the
food” (Kutas & Hillyard, 1980). Subsequent work has
shown that the N400 effect is elicited in response to
conceptual incongruities in other domains. For example,
incorrect answers to simple symbolic (e.g., “4 x 4 = 21”)
and verbal (e.g., “Twelve plus three equals sixteen.” )
arithmetic problems elicit an N400 effect (e.g., Niedeggen
& Rosler, 1999; Fisher, Bassok, & Osterhout, 2009). Thus,
the N400 effect is generally accepted to be a domain-general
index of semantic congruence.
The P600 component is positive and peaks at around
600ms after stimulus presentation. A P600 effect is elicited
by violations of syntax within a sentence (e.g., “The cat will
eating the food I leave on the porch.”; Osterhout &
Holcomb, 1992; Osterhout & Mobley, 1995) and by
violations of structure, such as a wrong note played in a
harmonic scale (Patel et al., 1998). Such violations of syntax
or structure lead to larger P600 amplitudes, relative to
control conditions (i.e., the P600 effect).
Furthermore, Osterhout and Mobley (1995) found that
when there is any kind of violation within a sentence,
syntactical or semantic, an N400 effect is also elicited by the
ending word of the sentence, even though that word is
perfectly correct. This last-item N400 effect is likely the
result of the experimental paradigm typically used in

1571

language research. Participants are typically asked to make
binary judgments about the “acceptability” of the sentences
they just saw (usually they are not instructed to look for any
particular type of error). Thus, when participants reach the
end of a sentence that contained a violation, the entire
sentence must now be categorized as “unacceptable.” The
N400 effect to the final word in the sentence may be a result
of this judgment processing.
Despite the relatively broad range of studies of conceptual
integration, to our knowledge, no previous studies have used
these ERP indices to examine a) how people integrate
concepts that are presumably organized in distinct
conceptual networks and b) the integration of concepts via
analogy. Both of these characterize the integration process
involved in the solution of mathematical word problems,
whereby people are required to apply arithmetic operations
in a way that fits the relations among objects in the “real
world.” This process involves analogical coordination of
real world knowledge (e.g., roses and daisies are flowers)
with one’s knowledge of arithmetic properties (One can add
3 roses to 5 daisies to create a bouquet of 8 flowers). As we
explain in the next section, people are highly systematic in
the way they coordinate their semantic and arithmetic
knowledge. The purpose of our study was to use ERP to
examine such cross-network, analogical conceptual
integration and, in particular, to test whether the same ERP
components that index violations of meaning and structure
in language also index violations of analogical alignment.

Mathematical Problem Solving in the “Real
World”
Research by Bassok and her colleagues has shown that,
when people reason about mathematical word problems,
they tend to align structurally analogous semantic and
arithmetic relations (Bassok, Chase, & Martin, 1998).
Specifically, people align categorically related objects (e.g.,
cars and trucks) with the commutative addition operation
and align functionally related objects (e.g., jars and
cookies,) with the non-commutative division operation.
Violating such semantic alignment (e.g., having to add jars
to cookies or having to divide cars by trucks) severely
impairs problem-solving performance (Bassok, Wu, &
Olseth, 1995; Martin & Bassok, 2005), and even blocks
retrieval of arithmetic facts from memory (Bassok, Pedigo,
& Oskarsson, 2008).
In the present study we investigated how people
conceptually integrate semantic and arithmetic relations
while reading simple addition and division word problems
presented in a sentence format (e.g., “Twelve roses plus
three daisies equals fifteen.”). We recorded ERPs as
participants read these word-problem sentences. We
analyzed the electrical waveforms elicited by the second
object word in the sentence, which completed the semantic
relation, and by the numerical mathematical answers (e.g.,
the two underlined words in, “Twelve roses plus three vases
equals fifteen”). The semantic object relations were either
analogically aligned (Aligned condition) or misaligned

(Misaligned condition) with the arithmetic relation in the
word problem, and the mathematical answers were either
correct or incorrect (see Table 1 for example stimuli). After
reading each word-problem sentence, participants were
asked to make judgments as to whether or not the problem
was “acceptable.” As is standard practice in typical
language research paradigms, we did not specify the criteria
by which participants were to make their judgments.
Table 1: Example Stimuli
Object
Alignment

Math Correct

Math Incorrect

Aligned
Addition

Twelve limes plus
three lemons
equals fifteen.

Sixteen cars plus
two trucks equals
twenty.

Aligned
Division

Fifteen roses
divided by three
bouquets equals
five.

Six robins divided
by two nests
equals eight.

Misaligned
Addition

Six questions plus
three quizzes
equals nine.

Eight cookies plus
four jars equals
two.

Misaligned
Division

Eighteen skirts
divided by two
dresses equals
nine.

Fifteen geese
divided by three
ducks equals six.

We had two main predictions. First, we expected that
conceptual integration in Aligned word problems should be
similar to conceptual integration in arithmetic problems,
presented in sentence-form, which do not contain objects.
Specifically, we expected that, in the Aligned condition, we
would replicate the N400 effect elicited by mathematically
incorrect answers to arithmetic problems (Fisher, Bassok, &
Osterhout, 2009). Second, and most important, if conceptual
integration via analogy is similar to conceptual integration
in rule-governed sequence processing, then analogical
misalignment of the semantic and arithmetic relations in the
problem should elicit a P600 effect. In particular, we
expected a P600 effect to occur at the second object word
because that word completes a semantic relation that cannot
be mapped onto the arithmetic relation in the problem, and
thus constitutes a structural violation (e.g., Gentner, 1983).
Furthermore, we expected that the mathematically correct
answer (the final item of the word problem sentence) in
Misaligned problems would elicit an N400 effect relative to
correct answers in Aligned problems, replicating previous
work by Osterhout and Mobley (1995).

Methods
Participants
The participants were 38 volunteer undergraduate students,
graduate students, and staff from the University of

1572

Washington (21 male, 17 female; Mage = 22.23 years, SDage
= 4.98 years) who were right-handed native English
speakers. Participants were either given course extra credit
or paid $30 for their participation.

Stimuli
The stimuli were simple word problem sentences that were
composed of digit pairs and object word pairs that were
either categorically related or functionally related. The digit
and object pairs were selected based on pilot testing, as
described below.
Arithmetic Problems The arithmetic problems were
composed of two operands and satisfied a number of
constraints established by cognitive arithmetic literature and
required for our experimental manipulations. First, the two
operands could be both added and divided to yield a wholenumber answer (e.g., 12 + 3; 12 / 3). Second, we excluded
tie problems (e.g., 2 + 2) and problems containing a one,
zero, or 10 as an operand, as evidence from prior work
suggests that these types of problems are processed
differently, and often more easily, than other simple
arithmetic problems (Ashcraft, 1992; McCloskey, 1992).
Third, we only selected problems that fell into the “small”
category of division problems, defined as having a divisor
lesser than 25, in order to avoid some of the issues of the
problem-size effect1 (see Zbrodoff & Logan, 2004, for a
review). Finally, we controlled for answer parity (LeMaire
& Reder, 1999).
Within these constraints, we created a set of 24 problems,
12 addition and 12 division, that were equivalent in
difficulty. These problems were selected based on results of
a pilot study (error rate and response time), in which 154
undergraduate students solved 48 addition and 48 division
problems meeting the above criteria. To create an answer
verification task, we constructed two different incorrect
answers for each problem. The “Close” incorrect answer
for both operations was derived by adding or subtracting the
value one or two to or from the correct answer (e.g., 12 + 3
= 14). The “Other” incorrect answers for addition were the
correct answers to division problems with the same
operands (e.g., 12 + 3 = 4), and the “Other” incorrect
answers for division were the correct answers to addition
problems with the same operands (e.g., 12 / 3 = 15)
Object Pairs We initially constructed a set of 163 word
pairs that we considered to belong to one of the two
semantic relations categories—categorical or functional.
The set contained 83 possible categorical pairs and 80
possible functional pairs consisting of concrete, plural nouns
(e.g., “cats, dogs”). From this set, we constructed rating
surveys that were completed by 202 undergraduate students
1
Note, however, that “small” division problems translate into
“large” addition problems. As described in this section, the stimuli
selection pilot study was conducted primarily to ensure that the
problems selected were of equivalent difficulty.

at the University of Washington as part of a class activity.
Instructions asked students to rate, on a seven-point scale,
either the extent to which the word pairs were categorically
related or the extent to which they were functionally related.
The average categorical and functional ratings in these two
conditions were compared for each word pair using an
independent t-test with an alpha level of .05. In order to be
included in the final set, word pairs had to have significantly
different categorical and functional ratings and an average
rating of greater than 5 in one dimension and 4 or less in the
other. Based on these ratings, we selected 48 categorical and
48 functional pairs. The word pairs in both relation
conditions were equivalent in their average number of
syllables and letters in each word.

Design
Operation (Addition vs. Division) was manipulated between
participants (NAddition = 19; NDivision = 19; participants were
randomly assigned). Analogical alignment of the
mathematical operation and the object sets (Aligned vs.
Misaligned), and mathematical correctness of the problems
(Correct vs. Close Incorrect vs. Other Incorrect) were
manipulated within participants.
Verbal versions of the arithmetic problems (e.g., Twelve
plus three” in place of “12 + 3”) were created and were then
combined with object pairs to create simple word problem
sentences (e.g., “Twelve limes plus three lemons equals
fifteen.”). For the Addition problems, all of the Aligned
stimuli were categorically related objects, and all of the
Misaligned stimuli were functionally related objects; the
reverse was true for the Division problems (see again Table
1). Thus, the same object sets were used for both
operations, but for one operation the object sets were
Aligned and for another they were Misaligned.
The experiment consisted of three blocks of trials. There
were 96 trials in each block, for a total of 288 trials. Within
each block, 50% of the trials were Aligned word problems,
and 50% were Misaligned. Within each alignment type,
50% were mathematically Correct, 25% were Close
Incorrect, and 25% were Other Incorrect. Trial order was
pseudo-randomized within each of the three blocks. Each of
the word pairs appeared once per block, and they were
combined with different arithmetic problems each time.

Procedure
Participants were seated comfortably in front of a CRT
monitor in an isolated room and fitted with electroencephalography (EEG) recording equipment. Each trial
consisted of a fixation point (500ms), and each item of the
word-problem sentence was presented alone on a screen
(450ms/350ms ISI). The final inter-stimulus interval before
the appearance of the YES/NO response screen was 1,000
ms (total trial duration was 7.1 seconds). Participants were
given a hand-held controller and were asked to respond YES
(response hand counter-balanced) using one button if they
thought the problem was completely “acceptable” and NO,
using another button if the problem was “unacceptable” in

1573

any way. They were told that the instructions were
intentionally vague because the criteria by which they
would judge the problems were at their discretion.
Furthermore, the task did not include object labels, which
are usually required in word problem solving. Participants
were asked not to blink between the onset of the fixation
point and the appearance of the response screen. They were
permitted to blink and take a short break while the response
screen was displayed. Response time was not recorded and
responses triggered onset of the next trial. A break was
given after each block. The entire experiment time,
including set-up, was less than two hours.

Data Acquisition & Results
EEG recording
Continuous EEG was recorded from 19 tin electrodes
attached to an elastic cap (Eletro-cap Inernational) in
accordance with the extended 10-20 system. Vertical eye
movements and blinks were monitored by two electrodes,
one placed beneath the left eye and one placed to the right
of the right eye. The 19 electrodes were referenced to an

electrode placed over the left mastoid. Electrical signals
were amplified, digitized at a rate of 250Hz, and bandpass
filtered at 0.01-40Hz. Impedances at scalp and mastoid
electrodes were held below 5 kΩ. Trials associated with
blinking, excessive eye movement or amplifier blocking
were removed prior to averaging (approximately 11% of all
trials). Stimuli were displayed to participants on an 18”
CRT monitor approximately three feet from the participants
at eye-level with white font on a black background.

Behavioral Responses
Because participants were asked to make open-ended
“acceptability” judgments, it is not surprising that there was
variation in how they judged the Misaligned problems,
particularly in the case where the problem was Misaligned
but mathematically correct. These behavioral differences in
acceptability judgments corresponded to differences in the
magnitude of the overall ERP effects we report here. In this
paper we do not discuss these individual differences, as they
are not essential to our primary research question.

1574

ERP Responses
EEG amplitudes elicited by the second object word and by
the last word (the mathematical answer to the problem) were
averaged according to their respective Alignment and
Answer conditions. Mean amplitudes were compared
separately for the Addition and Division operations in the
250-450ms time window (N400 effect) and in the 500700ms time window (P600 effect) following stimulus onset.
For all analyses, separate ANOVAs2 were conducted for
midline (Fz, Cz, Pz), medial (Fp1, F3, C3, P3, O1, Fp2, F4,
C4, P4, O2), and lateral (F7, T7, P7, F8, T8, P8) electrode
sites, with electrode location and hemisphere included as
factors in each ANOVA.
Incorrect Answers We first tested whether we replicated
previous work with sentence-form arithmetic problems
(Fisher, Bassok, & Osterhout, 2009), which found an N400
effect to incorrect numerical answers. We tested for this
effect within the Aligned condition, which served as our
baseline. Separately for Addition and Division, a 3-way
(Answer Type - Correct, Close Incorrect, Other Incorrect)
repeated measures ANOVA was conducted at each
electrode grouping. Indeed, we found a main effect of
answer types, such that mathematically incorrect answers
elicited a significant N400 effect relative to correct answers
for both Addition and Division word problems (see Figure
1) [Addition: FMidline(2,36) = 15.36, MSE = 11.99, p < .001;
FMedial(2,36) = 25.54, MSE = 17.71, p < .001; FLateral (2,36)
= 22.29, MSE = 5.86, p < .001; Division: = FMidline(2,36) =
6.08, MSE = 8.10, p < .01; FMedial (2,36) = 10.37, MSE =
13.69, p < .001; F Lateral(2,36) = 7.24, MSE = 6.23, p < .01]
Planned contrasts revealed no significant differences
between the Close and Other incorrect answer types except
at the lateral electrode sites for Addition3.
Semantic Alignment When comparing ERP responses
between semantic alignment conditions, we first compared
the ERP waveforms elicited by the second object word in
Aligned versus Misaligned problems (e.g., Twelve cars
plus three trucks equals fifteen. vs. Twelve roses plus three
vases equals fifteen.). Consistent with our predictions, we
found that the second object word in the Misaligned
condition elicited a P600 effect relative to the Aligned
condition in both operations [Addition: F Midline(1, 18) =
5.28, MSE = 4.08, p = .03; FMedial(1, 18) = 6.39, MSE =
6.66, p = .02; FLateral(1, 18) = 5.78, MSE = 1.68, p = .03;
Division: FMidline(1, 18) = 4.94, M S E = 4.25, p = .04;
FMedial(1,18) = 5.62, MSE = 7.16, p = .03; FLateral(1,18) =
2

A Greenhouse- Geisser correction for sphericity violations was
used when necessary
3
Specific results for different answer conditions and the
interactions between the semantic alignment variable, the answer
type variable, and behavioral response pattern are not central to the
research question addressed here and thus are not elaborated upon
for the sake of brevity.

3.20, MSE = 1.95, p = .09]. As noted earlier, this effect
occurred regardless of participants’ behavioral response as
to whether or not the problem was “acceptable.”
Next, we compared ERP amplitudes elicited by the
mathematically correct answer (the final item of the word
problem sentence) between the Aligned and Misaligned
conditions. Correct answers of Misaligned word problems
elicited an N400 effect relative to the correct answers of
Aligned word problems [Addition: F Midline(1,18) = 9.00,
MSE = 13.69, p < .01; FMedial(1,18) = 11.16, MSE = 23.81,
p < . 0 1 ; FLateral(1,18) = 8.62, M S E = 6.67, p < .01;
Division: FMidline(1,18) = 8.01, M S E = 15.67, p =.01;
FMedial(1,18) = 9.34, MSE = 32.98, p < .01; FLateral(1,18) =
7.26, MSE = 8.01, p = .02].
This pattern of ERP results mirrors those found in studies
of language processing (e.g., Osterhout & Mobley, 1995).
That is, structural/syntactic violations within a sentence
typically elicit a P600 effect, and the final word of sentences
containing such violations elicits an N400 effect, even when
those words contained no violations. In the case of our
particular stimuli, the sentences were simple arithmetic
word problems, and the structural violations were violations
of analogical alignment between the semantic and arithmetic
relations in the problem. The final words in the sentences
were the mathematical answers to the word problems, and
an N400 effect occurred for mathematically correct answers
in the Misaligned, relative to the Aligned, condition.

Discussion
The goal of this study was to examine the conceptual
integration process with respect to arithmetic word problems
and how it compares to conceptual integration for sentences
and other meaningful sequences. Arithmetic word problems
are unique in that they combine elements of language and
math and provide the opportunity for analogical alignment
or misalignment between the semantic relations and the
arithmetic relations in the problem (e.g., Bassok, Pedigo, &
Oskarsson, 2008; Bassok, Wu, & Olseth, 1995).
Overall, our results provide evidence for the fluid
integration of arithmetic and semantic knowledge during
word problem processing. More broadly, our results suggest
that the conceptual integration process does not change
significantly when people must integrate concepts across
two distinct knowledge networks. That is, the same ERP
effects were elicited by violations of structure and meaning
in word problems as are usually found in sentences and in
arithmetic problems not containing objects. These results
suggest that the N400 and P600 effects could be used as
dependent measures in investigations of other situations
wherein an individual has to integrate distinct types of
knowledge, such as in reasoning problems that involve the
applications of formal logic rules to object sets, or in song
writing wherein one has to coordinate lyrics with a melody.
Moreover, in the word problems used in our study,
semantic and arithmetic knowledge had to be coordinated
via analogy. Thus, our results also demonstrate that the

1575

P600 effect can serve as an index of the integrity of
analogical structure within arithmetic word problems just as
it indexes syntactic integrity in sentences (e.g., Osterhout &
Holcomb, 1992; Osterhout & Mobley, 1995) and structural
integrity in other meaningful sequences (e.g., Patel et al.,
1998). As such, our results provide a foundation for future
ERP investigations of the cognitive processes related to
analogical reasoning, using the P600 effect as an index of
structure-mapping (Gentner, 1983). That is, when the
structures of two relations cannot be mapped in an analogy
task (e.g., Bird:Nest as Bear:Cave vs. Bear:Desert;
Spellman, Holyoak, & Morrison, 2001), the size of the P600
effect could be used to discriminate the degree of relational
structure mismatch. Such investigations could examine the
analogical conceptual integration within one domain (e.g.,
animals and their habitats) or across two domains of
conceptual knowledge (e.g., Bird:Nest as Car:Garage).
Interestingly, we found these ERP effects for violations of
analogical alignment and mathematical correctness across
all participants even though we observed distinctly different
patterns of “acceptability” judgments and corresponding
ERP effect magnitude within our sample. Though we are
unable to elaborate on these differences here, initial analyses
suggest that these patterns are consistent with prior work in
mathematical reasoning suggesting that some people are
better than others at coordinating their mathematical and
“real world” knowledge when constructing and solving
more complex mathematical expressions than the ones
presented in this study (e.g., algebraic equations; Fisher &
Bassok, 2009). Because this ability is arguably relevant to
our simpler task, it is not surprising that there are individual
differences among our sample of participants such that some
were more sensitive than others to violations of semantic
alignment in simple word problems, particularly because
our sentences did not include labels as part of the solution.
Of course, further work is required to fully explore these
individual difference patterns and elucidate the reason
behind them. To expand on our current findings, we also
plan to more thoroughly investigate the processes of
analogical conceptual integration. Lastly, in the future we
hope other researchers will continue to use ERP for
investigations of conceptual integration in more complex,
knowledge-diverse situations.

Acknowledgments
This research was partially funded by the University of
Washington’s Royalty Research Fund, with a grant awarded
to Miriam Bassok and NIDCD Research Grant
R01DC01947 awarded to Lee Osterhout. Thanks to the
members of the Cognitive Neuroscience of Language Lab
for help with data collection and theoretical insights and to
Melody Sherry and Louis Wei for help with pilot data
collection and analysis.

References
Ashcraft, M.H. (1992). Cognitive arithmetic: A review of
data and theory. Cognition, 44, 75-106.

Bassok, M., Chase, V., & Martin, S. (1998). Adding apples
and oranges: Alignment of semantic and formal
knowledge. Cognitive Psychology, 35, 99-134.
Bassok, M., Pedigo, S. F., & Oskarsson, A. (2008) Priming
addition facts with semantic relations. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 34, 343-352.
Bassok, M., Wu, L.-L., & Olseth, K. L. (1995). Judging a
book by its cover: Interpretative effects of content on
problem-solving transfer. Memory & Cognition, 23, 354367.
Fisher, K.J., & Bassok, M. (2009) Analogical alignments in
algebraic modeling. In B. Kokinov, K. Holyoak, & D.
Gentner (Eds.), Proceedings of for the 2nd International
Conference on Analogy in Sofia, Bulgaria, pp. 137-144.
Fisher, K. J., & Bassok, M., & Osterhout, L (2009).
Conceptual integration is the same for digits and for
words: It’s the meaning, stupid! In N. A. Taatgen, H.
Van Rijn, L. B. J. Schomaker, & J. Nerbonne (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 31st Annual conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2142-2147).
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S. A. (1980). Reading Senseless
Sentences: Brain Potentials Reflect Semantic Incongruity.
Science, 207(4427), 203-205.
LeMaire, P. & Reder, L. (1999). What affects strategy
selection in arithmetic? The example of parity and five
effects on product verification. Memory & Cognition, 27,
364-382.
Martin, S. & Bassok, M. (2005). Effects of semantic cues
on mathematical modeling: Evidence from word problem
solving and equation construction. Memory & Cognition,
33, 471-478.
McCloskey, M. (1992). Cognitive mechanisms in numerical
processing: Evidence from acquired dyscalculia.
Cognition, 44, 107-157.
Niedeggen, M., & Rösler, F. (1999). N400 effects reflect
activation spread during retrieval of arithmetic facts.
Psychological Science, 10, 271-276.
Osterhout, L., & Holcomb, P. J. (1992). Event-related brain
potentials elicited by syntactic anomaly. Journal of
Memory and Language, 31, 785-806.
Osterhout, L., & Mobley, L. A. (1995). Event-related brain
potentials elicited by failure to agree. Journal of Memory
and Language, 34, 739-773.
Patel, A. D., Gibson, E., Ratner, J., Besson, M., & Holcomb,
P. J. (1998). Processing syntactic relations in language
and music: An event-related potential study. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 10, 717-733.
Spellman, B. A., Holyoak, K. J., & Morrison, R. (2001).
Analogical priming via semantic relations. Memory &
Cognition, 29, 383-393.
Zbrodoff, N. J., & Logan, G. D.(2005).What everyone finds:
The problem size effect. In J. I. D. Campbell (Ed.),
Handbook of mathematical cognition (pp. 331-346). New
York: Psychology Press.

1576

