UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Working Memory Constraints on Multiple Center-Embedding

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4j00v1j2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Author
Karlsson, Fred

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Working Memory Constraints on Multiple Center-Embedding
Fred Karlsson (fgk@ling.helsinki.fi)
Department of Modern Languages, PO Box 24
FI-00014 University of Helsinki, Finland

(3) On March 13, [C-1 when he preached a sermon on the
text,] he told his congregation how disappointed he
was (Brown).
(4) For an analysis of the possible modifications [C-1 of
which the pathological termination of an act [C-2
which is not according to law] are susceptible] we
have therefore ... (Jeremy Bentham)

Abstract
Gibson’s (1998) theory on the locality of syntactic
dependencies claims that multiply center-embedded clauses
are unacceptable if they contain a parse-state with at least two
long unresolved predicted categories in addition to the toplevel verb. ‘Long unresolved’ means a syntactic prediction
spanning at least three intervening new discourse referents.
This claim was based on experimental analysis of invented
examples. Karlsson (2007b) provided corpus data
demonstrating that, contrary to widely accepted views in
linguistics and cognitive science, there are well-defined
constraints on how many (maximally three) and what types of
multiple center-embeddings occur in spoken and written
discourse in natural languages. Gibson’s theory of the
processing of multiple center-embeddings will be evaluated in
the light of Karlsson’s empirical data. The corpus data do not
support the idea of a discrete limit on working memory
capacity, because almost one third of the extant examples of
multiple center-embedding are more complex than Gibson’s
acceptability limit stipulates. Spoken language processing
complexity is clearly below Gibson’s limit, written language
is capable of transgressing it.

When a sentence contains multiple embeddings of the same
type, e.g. two center-embeddings as in (4), the DEGREE OF
EMBEDDING is equal to the number of embeddings and
occasionally indicated by the character ‘C’ superfixed with
the degree. Thus, (4) is an instance of C2, double centerembedding.
A clause embedded after the initial subordinating (or
coordinating) conjunction of the superordinate clause is not
center-embedded but initially-embedded, e.g. the I-2-clauses
in (5, 6):
(5) [I-1 If [I-2 what is tantamount to dictatorship ...]
continues in a union] it can ... (LancasterOslo/Bergen Corpus = LOB))
(6) c. [I-1 If [I-2 when I’m 38] Metallica ends] I don’t
think ... ] (British National Corpus = BNC)

Keywords: center-embedding; clausal embedding; cognitive
explanation; complexity; embedding; multiple centerembedding; recursion; syntactic complexity.

Definition of Center-Embedding
The notion EMBEDDING refers to all types of clauses
occurring as subordinate parts of their superordinate clauses
(which themselves may be either main or subordinate). The
starting point will be the classical view of subordination as
expounded in Quirk et al. (1989, Chapter 14). Typical finite
sub-clauses are of three types: complement, relative, and
adverbial. They are indicated by subordinators or relative
pronouns, henceforth called sub/wh-elements.
CENTER-EMBEDDED clauses have words of the
superordinate clause both to their left (excluding
subordinators and coordinators) and to their right, as the
relative clauses in (1, 2) and the when-clause in (3). SELFEMBEDDING is multiple center-embedding invoking two or
more clauses of the same type, e.g. two relative clauses as in
(4). In the examples, the gross clausal structure is indicated
by angular brackets prefixed by the character ‘C’ for centerembedding and an integer indicating dept of embedding.
(1) Others [C-1 who are attracted to this Mecca of the beat
generation] are heroin addicts and small hoodlums.
(Brown Corpus)
(2) Another frequent pioneer difficulty, [C-1 caused by
wearing rough and heavy shoes and booths,] was
corns (Brown).

Here, the subordinating conjunctions of the respective I-1clauses are not fully integrated syntactic constituents in their
clauses and therefore a further clause embedded after them
is not center-embedded but initially-embedded. The
superordinate clause material preceding a center-embedding
must consist of full syntactic constituents, as in (1-4).

Empirical data on multiple center-embedding
By systematically searching the Brown and LOB corpora,
by checking the extant scarce empirically-minded literature
on multiple center-embedding, by consulting more than 100
older grammars, style manuals and philological studies
especially of older forms of German and Latin, and
furthermore by manually analyzing 6000 sentences by three
19th century scholars known for their intricate and
syntactically complex language use (Jeremy Bentham, John
Stuart Mill, C. S. Peirce), Karlsson (2007) established a data
pool of 13 triple center-embeddings, C3, and 104 double
center-embeddings, C2. As every C3 contains two C2s, the
total number of C2s is 130. The languages concerned were
English, German, Latin, Swedish, Finnish, French and
Danish, from Antiquity to the 21st century.
Here are three of the C3s observed:

2045

(7) In an excellent article ... Salvini draws a parallel
between the way [C-1 in which the spoken Latin of the
men [C-2 with whom Gregory of Tours, [C-3 whom he
has no reason to mention,] must have mixed]
eventually became Old French ...,] and the
comparable direct development of pre-Romanesque
painting ... (L. Thorpe, Gregory of Tours: The
History of the Franks, 1974; due to Geoffrey
Sampson)
(8) The Prime Minister [C-1 who at the height of the crisis
had snapped to a junior minister [C-2 who, [C-3 not
having seen him for some time,] had approached him
in a Westminster corridor with a view to wishing him
luck …,] ‘If you want to resign, put it in writing’,]
was unlikely to ... (Patrick Cosgrave 1979; De Roeck
et al., 1982)
(9) A person [C-1 who, [C-2 when riding a cycle, [C-3 not
being a motor vehicle,] on a road or other public
place,] is unfit to ride through drinks or drugs,] shall
be guilty of an offence. (British Road Traffic Act,
1972; Hiltunen, 1984)

is to aid in the specification of the topic of the
sentence.
(19) A/the lower clause in a multiple center-embedding
must contain at least one overt pronoun, preferably as
grammatical subject.
(20) Direct objects must not be multiply relativized in C2s
or C3s.
In practice, constraint (15) rules out multiple centerembedding in spoken language. This means that genuine
rested syntactic recursion under no circumstances can be
considered an important design feature of natural language
syntax.
Constraint (18) is explicable by the fact that the S-V
junction is the major natural syntactic break in SVOlanguages, between the topic (the grammatical subject) and
the comment.
Constraint (20) rules out the classical sentence (21), even
if (21) is in conformance with constraint (14). Sentence (21)
has often been used in the literature as supposed proof of the
absence of constraints on the degree of multiple centerembedding.

Here are four C2s (‘F’ = finally-embedded clause; ‘&’
coordinated clause):

(21) The ratj [C-1 the catk [C-2 the dogm chased _k] killed _j]
ate the malt.

(10) And yet a widow, [C-1 whose pension, [C-2 for which
her husband paid,] is wiped out [F-2 because she
works for a living wage,]] will now ... (LOB)
(11) At one point in the game [C-1 when the skinny old
man in suspenders [C-2 who was acting as umpire] got
in the way of a thrown ball] [&C-1 and took it painfully
in the kidneys,] he lay there ... (Brown)
(12) ... the girl ... [C-1 who was clothed in the tightestfitting pair of slacks [C-2 I had ever seen on a woman]
and a sweater [F-2 that showed everything [F-3 there
was]]] wanted to be sociable.] (Brown)
(13) But the idea [C-1 that the fact [C-2 that some pain is
heading my way] gives me no special reason to avoid
it] seems so at odds with ...] (Internet)
On the basis of the material collected, Karlsson (2007)
induced the following generalizations:
(14) The maximal degree of multiple center-embedding is
three in written language, but C3 is so rare as to be
practically non-existing (only 13 instances found).
(15) The maximal degree of multiple center-embedding is
two in spoken language, but it is so rare as to
practically non-existing (only three instances found).
(16) Only clauses that postmodify nouns (i.e. relative
clauses as in (7, 8, 10 12), complement that-clauses
as in (13), and indirect questions allow central selfembedding.
(17) A C2 must contain at least one postmodifying clause.
(18) The typical C3/C2 contains a pair of relative clauses,
and is located at the end of the grammatical subject
immediately before the main verb. Its main function

Not a single genuine example of double object relativization
was found in Karlsson’s (2007) corpus, nor are there any in
the literature known to me. (In (21), the traces of the
preposed objects are indicated.)

Gibson’s processing theory
Edward Gibson’s (1998) Syntactic Prediction Locality
Theory (SPLT) has been influential in accounting for the
relationship between the sentence processing mechanism
and the available (mental) computational resources.
The theory has two components: an INTEGRATION COST
component and a component for the MEMORY COST
associated with keeping track of obligatory syntactic
requirements. The type of memory concerned is, of course,
working memory (WM). WM cost is quantified in terms of
the number of syntactic categories that are necessary to
complete the current input as a grammatical sentence. Both
memory cost and integration cost depend on LOCALITY. The
longer a predicted category must be kept in WM before the
prediction is satisfied, the greater is the memory cost for
maintaining that prediction. The greater the distance is
between an incoming word and the most local head or
dependent to which it attaches, the greater the integration
cost.
When a syntactic prediction has been made, a WM cost of
one memory unit (MU) is taxed every time a new discourse
referent is encountered until the prediction is satisfied. The
operational definition of ‘new discourse referent’ is either
introduction of a referent not so far mentioned, or a tensed
verb. Because several syntactic predictions may be active

2046

simultaneously, several WM taxation counts may be
running simultaneously, consuming WM resources. The
main verb is assumed to be cost-free because its existence is
taken for granted in every sentence.
SPLT explains the processing difficulties associated with
an impressive number of difficult structures, including the
unacceptability (I would say: ungrammaticality) of multiple
center-embeddings such as the double object relativization
(21).

state are generally acceptable. A reasonable conclusion from
this analysis is that linguistic working memory capacity is
somewhere around 2M(3) MUs or just below”.
Gibson based his analysis on a handful of invented
examples. The rest of this paper evaluates Gibson’s
ACCEPTABILITY LIMIT in the light of my empirical data on
multiple center-embeddings. A characterization is also
offered of the overall processing complexity of these
constructions.

Triple center-embeddings

To illustrate, first consider Gibson’s examples (23, 24)
(22) The reporter [C-1 who attacked the senator] admitted
the error.
(23) The reporter [C-1 who the senator attacked] admitted
the error.
In the subject-relativized sentence (22), who predicts the
occurrence of a predicate and a pronoun gap in the relative
clause. When the next word attacked is encountered, both
predictions are satisfied and no costs incur. Attacked next
predicts an object but this occurs as the next constituent and
therefore no costs incur for this prediction either. The total
WM taxation for (22) is therefore 0 MUs.
Next, consider the object relativization in (23). Who
makes the same predictions as in (22), but the next
constituent is the new referent expressed by the senator,
whereupon both predictions incur a cost of 1 MU, totaling
2M(1) (two predictions having passed one new referent).
Next attacked resolves the pending predictions and the
analysis proceeds as in (22). Thus the correct analysis is
made that object relativization is more complex by
consuming more WM resources than subject relativization,
a fact well established in psycholinguistics.
Now consider Gibson’s (made-up) equivalent of (21),
sentence (24) with double object relativization:
(24) The administrator [C-1 who the intern [C-2 who the
nurse supervised] had bothered] lost the medical
reports.
The syntactic predictions (i.e. the predicate and the relative
pronoun gap) of the first who will not be satisfied until had
bothered is encountered, yielding a WM expenditure of
2M(3) MUs, the relevant three crossed new referents
pending in WM storage being intern, nurse and supervised
(bolded in (24)).
Gibson infers the following generalization “…structures
which include a parse state with at least two long unresolved
predicted categories in addition to the top-level verb are
unacceptable, and those without such a state are usually
acceptable. Under the memory cost function assumed here,
a ‘long’ unresolved prediction is one spanning at least three
intervening new discourse referents. Thus, sentences whose
parses include parse states whose memory cost is 2M(3)
MUs or greater are generally not acceptable, while
sentences whose parses do not include such a costly parse

Of the thirteen observed triple center-embeddings, only one,
(25), is clearly below the acceptability limit, by Gibson
defined as 2M(3) MUs. (25) consumes only 1M(3) for
satisfaction of the prediction at weil that C-1 needs a
predicate. This prediction is satisfied at the word verzichtet,
having crossed three new discourse referents, one in each of
the embedded clauses (Mitbewerber, angenommen,
überlegen). At angenommen wird there is a parse state with
a cost of 1M(2)+2M(1) MUs, also clearly below the
acceptability limit. (Note the use of the plus notation to
indicate the sum of differing simultaneous prediction costs.)
The consumption of WM resources is low in (25) because
all three embedded clauses are short, C-2 contains two
pronouns, and C-3 an impersonal passive construction
which disposes of its grammatical subject.
(25) Er hat den Preis nur, [C-1 weil ein Mitbewerber, [C-2
welcher ihm, [C-3 wie allgemein angenommen wird,]
überlegen ist,] verzichtet hat,] bekommen. (Literal
gloss: ‘He has the price only, (C-1) because a
competitor, (C-2) who over him, (C-3) as is generally
presumed, (C-2) is superior, (C-3) gave up, (Main)
got.’) (Blatz 1896: 1274)
There are two C3s reaching a maximum of 1M(4), with all
prior parse states < 2M(3). Gibson does not discuss
instances where only one prediction crosses more than three
referents. Assuming for the moment that the effort invested
in one syntactic prediction would be equal in WM cost to
that of crossing one new referent, we obtain the value 6 for
the TOTAL EFFORT invested at Gibson’s acceptability limit (2
syntactic predictions * 3 referent crossings = 6). We shall
assume that all multiple center-embeddings with a maximal
total effort smaller than 6 are below the acceptability limit,
in particular 1M(4), 1M(5) and 3M(1), all of which exist,
provided they have no prior parse state exceeding 2M(3).
Thus three C3s out of 13 are clearly below the limit, when
redefined in terms of total effort = 6.
Sentence (9) is exactly at (or, according to Gibson,
perhaps slightly above) the acceptability limit 2M(3), which
is reached at the verb is in C-1, after crossing of the three
referents riding, cycle, and road. In C-3 neither the bleak
copula nor the classificatory NP motor vehicle were
included in the count because C-3 expresses a property, not
an independent referent. Note the non-finitenesss of the
verbs in C-2 and C-3 and the consequent suppression of two

2047

grammatical subjects by sharing them with the upper clause.
There is one more C3 in the corpus at 2M(3) with an
additional parse state at 1M(4):
(26) Der Landvogt ... fand, [C-1 als er, [C-2 von dem, [C-3
was vorgefallen,] benachrichtigt,] in bestürzten
Märschen zurückkehrte,] die Stadt in allgemeinen
Aufruhr. (‘The governor found, (C-1) as he, (C-2)
about that, (C-3) which [had] happened, (C-2)
notified, (C-1) returned in fast march, (Main) the city
in general uproar’. (H. von Kleist, Michael Kohlhaas;
Hoffmann-Krayer 1925: 131)
Sentence (8) above requires maximally 1M(6) MUs and is
on the same level of processing complexity as those needing
2M(3) MUs when analyzed in terms of total effort.
The remaining seven C3s are further beyond the
acceptability limit. Sentence (7) above and one more claim
exactly 2M(4) MUs, one claims 2M(4) with a later parse
stage of 1M(5). These sentences were produced by wellknown writers and do not intuitively feel (much) more
complex than (9, 26), suggesting that 2M(3) MUs is just one
point on a more continuous slope of decreasing
acceptability. Still more convoluted is the following
sentence from von Kleist:
(27) Der Ritter von Malzahn, [C-1 dem der Junker sich als
einen Fremden, [C-2 der bei seiner Durchreise den
seltsamen Mann, [C-3 den er mit sich führe,] in
Augenschein zu nehmen wünschte,] vorstellte,]
nötigte ihn ... (‘(M) The rider from Malzahn, (C-1) to
whom the Junker himself as a stranger, (C-2) who
upon his journey (through) the strange man, (C-3)
whom he brought with himself, (C-2) to judge by
appearance wanted, (C-1) introduced, (Main) forced
… (H. von Kleist, Michael Kohlhaas; Schneider
1959: 469)
The more verbose the embedded clauses are, and the more
full (non-pronominal) constituents they contain, the greater
will be the WM expenditure as new referents are crossed.
(27) has a parse state peak at in Augenschein requiring
1M(5)+2M(4) MUs, where the prediction of the predicate in
C-1 (vorstellte) has crossed (at least) five referents (it is not
always clear what should be counted as a referent, what
not), and the predictions of a predicate and subject relative
in C-2 have consumed 2M(4) MUs. When the prediction of
vorstellte in C-1 finally is satisfied, its parse state has risen
to 1M(6): the referents crossed are Junker – Durchreise –
Mann – führe – Augenschein – nehmen.
The three most complex C3s in my corpus are a Swedish
one from 1863 reaching 2M(6), a German one from 1893
peaking at 2M(6)+2M(4) with a later local maximum at
2M(7), and a Danish sentence from a court decision in 1892
containing a maximum of 2M(6)+2M(4) with a later local
peak 1M(11), cf. examples (3, 12, 13) in Karlsson (2007b).
Such monster sentences are of course incomprehensible.

The conclusion of the analysis of C3s must be that few of
them, only three, are below Gibson’s acceptability limit. If
the limit reflects a foundational WM restriction, this
corroborates the marginality of C3s as a structural option,
already expressed in (14). But the extant C3s rather seem to
populate a gradual slope, where the value 2M(3) MUs does
not stand out as being of particular significance.

Double center-embeddings
2

The 104 C s in my corpus distribute themselves over WM
cost as shown in Table 1. Columns 1a-b give the WM costs
and numbers of those C2s that clearly are below Gibson’s
limit 2M(3) MUs (total effort less than 6). Columns 3a-b
lists the instances which are above the acceptability limit
with a total effort equal to or greater than 6.
Table 1: Working memory cost in 104 C2s.
1a
Cost
M(0)
1M(1)
1M(2)
1M(3)
1M(4)
1M(5)
2M(1)
2M(2)
3M(1)
Sum
%

1b
N
1
9
12
10
5
3
13
17
4
74
71

2a
Cost
1M(6)
1M(7)
1M(8)
2M(3)
2M(4)
2M(5)
2M(6)
2M(9)
3M(2)
3M(3)

2b
N
4
1
2
11
6
1
1
1
1
2
30
29

Total

104
100

More than two thirds of the C2s are below the limit and
many of them are far from causing overflow in working
memory. Here is an assortment, listed according to growing
complexity, of those C2s that are easiest to process and
understand, with the WM cost indicated at the end in
angular brackets.

2048

(28) The girl ... [C-1 who was clothed in the tightest-fitting
pair of slacks [C-2 I had ever seen on a woman] and a
sweater [F-2 that showed everything [F-3 there was]]]
wanted to be sociable. [M(0)]
(29) We yet looked forward to a time ... [F-1 when the rule
[C-2 that they [C-3 who do not work] shall not eat,] will
be applied not to paupers only. [1M(1)]
(30) It’s ironic [F-1 that I’m here, [F-2 where the man [C-3
the trophy [C-4 I won] is named after] coached.
[1M(2)]
(31) The reason [C-1 why this question of [C-2 when the
copy was made] is of some interest] is that ... [1M(3)]
(32) He knows ... [F-1 that, for example, [C-2 whereas in
1908 the proportion of his students at Leeds [C-3 who
were drawn from within 30 miles] was 78 %,] it was,
by 1955, reduced to 40 %. [1M(4)]

(40) The occasion [C-1 on which in the nation [C-2 of whose
language I am writing] the word repugnancy has
been most frequently made use of] is that where ...
[2M(4)]
(41) A number of speeches [C-1 into which a great deal of
thought and preparation on a level a great deal higher
[C-2 than is common in modern politics] have gone]
are not reported at all ... [2M(5)]
(42) Es wird allgemein angenommen, [F-1 dass die
Militärs, [C-2 die das Land dreizehn Jahre lang mit
Unterschiedlichem Erfolg und — mit Ausnahme
Murtala Muhammeds, [C-3 der erst sieben Monate an
der Macht war, [F-4 als er im Februar 1976 ermordet
wurde]] — ohne Popularität zu erlangen geführt
haben,] von sich aus eine Rückkehr an die Macht
nicht anstreben. ‘It is normally surmised (F-1) that
the soldiers (C-2) who ruled the country thirteen
years with variable results and – with the exception
of Murtala Muhammed, (C-3) who first was seven
months in power (F-4) until he was murdered in
February 1976 – without achieving popularity, do not
themselves strive for a return to power.’ [2M(9)]
(43) For an analysis of the possible modifications [C-1 of
which the pathological termination of an act [C-2
which is not according to law] are susceptible] we
have therefore only to ... [3M(2)]
(44) (Swedish:) Helt säkra på [C-1 vad blandningen, [C-2
som de insjuknade har druckit] består av,] var läkarna
inte.] ‘(M) Quite sure of (C-1) what the mixture, (C2) that the patients had drunk (C-1) consisted of,
(Main) the doctors were not’. [3M(3)]

(33) Laughland’s assertion [C-1 that the presence of
Delors – 14 years old [C-2 when the war began –] in
the Compagnons de France, the Vichy youth
movement, meant [F-2 that he supported fascism]] is
ridiculous. [1M(5)]
(34) The two most difficult skills [C-1 that everyone [C-2 I
know] has to learn when they join a team] are…
[2M(1)]
(35) All the concern [C-1 which he [C-2 to whom it belongs
by adoption] has in the matter] is the being ...
[2M(2)]
(36) But the general principle [C-1 that every thing [C-2 to
which such and such sensation belongs,] has such and
such a complicated series of predicates,] is not one
determined by reason but… [3M(1)]
In contradistinction to C3, C2 is obviously a wellestablished even if rare construction type especially in
written language: there is no question of the grammaticality
and acceptability of (28-36) even if it is clear that overall
acceptability has a tendency to decrease as the number of
constituents pending in WM and the number of new
referents crossed increases.
Note that there even are C2s like (28) that invoke no WM
cost at all. This situation is possible in (28) because the
subject and predicate of C-1 (who was clothed) are
immediately available and therefore the do not need to be
entered as pending predictions in WM. The predicate of C-1
predicts the occurrence of an adverbial prepositional phrase,
but it too (in the tightest-fitting pair of slacks) is completed
immediately, as the first part of a coordinated construction.
C-2 is beneficially inserted before the second, optional part
of the coordinated construction in C-1 and therefore does
not tax WM at all. – (The C-3 of (7) is also inserted at a
coordination junction, corroborating conclusion (18) that
multiple center-embedding is preferred at natural syntactic
breaks.)
The following sentences exemplify those 30 sentences (29
%) of Table 1 that are at or beyond the acceptability limit,
consuming 1M(6) or 2M(3) MUs or more. The examples are
listed according to growing complexity.
(37) For the remainder of his industrious life (apart from
during the second world war [C-1 when he worked in
the Ministry of Information [C-2 – where he was
banished to Belfast [F-3 for being lazy and
unenthusiastic –]] and the Auxiliary Fire Service)]
Quennell ... [1M(6)]
(38) And in particular [C-1 when the motives [C-2 which are
applied] are of the nature of those [F-2 which result
from a change [f-4 made in the condition of the
body,]]]] the power may be said to … [1M(8)]
(39) Neither, however, [C-1 as their critics and all of those
[C-2 who subsequently complained about their assault
on Heath] always stress,] felt moved to resign.
[2M(3)]

Table 2 displays the data of Table 1 recounted in terms of
total effort.
Table 2. Data of Table 1 recalculated in
terms of total effort.
Total effort
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
10+
Sum

N
1
9
25
14
22
3
16
1
8
2
1
2
104

Recall Gibson’s definition of the acceptability limit: “…
linguistic working memory capacity is somewhere around
2M(3) MUs or just below”. Table 2 shows that there are no
less than 16 instances of 2M(3) and its equivalents of a total

2049

effort of 6. These instances cannot all be declared
unacceptable by intuition alone. This suggests at least that
the acceptability limit rather is above than below 2M(3)
MUs and its equivalents.

Discussion
3

The analysis of C s and C2s has shown that the conjecture of
a demarcation line at 2M(3) MUs, or slightly below,
between acceptable and unacceptable multiple centerembeddings does not find clear support in real language data
drawn from genuine written texts or, rarely, from natural
spoken discourse. If there is such a demarcation line, it is
rather above than below 6 total effort units. But most likely,
the overall data speak in favor of a cline of asymptotically
decreasing complexity.
There might be systematic flaws in the design of the
procedure counting MUs. For example, the Swedish
sentence (44) has a WM cost of 3M(3) which is huge. All
ten native informants (including myself) I have consulted on
the acceptability of (44) confirm that there is nothing weird
about this sentence, which appeared in 2001 in the main
Swedish newspaper of Finland, Hufvudstadsbladet. It is
perfectly grammatical, acceptable and understandable. Its
WM expenditure is high just because the prediction of its
main clause subject is satisfied only after the doubly centerembedded relative clauses have been passed. That is, the
prediction of a postposed main clause grammatical subject
(here, läkarna ‘doctors’) turns out to be overly costly. The
model needs revision.
A similar problem occurs in sentences with an initial
modal or frame adverbial and a postposed grammatical
subject, like (38, 39). The late grammatical subject causes
the WM cost to become unrealistically high.
Overall, the data of this paper are in good conformance
with current theories of the nature of working memory, e.g.
Cowan’s (2000, 2005) theory of the storage limit on WM
being around four chunks, or the well-known capability of
humans to be able to simultaneously register some four
elements in the focus of visual attention. Recall that even C2
is next to non-existing in spoken language (15). Sentence
(30) above is one of the few documented ones from spoken
language. Its WM cost is only 1M(2), far below Gibson’s
acceptability limit. Of course one should not let the most
extreme instances of written language, such as (44), define
what the bottom line of (spoken) language WM
consumption is.

Cowan, N. (2000). The magical number 4 in short-term
memory: A reconsideration of mental storage capacity.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24, 87-185.
Cowan, N. (2005). Working memory capacity. New York:
Psychology Press.
De Roeck, A., Johnson, R., King, M., Rosner, M., Sampson,
G., & Varile, N. (1982). A myth about centreembedding. Lingua, 58, 327-340.
Gibson, E. (1998). Linguistic complexity: Locality of
syntactic dependencies. Cognition, 68, 1-76.
Givón, T., & Shibatani, M. (Eds.) (2009). Syntactic
complexity. Diachrony, acquisition, neuro-cognition,
evolution. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins
Publishing Company.
Hiltunen, R. (1984). The type and structure of clausal
embedding in legal English. Text, 4, 107-121.
Hoffmann-Krayer, E. (1925). Geschichte des deutschen Stils
in Einzelbildern. Leipzig: Verlag von Quelle & Meyer.
Hurford, J. R. (2007). The origins of meaning. Language in
the light of evolution. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Karlsson, F. (2007a). Constraints on multiple centerembedding of clauses. Journal of Linguistics, 43, 365392.
Karlsson, F. (2007b). Genuine data on multiple centerembedding
of
clauses.
[Available
at
www.ling.helsinki.fi/~fkarlsso/ceb_data.pdf]
Lewis, R. L. (1996). Interference in short-term memory:
The magical number two (or three) in sentence
processing. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 25, 93115.
MacWhinney, B. (2009). The emergence of linguistic
complexity. In Givón & Shibatani (Eds.).
Pawley, A. (2009). On the origins of serial verb
constructions in Kalam. In Givón & Shibatani (Eds.).
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G., & Svartvik, J. (1989).
A comprehensive grammar of the English language.
London: Longman.
Schneider, W. 1959. Stilistische deutsche Grammatik.
Freiburg im Breisgau: Verlag Herder KG.
Tucker, D. M., Luu, P., & Poulsen, C. (2009). Neural
mechanisms of recursive processing in cognitive and
linguistic complexity. In Givón & Shibatani (Eds.).
Vasishth, S. (1972). Working memory in sentence
comprehension. Processing Hindi center-embeddings.
New York and London: Routledge.

References
Baddeley, A., Gathercole, S., & Papagno, C. (1998). The
phonological loop as a language learning device.
Psychological Review, 105, 158-173.
Blatt, F. (1957). Latin influence on European syntax.
Travaux du Cercle Linguistique de Copenhague, 11, 3369.

2050

