UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Writing: The Process of Discovery

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5v66j3qh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 32(32)

Authors
Baaijen, Veerle
Galbraith, David
De Glopper, Kees

Publication Date
2010-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Writing: The Process of Discovery
Veerle Baaijen (V.M.Baaijen@rug.nl)
Center for Language and Cognition Groningen, University of Groningen
Oude Kijk in ‘t Jatstraat 26, 9700 AS, Groningen, The Netherlands

David Galbraith (D.Galbraith@staffs.ac.uk)
Centre for Educational Psychology Research, Staffordshire University
College Road, Stoke-on-Trent, ST4 2DE, United Kingdom

Kees de Glopper (C.M.de.Glopper@rug.nl)
Center for Language and Cognition Groningen, University of Groningen
Oude Kijk in ‘t Jatstraat 26, 9700 AS, Groningen, The Netherlands

Abstract
This paper describes the results of a study investigating the
process by which writers develop their understanding through
writing. It argues that, contrary to problem-solving models of
writing, the crucial ingredient is implicitly guided text
production. Two groups of writers, varying in the extent to
which their writing is assumed to be directed towards
rhetorical goals, were asked to write either planned or nonplanned texts. Key-stroke logs were collected, and changes in
subjective understanding about the topic were measured. The
results show that developments of understanding are strongly
related to the extent to which writers modify their texts during
writing, and this is highest in the conditions expected to
promote implicitly guided text production. We conclude that
these findings support a dual-process model of writing.
Keywords: Planning; knowledge change; writing processes;
keystroke logging; text production.

Introduction
Writing is an ideal area in which to study the ebb and flow
of thought. Although the end product is a fixed knowledge
object which has to be comprehensible in the absence of the
writer, the process by which it is produced is an extremely
dynamic one, in which writers both have to work out what
they think about a topic and how best to communicate this
to their readers. For this reason, writing is typically
characterized as a process of discovery. Bereiter and
Scardamalia (1987), for example, characterize expert
writing as a knowledge-transforming process, during which
writers actively transform their thought in response to their
evolving goals, and contrast this with the knowledge-telling
process employed by novice writers, in which a fixed store
of ideas in long term memory is translated directly into text.
They claim that the knowledge-transforming model
accounts for the “the peculiar value that many have claimed
for writing as a way of developing one’s understanding”
(Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1987, p. 302). In this paper, we
describe the results of an experiment investigating the
conditions under which writers develop their understanding
and how this is related to a simple indicator of one of the
processes involved in writing.

According to Bereiter and Scardamalia’s (1987)
knowledge-transforming model, discovery through writing
is a consequence of rhetorical problem solving. This claim
has three important features. The first is an emphasis on the
explicit thinking processes involved in the generation and
evaluation of content rather than on the processes involved
in translating thought into language. Second, and following
from this emphasis, the crucial contrast between the
knowledge telling and knowledge transforming processes is
the goals toward which writing is directed. Thus, in the
knowledge-telling model, the goal is to retrieve ideas stored
in memory and translate these into text. By contrast, in the
knowledge-transforming model, content retrieval and
evaluation is mediated by the writer’s communicative goals:
expert writers develop an elaborate representation of their
audience and the rhetorical situation and use this to guide
the generation of content. This leads to the re-evaluation of
existing content in long term memory and to the formulation
of new content. Third, the extent to which writers are able to
engage in this reflective evaluation of content depends on
how they manage the interaction between high-level
thinking processes and the formulation of content in text.
Translating processes and higher level thinking processes
are assumed to compete for limited cognitive resources, and
hence it is assumed that writers will be less able to engage
in rhetorical problem-solving the more they try to carry out
text production at the same time as generating content. It is
this conflict which is assumed to be responsible for the
beneficial effects of outlining prior to writing. Kellogg
(1988) has provided convincing evidence that outlining is
associated with the production of better quality text, and that
this is because it enables writers to clearly separate the
reflective processes involved in generating, organizing and
evaluating ideas from the processes involved in formulating
these ideas in well-formed text.
Overall, the knowledge-transforming model and
associated research on the benefits of outlining suggests that
discovery through writing is a consequence of the strategic
modification of content in order to satisfy rhetorical goals,
and that this will be enhanced when the writer is able to
focus on higher level thinking processes free from the
demands of simultaneously formulating full text.

1774

Recently, Galbraith (2009) has questioned this account
on empirical grounds. In a series of experiments examining
the conditions under which writers develop their
understanding, Galbraith and his colleagues have found
different patterns of development of understanding through
writing than would be expected on the basis of the rhetorical
problem-solving model. In brief summary, the essential
pattern of their findings is as follows. First, although writers
whose writing is assumed to be directed towards rhetorical
goals (high self-monitors) do develop more new content
after making notes than when they are required to write full
text, as would be expected if discovery depended on the
extent to which writing was directed towards rhetorical
goals, this new content was not associated with increases in
writers’ subjective understanding of the topic. Second, there
was also evidence that writers whose writing was assumed,
not to be directed towards rhetorical goals, but rather to be
implicitly organized (low self-monitors), developed new
content after writing full text, without pre-planning, and that
this was associated with developments of subjective
understanding. (See Snyder and Gangestad, 1986, for a
review of differences between low and high self-monitors.)
On the basis of these experiments, Galbraith has
suggested an alternative dual-process account of discovery
through writing. This proposes that the development of
understanding in writing depends on an interaction between
two different kinds of process. The first of these is an
explicit planning process. This involves the retrieval of
content from an explicit store of ideas and the goal-directed
manipulation of these ideas in working memory designed to
create a coherent knowledge object that satisfies rhetorical
goals. This is essentially equivalent to the knowledge
transforming model of Bereiter and Scardamalia, with the
crucial difference that, by itself, this process only involves
the reorganization of existing knowledge and is not
associated with developments of understanding. The second
is an implicit text production process. This operates on an
implicit store of conceptual knowledge in semantic memory,
which Galbraith defines as the writer’s disposition towards
the topic, and involves synthesizing content during text
production. The key features of this process, for present
purposes, are that it is engaged when writers have to
formulate their thought in explicit propositions, and that,
because the process is guided by the implicit organization of
material in semantic memory, the sequence in which content
is produced is unpredictable. Content is synthesized in the
course of formulation rather than being directly retrieved
from memory and translated into text. This process is
assumed to lead to developments of understanding when the
content it produces is different from the explicit content
stored in episodic memory.
The model suggests that the implicit text production
process will be at a maximum when writing is (i)
dispositionally guided, i.e. for low self-monitors, and (ii) not
outline planned, i.e. the order in which content is produced
is governed by the implicit organization of content in
semantic memory rather than by an explicit, pre-determined

plan in working memory. The implicit text production
process will be minimized when writing is (i) directed
towards rhetorical goals, i.e. for high self-monitors, and (ii)
controlled by an outline, i.e. when the sequence of text
production is pre-determined. Furthermore, it suggests that,
because changes in content can be induced by both explicit
planning and implicit text production, but only implicit text
production leads to the development of understanding, there
will be no direct relationship between the overall amount of
change in content and the development of understanding.
Instead, the development of understanding will be directly
linked to the extent that new content is produced by the
implicit text production process.
This experiment set out to test these claims by using
key-stroke logging to provide a direct measure of the extent
to which content was modified during the course of text
production, and examined how this varied depending on the
conditions under which writing took place, and how it was
related to developments in the writer’s personal
understanding of the topic. The present paper will report the
results for a simple indicator of content modification during
text production, which we will label as the text modification
index. This corresponds to the total number of words
recorded by key-stroke logging divided by the total number
of words appearing in the final text. When writers transcribe
their thoughts directly into text the index should be 1: all the
words that are written down during text production will be
retained in the final text. To the extent that the writer
changes the way that they express their ideas during text
production the index should increase: writers will produce
more words during the process of text production than
appear in the final text.
The design of the experiment was based on a previous
experiment by Galbraith, Torrance and Hallam (2006) and
manipulated two variables: self-monitoring and planning.
Each group was asked either to make an outline before
writing or to sum up their overall opinion of the topic prior
to writing (a procedure we call synthetic planning, and
which differs from outline planning in that it does not
specify the order in which content should be produced
during text production.). Our aim was to replicate the
conditions of this earlier experiment with a view to
assessing how the text modification index varied under
these conditions. We expected that, if the dual-process
model is correct, the text modification index should be at a
maximum when low self-monitors produce synthetically
planned texts, and that increases in subjective understanding
should be associated with high levels of text modification,
rather than with the overall amount of change in content
produced in the different conditions.

Method
Participants
84 students from the faculty of Arts of the University of
Groningen were recruited to participate in the experiment.
They were all native Dutch speakers, average age 22.2 years

1775

(SD = 3.8), and were pre-selected using Snyder’s revised 18
item self-monitoring scale (Snyder & Gangestad, 1986).
Participants could only take part if they were classified
either as a high or a low self-monitor. They were classified
as high self-monitors (HSM, n = 42) if they scored 11-18 on
the scale and as low self-monitors (LSM, n = 42) if they
scored 0 - 8 on the scale.

of the number and average length of ideas in the list
produced before writing.
Text modification index In order to assess the process by
which writing is carried out a text modification index was
calculated. For the text modification index the total number
of words recorded by Inputlog are divided by the number of
words appearing in the final text.

Design and procedure

Writing task In all four conditions, participants were asked
to plan and write an article for the university newspaper
discussing whether “our growing dependence on computers
and the Internet is a good development or not”. The writing
task was divided into three phases.
In phase 1, participants were first given 10 minutes to
list all the ideas they could think of relevant to the topic. It
was stressed that each idea should be no longer than a
sentence in length. They were then asked to rate how much
they felt they knew about the topic on a 7-point scale.
In phase 2, participants were given 5 minutes to either
write down a single sentence summing up their overall
opinion (synthetic planning) or to construct a structured
outline (outline planning). They were then given 30 minutes
to write a well-structured article for the university
newspaper. It was stressed that they had to produce a
reasoned argument reflecting their own opinion about the
matter. Participants were allowed to consult their written
outlines. During writing, keystrokes were logged using
Inputlog (Leijten & Van Waes, 2006).
In phase 3, immediately after writing, participants were
asked again to rate how much they felt they knew about the
topic. They were then given 10 minutes to again list all the
ideas they could think of relevant to the topic. Finally, they
were asked to compare the lists produced before and after
writing, and to rate the extent that ideas on list 2
corresponded with ideas on list 1, using a 6-point scale
ranging from 1=identical point to 6=no correspondence.

Measures
Subjective development of understanding The ratings of
knowledge were used to assess subjective changes in
understanding as a consequence of writing.
Development of ideas This was assessed using the
procedure used in previous research. New ideas were
defined as ideas in the second list that received ratings from
4 to 6 for their correspondence with ideas in the first list.
Preserved ideas were defined as ideas in the second list that
received ratings from 1 to 3 for their correspondence with
ideas in list 1. The average length of these ideas was also
calculated. These were assessed against baseline measures

Data screening Preliminary analysis of the data revealed 6
outliers (i.e. scores more than 3 SD’s above or below the
mean). Three participants had extremely low scores on the
initial or post knowledge rating. One had an extremely high
score on the mean length of ideas. Two had extremely high
scores on the text modification index. These participants
were removed from all analyses.

Results
Development of subjective understanding
A two-way (2*2) between subjects ANCOVA with selfmonitoring and planning as factors and with prior
knowledge as a covariate revealed a significant main effect
of type of planning on subjective understanding after
writing (F (1,73) = 4.61, p = .035, η2 =.033). Figure 1 shows
the mean ratings of knowledge before and after writing in
each condition (with error bars showing standard errors).
6
Mean rating of knowledge

High and low self-monitors were randomly allocated to the
two planning conditions resulting in the following four
experimental groups: (i) HSM outline planning, (ii) HSM
synthetic planning, (iii) LSM outline planning and (iv) LSM
synthetic planning.

Before writing
After writing

5
4
3
2
1
Outline planning

Synthetic planning

Figure 1: Development of subjective understanding as a
function of type of planning.
Planned comparisons comparing mean knowledge ratings
before and after writing in the synthetic and outline planned
conditions showed that there was a significant increase in
knowledge in the synthetic planned condition (t (39) = 3.34,
p = .002) but no significant difference in the outline planned
condition (t (37) = 0.47, p = .64).

Effects on idea change and relationships with
developments of subjective understanding
To assess the relationship between changes in the content of
the lists produced before and after writing and changes in
subjective understanding, we converted the knowledge

1776

ratings to a category variable representing the extent to
which knowledge increased, decreased or remained the
same. We then carried out a 3-way between subjects
MANCOVA, with self-monitoring, type of planning and
change in knowledge as independent variables; the number
of new and preserved ideas, and the average length of these
ideas, as dependent variables; and the number of ideas
produced before writing and their average length as
covariates. Using Pillai’s trace, this showed a significant
main effect of type of planning (V = .14, F (4, 60) = 2.51, p
= .05) and a significant interaction between type of planning
and knowledge change (V = .32, F (8, 122) = 2.85, p =
.006). To describe these effects, we will consider them in
two stages, starting with the main effect of type of planning
and then considering the interaction between type of
planning and change in knowledge.
Main effect of type of planning There were two important
findings here. First, as can be seen in figure 2, the preserved
ideas were significantly reduced in length in the outline
planning condition but not in the synthetic planning
condition (F (1, 66) = 5.80, p =.019, η2 =.05). There was no
equivalent effect for the new ideas.
Outline planning
8,0

Synthetic planning

Mean length per idea

7,0
6,0
5,0
4,0
3,0
2,0
1,0
0,0

Ideas list 1

Preserved ideas

New ideas

Figure 2: Words per idea for ideas in list 1, preserved ideas
in list 2 and new ideas in list 2.
A possible explanation for the effect is that when an outline
is constructed it is held in working memory to guide text
production. In consequence, when writers refer to ideas in
the outline, they label the idea held in memory in an
abbreviated form. Although this effect may prove useful as
a marker of the extent to which individuals within different
conditions construct a mental outline during writing, it does
not suggest a substantive effect of type of planning on the
content of the lists produced after writing.
The second important finding here is a negative one. The
follow-up analysis of the multivariate analysis revealed no
apparent effect of either self-monitoring or type of planning
on the number of new or preserved ideas produced after
writing. Possible reasons for this will be considered in the
discussion.
Interaction between type of planning and knowledge
change To determine the source of this effect, we carried

out simple effects analysis within the synthetic planning and
outline planning conditions, using 1-way MANCOVAs,
with change in knowledge as the independent variable, the
four measures of the lists produced after writing as
dependent variables, and the number of ideas in the initial
list and their average length as covariates. This confirmed
that there was no significant relationship between idea
change and changes in subjective knowledge within the
outline planning condition (V = .191, F (8, 54) =.71 p =.68).
However, there was a highly significant effect of within the
synthetic planning condition (V =.645, F (8, 60) = 3.57, p =
.002). Univariate ANOVAs, followed by planned
comparisons, on each of the dependent variables showed
that there were significant effects for 3 of the variables.
First, there was a significant effect on new ideas (F (2,
34) = 6.25. p =.005, η2=.25), with planned comparisons
showing that participants whose knowledge remained the
same produced more new ideas (M = 7.8, se = 0.68) than
both participants whose knowledge decreased (M = 1.69, se
= 2.34, p =.05) and participants whose knowledge increased
(M = 4.85, se =0.91, p =.045). Although increased
knowledge was associated with more new ideas than
decreased knowledge, this difference was not significant (p
= .65).
There was also a significant effect on the average length
of new ideas (F (2, 33) = 5.94, p =.006, η2=.14) with
participants whose knowledge decreased producing longer
new ideas than those whose knowledge remained the same
(p =.008) and those whose knowledge increased (p =.04).
Finally, there was a marginally significant effect on the
average length of preserved ideas (F (2, 34) = 2.46, p =.10,
η2=.04), with a tendency for participants whose knowledge
remained the same to produce preserved ideas shorter in
length than those produced by participants whose
knowledge either increased or decreased.
Taken together, these findings suggest, first, that
decreases in knowledge occurred in this condition when
writers were relatively unable to think of new ideas, and to
express what ideas they could think of concisely. This
implies that thinking of new content is generally necessary
in order to produce satisfactory text. Second, increases in
knowledge were associated with the production of fewer
new ideas than when knowledge stayed the same. This
contradicts previous research. A possible explanation for
this is that new ideas were produced by different processes
when knowledge remained the same than when it increased.
On the assumption that the length of preserved ideas reflects
the extent to which writing has been controlled by an outline
(see above), then the marginally significant effect on the
length of preserved ideas could indicate that texts where
knowledge remained the same were relatively more outline
planned than the texts where knowledge increased.

Relationship with processes
The preceding analysis revealed that, despite the significant
difference between synthetic and outline planning in the
extent to which writers reported increases in understanding,

1777

Mean text modification index

1,45
1,4

Outline planning
Synthetic planning

1,35
1,3
1,25
1,2
1,15
1,1
1,05
1

High self-monitors

Low self-monitors

Figure 3: The text modification index as a function of type
of planning and self-monitoring.
Second, there was a significant interaction between
knowledge change and type of planning (F (2, 66) = 3.67, p
=.03, η2=.07). Analysis of simple effects, followed by
planned comparisons of the differences between different
types of knowledge change, revealed that there was a highly
significant main effect of knowledge change within the
synthetic planning condition (F (2, 34) = 5.59, p = .008,
η2=.22). As can be seen in figure 4, this was a consequence
of the fact that increases in knowledge were associated with
significantly higher levels of text modification than when
knowledge remained the same (t (34) = 3.29, p = .007).
Although decreased knowledge was also associated with
lightly elevated levels of text modification, this was not
significantly different from the other conditions.

Outline planning

1,5

Synthetic planning

1,45

Mean text modification index

there were no differences in idea change within the two
planning conditions, and generally that there were no
relationships between the amount of change in ideas and
increased knowledge. According to the dual-process model,
this is because new content is produced by two different
processes -explicit rhetorical planning and implicitly guided
text production- and only implicit text production leads to
the development of understanding. To test these claims, we
carried out a 3-way between subjects ANOVA on the text
modification index, with self-monitoring, type of planning
and knowledge change as dependent variables. This
produced clear evidence to support these claims.
First, both self-monitoring and type of planning had a
clear effect on the extent to which ideas were modified
during text production. There was a significant main effect
of type of planning (F (1, 66) =5.55, p= .02, η2=.06), a close
to significant main effect of self-monitoring (F (1, 66) =
4.53, p =.06, η2=.03) and a significant interaction between
self-monitoring and type of planning (F (1, 66) = 4.45, p
=.04, η2=.04). Figure 3 shows that low self-monitors
produced higher levels on the text modification index than
high self-monitors and this was reduced when text
production was preceded by outline planning.

1,4
1,35
1,3
1,25
1,2
1,15
1,1
1,05
1

Decreased knowledge

Same knowledge

Increased knowledge

Figure 4: The text modification index as a function of type
of planning and knowledge change.

Discussion
The dual-process model claims that new content is produced
during writing by two different kinds of process: explicitly
controlled planning to satisfy rhetorical goals and implicitly
guided text production articulating the writer’s developing
understanding. This contrasts with the knowledgetransforming model in two key respects. First, it claims that,
although explicitly controlled planning does lead to changes
in content after writing, this is essentially a matter of
retrieving already existing knowledge which is more
appropriate to the rhetorical context than the ideas initially
considered relevant to the topic, and hence that changes in
content produced by explicit planning will not lead to
developments in understanding. Second, it claims that
implicitly guided text production is not simply a matter of
translating the output of planning into words, but is an
active knowledge-constituting process in its own right. Our
results provide strong support for both claims.
First, there was clear evidence that content was produced
by different processes in the outline planned and
synthetically planned conditions. The outline planned
condition involved significantly lower levels of text
modification during writing than the synthetically planned
condition. This is compatible with the claim that changes in
content in this condition are a consequence of higher level
thinking processes rather than of the modification of content
in the formulation of the text itself. By contrast, text
modification was at its highest in the condition – the lowself-monitors’ synthetically planned texts – where the dual
process-model assumes that text production is most
implicitly guided, and where new content is assumed to be
formulated in the text itself rather than through planning
prior to text production.
Second, although both conditions led to a similar amount
of change in ideas, as would be expected if both processes
play an active role in developing content during writing,
only the synthetic planning condition was associated with
significant increases in subjective ratings of understanding.

1778

This clearly supports the claim that explicit planning is less
strongly associated with the development of understanding
than implicitly guided text production is.
Third, there was no relationship between the amount of
change in content in the different conditions and increases
in subjective understanding. The dual-process model
provides a straightforward explanation for this: increases in
understanding depend on the extent to which new content is
produced by implicitly guided text production. This
explanation is strongly supported by the fact that
synthetically planned writing involved significantly higher
levels of text modification, and that it was precisely those
writers within this condition whose understanding increased
who produced the highest levels of text modification. The
only exception to this extremely clear pattern was that the
few writers who experienced decreases in knowledge in any
of the conditions also appeared to engage in relatively high
levels of text modification. The important feature of these
writers, however, is that they also produced few new ideas.
This leads to the general conclusion that increases in
understanding occur when writers develop new ideas in the
course of formulating the text itself. Understanding will
remain the same when text production is either controlled to
conform to a higher level plan (as in outline planning) or
when the writer’s knowledge prior to writing is sufficiently
clear for text to be fluently produced. Understanding will
decrease when text production does not lead to the
formulation of coherent new content.
There is one aspect of these results which does not
match previous research. Previous studies (see Galbraith,
2009) have found that low self-monitors typically produce
more new ideas than high self-monitors under synthetic
planning conditions, and that, under these conditions, the
number of new ideas is positively correlated with increases
in subjective understanding. The dual process model
assumes that this is because high self-monitors typically
impose more control on text production than low selfmonitors, so reducing the extent to which ideas are
formulated during text production. This was partially
supported in the present experiment in that high selfmonitors did engage in significantly less text modification
than low self-monitors in the synthetic planning condition.
However, there no was difference in the extent to which low
and high self-monitors produced new ideas in this condition,
and there was a negative rather than a positive relationship
between the number of new ideas and increases in
understanding.
We believe that this is a consequence of a difference in
the constraints under which synthetic planning was carried
out in this experiment. In previous research, the external
constraints for the text under synthetic planning conditions
have either been left unspecified or writers have been
actively instructed to write down their thought free from
rhetorical constraints. By contrast in this experiment, writers
were instructed to produce a finished article for the
university newspaper in the time available. According to the
dual-process model, this should lead to an increase in the

extent of explicit planning processes, and since these are
prioritized by high self-monitors, a greater increase in the
number of new ideas produced by high self-monitors
compared to low self-monitors. Furthermore, since these
new ideas are produced by explicit planning, which
according to the dual-process model is not associated with
changes in understanding, there will no longer be a
straightforward relationship between the amount of new
ideas and increases in subjective understanding, just as we
found in this experiment. This explanation could be tested
by comparing low and high self-monitors writing
synthetically planned text, either with clear rhetorical
constraints, as in the present experiment, or free from
rhetorical constraints as in previous research.
Our general conclusion is that in order to explain how
writers develop their understanding it is necessary to
examine the processes by which their ideas are created
rather than just assess the extent to which they have
modified their beliefs. The simple index of text modification
that we have used in this paper has shown clear distinctions
between different kinds of knowledge change, which
strongly supports the broad claim that the development of
thought during writing depends on two different kinds of
process. Further research is needed, using on-line measures
such as key-stroke logging, to examine in detail how ideas
are formulated during text production and how this results
in developments of the writer’s understanding.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Professor Kees de Bot for his
helpful comments on earlier drafts of this paper.

References
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1987). The psychology of
written composition. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates Publishers.
Galbraith, D. (2009). Writing as discovery. British Journal
of Educational Psychology Monograph Series II 6 Teaching and Learning Writing, 5-26.
Galbraith, D., Torrance, M., & Hallam, J. (2006). Effects of
writing on conceptual coherence. Proceedings of the 28th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
1340–1345.
Kellogg, R.T. (1988). Attentional overload and writing
performance: Effects of rough draft and outline strategies.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 14 (2), 355-365.
Leijten, M., & Van Waes, L. (2006). Inputlog: New
perspectives on the logging of online writing. In K.P.H.
Sullivan & E. Lindgren (Eds.), Computer Key-Stroke
Logging and Writing: Methods and Applications. Oxford:
Elsevier.
Snyder, M., & Gangestad, S.W. (1986). On the nature of
self-monitoring. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 51, 125-139.

1779

