UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A probabilistic approach to semantic representation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/44x9v7m7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Griffiths, Thomas L
Steyvers, Mark

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A probabilistic approach to semantic representation
Thomas L. Griﬃths & Mark Steyvers
{gruffydd,msteyver}@psych.stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-2130 USA

Abstract
Semantic networks produced from human data have
statistical properties that cannot be easily captured
by spatial representations. We explore a probabilistic approach to semantic representation that explicitly models the probability with which words occur
in diﬀerent contexts, and hence captures the probabilistic relationships between words. We show that
this representation has statistical properties consistent with the large-scale structure of semantic networks constructed by humans, and trace the origins
of these properties.

Contemporary accounts of semantic representation suggest that we should consider words to be
either points in a high-dimensional space (eg. Landauer & Dumais, 1997), or interconnected nodes in a
semantic network (eg. Collins & Loftus, 1975). Both
of these ways of representing semantic information
provide important insights, but also have shortcomings. Spatial approaches illustrate the importance
of dimensionality reduction and employ simple algorithms, but are limited by Euclidean geometry.
Semantic networks are less constrained, but their
graphical structure lacks a clear interpretation.
In this paper, we view the function of associative semantic memory to be eﬃcient prediction of
the concepts likely to occur in a given context. We
take a probabilistic approach to this problem, modeling documents as expressing information related
to a small number of topics (cf. Blei, Ng, & Jordan,
2002). The topics of a language can then be learned
from the words that occur in diﬀerent documents.
We illustrate that the large-scale structure of this
representation has statistical properties that correspond well with those of semantic networks produced
by humans, and trace this to the fidelity with which
it reproduces the natural statistics of language.

Approaches to semantic representation
Spatial approaches Latent Semantic Analysis
(LSA; Landauer & Dumais, 1997) is a procedure
for finding a high-dimensional spatial representation
for words. LSA uses singular value decomposition
to factorize a word-document co-occurrence matrix.
An approximation to the original matrix can be obtained by choosing to use less singular values than

its rank. One component of this approximation is a
matrix that gives each word a location in a high dimensional space. Distances in this space are predictive in many tasks that require the use of semantic
information. Performance is best for approximations
that used less singular values than the rank of the
matrix, illustrating that reducing the dimensionality of the representation can reduce the eﬀects of
statistical noise and increase eﬃciency.
While the methods behind LSA were novel in scale
and subject, the suggestion that similarity relates to
distance in psychological space has a long history
(Shepard, 1957). Critics have argued that human
similarity judgments do not satisfy the properties of
Euclidean distances, such as symmetry or the triangle inequality. Tversky and Hutchinson (1986)
pointed out that Euclidean geometry places strong
constraints on the number of points to which a particular point can be the nearest neighbor, and that
many sets of stimuli violate these constraints. The
number of nearest neighbors in similarity judgments
has an analogue in semantic representation. Nelson,
McEvoy and Schreiber (1999) had people perform a
word association task in which they named an associated word in response to a set of target words.
Steyvers and Tenenbaum (submitted) noted that the
number of unique words produced for each target follows a power law distribution: if k is the number of
words, P (k) ∝ k γ . For reasons similar to those of
Tversky and Hutchinson, it is diﬃcult to produce a
power law distribution by thresholding cosine or distance in Euclidean space. This is shown in Figure 1.
Power law distributions appear linear in log-log coordinates. LSA produces curved log-log plots, more
consistent with an exponential distribution.
Semantic networks Semantic networks were proposed by Collins and Quillian (1969) as a means
of storing semantic knowledge. The original networks were inheritance hierarchies, but Collins and
Loftus (1975) generalized the notion to cover arbitrary graphical structures. The interpretation of this
graphical structure is vague, being based on connecting nodes that “activate” one another. Steyvers and
Tenenbaum (submitted) constructed a semantic network from the word association norms of Nelson et

Word association data

0

10

−1

P(k)

d = 400
d = 200
d = 50

−1

10

10

−2

−2

10

10

−3

−3

10

10

−4

10

Latent semantic analysis

0

10

−4

0

10

1

2

10

3

10

10

10

0

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

k

Figure 1: The left panel shows the distribution of the
number of associates named for each target in a word
association task. The right shows the distribution
of the number of words above a cosine threshold for
each target in LSA spaces of dimension d, where the
threshold was chosen to match the empirical mean.
al. (1999), connecting words that were produced as
responses to one another. In such a semantic network, the number of associates of a word becomes
the number of edges of a node, termed its “degree”.
Steyvers and Tenenbaum found that the resulting
graph had the statistical properties of “small world”
graphs, of which a power law degree distribution is
a feature (Barabasi & Albert, 1999).
The fact that semantic networks can display these
properties reflects their flexibility, but there is no indication that the same properties would emerge if
such a representation were learned rather than constructed by hand. In the remainder of the paper, we
present a probabilistic method for learning a representation from word-document co-occurences that
reproduces some of the large-scale statistical properties of semantic networks constructed by humans.

A probabilistic approach
Anderson’s (1990) rational analysis of memory and
categorization takes prediction as the goal of the
learner. Analogously, we can view the function of
associative semantic memory to be the prediction
of which words are likely to arise in a given context, ensuring that relevant semantic information is
available when needed. Simply tracking how often
words occur in diﬀerent contexts is insuﬃcient for
this task, as it gives no grounds for generalization.
If we assume that the words that occur in diﬀerent
contexts are drawn from T topics, and each topic
can be characterized by a probability distribution
over words, then we can model the distribution over
words in any one context as a mixture of those topics
T
!
P (wi ) =

j=1

P (wi |zi = j)P (zi = j)

where zi is a latent variable indicating the topic
from which the ith word was drawn and P (wi |zi = j)
is the probability of the ith word under the jth topic.
The words likely to be used in a new context can
be determined by estimating the distribution over
topics for that context, corresponding to P (zi ).

Intuitively, P (w|z = j) indicates which words are
important to a topic, while P (z) is the prevalence
of those topics within a document. For example,
imagine a world where the only topics of conversation are love and research. In such a world we could
capture the probability distribution over words with
two topics, one relating to love and the other to research. The diﬀerence between the topics would be
reflected in P (w|z = j): the love topic would give
high probability to words like joy, pleasure, or heart,
while the research topic would give high probability
to words like science, mathematics, or experiment.
Whether a particular conversation concerns love, research, or the love of research would depend upon
the distribution over topics, P (z), for that particular context.
Formally, our data consist of words w =
{w1 , . . . , wn }, where each wi belongs to some document di , as in a word-document co-occurrence matrix. For each document we have a multinomial distribution over the T topics, with parameters θ (di ) ,
(d )
so for a word in document di , P (zi = j) = θj i .
The jth topic is represented by a multinomial distribution over the W words in the vocabulary, with
(j)
parameters φ(j) , so P (wi |zi = j) = φwi . To make
predictions about new documents, we need to assume a prior distribution on the parameters θ (di ) .
The Dirichlet distribution is conjugate to the multinomial, so we take a Dirichlet prior on θ (di ) .
This probability model is a generative model: it
gives a procedure by which documents can be generated. First we pick a distribution over topics from
the prior on θ, which determines P (zi ) for words
in that document. Each time we want to add a
word to the document, we pick a topic according
to this distribution, and then pick a word from that
topic according to P (wi |zi = j), which is determined
by φ(j) . This generative model was introduced by
Blei et al. (2002), improving upon Hofmann’s (1999)
probabilistic Latent Semantic Indexing (pLSI). Using few topics to represent the probability distributions over words in many documents is a form of
dimensionality reduction, and has an elegant geometric interpretation (see Hofmann, 1999).
This approach models the frequencies in a worddocument co-occurrence matrix as arising from a
simple statistical process, and explores the parameters of this process. The result is not an explicit representation of words, but a representation that captures the probabilistic relationships among words.
This representation is exactly what is required for
predicting when words are likely to be used. Because we treat the entries in a word-document cooccurrence matrix as frequencies, the representation
developed from this information is sensitive to the
natural statistics of language. Using a generative
model, in which we articulate the assumptions about
how the data were generated, ensures that we are

able to form predictions about which words might
be seen in a new document.
Blei et al. (2002) gave an algorithm for finding
estimates of φ(j) and the hyperparameters of the
prior on θ (di ) that correspond to local maxima of
the likelihood, terming this procedure Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA). Here, we use a symmetric
Dirichlet(α) prior on θ (di ) for all documents, a symmetric Dirichlet(β) prior on φ(j) for all topics, and
Markov chain Monte Carlo for inference. An advantage of this approach is that we do not need to explicitly represent the model parameters: we can integrate out θ and φ, defining model simply in terms
of the assignments of words to topics indicated by
the zi . 1
Markov chain Monte Carlo is a procedure for obtaining samples from complicated probability distributions, allowing a Markov chain to converge to the
target distribution and then drawing samples from
the Markov chain (see Gilks, Richardson & Spiegelhalter, 1996). Each state of the chain is an assignment of values to the variables being sampled, and
transitions between states follow a simple rule. We
use Gibbs sampling, where the next state is reached
by sequentially sampling all variables from their distribution when conditioned on the current values of
all other variables and the data. We will sample only
the assignments of words to topics, zi . The conditional posterior distribution for zi is given by
(w )

P (zi = j|z−i , w) ∝

i
n−i,j
+β

(·)

(d )

i
n−i,j
+α

(d )

i
n−i,j + W β n−i,·
+ Tα

(1)

where z−i is the assignment of all zk such that k ̸= i,
(wi )
and n−i,j
is the number of words assigned to topic
(·)

j that are the same as wi , n−i,j is the total number
(d )

i
of words assigned to topic j, n−i,j
is the number
of words from document di assigned to topic j, and
(di )
n−i,·
is the total number of words in document di , all
not counting the assignment of the current word wi .
α, β are free parameters that determine how heavily
these empirical distributions are smoothed.
The Monte Carlo algorithm is then straightforward. The zi are initialized to values between 1 and
T , determining the initial state of the Markov chain.
The chain is then run for a number of iterations,
each time finding a new state by sampling each zi
from the distribution specified by Equation 1. After enough iterations for the chain to approach the
target distribution, the current values of the zi are
recorded. Subsequent samples are taken after an appropriate lag, to ensure that their autocorrelation is
low. Gibbs sampling is used in each of the following
simulations in order to explore the consequences of
this probabilistic approach.

1
A detailed derivation of the conditional probabilities
used here is given in a technical report available at
http://www-psych.stanford.edu/∼gruﬀydd/cogsci02/lda.ps

Simulation 1:
Learning topics with Gibbs sampling
The aim of this simulation was to establish the statistical properties of the sampling procedure and to
qualitatively assess its results, as well as to demonstrate that complexities of language like polysemy
and behavioral asymmetries are naturally captured
by our approach. We took a subset of the TASA
corpus (Landauer, Foltz, & Laham, 1998), using the
4544 words that occurred both in the word association norm data and at least 10 times in the complete
corpus, together with a random set of 5000 documents. The total number of words occurring in this
subset of the corpus, and hence the number of zi to
be sampled, was n = 395853. We set the parameters of the model so that 150 topics would be found
(T = 150), with α = 0.1, β = 0.01.
The initial state of the Markov chain was established with an online learning procedure. Initially,
none of the wi were assigned to topics. The zi were
then sequentially drawn according to Equation 1
where each of the frequencies involved, as well as W ,
reflected only the words that had already been assigned to topics.2 This initialization procedure was
used because it was hoped that it would start the
chain at a point close to the true posterior distribution, speeding convergence.
Ten runs of the Markov chain were conducted,
each lasting for 2000 iterations. On each iteration
we computed the average number of topics to which
a word was assigned, ⟨k⟩, which was used to evaluate
the sampling procedure for large scale properties of
the representation. Specifically, we were concerned
about convergence and the autocorrelation between
samples. The rate of convergence was assessed using
the Gelman-Rubin statistic R̂, which remained below 1.2 after 25 iterations. The autocorrelation was
less than 0.1 after a lag of 50 iterations.
A single sample was drawn from the first run of the
Markov chain after 2000 iterations. A subset of the
150 topics found by the model are displayed in Table
1, with words in each column corresponding to one
topic, and ordered by the frequency with which they
were assigned to that topic. The topics displayed are
not necessarily the most interpretable found by the
model, having been selected only to highlight the
way in which polysemy is naturally dealt with by
this representation. More than 90 of the 150 topics
appeared to have coherent interpretations.3
The word association data of Nelson et al. (1999)
contain a number of asymmetries – cases where people were more likely to produce one word in response
to the other. Such asymmetries are hard to ac2
Random numbers used in all simulations were generated with the Mersenne Twister, which has an extremely
deep period (Matsumoto & Nishimura, 1998).
3
The 20 most frequent words in these topics are listed
at http://www-psych.stanford.edu/∼gruﬀydd/cogsci02/topics.txt

COLD
WINTER
WEATHER
WARM
SUMMER
SUN
WIND
SNOW
HOT
CLIMATE
YEAR
RAIN
DAY
SPRING
LONG
FALL
HEAT
ICE
FEW
GREAT

TREES
TREE
FOREST
LEAVES
GROUND
PINE
GRASS
LONG
LEAF
CUT
WALK
SHORT
OAK
FALL
GREEN
FEET
TALL
GROW
WOODS
WOOD

COLOR
BLUE
RED
GREEN
LIKE
WHITE
BROWN
BLACK
YELLOW
LIGHT
BRIGHT
DARK
GRAY
MADE
LITTLE
TURN
WIDE
SUN
PURPLE
PINK

FIELD
CURRENT
ELECTRIC
ELECTRICITY
TWO
FLOW
WIRE
SWITCH
TURN
BULB
BATTERY
PATH
CAN
LOAD
LIGHT
RADIO
MOVE
LOOP
DEVICE
DIAGRAM

GAME
PLAY
BALL
TEAM
PLAYING
GAMES
FOOTBALL
BASEBALL
FIELD
SPORTS
PLAYER
COACH
LIKE
HIT
TENNIS
SPORT
BASKETBALL
LEAGUE
FUN
BAT

ART
MUSIC
PLAY
PART
SING
LIKE
POETRY
BAND
WORLD
RHYTHM
POEM
SONG
LITERATURE
SAY
CHARACTER
AUDIENCE
THEATER
OWN
KNOWN
TRAGEDY

BODY
BLOOD
HEART
MUSCLE
FOOD
OTHER
BONE
MADE
SKIN
TISSUE
MOVE
STOMACH
PART
OXYGEN
THIN
SYSTEM
CHEST
TINY
FORM
BEAT

KING
GREAT
SON
LORDS
QUEEN
EMPEROR
OWN
PALACE
DAY
PRINCE
LADY
CASTLE
ROYAL
MAN
MAGIC
COURT
HEART
GOLDEN
KNIGHT
GRACE

LAW
RIGHTS
COURT
LAWS
ACT
LEGAL
STATE
PERSON
CASE
DECISION
CRIME
IMPORTANT
JUSTICE
FREEDOM
ACTION
OWN
SET
LAWYER
YEARS
FREE

Table 1: Nine topics from the single sample in Simulation 1. Each column shows 20 words from one topic,
ordered by the number of times that word was assigned to the topic. Adjacent columns share at least one
word. Shared words are shown in boldface, providing some clear examples of polysemy

Bipartite semantic networks
The standard conception of a semantic network is
a graph with edges between word nodes. Such a
graph is unipartite: there is only one type of node,
and those nodes can be interconnected freely. In
contrast, bipartite graphs consist of nodes of two
types, and only nodes of diﬀerent types can be connected. We can form a bipartite semantic network
by introducing a second class of nodes that mediate the connections between words. One example of
such a network is a thesaurus: words are organized
topically, and a bipartite graph can be formed by
connecting words to the topics in which they occur,
as illustrated in the left panel of Figure 2.
Steyvers and Tenenbaum (submitted) discovered
that bipartite semantic networks constructed by humans, such as that corresponding to Roget’s (1911)
Thesaurus, share the statistical properties of unipartite semantic networks. In particular, the number of
topics in which a word occurs, or the degree of that
word in the graph, follows a power law distribution
as shown in the right panel of Figure 2. This result
is reminiscent of Zipf’s (1965) “law of meaning”: the

number of meanings of a word follows a power law
distribution. Zipf’s law was established by analyzing dictionary entries, but appears to describe the
same property of language.

0

topic

topic

γ = −3.65

10

topic

<k> = 1.69
P(k)

count for in spatial representations because distance
is symmetric. The generative structure of our model
allows us to calculate P (w2 |w1 ), the probability that
the next word seen in a novel context will be w2 ,
given that the first word was w1 . Since this is a
conditional probability, it is inherently asymmetric.
The asymmetries in P (w2 |w1 ) predict 77.47% of the
asymmetries in the word association norms of Nelson et al. (1999), restricted to the 4544 words used
in the simulation. These results are driven by word
frequency: P (w2 ) should be close to P (w2 |w1 ), and
77.32% of the asymmetries could be predicted by the
frequency of words in this subset of the TASA corpus. The slight improvement in performance came
from cases where word frequencies were very similar
or polysemy made overall frequency a poor indicator
of the frequency of a particular sense of a word.

word

word

word

word

word
−5

10

0

10

1

10
k

2

10

Figure 2: The left panel shows a bipartite semantic
network. The right shows the degree distribution a
network constructed from Roget’s Thesaurus.
Our probabilistic approach specifies a probability
distribution over the allocation of words to topics. If
we form a bipartite graph by connecting words to the
topics in which they occur, we obtain a probability
distribution over such graphs. The existence of an
edge between a word and a topic indicates that the
word has some significant probability of occurring in
that topic. In the following simulations, we explore
whether the distribution over bipartite graphs resulting from our approach is consistent with the statistical properties of Roget’s Thesaurus and Zipf’s
law of meaning. In particular, we examine whether
we obtain structures that have a power law degree
distribution.

Simulation 2:
Power law degree distributions
We used Gibbs sampling to obtain samples from
the posterior distribution of the zi for two worddocument co-occurrence matrices: the matrix with
the 4544 words from the word association norms
used in Simulation 1, and a second matrix using

Random words, 50 topics

Random words, 150 topics

γ = −2.93
<k> = 2.11

γ = −2.95
<k> = 2.59

Norm words, 50 topics
0

Norm words, 150 topics

γ = −2.47
<k> = 3.33

γ = −2.78
<k> = 2.97

Norm words, 250 topics

γ = −2.65
<k> = 4.24

γ = −2.94
<k> = 4.80

Initialization

Random documents

γ = −1.88
<k> = 3.43

γ = −2.55
<k> = 3.68

Constant frequencies

Constant documents

γ = −1.90
<k> = 2.19

γ = −0.70
<k> = 2.22

P(k)

10

Random words, 250 topics

−5

10

0

10

1

10
k

2

10

Figure 3: Degree distributions for networks constructed in Simulations 2 and 3. All are on the same axes.
4544 words drawn at random from those occurring
at least 10 times in the TASA corpus (n = 164401).
Both matrices used the same 5000 random documents. For each matrix, 100 samples were taken
with T = 50, 100, 150, 200 and 250. Since the results seemed unaﬀected by the number of topics, we
will focus on T = 50, 150, 250. Ten samples were
obtained in each of 10 separate runs with a burn-in
of 1000 iterations in which no samples were drawn,
and a between-sample lag of 100 iterations.
For each sample, a bipartite semantic network was
constructed by connecting words to the topics to
which they were assigned. For each network, the
degree of each word node was averaged over the 100
samples.4 The resulting distributions were clearly
power-law, as shown in Figure 3. The γ coeﬃcients
remained within a small range and were all close
to γ = −3.65 for Roget’s Thesaurus. As is to be
expected, the average degree increased as more topics were made available, and was generally higher
than Roget’s. Semantic networks in which edges are
added for each assignment tend to be quite densely
connected. Sparser networks can be produced by
setting a more conservative threshold for the inclusion of an edge, such as multiple assignments of a
word to a topic, or exceeding some baseline probability in the distribution represented by that topic.
Our probabilistic approach produces power law
degree distributions, in this case indicating that the
number of topics to which a word is assigned follows
a power law. This result is very similar to the properties of Roget’s Thesaurus and Zipf’s observations
about dictionary definitions. This provides an op4
Since power law distributions can be produced by averaging exponentials, we also inspected individual samples to confirm that they had the same characteristics.

portunity to establish the origin of this distribution,
to see whether it is a consequence of the modeling
approach or a basic property of language.

Simulation 3:
Origins of the power law
To investigate the origins of the power law, we first
established that our initialization procedure was not
responsible for our results. Using T = 150 and the
matrix with random words, we obtained 100 samples
of the degree distribution immediately following initialization. As can be seen in Figure 3, this produced
a curved log-log plot and higher values of γ and ⟨k⟩
than in Simulation 2.
The remaining analyses employed variants of this
co-occurrence matrix, and their results are also presented in Figure 3. The first variant kept word frequency constant, but assigned instances of words to
documents at random, disrupting the co-occurrence
structure. Interestingly, this appeared to have only
a weak eﬀect on the results, although the curvature of the resulting plot did increase. The second
variant forced the frequencies of all words to be as
close as possible to the median frequency. This was
done by dividing all entries in the matrix by the
frequency of that word, multiplying by the median
frequency, and rounding to the nearest integer. The
total number of instances in the resulting matrix was
n = 156891. This manipulation reduced the average density in the resulting graph considerably, but
the distribution still appeared to follow a power law.
The third variant held the number of documents in
which a word participated constant. Word frequencies were only weakly aﬀected by this manipulation,
which spread the instances of each word uniformly
over the top five documents in which it occurred

and then rounded up to the nearest integer, giving
n = 174615. Five was the median number of documents in which words occurred, and documents were
chosen at random for words below the median. This
manipulation had a strong eﬀect on the degree distribution, which was no longer power law, or even
monotonically decreasing.
The distribution of the number of topics in which
a word participates was strongly aﬀected by the distribution of the number of documents in which a
word occurs. Examination of the latter distribution
in the TASA corpus revealed that it follows a power
law. Our approach produces a power law degree distribution because it accurately captures the natural
statistics of these data, even as it constructs a lowerdimensional representation.

General Discussion
We have taken a probabilistic approach to the problem of semantic representation, motivated by considering the function of associative semantic memory. We assume a generative model where the words
that occur in each context are chosen from a small
number of topics. This approach produces a lowerdimensional representation of a word-document cooccurrence matrix, and explicitly models the frequencies in that matrix as probability distributions.
Simulation 1 showed that our approach could extract coherent topics, and naturally deal with issues
like polysemy and asymmetries that are hard to account for in spatial representations. In Simulation 2,
we showed that this probabilistic approach was also
capable of producing representations with a largescale structure consistent with semantic networks
constructed from human data. In particular, the
number of topics to which a word was assigned followed a power law distribution, as in Roget’s (1911)
Thesaurus and Zipf’s (1965) law of meaning. In Simulation 3, we discovered that the only manipulation
that would remove the power law was altering the
number of documents in which words participate,
which follows a power law distribution itself.
Steyvers and Tenenbaum (submitted) suggested
that power law distributions in language might be
traced to some kind of growth process. Our results
indicate that this growth process need not be a part
of the learning algorithm, if the algorithm is faithful to the statistics of the data. While we were able
to establish the origins of the power law distribution in our model, the growth processes described by
Steyvers and Tenenbaum might contribute to understanding the origins of the power law distribution in
dictionary meanings, thesaurus topics, and the number of documents in which words participate.
The representation learned by our probabilistic
approach is not explicitly a representation of words,
in which each word might be described by some set of
features. Instead, it is a representation of the probabilistic relationships between words, as expressed

by their probabilities of arising in diﬀerent contexts.
We can easily compute important statistical quantities from this representation, such as P (w2 |w1 ),
the probability of w2 arising in a particular context
given that w1 was observed, and more complicated
conditional probabilities. One advantage of an explicitly probabilistic representation is that we gain
the opportunity to incorporate this representation
into other probabilistic models. In particular, we
see great potential for using this kind of representation in understanding the broader phenomena of
human memory.
Acknowledgments The authors were supported by a
Hackett Studentship and a grant from NTT Communications Sciences laboratory. We thank Tania Lombrozo,
Penny Smith and Josh Tenenbaum for comments, and
Tom Landauer and Darrell Laham for the TASA corpus.
Shawn Cokus wrote the Mersenne Twister code.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1990). The Adaptive Character of
Thought. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Barabasi, A. L. & Albert, R. (1999). Emergence of
scaling in random networks. Science, 286, 509-512.
Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. I. (2002). Latent
Dirichlet allocation. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 14.
Collins, A. M. & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreading
activation theory of semantic processing. Psychological
Review, 82, 407-428.
Collins, A. M. & Quillian, M. R. (1969). Retrieval
time from semantic memory. Journal of Verbal Learning
& Verbal Behavior, 8, 240-248.
Gilks, W., Richardson, S., & Spiegelhalter, D. J.
(1996). Markov Chain Monte Carlo in Practice. Chapman & Hall, Suﬀolk.
Hofmann, T. (1999). Probablistic latent semantic indexing. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Second Annual International SIGIR Conference.
Landauer, T. K. & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to Plato’s problem: The Latent Semantic Analysis
theory of acquisition, induction, and representation of
knowledge. Psychological Review, 104, 211-240.
Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (1998).
Introduction to latent semantic analysis. Discourse Processes, 25, 259-284.
Matsumoto, M. & Nishimura, T. (1998). Mersenne
twister: A 623-dimensionally equidistributed uniform
pseudorandom number generator. ACM Transactions on
Modeling & Computer Simulation, 8, 3-30.
Nelson, D. L., McEvoy, C. L., & Schreiber, T. A.
(1999). The University of South Florida word association norms. http://www.usf.edu/FreeAssociation.
Roget, P. (1911). Roget’s Thesaurus of English Words
and Phrases. Available from Project Gutenberg.
Shepard, R. N. (1957). Stimulus and response generalization: a stochastic model, relating generalization
to distance in psychological space. Psychometrika, 22,
325-345.
Steyvers, M. & Tenenbaum, J. B. (submitted). The
large-scale structure of semantic networks: Statistical
analyses and a model of semantic growth.
Tversky, A. & Hutchinson, J. W. (1986). Nearest
neighbor analysis of psychological spaces. Psychological
Review, 93, 3-22.
Zipf, G. K. (1965). Human behavior and the principle
of least eﬀort. Hafner, New York.

