UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Strong Schema Can Interfere with Learning: The Case of Children's Typical Addition
Schema

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3pv2h5pt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
McNeil, Nicole M
Alibali, Martha W

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Strong Schema Can Interfere with Learning:
The Case of Children's Typical Addition Schema
Nicole M. McNeil (nmmcneil@students.wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1202 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA

Martha W. Alibali (mwalibali@facstaff.wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1202 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA

Abstract
This study investigated whether children's schema for
typical addition interferes with their ability to learn about
mathematical equivalence. In a pretest, elementary
school children (1) solved a set of math equivalence
problems (e.g., 3 + 4 + 5 = 3 + __), (2) reconstructed
equivalence problems after viewing them briefly, and (3)
provided definitions of the equal sign. Children were
categorized according to the number of measures (out of
3) on which they exhibited the typical addition schema.
Children then received one of four interventions that
presented new information about equivalence problems.
Finally, children completed a posttest similar to the
pretest. From pretest to posttest, children who exhibited
the addition schema on all three measures were the least
likely to change their strategy for solving the problems,
followed by children who exhibited the schema on two
or one of the measures. All of the children who did not
exhibit the schema on any of the three measures
changed. It is important to note that all children used
incorrect strategies at pretest, so it was the addition
schema in particular that was associated with change
resistance. Thus, a strong schema can interfere with
learning. Furthermore, children's addition schema may
put them at risk for difficulties in learning higher-level
mathematics.

Some behaviors and ideas are particularly difficult for
individuals to acquire, even after numerous attempts
have been made by the individuals to learn them or by
instructors to teach them. Consider, for example, a
woman who has always counted on her fingers when
solving addition problems. She does not wish to count
on her fingers; in fact, she finds it to be an infuriating
habit. However, no matter how hard she tries to
memorize the addition facts, she always seems to resort
to counting on her fingers. Consider also a father who is
trying to learn a second language as an adult. The father
is frustrated because his daughter, who is only five
years old, is learning so much more quickly than he is.
Why is it so difficult for the woman to memorize the
addition facts and for the father to learn a second
language? One reason may have to do with the
organization and strength of the behaviors and ideas
they already possess. The woman's knowledge about

addition may be organized into a strong schema that
interferes with her memorizing of the addition facts,
and the father's knowledge about his first language may
be organized into a strong schema that interferes with
his learning of the second language.
A schema can be defined as a higher-level assembly
of knowledge that is "unitized" in that it supersedes its
constituent parts and acts as a whole (cf. Smolensky,
1986; see also Hayes-Roth, 1977; Hebb, 1949). Once
established, schemata can serve as selective
mechanisms that determine how environmental stimuli
are encoded, interpreted, and stored in memory. In
general, schemata enable fast and efficient processing
of environmental stimuli. However, this efficiency can
come with a price, especially if a particular schema is
inaccurate or lacking in some way.
When a schema is strong, it resists change (e.g.,
Allport, 1954; Bartlett, 1932; Bruner, 1957;
Schutzwohl, 1998). Individuals who have a strong
schema have been shown to resist learning new
information when it is more specific than (Adelson,
1984; Thorndyke & Hayes-Roth, 1979), not applicable
to (Voss, Vesonder, & Spilich, 1980), or discrepant
with (Marchant, Robinson, Anderson, & Schadewald,
1991; Markus, 1977) their current schema. Indeed,
individuals who have a strong schema often actively
resist change by modifying or distorting environmental
input so that it corresponds to their schema (Bartlett,
1932; Bruner & Postman, 1949; Guion, Flege,
Akahane-Yamada, & Pruitt, 2000; Hannigan & Reinitz,
2001). Importantly, the stronger a schema is, the more
resistant it is to changing (see Luchins, 1932).
Although the strength of a schema has clear
behavioral consequences, it is not always obvious how
to operationalize schema strength apriori. Some
theories suggest that strength may be determined by
how practiced particular action procedures are
(Luchins, 1942), while others suggest that it may be
derived from tightly organized perceptual (Flege, Bohn,
& Jang, 1997; Intraub & Bodamer, 1993) or conceptual
(Wellman & Gelman, 1992) information. These
accounts need not oppose one another, though, because
any given schema is likely constructed out of various
related sub-schemata (Smolensky, 1986). We propose
that schema strength depends on the relationship

between the three knowledge sources (action
procedures, perceptual information, and conceptual
information). According to this view, the strongest
schema is one in which all three knowledge sources
converge.
In the current study, we focused on a particular
schema that most elementary school children possess.
We refer to the schema as the typical addition schema.
This schema includes action procedures for solving
typical addition problems (e.g., 4 + 5 = __, 9 + 2 + 6 =
__), such as counting up all of the numbers in the
problem or summing all of the numbers by retrieving
addition facts from memory. It also includes particular
perceptual patterns, such as the pattern of having "= __"
at the end of problem (Baroody & Ginsburg, 1983). The
schema also includes a conceptualization of the equal
sign as an operational symbol that means "the total"
(Kieran, 1981; Rittle-Johnson & Alibali, 1999). When
an addition problem is presented, the typical addition
schema can be activated as a whole, enabling fast and
accurate processing of the problem (McNeil, 2001).
The typical addition schema is adaptive because
children need to use their knowledge of addition to
learn other math concepts, such as multiplication and
division. However, it may come with a price.
Specifically, it may interfere with children's ability to
learn about novel mathematics problems, such as
mathematical equivalence problems, which are
problems that have addends on both sides of the equal
sign (e.g., 3 + 4 + 5 = 3 + __; Perry, Church & GoldinMeadow, 1988).
Past work has shown that some children have an
especially strong typical addition schema that leads
them to distort environmental input about mathematical
equivalence to correspond to their schema. Consider the
problem 3 + 4 + 5 = 3 + __. In solving this problem,
some children add up all the numbers and put 15 in the
blank (McNeil & Alibali, 2000). In reconstructing the
problem after viewing it briefly, some children
reconstruct it in terms of the "= __ at end" perceptual
pattern and write "3 + 4 + 5 + 3 = __" (McNeil, 2001).
In defining the equal sign in the problem, some children
say that it means to "add up all the numbers" (McNeil
& Alibali, 2002).
Once children gain more experience with or are
instructed about mathematical equivalence problems,
they are bound to generate new ways of thinking about
the problems. However, these new ways of thinking
may be in conflict with their already established typical
addition schema, and the two may compete for
precedence (cf. Siegler, 1999). Accordingly, we
hypothesize that the strength of the typical addition
schema should be directly related to children's tendency
to resist changes in their thinking after an intervention
that provides new information about equivalence
problems.

Method
Participants
The sample consisted of 67 third-, fourth-, and fifthgrade children (29 boys and 38 girls), all of whom
solved a set of mathematical equivalence problems on
the experimental pretest incorrectly. Children attended
public or parochial schools in the greater Madison,
Wisconsin area.

Measures
Problem Solving The problem solving measure elicited
action procedures for solving the problems. It consisted
of three mathematical equivalence problems of the form
a + b + c = a + __. For each problem the experimenter
placed the problem on an easel and said, "Try to solve
the problem as best as you can and then put your
answer in the blank." After children wrote a solution,
the experimenter said, "Can you tell me how you got
x?" After explaining each solution, children were asked
to rate how certain they were about their "way of
doing" the problem on a 7-point scale that ranged from
"It's definitely wrong" to "It's definitely right," with
"I'm not sure if it's wrong or right" as the midpoint.
Problem Reconstruction The problem reconstruction
measure elicited perceptual representations of the
problems. Two tasks made up the measure. The first
was taken from Rittle-Johnson and Alibali (1999).
Children were asked to reconstruct three equivalence
problems of the form a + b + c = a + __ after viewing
each for five seconds. The second task also included
three problems and was a recognition version of the
first task. Children were given a sheet of paper face
down with seven problems on it. One of the problems
was an equivalence problem in its correct form. The
other six problems depicted errors children typically
make when reconstructing equivalence problems, one
of which was the typical addition foil a + b + c + a =
__. After viewing an equivalence problem for five
seconds, children were instructed to turn the sheet of
paper over and find the problem that they just saw.
Equal Sign Definition The equal sign definition
measure was used to elicit conceptual understanding of
the equal sign. Two tasks made up the measure. Both
were taken from Rittle-Johnson and Alibali (1999).
Children were first asked to define the equal sign. Then,
they were asked to rate the smartness of six fictitious
students' definitions as not so smart, kind of smart, or
very smart. The definitions were "the answer to the
problem," "repeat the numbers," "the end of the
problem," "something is equal to another thing," "two
amounts are the same," and "the total."

Procedure
Children participated individually in one experimental
session that was videotaped. In the pretest, children first
completed the problem-solving measure, followed by
the problem reconstruction and equal sign definition
measures presented in random order. After the pretest,
children were randomly assigned to intervention
conditions in a 2 (reconstruction intervention or no
reconstruction intervention) x 2 (equal sign definition
intervention or no equal sign definition intervention)
factorial design. During the intervention, children in all
four conditions were presented with an equivalence
problem that had the correct solution written in the
blank (3 + 4 + 5 = 3 + 9). In the control condition,
children were shown the correctly solved problem and
were told that it was a correctly solved problem. They
were then encouraged to think about the problem for
one minute. Children in the other three conditions also
were presented with the correctly solved problem, were
told that it was a correctly solved problem, and were
encouraged to think about it. In addition, children who
received the reconstruction intervention were
encouraged to notice the equal sign in the problem and
were asked to point to it. Children who received the
equal sign definition intervention were told that the
equal sign means "that the things on one side of it have
to be the same as the things on the other side of it" and
were asked to repeat the definition. All children spent a
total of one minute in the intervention. After the
intervention, children participated in a posttest in which
they first completed the problem reconstruction and
equal sign definition measures in random order,
followed by the problem-solving measure.

Coding
Problem Solving Problem-solving strategies were
coded using a system developed by Perry, Church and
Goldin-Meadow (1988). Strategies were assigned based
on children's problem solutions and verbal
explanations.
Problem Reconstruction Each reconstruction was
examined for conceptual errors. Conceptual errors were
errors that reflected inaccurate reconstructions of the
structure of the equation, such as omitting the equal
sign or one of the plus signs. Errors in reconstructing
the particular numbers or order of the numbers were not
counted as conceptual errors (e.g., for the problem 3 + 4
+ 5 = 3 + __, writing 4 + 3 + 5 = 3 + __). Each
recognition response was scored as correct or incorrect
based on whether children correctly identified the
equivalence problem on the sheet provided.
Equal Sign Definition Definitions were coded as
expressing the concept of equivalence or not. None of
the children gave a definition that expressed the concept
of equivalence on the pretest. Children's ratings of each

of the fictitious student's definitions of the equal sign
were coded. Two points were given for "very smart"
ratings, one point was given for "kind of smart" ratings,
and zero points were given for "not so smart" ratings.
The sum of the ratings for the two definitions "the total"
and "the answer to the problem" were subtracted from
the sum of the ratings for the two definitions "two
amounts are the same" and "something is equal to
another thing" to yield a difference score. A positive
difference score indicates that definitions expressing the
concept of equivalence were rated as smarter than
definitions such as "the answer" and "the total."
Typical Addition Schema Children were categorized
according to whether they exhibited the typical addition
schema on the pretest measures. They were coded as
exhibiting the schema on the problem-solving measure
if they (1) used the "add-all-the-numbers" strategy on at
least two of three equivalence problems (as shown in
Table 1) and (2) gave that strategy an average certainty
rating greater than four (on the 7-point scale). Recall
that ratings of less than four indicate children think
their strategy is incorrect. Children who use the add-allthe-numbers strategy but rate it as incorrect are likely
using the strategy because they cannot come up with
any alternatives (see Siegler, 1983), rather than because
they are operating according to a strong schema per se.
Children were coded as exhibiting the schema on the
problem reconstruction measure if they showed
evidence of converting at least two problems to typical
addition problems (either on the reconstruction task or
on the recognition task, as shown in Table 1).
Children were coded as exhibiting the schema on the
equal sign definition measure if they showed evidence
of thinking that the equal sign means “the sum” or “the
total.” Children could show this in one of two ways.
They could express the idea of adding or totaling in the
definition they provided (as shown in Table 1). Or, they
could rate the definition "the total" as "very smart."
Children were categorized according to the number
of pretest measures (out of three) on which they
exhibited the typical addition schema. Thus, children
were placed into an overall typical addition schema
category of 0, 1, 2, or 3. The number of measures on
which the schema was exhibited was considered to be a
reflection of schema strength.
Table 1 presents examples of schema-based and nonschema-based responses on each measure. Notice that
children’s responses are incorrect whether they exhibit
the typical addition schema or not. Moreover, there is
no reason to believe that the thinking of children
without the typical addition schema is "closer to
correct" than is the thinking of children with the
schema. For example, defining the equal sign as "the
answer" is just as incorrect, if not more so, than
defining it as "the total." Thus, outside of the present
framework, there is no reason to expect learning
differences between children who do or do not exhibit
the typical addition schema.

Table 1: Example Schema-based (SB) and Non-schema-based (NSB) Responses for the Problem 3+ 4 + 5 = 3 + __.

SB

NSB

Strategy (Solution || Explanation)
15 || "I added 3 plus 4 plus 5 plus 3."

Reconstruction
3 + 4 + 5 + 3 = __

Equal Sign Definition
"Add up all the numbers together."

14 || "I added them all up."

3+4+5+3

"The total of the problem."

3+4+5=3=

"Put your answer."

3 + 4 + 5 = + 3 __

"It's like where you end the problem."

4 || "4 comes after 3 in the pattern."
24 || "3 and 4 and 5, times 2 is 24."

Results
Manipulation Check
We examined pretest to posttest changes in children's
performance on the problem reconstruction and equal
sign definition measures as a check on whether our
interventions provided children with new ways of
thinking about the equivalence problems, as they were
designed to do. A 2 (problem reconstruction
intervention or no problem reconstruction intervention)
x 2 (equal sign definition intervention or no equal sign
definition intervention) ANOVA was performed with
pretest to posttest change in number correct on the
reconstruction measure (out of 6) as the dependent
variable. As expected, the analysis revealed a
significant main effect for problem reconstruction
intervention, F(1, 63) = 4.35. Children who received the
problem reconstruction intervention improved their
performance on the reconstruction measure from pretest
to posttest (M = +1.78, SD = 1.31) more so than did
children who did not receive the intervention (M =
+1.00, SD = 1.65). Neither the main effect for equal
sign definition intervention nor the interaction was
significant (both Fs < 1).
A similar 2 X 2 ANOVA was performed with pretest
to posttest change in difference score on the ratings
portion of the equal sign definition measure as the
dependent variable. Recall that a positive difference
score indicates that definitions such as "the same as"
and "equal to" were rated as smarter than definitions
such as "the answer" and "the total." As expected, the
analysis revealed a significant main effect for equal
sign definition intervention, F(1, 63) = 25.62. Children
who received the equal sign definition intervention
improved their difference score from pretest to posttest
(M = +1.94, SD = 2.0) more so than did children who
did not receive the equal sign definition intervention (M
= -.12, SD = 1.23). Neither the main effect for
reconstruction intervention nor the interaction was
significant (F < 1 for both).
The preceding analyses indicate that the interventions
provided new information about the equivalence
problems and that children were, in general, able to take
in the presented information in its specific form. The
main question at hand is how this new information

affected the way children solved the equivalence
problems. The interventions themselves did not predict
pretest to posttest changes in problem solving, χ2 (3, N
= 67) = 3.89. This is not surprising given that we
predicted that children would be differentially affected
by an intervention depending on the strength of their
typical addition schema.

Effects of Addition Schema
Recall that all children solved the problems incorrectly
at pretest. Similarly, only three of the children
responded correctly to all six problems on the
reconstruction measure at pretest, and none of the
children provided an equal sign definition that
expressed the concept of equivalence at pretest. It is
also important to note that children's pretest schema
category (0 to 3) was independent of whether they
participated in the control intervention or in one of the
experimental interventions, χ2 (3, N= 67) = 3.89. Our
main question was whether the strength of the typical
addition schema influenced children's tendency to resist
changes in the way they solved the equivalence
problems after an intervention that provided new ways
of thinking about the problems.
Table 2: Number of children in each typical addition
schema category who changed or did not change their
problem-solving strategy from pretest to posttest.
Number of Pretest
Measures Reflecting
Addition Schema
0

Change

No Change

5 (100%)

0

1

14 (64%)

8

2

13 (42%)

18

3

1 (11%)
χ2 (3, N = 67) = 12.88

8

Children were classified as changing their problemsolving strategy if they solved any of the three, posttest
problems using a different strategy than they used to
solve the pretest problems. Table 2 displays the number

of children who changed or did not change their
strategy from pretest to posttest in each of the typical
addition schema categories. As shown in the table,
children who exhibited the addition schema on all three
measures were highly unlikely to change their strategy
from pretest to posttest. Again, all children used an
incorrect strategy at pretest, so it was the typical
addition schema in particular that was associated with
change resistance. All of the children who did not
exhibit the schema on any of the measures changed
their strategy from pretest to posttest. Such a high
proportion of change is surprising, given that the
intervention lasted only one minute.
Although we were primarily interested in how a
strong schema influences change after an intervention,
we were also curious about the correctness of children's
strategies at posttest. Results were similar when
correctness of posttest strategy was used in the analysis
in place of pretest to posttest strategy change. Children
were classified as having a correct problem-solving
strategy if they solved any of the three, posttest
problems using a correct strategy. For example,
children would be classified as having a correct strategy
for the problem 3 + 4 + 5 = 3 + __ if they put the
solution "9" in the blank and said that they added 4 plus
5 to get 9. Of the 9 children who exhibited the schema
on all three measures, only 1 (11%) used a correct
strategy on the posttest. Of the 31 who exhibited it on
two measures, 10 (32%) used a correct strategy on the
posttest. Of the 22 who exhibited it on one measure, 8
(36%) used a correct strategy on the posttest. All 5
(100%) who did not exhibit the schema on any of the
measures used a correct strategy on the posttest. The
analysis revealed a significant relationship between the
strength of children's addition schema at pretest and
whether or not they used a correct strategy on the
posttest, χ2 (3, N = 67) = 11.52.

Discussion
The results of the current study indicate that the
strength of the typical addition schema can interfere
with children's ability to change their way of solving
mathematical equivalence problems after an
intervention that provided new ways of thinking about
the problems. Moreover, children who did not exhibit
the typical addition schema did not merely change their
strategy for solving the problems after an intervention,
but actually changed to using a correct strategy.
These results complement previous work that has
suggested that strong schemata resist change (e.g.,
Allport, 1954; Bruner, 1957; Luchins, 1932;
Schutzwohl, 1998). The present study indicates that
individuals who have a strong schema resist changes in
their thinking even after an intervention that supplies
new ways of thinking. This finding may provide a
potential avenue for investigation into individual
differences in learning. When a group of students is
presented with a particular instruction, why do some

fail to learn or change, while others succeed? Although
it is only speculation at this point, it may be the case
that individuals who have difficulty learning new ideas
are less flexible and more resistant to change because
they develop strong, inaccurate schemata more readily
than do individuals who are precocious learners.
The present study also extends previous research
about schemata by introducing a new way of
operationalizing schema strength. Some accounts have
defined schema-like structures according to wellpracticed action patterns (e.g., Luchins, 1942), while
others have emphasized perceptual (e.g., Guion et al.,
2000) or conceptual (e.g., Hannigan & Reinitz, 2001)
information. In the present study, children exhibited the
typical addition schema in their action procedures (i.e.,
problem-solving strategies), perceptual encodings (i.e.,
problem reconstructions) and conceptual knowledge
(i.e., equal sign definitions). Results provide support for
the notion that the strongest, most change-resistant
schemata are ones in which all three of the knowledge
sources converge on the same idea. Thus, if educators
wish to build strong, accurate schemata in their
students, they should not focus on building up one
aspect of knowledge at the expense of the other two.
The current research has additional implications for
educators. Specifically, findings suggest that a strong
typical addition schema carries a heavy price and may
put children at risk for difficulties in later years when
algebraic equations become the focus of mathematics
instruction. Thus, educators may want to consider
expanding and varying the context in which they
present the operation of addition and the equal sign so
that children are less likely to form an inaccurate
schema from their experience. More generally, results
suggest that children's existing knowledge can interfere
with the ability to learn new information. Thus,
educators should be cautious about what they infer
about children's abilities based on proficiency with
today's topic.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by National Science
Foundation Child Learning and Development grant
#BCS-0096129 to Martha Alibali. We thank members
of the Cognitive Development Research Group at the
University of Wisconsin for helpful discussions, Jerry
Haeffel for comments on a previous version of this
paper, and Maureen Kaschak for help with data
collection. We also thank the students, parents,
educators at Frank Allis, Van Hise, Marquette, Sacred
Hearts, Edgewood, and Our Redeemer schools. We
would especially like to thank Mrs. Burwell’s thirdgrade class at Sacred Hearts school for their generosity
and enthusiasm. A preliminary report based on a subset
of the data described herein was presented at the
October 2001 meeting of the Cognitive Development
Society, Virginia Beach, VA.

References
Adelson, B. (1984). When novices surpass experts: The
difficulty of a task may increase with expertise.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, & Cognition, 10, 483-495.
Allport, G. W. (1954). The nature of prejudice.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Baroody, A. & Ginsburg, H. (1983). The effects of
instruction on children's understanding of the
"equals" sign. Elementary School Journal, 84, 199212.
Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering: A study in
experimental and social psychology. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Bruner, J. S. (1957). On perceptual readiness.
Psychological Review, 64, 123-152.
Bruner, J. S., & Postman, L. J. (1949). On the
perception of incongruity: A paradigm. Journal of
Personality, 18, 206-223.
Flege, J., Bohn, O.-S., & Jang, S. (1997). Effects of
experience on non-native speakers' production and
perception of English vowels. Journal of Phonetics,
25, 437-470.
Guion, S. G., Flege, J., Akahane-Yamada, R., & Pruitt,
J. C. (2000). An investigation of current models of
second language speech perception: The case of
Japanese adults' perception of English consonants.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 107,
2712-2724.
Hannigan, S. L., & Reinitz, M. T. (2001). A
demonstration and comparison of two types of
inference-based memory errors. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 27, 931-940.
Hayes-Roth, B. (1977). Evolution of cognitive
structures and processes. Psychological Review, 84,
260-278.
Hebb, D. O. (1949). Organization of behavior. New
York: Wiley.
Intraub, H. & Bodamer, J. L. (1993). Boundary
Extension: Fundamental Aspect of Pictorial
Representation or Encoding Artifact? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 19, 1387-1397.
Kieran, C. (1981). Concepts associated with the
equality symbol. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 12, 317-326.
Luchins, A. S. (1942). Mechanization in problem
solving. Psychological Monographs, 54, (6, Whole
No. 248).
Markus, H. (1977). Self-schemata and processing
information about the self. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 2, 63-78.
Marchant, G., Robinson, J., Anderson, U., &
Schadewald, M. (1991). Analogical transfer and
expertise in legal reasoning. Organizational Behavior
& Human Decision Processes, 48, 272-290.

McNeil, N. M. (2001). Mental sets and flexibility in the
development of mathematical skill. Poster presented
at the Biennial Meeting of the Society for Research in
Child Development, Minneapolis, MN.
McNeil, N. M., & Alibali, M. W. (2000). Learning
mathematics from procedural instruction: Goals
influence learning from the "outside in." Journal of
Educational Psychology, 92, 734-744.
McNeil, N. M. & Alibali, M. W. (2002). Charting the
path of conceptual development: Not all contexts are
created equal. Manuscript in preparation.
Perry, M., Church, R. B., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (1988).
Transitional knowledge in the acquisition of
concepts. Cognitive Development, 3, 359-400.
Rittle-Johnson, B., & Alibali, M. W. (1999).
Conceptual and procedural knowledge of
mathematics: Does one lead to the other? Journal of
Educational Psychology, 91, 175-189.
Siegler, R. S. (1999). Strategic development. Trends in
Cognitive Science, 3, 430-435.
Siegler, R. S. (1993). How knowledge influences
learning. American Scientist, 71, 631-638.
Schutzwohl, A. (1998). Surprise and schema strength.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 24, 1182-1199.
Smolensky, P. (1986). Information processing in
dynamical systems: Foundations of harmony theory.
In J. L. McClelland, D. E. Rumelhart, & the PDP
Research Group (Eds.), Parallel Distributed
Processing. Volume 1: Foundations (pp. 194-281).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Thorndyke, P. W., & Hayes-Roth, B. (1979). The use of
schemata in the acquisition and transfer of
knowledge. Cognitive Psychology, 11, 82-106.
Voss, J. F., Vesonder, G., & Spilich, H. (1980). Text
generation and recall by high-knowledge and lowknowledge individuals. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 19, 651-667.

