UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Category Size and Category-Based Induction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8s2832p1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Feeney, Aidan
Gardiner, David R

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Category Size and Category-Based Induction
Aidan Feeney & David R. Gardiner
Department of Psychology
University of Durham, Stockton Campus
University Boulevard
Stockton-on-Tees, TS17 6BH
United Kingdom
{aidan.feeney, d.r.gardiner}@durham.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper we investigate the role of category size in
category-based induction. In a series of three experiments we
asked participants about the strength of inductive inferences
from arbitrary subordinate categories to their superordinates.
We show that people use both subordinate and superordinate
category size as a cue in category-based induction
(Experiments 1 & 2). However, the results of Experiment 3
show that the effect of subordinate category size is smaller
when the categories are said to be similar than when said to be
dissimilar. On the basis of this result we suggest that people
use category size as an indication of how much uncertainty
remains concerning the superordinate rather than as a means
of assessing how representative the category is as a sample of
the superordinate. We conclude with a discussion of possible
strategies for inductive reasoning.

One of the functions of categories is to promote inductive
inference. Knowing that one set of instances possesses a
certain feature allows us to consider whether other sets are
also likely to possess the same feature. For example,
knowledge that all of the chairs in the lecture room we are
currently in are made of plastic will assist us in making a
prediction about the chairs in the lecture theatre next door,
the cafeteria at the end of the corridor and the provost’s
office. The experiments to be reported in this paper were all
concerned with the role played by information about
category-size in such inductive inferences. They ask
whether participants are more likely to project a property if
it is possessed by instances of a larger category than of a
smaller category and whether people are more confident
about conclusions concerning large or small groups.
Furthermore, if people do turn out to be sensitive to size
cues in this manner, what kind of reasoning underlies their
use of such cues? As we will see below, there are a variety
of ways in which category size might influence people’s
judgements of inductive strength.
Other researchers have been interested in induction based
on categories and there are several models of categorical
induction in the literature all designed to capture between 12
and 15 phenomena (for an excellent review, see Heit, 2000).
One factor that is common to all of these models is intercategory similarity (Osherson et al, 1990) or featural
overlap between categories (Sloman, 1993). To illustrate

how similarity might affect the strength of an inductive
inference consider the arguments below where the statement
above the line is a premise and the statement below the line
is a conclusion. With arguments of this type participants are
asked to assume the premise to be true and to evaluate the
degree to which it supports the conclusion.
Robins have an ulnar artery
Thrushes have an ulnar artery

Argument 1

Robins have an ulnar artery
Flamingos have an ulnar artery

Argument 2

As the categories in Argument 1 are more similar than those
in Argument 2, people will judge the former to be stronger
than the latter. Where the conclusion category is
superordinate to the premise category, as in Argument 3
below, the degree to which the premise category is typical
of the superordinate category informs people's judgements
of inductive strength (see Rips, 1975).
Robins have an ulnar artery
Birds have an ulnar artery

Argument 3

A second factor which, in at least one model of categorybased induction, impacts upon judgements of argument
strength is ‘coverage’ (Osherson et al, 1990). Coverage is
the degree to which the premise categories are similar to
instances of the conclusion category (or, in cases where the
conclusion category is not superordinate to the premise
categories, to instances of the nearest superordinate
category containing both premise and conclusion
categories). So, for example, Argument 4 below would
normally result in greater ratings of inductive strength than
would Argument 5.
German Shepherds produce phagocytes
Poodles produce phagocytes
All dogs produce phagocytes
Argument 4
German shepherds produce phagocytes
Dobermans produce phagocytes
All dogs produce phagocytes
Argument 5

As the premise categories in Argument 4 are similar to a
greater range of instances of the conclusion category than
are the premise categories in Argument 5, the former is
judged to be stronger than the latter. In general, the more
diverse are the premise categories, the stronger is the
argument (although for exceptions see Sloman, 1993).
There are several things to note about much of the
existing work on category-based induction. First, although
rarely formally contrasted with normative models of
induction (for an exception see Heit, 1998), many of the
effects in the literature have an intuitively strong normative
basis. For example, both effects of similarity and coverage
might be expected under the assumption that participants
are sensitive to the representativeness of the samples about
which they have some information. Samples that are either
similar to, or typical of, the population to which the
property will be projected, are, intuitively at least, more
representative of that population. Similarly, diverse sets of
premises intuitively seem to be more representative of the
premises than are non-diverse premises.
A second characteristic of previous work on categorybased induction is that researchers have been interested in
investigating the effects of category knowledge on inductive
judgements concerning natural kinds. As it is not normally
possible to know the size of many naturally occurring
categories (for example, how many members are there of
the category ‘bird'?) research has tended to concentrate on
the role played by inter-category relationships. This may be
contrasted with work on, for example, statistical judgement
where both the a priori probabilities of the hypotheses as
well as the probability of the evidence given each
hypothesis has been manipulated. By presenting participants
with problems concerning arbitrary categories in which
category size was manipulated, the work to be described
here attempted to address the role that category size plays in
category-based induction.

Category Size and Category-Based Induction
Consider the following scenario:
672 people work in a 10 story office block. Of these, 313
work on floor 2 and 35 work on floor 7.
Given this scenario, which of these arguments is the
strongest?
All 313 people who work on floor 2 have an
identity number beginning with the letter Z
All 672 people who work in the office block
have an identity number beginning with the letter Z

Argument 6

All 35 people who work on floor 7 have an
identity number beginning with the letter Z
All 672 people who work in the office block
have an identity number beginning with the letter Z

Argument 7

There are at least two reasons for preferring Argument 6 to
Argument 7. The first line of reasoning is that the sample
size in Argument 6 is larger than that in Argument 7. As
larger samples are held to be more representative of the
populations from which they are drawn than are small
samples, Argument 6 is stronger than Argument 7 (for a
recent discussion of the psychological literatures on
sensitivity to sample size see Sedlmeier & Gigerenzer,
1997, and Keren & Lewis, 2000). However, since Nisbett et
al’s (1983) work on statistical heuristics in induction, it has
been known that the variability of the feature being
projected interacts with sample size to determine inductive
strength. For example, Nisbett et al found that only a very
small sample was required for participants to project
features for which there is little within category variability
(e.g. colour in a specific species of bird) whereas a much
larger sample was required for the projection of more
variable features. In the scenario above, the information that
people work on different floors may suggest variability in
staff identity numbers. That is, if category structure is made
salient by a scenario, sample size may not be considered
relevant in determining the strength of the inference.
The type of reasoning described above relies on indirect
inference. That is, an inference about characteristic of a
population is made on the basis of evidence about the
prevalence of that characteristic amongst members of a
sample. A less sophisticated, but more direct, way of
making the inference is to think about the sample as a
proportion of the population. Thus, if a large proportion of
the population is known to possess the characteristic, then
there is less uncertainty about the remaining members of the
population and hence, a greater probability that the
characteristic is universally possessed.
If we find that participants are sensitive to category size
when asked to evaluate category-based inductive inferences,
then the question arises as to what form of statistical
reasoning underlies that sensitivity. The first two
experiments to be reported here were designed to
investigate premise and conclusion categories as cues to
inductive reasoning whilst the final experiment was
designed to compare contrasting accounts of any category
size effect.

Experiment 1
Method
A total of 40 participants from the undergraduate population
of the University of Durham (Stockton campus) took part in
this experiment. Of these, 11 were male and 29 were
female. The average age of participants was 22 years.
Experiment 1 had an entirely within participants design.
The dependent variable was the number of problems for
which participants chose as strongest the argument

concerning a large premise category. Each participant
received a set of instructions and eight reasoning problems.
Each problem described a superordinate category and two
subordinate categories. The absolute size of each category
was described such that the Large subordinate category was
25-40%, and the Small subordinate category 5-8%, of the
size of the superordinate category. Participants received
problems such as the following:
Extensive research has shown that there are several
strains of the dreaded, and always fatal, Xanthrax virus.
1,000 people are known to have died from the virus.
One form of the virus is Strain 6 from which 300 people
have died. Another form is Strain 3 from which 60
people have died.
and were then asked to indicate which of two arguments
was the stronger. These arguments consisted of a premise,
concerning one or other of the subordinate categories, and a
conclusion concerning the superordinate category:
Xanthrax Strain 6 produces a blotchy rash in sufferers
All 1,000 Xanthrax fatalities displayed a blotchy rash
Xanthrax Strain 3 produces a blotchy rash in sufferers
All 1,000 Xanthrax fatalities displayed a blotchy rash
The order in which the arguments appeared was controlled
whilst the eight problems appeared in one of eight randomly
determined orders. The other seven problems concerned
books in a library, articles from several issues of a journal,
the age of trees in a forest, houses sold by an estate agent,
workers in an office block, characteristics of historical
artefacts and works of art.

subordinate. In Experiment 2 we kept subordinate category
size constant and, instead, manipulated the size of the
Table 1: Large and Small argument selection from
Experiment 1.
Subordinate Category
Problem Content
Disease
Library
Housing
Forest
Journal
Office Block
Artefacts
Gallery

Small
13
8
11
10
10
10
7
6

Large
27
32
29
30
30
30
33
34

superordinate category. Our strong intuition was that
participants would be happiest projecting a feature to a
small, rather than a large, category. An analogous effect
exists in the literature (Osherson et al, 1990) where
participants have been demonstrated to prefer projections to
lower level, and hence smaller, categories.
A second aim of this experiment was to demonstrate
category size effects in a between participants design. The
literature on base rate neglect (see Koehler, 1996) contains
demonstrations that participants are more likely to take the
base rate into account when base rate is manipulated within
participants. Hence, in Experiment 2 we wished to
investigate whether participants would take category size
into account in a between participant design.

Experiment 2

Results and Discussion

Method

As expected, participants displayed a marked preference for
arguments involving the large subordinate category. Out of
a maximum of eight, the mean number of such arguments
selected as being stronger was 6.13 (S.D. = 1.99). The
difference between the number of large subordinate
category arguments that were selected as stronger and the
number that would be predicted by chance was statistically
significant across all problem contents ( t (40) = 6.76, p <
.001). This preference for large premise categories was also
statistically significant in all eight problem contents (χ2(1)
> 8 in 7 out of the eight cases). Response frequencies,
broken down by content, are displayed in Table 1.
The results of Experiment 1 confirm our intuition that
participants are more likely to project a property to a
superordinate category from a large rather than a small

The experiment had a 2 x 3 mixed design. Population size
was manipulated between participants whilst each
participant received three different problems asking them to
rate the strength of an inductive argument.
A total of 116 participants from the undergraduate
population at the University of Durham (Stockton Campus)
took part in this experiment. Of these, 58 were male and 58
were female. The average age of participants was 21 years.
Participants received a booklet containing a set of
instructions followed by three reasoning tasks. These tasks
asked participants to evaluate the strength of arguments
projecting a feature possessed by a subordinate category to
all members of its superordinate. The problems concerned
sub-types of a disease, individual production lines in a
factory, and different variants of a plastic. Participants were

requested to rate the strength of the arguments on a 1-10
scale (very weak – very strong).
In cases where the superordinate category was small, the
subordinate category accounted for between 45 and 55% of
the superordinate. When the superordinate category was
large, subordinate categories accounted for between 5 and
8% of the larger category. Importantly, only the size of the
superordinate category was altered in this experiment.
Approximately equal numbers of participants attempted the
problems in each of the six possible orders.

Results and Discussion
The means and standard deviations from this experiment are
presented in Table 2. A 2x3 Anova analysis revealed a
significant effect of population size on the strength ratings
assigned to arguments (F (1, 114) = 5.32, MSE = 9.98,
p<.03). As expected, the mean ratings for large population
arguments (mean = 2.81, S.D. = 1.68) were significantly
smaller than for the small population arguments (mean =
3.59, S.D. = 1.96). Neither of the other effects tested by the
analysis were significant.
Table 2: Means and standard deviations from Experiment 2.
Condition
Large
Small

Disease
3.84 (2.41)
2.74 (2.07)
3.29 (2.31)

Content
Factory
3.14 (2.23)
2.84 (2.07)
2.99 (2.14)

Plastic
3.79 (2.71)
2.84 (1.96)
3.32 (2.40)

As expected, participants rated arguments projecting
features to small conclusion categories more highly than
they did arguments concerning large conclusion categories.
However, one striking aspect of these results is that mean
ratings of argument strength were very low. It would appear
that, at least in a between participants design, making
subordinate categories salient in the scenario causes
participants to doubt the conclusion regardless of conclusion
category size. One possible reason for this is that
participants may expect there to be differences between
subordinate categories. This expectation may contribute to
their unwillingness to project a feature to the superordinate
on the basis of evidence concerning only one subordinate.
In Experiment 3 we investigated the effects of explicit
information about similarities and dissimilarities between
subordinate categories on ratings of inductive strength.

Experiment 3
Experiments 1 and 2 have demonstrated that participants are
sensitive to both subordinate and superordinate category
when evaluating the strength of inductive arguments. In
Experiment 3 we attempted to contrast two possible

accounts of people's use of category size as a cue for
induction.
The first account we considered was that people's
judgements are affected by subordinate category size
because they use a sample size heuristic (see Nisbett et al,
1983). That is, people realise that larger samples are more
representative of the population from which they are drawn
than are smaller samples. Alternatively, people may reason
that a large subordinate leaves a smaller proportion of the
superordinate unaccounted for than a small subordinate and
hence, makes for a stronger argument.
To test these alternative accounts we gave one group of
participants reason to believe that all subordinate categories
in the domain were similar whilst telling another group that
they were dissimilar. Our reasoning was that 'similar'
problems should result in fewer attributions of variability to
the superordinate category. If participants were cautious in
using a sample size heuristic in Experiment 1 due to worries
about the representativeness of the sample, then for 'similar'
problems participants in this experiment should be less
cautious and a greater effect of category size should be
observed. On the other hand, 'dissimilar' problems should
produce even more caution and a smaller effect of category
size.
An alternative hypothesis is that the effect of category
size in Experiment 1 may have been due to an assumption
that the subordinate category was unrepresentative of the
superordinate. That is, participants may have been unwilling
to project a property to the superordinate because the
subordinate category for which information was available
may not have 'covered' the superordinate category.
Accordingly, participants may have endorsed inferences
from large premise categories more strongly because large
premise categories leave fewer cases unaccounted for in the
conclusion category. Thus, telling participants that the
subordinate categories in the scenario are similar may cause
them to rely less on category size as a cue and to assign
higher ratings of inductive strength regardless of category
size. Explicitly telling them that members of the
superordinate are dissimilar may lead them to rely even
more heavily on sample size.

Method
Eight male and 52 female undergraduate students (average
age 27 years) from the University of Durham's Stockton
Campus took part in this experiment which had a 2 x 2
entirely within participants design. The factors manipulated
were the similarity said to hold between subordinate
categories in each of the problems (similar vs. dissimilar)
and the size of the subordinate category (large vs. small).
Each participant received a nine-page booklet comprising
a set of instructions and eight inductive reasoning problems.

In each of these problems participants were told that
instances of a subordinate category possessed a feature and
were asked to evaluate the strength of an argument
projecting this feature to all members of the superordinate
category. The problems concerned workers in an office
block, symptoms of a disease, features of handmade chairs,
materials used by an engine manufacturer, properties of a
type of plastic, the type of material used in indigenous art,
production lines in a factory, and stock at a fish farm. Each
participant received one version of each problem and two
problems in each condition of the experiment. Each problem
content appeared equally often in each condition of the
experiment.
The problems were designed so that the large subordinate
category was 45-55% of the size of the superordinate
category, whilst the small subordinate category contained 58% of the superordinate population. To achieve the
similarity manipulation participants were explicitly told that
some similarity/dissimilarity existed between all members
of the superordinate category. For example, in the office
block problem participants were told that the workers either
worked for the same, or different, divisions of a company.

Results and Discussion
As participants completed two problems per condition of
the design, we calculated a mean score per condition for
each participant. We carried out a 2 x 2 entirely within
participants ANOVA on this data, the means from which
may be seen in Figure 1. Our similarity manipulation had a
highly significant effect upon the ratings of argument
strength (F (1, 59) = 24.70, MSE = 10.38, p<.001). Mean
ratings of argument strength were higher for categories
containing similar members (8.15) than for categories
containing dissimilar members (6.08). This finding
replicates previous work (e.g. Nisbett et al, 1983)
suggesting that within category variability significantly
affects people’s willingness to project a property from a
sample to a population.
Figure 1: Interaction between Category Size and Similarity
from Experiment 3
10
9
Large
Category

8
7

Small
Category

6
5
4
Similar

Dissimilar

Member Similarity

Our category size manipulation also had a significant
effect on ratings of argument strength (F (1,59) = 6.03, MSE
= 7.19, p<.02). Arguments involving the large subordinate
category were rated as stronger (7.54) than those involving
the small subordinate (6.69). Although the interaction
between these factors did not approach significance (F(1,
59) = .34, MSE = 8.21, p > .5), planned comparisons
revealed a significant effect of category size when category
members were said to be dissimilar but not when they were
said to be similar.
When participants are explicitly told that the members of
the superordinate category are similar, premise category
size ceases to have a significant effect on judgements of
inductive strength. Instead, it would appear that category
size is more important under conditions where ’indirect’
inductive inference from a subordinate to a superordinate is
likely to be unsafe. This suggests that category size
functions as an indicator of the number of cases for which
uncertainty remains.

General Discussion
Our finding, that category size acts as a cue in categorybased inductive inference, is entirely novel (if not entirely
unexpected). Likewise, the finding that the effect of
category size decreases when participants are explicitly told
that subordinate categories are similar is also novel We will
discuss possible interpretations of these findings and their
implications for the question of strategy use for induction.
The results of Experiment 3 might be regarded as being
consistent with Nisbett et al’s findings as in their study
participants were found to be insensitive to sample size
when the property that they were required to project was
unlikely to vary. Similarly, our participants were also
relatively insensitive to sample size when told that there
were similarities between subordinate categories. It might
even be argued that participants’ greater sensitivity to
sample size in the dissimilar condition is also consistent
with Nisbett et al’s results and is evidence that participants
realised that in conditions of variability, a large sample is
safer.
We are unsure about this reading of the results because
we find it implausible that participants told that there were
dissimilarities between subordinate categories should
consider a bigger subordinate category more likely to be
representative of the population than a smaller subordinate.
We find it much more plausible that participants attributed
greater strength to arguments that accounted for the most
population members. It is plausible, however, that in the
similar condition, participants projected features to the
population on the basis of characteristics of the sample.
Even in the small category size condition, premise
categories always had more than 20 members. This figure

was chosen as 20 was the largest sample size given to
participants in Nisbett et al’s experiment. Given the
existence of a subordinate category structure, participants
may have considered the increase in inductive strength from
small to larger premise categories to be insubstantial.
We contend that our results suggest that people are
flexible in the strategies that they adopt for inductive
inference. In conditions of low variability, people will
project properties to a population on the basis of the
characteristics of a sample. However, where high variability
exists, people may be more likely to base their judgements
of inductive strength on the number of cases outstanding.
The ’direct’ strategy is a very interesting one, partly
because it has been somewhat neglected in the literature
(although see Evans & Dusoir, 1977). The conditions for its
application are population size being both finite and
approximately known. In addition, we suspect that a ’direct’
strategy will be used in conditions where the population is
small. This is because indirect induction only becomes
necessary where the population is large or infinite and it is
difficult, or impossible, to check all members. With small
populations a direct strategy based on checking as many
members as possible is more tractable.
Evidence that group size can affect how people perform
induction comes from Wang (1996) who showed that the
demonstration of classic framing effects depends on the size
of the group being reasoned about. His explanation for this
finding is that we possess social-group domain-specific
reasoning abilities. As Wang only gave scenarios
concerning social groups to his participants, we are
unwilling to subscribe to the notion of social-group domainspecific abilities. However, we agree that the human species
is likely to have made inferences about relatively small
populations throughout most of its history. In addition,
formal notions of induction evolved relatively recently (see
Gigerenzer et al, 1989), most probably in response to a need
for safe inferences about population whose size was
unknowable or infinite. Although the ’direct’ strategy is
primitive when compared to more ’indirect’ forms of
induction, such a strategy may work very well with small
populations.

References
Evans, J.St.B.T. & Dusoir, A.E. (1977). Proportionality and
sample size as factors in intuitive statistical judgement.
Acta Psychologica, 41, 129 - 137.
Gigerenzer et al (1989). The empire of chance. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Heit, E. (1998). A Bayesian analysis of some forms of
inductive reasoning. In Oaksford, M. & Chater, N.
(Eds.) Rational models of cognition. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.

Heit, E. (2000). Properties of inductive reasoning.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 7, 569-592.
Keren, G. & Lewis, C. (2000). Even Bernoulli might have
been wrong. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making,
13, 125-132.
Koehler, J.J. (1996). The base-rate fallacy reconsidered:
Descriptive, normative and methodological challenges.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 19, 1-53.
Nisbett, R.E. et al (1983). The use of statistical heuristics in
everyday inductive reasoning. Psychological Review,
90, 339-363.
Osherson, D.N., et al (1990). Category-based induction.
Psychological Review, 97, 185-200.
Rips, L. (1975). Inductive judgements about natural
categories. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 14, 665-681.
Sedlmeier, P. & Gigerenzer, G. (1997). Intuitions about
sample size: The empirical law of large numbers.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 10, 33-51.
Sloman, S.A. (1993). Feature based induction. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 231-280
Wang, X.T. (1996). Domain specific rationality in human
choices: Violations of utility axioms and social
contexts. Cognition, 60, 31 - 63.

Acknowledgements
This research was funded by grant R000222426 from the
Economic and Social Research Council of the United
Kingdom

