UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Children’s Acceptance and Use of Unexpected Category Labels to Draw Non-Obvious
Inferences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6jp279t2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Jaswal, Vikram K
Markman, Ellen M

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Children’s Acceptance and Use of Unexpected Category Labels
to Draw Non-Obvious Inferences
Vikram K. Jaswal (jaswal@psych.stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Jordan Hall, Bldg. 420, Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-2130 USA

Ellen M. Markman (markman@psych.stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Jordan Hall, Bldg. 420, Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-2130 USA

Abstract
Language provides an efficient, uniquely human way of
transmitting non-obvious category information between
individuals and across generations. To explore whether it can
serve this purpose even for very young children, we
conducted two experiments: one with 24-month-olds, and the
other with preschoolers. Children made non-obvious
inferences about perceptually misleading animals. Those who
heard the animals called by counter-intuitive category labels
made inferences different from those who did not hear the
labels, demonstrating an important influence of language on
thought, even at 24 months of age. However, preschoolers
appear to have been less influenced than toddlers, suggesting
that there are limits on children’s willingness to accept
anomalous category labels.

Introduction
Categorization is fundamental to human cognition, enabling
communication and serving as the basis for the
representation of objects and for predicting and explaining
their behavior (Anglin, 1977; Markman, 1989). Children as
young as 3.5 months (Eimas & Quinn, 1994), adults (Rosch
et al., 1976), and non-human animals (e.g., Freedman et al.,
2001) alike readily use perceptual similarity to determine
the category to which something belongs. But when
reasoning about an object, or explaining or predicting its
behavior, perceptual appearance is not always criterial of
category membership. For example, even though eels look
like snakes, in order to more accurately characterize their
ancestry, behavior and physiological processes, experts
categorize them as fish.
Given sufficient experience, children as young as 30
months can form non-obvious categories by noting causal
(Gopnik & Sobel, 2000) or functional (Kemler Nelson et al.,
2000) regularities between objects.
Under some
circumstances, even non-human animals can learn to
categorize objects in perceptually non-obvious ways
(Herrnstein & DeVilliers, 1980). However, recognizing
non-obvious similarities can be a slow and laborious
process, often requiring experience that is difficult to obtain.
Moreover, it requires every individual in every generation to
have the experience for him or herself (Tomasello, 1999).
Another, arguably more reliable and efficient way to obtain
non-obvious category information is through language

(Gelman et al., 2000): When a trusted source uses an
unexpected category label for an object, it reflects a
particular perspective that others have found useful when
thinking and reasoning about that object in the past, and it
can cause us to revise a classification immediately. For
language to have this effect, however, listeners may have to
give up a compelling, perceptually based classification in
favor of a classification they do not immediately understand.
As adults, we can accept linguistically provided nonobvious classifications (e.g., a whale is a mammal, not a
fish) because we implicitly assume that something deeper
than surface similarity binds category members together
(Medin & Ortony, 1989). Such an essentialist assumption
would facilitate the rapid uptake of non-obvious category
terms. However, it is not clear whether very young children
also expect categories and category terms to encode more
than surface similarities. For example, it has been argued
that children begin with or quickly develop an expectation
that category labels encode similarly shaped objects (e.g.,
Imai, Gentner, & Uchida, 1994; Smith, 1999). Furthermore,
whereas children readily learn words for basic-level
categories (e.g., “table”), they have difficulty learning words
for superordinate categories (e.g., “furniture”), which have
fewer perceptual features in common than basic-level ones
(e.g., Horton & Markman, 1980; Mervis & Rosch, 1981;
Rosch et al., 1976). Finally, young children sometimes
object to parental attempts to correct perceptually based
categorization errors (Mervis, 1987).
In two studies, we investigated children’s willingness to
accept perceptually counter-intuitive classifications on the
basis of linguistically provided information alone. In our
first study, we asked this question of 24-month-olds.
Gelman and her colleagues have found that children as
young as 32 months can make inferences on the basis of
linguistic information rather than perceptual appearance
(Gelman & Coley, 1990; Gelman & Markman, 1986), but
their procedure involves memory demands, verbal
responses, and linguistic comprehension abilities beyond
those of younger children. Our procedure uses an imitation
paradigm that minimizes these task demands (see also
Baldwin, Markman, & Melartin, 1993; Mandler &
McDonough, 1996; Welder & Graham, 2001).

Although preschoolers have been shown to defer to adult
labels in the face of perceptually inconsistent information
(Gelman & Coley, 1990; Gelman & Markman, 1986), there
must be limits on this process. Surprisingly, no one has
considered situations under which children reject
linguistically provided category information. Using the
same paradigm and materials as in the first study, our
second study takes up this question with preschoolers.

Standard Animals

Misleading Test Animals

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 was designed to test whether 24-month-olds
would use an experimenter-provided, sometimes counterintuitive, category label when making non-obvious
inferences. In particular, we were interested in whether they
would use the label to make an inference that was different
from the one they would make without a label.

Method
Participants Participants were 32 toddlers, ranging in age
from 23 months, 6 days to 25 months, 28 days (M = 24
months, 10 days). Five additional toddlers were tested, but
their data are not included due to extreme fussiness resulting
in an inability to complete at least half of the session (4), or
due to experimenter error (1).
Stimuli Eight animals from familiar categories were
grouped into four sets based on similar sizes and body
shapes: Cat-dog, horse-cow, bear-pig, and squirrel-rabbit.
Category familiarity was confirmed by consulting the
MacArthur Communicative Development Inventory for
toddlers (Dale & Fenson, 1996), which indicated that at
least 44% of 24-month-old children could produce the word
associated with each animal (range: 43.9% for “squirrel” to
91.6% for “dog”).
Realistic, color drawings of a typical exemplar of each
animal were obtained from commercially available
picturebooks, and were digitized for computer manipulation
(hereafter, “standard animals”). In addition, three test
animals for each set were generated on Adobe PhotoShop
from the standard animals of that set: Two were typical
exemplars (hereafter “typical test animals”), and were
created by manipulating the coloration of the standards; the
third test animal looked more like one standard animal than
the other (hereafter, “misleading test animal”). Misleading
test animals were created by using one of the standards (or
an additional typical image) as a base, and adding features
from the other standard image of that pair. Examples of
standard and misleading animals from the cat-dog set are
shown in Figure 1.
Sixteen graduate students rated each animal, including the
standards, from each set on a 7-point continuum. At one
end of the continuum was the category label for one of the
animals in a given set (e.g., “cat”), and at the other end was
the category label for the other animal in that set (e.g.,
“dog”). Subjects indicated on the continuum the position of
each animal image, with 4 being ambiguous—exactly

Figure 1: Sample stimuli from the cat-dog set. Each
stimulus set was made up of two standard animals, two
typical animals (not shown, but very similar to the
standards), and one of two misleading animals.
halfway between the two. The average ratings of the
standards and typical test animals were always at the ends of
the continuum (between 1 and 2 or between 6 and 7), and
those of the misleading test animals were always slightly
closer to the center, but leaning in one direction (between 2
and 3, or between 5 and 6) and significantly different from 4
and from each other. A full display of the stimuli and
details of their adult ratings can be obtained at http://wwwpsych.stanford.edu/~jaswal/Stimuli/index.html.
All images were sized to approximately 3 to 4 inches
wide, with their heights constrained by their widths. Each
image (and its left-right reverse) was printed on a 600 dpi
color printer, cut out, laminated, and mounted into a small
stand that allowed it to remain upright.
Each set of animals was associated with a particular
activity, and members of the same pair were associated with
contrasting props or dioramas (hereafter, “props”).
Activities were chosen that could be easily and clearly
demonstrated with a 3-dimensional prop, and that might
(though not necessarily) be familiar to children: The cat
played with a ball of yarn, the dog played with a stick; the
horse slept on the hay, the cow slept on the grass; the bear
lived in the forest, the pig lived in the mud; the squirrel ate a
nut, the rabbit ate a carrot. Props were purchased or
specially constructed.
Design The 32 children were randomly assigned to a label
or a no-label condition, resulting in 16 children per
condition, balanced for sex. Each child in the label
condition was yoked to a child in the no-label condition so
that both saw exactly the same animals in exactly the same
configuration and order. The only difference was that one
heard a label during the presentation of each test animal, and
the other did not.

Results and Discussion
As shown in Figure 2, children in both the label and the nolabel conditions inferred that the typical test animals
engaged with the props associated with their perceptual
appearance significantly more frequently than would be
expected by chance (50%) [label condition: t(15)=4.01,
p<0.01; no-label condition: t(15)=2.93, p<0.05], and at
levels not different from each other [t(30)<1, n.s.]. This is
consistent with other work showing that, in the absence of
labels, even 9-month-olds can make non-obvious inferences
based on an object’s appearance (Baldwin et al., 1993).
When a test animal was perceptually misleading,
however, labeling had a dramatic effect, as Figure 2 shows.
Children in the label condition made inferences based on the
perceptual appearance of the misleading test animals less
frequently than by chance [t(15)=-2.93, p<0.05], whereas
those in the no-label condition did so at chance levels
[t(15)<1, n.s.]. A 2-way mixed ANOVA on the mean
percentage of perceptual inferences (label/no-label x
typical/misleading) yielded a main effect of stimulus type
[F(1,30)=13.41, p<0.01], and a significant interaction
[F(1,30)=6.62, p<0.05]. Children in the label condition
made significantly fewer inferences in line with the
perceptual appearance of the misleading test animals than
those in the no-label condition [t(30)=-2.32, p<0.05].
In short, children in the label condition inferred that the
misleading animal engaged with the prop associated with its
label, while those in the no-label condition were
significantly more likely to infer that it engaged with the
prop associated with its perceptual appearance. For
example, when shown the misleading animal that adult
subjects rated as dog-like, children who heard it referred to
as “this cat” inferred that it played with the ball of yarn,
while those who heard it referred to as “this one” were more
likely to infer that it played with a stick.
100

Label

90

% Perceptual inferences

Procedure Toddlers were seated on their parent’s lap at a
table in a testing room, or at a small table on their own, with
the experimenter sitting across the table from them. Each
session began with a warm-up trial to familiarize them with
the procedure: The experimenter demonstrated that a fish
lived in an aquatic scene (“water”), and a bird lived in a
tree. They were then shown additional typical fish and birds
in alternating order and asked to show where each lived,
until they succeeded in putting a fish in the water and a bird
in the tree consecutively, or until their attention waned.
Correct selections were praised, and incorrect selections
were corrected.
During the testing phase, children watched as the
experimenter demonstrated and explained aloud that one
standard animal engaged in an activity with one prop (for
example, that a cat played with a ball of yarn), and that the
second standard animal of that set engaged in an activity
with another prop (for example, that a dog played with a
stick). Following the introduction and labeling of each
standard animal, children were encouraged to imitate the
activity with that same animal.
Children were then shown the two typical test animals
and one of the misleading test animals from that set, one at a
time and in a random order. They were asked to show the
activity in which each engaged. The children in the label
condition heard the experimenter use a category label to
introduce each of the test animals (for example, “Look at
this! Look at this dog! Can you show me what this dog
plays with?”). The typical test animals were always called
by labels that matched their appearance, and the misleading
test animals were always called by labels that were the
opposite of their appearance (i.e., if adult raters had
indicated that a misleading test animal looked more like a
dog than a cat, it was referred to as “this cat”). To establish
baseline levels, children in the no-label condition heard the
experimenter use the phrase “this one” to introduce each test
animal (for example, “Look at this! Look at this one! Can
you show me what this one plays with?”). Regardless of
their selection, children were given neutral feedback in a
positive tone (“OK!”), and the experimenter then proceeded
to the next test animal or animal set.
Most children were presented with all four sets of
animals; however, due to fussiness, five children were
presented with three sets rather than four. The order in
which the animal sets were presented was counterbalanced
across pairs of children according to a Latin Square design.
The prop or diorama matching a misleading test animal’s
perceptual appearance appeared twice on the left and twice
on the right for each child, and this was counterbalanced
across pairs of children.
Coding was conducted off-line, via videotape, and
involved noting which of the two possible props was
selected for each test animal. Two coders, blind to
condition, each coded one-half of the sessions. To assess
reliability, each coder also independently coded 1/4 of the
other coder’s sessions (selected randomly); agreement on
which prop was selected was 99% (Cohen’s kappa=.98).

No-Label

80
70
60
50

Chance

40
30
20
10
0
Typical

Misleading

Test animal
Figure 2: Mean percentage of inferences by toddlers that
were consistent with perceptual appearance. Error bars
show standard error.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was designed to explore whether preschoolers
would be as willing to accept perceptually counter-intuitive
category labels as the toddlers in Experiment 1.
Presumably, older children have been exposed both to more
exemplars and to a wider range of exemplars from the
familiar animal categories used in our experiment. Because
of this experience, they may be less willing to accept
anomalous category information. For example, when they
see an animal clearly possessing the perceptual features of a
dog (a “misleading test animal”), they may construe it as a
dog that shares properties with other dogs—regardless of
what the experimenter calls it.

were then shown the three test animals one at a time and in a
random order, and asked to show the activity in which each
engaged. All children were shown four sets of animals.1
The major difference from Experiment 1 was that children
heard labels for test animals from two of the sets, and did
not hear labels for test animals from the other two. As in
Experiment 1, children were yoked in pairs so that both saw
exactly the same stimuli in exactly the same configuration
and order. When one child heard test animals from a
particular set labeled, his or her yoked partner did not. The
order in which the sets were presented was random, as was
the order of the test-baseline sets. The prop matching the
misleading animal’s perceptual appearance appeared equally
often on the left and right for label and no-label sets.
Coding was conducted off-line, via videotape, and
involved noting which of the two possible props was
selected for each test animal.

Results and Discussion
As shown in Figure 3, like the toddlers in Experiment 1,
preschoolers inferred that the typical test animals engaged
with the props associated with their perceptual appearance
significantly more frequently than would be expected by
chance, regardless of whether the animals were labeled or
not [label condition: t(11)=13.40, p<0.01; no-label
condition: t(11)=6.09, p<0.01], and at levels not different
from each other [t(11)=1.00, n.s.].
For perceptually misleading animals that were not
labeled, preschoolers had them engage with the prop that
matched their appearance more frequently than would be
expected by chance [t(11)=11.00, p<0.01]. By contrast,
when they were labeled, children had them engage with the
prop that matched their appearance at chance levels
[t(11)<1, n.s.]. A 2-way repeated measures ANOVA on the
100
90

% Perceptual inferences

Using a non-verbal response measure, we found that even
24-month-old children weigh the category label that a
speaker applies to an animal more heavily than the animal’s
perceptual appearance when the two are in conflict.
Although the vast majority of category labels in a typical
two-year-old’s productive vocabulary represent categories
whose members cohere perceptually (Samuelson & Smith,
1999), these children nonetheless expect category members
to share deeper similarities, and they can use language to
think about objects in non-obvious—even counterintuitive—ways. The power of a simple category label to
convey non-obvious category information may well develop
with age and experience with language. Certainly by 24
months, however, this process is in place, and can serve as
an important mechanism for the cultural transmission of
knowledge and information.
This raises interesting questions about the limits of this
process, including circumstances under which children
might weigh an object’s perceptual appearance more heavily
than its category label. In our second experiment, we
explored one possibility, namely that older children might
be less willing to accept a perceptually counter-intuitive
category label than younger children.

Method
Participants Twelve 3-year-old (M = 3 years, 3 months;
range = 2-10 to 3-6) of middle-class and upper-middle-class
backgrounds participated at a university-affiliated
preschool. Six were girls and six were boys.
Stimuli The stimuli were the same as those used in
Experiment 1.
Design Experiment 2 used a within-subject design, with the
same child hearing some test animals labeled and other test
animals referred to as “this one.”
Procedure Children were tested individually in a quiet
room at their preschool. The procedure was generally the
same as that used in Experiment 1: Children watched as the
experimenter demonstrated and explained aloud that one
standard animal engaged with one prop, and the second
standard animal of that pair engaged with another. They

80
70
60
50

Chance

40
30
20

Label

10

No-Label

0
Typical

Misleading

Test animal
Figure 3: Mean percentage of inferences by preschoolers
that were consistent with perceptual appearance. Error bars
show standard error.
1

Additionally, children were shown two sets of artifacts; those
data will not be presented here.

General Discussion
These two experiments investigated children’s
willingness to accept perceptually counter-intuitive
classifications on the basis of linguistically provided
information. In Experiment 1, 24-month-olds used
category labels provided by the experimenter to make nonobvious inferences about animals that were the opposite of
those they would make without a label. These results
converge with those of Welder and Graham (2001), who
found that 16- to 21-month-olds could use a label to make a
non-obvious inferences about a novel object. In that study,
infants who heard two moderately dissimilar novel objects
called by the same novel name inferred that they shared a
non-obvious property (Study 2). When the objects were not
labeled, infants did not spontaneously assume that they
shared the same property (Study 1).
Our design differs from that of Welder and Graham
(2001) in an important way: In particular, whereas Welder
and Graham used novel objects and novel labels (except in
Study 3, where they used novel objects and familiar labels),
we used instead familiar objects and labels. By using
familiar categories, we were able to show that despite
compelling, contradictory perceptual information indicating
membership in a different category, 24-month-olds
nonetheless could accept and use the experimenter’s label in
making a non-obvious inference.
In Experiment 2, we found that preschoolers could also
use labels to make inferences different from those they
would make without a label. This is consistent with work
by Gelman and her colleagues (Gelman & Coley, 1990;
Gelman & Markman, 1986), who have found similar results
with preschoolers using different procedures. However, we
also found that preschoolers were less willing to accept and
use an unexpected category label than the toddlers in
Experiment 1. The first piece of evidence for this
conclusion comes from the chance analyses, which showed
that hearing a label for a misleading animal made toddlers in
Experiment 1 less likely than chance to make an inference
in line with the animal’s perceptual appearance, whereas
preschoolers in Experiment 2 were merely at
chance—meaning that the older children were as likely to

use the animal’s perceptual appearance as the experimenterprovided label.
The second piece of evidence comes from an additional
analysis of the data from the label conditions. So far, we
have been considering the proportion of inferences children
made in line with each test animal’s perceptual appearance.
Another way to consider the data from the label conditions
only is in terms of the proportion of inferences children
made in line with the experimenter-provided labels. These
data are shown in Figure 4.
One might reasonably expect the proportion of label
inferences for typical animals to be higher than the
proportion of label inferences for the misleading animals,
because in the case of a typical animal, there is no conflict
between the label and the animal’s appearance. And, in
fact, as can be seen in Figure 4, for both toddlers and
preschoolers, this is the case. However, whereas toddlers
made only slightly fewer label inferences for misleading
animals than typical ones, preschoolers were much less
likely to make label inferences for misleading animals than
typical ones. Indeed, a 2-way mixed ANOVA on the
average percentage of label inferences (toddler/preschool x
typical/misleading) yielded a main effect of stimulus type
[F(1,26)=9.67, p<0.01], and a significant interaction
[F(1,26)=7.01, p<0.05]. In other words, toddlers were
equally likely to make an inference in line with misleading
animals’ labels as typical animals’ labels [t(15)<1, n.s.],
while preschoolers were significantly less likely to do so
[t(11)=-3.74, p<.01].
Although differences in the design of these two studies
make the cross-experiment comparisons somewhat
tentative, this difference in children’s willingness to accept
anomalous category labels is extremely provocative: It
suggests that 24-month-olds may be more “open-minded”
about category information than 3-year-olds, perhaps
because the toddlers assumed that they had not yet
encountered all possible exemplars of even common
100
90

% Label inferences

mean percentage of perceptual inferences (label/no-label x
typical/misleading) yielded a main effect of condition
[F(1,11)=33.00, p<0.01], a main effect of stimulus type
[F(1,11)=7.44, p<0.05], and a significant interaction
[F(1,11)=23.44, p<0.01]. When they heard misleading
animals labeled, children made significantly fewer
inferences in line with their perceptual appearance than
when they did not hear them labeled [t(11)=-5.61, p<0.01].
As in Experiment 1 with toddlers, then, labeling clearly
had an effect on preschoolers’ inferences about the
perceptually misleading animals. However, as will be
discussed below, once performance on the typical animals
was equated, preschoolers appear to have been less likely to
accept and use counter-intuitive category labels than
toddlers.

80
70
60
50

Chance

40
30

Toddlers (Expt. 1)

20

Preschoolers (Expt. 2)

10
0
Typical

Misleading

Test animal
Figure 4: For toddlers and preschoolers who heard test
animals labeled, mean percentage of inferences that were
consistent with the labels. Error bars show standard error.

animals, whereas the preschoolers assumed they had (see
Naigles, Gleitman, and Gleitman, 1992, for an analogous
argument in verb learning). On-going work is considering
this possibility.
Putnam (1977) has argued that a key element of adult
communication is that we frequently use terms to refer to
things without necessarily knowing the criteria for those
terms. However, we assume that there are experts in our
community who could provide the criteria and perform a
test, if necessary, to fix the extension of those terms. In his
words, language use requires a “division of linguistic labor.”
We have shown that children as young as 24 months also
have something like a division of linguistic labor operating:
They can accept and use what might be considered baffling
category labels in order to make non-obvious inferences
about animals. Using language in this way allows them to
stretch the boundaries of their own spontaneously generated,
often perceptually based, categories (but see Mandler &
McDonough, 1996), and to take advantage of the richer and
more conceptual frameworks that their cultures have
evolved. A fruitful area for further investigation will be
exploring the limits of this process.

Acknowledgments
We thank the children, teachers, staff, and parents who
participated in this research, including those at the
Arboretum Child Care Center and Bing Nursery School.
Additionally, we thank A. Fernald for her assistance in
subject recruitment and for providing testing space, and A.
Sud for assistance in data collection. This research was
supported by an NRSA predoctoral award from NIH and a
Stanford Graduate Research Opportunity grant to VKJ.

References
Anglin, J. M. (1977). Word, object, and conceptual
development. New York: Norton.
Baldwin, D. A., Markman, E. M., & Melartin, R. L. (1993).
Infants' ability to draw inferences about nonobvious
object properties: Evidence from exploratory play. Child
Development, 64, 711-728.
Dale, P. S., & Fenson, L. (1996). Lexical development
norms for young children. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments & Computers, 28, 125-127.
Eimas, P. D., & Quinn, P. C. (1994). Studies on the
formation of perceptually based basic-level categories in
young infants. Child Development, 65, 903-917.
Freedman, D. J., Risenhuber, M., Poggio, T., Miller, E. K.
(2001). Categorical representation of visual stimuli in the
primate prefrontal cortex. Science, 291, 312-316
Gelman, S. A., & Coley, J. D. (1990). The importance of
knowing a dodo is a bird: Categories and inferences in 2year-old children. Developmental Psychology, 26, 796804.
Gelman, S. A., Hollander, M., Star, J., & Heyman, G. D.
(2000). The role of language in the construction of kinds.
The Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 39, 201-263.

Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. M. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-208.
Gopnik, A., & Sobel, D. M. (2000). Detecting blickets:
How young children use information about novel causal
powers in categorization and induction.
Child
Development, 71, 1205-1222.
Herrnstein, R. J., & de Villiers, P. A. (1980). Fish as a
natural category for people and pigeons. The Psychology
of Learning and Motivation, 14, 59-95.
Horton, M. S., & Markman, E. M. (1980). Developmental
differences in the acquisition of basic and superordinate
categories. Child Development, 51, 708-719.
Imai, M., Gentner, D., & Uchida, N. (1994). Children's
theories of word meaning: The role of shape similarity in
early acquisition. Cognitive Development, 9, 45-75.
Kemler Nelson, D. G., Russel, R., Duke, N., & Jones, K.
(2000). Two-year-olds will name artifacts by their
functions. Child Development, 71, 1271-1288.
Mandler, J. M., & McDonough, L. (1996). Drinking and
driving don't mix: Inductive generalization in infancy.
Cognition, 59, 307-335.
Markman, E. M. (1989). Categorization and naming in
children: Problems of induction. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Medin, D. L., & Ortony, A. (1989). Psychological
essentialism. In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.),
Similarity and analogical reasoning. Cambridge:
Cambridge UP.
Mervis, C. B. (1987). Child-basic object categories and
early lexical development. In U. Neisser (Ed.), Concepts
and conceptual development: Ecological and intellectual
factors in categorization. Cambridge: Cambridge UP.
Mervis, C. B., & Rosch, E. (1981). Categorization of natural
objects. Annual Review of Psychology, 32, 89-115.
Naigles, L. G., Gleitman, H., & Gleitman, L. R. (1992).
Children acquire word meaning components from
syntactic evidence. In E. Dromi (Ed.), Language and
cognition: A developmental perspective. Norwood, NJ:
Ablex.
Putnam, H. (1977). Meaning and reference. In S. P.
Schwartz (Ed.), Naming, necessity, and natural kinds.
Ithaca: Cornell UP.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C. B., Gray, W. D., Johnson, D. M., &
Boyes-Braem, P. (1976). Basic objects in natural
categories. Cognitive Psychology, 8, 382-439.
Samuelson, L. K., & Smith, L. B. (1999). Early noun
vocabularies: Do ontology, category structure and syntax
correspond? Cognition, 73, 1-33.
Smith, L. B. (1999). Children's noun learning: How general
learning processes make specialized learning
mechanisms. In B. MacWhinney (Ed.), The emergence of
language. Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human
cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP.
Welder, A. N., & Graham, S. A. (2001). The influence of
shape similarity and shared labels on infants' inductive
inferences about nonobvious object properties. Child
Development, 72, 1653-1673.

