UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Comparison and the development of knowledge
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/21q3m9g0
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)
Author
Boroditsky, Lera
Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

                             Comparison and the Development of Knowledge
                                                  Lera Boroditsky (lera@mit.edu)
                                                       NE20-456, MIT, 77 Mass Ave
                                                        Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
                             Abstract                                 example, Goldstone, Lippa, and Schiffrin, (2001) showed
                                                                      that object representations can change as a result of
   This paper considers the role of comparison in the                 category-learning, with objects assigned to the same
   development of knowledge. Results show that comparing              categories becoming more similar (see also Kurtz, 1998).
   similar objects makes them appear more similar, while
                                                                      Further, previous research by Gentner and Namy (2000)
   comparing dissimilar objects makes them appear less similar.
   The effect of comparison on similar items was especially
                                                                      suggests that providing children with an opportunity for
   striking since subjects judged items to be more similar after      comparison may help them in category learning by allowing
   comparison even if the comparison task was to list differences     them to discover deeper relational similarities between
   between the two items. Further, this effect appears specific to    category members (see also Kurtz & Gentner, 1998).
   comparison and does not appear to be simply due to a                    This paper considers the role of comparison in the
   ìfleshing outî of object representations (listing properties of    development of similarity. Results of four experiments
   two objects without comparing the objects themselves served        suggest that comparison can play an important role in
   to increase the objectsí similarity regardless of whether the      knowledge development. By making similar things appear
   objects were similar or dissimilar to start). This suggests that
                                                                      more similar, and dissimilar things appear less similar
   comparison may play a special role in partitioning bits of
   experience into categories, sharpening categorical boundaries,
                                                                      comparison may help us partition bits of experience into
   and otherwise helping us create conceptual structure above         categories and sharpen categorical boundaries.
   and beyond that offered by the world.                                   Four experiments explore the effects of comparison on
                                                                      object representation. Experiments 1 and 2 examine the
                         Introduction                                 effects of comparison on the perceived similarity of similar
                                                                      and dissimilar objects. Experiment 3 contrasts the effects of
Are our mental representations of things in the world simply
                                                                      comparison with those of simple ìfleshing outî or
a reflection of the structure of the world, or do we create
                                                                      elaboration of object representations. Experiment 4 extends
new structures and partitions in conceptual space? Further,
                                                                      the findings of Experiments 1and 2 to novel objects.
are our representations static, or do they change over time in
systematic ways as a result of the way we process and use
our knowledge? This paper suggests that some common
                                                                                            Experiment 1
cognitive processes (in this case, comparison) can introduce
systematic biases into our representations of the world.              Method
These biases may be beneficial for separating out bits of
experience into categories, sharpening categorical                    Participants 132 Stanford University undergraduates
boundaries, and otherwise helping us create conceptual                participated in the study in order to fulfill a course
structure above and beyond that offered by the world.                 requirement.
      This paper focuses on object similarity. Similarity is a
central construct in explanations of cognition. Explanations          Materials Materials consisted of a one-page questionnaire.
of categorization, induction, learning, and memory all rely           The top of the page contained line-drawings of 4 named
on the construct of similarity. Things that are similar are           familiar animals (a deer, a horse, a goat, and a donkey) as
likely to end up in the same categories, are likely to support        shown in Figure 1a. The rest of the page contained three
inductive inferences for each other, will aid in the learning         questions. For 73 participants, the first question asked them
of other similar things, and serve as good reminders for one          to describe three similarities between two of the animals
another in memory. But where do similarities come from?               (e.g., "Please describe 3 similarities between the goat and
Are similarities between objects apprehended immediately              the donkey.") For the other 59 participants, the first
and automatically, or do they develop as a function of                question asked them to describe three differences between
directed processing and experience?                                   two of the animals (e.g., "Please describe 3 differences
      This question has been taken up seriously in the study          between the goat and the donkey.") Participants were given
of categorization in the following form: Why do categories            three blank lines for their responses. Which two animals
appear to contain similar things? Is it because similar things        were chosen for comparison was counterbalanced across
tend to end up in the same categories, or is it that putting          subjects such that each pair of adjacent shapes was the focus
two things in the same category makes them appear more                of comparison equally often. Which animal was named first
similar? Previous research suggests that both are true. For           in the comparison was also counterbalanced across subjects.

     The last two questions asked participants to rate the      serves to increase perceived similarity, then it is the ability
similarity of the two animals they had just compared (e.g.,     to find meaningful similarities (and not just the creation of
"How similar are the goat and the donkey?"), and of the         an extra feature) that is responsible for the findings of
other two animals (e.g., " How similar are the deer and the     Experiment 1. In Experiment 2, the pictures of four similar
horse?"). Half of the subjects rated similarity for the         animals used in Experiment 1 were replaced with pictures of
previously compared pair first, and the other half rated        four quite dissimilar objects: a phone, a pretzel, a hat, and a
similarity for the other pair first. As before, which animal    football.
was named first in each comparison was counterbalanced
across subjects. Subjects rated similarity on a 10-point scale
(1=not similar and 10=very similar).
Procedures The one page questionnaire was embedded in a
larger questionnaire packet which contained many other
pages unrelated to this study. Participants completed the
questionnaire at home on their own time.
Results
Comparing two similar items made people think of them as
more similar. This was true regardless of whether the
comparison involved naming similarities between the two
items (M=6.42 after naming similarities, M=5.93 without
naming similarities, t=2.01, p<.05) or naming their
differences (M=6.69 after naming differences, M=6.30
without naming differences, t=1.89, p<.05). There was an
overall effect of comparison (F(1,130)=7.11, p<.01) and no
interaction between the two comparison types
(F(1,130)=.08, p=.78)).
Discussion
Experiment 1 showed that comparing two things (even
when looking for their differences) can cause people to
discover similarities between the two things. But why
should the similarity of two objects increase after they are
compared, especially if oneís task is to describe their
differences? One possibility is that in the process of finding
and articulating differences, people are also finding
similarities. As shown by Gentner & Markman (1994), the
most meaningful (and easiest to name) differences are those
that are attached to the structural similarities. On this view,
because the process of comparison involves an alignment
between two representational structures (see Markman &
Gentner, 1993a, 1993b, 1996), discovering meaningful               Figure 1: Stimuli used in Experiments 1 and 2 (shown in
differences involves first establishing the similarities. To        parts A and B respectively). Images were taken from
take a particular example, if one wanted to mention that the              Snodgrass, J. G., & Vanderwart, M. (1980).
goat has a shorter tail than the donkey (a difference), this
makes salient the fact that both animals have tails (a                                 Experiment 2
similarity).
     But there could also be a less interesting explanation for Method
these results. What if similarity only increases after
comparison because people create a new feature for the          Participants 61 Stanford University undergraduates
things they compare, something like "thing I compared           participated in the study in order to fulfill a course
before." If this is the case, similarity might be increasing    requirement.
simply because the two things previously compared now
both have this extra feature in common. One way to test         Materials Just as in Experiment 1, materials consisted of a
this possibility, is to ask people to carry out comparisons     one-page questionnaire. The top of the page contained
between things that are so different, that no meaningful        pictures of 4 dissimilar objects as shown in Figure 1b. The
similarities are likely to be found. If comparison no longer    rest of the page was constructed just as described for

Experiment 1. The comparison task for all 61 of the                                     Experiment 3
subjects was to name differences between two items.
                                                                 Method
Procedures The procedures were the same as in Experiment
1.
                                                                 Participants 234 Stanford University undergraduates
Results                                                          participated in the study in order to fulfill a course
                                                                 requirement. Of these, 119 completed the task with similar
First, the stimuli in this experiment were indeed perceived
                                                                 items from Experiment 1 and 115 completed the task with
to be much less similar to each other (M=2.60) than those
                                                                 dissimilar items from Experiment 2.
used in Experiment 1 (M=6.50), F(1,118)=278.9, p<.001.
This was necessary as a manipulation check.
                                                                 Materials Just as in Experiments 1 and 2, materials
      It turned out that comparing two dissimilar objects did
                                                                 consisted of a one-page questionnaire. The top of the page
not increase their similarity. In fact, naming differences
                                                                 contained either pictures of the 4 similar animals shown in
between two dissimilar objects actually made participants
                                                                 Figure 1a or the 4 dissimilar objects shown in Figure 1b.
think of the objects as less similar (M=2.41), than if they
                                                                 Instead of being asked to name differences between two of
hadn't compared them before (M=2.79), t=-1.89, p<.05.
                                                                 the items, participants were asked to name properties of two
This pattern was significantly different from that observed
                                                                 of the items separately (e.g., ìPlease describe 3 properties of
in Experiment 1 as confirmed in an interaction in a 2x2
                                                                 the phone.î followed by 3 blank lines for participants to fill
repeated measures ANOVA (2 (named differences or not) X
                                                                 in and further followed by ìPlease describe 3 properties of
2 (stimuli similar or dissimilar)), F (1,118)=6.90, p=.01.
                                                                 the pretzel.î again followed by 3 blank lines.) All of the
                                                                 counterbalancing and the rest of the page was done just as
Discussion
                                                                 described for Experiment 1.
Comparison appears to have different effects on similar and
dissimilar objects. Comparing things that are similar can        Procedures The procedures were the same as Experiment 1.
lead one to discover new (or highlight old) similarities,
thereby increasing the perceived similarity of the two           Results
objects. Comparing things that are dissimilar on the other
                                                                 Participants judged items to be more similar if they had
hand, is less likely to lead one to discover similarities (since
                                                                 previously been asked to name their properties than if they
there are fewer similarities there to be discovered). Hence,
                                                                 hadnít. This was true for both the similar items from
comparing two dissimilar things may serve to make the
                                                                 Experiment 1 (M=6.34 after naming properties, and M=5.92
items less similar.
                                                                 without naming properties, t=1.90, p<.05) and the dissimilar
      The results of Experiment 2 suggest that the increase in
                                                                 items from Experiment 2 (M=3.37 after naming properties,
similarity following comparison in Experiment 1 was not
                                                                 and M=2.97 without naming properties, t=2.14, p<.02). This
simply due to subjects creating an extra feature (something
                                                                 pattern for the dissimilar items was significantly different
akin to ìthing I compared beforeî) for items they were
                                                                 from that observed in Experiment 2 as confirmed in an
asked to compare. A co-history of comparison does not
                                                                 interaction in a 2x2 repeated measures ANOVA (2 (items
automatically result in higher similarity. Rather, it seems
                                                                 were focused or not) X 2 (comparison or property-listing)),
that only when meaningful similarities are to be found as a
                                                                 F (1,174)=6.817, p=.01.
result of comparison, does comparison increase similarity.
      However, there is one concern. At this point, it is not    Discussion
clear whether the difference observed between Experiments
1 and 2 is specifically a difference brought out by the          Unlike comparison, listing properties of individual items did
process of comparison, or a more general difference              not have a different effect on similar and dissimilar items.
inherent in the items.         It could be that performing       Whereas comparison served to increase the similarity only
comparisons between items is simply serving to flesh out         for similar items, property-listing increased similarity for
their representations, and it could be the differences inherent  both similar and dissimilar items.           The process of
in these fleshed-out representations that produce the effects,   comparison appears to have the special effect of selectively
and not the way comparison (per se) interacts with the           increasing the similarity of similar items (and possibly
representations. To explore this possibility, instead of         decreasing the similarity of dissimilar items). Simply
asking subjects to perform comparisons between items,            fleshing out the representations (by listing properties) was
Experiment 3 asked subjects to list properties of the items      not sufficient to have this effect.
separately (without comparing the items). This property-              It appears that the process of comparison could play a
listing task was designed to flesh-out the representations       crucial role in the development of knowledge. However, the
without invoking the extra step of comparison. One group         studies so far have only tested the effects of comparison on
of subjects performed this task with the similar items used      familiar items, things that people already have
in Experiment 1, and another group of subjects performed         representations for. Can comparison play a similar role
the task with the dissimilar items used in Experiment 2.

even when people are just learning about something new?      between the shapes, and (2) before being asked to verbally
To investigate this, novel shapes were used in Experiment 4. describe the differences, participants were asked to circle
                                                             three differences between two of the novel shapes on the
                                                             pictures themselves (e.g., "Please circle 3 differences
                                                             between Chico and Harpo.") The rest of the page was
                                                             constructed and counterbalanced just as for Experiment 1.
                                                             Procedures The procedures were the same as Experiment 1.
                                                             Results and Discussion
                                                             First, a manipulation check: participants indeed judged the
                                                             ìsimilarî items in Figure 2a to be more similar (M=3.84)
                                                             than the ìdissimilarî items in Figure 2b (M=2.37), F
                                                             (1,186)=36.6, p<.001.
                                                                  The effects of comparison were exactly as predicted by
                                                             Experiments 1 and 2. Naming differences between two
                                                             similar shapes (Figure 2a), again made people think of the
                                                             two shapes as more similar (M=4.09 after naming
                                                             differences, and M=3.58 without naming differences,
                                                             t=2.83, p<.01). Naming differences between two dissimilar
                                                             shapes (Figure 2b), on the other hand made people think of
                                                             the two shapes as somewhat less similar (M=2.31 after
                                                             naming differences, and M=2.43 without naming
                                                             differences, t=-.61, p=.27). The patterns for similar and
                                                             dissimilar items were significantly different from each other
                                                             as confirmed in an interaction in a 2x2 repeated measures
                                                             ANOVA (2 (named differences or not) X 2 (stimuli similar
                                                             or dissimilar)), F (1,186)=4.43, p<.05.
                                                                  It appears that the process of comparison had the same
                                                             effect on novel items as it did on familiar items in
                                                             Experiments 1 and 2. Comparing two similar novel items
                                                             made them appear more similar, while comparing dissimilar
                                                             novel items made them appear less similar.
                                                                                 General Discussion
      Figure 2: Stimuli used in Experiment 4. More similar   The studies described in this paper examined the effects of
 items are shown in part A and less similar items are shown  comparison on perceptions of similarity. It appears that
    in part B. Images provided by Michael J. Tarr (Brown     comparison can alter peopleís representations of objects by
        University) and Pepper Williams (University of       leading them to discover (or take note of) new similarities
                       Massachussetts).                      and differences. In future studies, it would be interesting to
                                                             see how long effects of comparison last, and if these effects
                       Experiment 4                          also extend to categorization. Previous research by Gentner
                                                             and Namy (2000) suggests that this may indeed be the case.
Method                                                       Further studies looking directly at the effects of comparison
                                                             on categorization would be an interesting extension of this
Participants 188 Stanford University undergraduates          research.
participated in the study in order to fulfill a course            Also worthy of further investigation are the interactions
requirement.                                                 between similarity, structural alignability, and the process of
                                                             comparison.       In the studies reported in this paper,
Materials Just as in Experiment 1, materials consisted of a  comparison was found to have different effects on similar
one-page questionnaire. The top of the page contained color  versus dissimilar items (making similar items more similar,
pictures of 4 named novel shapes. One set of questionnaires  and dissimilar items less similar). However, the similar
used the 4 similar objects shown in Figure 2a, and the other items used in these experiments were similar in several
used the dissimilar objects shown in Figure 2b. The rest of  different ways: for example, both in terms of surface
the page was constructed just as in Experiment 1, with the   features and in deeper structural ways. Since several kinds
following two differences: (1) all of the participants were  of similarity were confounded, it is not clear which of these
asked to focus on differences (none named similarities)      aspects contributed to the effect. In future studies it would

be interesting to investigate the separate contributions of   Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1996). Commonalities and
structural and surface similarity as they interact with the    differences in similarity comparisons. Memory &
comparison process. These further studies should also shed     Cognition, 24(2), 235-249.
more light on why comparison has the effect it does.          Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993a). Splitting the
                                                               differences: A structural alignment view of similarity.
                       Conclusions                             Journal of Memory and Language, 32, 517-535.
                                                              Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993b). Structural
Four studies showed that comparing similar objects makes       alignment during similarity comparisons. Cognitive
them appear more similar, while comparing dissimilar           Psychology, 25, 431-467.
objects makes them appear less similar. This was true for
both novel and familiar objects. The effect of comparison
on similar items was especially striking since subjects
judged items to be more similar after comparison even if the
comparison task was to list differences between the two
items. Further, this effect appears specific to comparison
and does not appear to be simply due to a ìfleshing outî of
object representations. When subjects were only asked to
list properties of objects without comparing the objects
themselves, the perceived similarity of the objects increased
regardless of whether the items were similar or dissimilar to
start. By making similar things appear more similar, and
dissimilar things appear less similar, comparison may play a
special role in category development. Further, it appears
that even incidental conceptual experience (e.g., happening
onto one comparison versus another) can play an important
role in knowledge development.
      These results suggest that common cognitive processes
like comparison can introduce systematic biases into our
representations of objects and their similarities. These
biases may be beneficial for separating out bits of
experience into categories, sharpening categorical
boundaries, and otherwise helping us create conceptual
structure above and beyond that offered by the world.
                    Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank Michael Ramscar, Herbert
H. Clark, Dedre Gentner, the members of SLUGS, and the
citizens of Cognation for many helpful discussions of this
research, and Davie Yoon for invaluable help with data
collection and coding.
                         References
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1994). Structural
   alignment in comparison: No difference without
   similarity. Psychological Science, 5(3), 152-158.
Gentner, D., & Namy, L. (2000). Comparison in the
   development of categories. Cognitive Development,
   14(4), 487-513.
Goldstone, R., Lippa, Y., & Shiffrin, R. (2001). Altering
   object representations through category learning.
   Cognition, 78 (1), 27-43.
Kurtz, K. (1998). The influence of category learning on
   similarity. Doctoral Dissertation, Stanford University.
Kurtz, K.J. & Gentner, D. (1998). Category learning and
   comparison in the evolution of similarity structure.
   Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual Conference of the
   Cognitive Science Society, 1236.

