UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Conditional Promises and Threats – Cognition and Emotion

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2x99t1zc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Author
Beller, Sieghard

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Conditional Promises and Threats – Cognition and Emotion
Sieghard Beller (beller@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Freiburg
D-79085 Freiburg, Germany
Abstract
Conditional promises and threats are speech acts that can
be used to manipulate the behavior of other persons.
Although reasoning studies have been able to reveal some
peculiarities of these concepts, the explanation has
remained fragmentary. To fill in this gap, a theoretical
analysis of conditional inducements is proposed, which
integrates cognitive as well as emotional aspects. An
experiment – focussing on linguistic, pragmatic, emotional, and deontic consequences – corroborates the analysis and shows that persons have a clear understanding of
conditional inducements.

Introduction
Conditional promises and threats are speech acts
(Searle, 1971) uttered by a person to manipulate an
addressee’s behavior by setting up consequences of his
behavior (cf. Conison, 1997; von Wright, 1962). Walking home from school, Henry may make the following
proposal to his classmate Bob:
(1) “If you lend me your bike,
then I will help you with your homework”.
Bob can infer from this statement that Henry would like
to borrow his bike, and that Henry believes that he (Bob)
needs Henry’s help.
Research on human reasoning usually focusses on the
inferential use of conditional promises/threats within the
normative framework of propositional logic: Which
inferences do people draw from conditional arguments?
Suppose, (2) Bob lends Henry his bike. What follows
then from (1) and (2)? Will Henry help Bob? – Although
we cannot know for sure which action a person will
actually take, we would expect that Henry will help him,
or at least we think that he will have to. This answer is
logically warranted by Modus Ponens (MP). But what
should be concluded from the promise (1), if (3) Bob
does not lend out his bike? Usually, persons answer that
Henry will not help Bob either. This inference, however,
corresponds to a logically invalid pattern known as
Denial of the Antecedent (DA).
In general, the valid MP and MT (Modus Tollens) as
well as the invalid DA and AC (Affirmation of the Consequent) are drawn more frequently from conditional
promises and threats than from universal conditionals
(e.g., Fillenbaum, 1978; Markovits & Lesage, 1990;
Newstead, Ellis, Evans, & Dennis, 1997; but see Evans
& Twyman-Musgrove, 1998, for a diverging result).

Most people accept the complementary conditional
‘If not-P, then not-Q’ as following from inducements of
the form ‘If P, then Q’ (Fillenbaum, 1978). Geis and
Zwicky (1971) speak of “invited inferences” in normal
linguistic usage. Accordingly, the associated truth tables
often reflect an equivalence relation instead of an implication (Newstead et al., 1997).
Treating conditional inducements in this way enables
one to detect effects of different propositional contents
on reasoning, but it is not sufficient to explain the underlying causes. What is the reason for the DA inference in
the introductory example? Furthermore, a simple truthtable analysis is much too restricted to capture conceptual aspects of conditional inducements beyond the ifthen relation. Why, for example, is Henry obliged to
help Bob under certain circumstances? How will Bob
react emotionally if Henry does not help him? A detailed
theoretical analysis is presented to overcome these limitations. It integrates several aspects on different levels:
goals and incentives on the motivational level, formulations and inferences on the linguistic level, obligation
and permission on the deontic level, action sequences on
the pragmatic level, and finally, affective reactions on
the emotional level. The multi-level analysis explains
the phenomena observed in reasoning studies; new phenomena are predicted and experimentally confirmed.

Levels of Conditional Inducements
(1) Motivational level: The basic level of analysis concerns the motivational situation in which a person utters
an inducement. It is determined by expectations, goals
and incentives. The speaker (S) wants an addressee (A)
to show a certain goal-behavior (i.e., to perform a certain action or to refrain from performing an action) with
a positive value for himself, the speaker (S+: BehaviorA).
In the introductory example, it was Henry who wanted
Bob to lend him his bike. Henry must expect that the
addressee is not willing to show this behavior voluntarily, otherwise an inducement would not be necessary.
Thus, the speaker has to induce a behavioral change:
Expected behavior (grey boxes)

S–: ¬BehaviorA

Goal of the speaker S

S+: BehaviorA

This change can be motivated in two ways: First, the
speaker may promise to reward the desired goal behavior S+ with a positive consequence for the addressee

(➥ A+: RewardS). Believing that Bob needs help with
his homework, Henry may promise to help him (A+) if
Bob lends him his bike (S+). The reward should be
under the speaker’s control and should not occur for any
other reason, as otherwise it cannot develop its motivational effect (e.g., Evans & Twyman-Musgrove, 1998).
The whole motivational schema may be represented as:
S–: ¬BehaviorA

A–: ¬RewardS

S+: BehaviorA

➥ A+: RewardS

Promise

Instead of rewarding the desired behavior, the speaker
may punish the undesired behavior he fears (S–) with a
negative consequence (A–). If he usually helps Bob with
his homework, Henry can use Bob’s expectation and
threaten to withdraw his help (A–) if Bob does not lend
him his bike (S–). The corresponding schema is:
S–: ¬BehaviorA

➥ A–: PunishmentS

S+: BehaviorA

A+: ¬PunishmentS

Threat
In both cases, the speaker announces (explicitly or
implicitly) that he will react positively (A+) if the
addressee shows the desired behavior (S+), and negatively otherwise. There is an essential difference, however: If the addressee cooperates (S+), then in the first
case he gets something he cannot expect without the
promise (the reward A+), whereas in the second case he
only avoids the punishment (A–) without getting anything positive in return.
(2) Linguistic level: The motivational schemas
directly determine which formulations are appropriate
to express the intended speech act. Conditionals ‘If P,
then Q’ can be used equally well with both schemas.
Conditionals point out a necessary consequence ‘Q’ of
an antecedent condition ‘P’, and that is exactly what the
speaker intends on the motivational level: to establish a
new, definite consequence for one of the addressee’s
behavioral options. The canonical formulations are:
“If you do P [S+], then I will reward you with Q [A+]” vs.
“If you do P [S–], then I will punish you by Q [A–]”.
Looking at the underlying motivational schemas, it
becomes clear why the complementary form ‘If not-P,
then not-Q’ is inferred, and why conditional inferences
(MP, MT, DA, AC) seemingly correspond to an equivalence relation. The motivational level suggests that there
are two action sequences: a cooperative one and a notcooperative one. The complementary conditional
reflects that part of the motivational background that is
not expressed explicitly by the canonical statement.
Together, the canonical and the complementary conditional yield the equivalence interpretation. Different
from a logical equivalence, however, the reversed form
(e.g., “If I reward you with Q [A+], then you will do
P [S+]”) is not really equivalent to the canonical one. By
reversing antecedent and consequent, the temporal order

changes as well, so that the speaker can no longer guarantee that action ‘P’ is a necessary consequence of the
antecedent event ‘Q’ (‘P’ is not under his control).
The differences between the motivational schemas
also explain why only threats are formulated disjunctively, whereas both promises and threats can be formulated conjunctively (Fillenbaum, 1978). The conjunctive
formulation expresses the connection between the new
consequence set by the speaker and the addressee’s
behavior:
“Do P [S+] and I will reward you with Q [A+]” vs.
“Do P [S–] and I will punish you by Q [A–]”.
A disjunction points out alternatives. In the case of a
threat, it enables the speaker to express both his goal S+
and the punishment A–, which are part of alternative
action sequences: “Refrain from doing P [S+] or I will
punish you by Q [A–]”. If a promise were to be reformulated disjunctively, then either the speaker’s goal or
his reward could no longer be expressed.
(3) The deontic level deals with the question of
which action a person may or must perform with respect
to a social rule (e.g., Beller, 2001). Conditional promises and threats establish such a rule and determine
which actions persons are obliged to perform. Since the
addressee can freely decide whether or not he cooperates, there is no deontic constraint on his behavior. He
may cooperate, but he need not. The speaker’s situation
is different. Consider the promise
“If you do P [S+], then I will reward you with Q [A+]”.
Once the addressee cooperates and fulfills the speaker’s
goal ‘P’, the promisor is obliged to cooperate and to
give reward ‘Q’. The promisor himself declared ‘Q’ to
be a necessary consequence of condition ‘P’, so he must
guarantee the reward. If the addressee does not cooperate, then there is no deontic constraint; the speaker need
not give the reward, but he is permitted to do it voluntarily. Which obligation, however, results from a threat
“If you do P [S–], then I will punish you by Q [A–]”?
Two lines of argumentation are possible here: First,
arguing analogously to the promise, the speaker is
obliged to punish the addressee (‘Q’) if A does not
cooperate (‘P’). The speaker declared punishment ‘Q’ to
be a necessary consequence of condition ‘P’, so he must
react consequently (and indeed perhaps he should, in
order to keep his credibility). What is the case if the
addressee cooperates? By analogy, there is no constraint
on the speaker’s action, so he need not punish the
addressee, but he actually may punish him. An implicit
social rule, however, intuitively contradicts this interpretation: A person must not be punished without reason,
whereas one may well give a reward without reason.
Second, it can be argued that the threat implies a complementary promise that determines the deontic interpretation: “If you refrain from doing ‘P’ [S+], then I will
not punish you by Q [A+]”. Associated with a promise
is an obligation for the speaker to cooperate (A+) once

the addressee has fulfilled his goal (S+). If the addressee
refrains from doing ‘P’ (S+), then the speaker must
refrain from the punishment. If the addressee does not
cooperate, then there is no deontic constraint and the
speaker is permitted to punish the addressee. Since the
punishment is now justified, this interpretation is in line
with the implicit social rule mentioned above.
(4) The pragmatic level deals with the question of
which actions are actually taken after an inducement has
been uttered. Since both persons are assumed to have
full freedom of action, four action sequences are possible: If the addressee fulfills the speaker’s goal (S+), then
subsequently the speaker may also cooperate (A+) or
may not (A–). If the addressee does not show the goal
behavior (S–), then the speaker may not cooperate either
(A–) or may cooperate (A+). Common to all four
sequences is a particular temporal order: The addressee
decides first whether he wants to cooperate, whereas the
speaker has to react to the addressee’s behavior.
(5) Emotional level: Eventually, one of the four
action sequences follows a conditional inducement.
Each sequence is characterized by goals, expectations
and incentives. These factors are directly relevant for the
elicitation of emotions (e.g., Lazarus, 1991; Roseman,
Antoniou & Jose, 1996). Goal-relevance is a necessary
requirement for emotional reactions in general; goalcongruent events elicit positive emotions, while goalincongruent events elicit negative emotions. Applied to
conditional promises and threats, addressee and speaker
should feel a positive emotion if the partner cooperates
(and fulfills their goal or expectation), while a negative
emotion should result if the partner does not cooperate.
Which specific emotion arises in a given situation
depends on further appraisal dimensions that cannot be
described in detail here (for extensive analyses see, e.g.,
Roseman et al., 1996). Summarizing those studies
though, joy can be expected when a person gets something positive, relief when an expected negative event
does not occur, and anger when the partner does not
cooperate even though he or she is obliged to.

Experiment
The proposed multi-level analysis integrates motivation,
linguistics, pragmatics, deontic considerations, and
emotions, thereby overcoming the limitations of a
purely truth functional analysis of conditional promises
and threats. In order to test hypotheses regarding particular facets of the analysis, an experiment was conducted
which consisted of two parts.
The starting point of part I was an influential finding
of Leda Cosmides (1989). Cosmides showed with
domain-specific versions of Wason’s (1966) selection
task that persons are sensitive to which of the partners
involved in a reciprocal exchange is accused of breaking
his promise, but not to the conditional formulation. It
did not make a difference whether the promise was formulated canonically or reversed. The multi-level analysis makes just the opposite prediction; namely that

persons should be sensitive to the formulation of inducements. A reversed inducement is not equivalent to the
original one, since it also implies a reversal of the temporal order and of the roles (speaker-addressee-asymmetry): Given a particular role allocation, the canonical
conditional should be preferred to the reversed one, the
complementary conditional (and not the reversed one)
should be preferred as implication, and the action
sequence should be “addressee first”. In addition, it was
assessed which emotional reactions persons attribute to
the addressee if the speaker keeps or breaks “the rule”.
Part II of the experiment focusses on an aspect that
has not been explored until now: the deontic inferences
people draw from conditional promises and threats. The
prediction for promises is clear: If the addressee has fulfilled the speaker’s goal, then an obligation arises for the
speaker to give the promised reward; otherwise there is
no such obligation. The deontic interpretation of conditional threats, however, is not equally clear. Do people
infer (from the conditional form) an obligation for the
speaker to punish the addressee A if A does not cooperate, or do they rather infer (from the complementary
promise) an obligation to cooperate and refrain from the
punishment if the addressee cooperates? It was expected
that the second interpretation would predominate since
it is not in conflict with general moral rules.

Method
Both parts of the experiment were integrated into one
questionnaire. They used different basic scenarios from
which four context stories each were constructed. The
stories in part I dealt with the exchange situation mentioned in the introductory example (help with homework
in exchange for borrowing a bike) but varied with regard
to role allocation and speech act. Four tasks had to be
solved, which focussed on the linguistic, pragmatic and
emotional level. The context stories in part II were constructed from two different scenarios; one dealt with
mutual lending of things and the other with mutual
destruction of toys. Again, the speech acts varied, but
this time only one role allocation was used. Four tasks
asked for deontic inferences from the inducements. To
facilitate the discussion of the results, stories and tasks
for both parts are described later in separate sections.
Participants: 40 students from two introductory cognitive psychology courses (at the University of Freiburg)
participated in the experiment. 18 students were male
and 22 female, with a mean age of M = 23.8 years
(range: 20-39 years).
Design: Participants were randomly assigned to one
of four groups (n = 10). The four context stories of each
part varied between groups. The speech acts were balanced within groups: If part I was about a promise then
part II dealt with a threat (and vice versa).
Procedure: The questionnaire was administered at
the beginning of the first course session. After a general
instruction on the first page, the questionnaire began
with the tasks of part I, followed by the tasks of part II.

The tasks were ordered as described below and each was
written on a new page. Participants were instructed to
work on the tasks in the given order, and to take as much
time as needed. All materials were presented in German.

Henry’s

Part I: Assessing the Speaker-AddresseeAsymmetry and Emotional Reactions

Conditional

In order to assess the speaker-addressee-asymmetry,
four context stories were designed, which were similar
to the introductory exchange scenario. The stories
described the person’s goals and their usual behavior;
they varied with regard to the intended speech act
(promise vs. threat) and the roles (speaker vs.
addressee). In two stories, Henry wants to borrow Bob’s
bike. He tries to achieve this goal either by a promise or
by a complementary threat (canonical conditionals: “If
you lend me your bike, then I will help you with your
homework” vs. “If you do not lend me your bike, then I
will not help you with your homework”). In the other
two stories, the roles were interchanged: This time, Bob
wants Henry to help him with his homework and he tries
to achieve this goal by the reversed promise or threat
(“If you help me with my homework, then I will lend
you my bike” vs. “If you do not help me with my homework, then I will not lend you my bike”). Each story was
followed by four tasks.
(1) Formulation task: In the first task, the motivational background was given together with the type of
speech act to be used. The participants were then
instructed to choose from four given conditionals the
one that was most appropriate for the speaker’s intended
inducement. The conditionals were derived from the
canonical one by reversing and negating ‘P’ and ‘Q’.
Table 1 shows the results. As predicted, the canonical
conditionals were clearly preferred (90% aggregated
over all context stories). If the speech act changed then
the complementary conditional was chosen, whereas if
the role allocation changed then the reversed form was
preferred.
(2) Inference task: From this task onwards, the context stories had been supplemented by the canonical
conditional. The instruction called for participants to
choose an adequate implication of the given conditional
Table 1: Frequency of choosing each conditional as the
speaker’s adequate promise or threat (n = 10 in each
condition; canonical conditionals are bold-faced).
Henry’s
Conditional
If bike then help
If no bike then no help
If help then bike
If no help then no bike

Table 2: Frequency of choosing the most adequate implication of a given promise or threat (n = 10 in each
condition; complementary inducements are bold-faced).

Bob’s

Promise

Threat

Promise

Threat

10
-

1
9
-

10
-

3
7

Promise

If bike then help
given
If no bike then no help
8
If help then bike
2
If no help then no bike
-

Bob’s

Threat

Promise

Threat

9

1
given

2
8

9

given

given

1

from the three others known from the formulation task.
The results are presented in Table 2. As predicted, participants preferred the complementary conditional,
which leaves the order of the actions the same, over the
reversed one (85.0% vs. 12.5%, aggregated over all
tasks, χ2(1, n = 39) = 21.6; p < 0.001).
(3) Sequence task: In the third task, the participants
had to decide on the order of the actions once the conditional inducement had been made. It was expected that
the addressee would decide first whether he is willing to
cooperate. Without exception, all participants (100%)
answered the sequence question according to this prediction. If Henry made the inducement then Bob decides
first whether he lends out his bike, and vice versa. Thus,
changing roles reversed the typical action sequence.
Altogether, the results of the first three tasks corroborate the predicted speaker-addressee asymmetry.
(4) Emotion task: After the introduction of the conditional inducement in the context story, the emotion task
mentioned that the addressee cooperated and fulfilled
the speaker’s goal (S+). Participants had then to decide
(i) what the speaker has to do in order to keep versus not
to keep ‘the rule’, and (ii) which feeling the addressee
will have afterwards. Three critical emotions (relief, joy,
and anger) were given together with four distractors in a
multiple-choice format and participants were instructed
to choose the most appropriate one.
(i) To keep the rule means that, given that the
addressee cooperated before (S+), the speaker will also
cooperate (A+). Cooperation corresponds to the MP
inference in the case of a conditional promise ‘If P [S+],
then Q [A+]’, but to the NA inference in the case of a
threat ‘If P [S–], then Q [A–]’. Not keeping the rule
means reacting defectively towards the addressee (A–)
even though the addressee fulfilled the speaker’s goal
(S+). In the case of a promise, defection violates the
conditional statement itself (‘P and not-Q’). In the case
of a conditional threat, however, defection corresponds
to ‘not-P and Q’ and violates the complementary conditional. The results show that the participants had a clear
understanding of these regularities: Asked what the
speaker has to do in order to “keep the rule”, all persons
(100.0%) choose the MP-option given a promise, but the
NA-option (95.0%) given a threat (aggregated over both

Table 3: Attributed emotional reactions of the addressee
on keeping vs. not keeping a promise/threat.
Keeping
Emotion
Relief
Joy
Anger
Others

Not Keeping

Promise Threat Promise Threat
(+)
(+)
(–)
(–)

5
15
-

10
5
3
3

19
3

1
19
1

The frequencies do not add up to 20 in each column
because four persons marked two emotions.

role versions). Correspondingly, all persons (100.0%)
answered that not keeping a promise corresponds to
‘P and not-Q’, while again 95.0% chose the complementary category ‘not-P and Q’ in the case of a threat.
(ii) How does the addressee react emotionally in these
cases? Table 3 lists positive and negative emotions (+/–)
aggregated over both role versions. The answers are in
line with the predictions from appraisal theories: If the
speaker keeps the rule then the addressee is said to feel a
positive emotion (85.4% positive vs. 14.6% negative);
otherwise a negative emotion results (2.3% positive vs.
97.7% negative; χ2(1, n = 84) = 59.1; p < 0.001). In the
latter case, the addressee was uniformly said to feel
angry, whereas in the former case different emotions
were associated with the two speech acts: Keeping the
promise mostly resulted in joy (75% joy vs. 25% relief)
while in the case of a threat relief predominates (23.8%
joy vs. 47.6% relief; χ2(1, n = 35) = 6.08; p = 0.014); on
three occasions the addressee was even said to feel
angry. This may be the result of having been forced to
cooperate by a threat. Whether these differences reflect
differences between the speech acts or between the
incentives (lending out one’s bike vs. giving help with
the other’s homework) is open to further analyses.

Part II: Assessing Deontic Inferences
Part II aimed to test the hypothesis that the deontic interpretation of a conditional threat follows the interpretation of the corresponding complementary promise: If
the addressee cooperates, then the speaker is obliged to
cooperate; otherwise he is not. Thus, the deontic inferences from complementary promises and threats need to
be compared. This was done in two content versions
(mutual lending vs. mutual destruction).
The scenarios of mutual lending stated that Peter
would like to borrow Corinna’s comic book. He tries to
achieve this goal either by a promise (“If you lend me
your comic book, then I will lend you my computer
game”) or by a complementary threat (“If you do not
lend me your comic book, then I will not lend you my
computer game”). The mutual destruction scenario concerned two quarreling children. Sarah is about to smash

George’s Lego car. George would like to prevent Sarah
from smashing his car. George knows that Sarah has set
up her Playmobil farm. Again, George tries to achieve
this goal either by a threat (“If you smash my car, then I
will smash your farm”) or by a complementary promise
(“If you do not smash my car, then I will not smash your
farm”). Altogether, four context stories were used. Each
was followed by four tasks that asked for deontic inferences about the speaker’s action after the addressee had
already cooperated versus the speaker’s action after he
had not.
Task 1+2: The addressee cooperated: The first two
tasks supplemented the context story with the information that the addressee fulfilled the speaker’s goal (i.e.,
Corinna lent her comic book to Peter, and in the other
scenario, Sarah did not smash George’s Lego car). The
first task required participants to decide whether the
addressee’s cooperation implies an obligation for the
speaker to cooperate also. The second task asked
whether the speaker is permitted to cooperate. It was
expected that the deontic interpretation of the threat
would follow the one of the complementary promise in
both content versions equally: The speaker is obliged to
cooperate (i.e., Peter must lend out his computer game
while, in the other scenario, George must refrain from
smashing Sarah’s Playmobil farm), and the speaker is
permitted to do so.
Task 3+4: The addressee did not cooperate: The
other two tasks stated that the addressee did not fulfill
the speaker’s goal (i.e., Corinna did not lend out her
comic book, while Sarah smashed George’s Lego car).
Again, the participants had to decide whether the
speaker is obliged to cooperate and whether he is permitted to do so. This time it was predicted that – independent from the speech act and the content – no
obligation would arise for the speaker (i.e., Peter need
not lend out his computer game and George need not
refrain from smashing Sarah’s Playmobil farm), but
again the speaker is permitted to cooperate.
To test the hypothesis that the deontic interpretation
of conditional threats is equivalent to the interpretation
of the complementary promises, a log-linear analysis
(Kennedy, 1992) with two independent variables
(speech act and content) was performed for each task.
The analyses corroborated the hypotheses: neither the
factor speech act nor the factor content significantly
contributed to the data. Both factors could be removed
from the analyses without loosing the fit of the resulting
log-linear model (for each analysis: G2 < 10.5, df = 6,
p > 0.10). It is thus justifiable to aggregate the data of
each task over the four groups.
The aggregated results are shown in Table 4. Most
participants drew the deontic inferences that were predicted from the explicit (or implicit) conditional promise: An obligation arises for the speaker only if the
addressee A cooperates (67.5% obligation vs. 0% no
obligation), but not if A does not cooperate (10.0% obligation vs. 77.5% no obligation; χ2(1, n = 62) = 47.8;
p < 0.001). Independent from the fact whether the

Table 4: Percentages of deontic inferences aggregated
over content versions and speech acts (N = 40 in each
condition; expected inferences are bold-faced).
The addressee A ...
cooperated

did not cooperate

Obligation: Must the speaker S cooperate?
obligation
no obligation
undecidable

67.5
0.0
32.5

10.0
77.5
12.5

Permitted: May the speaker S cooperate?
permitted
not permitted
undecidable

67.5
5.0
27.5

50.0
22.5
27.5

addressee cooperated or not, the speaker was said to be
permitted to cooperate (58.8% permitted compared to
20.6% not permitted and undecidable answers on average; χ2(1, n = 80) = 23.3; p < 0.001).

Summary and Discussion
The results of both experimental parts show a clear and
consistent picture that strongly corroborates the predictions from the multi-level analysis.
Conditional inducements are specifically formulated
depending on the motivational background and the
intended speech act. Thus, conditional promises and
threats cannot simply be reversed. This is due to the
speaker-addressee-asymmetry: The canonical conditional and its reversal correspond to speech acts of different persons, they have different implications and are
associated with complementary action sequences.
It could further be shown that the deontic interpretation of conditional threats is not derived from the conditional formulation, but from the implicit complementary
promise. No matter whether a person uses a promise or a
threat to pursue his or her goal, there is an obligation to
cooperate if the addressee fulfills this goal.
Finally, conditional inducements concern individual
goals, actions, and incentives, and are thus highly emotional speech acts. The addressee was said to feel joy or
relief when the speaker kept “the rule” and cooperated,
whereas the addressee reacted angrily when the speaker
broke the rule. This is in line with predictions from
appraisal theories of emotion (e.g., Lazarus, 1991;
Roseman et al., 1996). Several questions, however, are
open to further analyses: Which emotional reactions are
associated with other possible action sequences? How
does the content of the inducements (e.g., reciprocal
exchange or mutual destruction) affect the emotional
reactions? Further experiments are needed to answer
these questions.

In short, the multi-level analysis of conditional inducements brings together motivation, linguistics, pragmatics, deontic considerations, and emotions. It thereby
overcomes the limitations of a purely truth functional
analysis often found in reasoning studies.
Acknowledgements I am grateful to Andrea Bender,
Stefan Kleinbeck, Gregory Kuhnmünch, and Josef Nerb
(Freiburg) who helped to develop the materials and/or
gave valuable comments on earlier versions of this
paper.

References
Beller, S. (2001). A model theory of deontic reasoning
about social norms. In J. D. Moore, & K. Stenning
(Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 63-68).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Conison, J. (1997). The pragmatics of promise. Canadian Journal of Law and Jurisprudence, 10, 273-322.
Cosmides, L. (1989). The logic of social exchange: Has
natural selection shaped how humans reason? Studies
with the Wason selection task. Cognition, 31, 187-276.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Twyman-Musgrove, J. (1998).
Conditional reasoning with inducements and advice.
Cognition, 69, B11-B16.
Fillenbaum, S. (1978). How to do some things with IF. In
J. W. Cotton, & R. L. Klatzky (Eds.), Semantic factors
in cognition (pp. 169-231). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Geis, M. L., & Zwicky, A. M. (1971). On invited inferences. Linguistic Inquiry, 2, 561-566.
Kennedy, J. J. (1992). Analyzing qualitative data. New
York: Praeger.
Lazarus, R. (1991). Emotion and adaptation. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Markovits, H., & Lesage, C. (1990). Pragmatic reasoning schemas for conditional promises: Context and
representation. In J.-P. Caverni, J.-M. Fabre, & M.
Conzalez (Eds.), Cognitive Biases (pp. 183-192).
North Holland: Elsevier.
Newstead, S. E., Ellis, M. C., Evans, J. St. B. T., & Dennis, I. (1997). Conditional reasoning with realistic
material. Thinking and Reasoning, 3, 49-76.
Roseman, I. J., Antoniou, A. A., & Jose, P. E. (1996).
Appraisal determinants of emotions: Constructing a
more accurate and comprehensive theory. Cognition
and Emotion, 10, 241-277.
Searle (1971). What is a speech act? In J. R. Searle (Ed.),
The philosophy of language (pp. 39-53). London:
Oxford University Press.
von Wright, G. H. (1962). On promises. Theoria, 28,
276-297.
Wason, P. C. (1966). Reasoning. In B. M. Foss (Ed.),
New horizons in psychology. Harmondsworth: Penguin.

