UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Contradictions and Counterfactuals: Generating Belief Revisions in Conditional Inference

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/329985dc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Byrne, Ruth M.J.
Walsh, Clare R

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Contradictions and Counterfactuals:
Generating Belief Revisions in Conditional Inference
Ruth M.J. Byrne (rmbyrne@tcd.ie)
Psychology Department, University of Dublin,
Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland

Clare R. Walsh (cwalsh@tcd.ie)
Psychology Department, University of Dublin,
Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland

Abstract
Reasoners revise their beliefs in the premises when an
inference they have made is contradicted. We describe
the results of an experiment that shows that the belief
they revise depends on the inference they have made.
They revise their belief in a conditional (if A then B)
when they make a modus tollens inference (from not-B
to not-A) that is subsequently contradicted (A). But when
they make a modus ponens inference (from A to B) that
is contradicted (not-B) they revise their belief in the
categorical assertion (A). The experiment shows that this
inference contradiction effect occurs not only for factual
conditionals but also for counterfactual conditionals.
However, reasoners revise their beliefs in factual
conditionals more than counterfactuals.

Belief Revision
Suppose you know the following well-established set of
knowledge to be true:
If the car was out of petrol then it stalled.
The car was out of petrol.
What, if anything, follows?
You may conclude:
The car stalled.
But suppose additional knowledge comes to light at a
later time and you discover the following is true:
The car did not stall.
What do you think you should believe to be true at this
point?
New information can contradict previously held
beliefs and inferences about the world. The ability to
recognise inconsistency is a necessary step in revising
beliefs (e.g., Legrenzi, Girotto, & Johnson-Laird, 2002).
Once inconsistencies and contradictions are detected,
they must be resolved (e.g., Elio & Pelletier, 1997). For
example, you may decide to revise your belief in the
conditional, and believe instead that the car being out of
petrol does not necessarily mean that it stalled (it may
be a diesel engine). Or you may revise your belief in the
categorical, and believe instead that the car was not
entirely out of petrol.

Dealing with contradictions is common not only in
scientific discovery but also in everyday ‘nonmonotonic’ inference. Which beliefs do people revise
most readily? Conditionals can convey explanations,
regularities or hypotheses about the world; categoricals
can convey facts, data or observations (Elio, 1997).
Revising the conditional or categorical is equally
acceptable logically (Revlin, Cate, & Rouss, 2002). Yet
most studies show that reasoners revise their belief in
the conditional (Dieussaert, Schaeken, De Neys, &
d’Ydewalle, 2000; Elio, 1997; Elio & Pelletier, 1997
Politzer & Carles, 2001; Revlin, et al, 2002).
Reasoners may prefer to revise some sorts of beliefs
more than others because they accommodate new
information by changing little of their existing beliefs
(Harman, 1986). Minimal changes can be accomplished
by altering beliefs that have the least explanatory power
or informational content
(Gardenfors, 1988).
Categoricals convey more semantic information (they
rule out more states of affairs as false) than conditionals
(Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991); but conditionals and
categoricals may differ in how entrenched they are in a
belief system.
Intriguingly, some studies suggest that the belief
reasoners revise depends on the inference contradicted.
Consider a second problem:
If the car was out of petrol then it stalled.
The car did not stall.
You may conclude:
The car was not out of petrol..
But suppose the additional knowledge comes to light:
The car was out of petrol.
What do you think you should believe to be true? Once
again you may decide to revise your belief in the
conditional; or you may revise your belief in the
categorical, and believe instead that the car did stall. The
first example illustrates a modus ponens inference and
the second illustrates a modus tollens inference, and
Table 1 summarizes the structure of the two sorts of
problem.

Table 1: Two types of belief revision problem
Modus ponens Modus tollens
____________________________________________
1. Conditional
If A then B
If A then B
2. Categorical
A
Not-B
3. Conclusion
B
Not-A
4. Contradiction Not-B
A

The Inference Contradiction Effect
Some studies show that reasoners revise their belief in
the conditional more when a modus tollens inference
has been contradicted, whereas they revise their belief in
the categorical more when a modus ponens has been
contradicted (Elio, 1997, experiment 1; Politzer &
Carles, 2001). The possibility that the belief reasoners
revise depends on the inference that has been
contradicted, which we will call the i n f e r e n c e
contradiction effect, is puzzling. The contradiction
establishes the same counterexample for both
inferences, e.g., the car was out of petrol and it did not
stall (A and not-B), yet the counterexample is
accommodated differently in each case.
However, it is by no means clear whether an inference
contradiction effect exists: some studies show the
opposite pattern (Dieussaert, et al, 2000; Revlin, et al,
2002), and others show more revision of the conditional
following a modus ponens inference, but equal revision
of the categorical following modus ponens and tollens
(Elio & Pelletier, 1997). The vagaries may arise because
previous studies have asked participants to select from
different sorts of - sometimes quite complex and
constrained - options, e.g., to indicate denial or doubt
about each of the statements, to choose one statement to
reject, to rate degrees of belief, or to choose among
various compound options such as ‘disbelieve
conditional and uncertain about categorical’. Our aim in
the experiment we report is to establish whether an
inference contradiction effect exists, and so we allowed
participants to generate their own revisions, unfettered
by pre-set selection options.
Previous studies have also presented a conclusion to
participants prior to contradicting it, without requiring
participants to indicate their evaluation of the inference.
A participant who has not made the inference, or who
does not agree that the presented inference is valid, may
not need to engage in belief revision following the
subsequent ‘contradiction’. To guard against such a
possibility, we allowed participants to generate the
inferences they considered to follow from the premises,
prior to presenting them with a contradiction, and in
this way we ensured that their beliefs were genuinely
contradicted.

Our conjecture is that an inference contradiction
effect occurs because different cognitive processes are
required to alter conditional and categorical beliefs
following modus ponens and tollens inferences, and we
return to this idea after we consider some new data.

Generation of Belief Revisions
We constructed a set of 8 problems, consisting of three
modus ponens inferences, three modus tollens
inferences, and two fillers based on quantifiers. The
problems were based on a science fiction content about
different aliens, their properties, living habits and so on
(in other experiments we have examined causal and
definitional contents, see Byrne and Walsh, 2002). The
content and instructions were adapted from Elio &
Pelletier (1997) and Politzer & Carles (2001).
Participants were told they would be given ‘an initial set
of knowledge that was true and well established at the
time you began exploring. There were no mistakes at
that time’. They were given a set of premises on a page
of a booklet (e.g., if A then B, A) and asked to write
what, if anything, followed. On the next page, they were
given the contradiction (e.g., not B). They were told this
information was ‘additional knowledge about the planet
that has come to light at a later time. This knowledge is
also true and well established. The world is still the
same but what has happened is that knowledge about it
has increased’. Their task was ‘ to try to reconcile the
initial knowledge and the additional knowledge. You are
to write down what you now believe to be true of all the
knowledge you have at this point’.
The conditionals given to one group of participants
were phrased in the indicative mood, e.g., ‘If the
ancient ruin was inhabited by Pings, then it had a force
field surrounding it’, and those given to a second group
were in the subjunctive mood e.g., ‘If the ancient ruin
had been inhabited by Pings, then it would have had a
force field surrounding it’. The participants were 28
undergraduates of the psychology department at the
University of Dublin, Trinity College who participated
for course credit

Belief Revision Responses
The sorts of revisions that reasoners spontaneously
generated fall into three main categories:
1. Revisions or negations of the conditional. Reasoners
indicated that the original interpretation of the
conditional needed to be revised, saying, e.g., ‘A does
not mean must B’, ‘If A don’t have to B’, ‘not all A’s do
B’. Or they denied its truth, e.g., ‘that B if A is false’,
‘the original statement that A’s B is incorrect’.
Revisions of the interpretation were far more common
than negations.
2. Revisions or negations of the categorical. Negating
the categorical for modus ponens leads to the conclusion

‘not-A’, for modus tollens it leads to the conclusion ‘B’
via the double negation ‘not not-B’. In other cases,
reasoners deduced a new conclusion from the
contradiction and the conditional. The contradiction for
modus ponens is ‘not B’, and with the conditional leads
(via modus tollens) to ‘not-B and so not-A’ (which is
also the denial of the categorical). The contradiction for
modus tollens is ‘A’, and with the conditional leads (via
modus ponens) to ‘’B’ (see also Elio & Pelletier, 1997).
This tactic leads to the same conclusion as the previous
one, but by a different process.
3. Reasoners affirmed the contradiction and the
categorical, either in combination or separately. This
tactic led to the conclusion ‘A and not-B’ (or
equivalently, ‘not-B and A’). Reasoners find it difficult
to make the inference from ‘not (if A then B)’ to the
conclusion ‘A and not-B’ (Handley, 1996), which
supports the suggestion that the conclusion ‘A and notB’ is reached by a different process from the
conclusions in 1.

Revisions to Factual Conditionals
We report first the results for the participants who
received indicative conditionals. They made the modus
ponens and tollens inferences frequently (100% and
90% respectively) perhaps unsurprisingly given the
content. Most participants generated one revision (81%)
and we scored those who generated more than one by
their first one (see Byrne & Walsh, 2002 for details).
Table 2: The percentages of revision types for modus
ponens and tollens for indicative conditionals
Modus Modus
Mean
Ponens Tollens
____________________________________________
Revise conditional
33
54
44
Revise categorical
41
18
30
Affirm contradiction
and/or categorical
8
18
13

Participants revised their belief in the conditional
somewhat more than the categorical (44% versus 30%,
binomial z = 1.32, 1-tailed p = .093). However, they
revised their belief in the conditional more often when
modus tollens was contradicted than when modus
ponens was contradicted (54% versus 33%, Wilcoxon z
= 1.94, p = .05), whereas they revised their belief in the
categorical more often when modus ponens was
contradicted than when modus tollens was contradicted
(41% versus 18%, Wilcoxon z = 2.20, p = .03), as Table
2 shows. Some of their responses consisted of
affirmations of the contradiction and the categorical (A
and not-B) either together or separately (13%), as Table

2 shows. The remainder of responses consisted largely
of explanations of the premises or contradiction, or
assertions that none of the premises were true.
The results confirm earlier findings that reasoners
revise their belief in the conditional more than the
categorical; perhaps more importantly the results also
confirm earlier findings of an inference contradiction
effect, that is, the belief revised depends on the
inference contradicted. In this experiment, the direction
of the inference contradiction effect is that reasoners
revise the conditional more following modus tollens and
the categorical more following modus ponens (for
similar results see Elio, 1997; Politzer & Carles, 2001).
The generated revisions show that reasoners do not
revise their beliefs solely by rejecting or disbelieving
one or both of the premises, nor by doubting or
expressing uncertainty in one or both of them. Instead
their revisions actively attempt to re-interpret the
premises in a way that genuinely reconciles the
conflicting information and resolves the contradiction,
for example, by calling into question the necessity of the
antecedent for the consequent. This sort of revision has
not been identified in previous studies which relied on
presented selections only. The generated revisions also
show that reasoners do not confine themselves solely to
revising their categorical or conditional beliefs; a third
category of responses emerged which consisted of
affirmations of (one or both of) the contradiction and the
categorical. It is noteworthy that no participant
generated a response which simply affirmed the
conditional.

Revisions to Counterfactual Conditionals
The second group of participants received
counterfactual conditionals in the subjunctive mood e.g.,
‘If the Spracks had had high-frequency sound sensor
ears then they would have had tentacles’. A
counterfactual seems to mean something different from
its corresponding factual conditional (Costello &
McCarthy, 1999; Ginsberg, 1986; Lewis, 1973;
Stalnaker, 1968). It conveys the presupposition that the
facts are ‘Spracks do not have high-frequency sound
sensor ears’ and ‘Spracks do not have tentacles’. When
reasoners are given a surprise memory test for
counterfactuals, they mistakenly identify that they were
given these facts (Fillenbaum, 1974). They judge that
someone uttering a counterfactual means to imply these
facts (Thompson & Byrne, in press). They make the
modus tollens inference more readily from a
counterfactual than from a corresponding factual
conditional (Byrne & Tasso, 1999). They make the
modus ponens inference just as readily from both sorts
of conditional.
Since counterfactual conditionals convey both the
facts ‘Spracks do not have high-frequency sound sensor

ears’, ‘Spracks do not have tentacles’, as well as the
suppositions, ‘Spracks have high-frequency sound
sensor ears’, ‘Spracks have tentacles’, we considered
that reasoners would not revise their beliefs in
counterfactual conditionals as often as factual
conditionals.
Table 3: The percentages of revision types for modus
ponens and tollens for counterfactual conditionals
Modus Modus
Mean
Ponens Tollens
____________________________________________
Revise conditional
16
38
27
Revise categorical
53
13
33
Affirm contradiction
/ categorical
18
29
24

The results support our conjecture, as Table 3 shows.
Once again, participants made the modus ponens and
tollens inferences frequently (96% and 87%
respectively). A comparison of the means in both tables
shows that reasoners revise a factual conditional more
than a counterfactual conditional (44% vs 27%, chi2=
5.29, p <.05). For a counterfactual conditional, they
often affirmed the contradiction and the categorical
(together or separately). The results also show the
presence of an inference contradiction effect, and its
direction is the same for counterfactual as for factual
conditionals.

Cognitive Processes in Belief Revision
Different cognitive processes may be required to alter
conditional and categorical beliefs following modus
ponens and tollens inferences from a factual conditional.
The different effects of the counterexample, A and notB, on the way reasoners revise their beliefs may arise
because of the mental representations they have
constructed in the course of making an inference.
Reasoners may understand conditionals by keeping in
mind different possibilities (Johnson-Laird & Byrne,
1991). The explicit set of models for the conditional ‘if
A then B are as follows:
A
B
Not-A not-B
Not-A B
where in the diagram ‘not’ is a propositional-like tag to
indicate negation. Reasoners who interpret the
conditional as a biconditional will construct the first two
models in the set only. Regardless of their interpretation,
reasoners may construct an initial set of models that
makes some information explicit, but leaves other
information implicit, because of the constraints of
working memory:

A B
...
where the three dots represent an implicit model
(Johnson-Laird & Byrne, in press).
Reasoners can make the modus ponens inference from
this initial set of models. The categorical, A, is
consistent with the explicit model:
A B
which supports the parsimonious conclusion, B. To
make the modus tollens inference, they must flesh out
the initial set of models to be more explicit. The
information, not-B, cannot be incorporated readily into
the initial set of models. However, it can be incorporated
into the fleshed-out models, it eliminates two of them
and it leaves a single model:
not-A not-B
which supports the parsimonious conclusion, not-A.
The process by which the two inferences are made
differs. The modus ponens inference is made from the
initial set of models, but the modus tollens inference is
made only after fleshing out the models to be explicit,
eliminating models that are inconsistent. This difference
in the process of making the inferences may affect the
revision of beliefs.
Consider the contradiction to the modus ponens
inference. Reasoners must incorporate the contradiction
‘not-B’. They made the inference, ‘B’, based on the
initial set of models, and so they have the option of
returning to the initial set to flesh them out to be more
explicit. Faced with the contradiction, they may decide
they need to think more fully about the possibilities
compatible with the conditional. People often return to
earlier possibilities to think about what might have been
(e.g., Byrne & McEleney, 2000). When they do so they
can incorporate the contradiction ‘not-B’ into one of the
fleshed out models:
Not-A not-B
The new model indicates that the belief to revise is the
categorical, A.
For the modus tollens inference, reasoners must
incorporate the contradiction, A. They made the modus
tollens inference by fleshing out the models to be more
explicit and eliminating all but the model:
Not-A not-B
They do not have the option of returning to flesh out the
initial models again, since they have executed that
option in the process of making the inference. In the
course of making the inference they have considered
several alternatives and eliminated them, ‘cashing out’
the possibilities to one single remaining possibility. The
contradiction ‘A’ cannot be incorporated into the
existing model and so the belief to revise is the
conditional, if A then B.
The essential revision principle may be that a
contradiction can be incorporated into one of the
possibilities compatible with the conditional, if these

possibilities have not been thought about and eliminated
already. In the case of modus ponens, the only
possibility compatible with the contradiction and the
conditional (not-A not-B) is incompatible with the
categorical (A) and so the categorical must be revised.
In the case of modus tollens, the possibilities have been
exhausted already in the course of making the inference,
and so the conditional itself must be revised. The
inference contradiction effect, that the belief revised
depends on the inference made before the contradiction,
may arise because different inferences require people to
keep in mind different possibilities, which subsequently
limits their room for manuever in incorporating
contradictory information.
Reasoners can rely on background knowledge to add
or eliminate possibilities (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, in
press). As a result, when they have relied on knowledge
to add or eliminate possibilities, their revisions may not
be influenced by the inferences they have made (Byrne
and Walsh, 2002). For example, given a causal
conditional, ‘if water was thrown on the campfire then it
went out’, and ‘the fire did not go out’, reasoners make
the modus tollens inference, ‘water was not thrown on
the campfire’. But when the inference is contradicted
‘water was thrown on the campfire’ they can incorporate
it by saying, for example, ‘not enough water was
thrown on the campfire’. Reasoners may even short-cut
the process by ‘matching’ various models (Legrenzi,
Girotto, & Johnson-Laird, 2002). The inference
contradiction effect may be a feature of certain kinds of
content.

Modifying or Abandoning Beliefs?
Previous studies have focused on what beliefs people
disbelieve, deny or reject, doubt or are uncertain about.
However, a contradiction can call for a revision to the
original interpretation of the premises. A putative
counterexample, A and not-B, does not necessarily
mean that a conditional, if A then B, is false. Our
participants generated revisions to the interpretation
(e.g., ‘A’s do not necessarily have B’s’, ‘Some other
variable affected B, e.g., C’) more often than they
indicated disbelief, denial, rejection, doubt or
uncertainty about the conditional’s truth.
Reasoners may reach many different interpretations of
a conditional (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, in press). One
interpretation of ‘if A then B’ is that A is sufficient but
not necessary for B, and a second is that A is both
necessary and sufficient for B. These ‘conditional’ and
‘biconditional’ interpretations are inconsistent with the
counterexample, A and not-B. But other interpretations
are consistent with it, for example, that A is necessary
but not sufficient for B. This ‘reverse conditional’
interpretation may be common in everyday reasoning
(Byrne, Espino, & Santamaria, 1999).

The reverse conditional interpretation can occur when
an additional requirement is made explicit, e.g., ‘if the
ruin was inhabited by Pings then it had a force field, if
they had to protect their habitations then it had a force
field’. The modus ponens inference from, e.g., ‘the ruin
was inhabited by Pings’ is suppressed (Byrne, 1989).
Reasoners say there is not enough information, or they
incorporate the second requirement e.g., ‘The ruin had a
force field if the Pings had to protect their habitations’
(Byrne, et al, 1999). They select options that refer to the
second requirement (e.g. Diuessaert, Schaeken,
Schroyens, & d’Ydewalle, 2000) and they judge the
requirements to be conjoint (Byrne & Johnson-Laird,
1992). When both requirements are affirmed they
readily make the inferences (Byrne, 1989; 1991), and
they can be enhanced when reasoners know the
additional requirements have been satisfied (Manktelow
& Fairley, 2000). The suppression is increased when
the additional requirement is emphasized, by phrasing it
as a biconditional, ‘if and only if the Pings had to
protect their habitations…’ (Byrne, et al, 1999), by
relying on familiar content (Chan & Chua, 1994; see
also Bonnefon & Hilton, in press), by qualifying its
satisfaction (Stevenson & Over, 1995), or by specifying
that the requirement was uttered by an expert rather than
a novice (Stevenson & Over, 2001). Conditionals with
many additional requirements lead to more suppression
(Cummins, Lubart, Alksnis, & Rist. 1991; see also Elio,
1997). The conditions in which a reverse conditional are
true can be specified with as much certainty as the truth
conditions of a conditional or biconditional (but see
Politzer & Braine, 1991; Stevenson & Over, 1995;
2001).
Our results show that revising belief in a conditional
can mean modifying the original interpretation, for
example changing from a conditional interpretation to a
reverse conditional one, rather than abandoning belief in
the truth of the conditional. In everyday life, just as in
scientific thought, it may be rare to abandon entirely
either a theory or a fact, upon discovery of another
contradictory fact; instead reasoners may progress by
attempting to modify their interpretation to restore
consistency.

Conclusions
In everyday reasoning, the conclusions to inferences can
be readily withdrawn in the light of subsequent
information, that is, they are non-monotonic. An
important task in everyday inference is the revision of
beliefs in the light of contradictions. The results also
show an inference contradiction effect, that is, reasoners
revise a categorical belief when a modus ponens
inference is contradicted and they revise a conditional
belief when a modus tollens inference is contradicted.
Our results show that reasoners revise their belief in a
factual conditional more than a counterfactual

conditional. Our novel revision generation task allowed
us to capture some of the rich re-interpretations that
people produce to resolve contradictions through
modifying rather than abandoning beliefs.

Acknowledgements
We thank Jean-Francois Bonnefon, Renee Elio, Uri
Hasson, Phil Johnson-Laird, Mark Keane, and Guy
Politzer for helpful comments on an earlier draft and
Michelle Cowley and Michelle Flood for help with the
experiment. The research was supported by the Dublin
University Arts and Social Sciences Benefactions Fund.

References
Byrne, R.M.J. (1989). Suppressing valid inferences with
conditionals. Cognition, 31, 61-83.
Byrne, R.M.J. (1991). Can valid inferences be
suppressed? Cognition, 39, 71-78.
Byrne, R.M.J. & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1992). The
spontaneous use of propositional connectives.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 45A,
89-110.
Byrne, R.M.J., Espino, O. and Santamaria, C. (1999).
Counterexamples and the suppression of inferences.
Journal of Memory and Language, 40, 347-373.
Byrne, R. M. J. & Tasso, A. (1999). Deductive
reasoning with factual, possible and counterfactual
conditionals. Memory and Cognition, 27, 726-740.
Byrne, R.M.J. & McEleney, A. (2000) Counterfactual
thinking about actions and failures to act. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 26, 1318-1331.
Byrne, R.M.J. & Walsh, C.R. (2002). Belief revision,
the inference contradiction effect and counterfactual
conditionals. Manuscript in preparation.
Bonnefon, J-P, and Hilton, D. (in press). The
suppression of modus ponens as a case of pragmatic
preconditional reasoning, Thinking and Reasoning.
Costello, T., & McCarthy, J. (1999). Useful
Counterfactuals. Electronic Transactions on the Web,
3, 51-76.
Chan, D. & Chua, D. (1994). Suppression of valid
inferences: syntactic views, mental models and
relative salience. Cognition, 53, 217-238.
Cummins, D.D., Lubart, T., Alksnis, O. and Rist.
(1991). Conditional reasoning and causation. Memory
and Cognition, 19, 274-282.
Diuessaert, K, Schaeken, W., De Neys, W. &
d’Ydewalle, G. (2000). Initial belief state as a
predictor of belief revision. Current Psychology of
Cognition, 19, 277-288.
Diuessaert, K, Schaeken, W., Schroyens, W. &
d’Ydewalle, G. (2000). Strategies during complex
conditional inferences. Thinking and Reasoning, 6,
125-160.

Elio R. (1997). What to believe when inferences are
contradicted. In M. Shafto & P.Langley (Eds).
Proceedings of the 19th Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. Hillsdale: Erlbaum. pp. 211-216.
Elio, R. & Pelletier, F.J. (1997). Belief change as
propositional update. Cognitive Science, 21, 419-460.
Fillenbaum, S. (1974). Information amplified: memory
for counterfactual conditionals. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 102, 44-49.
Gardenfors, P. (1988). Knowledge in flux. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Ginsberg, M. L. (1986). Counterfactuals. Artificial
Intelligence, 30, 35-79.
Harman, G. (1986). Change in view. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Handley, S. (1996). Explicit negation. Phd thesis,
University of Wales.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991).
Deduction. Hove, UK: Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. & Byrne, R. M. J. (in press).
Conditionals: a theory of meaning, inference, and
pragmatics. Psychological Review.
Legrenzi, P. , Girotto V., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2002).
Models of consistency. Manuscript.
Lewis, D. (1973). Counterfactuals. Oxford: Blackwell.
Manktelow, K.I. and Fairley, N. (2000). Superordinate
principles in reasoning with causal and deontic
conditionals. Thinking and Reasoning, 6, 41-65.
Politzer, G. and Braine, M.D.S. (1991). Responses to
inconsistent premises cannot count as suppression of
valid inferences. Cognition, 38, 103-108.
Politzer, G. and Carles, L. (2001). Belief revision and
uncertain reasoning. Thinking and Reasoning, 7, 217234.
Revlin, R., Cate, C.L., & Rouss, T.S. (2002). Reasoning
counterfactually: combining and rending. Memory
and Cognition.
Stalnaker, R.C. (1968). A theory of conditionals. In N.
Rescher (Ed.), Studies in logical theory. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
Stevenson, R.J. and Over, D.E. (1995). Deduction from
uncertain premises. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 48A, 613-643.
Stevenson, R.J. and Over, D.E. (2001). Reasoning from
uncertain premises: effects of expertise and
conversational context. Thinking and Reasoning, 7,
367-390.
Thompson, V. & Byrne, R.M.J. (in press). Making
inferences about things that didn’t happen. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition. .

