UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Deriving a conclusion from relational premises

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3qw477fw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Van der Henst, Jean-Baptiste
Schaeken, Walter

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Deriving a Conclusion From Relational Premises
Jean-Baptiste Van der Henst (jvanderhenst@hotmail.com)
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, K.U. Leuven, Tiensestraat 102
Leuven, 3000 Belgium

Walter Schaeken (Walter.Schaeken@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, K.U. Leuven, Tiensestraat 102
Leuven, 3000 Belgium
Abstract
Literature on relational reasoning mainly focuses on the
performance question. It is typically argued that problem
difficulty relies on the number of “mental models”
compatible with the problem. However, no study has
ever investigated the wording of conclusions that
participants formulate. In the present work, we analyse
the relational terms that people use in drawing
conclusions from spatial relation problems (A is to the
left of B, B is to the left C, D is in front of A, E is in
front C, What is the relation between D and E?). We
show that the linguistic form of premises, the
presentation format, the orientation of the question and
the internal inspection of the mental model are important
factors in determining the wording of conclusions. Our
study shows that the type of conclusion produced
provides a key to identifying the mental processes
involved in solving these problems.

Introduction
Consider
problem:

the

following

relational

reasoning

A is to the left of B
B is to the left of C
D is in front of A
E is in front of C
What is the relation between D and E?
How might this problem be solved? One possibility
consists of building in one’s mind an analogical
representation, which exhibits the relation between D
and E:
A
D

B

C
E

Another is to use inference rules and apply these rules
to the propositional form of the premises to derive the
required relation. During the last forty years, numerous
studies have attempted to discriminate between these
two approaches. In the sixties and seventies, they were
respectively labelled the ‘analogical’ approach (DeSoto,
London & Handel, 1965; Huttenlocher, 1968) and the
‘linguistic’ approach (Clark, 1969a; b) and related to
representational processes. In the eighties and nineties,
they were labelled the “mental model” (Johnson-Laird,
1983; Byrne & Johnson-Laid, 1989) and the “mental

logic” approaches (Hagert, 1984; Rips, 1994;
Braine & O’Brien; 1998) and related to inferential
processes.
To compare these two approaches, researchers
have relied on performance results (see Evans,
Newstead & Byrne, 1993 for review). They either
consider the correctness of the conclusion or the
response time. However, no study has ever
investigated the type of conclusions that people
formulate. It is rather surprising that psychologists
of reasoning have ignored this question since in
another field of deductive reasoning, namely
reasoning involving quantifiers like “all”, “none”,
and “some”, this issue was one of the first to be
investigated under the guise of the ‘atmosphere’
effect (Woodworth & Sells, 1935). This effect,
which has since been extensively explored (see
Evans, Newstead and Byrne, 1993 for review) refers
to the fact that universal premises (All A are B)
prompt universal conclusions, particular premises
(Some A are B) prompt particular conclusions,
affirmative
premises
prompt
affirmative
conclusions and negative premises prompt negative
conclusions.
The question we will address is that of the
wording of conclusions in relational reasoning. In
the above example, the answers “D is to the left of
E” and “E is to the right of D” are both correct. But
which of these two conclusions do people actually
draw? In this article, we want to show that taking
into account the wording of the conclusions can
reveal several important mechanisms that occur in
representing and in reasoning from spatial relational
descriptions. We now present several factors that
may influence the wording of conclusions.

The linguistic form of the premises
According to mental model theory, there are two
stages in representing the premises. The first stage,
which is compatible with a linguistic approach,
consists of forming a propositional representation
that is close to the surface form of the sentence. The
second stage consists of using this propositional
representation as a basis for constructing a mental
model that is analogous to the situation described in
the premises. Once the model is built, the linguistic
details of the premises and their propositional
representation tend to be forgotten (Mani &
Johnson-Laird, 1982). The formulation of the

conclusion should then rely only on the mental model,
which does not keep track of the comparative
expression in the premises. Hence, the comparative
used in the premises should not be used more often than
its contrary in formulating the conclusion. ‘Left-left’
problems, whose first two premises contain the
comparative ‘left’ (problems 1-2-9-10 in Table 1a)
should not prompt more ‘left’ conclusions than ‘rightright’ problems (problems 7-8-15-16 in Table 1b).
On the other hand, according to the linguistic
approach (Clark, 1969a; b; Hagert, 1984) the
comparative used in the conclusion should be congruent
with the comparative used in the premises. In the above
example, the first two premises will be represented by
two independent propositions: LEFT (A,B); LEFT
(B,C). As a result, the predicates used in the inference
rule will match those used in the premises: ‘LEFT
(X,Y) & LEFT (Y,Z)
LEFT (X,Z)’. Hence, the
inferred relation between A and C will be stored with
the predicate ‘left’: LEFT (A,C). Since the relation
between D and E is identical to that between A and C,
the D-E relation will be stored with the same predicate:
LEFT (D,E). More generally, ‘left-left’ problems
should prompt more ‘left’ conclusions than ‘right-right’
problems.
It also follows from the linguistic approach that the
relevance of the premises may affect the wording of the
conclusion. Consider Problem 11 from Table 1. The
first premise is irrelevant (as for all problems in Table
1b) since it does not have to be taken into account to
answer the question: The relation between D and E
relies on the relation between A and C, which is
explicitly given by the second premise. Hence, the
comparative used in the conclusion is likely to be
congruent with the comparative used in that premise.
Given this assumption, Problems 11 and 12 (irrelevant
premise with ‘left’, relevant premise with ‘right’)
should prompt more ‘right’ conclusions than Problems
13 and 14 (irrelevant premise with ‘right’, relevant
premise with ‘left’).
Table 1: The 16 spatial problems
Table 1a: One-model problems
Pb1
A left B
B left C
D front A
E front C

Pb2
A left B
B left C
E front C
D front A

Pb3
A left B
C right B
D front A
E front C

Pb4
A left B
C right B
E front C
D front A

Pb5
B right A
B left C
D front A
E front C

Pb6
B right A
B left C
E front C
D front A

Pb7
B right A
C right B
D front A
E front C

Pb8
B right A
C right B
E front C
D front A

Table 1b: Two-model problems (first premise
always irrelevant)
Pb9
A left B
A left C
D front A
E front C

Pb10
A left B
A left C
E front C
D front A

Pb11
A left B
C right A
D front A
E front C

Pb12
A left B
C right A
E front C
D front A

Pb13
B right A
A left C
D front A
E front C

Pb14
B right A
A left C
E front C
D front A

Pb15
B right A
C right A
D front A
E front C

Pb16
B right A
C right A
E front C
D front A

Problem difficulty and presentation format
Most researchers currently agree that the
difficulty of a relational reasoning problem is a
function of the number of models it supports. For
instance, the following problem,
A is to the left of B
A is to the left of C
D is in front of A
E is in front of C,
What is the relation between D and E?
is compatible with two models,
A
D

B

C
E

A

C
D

B
E

and is more difficult than a one-model problem
since two models are harder to construct and store
than a single one (Byrne & Johnson-Laird; 1989). It
has also been shown that when the number of
models increases, people are less likely to construct
such models and are more prone to stay at the
propositional level of representation (Mani &
Johnson-Laird,1982). Mani and Johnson-Laird
argued that the indeterminacy introduced by
multiple-model problems disrupts the model
construction process. They showed that people were
more likely to recall linguistic details for
indeterminate than for determinate descriptions.
Hence, the premises may have a stronger influence
over the wording of conclusions for two-model
problems than for one-model problems: The
comparative used in the conclusion should be more
often congruent with the comparative used in the
premises with two-model problems than with onemodel problems.
In addition, the presentation format might have
an effect on the type of representation involved (see
Potts & Scholz, 1975; Ormrod; 1979; Schaeken &
Johnson-Laird, 2000; Roberts, 2000) and,
consequently, on the type of conclusion formulated.
One can distinguish between two ways of
presenting the premises. With simultaneous
presentation, all premises are presented together

with the question and remain available when one solves
the problem. Sequential presentation places more load
on working memory: the premises are presented one
after the other and disappear each time a new premise
or the question occurs. It has been argued (Ormrod,
1979) that an analogical representation is more likely to
occur with a sequential presentation. The reason is that
in a linguistic representation, each relation – given in
the premises or inferred from them – is stored
separately whereas in a model representation, all
premises are integrated within a single representational
format. Thus, when working memory load increases it
becomes harder to keep track of the premises and
inferences separately and a mental model becomes a
more efficient and concise mode of representation.
Hence, we should observe fewer conclusions with a
relational comparative congruent with that of the
premises in the sequential presentation than in the
simultaneous presentation.

Scanning the mental model
The wording of the conclusions might reveal how
individuals scan the model they constructed. If people
scan their model in a ‘left-to-right’ direction, they will
be likely to make a ‘left’ conclusion since the first
element they encounter, which is likely to be the first
element mentioned in the conclusion, is on the left part
of the model; alternatively; if people scan their model in
a ‘right-to-left’ direction, they will be likely to make a
‘right’ conclusion.
One might suppose that the
direction of scanning is driven by left-to-right reading
habits (Cicirelli, 1977), leading to ‘left-to-right’
inspections of mental models and to ‘left’ conclusions.
Another factor that might govern the direction of
model-inspection is the question. The question given in
the above examples (“What is the relation between D
and E?”) initially directs attention to the left side of the
models since D is mentioned first in the question and is
located on the models’ left side. Consequently, such a
question is likely to induce a ‘left-to-right’ inspection of
the model and a ‘left’ conclusion. Inversely, the
question “What is the relation between E and D?” is
likely to induce a ‘right’ conclusion.
Finally, the order in which the items are inserted
within the model might direct inspection of the model.
If the premise containing the D item is provided before
the premise containing the E item, D will be inserted
before E in the model and the construction of the D-E
line will proceed from left to right (granted that D is to
the left of E as in all the problems of Table 1). Payne
(1993) has shown that people keep track of the
construction process. One can extend this approach and
assume that keeping track of the construction process
may induce people to scan their model in the direction
of its construction.

Experiment
Before describing the method of the experiment
let us first recall the predictions:
- The linguistic form of the premises should
influence the wording of the conclusion
according to a linguistic approach but not
according to an analogical approach.
- Problems conveying an indeterminacy (i.e. twomodel problems) could favor more the
occurrence of linguistic processes than
determinate problems (i.e. one-model problem).
- A sequential presentation could favor more the
occurrence of analogical processes than a
simultaneous presentation.
- ‘Left-to-right’ reading habits could prompt ‘leftto-right’ inspections of mental models.
- ‘Left-to-right’ questions could prompt ‘left-toright’ inspections of mental models.
- ‘Left-to-right’ constructions of mental models
could prompt ‘Left-to-right’ inspections of
mental models.

Method
Participants The participants were 174 first-year
psychology students from the University of Leuven.
Design Each participant received 16 relational
reasoning problems (Table 1). Half of these
problems were one-model problems (Table 1a) and
the other half two-model problems (Table 1b). In
half of the problems, the first two premises had the
same relational term (four ‘left-left’ problems and
four ‘right-right’ problems); in the remaining half,
the first two premises had different relational terms
(four ‘left-right’ problems and four ‘right-left’
problems). Moreover for half of the problems
(Type-1 problems), the premise introducing the item
located on the left (i.e. the item D) was given before
the premise introducing the item located on the right
(i.e. the item E; Problems 1-3-5-7-9-11-13-15 in
Table 1). For the other half (Type-2 problems), this
presentation order was reversed (Problems 2-4-6-810-12-14-16).
There
were
two
between-participant
manipulations: 2 types of presentation format 2
types of question. First, participants received the
premises and question in a simultaneous
presentation format or in a sequential presentation
format. Second, the first item mentioned in the
question was either the item mentioned in the third
premise (i.e. “what is the relation between D and
E?” for Type-1 problems and “what is the relation
between E and D?” for Type-2 problems) or the
item mentioned in the fourth premise (i.e. “what is
the relation between E and D?” for Type-1
problems or “what is the relation between D and
E?” for Type-2 problems).
Procedure and Materials. Participants were tested
in groups of 12 to 20 individuals. The instructions

and the problems were given in Dutch and were
displayed on a screen via a data projector. Participants
received 2 training problems and 16 randomly ordered
test problems with contents relating to fruits and
vegetables (see Table 1). In the simultaneous
conditions, each problem was displayed for 50 seconds.
In the sequential conditions, each premise and the
question appeared for 10 seconds. Participants wrote
their answers on a sheet of paper.
Results. Performance was in line with the relational
reasoning literature since one-model problems were
easier to solve than two-model problems (83% vs. 73%,
Wilcoxon’s T = 1787, n = 131, p < .00001). We now
turn to the analysis of the conclusions that people
expressed. We discarded incorrect answers and 0.1% of
correct but imprecise answers (i.e. ‘D is next to E’).
We will now discuss the relevant main effects and
interactions.
First, participants had a clear preference for ‘left’
conclusions. Overall, there were 68.6% of ‘left’
conclusions and 31.4% of ‘right’ conclusions,
suggesting a tendency for mental models to be scanned
in a ‘left-to-right’ direction.
Second, the type of question influenced the wording
of the conclusion. With ‘left-to-right’ questions (D-E?)
there were 83.1% of ‘left’ conclusions (and
consequently 16.9% of ‘right’ conclusions) whereas
with ‘right-to-left’ questions (E-D?) there were only
54.2% of ‘left’ conclusions (Wilcoxon’s T = 1082, n =
135, p < .00001).
Third, the extent to which the question influenced
the incidence of ‘left’ and ‘right’ conclusions depended
on presentation format. Given the ‘left-to-right’
question, which prompted a ‘left-to-right’ inspection of
the model, simultaneous presentation gave rise to
78.5% of ‘left’ conclusion while sequential presentation
led to 88.5% of ‘left’ conclusions (Mann-Whitney U’s
= 3029.5, n1 = 92, n2 = 82, p < .01). A similar, but nonsignificant trend was obtained for the ‘right-to-left’
question, which prompted a ‘right-to-left’ inspection of
the model. Here, simultaneous presentation gave rise to
57% of ‘left’ conclusions, but sequential presentation
resulted in 50.7% of ‘left’ conclusions. The directional
scanning induced by the question is apparently
enhanced by sequential presentation, in accordance with
the notion that analogical processes are more likely
under such conditions.
Fourth, the wording of the premises influenced the
wording of the conclusions in the simultaneous
condition since ‘left-left’ problems elicited more ‘left’
conclusions than ‘right-right’ problems. Whereas, 75.5
% of ‘left’ conclusions were observed for ‘left-left’
problems, there were 57.4% of ‘left’ conclusions for
‘right-right’ problems (Wilcoxon’s T = 385.5, n = 61, p
< .00005). In contrast, in the sequential condition there
was no influence of the linguistic form of the premises
since the rate of ‘left’ conclusions was essentially the
same in each type of problem (71.5% for ‘left-left’
problems, and 71.1 % for ‘right-right’ problems). This

indicates that when the premises were not available,
participants were not inclined to use the
comparative introduced by the premises. The results
suggest that participants tend to adopt a linguistic
representation given simultaneous presentation and
an analogical representation given sequential
presentation.
Similarly, in the simultaneous presentation
condition, the findings obtained for two-model
problems, which all had an irrelevant first premise,
indicated that participants were prone to
formulating conclusions congruent with the relevant
premise. When the relevant premise contained the
comparative ‘left’ and the irrelevant one contained
the comparative ‘right’, 77.9% of ‘left’ conclusions
occurred; when the relevant premise contained the
comparative ‘right’ and the irrelevant one contained
the comparative ‘left’, 57.4% of ‘left’ conclusions
occurred (Wilcoxon’s T = 236, n = 49, p < .0001).
However, given sequential presentation, participants
were not really inclined to formulate a conclusion
congruent with the relevant premise. When the
relevant premise contained the comparative ‘left’,
69.1% of conclusions were ‘left’ and when it
contained the comparative ‘right’, the percentage of
‘left’ conclusions was 67.6.
Fifth, one might have expected that when the
insertion of the last two items in the mental model
proceeds from left to right (Type-1 problems), more
‘left-to-right’ inspections and ‘left’ conclusions
would occur than when it proceeds from right to left
(Type-2 problems). This was not the case and the
results even show a tendency in the opposite
direction. There were 66.6% of ‘left’ conclusions
for Type-1 problems and 71% of ‘left’ conclusions
for Type-2 problems.
Sixth, it could be argued that when the number
of models increases participants should be more
prone to relying on the linguistic form of the
premises. However, the differences in ‘left’ and
‘right’ conclusions were almost identical in one and
two-model problems. Indeed, ‘left-left’ one-model
problems gave rise to 73.9% of ‘left’ conclusions
and ‘left-left’ two-model problems gave rise 73.6%
of left conclusions. Similarly, ‘right-right’ onemodel problems gave rise to 62.6% of ‘left’, and
‘right-right’ two-model problems gave rise to 64.9%
of ‘left’ conclusions. Hence, people who gave a
correct answer to two-model problems did not rely
more on the linguistic form of the premises than in
the case of one-model problems.

General discussion
Our study is the first to analyze the wording of
the conclusions people draw in relational reasoning.
We have shown that the wording of conclusions
exposes several psychological mechanisms. Two of
the effects we have demonstrated are compatible
with the analogical approach to reasoning and
provide new insight in the way people inspect their

mental model: First, the preference for ‘left’
conclusions is nicely explained by the fact that people
construct mental models and inspect them from left to
right. Second, the nature of the question is an important
factor in determining the direction of model inspection:
a ‘left-to-right’ question prompts ‘left-to-right’
inspection of the model and a ‘left’ conclusion. On the
other hand, the congruence effect is compatible with the
linguistic approach to reasoning. It shows that linguistic
details of the premises, like the type of comparative, are
stored in memory and are used in the inferential phase.
However, the occurrence of analogical and
linguistic processes and the degree to which they are
involved largely depend upon the presentation format.
Sequential presentation increases the incidence of
analogical processing: the “preference-for-left”-effect
and the question-effect were stronger in the sequential
condition than in the simultaneous condition.
Simultaneous presentation induces linguistic processes:
the congruence effect was present in the simultaneous
condition but not in the sequential condition.
Interestingly, two effects were not observed. First,
the number of models did not influence the wording of
conclusions: the congruence effect was not greater in
indeterminate problems. At first sight this seems to
contradict the results of Mani & Johnson-Laird (1982),
who found that people more often recalled linguistic
details when the description was indeterminate. But
they also reported that recall of the gist was lower when
the description was indeterminate. Hence, having a
weak representation of the gist of the description was
related to high retention of the linguistic details of the
sentences supporting the description. However, in the
results taken into account here the representation was
not weak since only correct conclusions were
considered. This might explain the absence of a greater
congruence effect with 2-model problems, and shows
that when the representation of the description is correct
people do not rely more on the linguistic level given
indeterminate vs. determinate problems.
Second, the direction of model inspection was not
congruent with the direction of model construction.
People did not scan their model in the direction they
constructed it. When construction of the D-E part of the
model proceeded from left to right, it did not prompt
more frequent ‘left-to-right’ inspection than when it
proceeded from right to left.
In conclusion, some of the data presented here
support the analogical framework and others support
the linguistic framework. This contrasts with many
reasoning experiments in which the data are considered
to be entirely compatible with one approach and
entirely incompatible with the other (see also Roberts,
1993)
Our findings show that both linguistic and
analogical processes do contribute to the wording of
conclusions in spatial reasoning. However, the impact
of the different kind of processes is unequal: whereas
the simultaneous presentation format provides evidence
supporting both approaches (i.e. the congruence effect

and effects related to model scanning were
observed), the sequential presentation condition
provides empirical evidence supporting the
analogical approach and not the linguistic approach
(i.e. the congruence effect was not observed for this
condition). This pattern of data seems to indicate
that analogical processes are pre-eminent in
reasoning from spatial premises.
However, a comprehensive theoretical account
of these results has to take into account both types
of processes. Such a mixed model has been adopted
previously by several researchers like Shaver,
Pierson & Lang, (1974) Sternberg (1980) and
Johnson-Laird (1983; Mani & Johnson-Laird,
1982). According to Sternberg and Johnson-Laird,
the premises are first decoded into a linguistic
format and are subsequently represented by a spatial
mental model. However, this view concerns only
the representational phase but not the inferential
phase. Accordingly, it seems then that the
inferential phase, during which the reasoner
produces a conclusion, relies only on the inspection
of the mental model. However the data we obtained
indicate that the formulation of a conclusion is
influenced by both analogical and linguistic factors
in the simultaneous presentation, and support the
idea that both factors influence not only the
representational phase but also the inferential one.
A possible explanation is that when people have
achieved the construction of the mental model, they
go back to the premises, when they are available,
and use the premises as a guide to inspect the
mental model. According to this view, linguistic
factors play a role, but it does not necessarily imply
that inferences rules are used while our data clearly
indicate that mental models are constructed.

References
Byrne, R.M.J. & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1989).
Spatial reasoning. Journal of Memory and
Language, 28, 564-575.
Clark, H.H. (1969a). Linguistic processes in
deductive reasoning. Psychological Review, 76,
387-404.
Clark, H.H. (1969b). Influence of language on
solving three-term series problems. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 82, 205-215.
Cicirelli, V.G. (1977). Children’s problem solving
in relation to perceptual habit. Perceptual and
Motor Skills, 44, 883-888.
De Soto, C.B., London, M., & Handel, S. (1965).
Social reasoning and spatial paralogic. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 2, 293-307.
Evans, J.St.B.T., Newstead, S.E., & Byrne, R.M.J.
(1993). Human reasoning. The Psychology of
Deduction. Hove, UK: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Hagert, G. (1984). Modelling mental models:
Experiments in cognitive modelling spatial
reasoning. In T. O'Shea (Ed.), Advances in

artificial intelligence, pp. 389-398. Amsterdam:
North-Holland.
Huttenlocher, J. (1968). Constructing spatial images: a
strategy in reasoning. Psychological Review, 75, 550560.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1983). Mental Models.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. & Byrne, R.J.M. (1991).
Deduction. Hove, U.K: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Mani, K., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1982). The mental
representation of spatial descriptions. Memory and
cognition, 10, 181-187.
Ormrod, J.E. (1979). Cognitive processes in the
solution of three-term series problems. American
Journal of Psychology, 92, 235-255
Payne, S.J. (1993). Memory for mental models of
spatial descriptions: An episodic-construction-trace
hypothesis. Memory and Cognition, 21, 591-603
Potts, G.R., & Scholz, K.W. (1975). The internal
representation of three terms series problem. Journal
of verbal Learning and Verbal behavior, 14, 439-452.
Roberts, M.J. (1993). Human reasoning: deduction
rules or mental models, or both? The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 46A, 569-589.
Roberts, M.J. (2000). Strategies in relational reasoning.
Thinking and Reasoning, 6, 1-26.
Rips, L.J. (1994). The psychology of proof. Deductive
reasoning in human thinking. Cambridge,
Massachusetts, MIT Press, Bradford
Schaeken, W. & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2000). Strategies
in temporal reasoning. Thinking and Reasoning, 6,
193-219.
Shaver, P., Pierson, L., & Lang, S. (1974). Converging
evidence for the functional role of imagery in
problem solving. Cognition, 3, 359-375.
Sternberg, R.J. (1980). Representation and process in
linear syllogistic reasoning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 109, 119-159.
Woodworth, R.S. & Sells, S.B. (1935). AN atmosphere
effect in syllogistic reasoning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 18, 451-460.

