UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does Positivity Bias Explain Patterns of Performance on Wason’s 2-4-6 Task?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5w46f77h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Gale, Maggie
Ball, Linden L

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Does Positivity Bias Explain Patterns of Performance
on Wason’s 2-4-6 Task?
Maggie Gale (m.gale@derby.ac.uk)
University of Derby
Western Road, Mickleover, Derby DE3 9GX, U.K.

Linden J. Ball (l.ball@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University,
Lancaster, LA1 4YF, U.K.

Abstract
In the standard form of Wason’s (1960) 2-4-6 task,
participants must discover a rule that governs the
production of sequences of three numbers. Studies
typically show success rates of approximately 20%,
which Wason attributed to a cognitive deficit that he
labeled ‘confirmation bias’. In Tweney et al.’s (1980)
formally equivalent Dual Goal (DG) form of the task,
however, success rates are at least double to those seen
on the standard task. If this facilitated performance could
be accounted for, then this would go some way toward
explaining the normally low performance on the standard
problem. The present experiment examined two
competing accounts of the DG superiority effect: Evans’
(1989) positivity bias explanation, and Wharton, Cheng
and Wickens’ (1993) goal complementarity theory. The
experiment independently manipulated the number of
goals that participants had to explore (a single goal vs.
two complementary goals) and the linguistic labels used
to provide feedback (DAX and MED vs. ‘fits the rule’
and ‘does not fit the rule’). Results supported the goal
complementarity account in that facilitation was evident
in both DG conditions irrespective of the polarity of the
feedback provided. We also discuss a novel finding: that
it is the production of at least a single ‘negative’ triple
that is most closely associated with task success.

Introduction
Poletiek (2001) summarises hypothesis testing as
comparing internal thoughts with external facts in order
to interact with the world. For example learning a
language can be characterised as hypotheses testing as
the learner utters sounds and observes the listener’s
reactions. Hypothesis testing, therefore, can be viewed
as a fundamental mode of mental functioning, and for
this reason is of considerable interest to psychologists
and cognitive scientists alike.
One important experimental paradigm that has been
employed extensively in order to study hypothesistesting behaviour is the 2-4-6 task, introduced by Peter
Wason in 1960. The 2-4-6 task is a deceptively simple
rule discovery task, which Wason originally devised to
investigate whether people conformed to the

contemporary scientific norm of hypothesis testing,
namely falsification (Popper, 1959). In the standard
version of the 2-4-6 task, participants seek to discover a
rule which generates sequences of three numbers
(referred to as triples). They are initially given an
example, conforming triple (2-4-6), and are then
required to produce further triples which the
experimenter classifies as either conforming to, or not
conforming to, the rule. The to-be-discovered rule is
‘any ascending sequence’. Participants produce triples
until they are confident that they know the rule, at
which point they announce it. Despite the seeming
simplicity of the task, participants perform poorly, with
typically only around 20% correctly announcing the
rule on the first attempt, (e.g., Tukey, 1986; Wason,
1960; Wharton, Cheng & Wickens, 1993). Many of
these incorrect announcements are a more restricted
version of the rule, for example, ‘numbers increasing by
two’. It has been suggested (e.g., Wetherick, 1962) that
the initial 2-4-6 exemplar lures participants into
formulating
such
overly-restricted
hypotheses.
Participants then produce triples motivated by these
hypotheses (e.g., 8-10-12), which always receive
positive feedback, since they form a subset of the target
rule. Faced with repeated confirmations of their
hypothesis, participants seemingly become increasingly
confident of its correctness until they announce it as the
rule. It is clear that unless participants change their
testing strategy they will never discover that although
their hypothesis is sufficient, it is not necessary.
In his analysis of participants’ performance on the
task, Wason showed that solvers and non-solvers could
be differentiated in terms of both the number of triples
they produced (with solvers producing reliably more
triples), and the type of triples generated (with solvers
producing a higher proportion of triples which received
negative feedback). Wason viewed the non-solvers’
strategy of testing positive instances of their
hypothesised rule as a cognitive failing, which he
labeled ‘confirmation bias’. However, Klayman and Ha
(1987), in an elegant conceptual analysis of the
underlying structure of the 2-4-6 task and its variants,

demonstrated that it is the relationship of the
hypothesised rule to the target rule in the original task
which causes participants’ failure to discover the target
rule. Klayman and Ha ague that what Wason regarded
as a bias to seek confirmatory evidence could instead be
conceptualised as a ‘positive test strategy’, which in
certain circumstances is an effective method for
yielding disconfirmations of a current hypothesis. Their
essential point (cf. Wetherick’s, 1962, argument noted
earlier) is that in the standard task, the target rule (‘any
ascending sequence’) has been deliberately designed to
be more general than the hypothesis invited by the
given triple, such that the application of a positive test
strategy can never lead to the discovery of the target
rule. For other target rule/hypothesis relationships,
however, such as where the experimenter’s rule (e.g.,
‘even numbers ascending by two and less than 10’) is
more restricted than the participant’s initial hypothesis
(e.g., ‘numbers increasing by two’), then the
implementation of positive testing would lead rapidly to
falsification of the overly general initial hypothesis, and
to accurate rule discovery.

Dual Goal Instructions
Tweney, Doherty, Worner, Pliske, Mynatt, Gross, and
Arrkelin (1980) introduced a modified form of the task,
in which participants were instructed to discover two
rules, one called DAX, the other MED. The DAX rule
governs triples of the traditional ascending type, all
other triples are MEDs. Although formally equivalent
to Wason’s original task, this simple Dual Goal (DG)
manipulation was seen to have a dramatic effect on
success rates, with 60% of participants making a correct
first announcement of the rule. This facilitated
performance has been shown to be a robust finding that
has been replicated many times (e.g., Farris & Revlin,
1989a, 1989b; Tukey, 1986; Wharton, Cheng &
Wickens, 1993). Tweney et al., were at a loss to explain
the facilitatory effect of the DG manipulation, although
they felt that the explanation was somehow related to
the way participants conceptualise the task, and how
triples produced are related to their conceptualisation.
It has been noted that the DG manipulation has the
effect of increasing the number of triples which are
generated before rule announcement, and also the
variety of triples (Gorman, Stafford & Gorman, 1987;
Tukey, 1986; Tweney et al., 1980). Vallée-Tourangeau,
Austin and Rankin (1995), in their replication and
extension of DG instructional effects, formulated two
measures of triple heterogeneity, namely posvars and
negtypes. Posvars are triples which receive positive
feedback but which do not increase by a constant. Thus,
if the numbers that make up a triple are a, b, and c, a
posvar is a triple in which (b-a) (c-b). Negtypes are
the eight possible types of triples which receive
negative feedback, (e.g., descending triples, identical-

number triples, etc.). Vallée-Tourangeau et al. found
that using these indices of triple heterogeneity, the DG
manipulation led to increased production of both
posvars and negtypes compared to Single Goal (SG)
instructions. They interpreted this as being indicative of
participants considering a wider range of hypotheses,
although they did not directly test this claim. Whilst
these observations of triple heterogeneity are
interesting, they are largely descriptive, and do little to
explain the facilitatory effect of DG instructions.
Evans (1989) proposed that poor performance on the
standard task could be attributed to the operation of a
general ‘positivity bias’, which is a form of selective
processing that causes people to attend to positive
rather than negative information. According to this
proposal, facilitated performance using DG instructions
is caused by the labeling of triples that ‘do not fit the
target rule’ as MED, thereby avoiding a negative label,
and hence counteracting participants’ tendencies not to
attend to this information. Evans (1989) argues that in
the standard version of the 2-4-6 task, if a participant
forms the hypothesis ‘numbers ascending by equal
intervals is right’, they have logically also formed the
hypothesis ‘numbers not ascending by equal intervals is
wrong’. They are, however, not aware of this alternative
hypothesis, and therefore do not test it. In the DG
manipulation, however, because participants are
attempting to discover two rules, they test both DAX
(correct) triples, and MED (incorrect) triples.
Participants are more successful with the DG
instructions since by carrying out positive tests of their
MED hypotheses they are effectively carrying out
negative tests of their DAX hypotheses, thus
eliminating the overly restrictive hypotheses typically
announced by the SG non-solvers. In summary, then,
Evans argues that DG instructions facilitate
performance by changing participants’ representation of
the task by creating a positive label for the previously
negative ‘does not fit’ feedback.
Wharton et al. (1993) proposed a subtly different
mechanism by which DG instructions improve
performance. They invoke Klayman and Ha’s (1987)
proposal that a central feature of hypothesis testing
behaviour is a tendency for individuals to adopt a
positive test strategy which leads to the generation of
triples that match their hypothesised rule. As we noted
earlier, in the standard 2-4-6 task positive testing will
never enable participants to discover the overly
restrictive nature of their hypothesis as they will never
generate a triple which lies outside of their hypothesis
yet is still within the experimenter’s target rule. With
DG instructions, however, even though the exemplar
triple for DAX suggests the same restricted hypothesis,
the requirement to discover the second (MED) rule
should encourage participants to form a second
hypothesis (e.g., ‘numbers ascending by intervals other

than two’ are MED). On carrying out a positive test of
the MED hypothesis, (e.g., 5-10-15) participants will
(unexpectedly) receive DAX feedback, thus causing
them to alter both their DAX and MED hypotheses.
This sequence of events is repeated until satisfactory
rules for DAX and MED are discovered. Thus,
according to Wharton et al., it is the complementary
nature of the two rules that leads to task success.
It is clear that Evans’ (1989) positivity-bias account
and Wharton et al.’s (1993) goal-complementarity
account make very different predictions regarding
performance on the 2-4-6 task. Evans’ theory predicts
that participants given positively-labeled DAX and
MED feedback in relation to generated triples will
perform better than those given a combination of ‘fits
the rule’ (positively labeled) and ‘does not fit the rule’
(negatively labeled) feedback, and that this dissociation
will be present irrespective of whether participants are
asked to discover a single target rule or two
complementary rules. In contrast, the goalcomplementarity account proposed by Wharton et al.
predicts that participants given the task of discovering
two complementary rules will be more successful than
those seeking a single rule, regardless of whether
feedback is given as DAX/MED or ‘fits’/’does not fit’.
Previous studies of the facilitatory effect of DG
instructions have always confounded these two
variables, such that participants given DG instructions
have always been given DAX/MED feedback, whilst
those given SG instructions have always received
‘fits’/’does not fit’ or ‘yes’/’no’ feedback. The present
experiment was designed to discriminate between the
positivity-bias account and the goal complementarity
theory, by manipulating these two factors
independently. To this end, the participant’s goal (i.e.,
discovery of one rule vs. discovery of two
complementary rules) was systematically crossed with
the linguistic label of the feedback (i.e., DAX/MED vs.
‘fits the rule’/’does not fit the rule’).

Procedure
Participants were tested in groups of up to four in a
quiet laboratory. Standardised instructions were read to
each group. Single Goal (SG) instructions referred to a
unique rule: ‘I have in mind a rule that specifies how to
make up sequences of three numbers (triples), and your
task is to discover this rule’. In what we subsequently
refer to as the SG—Fits condition, participants were
asked to discover the target rule by generating triples
which they would be told either ‘fitted’ or ‘did not fit’
the rule that the experimenter had in mind. On the other
hand, in what we refer to as the SG—DAX condition,
participants were told that triples that fitted the rule
were called DAX triples and those that did not fit the
rule were called MED triples. It was explained to
participants that on generating a triple they would be
informed as to whether it was a DAX or a MED triple.
The Dual Goal (DG) instructions emphasised that
there were two rules to be discovered: ‘…your task is
discover this rule, and also a second rule for
categorising the triples that do not fit my rule’. In the
standard DG task (i.e., DG—DAX), participants were
additionally informed that triples that fitted the rule
were called DAX triples and those that did not fit the
rule were called MED triples. They were instructed to
produce further triples, which the experimenter would
describe as either DAX or MED. In the DG—Fits
condition, participants were told to generate triples
which the experimenter would classify in terms of
whether they ‘fitted’ or ‘did not fit’ the rule.
Participants in all conditions were given 2-4-6 as the
example triple. All participants were provided with an
answer sheet and were asked to write 2-4-6 on the first
row, and either ‘fits’ or DAX in the feedback column,
as appropriate. They were instructed that they could
produce as many triples as they wished, and that when
they were sure of the rule(s) they should write it (or
them) on the answer sheet. In line with Gorman (1992),
participants were allowed only one guess at the rule(s).

Method
Participants
Sixty undergraduates of varying backgrounds and
ethnicity from the University of Derby took part in the
experiment in exchange for course credits. They had not
received any teaching on the psychology of reasoning
before the experiment.

Design
A fully between participants design was employed that
manipulated two factors: Goal (Single Goal vs. Dual
Goal), and Linguistic Labeling (DAX/MED vs.
Fits/Does Not Fit). Fifteen participants were randomly
assigned to each of the four resulting conditions.

Results
Success Table 1 shows the frequency of correct and
incorrect announcements by participants in each of the
four experimental conditions.
Table 1: Frequency of correct announcements by
condition.
Condition
SG—DAX
SG—Fits
DG—DAX
DG—Fits

N
15
15
15
15

Solvers
3
3
12
11

Non-Solvers
12
12
3
4

Table 2: Mean number of triples (and type of triples) produced by condition.
Condition

Total
Triples
SG—DAX
7.6 (6.25)
SG—Fits
5.87 (2.75)
DG—DAX
10.27 (6.30)
DG—Fits
8.33 (3.22)
Note: SD in parenthesis.

Posvars

Feedback

Negtypes

0.33 (0.62)
0.53 (1.36)
1.13 (1.06)
1.07 (1.10)

0.73 (1.28)
0.93 (1.58)
2.67 (1.95)
1.4 (1.24)

0.33 (0.62)
0.80 (1.42)
1.20 (0.86)
0.93 (0.80)

Labeling of feedback (DAX/MED vs. Fits/Does Not
Fit) seems to have had little effect on the likelihood of
success; the proportions of solvers were similar
between both the two SG groups and also the two DG
groups. However more than three times the number of
participants in the DG conditions than in the SG
conditions announced the correct rule. A contingency
table chi-square analysis was performed on the
frequencies of correct and incorrect announcements
(pooled over the labeling of feedback), and revealed a
highly significant effect of the SG versus DG
manipulation, χ2 (1) = 19.288, p < .001.
Feedback Analyses were also performed to ascertain
whether the manipulated factors had any effect on the
type or number of triples produced (see Table 2).
Again, the labeling of the feedback appeared to make
little difference to the number or type of triples
produced by participants. With regard to the SG versus
DG instructions, however, there were significant main
effects on three of the measures: number of triples
produced, F(1, 56) = 4.09, p < .05; number of triples
receiving negative feedback, F(1, 56) = 9.1, p < .01;
and number of variable positive triples, F(1, 56) = 5.86,
p < .05. The difference in the number of negtypes
produced across SG and DG conditions also approached
significance, F(1, 56) = 3.96, p = .052. There were no
significant interactions for any of the measures.
Presence of Triple Types Although the analyses of
triple type are interesting they do not give insight into
the absolute importance of the production of the triple
types. For this reason, it was decided to carry out
further analyses in which the production of either a
posvar or a negative triple was crossed with success on
the task. In this way it would be possible to test whether
the production of such triples is necessary for task
success.
Table 3: Frequency of correct announcements by
production of at least one posvar.
Solvers
Posvar produced
No Posvar produced
Total

25
6
31

NonSolvers
10
19
29

Total
35
25
60

A contingency table was, therefore, produced in which
the production of at least one posvar was crossed with
success (see Table 3). The table clearly demonstrates
that the production of a single posvar is associated with
success on the task, with four times the number of
participants who produced a posvar making a correct
announcement compared to those who did not produce
one. A chi-square analysis confirmed the reliability of
this observation, χ2 (1) = 13.137, p < .001.
Table 4 shows a contingency table in which the
production of at least one negative triple is crossed with
success. Here the association is even more marked than
in the case of the production of at least a single posvar,
with there being only one instance of a participant who
had not produced a negative triple correctly announcing
the rule. In contrast, of the 34 participants who did
produce a negative triple, 28 solved the task. A chisquare analysis revealed that these differences were
highly significant, χ2 (1) = 36.363, p < .001).
Table 4: Frequency of correct and incorrect
announcements by production of a negative triple.
Solvers
Negative triple present
Negative triple absent
Total

28
1
29

NonSolvers
6
25
29

Total
34
26
60

Discussion
The results of the present experiment clearly support
the goal complementarity account (Wharton et al.,
1993) of the facilitatory effect of DG instructions on the
2-4-6 task. Evans’ (1989) positivity-bias account, on the
other hand, fails to find support in the evidence
presented. The results show that DG superiority cannot
be attributed to the re-labeling of negatively valenced
‘does not fit’ feedback as positive ‘MED’ feedback, as
participants in the DG conditions performed
significantly better than participants in the SG
conditions, regardless of the nature of their feedback.
This leads to the conclusion that the typically poor
success rates on the standard form of the task cannot be
accounted for by participants selectively attending to

positive information and thus ignoring a potentially
informative set of triples. In relation to this point, the
analyses of triple type and triple production show that
participants in the DG condition produced a greater
number and variety of triples. It could, therefore, be
argued that it is not that SG instructions lead to
selective processing of negative information, but rather
that SG instructions do not promote the exploration of
negative information in the first place (cf. Wharton et
al., 1993).
The final set of analyses also revealed a hitherto
unremarked phenomenon. It has long been noted that
people who solve the 2-4-6 task tend to produce more
triples as well as a greater proportion of negative triples
(Wason, 1960). It has also been demonstrated more
recently that solvers generate a greater variety of triples
(e.g., Vallée-Tourangeau et al., 1995). What has not
previously been shown, however, is that it is the
production of at least a single negative triple that is so
closely associated with success on the task. Indeed it
remains possible that other indices of success such as
the total number of triples produced or overall triple
variety may well be mediating factors through which
the critical negative triple is produced as a result of task
manipulations. This is an area which would seem to
require closer investigation.
The basic observation that negative-triple production
is so closely related to task success, does, at first sight,
appear rather paradoxical The point is, that given the
typically
overly-restrictive
hypotheses
which
participants form, it seems intuitively obvious that it
should be the production of the discriminatory posvars
(rather than negative triples) that would be most
strongly associated with task success. Although our
results do indicate that posvar generation is
significantly
linked
to
correct
initial
rule
announcements on the task, it remains striking that the
production of negative triples is even more predictive of
task success. Why might this be the case?
One possibility is that the production of a descending
triple (and its associated MED or ‘does not fit’
feedback) somehow makes the general dimension of
ascending numbers appear to be relevant to the target
DAX or ‘fits’ rule. The concept ‘descending’ may have
this effect by facilitating the establishment of a salient
contrast class that promotes an insight into the potential
scope of the target rule. Closer investigation of the
precise role of negative triples in facilitating task
success - perhaps through the invocation of clear
contrast sets within the space of possible triples would, therefore, appear to be essential. To achieve this
a finer-grained system of codifying the triples that
participants produce may be required.
In summary, the results of this study clearly support a
goal
complementarity
account
of
facilitated
performance using DG instructions on the 2-4-6 task.
Participants in the DG conditions were more successful
at the task than those in the SG conditions. The lack of

effect with regard to the labeling of feedback would
appear to undermine a standard positivity-bias account.
Further work, however, is vital to understand the role
that negative triples play in determining task success.

References
Evans, J. St. B. T. (1989). Bias in human reasoning:
Causes and consequences. Hove: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.
Farris, H., & Revlin, R. (1989a). Sensible reasoning in
two tasks: Rule discovery and hypothesis evaluation.
Memory and Cognition, 17, 221-232.
Farris, H., & Revlin, R. (1989b). The discovery process:
A counterfactual strategy. Social Studies of Science,
19, 497-513.
Gorman, M. E. (1992). Experimental simulations of
falsification. In M. T. Keane & K. J. Gilhooly (Eds.),
Advances in the psychology of thinking: Vol. 1.
Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Gorman, M. E., Stafford, A., & Gorman, M. E. (1987).
Disconfirmation and dual hypotheses on a more
difficult version of Wason’s 2-4-6 task. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology 39A, 1-28.
Klayman J., & Ha, Y-W. (1987). Confirmation,
disconfirmation and information in hypothesis
testing. Psychological Review, 94, 211-228.
Poletiek, F. H., (2001). Hypothesis-testing behaviour.
Hove: Psychology Press.
Popper, K. (1959). The logic of scientific discovery.
London: Hutchinson.
Tukey, D. D. (1986). A philosophical and empirical
analysis of subjects’ modes of inquiry in Wason's 24-6 task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 38A, 5-33.
Tweney, R. D., Doherty, M. E., Worner, W. J., Pliske,
D. B., Mynatt, C. R., Gross, K. A., & Arrkelin, D. L.
(1980). Strategies of rule discovery in an inference
task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
32, 109-123.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Austin, N. G., & Rankin, S.
(1995). Inducing a rule in Wason's 2-4-6 task: A test
of
the
information-quantity
and
goalcomplementarity hypotheses. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 48A, 895-914.
Wason, P. C. (1960). On the failure to eliminate
hypotheses in a conceptual task. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 12, 129-140.
Wetherick, N. E. (1962). Eliminative and enumerative
behaviour in a conceptual task. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 14, 129-140.
Wharton, C. M., Cheng, P. W., & Wickens, T. D.
(1993). Hypothesis-testing strategies: Why two goals
are better than one. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 46A, 743-758.

