UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Events versus States: Empirical Correlates of Lexical Classes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1k78x3jn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Gennari, Silvia
Poeppel, David

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Events Versus States: Empirical Correlates of Lexical Classes
Silvia Gennari (sgen@wam.umd.edu)
Cognitive Neuroscience of Language Laboratory
1401 Marie Mount Hall. University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742

David Poeppel (dpoeppel@deans.umd.edu)
Cognitive Neuroscience of Language Laboratory
1401 Marie Mount Hall. University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742

Abstract
Philosophers and linguists have claimed that verb meanings
are divided into semantic types or superordinate categories
that differ in internal conceptual structure. In particular,
eventive verbs, which have internal causal structure are
distinguished from stative verbs, which have no internal
causal structure. In this paper, we explore the processing
consequences of assuming that the lexical representations
of verb meanings differ in the complexity of their internal
representations. We conducted two experiments, a lexical
decision task and a self-paced reading study, that
investigated how verb types of different complexity are
processed. We predicted that the conceptually more
complex eventive verbs would take longer to process than
stative verbs. In both experiments, this prediction was
confirmed. This lends support to theories of verb concepts
that propose classifications based on internal
representations and shows that there are discrete and
abstract conceptual categories in the domain of events.

Introduction
An important question in cognitive science concerns
how word meanings (or lexical concepts) are internally
represented. Although considerable progress has been
made in the domain of nominal concepts since Rosch’s
studies, the nature and organization of verb concepts is
less well understood. Early studies on verb meanings
investigated whether verbs had internal semantic
structure, as proposed in linguistic theories, but failed to
find evidence supporting such a view (e.g., Fodor,
Garrett, Walker, & Parkes 1980, Kintsch, 1974, Rayner &
Duffy, 1986). For example, Rayner and Duffy (1986)
measured the eye-fixation time on verbs during reading
that were assumed to differ in internal complexity. They
found no reading time differences corresponding to the
semantic complexity of the verbs. This sort of finding,
together with Fodor and colleagues’ theoretical arguments
(Fodor, 1975, Fodor, Fodor, & Garrett, 1975, Fodor &
Lepore, 1998), was taken to support the view that verb
meanings are atomic and lack internal structure. However,
recent psycholinguistic studies challenge this view.
Several sentence processing experiments have shown that
lexical semantic properties such as selectional restrictions
and verb-specific thematic roles (agent vs. patient) are
quickly accessed by the processor when parsing syntactic
ambiguities (e.g., Trueswell, Tanenhaus & Kello, 1993,
Trueswell, Tanenhaus & Garnsey, 1994). More relevant
to verb concepts per se, McRae, Ferretti & Amyote
(1997) have shown that thematic roles have internal

conceptual structure (as object categories do) and that
their feature structure is quickly accessed by the parser
when resolving syntactic ambiguities. Moreover, Ferretti,
McRae & Hatherell (2001) have shown that verbs prime
their typical agents, patients and instruments (e.g.,
praying primes nun). They argue that verbs activate event
schemas or generalized situation based knowledge that
facilitate accessing the meaning of their typical
participants. Finally, McKoon & Macfarland (2000) have
found processing correlates of two types of verb
meanings, those that are conceptualized as either
externally caused events (e.g., break) or internally caused
ones (e.g., grow). These verb types are assumed to differ
in internal lexical complexity, particularly in their causal
components (see also Gentner 1981). Taken together,
these findings suggest that there is some internal structure
in verb meanings: thematic structure and event types.
The work presented here further investigates verb
concepts, i.e., how verbs, which refer to events, are
processed and internally represented. In particular, we ask
whether there are verb-general concepts and structures
beyond and above the idiosyncratic meanings of
individual verbs. We follow numerous linguistic and
philosophical studies (as in McKoon & Macfarland, 2000)
in assuming common structural and causal properties
across classes of verbs that define superordinate concepts.
Thus, beyond the existence of typical agent-verb-relations
(that between nuns and praying), there may be more
abstract structural or conceptual properties that organize
our knowledge of events stored in the lexicon.
The classification of verbs and their semantic properties
has been the topic of numerous philosophical and
linguistic studies (Vendler, 1967). Following traditional
Aristotelian classes, these studies have argued that there is
a typology of events underlying verb uses. Verb types
appear to be universal (Smith, 1991) and are supposed to
reflect the way speakers conceptualize the domain of
events, i.e., the semantic/conceptual properties they assign
to a particular actual occurrence. One general distinction
typically made between verb meanings is, among others,
that between states and events (Vendler 1967, Dowty,
1979, Taylor 1977, Bach, 1986, Verkuyl, 1993,
Jackendoff, 1990, Rappaport-Hovav & Levin 1998). The
distinction seems cognitively basic because it is grounded
in causal properties: eventive verbs typically denote a
cause and a change from an initial state to a resulting one
(e.g. write, destroy), while stative verbs simply denote
properties or stable relations between participants (e.g.
love, belong, contain) (Dowty, 1979, Parsons 1990). The

distinction presupposes that verb lexical meanings have
internal conceptual structures that differ in complexity:
event lexical concepts have internal sub-components
derived from their causal properties (e.g., the cause and
the resulting state), while states lack any such
components.
In this paper, we investigate how verbs denoting states
and events are processed and represented. In particular,
we ask whether eventive and stative verbs, which
drastically differ in their semantic-conceptual complexity,
are processed in ways consistent with their complexity.
Two psycholinguistic experiments show that speakers’
processing of verb meanings varies according to lexical
semantic complexity, thus supporting the view that
eventive and stative verbs are represented differently.

The Distinction between Verb Classes
Eventive and stative verbs are distinguished by semantic
and syntactic properties. Syntactically, they differ in their
ability to co-occur with certain adverbs and in certain
constructions. These distributional restrictions are taken
as tests that identify membership in one verb class or
another. For example, stative verbs such as deserve are
distinguished by their ability to occur with simple present
in English but not present progressive, as in (1) and (2).
Similarly, stative verbs cannot occur in nominalized
constructions such as that in (3), cannot appear as
complements of verbs like force as in (4), and cannot be
modified by adverbial phrases as in (5). In contrast,
eventive verbs such as build have the opposite
distributions (for more tests, see Dowty 1979):
(1) Bill is deserving* / is building something.
(2) Bill deserves / builds* something.
(3) What Bill did was to deserve* / build something.
(4) Bill forced Mary to deserve* / build something.
(5) Bill deserved* / built something in an hour.
The intuition behind (1)-(4) is that the participants of a
stative eventuality are not causal or volitional agents.
Rather, they are experiencers. The two classes thus
involve different relations between their participants. The
intuition behind (5) is that states persist in time while
events have ending points or culminations. Examples of
each verb type are given in Table 1.
Table 1: Verb examples
Events
enter
accuse
create
give
build
buy
betray

States
live
love
contain
know
despise
constitute
cherish

Semantically, the classes are distinguished by logical
entailments. When each verb type occurs in sentences,
they allow or disallow distinctive inference patterns. The
entailments refer to causal and temporal properties of the
construed eventuality as a whole. Stative sentences imply
facts, i.e., they entail that they hold true for an indefinite
period of time. In contrast, eventive verbs have the
change-of-state entailment: they either entail a single
change of state, as in (6) and (7) below (in Vendler’s
classification, achievement and accomplishment verbs),
or sequence of changes as in (8) (activity verbs). These
changes are caused by either an agent’s single act or a
series of actions that may be sustained for a while. But in
contrast to states (which can persist on their own) events
stop when their cause does so that they do not hold for
indefinite periods.
(6) x killed y ‡ x caused y to become dead
(7) x built y ‡ x caused y to become existent
(8) x hammered y ‡ x caused y to become hammered
The temporal entailments distinguishing each class are
the counterpart of their causal properties. Because states
have no internal (causal) structure, they are true at a given
interval as well as at any subpart of this interval. More
precisely, if a state is true at any interval i, it follows that
it is true at all instants within i, as in (9).
(9) If Bill had a bike last week, he had a bike
throughout the week.
This entailment is called temporal homogeneity. In
contrast, events lack this property (Dowty 1979): if a
change of state is true at any interval i, it follows that it is
false at the initial part of i, (the initial state) and it is true
at the final part of i (the final state) as in (10):
(10) If Bill wrote a letter in an hour, the letter was not
written before the hour and was written right after it.
The entailment captures the fact that single-change events
typically have sub-parts (the initial and resulting state) so
that the event as a whole cannot be true until it is
completed. This also holds for activity events at the level
of each component change. It follows that events are not
temporally homogeneous because their truth at a given
interval does not hold at any sub-instant.
It is clear that whether one focuses on their temporal or
causal properties, states are fundamentally different from
events. While states lack internal causal structure and are
temporally homogeneous, events have complex causal
structures and are not temporally homogeneous.
The contrast between these verb classes has led
linguists to propose conceptual lexical representations that
capture their semantic properties and the relations
between their participants. The representations are
expressed via logical operators (Dowty 1979) or primitive

predicates (Rappart Hovav & Levin 1998, Jackendoff,
1990) such as CAUSE and BECOME, together with verbspecific lexical predicates that hold true of their
arguments. Consider the representations of the following
verbs:
write = x CAUSE(BECOME(y be-written))
break = x CAUSE(BECOME (y be-broken))
possess = x possess y
deserve = x deserve y
Because verbs of the same type have structurally similar
representations, the distinction between events and states
can be expressed in verb-general conceptual structures:
Events x CAUSE(BECOME(y state))
States x state y = state(x, y)
Eventive representations typically involve changes and
causes, while stative representations simply involve a
stative predicate that holds true of participants. In fact,
stative predicates are component part of events, because
changes include resultative states. This renders eventive
verbs as semantically more complex than stative verbs.

Experimental Evidence
If the mental representations of verbs in fact differ due to
their causal and temporal properties, this suggests that
each verb type may involve differential processing cost
depending on internal complexity. Representing the
meaning of an eventive verb entails representing different
alternative states of affairs such as the initial state and
final state resulting from the agent’s intervention. In
contrast, representing the meaning of a stative verb
implies representing a single state of affairs. If processing
a verb implies accessing and processing its lexical
meaning, more complex meanings should yield longer
processing time. To test this empirical prediction, we
conducted two psycholinguistic experiments. The first
experiment was a visual lexical decision task. This task
has been shown to be sensitive to top-down influences of
meaning (see Balota, 1994, Balota, Ferraro & Connor,
1991) and several semantic effects such as abstract vs.
concrete aspects of meaning have been reported
(Blesdale, 1987, Eviatar, Menn & Zaidel, 1990, Paivio,
1991). The second experiment was a self-paced reading
study, in which the reading time of verbs (occurring in
sentences) was measured. Previous literature has shown
that lexical complexity factors such as number of senses
(Rayner & Duffy 1986) and type of verbs (McKoon &
Macfarland 2000) have an effect on reading times.

Experiment 1: Visual Lexical Decision Task
In this experiment, we ask whether stative verbs are
recognized faster than eventive verbs, given the
hypothesized semantic complexity differences.

Materials 31 and 32 words were selected for each verb
type (states and event) according to the semantic and
syntactic criteria discussed in Dowty, 1979. The items
were matched for word length, frequency (Associate Press
Corpus, mean frequency for events = 2.40, and for states
= 2.45), number of sense (WordNet database: events:
2.79; states: 2.59), number of orthographic neighbors
(events: 2.23, states: 1.85) and argument structure. Verbs
were transitive verbs (taking obligatory NP or PP
complements), except for 6 intransitive verbs in each
class, and were not ambiguous between noun and verb
uses. Non-words (= 62) were possible words similar to
real words. This favors deeper processing of words,
because written form is not sufficient discriminator to
perform the task (see Seidenberg, Petersen, MacDonald &
Plaut, 1996).
In a pre-test study, imageability ratings (how easy is it
to imagine/visualize the meaning of a word) were
collected from another set of subjects to control for the
possibility of this effect. We subsequently used the items’
imageability ratings as a covariate in our analysis. The
rationale for incorporating this factor derives from the
observation that higher imageability ratings are associated
with faster reaction times (James, 1975, Paivio, 1991,
Strain, Patterson & Seidenberg, 1995). We used the
instructions provided in Chiarello, Shears, & Lund’s
(1999) norming. Comparisons of these ratings across
categories revealed that the categories differed, with
eventive verbs being more imagaeble (mean for events =
4.21 in a scale from 1 to 7, mean for states = 3.25, p=
.001).
Examples of test words are the following:
Events: betray, borrow, conquer, create, deduce, align,
attract, devour.
States: adore, aspire, believe, belong, cherish, comprise,
contain, deserve, detest.
Participants and Procedure 52 right-handed native
speakers of English participated in this study, all students
at the University of Maryland. For each word presented in
the screen, participants decided whether it was a word of
English. The experiment was carried out in G3 Macintosh
computer running Psyscope. Words were presented at
varying inter-trial time (500-1500 ms) on the center of the
screen. Before each stimulus word or non-word, a fixation
point was presented for 500 ms. The reaction time (RT) to
each stimulus was automatically collected.
Results Analysis of covariance across items with RTs as
dependent variable and imageability ratings as covariate
revealed a significant main effect of imageability
(F(1,60)= 7.19, p= .009), a main effect of word type (F(1,
60)= 7.95, p= .006) and no interaction. The overall word
effect is represented in Figure 1, with bars representing
standard error. Mean difference was small but reliable,
(about 20 ms), because not all state/event pairs show big

differences. We also conducted an analysis across
subjects with similar result (F(51,1)= 40.21, p = .0001).

RT
700

same number of syntactic frames in which they can occur
and for the most frequent frame, the same number of
arguments. For example, love was matched with build,
which have similar log frequencies. Proportions of corpus
occurrences in different syntactic frames is the following:
love
subj:obj
subj:to-inf
subj:v-ing

690
680
670

0.67
0.10
0.03

build
subj:obj
subj:obj:obj
subj:obj:for

0.76
0.05
0.04

660
650
640
630
620

event

state

Figure 1: RTs as a function of word type
We interpret these findings as indicating that both
imageability and meaning complexity have an effect on
RTs. The lack of an interaction between the two main
effects indicates that the word type effect does not depend
on imageability. Overall these results support the
prediction that stative verbs are recognized faster than
eventive verbs, consistent with an effect of
representational complexity.

Experiment 2: Self-paced Reading study
In this experiment, we asked whether stative verbs are
processed faster than eventive verbs when integrated into
previous information in the process of sentence
comprehension. For this, we measured the reading time to
verbs of the sentence stimuli.
Materials 84 sentences containing 42 stative and 42
eventive verbs (plus fillers) were selected. Test verbs and
sentences were carefully matched for a number of
variables known to affect reading times in context. First,
the verbs were pair-wise matched for frequency and word
length. Mean log-frequency for both states and events was
3.96 and the mean word length was 6.11 characters for
events and 5.82 for states (Collins Cobuild corpus).
Comparisons of these variables were not significant.
Second, we pair-wise matched the verbs used in the
sentences by their number of syntactic arguments and
preferred (most frequent) syntactic frames. This is
because Shapiro, Nagel & Levine (1993), Shapiro, Zuriff,
& Grimshaw (1987), Rayner and Duffy (1986), McElree
(1993) and others have shown that argument structure
complexity as well as preferred argument structure can
have behavioral consequences in reading times. We used
Schulte im Walde’s (1999) electronic corpus based on
syntactic analysis of the Bank of English to compute
number of syntactic arguments and the frequency of
syntactic frames. Each selected verb pair had roughly the

Both verbs occur very frequently in transitive uses, and
both verbs have 3 possible argument structures. For verbs
like believe (equi-biased verbs), which have two equally
frequent argument structure (NP, sentence complement),
the two most frequent frames were matched for number of
arguments. So, believe was matched with report, which
have roughly the same frequent syntactic frames.
Third, test sentences were exactly alike up to the point
of the verb, and in some cases, the sentences were
completely alike except for the verb. This eliminates the
possibility that factors associated with preceding words
affect the reading time of the verbs. Examples of matched
verb and sentence stimuli are the following:
(11)

The young boy bullied his parents. (event)
The young boy adored his parents. (state)
(12)The retired musician built a house. (event)
The retired musician loved his daughter. (state)
Finally, we control for the plausibility relation between
the subject NP and the verb. Because certain types of
subjects may be more likely to appear with one or the
other verb type, we obtained individuals’ judgments
rating the typicality of the subject-verb relation. We asked
50 students to rate how typical it was for a given subject
NP to perform the corresponding action denoted by the
verb (Trueswell, et al. 1994). The ratings were compared
across word types and did not differ significantly (t<1).
The mean rating for events and states were 5.51 and 5.60
respectively in a scale of 1 to 7.

Procedure 30 students at University of Maryland read
sentences on the computer screen. After each sentence,
participants answered a comprehension question. The
words of the sentences were presented one-by-one and the
participants pressed a key on the keyboard to see each
word. Reading time for each word was recorded, though
our interest was in the reading time of verbs.
Results comparison of reading times at the verb position
revealed a word type effect both across subjects (F(1,
29)=10.66, p=.003) and items (F(1,43)=8.9 p=.004).
Eventive verbs took longer to process than state verb
(about 25 ms. difference). Figure 2 represents the mean
reading times (and standard errors) for the nouns
preceding the verb, the verb position and the next word.

The results are thus similar to those of the lexical decision
task and strongly support our hypothesis of a semantic
complexity difference between verb meanings. Semantic
complexity in this experiment is clearly independent of
syntactic behavior and argument structure complexity.
RT
460

event
state

450
440
430
420
410
400
390

preceding noun

critical verb

next word

Figure 2: Reading times as function of word type and
position

Discussion
The results of these experiments show that eventive verbs
take longer to process than stative ones, thus supporting
the view that the mental representations associated with
them differ in semantic complexity. Computing the verbs’
meanings involves differential processing cost, as
suggested by the hypothesized complexity of conceptual
representations. The distinction between these verb
classes is rather abstract and is based on whether the verbs
involve a change of states. To our knowledge, this is the
first time that these verb classes are shown to have
empirical correlates.
Note that the results cannot be attributed to syntactic
differences among verbs (frames or number of
arguments), as this factor was kept constant. Nor can they
be explained as a consequence of expectations generated
by the type of arguments with which verbs occur, a factor
that has been often manipulated in studies of syntactic
ambiguity resolution. In our sentence comprehension
experiment, the same subject-arguments were used for
both eventive and stative verbs and the plausibility
relations between subject-argument and verb were
equalized. Also, no such factor was present in the lexical
decision task. Thus, the alternative interpretation of the
results in which there is a processing difference but not a
representational one does not seem plausible, as there is
no apparent reason to expect a purely processing
difference. We are inclined to conclude, then, that
difference in processing cost are due to representational
complexity differences between states and events and that
such differences may rely on the causal vs. non-causal
relations they establish between their participants.
However, the results are neutral as to whether
representations such as x CAUSE(BECOME(y state)) are

accurate expressions of the internal representation of the
verb meaning. These results only suggest that the
representation of eventive verbs is more complex than
that of stative ones, regardless of how the complexity is
spelled out. Yet if the internal mental representation of
verbs includes the type of relations that they establish
between participants, it is possible that the complexity
difference is due to causal features. In one case, the
eventualities denoted involve changes and cause-effect
relations (and therefore, agentive participants), while in
the other case, they involve mere descriptions of facts.
These are important cognitive differences that may
somehow be abstracted over verb-specific meaning.
Our results have some important implications for
theories of word meanings. As McKoon & Macfarland’s
(2000) findings, our results challenge the view that verb
meanings are atomic and unstructured. On such a view,
there is no principled reason to expect these differences in
processing unless the lexical entry is allowed to have
some sort of internal structure. In this respect, the failure
of previous attempts to find lexical complexity effects
could be due to the fact that indirect measures of
complexity were used (e.g., Fodor et. al 1980) or very
small (perhaps undetectable) differences between verb
classes were investigated (e.g., Rayner & Duffy, 1986).
Our results also suggest that part of the information
encoded in the verb is semantic/conceptual, and
somewhat independent from number of participants and
syntactic frames. Several psycholinguistic studies have
shown that these syntactic variables do influence
behavioral measures (e.g., Shapiro et al. 1993). Similarly,
Fodor & Lepore (1998) claim that syntactic combinatorial
rules can be part of lexical entries, thus increasing their
complexity. Our results indicate however, that such
syntactic information is not the only relevant factor for
complexity effects. Purely semantic properties can also
yield processing time differences.
Finally, our results have implication about the exact
source of the semantic complexity effects and the overall
organization of verb concepts in the lexicon. McRae et al.
(1997) and Ferretti et al. (2001) have suggested that
events in memory are organized in event schemas and that
such schemas arise from the knowledge of their typical
agents and patients acquired during learning, i.e., thematic
feature knowledge. Thus, it is in principle possible that
the verb classes studied here can be distinguished by such
thematic features (e.g. features defining agent/patient vs.
experiencer/entity structures). However, it is unclear how
these features would explain the complexity effects. More
importantly, it is unclear whether such features can in fact
be distinguished from other aspects of the verb meaning
such as the relation between participants established by
the verb. Both types of information are inherently related.
Our results suggest a level of abstraction or generalization
of verb schemas that goes beyond verb-specific
knowledge of typical participants and typical situations.
Rather, as is the case for nominal concepts, verb concepts

seem to be organized in major event types, in this case
distinguished by general causal properties. These types
provide the domain of events with a hierarchical
organizational structure from verb-specific concepts to
abstract verb-general concepts.

References
Bach, E. (1986). The Algebra of Events. Linguistics and
Philosophy, 9, 5-19.
Balota, D., Ferraro, F., and Connor, L. (1991). On the
early influence of meaning in word recognition: a
review of the literature. In P. J. Schwanenflugel (Ed.),
The psychology of word meanings (pp. 187-218).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Balota, D. (1994). Visual word recognition: The journey
from features to meaning. In M. A. Gernsbacher (Ed.),
Handbook of psycholinguistics (pp. 303-358). San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Blesdale, F. (1987). Concreteness-dependent associative
priming: separate lexical organization for concrete and
abstract words. Journal of experimental psychology:
Learning , Memory and Cognition, 13, 582-594.
Chiarello, C., Shears, C., & Lund, K. (1999). Imageability
and distributional typicality measures of nouns and
verbs in contemporary English. Behavioral Research
Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 31(4), 603-637.
Dowty, D. (1979). Word meaning and Montague
grammar: Kluwer, Reidel, Dordrecht.
Eviatar, Z., Menn, L., & Zaidel, E. (1990). Concreteness:
Nouns, verbs, and hemispheres. Cortex, 26(4), 611-624.
Ferretti, T. R., McRae, K. and Hatherell, A. (2001).
Integrating verbs, situation schemas, and thematic role.
Journal of Memory & Language, 44(4), 516-547.
Fodor, J., Fodor, J. A., & Garrett, M. (1975). The
psychological unreality of semantic representations.
Linguistic Inquiry, 6, 515-535.
Fodor, J. A. (1978). Tom Swift and his procedural
grandmother. Cognition, 6, 229-247.
Fodor, J. A., and Lepore, E. (1998). The emptiness of the
Lexicon. Linguistic Inquiry, 29(2).
Fodor, J. A., Garrett, M. F., Walker, E. C. T., & Parkes,
C. H. (1980). Against definitions. Cognition, 8, 263367.
Gentner, D. (1981). Verb Semantic Structures in Memory
for Sentences: Evidence for a Componential
Representation. Cognitive Psychology, 13, 56-83.
Jackendoff, R. (1990). Semantic structures. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
James, C. (1975). The role of semantic information in
lexical decision. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 1(2), 130-136.
Kintsch, W. (1974). The representation of meaning in
memory. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
McElree, B. (1993.). The locus of lexical preference
effects in sentence comprehension: A time-course
analysis. Journal of Memory & Language., 32(4).

McKoon, G., and Macfarland, T. (2000). Externally and
internally caused change of state verbs. Language, 76,
833-858.
McRae, K., Ferretti, T., and Amyote L. (1997). Thematic
Roles as Verb-specific Concepts. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 12(2/3), 137-176.
Paivio, A. (1991). Dual coding theory: Retrospect and
current status. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 45,
255-287.
Parsons, T. (1990). Events in the semantics of English: a
study in subatomic semantics. Cambridge MA: MIT
Press.
Rappaport Hovav, M. and Levin, B. (1998). Building
Verb Meanings. In M. B. a. W. Geuder (Ed.), The
Projection of Arguments: Lexical and Compositional
Factors (pp. 97-134). Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Rayner K. and Duffy, S. (1986). Lexical complexity and
fixation times in reading: Effects of word frequency,
verb complexity, and lexical ambiguity. Memory and
Cognition, 14(3), 191-201.
Schulte im Walde, S. (1998). Automatic Classification of
Verbs according to their alternation behavior. ,
Stuttgart University, Stuttgart, Germany.
Seidenberg, M., Petersen, A., MacDonald, M., and Plaut,
D. . (1996). Pseudohomophone effects and models of
word recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 22(1), 48-62.
Shapiro, L., Nagel, N., and Levine, B. (1993). Preferences
for a Verb’s Complements and Their Use in Sentence
Processing. Journal of Memory and Language, 32, 96114.
Shapiro, L. Z., E., & Grimshaw J. (1987). Sentence
Processing and the mental representations of verbs.
Cognition, 27, 219-246.
Smith, C. (1991). The Parameter of Aspect. Dordrecht:
Kluwer.
Strain, E., Patterson, K., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1995).
Semantic effects in single-word naming. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 21(5), 1140-1154.
Taylor, B. (1977). Tense and Continuity. Linguistics &
Philosophy, 1, 199-220.
Trueswell J.C., T., M. K. and Garnsey S. M. (1994).
Semantic Influences on Parsing: Use of Thematic Role
Information in Syntactic Ambiguity Resolution.
Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 285-318.
Trueswell, J. C., Tanenhaus, M.K., and Kello, C. (1993).
Verb-specific constraints in sentence processing:
Separating effects of lexical preference from garden
paths. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory and Cognition, 19, 528-553.
Vendler, Z. (1967). Linguistics and philosophy. Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press.
Verkuyl, H. (1993). A theory of aspectuality. UK:
Cambridge University Press.

