UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Feedback Effects in the Acquisition of a Hierarchical Skill

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/45s838fj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Corrigan-Halpern, Andrew
Ohlsson, Stellan

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Feedback Effects in the Acquisition of a Hierarchical Skill
Andrew Corrigan-Halpern (ahalpe1@uic.edu)
Stellan Ohlsson (stellan@uic.edu)
UIC Department of Psychology, 1007 W. Harrison
Chicago, IL 60607

Abstract
Complex cognitive skills cannot be learned without feedback.
There are reasons to believe that positive and negative
feedback function differently. For skills that are represented
hierarchically, feedback can provide information locally,
concerning individual actions, or more globally, referring to
higher level goals. A 2-by-2 factorial experiment showed an
interaction between type of feedback (positive or negative)
and scope of feedback (global or local). Contrary to the wide
spread belief in the effectiveness of positive feedback, local
negative was most effective. Global negative feedback was
least effective. Positive feedback fell between these two
conditions and was less affected by scope. The results are
discussed in terms of the information content of the feedback.

Introduction
A large part of learning consists of gradually fine-tuning our
efforts until we have succeeded in the task at hand. Learners
may be able to evaluate progress without aid in simple tasks,
but for complex tasks they rely on feedback (Kluger &
DeNisi, 1996). For complex tasks, performance will often
involve the execution of many goals, each involving the
application of component skills (Kotovsky & Simon, 1973).
Many of the studies that employ feedback use it in the
service of other research interests and are less concerned
with comparing one feedback condition to another.
Feedback is used to establish the levels of learning that the
purpose of the experiment requires, but is not itself the
object of study. Consequently, we know less about the
cognitive function of feedback than one might expect.
Studies that do focus on the feedback itself report
contradictory findings and no current theory can fully
explain why feedback is effective.
Some contrary findings may be explained by the fact that
studies take one of two approaches, either investigating the
informational or the motivational impact of feedback
(Kluger & DeNisi, 1996). However, inconsistencies are not
eliminated when we limit our survey to one or the other
approach. In this article, we focus on the information aspect
of feedback.

Background and Rationale
It seems obvious that if feedback is helpful, then more
feedback should be more beneficial than less feedback.
Many investigations have studied the impact of feedback
rate (Salmoni, Schmidt, & Walter, 1984). In some cases,
increasing the rate improves performance (Kulik & Kulik,
1988; Salmoni et al., 1984; Schmidt et al., 1989; Thorndike,

1927). In other studies, increasing the feedback rate is found
to hinder performance (Bourne, 1957; Bourne & Bundeson,
1963; Schroth, 1997). This indicates that the effect of
feedback is strongly mediated by other variables.
We would expect the content of the feedback itself to be
one such variable. Studies in social psychology suggest that
feedback is less effective when it draws attention to general
performance or to self-efficacy and it is most effective when
it draws attention to the task itself (Kluger & DeNisi, 1998).
Another relevant variable is the type of task the learner is
acquiring knowledge about. For complex tasks, feedback
might foster more active processing, enhancing
performance. For simple tasks, constant feedback may
interfere with deeper evaluation, reducing performance.
(Schmidt & Wulf, 1997). A third variable that affects the
outcome reported in a study is the manner in which
feedback is measured. The most effective feedback
condition as measured during training might not be the most
effective condition as measured by transfer measures
(Schmidt, Young, Swinnen & Shapiro, 1989; Scroth, 1997).
In the study reported in this paper, we focus on yet
another dimension of feedback: whether it provides
information about appropriate, correct and useful actions,
which we refer to as positive feedback, or whether it
provides information about errors and mistakes, which we
call negative feedback. Empirical work supports the notion
that negative and positive feedback have qualitatively
different effects (Taylor, 1991).
There is widespread belief that positive feedback is more
effective than negative feedback. A simple argument about
information content supports this belief: When a learner
receives information that an action is appropriate, correct or
useful, this requires neither change nor interpretation. The
straightforward implication is that he or she should repeat
that action when a similar situation arises in the future.
When a learner receives information that his or her action
was an error, he or she merely knows to avoid that particular
action in the future, but not which action to perform instead.
Positive feedback provides definite information, while
negative feedback requires interpretation of the cause of the
error and the selection of an alternative action. The
interpretation process for negative feedback can be quite
complex (Ohlsson, 1996).
The argument from information content is even stronger if
we factor in the scope of the feedback. Many situations in
real life do not provide feedback immediately after every
elementary action. The effects of one's behavior might be
delayed until after a series of actions has been completed

(Salmoni, Schmidt, & Walter, 1984). We call feedback that
refers to a single action as being local in scope. Feedback
that refers back to a series of actions is global in scope. The
interpretation problem for global negative feedback is even
more difficult than for local feedback. If a series of actions
ends in an undesirable outcome, which part of the
underlying cognitive skill should be affected by this
feedback? If the sequence of actions is controlled by a
subgoal, which in turn is dominated by a superordinate goal,
which goal or goals should be affected by the negative
feedback? During problem solving, a correct higher goal can
dominate an incorrect lower goal, and vice versa. In prior
work with a simulation model, we have shown that
situations can arise in which a hierarchical, feedback driven
system fails to learn because a superordinate and correct
goal cannot recover from the negative feedback generated
by incorrect lower level goals or actions (Corrigan-Halpern
& Ohlsson, 2001). Ohlsson & Halpern, 1998). In contrast,
global positive feedback does not seem to pose a more
complex interpretation problem than local positive
feedback. Learning that an entire sequence of actions was
correct should be more powerful than receiving similar
information about a single action.
However, empirical and theoretical research is not fully in
accord with the implications of the argument from
information content. Some researchers have indeed found
that positive feedback is more effective than negative
feedback (Greeno, 1974). However, in other cases, negative
feedback was found to produce better performance (Mesch,
Farh & Podsakoff, 1994). In prior work using a computer
simulation model, we showed that some combinations of
learning mechanisms imply that negative feedback will have
a stronger impact on learning rate than positive feedback
(Ohlsson & Jewett, 1997). The interaction with scope
appears not to have been systematically investigated.
Closer scrutiny of the information content argument itself
shows that it overlooks potential interactions with some of
the factors mentioned above. The difference between
practicing a simple task – drill – and solving an unfamiliar
problem might be important. During problem solving, many
actions are taken tentatively, with little or no rationale.
When such an action fortuitously generates positive
feedback, the learner only gains knowledge about how to
solve that particular problem. To learn something that
transfers to a related but different problem, he or she must
figure out why the action worked. Hence, in this case,
positive feedback requires interpretation. On the other hand,
when the learner has acquired a rationale for his or her
responses, then the positive feedback arrives after learning.
In summary, a straightforward application of the
information content argument suggests that positive
feedback should be more effective than negative feedback
and that the advantage should be greater for large than for
small scope, but this argument overlooks potential
complicating factors. In the present study, we aimed to
increase available information about these issues by

systematically varying both feedback type and feedback
scope, and by assessing the outcome during learning, after
learning, and with transfer tasks.

Method
Participants. Ninety-four undergraduates participated in
return for class credit.
Task. The subjects mastered a version of the sequence
extrapolation task studied by, among others, Simon and
Kotovsky (1963). The subject is shown a series of letters
that follow a specifiable pattern (e.g., MABMCDM ... ).
Then he or she is asked to extrapolate the pattern to N
additional places (EFMGHM...). We used a type of
extrapolation problem that incorporated the hierarchical
organization typical of the related problems studied by
Restle (1970).
To make letter extrapolation into a task with multiple
opportunities to receive feedback, we presented the given
sequence via several short presentations and asked for a
response after each one. The subjects viewed the given
sequence for 20 seconds, then attempted to extrapolate it.
They were asked to reproduce as much of the pattern as they
could, guessing the letters for which they were uncertain.
They received feedback on their extrapolation as described
in detail below. Then the next trial (20 second study period,
plus extrapolation attempt) began. The subjects went
through 12 such trials.
To make the problem more difficult, a different sequence
of letters was presented on each trial. For example, suppose
a subject studied the sequence C A D F F D A C D B E G G
E B D. He or she was prompted with the letter M and the
correct extrapolation was M K N P P N K M N L O Q Q O
L N. On the following trial, he or she saw a new
instantiation of the pattern, e.g., F D G I I G D F G E H J J
H E G. He or she was again prompted with M and the
correct extrapolation was once again M K N P P N K M N L
O Q Q O L N. The extrapolation prompt (M), and hence the
correct extrapolation, was the same on each trial.
The tasks were presented on a 15 inch computer monitor
with help of the PsyScope experimental control software.
The given sequences were presented in black letters on a
white background. When the 20 second study period ended,
the given sequence was erased and the prompt M appeared
on the screen to the left of a horizontal row of 15 answer
boxes. The subjects gave their answer by clicking on the
answer boxes in any order and typing in a letter. When
done, they clicked on a 'Done' button, and the next trial
commenced.
Design. In a 2-by-2 between-subjects design, we varied
feedback with respect to type (positive vs. negative) and
scope (local vs. global). Negative feedback consisted of the
word "wrong" appearing in red text underneath an incorrect
response. Positive feedback consisted of the word "correct"
appearing in green text underneath a correct response. Each
subject saw only one type of feedback.

Results
Analysis of Learning Stage
A Mixed ANOVA was performed to assess performance
during the learning stage. All 12 Training trials were
entered as a within-subjects factor. Feedback Scope (local
or global) and feedback Type (positive or negative) were
entered as between-subjects factor. The dependent measure
was the number of letters correct per trial. There was a
significant learning effect as shown in Figure 1, F (990, 11)
= 42.21, p < .001. There was no effect of feedback Scope,
F (90 , 1) = 1.33, p > .05. There was no effect of feedback
Type, F (90 , 1) = 0.31, p > .05. There was an interaction
between Scope and Type, F (90 , 1) = 8.45, p = .005,
indicating that the effectiveness of either feedback type is
mediated by scope.
15
14

Neg / Global

13

Pos / Global

12

Correct out of 15

Because feedback is intermittent in most real learning
scenarios, we provided feedback probabilistically. A subject
in a negative feedback condition received feedback on a
random selection of 75% of his or her errors. For the
remaining 25% of erroneous responses, plus all his or her
correct responses, the subject saw the word “none” in white
letters on black background below his or her response. The
instructions emphasized that "none" meant that the response
was either incorrect or correct. This feature prevented
subjects from inferring that a response that did not receive
negative feedback was correct (and vice versa). The
presentation of positive feedback was analogous.
By local feedback we mean information about the
correctness of a single letter. In contrast, global feedback
referred to the natural chunks of the extrapolated sequence.
Consider the given sequence CADFFDACDBEGGEBD. It
consists of two parts, CADFFDAC and DBEGGEBD,
which have the same structure but are separated by one
position in the alphabet. The first part consists in turn of two
subparts, CADF and FDAC, which are mirror images of
each other; similarly for DBEG GEBD. Hence, the correct
extrapolation MKNPPNKMNLOQQOLN consists of the
four chunks MKNP, PNKM, NLOQ, and QOLN. In the
global conditions, feedback was given with respect to these
chunks by drawing a line underneath each group of four
answer boxes; the word "correct", "wrong" or "none"
appeared under the center of that line. The instructions
emphasized that the feedback referred to the entire group of
for letters. Thus, negative feedback meant that at least one
of the responses in that group was wrong. In order to be get
global positive feedback, all the responses in a chunk had to
be correct.
In both the local and global conditions, the feedback
remained on the screen for 45 seconds before the next trial
commenced.
Procedure. The experiment began with an Instruction
stage, in which subjects were given general information
about the experiment. They were also taught the three
relevant pattern construction operations (displace a letter or
a group of letters one position forwards or backwards in the
alphabet; repeat a letter or group of letters, and extend a
sequence with its own reversal) with both verbal
descriptions and examples. In the Training stage, the
subjects went through twelve trials with respect to the target
problem, as described above. In the Assessment stage, the
subject solved the target problem twice without prior
presentation of the given sequence and without feedback.
That is, the prompt letter M appeared together with the
answer boxes, and the subject attempted to fill them in; then
M appeared again and the subject filled in the answer boxes
once more. In the Transfer stage, the subject tried to solve a
letter sequence problem with the same pattern as the pattern
in the target problem. However, the prompt letter was T
instead of M. In this case, the correct extrapolation consisted
of a completely different sequence of letters. No feedback
was given on the transfer problem.

Neg / Local

11
10

Pos / Local

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11 12

Trial
Figure 1. Performance on the training trials.
We hoped that by training subjects on the three
construction rules, and by providing problems with a
chunking structure, we would maximize the likelihood that
they would represent the pattern hierarchically. To test
whether this manipulation worked, we examined the inter
response time for each position.
We computed solution times for each of the positions of
the pattern. There was no time for the first letter of the
pattern since this was given to subjects in the form of the
prompt “M”. We analyzed the last four trials of training, so
that we could capture the final product of learning, the point
where subjects would have come to represent the pattern
hierarchically. Four subjects were removed from the
analysis because they omitted responses on one or more of
the trials. Figure 2 shows the result.

12000

K

measure was the number of letters correct per trial. There
was neither an effect of Type nor of Scope, F (90 , 1) = 0.05,
F (90 , 0) = 2.15, p > .05. The interaction between Type and
Scope was once again significant, F (90 , 1) = 7.58, p < .01.
Figure 4 shows the results for the Transfer trials.

16
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Correct out of 15

Subjects spent the longest times at the beginning of the
pattern. The first three responses “K” “N” and “P”
correspond to the first chunk. The high latency for the first
‘K” probably reflected initial time planning to reproduce the
pattern. The next four positions (5-8) correspond to the
second chunk, “PNKM”. Since subjects could reproduce
these letters by reflecting the first chunk, response times
were much quicker and there was a trend for these positions
to form a horizontal line.
The next chunk “NLOQ”
involves the translation of the first chunk by one letter in the
alphabet. This required more effort as indicated by the
increase in latency from position 8 to position 9. The last
chunk, “QOLN”, could also be completed by reflection.
Latencies match those of the second chunk and the
horizontal trend is again present.

10000

All

Time

8000

P

6000

N

N
4000

2000

0

Local Feedback
Global Feedback

Positive
L O

Feedback Type

Q

N K M
P

Negative

Q

Figure 3. Accuracy for the two Assessment trials.

O L N

(M)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

Figure 2. Time to complete each position averaged across
the last 4 learning trials.

Analysis of Assessment and Transfer Stages
A mixed within-subjects ANOVA was performed for the
Assessment trials. Both trials of the Assessment stage were
entered as within-subjects measure. Type and Scope were
entered as between-subjects measures. The dependent
measure was the number of letters correct per trial.
There was no effect of feedback Type, F (90 , 1) = 0.10, p
> .05 and no effect of feedback Scope F ( 90 , 1) = 3.23, p >
.05. The interaction between Type and Scope was once
again significant, F (90 , 1) = 7.70, p < .01, indicating that
the effect of feedback type depends on scope. There were
no effects involving the repeated measure. Figure 3 shows
the results for the Assessment trials.
The two Transfer trials were entered as a within-subjects
measure in an ANOVA. Feedback Type and Scope were
entered as between-subjects measures. The dependent

Correct out of 15

Position in Pattern

16
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Local Feedback
Global Feedback

Positive

Negative

Feedback Type
Figure 4. Accuracy for the two Transfer trials.

In summary, we first showed that learning occurred
during the Training stage of the experiment and we verified
that subjects were representing the pattern hierarchically
We showed that during all of the stages of the experiment
there was an interaction between Scope and Type. This
interaction is driven by the fact that negative feedback is
maximized when provided locally, F (90 , 1) = 9.88, p <
.005, while for positive feedback, there is no significant
effect of Scope, F (90 , 1) = 1.36, p > .05.

Discussion
We presented data to show an interaction between feedback
Type and feedback Scope. Local negative feedback was the
most effective condition, while global negative feedback
was the least effective one. Positive feedback fell between
these two in effectiveness. Performance was similar for the
two positive feedback conditions, suggesting that for this
type of feedback Scope plays a limited role. This exact
pattern of outcomes recurred during training (see Figure 1),
in the assessment tasks (see Figure 3), and in the transfer
tasks (see Figure 4).
This is not the pattern that is predicted by a
straightforward formulation of the information content
argument, since it predicts that the two positive feedback
conditions should be best. According to the latter, negative
feedback should provide less information regardless of
scope, but this is not what we found. Furthermore, it is
unclear what the information content argument predicts with
respect to a transfer task in which the exact solution
acquired during training is no longer sufficient.
Nevertheless, the same pattern was observed in the transfer
tasks.
We propose an alternative to the information content
view, one where the informational content plays a role, but
where it is not the only factor. In this study, negative local
feedback was superior to negative global. Since negative
local feedback provides direct information concerning
individual responses, it is easier to interpret and hence can
more directly be used to change subsequent responses. This
explains why local negative feedback was more effective
than global, but it does not explain our findings with respect
to positive feedback.
Positive feedback applies in either of two cases. During
problem solving, responses are sometimes made tentatively,
without a rationale or reason. In the case of such fortuitously
correct responses, positive feedback requires no less
interpretation than negative feedback: why was the response
correct? When the rationale has been worked out, the
feedback arrives after learning has already occurred. The
argument from information content ignores the dynamics of
learning. Negative feedback is naturally received before
learning occurs, and hence can influence and support
learning. If the learner already knows how to generate a

correct answer, the information in the resulting positive
feedback is not novel and hence might not contribute
strongly to learning.
This study has multiple limitations. The learning phase
was short, only twelve trials. The feedback messages were
limited to "correct" versus "incorrect" with none of the
explanatory content that would be likely to accompany a
feedback message in a realistic instructional situations (but
not always in realistic situations where the feedback is
'delivered' by physical reality itself, e.g., in the form of a
malfunctioning device). The transfer tasks were only
moderately distant from the training tasks. The
generalisability of the interaction between scope and type of
feedback cannot be determined at this time. Future work
will address these limitations.
What emerged clearly in this course of this study is that,
contrary to the wide spread impression that feedback during
problem solving practice is a topic that has been studied to
death, we do not, in fact, know very much about the
function of feedback. In particular, we do not understand the
space of relevant parameters, and we do not know how
currently identified parameters interact. It is plausible that
the contradictory findings mentioned in the introduction are
due to aggregation over overlooked interactions. A
systematic experimental attack on the determinants of
feedback effectiveness is warranted.

References
Bourne, L. E. (1957). Effects of delay of information
feedback and task complexity on the identification of
concepts. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 54, 201207.
Bourne, L. E., & Bunderson, C. V. (1963). Effects of delay
of informative feedback and length of postfeedback
interval on concept identification. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 65, 1-5.
Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P. J., & Moser, J. M. (1981).
Categorization and representation of physics problems by
experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Corrigan-Halpern, A., & Ohlsson, S. (2001). Failure to
Learn from Negative Feedback in a Hierarchical Adaptive
System. In E. M. Altman & A. Cleermans & C. D.
Schunn & W. D. Gray (Eds.), Fourth International
Conference on Computer Modling. Fairfax, VA: Laurence
Erlbaum.
Greeno, J. G. (1974). Hobbits and orcs: Acquisition of a
sequential concept. Cognitive Science, 6, 270-292.
Hammond, K. R., Summers, D. A., & Deane, D. H. (1973).
Negative effects of outcome feedback in multiple cue
probability learning. Organizational Behavior and Human
Performance, 9, 30-34.
Kluger, A., & DeNisi, A. (1996). The effects of feedback
interventions on performance: a historical review, a metaanalysis, and a preliminary feedback intervention theory.
Psychological Bulletin, 119(2), 254-284.

Kluger, A. N., & DeNisi, A. (1998). Feedback interventions:
Toward the understanding of a double edged sword.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 7(3), 67-72.
Kotovsky, K., & Simon, H. A. (1973). Empirical tests of a
theory of human acquisition of concepts for sequential
patterns. Cognitive Psychology, 4(3), 399-424.
Kulik, J. A., & Kulik, C.-l. C. (1988). Timing of feedback
and verbal learning. Review of Educational Research.,
58(1), 79-97.
Mesch, D. J., Farh, J.-L., & Podsakoff, P. M. (1994). Effects
of feedback sign on group goal setting, strategies, and
performance. Group & Organization Management, 19(3),
309-333.
Ohlsson, S., (1996). Learning from performance errors.
Psychological Review, 103, 241-262.
Ohlsson, S., & Halpern, A. (1998). Strength adjustment in
hierarchical learning. Paper presented at the 20th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Madison,
WI.
Ohlsson, S., & Jewett, J. J. (1997). Ideal adaptive agents and
the learning curve. In J. Brzezinski & B. Krause & T.
Maruszewski (Eds.), Idealization VIII: Modeling in
psychology. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Rodopi.
Restle, F. (1970). Theory of serial pattern learning:
Structural trees. Psychological Review, 77(6), 481-495.

Salmoni, A. W., Schmidt, R. A., & Walter, C. B. (1984).
Knowledge of results and motor learning: a review and
critical reappraisal. Psychological Bulletin, 95(3), 355386.
Schmidt, R. A., & Wulf, G. (1997). Continuous concurrent
feedback degrades skill learning: Implications for training
and simulation. Human Factors, 39(4), 509-525.
Schmidt, R. A., Young, D. E., Swinnen, S., & Shapiro, D.
C. (1989). Summary knowledge of results for skill
acquisition: support for the guidance hypothesis. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and
Cognition, 13(2), 352-359.
Schroth, M. L. (1997). Effects of frequency of feedback on
transfer in concept identification. American Journal of
Psychology, 110(1), 71-79.
Simon, H. A., & Kotovsky, K. (1963). Human acquisition of
concepts for sequential patterns. Psychological Review,
70(6), 534-546.
Taylor, S. E. (1991). Asymmetrical effects of positive and
negative events: The
mobilization-minimization hypothesis. Psychological
Bulletin, 110(1), 67-85.
Thorndike, E. L. (1927). The Law of effect. American
Journal of Psychology, 39, 212-222.

