UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Graphically Speaking: Do Graphics Affect Perspectives in Event Conceptualization?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/510268hx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Umata, Ichiro
Katagiri, Yasuhiro
Shimojima, Atsushi

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Graphically Speaking:
Do Graphics Affect Perspectives in Event Conceptualization?1
Ichiro Umata (umata@atr.co.jp)
ATR Media Information Science Laboratories;
Seika Soraku Kyoto, 619-0288 Japan
Yasuhiro Katagiri (katagiri@atr.co.jp)
ATR Media Information Science Laboratories;
Seika Soraku Kyoto, 619-0288 Japan
Atsushi Shimojima (ashimoji@jaist.ac.jp)
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology;
1–1 Asahi Tatsunokuchi Nomi Ishikawa 923-1292 Japan
Abstract
To see is to believe. A picture is often worth a thousand
words in everyday communication settings. A graphical representation actually “talks” in such communication, integrated with some other representation systems
like spoken language. Because of its power, however, a
graphical representation can affect the way people grasp
a target situation it describes. This paper presents an empirical investigation of language usage in graphical communication. Drawing on actual dialogue data, we show
that the configuration of graphics affects linguistic expressions of motion when people collaboratively work on
a task. This effect of graphics on language usage demonstrates that the configuration of graphics has an influence
on perspectives in event conceptualizations.

Introduction
Daily communication is by nature multi-modal, and
graphics often serve as strong visual aids for information exchange. People communicate with each other effectively by integrating information from linguistic and
graphical sources (Neilson and Lee (1994); Umata, Shimojima, and Katagiri (2000)). People grasp described
situations via graphics, taking advantage of their “handiness.” Because of this role they play, however, the way
people grasp target situations can be affected by graphics.
Recent investigations have demonstrated that the perspectives of spatial descriptions and linguistic expressions show some correspondence. Levinson (1996) observed that some languages make almost exclusive use
of absolute coordinates while European languages tend
to use egocentric or relative coordinates, reflecting people’s strategies for spatial memory and inference. Taylor
and Tversky showed that there are three perspectives of
spatial descriptions (i.e. a gaze tour/a route/a survey)
that roughly correspond to the frames of reference distinguished by Levinson in a linguistic method.
It has also been observed that the existence of graphics
provides two graphics-based perspectives in addition to
those used in only describing a world, and that there is a
trade-off between cognitive costs and alignment-failurerobustness (Umata, Katagiri, and Shimojima (2002)).
One of those perspectives is called the Observer-toGraphics Perspective, in which people conceptualize the
1 This research was supported in part by the Telecommunications Advancement Organization of Japan.

target events from the viewpoint of the observer relative
to the graphics. Suppose one says: “From Baker Street,
we’ll travel on the Bakerloo Line and then go right at
Oxford Circus to Holborn” while holding the map of the
London Underground shown in Figure 1. The movement
is described from the viewpoint of the observer relative
to the map. On the other hand, if one says: “From Baker
Street, we’ll travel on the Bakerloo Line and then go left
at Oxford Circus to Holborn,” the speaker “goes into”
the map world as an imaginary agent, taking the other
perspective called the Protagonist Perspective.
When people see and talk about world situations
through graphics, it is quite likely that the features of the
graphics affect the way people conceptualize the target
situations. In this research, we studied how the availability and configuration of graphics affect language usage
in communication and problem-solving. We focused on
the influence of graphical representations on the conceptualization of motion events.
Suppose that John and Mary are at the Goodge Street
tube station, discussing where to have dinner together.
Mary might suggest a place by saying (1) below, but she
would not do it by saying (2):
(1) Let’s go down to Waterloo Station on the Northern
Line and eat at Livebait.
(2) Let’s come down to Waterloo Station on the Northern
Line and eat at Livebait.
The current position where the two people are located becomes the reference point of the movement in this case,
and the movement can only be conceptualized as a movement away from the reference point, and hence the use
of “go.” Suppose, on the other hand, that John and Mary
are discussing their evening plans over the map of the
London Underground shown in Figure 1. Mary could
use, in this case, either (1) or (2). The availability of the
map and the configuration of icons on the map affect the
conceptualization of the movement here: the nearness of
the Waterloo Station icon from them makes it possible
for her to conceptualize the movement, in addition to the
previous distal movement conceptualization, as a movement in the map-world toward the reference point, their
current position. Graphical representation can have an
influence on language usage.
The use of “come” in (2) is possible because the map
and the graphical objects contained in it are readily avail-

Baker Street

Regent's Park

are four possible categories of perspectives on motion
events in graphical communication.
Goodge Street

(a) Observer-to-World Perspective
Bond Street

Oxford Circus

Tottenham
Court Road

Halborn

Chancery
Lane

Marble Arch
Covent Garden
Green Park

Bakerloo

Piccadilly
Circus

Leicester Square

Charing Cross

Central
Jubilee

Embankment

A movement is taken as a movement in the real
world and conceptualized from the viewpoint of
the observer within the real world. This perspective is concerned solely with the real world.
(b) Agent Perspective
A movement is taken as a movement in the real
world and conceptualized from the viewpoint of
the agent of motion. This perspective is concerned solely with the real world.
(c) Observer-to-Graphic Perspective

Northern
Piccadilly
Waterloo

Figure 1: Route Map of London’s Underground System
able to the speaker as a resource to formulate messages
to be communicated and problems to be reasoned about.
The locations and arrangements of objects can be expressed in terms of the relationships between graphical
objects and the speaker, as well as those between objects
themselves and the speaker. This availability, or the ease
of accessibility, of graphical representations should work
to amplify our communicative and reasoning capabilities
by providing us with a novel set of possibilities for constructing perspectival event conceptualizations.
We investigated the effect of graphical representations
on perspectival event conceptualizations through an empirical analysis of the use of motion verbs in actual twoparty task-oriented dialogues that make use of diagrams.
We first outline, in the next section, the classification of
the types of perspectival conceptualizations available in
communications that involve graphical representations.
We then examine, in the following section, the Japanese
dialogue data from our corpus involving a “Missionaries
and Cannibals” type puzzle. We found that the configuration of graphics affects the way people grasp the target
situations and that the perspectival conceptualizations of
the graphical objects are more prominent than those of
the real-world objects they represent.

Perspectives in Graphical Communication
In graphical communication, graphical representations
work as “windows” through which we can see the target situations the graphics describe. However, they also
serve as information processing “sites” because we can
take advantage of their handiness. Graphical representations are so deeply ingrained in how we grasp and describe target situations that their existence raises the possibility of setting novel perspectives in conceptualizing
events. Two such perspectives were observed in Umata,
Katagiri and Shimojima (2002), in addition to two perspectives concerned solely with the target world. There

A movement is taken as a movement in the map
space and conceptualized from the viewpoint of
the observer relative to the map. This perspective concerns both the real world and the graphic
space and creates a bridge between the two.
(d) Protagonist Perspective
A movement is conceptualized from the viewpoint of an imaginary agent in a narrative world.
In graphical communication situations, a graphic
provides the narrative domain for this perspective. The agent can be identified with either the
speaker or the listener. This perspective belongs
solely to the narrative world.
The first two categories are perspectives concerned
solely with the target world, which can also be observed
in communication without the use of graphics. When
you say “John is coming to my place from Goodge
Street” without a map, you are taking the Observer-toWorld Perspective. If you are actually driving to somebody’s place, you might say “I’m now going to the righthand side of Piccadilly Circus,” taking the Agent Perspective. If you are explaining the way to somebody via
a cellular phone, you might say, “Go south and turn left
at Leicester Square,” taking the Agent Perspective of the
person to whom you are talking.
In graphical communication, the latter two perspectives are available in addition to (a) and (b). Examples
from the HCRC Map Task Corpus analyzed in Umata,
Katagiri and Shimojima (2002) are shown below.

HCRC Map Task Corpus
The examples shown in the following sections are from
the HCRC Map Task Corpus. This map task is a cooperative one involving two participants. The two speakers
sit opposite one another, and one speaker gives instructions for a route to the other. Each has a map that the
other cannot see, and a route is marked on the Instruction Giver’s map while no route is marked on that of the
Instruction Follower. The speakers are told that their goal
is to reproduce the Giver’s route on the Follower’s map.
Their maps are not exactly identical and the speakers are

Collapsed
Shelter
Gazelles
Finish

Figure 3: Movement described in (4)
Figure 2: Movement described in (3)
told this explicitly at the beginning of their first session.
It is, however, up to them to discover how the two maps
differ. The maps describe fictitious areas.

Follower: Right
Giver: And then go round to your left
Follower: My left?
Giver: As you’re the wee guy

Observer-to-Graphic Perspective
First, consider the following utterances:
(3) (The Giver is showing the Follower the movement
shown in Figure 2.)
Giver: Okay? Now you need to drop straight down towards the gazelles.
Follower: Right, coming in at the top of them.
Giver: That’s right, and then go round the bottom of the
gazelles.
Follower: On the left-hand side?
Giver: And head off to the right-hand side ... So you go
under the gazelles

The expression “drop straight down to” would not
have been suitable without a map. It describes the motion
from the Observer-to-Graphic perspective, making use
of the spatial relation on the map. Other spatial expressions (“at the top of,” “bottom of,” “right-hand side,” and
“under”) also describe the spatial relation of the target
situation via the graphical relations. For example, “go
round the bottom of the gazelles” does not mean actually
going under the gazelles in the target situation. Also, notice that the deictic spatial expression “to the right of” is
based on the Observer-to-Graphic Perspective. It would
have been “to the left-hand side” if the giver was taking
the Protagonist Perspective.

Protagonist Perspective
Now we will examine the examples of the Protagonist
Perspective shown in (4):
(4) (The Giver is showing the Follower the movement
shown in Figure 3.)
Giver: Then down.
Follower: What do you mean down? Towards the bottom
of the paper?
Giver: Uh-huh
Follower: Uh-huh. Do I ... do I go by the collapsed shelter?
Giver: Uh-huh
Follower: Uh-huh
Giver: And then ... so that ... until you’ve got ...
Follower: The collapsed shelter’s on my right?
Giver: Uh-huh

The spatial expressions “on my right,” “to your left”
and “my left” are clearly based on the Protagonist Perspective. If the speakers were talking based on the
Observer-to-Graphic Perspective, they would have said
“on my left,” “to your right” and “my right,” respectively. The giver confirmed it with the utterance “as
you’re the wee guy,” introducing an imaginary agent explicitly. Thus, we can find many such expressions spoken
from the two graphic-based perspectives in communications that make use of graphics.

Perspectives and Alignment of Coordinates
We have observed that the existence of graphics provides two novel perspectives, namely the Observer-toGraphics Perspective and the Protagonist Perspective.
The former requires less cognitive resources because
one can grasp motion events as seen on graphics. This
perspective works if the coordinates are firmly aligned
between speakers. However, misalignment of coordinates leads to serious miscommunication. On the other
hand, the Protagonist Perspective is robust against misalignment, because conversation participants “go into the
graphics,” and the spatial relations between the actual
speakers and their graphics are not crucial in this perspective. Such a “trade-off” between description cost
and misalignment robustness was actually observed in
the HCRC Map Task Corpus (Umata, Katagiri and Shimojima (2002)).

Dialogues Involving a “Missionaries and
Cannibals” Type Puzzle
We have observed that the availability of graphics provides a novel set of perspectives based on graphics. Because people “see” the target situations via graphics from
those perspectives, it is quite likely that the features of
the graphics affect the way people conceptualize the target situations.
The dialogue data analyzed in this section were taken
from two collaborative problem solving experiments that
involved back-and-forth movement. Another important
feature of this task was that it involved two real-world
places that subjects were familiar with. We also examined how much effect the Observer-to-World Perspective
had on the usage of motion verbs.

N

Motion Verbs in Corpus
Verbs like come and go reflect a speaker’s reference
point, as shown in (1) and (2). Go indicates motion to
a location that is distinct from the reference point. Come
indicates motion toward the reference point2 .
The Japanese language also has a pair of motion verbs
similar to English come and go: kuru and iku. iku (go)
and tsurete-iku (take) indicate motion to a location that
is distinct from the reference point. kuru (come) and
tsurete-kuru (bring) indicate motion toward the reference
point3 . Iku-type verbs are used more widely than kurutype verbs in the sense that the former expresses movements that are neutral with respect to the reference point
locations. There are several verbs that can be classified
into these two classes. We examined the usage of these
two classes of verbs in the following two experiments.

Data
The data analyzed here was gathered from experiments
involving problem solving. In this task, two subjects collaboratively worked on a “Missionaries and Cannibals”
type puzzles using a diagram given to them. The structure of the puzzle was basically the same as the original one, except that it involved two actual places that the
subjects were familiar with. The time limit was seven
minutes.
The subjects recruited from local universities were
seated in separate, soundproof rooms and worked together as a pair using a shared virtual whiteboard and
a full duplex audio connection. The diagram was shown
on their whiteboards, and the subjects could draw and
erase freely except that they could not erase the original
diagram. All inputs to the screen were by stylus, and any
writing or erasing by one participant would appear simultaneously on the partner’s screen. A pointing action
with the stylus was shown by a cursor on the screen, and
the subjects could see what their partner was pointing to.
The subjects were video-taped during the task.

The Motorcycle Gang Task
The puzzle was almost the same as the original one, except that we used two actual places and replaced the missionaries and cannibals with two teams of motorcycle
gangs. The subjects were told to work out how all members of both gangs could be transported safely. This task
involved only two kinds of motion: forward and backward motion between two places. The time limit was
seven minutes, including the time they used to read the
problem sheet.
2 Actually, come and go have more complicated semantics,
as shown in Fillmore (1997). The scheme presented here is a
rather simplified version, but serves well enough for the present
purpose.
3 There is one clear difference between English and
Japanese, though. When a speaker is trying to go to the hearer,
s/he will say, “I’ll come to you,” while iku (go) is used rather
than kuru (come) in Japanese. However, this difference is not
relevant here.

Saidaiji

N

Nara

Saidaiji

15 min.
15 min.

Nara

Figure 4: Horizontal and Vertical Diagrams

Experiment 1
The first experiment was conducted to examine the effect
of the configurational features of graphics when a perspective based on graphics is taken. The motion in this
task was much more simplified, though there was backand-forth motion that was not in the HCRC Map Task.
The problem involved motion between two actual places
on a motorbike so that the subject could also directly access the real world. This task has a general direction of
motion: all six boys have to move from Saidaiji to Nara.
Each of these locations is about the same distance from
the experiment site. The bike was supposed to be able to
carry only two people at one time, and someone had to
ride back on it. Two kinds of graphical representations
were provided as shown in Figure 4. One had a horizontal configuration, in which the two icons of the places are
at about the same distance from the subject4 . The other
one had a vertical configuration, which had a variation in
the distance from the subject to each place. Each condition had eight pairs of subjects.
The speakers were not supposed to be the ones moving between the two places in this task setting, so the
Agent Perspective was not possible. Thus, the possible perspectives were expected to be the Observer-toWorld, the Observer-to-Graphic and the Protagonist Perspective. Because the motion is taken as that in the map
from the real-world observer in the Observer-to-World
Perspective, it is likely that the spatial relation between
the speaker and the graphical objects plays an important
role. The assumption was that, under that perspective,
kuru(come)-type verbs would be used for the motion to
Nara more frequently in the vertical condition than in the
horizontal one, because they would be affected by the
nearness of the Nara icon in the diagram to the speaker.
Results of Experiment 1 The distribution of motion
verbs was as follows:
Iku-type verbs and kuru-type verbs exhibited significantly different distributions depending on the direction of movement in both conditions (horizontal: χ2 (1) =
93.64, p < 0.01; vertical (χ2 (1) = 53.98, p < 0.01). In
both the horizontal and vertical conditions, iku-type
4 Note that it is common for maps in Japan to have a direction other than north at the top.

Table 1: Distribution of iku-type and kuru-type verbs.

Horizontal
Vertical

Saidaiji → Nara
Nara → Saidaiji
Saidaiji → Nara
Nara → Saidaiji

iku-type
66
4
47
1

kuru-type
2
45
18
45

V ertical
com e-type (fro)
com e-type (to)
go-type (fro)
go-type (to)
H orizontal

-5

0

5

Figure 5: Difference in distribution of motion verbs
verbs were predominantly employed for the movement
from Saidaiji to Nara, whereas kuru-type verbs were
predominantly employed from Nara to Saidaiji. This
distributional imbalance indicates that our four perspective types are not sufficient to explain the whole story
of graphical communication in problem solving settings,
since, for the horizontal condition, movement in each
direction could be considered neither toward nor away
from the reference point under all four perspectives.
Hence one would predict that all movement in the horizontal condition should be expressed with iku-type verbs.
We therefore stipulated an additional perspective, the
Problem Perspective, to account for this distributional
imbalance. As the task for “Missionaries and Cannibals”
type problems is to transport all parties collectively from
one location to another, the nature of the problem itself
induces a general direction of movement from the source
location to the goal location. This is equivalent to positing the reference point at the source location, which is
Saidaiji in our experimental setting. Under the Problem
Perspective each movement is taken as a movement either toward or away from the reference point as posited
by the structure of the problem itself, and this perspective
is expected to appear in transportation type problems in
both concrete and abstract domains.
Comparing the horizontal and the vertical conditions,
we notice that kuru-type verbs are more frequently used
for the movements from Saidaiji to Nara. Figure 5 shows
the difference in the distribution of motion verbs between
the two conditions. The motion verbs exhibit significantly different distributions between the horizontal and
the vertical conditions (χ2 (3) = 17.65, p < 0.01). More
concretely, the frequency of the kuru-type in Saidaiji to

Nara motion is significantly larger in the vertical condition (adjusted residual: horizontal = -3.87, vertical =
3.87).
The Problem Perspective sets a general reference point
at Saidaiji, the source of the whole transportation process. It appears, however, that the graphics configuration may be able to modify the reference point settings.
The kuru-type showed higher frequency for Saidaiji to
Nara in the vertical condition than in the horizontal condition. This shows that the spatial relation between the
speaker and the graphical objects makes the transition to
the Observer-to-Graphic Perspective, and this affects the
reference point setting accordingly. The handiness of the
graphical representation can cause a switch in perspectives and thus a shift in the reference point.
In contrast to the increase in kuru-type verbs in the vertical condition, we notice no increase in iku-type verbs
for the movements in the opposite direction. The low
frequency of the iku-type for Nara to Saidaiji suggests
that the perspective switch from the Problem Perspective
to the Observer-to-Graphic Perspective is preferred when
the resulting perspective takes the movement as a toward
movement rather than as an away-from movement. This
asymmetry also suggests that the Protagonist Perspective was not playing a significant role, as switching to
it would have increased the occurrence of iku-type verbs
here.
Thus, it was shown that the effect of the Problem Perspective defined by the task was the most prominent factor in reference point setting, but that the configuration
of a graphical representation often affects this reference
point setting.

Experiment 2
The previous experiment showed that the Problem Perspective was the most influential factor, while the configuration of graphics also affects the usage of motion
verbs. Now we will look into the effect of the real-world
configuration in conversations involving graphics. The
setup of Experiment 2 differs from that of our previous
experiment as follows:
• Both of the two conditions had a vertical configuration.
• One of the locations was the current position of the
subject (ATR), and the other was a place some distance
away.
• One condition was consistent with the physical world,
while the other condition was inconsistent with the
physical world.
The difference was that one diagram had a configuration consistent with the real-world relationship, while
the other did not; that is, the nearer icon in the graphics
represented a farther place in the real world. The general starting point was placed at the top of both diagrams.
These diagrams are shown in Figure 6.
If the real-world configuration has some effect on setting the reference point, the motion verbs would show

N
ATR

Saidaiji

Conclusion

N

15 min.

ATR

Saidaiji

Consistent

Inconsistent

Figure 6: Consistent and inconsistent diagrams
different distributions between the consistent condition
and the inconsistent condition. The frequency of kurutype verbs in start-to-goal motion is expected to be lower
in the inconsistent condition than in the consistent one.
If the real-world configuration did not have much effect,
then the distribution would be almost the same between
these two conditions. Each condition had eight pairs of
subjects.
Results of Experiment 2 The distribution of motion
verbs was as shown in Table 2.
Table 2: Distribution of iku-type and kuru-type verbs in
Exoeriment 2.
Consistent
Inconsistent

Start → Goal
Goal → Start
Start → Goal
Goal → Start

spective in graphical communication settings.

iku-type
70
1
47
4

kuru-type
17
48
25
42

No significant difference was observed between the
consistent and inconsistent conditions (χ2 (3) = 7.00 <
7.81, p = 0.05). Furthermore, a comparison of each condition with the vertical condition in Experiment 1 also
did not show any significant difference (consistent vs.
vertical: χ2 (3) = 2.14 < 7.81, p = 0.05; inconsistent vs.
vertical: χ2 (3) = 2.83 < 7.81, p = 0.05). The distribution
in each condition was similar to the distribution in the
vertical condition of Experiment 1. The kuru-type was
observed in the Start-to-Goal motion in both conditions.
The frequency of the iku-type for the Nara to Saidaiji
motion was again quite low.
The results show that spatial consistency did not contribute to shifting the reference point. The Observer-toWorld Perspective did not have a strong influence in conversation with a diagram. The Protagonist Perspective
was also weak in this setting.
It turned out that the spatial property of graphics had a
stronger effect on event conceptualization than that of its
target world. This suggests that the Observer-to-Graphic
Perspective is stronger than the Observer-to-World Per-

We have analyzed the effect of graphics on language usage in communication. Based on an empirical analysis
of the uses of movement verbs in actual conversational
data, we have shown that the configuration of a graphical
representation affects the reference point setting when
people conceptualize motion events from graphics-based
perspectives. We found that: (1) the task settings provided yet another kind of perspective, the Problem Perspective, setting a general reference point to the general origin; (2) the Problem Perspective is stronger than
graphics-based perspectives; (3) the Observer-to-Map
Perspective is the next strongest; and (4) the real-world
perspective does not contribute, in comparison with the
graphics-based perspective, to the reference point shift.
These results suggest that we are mainly grasping an
event of the target world via its representation, rather
than from the event itself, in graphical communication
situations. The point of using graphical representations
is the convenience and the ease of access they give us,
which helps us to grasp an event through the mediation of
graphics. This mediation makes it possible to talk about
distal objects by manipulating their proximal counterparts, thereby facilitating both communication and reasoning processes. This provides us with a novel set of
perspectives based on graphics, and conceptualization
of target events may be affected by the features of the
graphics when people rely on those perspectives.

References
Fillmore, C. J. (1997). Lectures on Deixis. Stanford,
CA.: CSLI Publications.
Levinson, S. (1996).
Frames of Reference and
Molyneux’s Question: Cross-linguistic Evidence. In
P. Bloom, M. A. Peterson, L. Nadel, and M. Garrett.
(Eds.) Space and Language, 109–169. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Neilson, I., and J. Lee (1994). Conversations with
Graphics: Implications for the Design of Natural Language/Graphics Interfaces. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies 40, 509–541.
Taylor, H. A., and B. Tversky (1996). Perspective in Spatial descriptions. Journal of Memory and Language
35, 371–391.
Umata, I., A. Shimojima, and Y. Katagiri (2000). Talking
through Graphics: An Empirical Study of the Sequential Integration of Modalities. Proceedings of the 22nd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
529–534.
Umata, I., Y. Katagiri, and A. Shimojima (2002). Movement Conceptualizations in Graphical Communication. In Hegaty, M., Meyer, B. and N. Hari Narayanan
(Eds.) Diagrammatic Representation and Inference
LNAI 2317, 3–17. Berlin: Springer.

