UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How are speech and gesture related?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/35b912q8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Yoshida, Hanako
Smith, Linda B
Ping, Raedy M
et al.

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How are Speech and Gesture Related?
Hanako Yoshida (hayoshid@indiana.edu)
Linda B. Smith (smith4@indiana.edu)
Raedy M. Ping (rping@indiana.edu)
Elizabeth L. Davis (elldavis@indiana.edu)

Psychology Department, Indiana University, 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405-7007 USA

Abstract
People gesture when they speak. Despite considerable
attention from a variety of disciplines, the precise nature
of the relation between gesture, speech and thought has
remained elusive. The research reported here considers
two very different hypotheses about the fundamental
relationship. By one account, gesture is a consequence of
physiological arousal. By another account, gesture use
reflects more cognitive processes and is strongly linked
to mental representation. This paper seeks the
mechanism underlying the link between gesture and
speech by showing that both mental representation and
physiological arousal are reflected in our gesture use.

Introduction
Communication is the activity of transmitting
information about things in the world. In everyday life,
we refer to things by employing a number of
communicative tools. Language, gestures, facial
expressions, and non-linguistic vocalizations are often
considered communicative tools. Interestingly, we
integrate multiple modalities in our communication and
indeed, past research suggests a tight link between
modalities, and particularly between speech and
gesture.
This study is motivated by two approaches to the
study of gesture. McNeill (1992), Kita (2000) and
McNeill & Duncan (2000) consider the relationship
between the specific forms of gesture and speech,
specifically between iconic gesture and speech. An
iconic gesture is one in which the speed, motion, or
shape of the gesturing hand resembles the meaning
being conveyed. McNeil and colleagues consider the
emergence of iconicity in gesture as natural, and due to
the embodied and imagistic nature of thought. Another
approach, however, considers gesture as a consequence
not of meaning, but of arousal. Schwarts & Black,
(1996) and Iverson & Thelen (1999) particularly
suggest that gestures can be explained as an overflow of
one’s excitement, which is physiologically produced by
speech. The idea here is that speech is a motor program,
and as the speaker is aroused—by topic or by the very
act of speaking—that energy overflows and is evident
in other bodily movements.

This present research is concerned with one
flashpoint in these accounts: the idea that gesture use
fluctuates. At present, the variability in gesture use and
in kind of gesturers is not well explained. Yet this very
variability should be the key to underlying mechanism.
We demonstrate the bi-directional relationship between
gesture, thoughts and arousal by confirming that both
mental representation and arousal are reflected in and
influence iconic gesture use. We experimentally
manipulate speech rate as a means of increasing the
“motor overflow” from speech. Although speech rate is
at best an indirect marker of arousal, we believe it is a
good starting point for a mechanistic explanation of
variability in gesture use.

Iconicity
Communicative tools in general range from
conventional forms that are more arbitrary, to less
conventional forms that are more iconic. An example of
the conventional forms in traditional verbal languages
would be the word “dog” which can hold the meaning
only when both senders and receivers are
knowledgeable about the rule indicating the label—‘a
dog’ means a dog. This form can also be seen in written
language when one spells out letters, d, o, g to refer to a
dog. Again, receivers can make sense out of the
particular combination of letters only by knowing the
convention, that the order and the combination of letters
are signifying a dog. People also refer iconically. For
example, in verbal language use, one might imitate a
sound of a dog to refer to a dog (e.g., “woof, woof!”),
and in American Sign Language the word for a dog
consists of a pat on one’s leg and a snap of one’s
fingers as if calling a dog.
People also often gesture iconically (Kita, 2000). For
example, a speaker might make a circle with one’s
hands to describe shape and/or the size of a plate to
which the person refers. Indeed, even nonverbal
primates may gesture to convey meaning. For example,
Tanner and Byrne (1996) recently reported that several
observed gestures of gorillas are iconic. Another
example that highlights both natural emergence and
ease of iconic gesture use is an observation made by
Goldin-Meadow and Feldman (1977). They observed

communication formation of linguistically deprived
deaf children who were unable to acquire oral language
naturally and who were not exposed to a standard
manual language. They reported that children
spontaneously refer to things by using iconic gestures.
All these results suggest a tight and natural relationship
between gesture and thought. If this is so, then
experimental manipulations of the content of thought
should have direct and measurable effects on gesture.
We show experimental evidence for this connection
in Experiment 1. Participants were asked to read and retell the story to their children. A story was about either
a carp, which was expected to induce more gesture that
engages a hand held in a vertical position or a stingray,
which was expected to induce more gesture that
engages a hand held in a horizontal position. If mental
representations are reflected in our gesture use, then we
should expect these different gesture patterns across
participants who read the same story about the two
different fishes. Moreover, Experiment 1 also serves as
baseline measure of gesture production with a normal
speech rate. This baseline was used to manipulate
participants’ speech rate in Experiment 2.

Gesture as motor overflow
The second idea that gestures result from an overflow
in the motor program for speech is not one that has
received much empirical attention, nor one that has
been well specified theoretically. However, this idea
suggests that amount of motor activity in speaking
should have direct influences on amount of gestures,
and this should be thought so independently of the
content of speech. Accordingly, to test this idea, in
Experiment 2, we entrained speech to either a slow or
fast metronome. Do gestures decrease when people
speak at slower than normal rates? Do gestures increase
given the faster rate of speaking? They should if
gestures reflect motor overflow. Finally, does rate of
speech influence rate of gesture independent of
content? An affirmative answer would suggest two
independent driving forces behind gesture: the
meaningful content of thought and arousal.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Twenty mothers and their children whose
ages ranged from 26 to 61 months participated in the
study.
Procedure Participants were assigned to either the
Carp condition or the Stingray condition. The
difference in the manipulation between the conditions
was a kind of fish used as a hero of the story. Parents
were presented with a sheet of paper, which contained
either a carp story or a stingray story and were asked to

read and retell the story from memory to their child.
Participants were also asked to have the child tell the
story back to them. While participants were retelling a
story, the aspects of their story telling were recorded by
a video camera for a later coding. The story used in the
study is provided in Table 1.

Result
Each parent’s session was coded for several variables:
all gestures, two target hand positions and speech rates.
All variables were measured as rates, that is, production
per minute. In order to code for these variables, the
video was played in slow motion; the exact times that a
hand movement began and ended were coded. Two
target hand positions were counted. The “Carpswimming” gesture consisted of holding the hand flat
palm perpendicular to the horizontal table surface and
the “Stingray-swimming” gesture was defined as a
gesture in which the hand was flat palm down parallel
to the horizontal surface of the table. These gestures
were coded as either corresponding or noncorresponding gestures depending on whether the hand
position corresponds to the fish in the assigned story
(e.g., a carp gesture given a carp story was
corresponding gesture and a stingray gesture given a
carp story was a non-corresponding gesture.) All
gestures were independently scored by two observers.
Participants produced gestures (target gestures plus
all other gestures) at a rate of 4.1 gestures per a minute.
However, as shown in Figure 1, participants produced
more target gestures that corresponded to the story than
gestures that did not correspond. In addition,
storytellers held their hands in a horizontal position
more often when telling the story about the stingray
than when telling one about a carp. Finally, the average
speech rate was 141.0 words per a minute.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants Twenty mothers and their children whose
ages ranged from 23 to 60 months participated in the
study.
Procedure The procedure was the same as that of
Experiment 1 with an exception. Participants were
assigned to one of four conditions: Carp condition, fast
metronome, Carp condition with slow metronome,
Stingray condition with fast metronome and Stingray
condition with slow metronome. The speeds of the
metronome were selected based on the average speech
rate observed in Experiment 1. Since the normal speech
rate in Experiment 1 was 140 words per a minute, we
selected 150 beats per a minute for the Fast condition
and 80 beats per a minute for the Slow condition. We
were conservative in attempting to entrain speech to a

Table
Table 1: Story used for the study: The Adventures of
(Carl the Carp / Steve the Stingray)
(Carl the Carp / Steve the Stingray) was a happy,
friendly (carp with a round, silver body, big,
round eyes, and a flowing, fan-like tail / stingray
with a flat, gray body, beady black eyes, and a
long, whip-like tail) who loved swimming with
his other (carp / stingray) friends. They especially
liked swimming into the depths of the water and
returning to the surface. One day, when (Carl the
Carp / Steve the Stingray) and his friends were
enjoying another adventure in the depths of the
water, they sensed some danger. They were
eating lunch when, all of a sudden, there was a
giant shadow looming over them. (Carl the Carp /
Steve the Stingray) turned around, but it was too
late! He found himself inside the belly of a big
fish. He thought to himself, “This is the end of
(Carl the Carp / Steve the Stingray). I’ll never be
able to swim around with my (carp / stingray)
friends and have fun again.” Just as he was
thinking this, he heard a loud rumbling and was
pushed out from the fish’s stomach. His friends,
who had been hiding in the rocks, swam
cautiously towards him to make sure he was
okay. “(Carl / Steve),” one of his friends said,
“that big fish just burped you up! Are you all
right?” “Yes,” a relieved (Carl the Carp / Steve
the Stingray) said, “I’m fine. Let’s finish our
adventure.” Then, (Carl the Carp / Steve the
Stingray) and all of his (carp / stingray) friends
swam happily off for another fun adventure.

Results
First, we did successfully manipulate speech rate, t = 2.44, p < .05. The average number of words per minute
was 145.5 in the Fast condition and 120.0 in the Slow
condition. Second, as can be seen in Figure 2,
participants produced more gestures per a minute in the
Fast condition than they did in the Slow condition. This
indicates that gesture production is tied to speech rate.
As shown in Figures 3 and 4, content effects are seen
in the both Fast and Slow conditions, but the effect is
reliable only in the Fast condition (for Fast condition; t
=2.198, p< .05, and for Slow condition; t =1.405, p=

.18.) Participants in both Fast and Slow conditions
produced more gestures that corresponded to the story
that they retold than gestures that did not correspond.
The fact that speech entrained to a slow metronome, 80
beats per a minute, decreases gesture use and weakens
the content effect on iconic gestures suggests a direct
link between arousal and content.

Discussion
The two experiments yield 3 main results. First, the
content of thought directly influences hand position.
Thinking about carps leads one to holds one’s hand
perpendicular to the tabletop. Thinking about stingrays
leads to hands held in a horizontal position over the
table. By experimentally manipulating the content of
thought, one manipulates hand position. This is
consistent with the proposal that gestures iconically
represent meaning. Second, speech and gesture are
readily entrained to a rhythmic beat. And, faster rates of
speech lead to more gestures and slow rates of speech
lead to fewer gestures. This is consistent with the idea
of gestures emerging as a consequence of arousal.
Amount of energy appears to be is a driving force in
gesture. Third, arousal (or rate of speech) appears
linked to the frequency of iconic gestures. This
suggests, contrary to the motor overflow hypothesis,
that the relevant activation concerns meaningful content
and not just the speech motor plan. High activation
leads to more iconically related gestures as if high
arousal leads to more highly activated meanings that
emerge in both spoken words and in meaning related
gestures.

Figures

gesture per a minute

faster rate in this first entraining experiment in an effort
to maximize our success in entraining speech. The
parent storytellers were not told about the purpose of
the metronomes, but were instead told to ignore them.
The task of individual participants was identical to that
of Experiment 2.

1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
correspond

non-correspond

gesture types

Figure 1: correspond and non-correspond gesture

References

gesture per a minute

All gesture
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Slow

Fast
metronome beats

Figure 2: all gestures per minute.

gesture per a minute

Fast
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
correspond

non-correspond

gesture types

Figure 3: correspond and non-correspond gesture in
Fast condition

gesture per a minute

Slow
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
correspond

non-correspond

gesture types

Figure 4: correspond and non-correspond gesture in
Slow condition

Goldin-Meadow, Susan & Feldman, Heidi (1977) The
development of language-like communication
without a language model. Science. 197(4301): 401403. US: American Assn. for the Advancement of
Science.
Iverson, J.M. & Thelen, E. (1999). Hand, mouth and
brain: The dynamic emergence of speech and
gesture. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 6 (11-12),
19-40.
Kita S. (2000). Why Do People Gesture? Cognitive
Studies, 7 (1), 9-21
Kita, S. (2000). How representational gestures help
speaking. In D. McNeill (Ed.), Language and
gesture, pp. 162-185. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and mind: What gestures
reveal about thought. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
McNeill D. & Duncan, S. (2000). Growth points in
thinking-for-speaking. In D. McNeill (Ed.), Language
and Gesture: Window into Thought and Action, 141161. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, in
press.
Schwartz, D. L., & Black, J. B. (1996) Shutting
between depictive models and abstract rules:
Induction and fallback. Cognitive Science, 20, 457498
Tanner, J. E. & Byrne, R. W. (1996) Representation of
action through iconic gesture in a captive Lowland
gorilla. Current Anthropology, 37, 162-173

