UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interactional Context in Graphical Communication

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7qr1x1b0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Healey, Patrick G. T.
Garrod, Simon
Fay, Nicholas
et al.

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interactional Context in Graphical Communication
Patrick G. T. Healey

Information, Media and Communication Research Group
Department of Computer Science,
Queen Mary University of London.

Simon Garrod, Nicholas Fay
HCRC
Department of Psychology,
University of Glasgow.

John Lee and Jon Oberlander

HCRC and Department of Architecture,
Division of Informatics,
University of Edinburgh.
Abstract
A body of empirical evidence indicates that interactional context has a key influence on the form and
interpretation of language. This paper reviews a series of experiments which indicate that interactional
context also plays a key role in the interpretation
of drawings and sketches. Two graphical communication tasks, analogous to definite reference tasks,
are described. The findings from these tasks show
significant parallels between the mechanisms of coordination in graphical dialogue and natural language dialogue. Specifically; the coordination of
graphical representation types by ‘dialogue’ participants, the contraction of recurrent ‘graphical referring expressions’, e↵ects of direct interaction on
the use of abstract drawings, and the development
of community-specific graphical conventions.

Interactional Context in Dialogue
Conversation is a, if not the, key context of understanding for language. People’s use of language to
represent objects, events and situations is sensitive
to, amongst other things; who they are speaking to,
the mutual availability of referents, the history of
their conversation and their (dis)joint membership
of cultural and linguistic sub-communities (Hymes,
1972; Clark, 1998). Evidence for the direct influence
of interactional context on interpretation and understanding comes from a variety of sources (see Krauss
and Fussell, 1996, for a review). One example is
provided by work on the Collaborative Model of dialogue (Schober and Clark, 1989; Clark and WilkesGibbs, 1986). Wilkes-Gibbs and Clark (1992) have
shown that full understanding of referring expressions depends on the degree of active participation in
conversation by speaker and addressees. Non-active
participants in a conversation, such as passive sideparticipants, overhearers, or bystanders, have more
difficulty in interpreting referring expressions than
active participants. This is observed even when, in
gross informational terms, they are equivalent to active participants.
A second example of the influence of interactional
context comes from studies of conceptual and linguistic co-ordination in dialogue. Garrod and Anderson (1987) have shown that conversational partners tend to match or ‘entrain’ on the form and in-

terpretation of utterances during interaction. Where
several types of semantically distinct referring expressions are possible for describing a location, people show a strong preference for matching the type
of expression used by their conversational partner.
Brannigan, Pickering and Cleland (2000) have observed similar entrainment e↵ects with syntax. Garrod and Anderson (1987) argue that these dialogue
phenomena reflect the operation of a basic dialogue
co-ordination mechanism which simplifies the processes of production and comprehension in interaction.

Interactional Context in Graphical
Dialogue
Intuitively, it might be supposed that graphical representations would be less sensitive to interactional
context. One reason for this is that the production
and use of drawings and sketches is normally treated,
and analysed, as an activity more akin to monologue
than dialogue (cf. Scaife and Rogers, 1996). There
is evidence, however, that this underestimates both
the actual and potential use of drawing activities as
a mode of interaction. Anecdotally, drawings are often incrementally produced and modified as part of a
conversational exchange. For example, sketch maps
and explanatory diagrams form a familiar extension
of many routine conversations.
van Sommers (1984) provides evidence from a
questionnaire study that approximately half of routine, non-work, drawing activities take place with
or for an audience. Although van Sommers does
not report how often these interactions involve direct graphical exchanges, his findings demonstrate
the variety of interactional contexts in which drawing occurs. The most frequently cited category is the
production of sketch maps of a local area, either as
part of an explanation or in order to give directions.
The second most frequently cited category relates to
activities with children including; games and amusements, teaching or helping with homework and helping children learn to draw. Additional categories of
‘public’ drawing include; sketching of hair, makeup
and clothing, sketching house plans, drawing to express feelings, defacing pictures and drawing people.

The collaborative development and modification
of sketches is a feature of many specialised work related interactions, such as architect-architect and
architect-client (Neilson and Lee, 1994). We estimate that in the architects’ practice studied by
Healey and Peters (2001) approximately 30% of
daily drawing activities occurred as an integrated
part of a conversational exchange. Engle (1998) provides experimental evidence that graphics, gesture
and language combine in explanatory dialogues to
create composite communicative signals (cf. Clark,
1996). Overall, there is a prima facie case that
sketches and drawings are often closely integrated
into interaction and that this may have significant
implications for their interpretation.
A second source of scepticism about the role of interactional context in the interpretation of sketches
and drawings is the intuition that drawings and
sketches are easier to interpret than language. Arguably, many of the interactional influences on language interpretation are associated with the conventional nature of linguistic representation. Coordinated interpretation of utterances requires the
concerted application of conventions. Interaction is
used to maintain and modify those interpretations.
Drawings and sketches can exploit iconicity to provide a less arbitrary form of representation. Consequently, we might suppose that they would be less
dependent on interaction to secure their interpretation. This idea is most plausible for, say, sketches of
buildings or people but it does not cover the range of
uses to which sketches and drawings are put. Explanations involving sketches of Venn diagrams or Euler
circles provide perhaps the most obvious counterexample.

Experiments on Graphical Dialogue
The present paper summarises the findings from
a series of experiments which, considered together,
provide evidence that the interpretation of drawings
and sketches is sensitive to interactional context.
In particular, that interactional context a↵ects the
form, interpretation and understanding of sketches;
and that the mechanisms and processes that give
rise to these e↵ects show important parallels to those
identified for natural language dialogue.
The findings reported below are drawn from experiments involving two basic referential communication tasks, the Concept Drawing Task and the Music Drawing Task, in which pairs of subjects communicate about a variety of concepts using exclusively
graphical means. These tasks can be thought of as
two-way or conversational variants of the party game
‘Pictionary’ (TM).

The Experimental Tasks
The basic Concept Drawing Task uses an ordered list
of twelve concept words drawn from the categories;
places (e.g., “theatre”, “art gallery”, “museum”),

people (e.g., “Robert de Niro”, “Arnold Schwarzenneger”, “Clint Eastwood”), television programmes
(e.g., “drama”, “soap-opera”, “cartoon”), objects (e.g., “television”, “computer” “microwave”),
and abstract concepts (e.g., “loud”, “homesick”,
“poverty”). One participant, the ‘Drawer’, is given
an ordered list of twelve words. Their partner, the
‘Chooser’, is presented with an unordered list of the
same twelve words plus four distractors. The task is
for the Drawer to take each word in turn from their
list and produce a sketch of it so that their partner,
the Chooser, can identify the concept depicted. The
aim is for the Chooser to determine the original ordered list of twelve concept words that the Drawer
started with.
The basic Music Drawing Task is similar to the
Concept Drawing task but uses pieces of music in
place of concept words. The pieces are relatively
unknown 30 second piano solos in a variety of genres
and styles. In the typical procedure, the Drawer
and the Chooser are seated in separate rooms. The
Drawer listens to a target piece of piano music and
produces a sketch of it. The Chooser has two pieces
of music, the target and a distractor, and tries to
select which piece is the one depicted by the Drawer.
Playback of the pieces is self-paced and all drawing
takes place on a shared virtual whiteboard which
logs the drawing data for analysis (Healey, Swoboda,
King, forthcoming).
In both tasks, subjects are free to draw anything
they like; the only restriction is that they do not use
letters or numbers. The types of drawing produced
for each concept or piece of music varies substantially between pairs, some examples are provided in
Figures , 2 and 3. All things being equal, each pair
tends to establish their own conventional solutions
to the communication problems posed by the task.
Subjects appear to find both tasks enjoyable and
engaging and perform them with above chance accuracy.

E↵ects of Interactional Context
A number of experiments have been performed
using these tasks which suggest important parallels between the e↵ects of interactional context on
graphical and verbal dialogue. Here we provide an
overview of the findings from these experiments and
discuss their implications for investigations of graphical representation and models of human interaction.
Interactional Entrainment. One of the simplest
pieces of evidence for e↵ects of interactional context
on the use of drawing comes from the Music Drawing task. Participants in this task produce drawings
that can be reliably classified into two basic types1 ;
‘Abstract’ and ‘Figurative’ (Kappa = 0.9, N = 287,
k= 2). Abstract drawings, illustrated in Figure 1,
1

For ease of exposition a third, ‘Composite, type is
not discussed here

Figure 1: Example Abstract Drawings from Two
Trials of the Music Drawing Task

Figure 3: A Sequence of ‘Robert deNiro’s from the
Concept Drawing Task

Figure 2: Example Figurative Drawings from Two
Successive Trials of the Music Task
typically involve graph-like representations of e.g.,
pitch, melody, rhythm or intensity. By contrast,
Figurative drawings, illustrated in Figure 2 typically
depict recognisable objects, figures or scenes. Where
pairs of participants in the task both take the role
of Drawer (either by alternating roles or in manipulations in which both participants draw at the same
time) they show a reliable tendency to match each
another in their use of drawing the Figurative and
Abstract drawing types (Healey, Swoboda, Umata,
& Katagiri, 2001). As noted above, this pattern of
entrainment between the participants in an interaction is also established for semantic and syntactic aspects of utterances in dialogue (Garrod and Anderson, 1987; Brannigan, Pickering and Cleland, 2000).
Garrod and Anderson (1987) argue that entrainment
constitutes a basic mechanism through which conceptual co-ordination is achieved in dialogue.
Contraction of Recurrent References. The
procedure for the Concept Drawing task typically
requires pairs to repeat the same set of twelve target
words, in di↵erent orders, over several trials. This
manipulation ensures that each word is drawn, and
identified, several times by each pair. This is designed to reproduce the procedure followed by Clark
and Wilkes-Gibbs (1986) who investigated the production of recurrent (verbal) referring expressions
by conversational partners. Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs
found that both the average number of words and av-

erage number of turns used to refer to a target item
(in their case a tangram figure) rapidly declined with
the number of repetitions. Experiments with the
concept drawing task show the same pattern of reduction. This is illustrated in Figure 3 which shows
a sequence of four trials (ordered left to right and
top to bottom). Where target concepts recur, the
drawings that represent them quickly become simplified. This is indexed both by simple quantitative
measures such as the amount of ‘ink’ and number of
lines used, and by their complexity as estimated by
human judges and calculations of their visual complexity.2
Experiments to evaluate the e↵ects of these contractions on the intelligibility of the drawings for
non-participants are currently in progress. However,
it appears likely that they will have a substantial
e↵ect. The first drawing in Figure 3 has a number of elements that might allow a non-participating
observer to guess the identity of the individual depicted. For example it includes a sketch map of Italy,
sketches of a TV and VCR, and an image of a taxi
(which refers to a de Niro film). By contrast, the
last sketch in the sequence, consisting of a star and
a dollar sign would be much harder to decipher.
E↵ects of Direct Interaction. Experiments
with the Music Drawing task have investigated the
influence of level of communicative interaction between participants on the type of drawing (Abstract
or Figurative) that they produce. The basic contrast is between an interactive and non-interactive
version of the task (Healey et al., 2001; Healey, Swoboda, Umata and Katagiri, forthcoming). In the
2

The analysis of visual complexity is based on a psychophysical measure developed by Pelli Burns Farell and
Moore (in press) and is based on the formula: Complexity = Perimeter2 / Ink.

non-interactive version, subjects alternate between
acting as Drawer and Chooser on each trial and
the whiteboard is configured to prevent the Chooser
from drawing. In this version of the task each trial
approximates to a single turn in the communicative
exchange. In the interactive version the task is altered so that both members of a pair draw at the
same time. They have one piece of music each and
must determine, using only drawing, whether their
pieces are the same or di↵erent. In this case there
is a richer communicative exchange. In addition to
producing drawings of their pieces, subjects employ
devices such as arrows, underlining, and circling to
query and revise various aspects of their drawings.
Each trial in the interactive task thus approximates
to a number of ‘conversational’ turns.
The e↵ect of the di↵erence in level of communicative interaction can be seen in Table 1 (the ‘Composite’ category refers to drawings that combine Figurative and Abstract elements). Where both members
of a pair can interact directly on the whiteboard,
they rely primarily on the Abstract drawings. In
the non-interactive task, where they are alternating
between drawing and choosing, they rely primarily
on Figurative drawings.
Table 1: Distribution of Drawing Types in the Music
Drawing Task
Task
Interactive
NonInteractive

Abstract
59%
27%

Drawing Type
Figurative Composite
21%
16%
64%
8%

Further evidence for the importance of direct interaction comes from analysis of the logs of drawing activity (Healey, Swoboda, Umata and Katagiri,
forthcoming). The Abstract and Figurative drawing
types are not distinguishable in terms of the number
of lines or ink (pixels) involved in producing them,
nor in terms of the accuracy of responses associated with their use. Considerations of the efficiency
or e↵ectiveness of the two drawing types alone do
not appear to explain their pattern of use. However, drawing activities overlap approximately 20%
more when subjects produce Abstract drawings than
when they produce Figurative drawings. This suggests it is the availability of specific mechanisms of
communicative interaction, such as the circling and
underlining of each others drawings, that is critical
to the co-ordinated use of the Abstract drawings.
Community-based Conventions. Perhaps the
most interesting parallel between graphical and verbal dialogue comes from experiments on the emergence of graphical conventions in experimental ‘subcommunities’ (cf. Garrod and Doherty, 1994).

Data from an unpublished experiment with the
Music Drawing task demonstrates that, for this
task at least, the patterns of co-ordination in drawing style that emerge within sub-communities are
specific to those sub-communities (cf.
Healey,
1997). The experiment takes place in two phases.
In the first ‘convergence’ phase experimental subcommunities consisting of sub-groups of six people
are formed. Subjects themselves are unaware of this
sub-group manipulation, from their perspective the
experiment consists of a series of rounds of Music
Drawing with a di↵erent partner each time. During
the convergence phase, the composition of pairs is
controlled so that they are always made up of individuals from within the same sub-group. This continues for four rounds thus allowing for a history of
interactions to build up within each sub-group. On
each round subjects perform the interactive version
of the Music Drawing Task for 12 trials.
The second, experimental, phase occurs in the
fifth round. In this round two conditions are compared; same-group pairs who are composed, as before, of subjects from within a single sub-group
and cross-group pairs who are composed of subjects
drawn from di↵erent subgroups.3 Same-group and
cross-group pairs have equivalent task experience
and, as noted, are unaware of any sub-group manipulation. Nonetheless they are reliably di↵erent
in their use of the Drawing types. Multinomial regression analysis shows a reliable e↵ect of the group
manipulation on the distribution of Drawing types
(Chi2(3) =25.44, p=0.00, n=516). The percentages
are shown in Table 2.
Table 2: Use of Drawing Types in Pairs Drawn from
the Same or Di↵erent Subgroups

Task Version
Same-group
Cross-group

Abstract
62.7%
41.3%

Drawing Type
Figurative Composite
11.1%
18.1%
32.9%
15.8%

These results indicate that the co-ordination
on particular drawing types that develops within
the experimental sub-communities is communityspecific. Subjects in the cross-group interactions use
a more mixed profile of drawing types. This suggests
that the graphical conventions established within
sub-communities do not readily transfer to interaction outside those communities. Healey (1997) reports parallel results for verbal dialogues about spatial locations. In this case the types of spatial referring expressions established within sub-communities
3
The original design employed three experimental
subgroups but for ease of exposition only two are reported here.

Discussion

Figure 4: Reduction in Visual Complexity of Concept Drawings with Repetition in a Round (B1-B3
= Blocks of recurring items within a round)

during the corresponding convergence phase also
proved unstable in ‘cross-group’ interactions.
Data from a community-based version of the Concept Drawing Task also suggests parallels between
communities of graphical and linguistic communicators. The task requires a community group of 8
participants to communicate with each of the other 7
over an extended period of time. In the first round
of the experiment they work in 4 pairs with both
participants drawing each concept 3 times over the
course of the round. In the second round the 8 participants are re-paired and again draw the concepts
3 times. After each round they are re-paired again
until every participant has encountered each of the
others once and only once.
Figure 4 shows how drawings become increasingly
simple (on the Pelli et al. measure) as the experiment proceeds. In the first 3 rounds this simplification process occurs across repetitions of the drawings
(shown along the x axis of the figure). However, as
the shared interaction within the community begins
to develop (i.e., after round 4) the initial drawings in
a round become as simple as the final drawings in the
round. A similar pattern of results emerges for the
communicators accuracy at identifying the concepts
conveyed by their partners drawings. These findings
are consistent with the idea that as a community becomes established through a common history of interaction so the drawings become conventionalised
within the community: Drawings become simpler
and more readily interpreted by the members of the
community.
The implication of these results is that the processes which establish the conventions for producing
and interpreting drawings and verbal descriptions
operate in a manner that is directly tied to the character and pattern of interactions in which they were
developed and used.

The aim of providing an overview of a number of experimental results means that much important detail
has been elided from the descriptions of experiments
and results provided above. Nonetheless, the results
summarised above consistently point to the importance of interactional context in graphical communication.
Like referring expressions in conversation, the
form and interpretation of drawings is systematically influenced by the character of the interaction
in which they occur. Participants in interactions
show a strong tendency to match each others representational style and type. If items recur in an
interaction, pairs also tend to develop increasingly
abbreviated ways of representing them that are difficult for third parties to interpret. These patterns of
change in the form of drawings obtain independently
of the particular concept or item being represented.
In addition to these basic co-ordination processes
of entrainment and abbreviation, there is evidence
that level of direct graphical interaction available to
participants a↵ects the form of representations they
use. In particular, the ability to mark up and modify
elements of each others’ drawings appears to be important to the sustained use of more abstract representations. Lastly, this paper has presented evidence
that interactions within sub-communities lead to the
development of community-specific conventions for
graphical interaction.
The programmatic rationale for investigating
tasks, such as those described above, that involve
exclusively graphical communication is the potential
they o↵er for comparison with other modes of interaction. The results summarised above suggest significant parallels between the mechanisms that underpin communicative co-ordination in exclusively
graphical and verbal exchanges. As noted above,
some of these findings can be accounted for in terms
of the collaborative model of grounding (Clark and
Wilkes-Gibbs 1986; Clark, 1996) and input-output
coordination model (Garrod and Anderson 1987,
Garrod and Doherty 1994). The importance of interactional mechanisms, such as localisation, to graphical communication also suggests possible parallels
with the mechanisms of conversational repair (Sacks,
Scheglo↵ and Je↵erson 1974; Scheglo↵ 1992). The
viability of applying these explanations to the details
of graphical communication is the subject of further
work.

Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the support of
ESRC/EPSRC under the PACCIT programme
for the project MAGIC: Multimodality and Graphics in Interactive Communication (L328253003),
and ATR Media Information Science Laboratories.
We are especially grateful to James King, Nik

Swoboda, Ichiro Umata and Yasuhiro Katagiri for
their contributions to this research. An earlier
version of this paper was presented under the title
“Interactional Context in Sketch Understanding” at
the AAAI Spring Symposium, Stanford, 25th-27th
of March, 2002.

References
Brannigan, H., Pickering, M., & Cleland, A. (2000).
Syntactic co-ordination in dialogue. Cognition,
75 (B), 13-25.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H. (1998). Communal lexicons. In
K. Malmkjoer & J. Williams (Eds.), Context
in language learning and language understanding
(3rd ed., pp. 63–87). Cambridge: CUP.
Clark, H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring
as a collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1–39.
Engle, R. (1998). Not channels but composite
signals: Speech, gesture, diagrams and object
demonstrations are integrated in multimodal explanations. In M. Gernsbacher & S. Derry (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 20th annual conference of the
cognitive science society (pp. 321–326).
Garrod, S. C., & Anderson, A. (1987). Saying what
you mean in dialogue: A study in conceptual and
semantic co-ordination. Cognition, 27, 181–218.
Garrod, S. C., & Doherty, G. (1994). Conversation,
coordination and convention: an empirical investigation of how groups establish linguistic conventions. Cognition, 53, 181–215.
Healey, P. (1997). Expertise or expertese?: The
emergence of task-oriented sub-languages. In
M. Shafto & P. Langley (Eds.), Proceedings of the
19th annual conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 301–306).
Healey, P., & Peters, C. (2001, 18th-20th April).
Notes on turn-taking and topic in drawing-ininteraction. (Paper presented at the The 4th International Workshop on Gesture and Sign Language
based Human-Computer Interaction City University, London)
Healey, P., Swoboda, N., & King, J. (forthcoming).
A tool for performing and analysing experiments
on graphical communication. (Paper to be presented at HCI2002: The 16th British HCI Group
Annual Conference, September 2nd- 6th, South
Bank University, London)
Healey, P., Swoboda, N., Umata, I., & Katagiri, Y.
(2001). Representational form and communicative

use. In J. Moore & K. Stenning (Eds.), Proceedings of the 23rd annual conference of the cognitive
science society (pp. 411–416).
Healey, P., Swoboda, N., Umata, I., & Katagiri, Y.
(forthcoming, October). Graphical representation
in graphical dialogue. (Paper to appear in a special issue of the International Journal of Human
Computer Studies on Interactive Graphical Communication)
Hymes, D. (1972). Models of the interaction of language and social life. In J. Gumperz & D. Hymes
(Eds.), Directions in sociolinguistics (pp. 35–71).
New York: Holt, Rinehart and Wilson.
Krauss, R., & Fussell, S. R. (1996). Social psychological models of interpersonal communication.
In A. Higgins, E.T. nad Kruglanski (Ed.), Social
psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp. 655–
701). London: Guildford Press.
Neilson, I., & Lee, J. (1994). Conversations with
graphics: implications for the design of natural
language/graphics interfaces. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 40, 509–541.
Pelli, D. G., Burns, C. W., Farell, B., & Moore, D. C.
(in press). Identifying letters. Vision Research.
Sacks, H., Scheglo↵, E., & Je↵erson, G. (1974). A
simplest systematics for the organisation of turntaking for conversation. Language, 50, 696–735.
Scaife, M., & Rogers, Y. (1996). External cognition: How do graphical representations work? International Journal of Human-Computer Studies,
45 (2), 185–213.
Scheglo↵, E. A. (1992). Repair after the next turn:
The last structurally provided defense of intersubjectivity in conversation. American Journal of Sociology, 97 (5), 1295–1345.
Schober, M. F., & Clark, H. H. (1989). Understanding by addressees and overhearers. Cognitive
Psychology, 21, 211–232.
Sommers, P. van. (1984). Drawing and cognition:
Descriptive and experimental studies of graphic
production processes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wilkes-Gibbs, D., & Clark, H. H. (1992). Coordinating beliefs in conversation. Journal of Memory
and Language, 31, 183–194.

