UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Investigating creative language: People’s choice of words in the production of novel nounnoun compounds

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5t62m129

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Author
Costello, Fintan

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Investigating Creative Language: People’s Choice of Words
in the Production of Novel Noun-Noun Compounds
Fintan Costello (fintan@compapp.dcu.ie)
School of Computer Applications, Dublin City University,
Glasnevin, Dublin 9, Ireland.
Abstract
The production of novel noun-noun compounds is a prime
example of everyday linguistic creativity. What cognitive
processes guide people’s choice of words when they make up a
new noun-noun compound? An experiment examined people’s
production of noun-noun compounds as names for novel objects.
The results showed that people’s choice of words in these novel
compounds was influenced by the diagnosticity of properties in
those objects. By contrast, people’s choice of words did not
seem to be influenced by the communicative precision of the
resulting compounds. These results suggest that, in constructing
novel compounds, people are guided by conceptual
representation rather than communicative task.

Introduction
The production of noun-noun compounds is a prime example
of everyday linguistic creativity. Compounds such as soccer
mom (a middle-class suburban mother) or alpha geek (the
person in a workplace who knows most about computers)
convey a lot of information in a concise and inventive way.
How do people produce novel compounds such as these?
What cognitive processes guide people’s choice of words when
they make up a new noun-noun compound? There has been
much recent research on the cognitive processes of conceptual
combination, which allow people to understand novel nounnoun compounds by combining their constituent words in
meaningful ways (Costello & Keane, 2000, 2001; Gagné &
Shoben, 1997; Hampton, 1987; Murphy, 1988; Wisniewski &
Gentner, 1991). There has also been much work on the
situations in which noun-noun compound production occurs,
especially in child language (asking whether children create
compounds to fill gaps in their lexicon, to mark contrasts, or to
allow more precise communication; see Clark, 1987, Clark &
Berman, 1984, Windsor, 1993). However, there has been little
research on the specific cognitive processes involved in
people's creation of novel noun-noun compounds. This paper
attempts to address this gap.
This paper describes an experiment examining people's
choice of words in novel noun-noun compounds. In this
experiment participants are given a description of a novel
object and asked to make up a noun-noun compound as a
name for that object. The experiment examined the influence
of property diagnosticity on people's compound production.
Diagnostic properties for a concept are those which serve to
identify members of that concept: a diagnostic property is one
that most members of a concept have, but most non-members
do not have. Previous research has shown that property
diagnosticity is important in people's interpretation of
compound phrases (Costello & Keane, 2001). In the current
experiment, the novel object descriptions presented to
participants are controlled for diagnosticity: some containing
diagnostic properties for a given concept, others containing

non-diagnostic properties. If diagnosticity also plays a role in
compound production, then there should be a relationship
between the diagnosticity of properties in a novel object
description, and people's choice of words when producing
compound names for that object.
The current experiment uses materials derived from Costello
& Keane's (2001) study of diagnosticity in compound phrase
interpretation. The first part of this paper describes this earlier
study. The second part describes the current experiment
examining the production of novel compounds.
To
foreshadow the results, this experiment found that
diagnosticity was an accurate predictor of compound
production: in the experiment the more diagnostic the property
in an object description was for a given word, the more likely
that word was to be used in generating a compound to name
that object. An alternative factor, that of communicative
precision (Clark, 1987, 1990), was not a reliable predictor of
compound production. The final part of the paper links these
findings to other research on concept combination and
compound production.

Diagnosticity in the Interpretation of Noun-Noun
Compounds
How are people able to understand and grasp the meaning of a
noun-noun compound which they have never seen before?
When confronted with a novel noun-noun compound, people
interpret that compound by combining the compound's
modifier concept (the first word in the compound) with the
compound's head concept (the second word). People can
combine these two parts in a variety of different ways. Three
main combination types have been recognised: conjunctive,
relational, and property-transfer interpretations (Hampton,
1987; Murphy, 1988; Wisniewski & Gentner, 1991). In
conjunctive interpretations people produce a combined
concept that is an instance of both concepts being combined
(e.g., "a pet bird is a bird which is also a pet"). In relational
interpretations people assert a relation between the two
concepts being combined ("an apartment dog is a small dog
which lives in city apartments").
In property-transfer
interpretations people create a new combined concept by
transferring a property from the modifier concept to the head.
For example, the compound "elephant pig" might be
interpreted as " an elephant pig is a pig that has tusks": the
transfer of a property from the modifier concept ("elephant")
to the head concept ("pig").
These property-transfer
combinations have been the focus of much recent research
(Costello & Keane, 2001; Gagné, 2000; Wisniewski & Love,
1998). This focus in this paper is on property-transfer
combinations.
Costello & Keane (2001) describe an experiment examining
people's interpretation of property-transfer combinations. The

experiment was designed to test two differing predictions
about these property-transfer combinations. One prediction
was that the transferred property would be a structurally
aligned difference between the modifier and head concepts;
that is, a property in the modifier concept that structurally
corresponds to a different property in the head (Wisniewski,
1996). The competing prediction was that the transferred
property would be a diagnostic property of the modifier
(source) concept; that is, a property that helps identify
members of that concept and distinguish it from other
concepts (Tversky, 1977; Costello & Keane, 2000). In this
experiment, participants were shown 16 novel compound
phrases, with 4 different property-transfer interpretations as
possible meanings for each phrase. Using two pre-tests, the 4
interpretations for each compound were controlled and crossed
for structural alignment and diagnosticity. For example, for
the phrase "elephant pig" the 4 interpretations were
Elephant pigs are
• pigs that are big
(diagnostic, aligned)
• pigs that are grey
(non-diagnostic, aligned)
• pigs that have tusks
(diagnostic, non-aligned)
• pigs that are an endangered species
(non-diagnostic, non-aligned)
Participants were asked to judge how good or bad they thought
each property-transfer interpretation was as a meaning for the
compound phrase in question, and to rate the acceptability of
each interpretation on a scale going from -3 to +3.
The results of this experiment showed that people’s
interpretation of property-transfer compound phrases was
strongly influenced by the diagnosticity of the transferred
property for the modifier concept in the combination. People
reliably rated interpretations using diagnostic properties as
acceptable, and those using non-diagnostic properties as
unacceptable. There was a significant correlation between the
acceptability of interpretations and the rated diagnosticity of
the properties they contained. Structural alignment had no
influence on people’s interpretation acceptability ratings in the
experiment. In a subsequent test participants were shown the
same phrases and simply asked to write down their own
interpretations. Again, diagnosticity, but not structural
alignment, influenced people’s interpretation of the phrases.
Costello & Keane's (2001) materials provide the basis for
the current experiment on role of diagnosticity in people's
production of novel compound phrases. Costello & Keane's
materials were constructed as follows. First, 16 participants in
a property-generation task produced lists of properties for the
modifier and head concepts of the compounds used in the
experiment. For the modifier concept in each compound, 4
frequently-listed properties were selected. The diagnosticity
of these 4 properties was then obtained in a diagnosticityrating task. Another set of participants were shown the
selected properties, each property being paired with the
modifier concept of the relevant compound. Participants were
asked to imagine they were playing the game in which they
had to help the other player to guess the concept shown. They
were asked to rate how helpful each property would be in
helping their partner identify the concept in question. For
example, to assess the diagnosticity of properties for the

concept "elephant", participants were asked to rate how
helpful each of properties:
•
•
•
•

are big
are grey
have tusks
are an endangered species

would be in allowing their partner in the game to identify the
concept "elephant". Participants rated the helpfulness of the
properties on a 7 point scale going from -3 (not at all helpful)
to +3 (very helpful). Diagnostic properties were those whose
average rating was above 0 on this 7-point scale. Two
diagnostic and two non-diagnostic properties were obtained
for each modifier concept, and these properties were used to
construct the 4 interpretations for the compound phrase in
question. In the main experiment, participants rated the
acceptability of these interpretations for those compound
phrases. The next section describes how these materials were
used to investigate the role of diagnosticity in the production
of compound phrases.

Diagnosticity in the Production of Noun-Noun
Compounds
The previous section described an experiment showing that, in
interpreting compound phrases, the property diagnosticity
plays an important part. Is diagnosticity also important when
people are producing, rather than interpreting, compound
phrases? This section describes an experiment addressing this
question.
In this compound production experiment, participants were
shown descriptions of unusual objects and asked to generate
compound names for those objects. The object descriptions
used were selected from the interpretations used in the
comprehension study. Each of the 16 phrases in the earlier
experiment had 4 object descriptions as interpretations, two
using diagnostic properties and two using non-diagnostic
properties. In the current experiment one diagnostic and one
non-diagnostic object description was selected for each phrase.
Participants were given the object descriptions alone (and not
given the compound phrases). They were then be asked to
generate a two-word noun-noun phrase to name that object.
For example, some participants were given the object
description
•

"a special type of pig that has tusks"

and asked to write down a two-word noun-noun phrase to
name that special type of pig. Other participants were given
the object description
•

" special type of pig that is grey",

and asked to come up with a noun-noun phrase for that object.
The question of interest was whether participants would
produce the phrase which corresponded to that object in the
earlier experiment; that is, whether participants would produce
the phrase "elephant pig" as a name for "pigs that have tusks".
Notice that in the object description the head word for the
phrase in question is already given (participants already know
that the object described is a type of pig, and so would most

likely use that word as the head of whatever phrase they
produce). The focus of analysis in the experiment is therefore
on people’s choice of modifier word for the phrases they
generate. Will people be more likely to produce the expected
modifier for object descriptions containing diagnostic
properties ("pigs that have tusks") than for those containing
non-diagnostic properties ("pigs that are grey")?

Method
Participants.
The participants were 18 Dublin City
University undergraduates who took part for course credit.
Materials. The materials were 16 sets of object descriptions.
Each set contained two object descriptions both of which had
the same target phrase consisting of a modifier and a head.
(Appendix A shows all 16 sets of object descriptions and
target phrases). One object description contained a diagnostic
property for the modifier concept in that target phrase; the
other object description contained a non-diagnostic property
for that concept. Participants in the experiment saw one object
description from each set. Participants did not see the
modifier concept for the target phrase for that set. The factor
of interest was whether participants would produce a phrase
containing the target modifier concept. Object descriptions
were taken from the materials of Costello & Keane’s (2001)
experiment on compound phrase comprehension. The framing
phrase "a special type of.." was added to each object
description (so that, for example, participants were asked to
produce a noun-noun compound to name "a special type of pig
that has tusks").
Design. All participants saw 16 object descriptions, one from
each of the 16 object-description sets. Participants were
randomly divided into two groups. The first group of
participants obtained the diagnostic object descriptions from
one half of the object-description sets and the non-diagnostic
descriptions from the other half. The second group of
participants obtained non-diagnostic object descriptions from
the first half of the object-description sets and the diagnostic
object descriptions from the other half.
Procedure. Each participant received a booklet consisting of
an instruction sheet followed by 16 object-description sheets
in random order. Each object description sheet had an object
description at the top of the page, and three slots in which
participants were asked to write down three noun-noun
compound names for the object described at the top of the
page. Each slot provided space for a modifier and a head
concept Participants had 40 minutes to complete the task.
The instruction sheet explained to participants that they
would be asked to read a set of object descriptions and to
respond by writing down some noun-noun phrases which they
thought would be good names for the objects described. Four
examples of familiar noun-noun phrases were given, to
illustrate the type of response required. These examples were
marked with a tick, to show that they were the correct type of
response (see Table 1). These examples involved various
different relationships between the nouns in the phrase.
A pre-test showed that, when asked to produce compound
phrases as names for object descriptions, participants

Table 1. Examples of correct responses in instruction sheet.
Special type of thing
a special bed with hot lightbulbs
above it, giving the user a tan.
a special bike with strong rugged
tyres and frame.
a special padded glove which protects
against heat.
a special lamp containing moving
bubbles of hot, coloured oil.

Correct compound
a “sun bed”
a “mountain bike”
an “oven glove”
a “lava lamp”

sometimes simply reproduced a word from the description
rather than coming up with a new noun-noun phrase
(producing the compound name “tusked pig” for the object
description “a special type pig that has tusks”, for example).
To avoid uninteresting responses of this type, instruction sheet
stressed that, in producing a compound name for an object,
participants should not simply reproduce the words used in the
description of that object. Participants were shown four
examples of compounds which simply reproduced terms from
an object description (Table 2, below). These were marked by
crosses to show they were incorrect responses.

Results
The noun-noun phrases produced by participants for the
object descriptions were analysed by counting, for each object
description, the number of participants who produced that
description’s target phrase as a name for that object
description. For the object description “a special type of pig
that has tusks”, for example, this would mean counting how
many participants produced the target phrase “elephant pig”
for that object description. Variations of the target phrase
were allowed if they clearly included the target modifier; for
example, if a participant produced a blending such as “ele-pig”
for “a special type of pig that has tusks”, that would be taken
as an occurrence of the target phrase.
For each target phrase there were two object descriptions;
one using a diagnostic property of the modifier concept, the
other using a non-diagnostic property of the modifier. For
each target phrase, one group of 9 participants saw one object
description, the other group saw the other object description;
thus each object description was seen by 9 participants. For
the object descriptions containing diagnostic properties of the
modifier concept, the target phrase was produced by 3 out of 9
participants, on average. For the non-diagnostic object
descriptions, the target phrase was never produced.
Table 2. Examples of incorrect responses in instruction sheet.
Special type of thing
Incorrect compound
a special bed with hot lightbulbs
a “lightbulb bed”
above it, giving the user a tan.
a special bike with strong rugged
a “rugged bike”
tyres and frame.
a special padded glove which protects a “protective glove”
against heat.
a special lamp containing moving
a “coloured lamp”
bubbles of hot, coloured oil.

target phrase production
property diagnosticity

Object descript ions (diagnost ic property object s only)

target phrase production
interpretation acceptability

Object descript ions (diagnost ic propert y objects only)

Figure 1. Probability of target phrase production for
the 16 diagnostic-property object descriptions, and
diagnosticity of properties for modifier in target phrase
(diagnosticity mapped to probability scale).

Figure 2. Probability of target phrase production for
the 16 diagnostic-property object descriptions, and
acceptability of descriptions as interpretations for
phrases (acceptability mapped to probability scale).

Results: diagnosticity. The previous analysis showed that
participants were clearly more likely to produce the target
phrase for descriptions with diagnostic properties than for
descriptions with non-diagnostic properties. A more detailed
examination of the role of diagnosticity in compound phrase
production was performed by analysing the relationship
between the diagnosticity of properties in descriptions and the
rate of target phrase production for those descriptions. This
analysis was carried out for diagnostic-property descriptions
only (the only descriptions for which the target phrase was
produced). There was a significant correlation between the
average rated diagnosticity of properties in these descriptions
for the modifier concept (obtained from the pre-test for
Costello & Keane’s (2001) experiment), and the probability of
target phrase production for those descriptions. The more
diagnostic the property in an object description was for the
modifier, the more frequently participants produced the target
phrase (r= 0.81, p< 0.001, %var = 0.66). Figure 1 shows a
graph of probability of target phrase production versus average
property diagnosticity for the 16 diagnostic object
descriptions. (In this graph property diagnosticity is mapped
from its original rating scale of -3 to +3 onto the 0 to 1 interval
on which probability of target phrase production is shown).
This result suggests that the production of novel noun-noun
phrases for property-based object descriptions can be
predicted from the diagnosticity of properties in those object
descriptions. It might be argued, however, that the target
phrase production in the experiment was not influenced by
property diagnosticity per se, but by a more general
association between the properties and concepts in question.
For example, it could be that the phrase elephant pig was
produced frequently for the object description "a special type
of pig with tusks", not because having tusks is specifically
diagnostic in identifying the concept elephant, but because
there is a general association between elephants and tusks.

To address this possibility a general measure of association
between concepts and properties was obtained from Costello
& Keane’s (2001) original property-generation task. In that
task, 16 participants listed properties for the concepts used in
the experiment. For each property and concept, the number of
participants who listed that property as belonging to that
concept was obtained. This number was taken to be a measure
of the general association between the property and the
concept. The correlation between this property-concept
association and the rate of target-phrase production did not
reach significance ( r= 0.41, p > .1, %var = 0.17). This
suggests that it is diagnosticity specifically, rather than a more
general association between properties and concepts, that is
important for compound production.
Results: Communicative accuracy. In addition to examining
the role of diagnosticity in compound phrase production, the
current experiment allows us to examine the role of
communicative precision in people’s production of compound
phrases. One view of compound production is that people
produce novel compounds to allow them to precisely
communicate their intended meaning to the listener (Clark,
1987, 1990; Clark & Berman, 1984). In this view, compound
production is a listener-centered process: a person producing a
compound as a name for a given object will choose a
compound that the listener would easily interpret as referring
to that object. If communicative precision is important in
compound production, there should be a relationship between
the rate at which people produce a given compound phrase as
name for a particular object, and the degree to which people,
when given that compound phrase, describe that object as the
correct interpretation for the phrase.
The role of communicative precision in compound phrase
production was analysed by comparing the rate at which
people produced the target phrase for the given object
descriptions in the current experiment against the degree to

which participants in Costello & Keane’s (2001) study rated
those object descriptions as good interpretations for those
phrases. The correlation between the phrase production for a
given description and description acceptability as an
interpretation for that phrase was not significant (r = 0.1, p
>.1, %var= 0.01). Figure 2 shows a graph of the rated
description acceptability as interpretation and target phrase
production. This finding of no relation between target phrase
production and interpretation acceptability casts some doubt
on the role of communicative precision in compound phrase
production. This finding is in line with other results (e.g.
Windsor, 1993; Elbers, 1988) which also call into question the
communicative precision view of compound production.

Conclusion
This paper has examined people’s production of novel nounnoun compounds. Compound production is quite a creative
linguistic task, with compounds often conveying a lot of
information in an inventive way (as in the original soccer mom
and alpha geek examples). The experiment reported here
found that compound production is influenced by the
diagnosticity of properties for concepts in compounds, but not
by the communicative precision of those compounds. This is
in line with other findings (Windsor, 1993; Eberts, 1988),
suggesting that people’s production of novel compounds is
influenced more by their conceptual representations than by
the communicative task that they are carrying out.
Why should diagnosticity play a role in people’s novel
compound production? Diagnostic properties are properties
which help identify items and classify them as members of
particular categories. Perhaps diagnosticity is important in
compound production because in compound production the
choice of words depends on judgements of category
membership. According to this suggestion, when producing
the phrase "elephant pig" as a name for the object description
"a special type of pig with tusks", people use the diagnostic
property "tusks" to classify the object described as to some
extent falling into the category "elephant", thus allowing the
modifier "elephant" to be used in forming the phrase. This is
in line with Costello & Keane’s (2000, 2001) proposal on the
role of diagnosticity in compound interpretation. According to
this proposal, when people interpret the phrase "elephant pig"
as "a pig with tusks" they are asserting the diagnostic property
"tusks" because it allows the newly described object to be
classified under the category "elephant", hence justifying the
compound (see Costello & Keane, 2000, for a computational
model of implementing this approach).
How do the results reported here fit with other work on
language production? The main stream of research on
language production tends to use a "picture-naming" task to
focus on people's production of words in response to a single
concept. In this task people are presented with a picture of a
single concrete object (e.g. a picture of a rabbit) and are asked
to name that object. Models of language production in this
framework typically have 5 stages: (i) Preliminary Analysis,

(ii) Feature Recognition, (iii) Categorisation, (iv) Lexical
Access, and (v) Decision (Bock & Griffin, 2000). The
suggestion that diagnosticity is important in compound
production because it related to judgements of category
membership, fits nicely into the third Categorisation stage in
this framework. Indeed, the findings of the current experiment
suggest that property diagnosticity may play an important role
in the Categorisation stage in this language production
framework.

References
Bock, K, & Griffin, Z. M. (2000). Producing words: how
mind meets mouth. In Linda Wheeldon, ed. "Aspects of
language production", pp 7-49. Psychology Press.
Costello, F. J., & Keane, M. T. (1997). Polysemy in
conceptual combination: Testing the constraint theory of
combination. Nineteenth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Costello, F. J., & Keane, M. T. (2000). Efficient creativity:
Constraint guided conceptual combination.
Cognitive
Science,24(2).
Costello, F. J., & Keane, M. T. (2001). Testing two theories
of conceptual combination: Alignment versus diagnosticity
in the comprehension and production of combined concepts.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory &
Cognition, 27(1), 255-271.
Clark, E. V. (1987). The principle of contrast: a constraint on
acquisition. In B. MacWhinney (ed.) Mechanisms of
language acquisition. Hillsdale, NJ. Erlbaum.
Clark, E. V. & Berman, R. A. (1984). Structure and use in the
acquisition of word formation. Language, 60, 542-590.
Elbers, L. (1988). New names from old words: related aspects
of children’s metaphors and word compounds. Journal of
Child Language 15, 591-617.
Gagné, C. L., & Shoben, E. J. (1997). Influence of thematic
relations on the comprehension of modifier-noun
combinations.
Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory & Cognition, 23(1), 71-87.
Hampton, J. A. (1987). Inheritance of attributes in natural
concept conjunctions. Memory and Cognition, 15(1), 55-71.
Murphy, G. L. (1988). Comprehending complex concepts.
Cognitive Science, 12(4), 529-562.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological
Review, 84, 327-352.
Windsor, J. (1993). The functions of novel word compounds.
Journal of Child Language 20, 119-138.
Wisniewski, E. J., & Love, B. C. (1998). Properties versus
relations in conceptual combination. Journal of Memory
and Language.(38), 177-202.
Wisniewski E. J. (1998). Property instantiation in conceptual
combination. Memory & Cognition, 26(6), 1330-1347.
Wisniewski, E. J., & Gentner, D. (1991).
On the
combinatorial semantics of noun pairs: Minor and major
adjustments to meaning. In G. B. Simpson (Ed.)
Understanding word and sentence. Amsterdam: North
Holland.

APPENDIX 1. Object descriptions and target phrases from Experiment

Object description

Description
Set

Property is diagnostic for modifier

Target phrase
(modifier head)

Property is not diagnostic for modifier

1

A special type of chair that has blankets

A special type of chair that has wheels

Bed chair

2

A special type of moth that stings

A special type of moth that fertilises plants

Bumblebee
moth

3

A special type of oak that stores water

A special type of oak that is completely green

Cactus oak

4

A special type of pig that has tusks

A special type of pig that is grey

Elephant pig

5

A special type of beetle that jumps

A special type of beetle that eats insects

Frog beetle

6

A special type of antelope that has a long
neck

A special type of antelope that has a long
tongue

Giraffe
antelope

7

A special type of airplane that has
horizontal rotors

A special type of airplane that is manuverable

Helicopter
airplane

8

A special type of monkey that has a pouch to
carry young

A special type of monkey that doesn’t
climb trees

Kangaroo
monkey

9

A special type of lobster that has eight limbs

A special type of lobster found in warm waters

Octopus lobster

10

A special type of robin that can talk

A special type of robin that can be a pet

Parrot robin

11

A special type of horse that has a horn

A special type of horse that is very dangerous

Rhinoceros
horse

12

A special type of squirrel that smells bad

A special type of squirrel that lives on the
ground

Skunk squirrel

13

A special type of spider that has a shell

A special type of spider that eats plants

Snail spider

14

A special type of iguana that slithers

A special type of iguana that is used to make
handbags

Snake iguana

15

A special type of slug that is poisonous

A special type of slug that is fast

Viper slug

16

A special type of seal that has a blowhole

A special type of seal that is an endangered
species

Whale seal

