UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Is Concept Formation An Age-Independent Process?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/53q383n0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Livingston, Kenneth R
Andrews, Janet K
Kuschner, Emily

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Is Concept Formation An Age-Independent Process?
Kenneth R. Livingston (livingst@vassar.edu)
Department of Psychology and Program in Cognitive Science
Vassar College, 124 Raymond Avenue, Box 479
Poughkeepsie, New York 12604
Janet K. Andrews (andrewsj@vassar.edu)
Department of Psychology and Program in Cognitive Science
Vassar College, 124 Raymond Avenue, Box 146
Poughkeepsie, New York 12604
Emily Kuschner (emkushner@vassar.edu)
Department of Psychology
Vassar College, 124 Raymond Avenue, Box 1471
Poughkeepsie, New York 12604
Abstract
We present the results of a study examining the
effects of category learning on the performance of
five year-old children and adults on similarity
judgment and same-different tasks. Participants
in the learning condition learned to distinguish
two kinds of invented alien stimuli by hearing an
interactive story over the course of two days, at
the end of which they performed three tasks. A
comparison of their performance with control
participants revealed a marked expansion effect
in both children and adults, with learning groups
judging between-category pairs to be more
different than control groups did. There was no
compression effect (within-category pairs were
not judged as more similar by learning than
control groups). We hypothesize that expansion
occurred because distinguishing pairs of stimuli
was difficult, as indicated by a high error rate on
the same-different task for both child and adult
participants.

Introduction
Nearly a decade of research now suggests that
the space of similarities within which we locate
objects undergoes a systematic change in metric
structure in the course of category learning (e.g.,
Beale and Keil, 1995; Goldstone, 1994a;
Goldstone, Lippa, and Shiffrin, 2001;
Livingston, Andrews, and Harnad, 1998). This
result contrasts sharply with the view of
similarity taken for granted in classical
descriptions of the category learning, where it is
assumed that the metric of psychological
similarity is fixed, with the result that the
locations of objects within that space, and thus
their relationships to one another, are entirely
determined by their perceptual properties (e.g.,

Bruner, Goodnow, and Austin, 1956; Hutchinson
and Lockhead, 1977). The more recent work
suggests that the process of category learning
itself may actually alter the similarity space and
thus the representational structure of our
categories.
Two different kinds of changes to
psychological similarity space have now been
documented in the literature. Compression
occurs when one region of the n-dimensional
space of similarities changes such that items
falling within that region come to have more
nearly equivalent encodings than they did prior
to category learning. This pattern has been
observed by Livingston, et al. (1998), and Kurtz
(1996), for example, and manifests as (1) an
increase, following category learning, in
similarity ratings among items drawn from the
same category as compared with items drawn
from different categories, or, (2) as greater
confusability among items drawn from the same
category than among those drawn from different
categories. In neural network simulations, the
change has been measured directly as an
increased similarity in activation patterns on
hidden units in a simple feedforward network
(Harnad, Hanson, and Lubin, 1995).
The other pattern of change in similarity space
following category learning, called expansion,
occurs when a region of the space of similarities
changes such that items falling within that region
are judged to be more different after category
learning than prior to it, or are less confusable in
a same-different task. This pattern has been
extensively documented by Goldstone (1994a;
1994b; 1996; see also Goldstone, et al. 2001). In
neural network simulations, the change has been

measured directly as an a greater dissimilarity in
activation patterns on hidden units in a
feedforward network (Harnad, et al. 1995;
Tijsseling and Harnad, 1997).
In theory, both kinds of changes could occur in
the course of category learning, but in general
only one pattern is typically observed for a given
set of stimuli. Research is currently ongoing to
establish the conditions under which one
observes compression versus expansion. One
hypothesis under active investigation is that
expansion is observed in those cases where the
discrimination among exemplars in the training
set is perceptually difficult, which results in
discrimination learning. Compression, on the
other hand, occurs when no difficult perceptual
discrimination is required. What is important to
note, regardless of the ultimate fate of this
hypothesis, is that either compression or
expansion is sufficient to produce the effect
necessary for the psychological distinctiveness
that characterizes concepts: a set of similarity
relationships that sets the members of the
category apart from non-members by its
relatively greater degree of intra-category
similarity (or, alternatively, inter-category
dissimilarity).
It has been suggested by many of the
researchers who have studied compressionexpansion effects that the process may be so
fundamental to category learning that it
constitutes a basic mechanism by which abstract
and universal representations (concepts) are
formed (Damper and Harnad, 2000; Goldstone,
1996; in press; Livingston, et al, 1998). If this
contention is correct, then evidence for the
operation of this process should be found among
young children as well as in adults. To count as
truly fundamental to the process by which
perceptual categories are built, it should not turn
out that compression-expansion effects reflect a
strategy acquired late in life or taking a long time
to develop. Indeed, it does not appear that there
is anything consciously strategic about the
process at all; it seems to reflect the operation of
an automatic recalibration of psychological
similarity space in response to the discovery,
during category learning, that a set of items
needs to be partitioned in a consistent way.
Nevertheless, evidence that this process operates
in young children as well as in adults would
strengthen the claim that it constitutes a basic
mechanism of category learning.
Certainly there is little doubt that children and
young infants can learn to make category
distinctions, at least among perceptual categories

of the kind at issue here (e.g., Quinn, Slater,
Brown, and Hayes, 2001). There is also a
growing, if still controversial, body of literature
concerning the ability of young children to make
use of information about function (e.g., Rakison
and Cohen, 1999) or internal, inferred features
(Gutheil, Vera, and Keil, 1998) when learning
new categories or assigning novel objects to
existing ones.
There seem to be many
similarities between the processes of concept
formation in children and adults. To date,
however, there has been no successful
demonstration that children's category learning is
characterized by compression-expansion effects
(but see Katz, 1963 for suggestive findings).
The major purpose of the research reported
here is to test the hypothesis that the category
learning of children will show patterns of
compression and/or expansion similar to those
already observed among adults. In addition, the
present study presents an opportunity to compare
performance on similarity judgments with
performance (errors and response times) on a
same-different discrimination task.
The
similarity task may be more sensitive to the
effects of category learning than the samedifferent task, but its conceptual complexity
makes it difficult to use with children younger
than five. Evidence that the same-different task
can capture the effects of category learning
would clear the way for future work with
younger children.
The limited attention spans of young children
necessitated the development of a more elaborate
training and testing procedure than is needed
with adults. Extensive pre-testing was required
to design a story-based category learning task
and engaging tasks for the testing process. Pilot
studies revealed that the procedures are too
demanding for children younger than five years
of age, and even for older children must be
spread across sessions on two consecutive days.
Rather than rely on an implicit comparison to the
adult literature, we included an adult sample that
followed the same procedures used with the
children.

Method
Participants
Participants were 27 kindergarten children
between the ages of five and six, and 23 Vassar
College students participating through an
introductory psychology research requirement.
Participants in each age group were randomly
assigned to the learning or control conditions.

Stimuli
The stimuli were designed to resemble
friendly-looking alien creatures and varied on the
dimensions of torso width and arm length.
Figure 1 shows stimuli with extremes on these
dimensions; intermediate values were defined at
equal intervals between extremes. All stimuli had
yellow bodies, green feet, blue hands, and a pink
nose.
For the learning condition, two categories
were created and identified by the nonsense
labels Fip and Zug. The Fips had longer arms
and narrower torsos, while the Zugs had shorter
arms and wider torsos. For each category there
were three possible values on each dimension,
for a total of nine possible members of each
category. Of the eighteen different possible
stimuli, fourteen (seven in each category) were
used in the experiment. Stimuli were printed out
on yellow paper, laminated, and glued onto felt
with a black oval-shaped background. A 155-cm
X 74-cm board covered in black felt served as
the background for the story. To enhance the
interaction of the children with the materials and
make the story more interesting, felt props were
also used. These props represented various
objects and devices described in the story. For
instance, when it was explained that the Zugs
trained by lifting moon rocks and eating a diet of
fuzzy pickles and purple pretzels, participants
would be asked to place moon rocks, fuzzy
pickles, and purple pretzels alongside the Zugs.

Figure 1. Examples of the stimuli.

Procedure
The learning condition. Those who learned to
distinguish Fips and Zugs did so over the course
of two, one-on-one sessions with an
experimenter. Learning occurred in the context
of a story, told using the large felt board and felt
props, about two teams of four aliens, the Fips
and the Zugs, who compete in an alien Olympics
competition. The story is designed to hold a

young child's attention so as to allow the
experimenter to highlight the differences
between the two categories in the context of an
interactive dialogue rather than by direct
instruction. For example, the long-armed Fips
more easily get tangled in a cargo net while
climbing, but their narrow torsos make them less
likely to get stuck in an obstacle course.
Interactivity is introduced by inviting the
participant to help construct each scene. At
several points in the script the participant is also
asked to sort the aliens into categories, to allow
provision of feedback as learning progressed.
On the second day of the learning condition,
the story was continued. It concludes with a
final competition, which results in a tie. The
participant is told that he or she will get to stage
one last game to settle the tie, but that first there
are some other games to be played. These other
games are the three primary data gathering tasks.
The participant gave similarity judgments for
all fifteen possible pairs of six aliens, which
include four that the participant had learned to
categorize during the story telling (two from
each category) and two not seen before (one
from each of the two categories). Pre-testing
indicated that fifteen judgments is an upper limit
on five-year-olds' attention. The novel stimuli
provide a check on whether what has been
learned is a generalizable category. In the
similarity judgment procedure one picture is
placed at the left end of a long felt strip marked
off into distinct intervals that allowed scores
from 0.5 to 8.5 in 0.5 intervals. The participant is
asked to place the other item according to how
similar it was to the first item, with more
proximal placement indicating greater similarity.
The participant is trained on the task using
pictures of different breeds of dogs. Pre-training
continued until the judgments were being made
reliably and with confidence. Once the system
was understood, we presented the fifteen pairs of
aliens. The experimenter recorded the judgment
by reading the position of the center of the
stimulus in relation to the marks on the strip.
In the second task, participants viewed twentyone pairs of stimuli, presented simultaneously on
a Macintosh Powermac G3 or Powerbook G3
using SuperLab Pro 1.75 software. The same six
stimuli used in the similarity judgment task were
used here as well. In addition to the fifteen pairs
presented in that task, an additional six pairs
were presented, comprised of each of the six
stimuli presented with its identical twin. Careful
training using pictures of flowers ensured that
participants understood that a "same" response

Results
Similarity judgments. A 2 (age: child vs.
adult) by 2 (group: learning vs. control) by 3
(pair type: Fip-Fip, Fip-Zug, Zug-Zug) analysis
of variance with repeated measures on the third
variable yielded a highly significant main effect
of pair type (F(2, 90) = 81.140, MSE = 1.004, p
< .0001) and a highly significant interaction
between condition and pair type(F(2, 90) =
10.473, MSE = 1.004, p < .0001). The betweencategory pairs were judged overall to be less
similar than the within-category pairs, and the
between-category pairs were also judged to be
less similar by the learning groups than by the
control groups, a clear case of expansion at the
category boundary following learning. There is
no interaction with age (see Figure 2.) No other
effects were statistically significant.
Same-different judgments. This task yielded
two dependent measures, proportion of errors
and mean response time. Single-sample t tests
demonstrate that all four groups performed the
same-different task better than chance. A 2 (age:

Learning

7

Control

Mean Similarity Judgment

required the stimuli to be identical. Participants
answered by pressing clearly marked keys on a
keyboard. A colorful feedback screen indicated
whether the response was correct. These screens
were designed during pre-testing so as to assure
that the children wanted to produce the "correct"
screen and did not like the "incorrect" screen.
For the third and final task each participant
was asked to sort a slightly larger set of fourteen
stimuli into two groups, the Fips and the Zugs.
To the eight stimuli used in the story, and the
two added during testing, we added four more,
two from each category. Pilot studies suggested
child sorting becomes unreliable when more than
fourteen stimuli were included. This final task
provides data concerning whether participants in
the "learning" condition actually did learn the
category distinction, and if so how well they
extend the concept to new instances.
The control condition. Participants in the
control condition performed the same three tasks
as those in the learning condition but did not
learn the story or receive any information about
categories or types of aliens. Because they had
not learned to categorize them, we could not
refer to them by name. The only change in the
tasks required by this difference was to the
sorting task instructions, which simply asked that
the aliens be put into two groups according to
which ones seem to go together.

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
F-F

F-Z

Z-Z

Figure 2. Mean similarity judgments by both learning
and control groups for each of three pair types (FF,
FZ, ZZ).
Higher numbers indicate greater
dissimilarity

child vs. adult) by 2 (group: learning vs. control)
by 3 (pair type: identical, same category nonidentical, different category) analysis of variance
with repeated measures on the third variable on
the proportion of errors yielded a significant
main effect of age (F(1, 46) = 4.611, MSE =
.045, p < .04) and a highly significant main
effect of pair type (F(2, 92) = 23.095, MSE =
.027, p < .0001). Children made more errors
than adults (.221 vs. .146) and different category
pairs produced fewer errors (.057) than identical
pairs (.218) or same category non-identical pairs
(.275). No other effects were statistically
significant.
A 2 (age: child vs. adult) by 2 (group:
learning vs. control) by 3 (pair type: identical,
same category non-identical, different category)
analysis of variance with repeated measures on
the third variable on the response times yielded
significant main effects of age (F(1, 45) = 8.823,
MSE = 12859202, p < .005) and pair type (F(2,
90) = 5.399, MSE = 1932184, p < .007), and a
significant interaction of age and pair type (F(2,
90) = 7.748, MSE = 1932184, p < .001) . Adults
were significantly faster than children overall
(2679 msec. vs. 4577 msec.), but this difference
was due entirely to the non-identical pairs (both
same and different category), which were also
faster overall than the identical pairs. No other
effects were statistically significant.
Sorting task. An item was considered
correctly sorted if it was placed with the majority
of the items of its category. This allows
characterization of sorts by control participants
as correct or incorrect. If one of the groups was

sufficiently larger than the other at the
completion of the sorting, it might contain a
majority of items from both categories. In that
case, the larger majority was said to define the
category and thus what counted as correct and
incorrect in the two categories. A 2 (age: child
vs. adult) by 2 (group: learning vs. control)
analysis of variance on the number of items
incorrectly sorted yielded significant main
effects of age (F(1, 45) = 9.032, MSE = 2.603, p
< .005) and condition (F(1, 45) = 13.683, MSE =
2.603, p < .001). The interaction approached
significance (F(1, 45) = 3.846, MSE = 2.603, p <
.06). Children made more errors than adults and
control groups made more errors than learning
groups, with control children making by far the
most errors. Single-sample t tests demonstrate
that only the children in the control condition
performed this sorting task no better than chance.

Discussion
The finding, based on similarity judgments,
that both adults and children in the learning
condition show the same pattern of expansion at
the category boundary when compared with
participants in the control condition is consistent
with the idea that changes to the metric of
similarity space may mediate concept formation
in an age-independent fashion. The results thus
provide encouragement to seek similar evidence
from work with still younger children, and to
pursue that idea that adjustments to the metric
properties of similarity space constitute a general
phenomenon
in
category
learning.
Unfortunately, the failure to find evidence for
expansion using the same-different task suggests
that this procedure is not a good candidate for
extension to younger ages. We had hoped that
there would be differential changes in speed of
responding between experimental and control
groups, even in the absence of differences in
errors, but found none of the necessary
interaction effects for that measure either.
Clearly, other task candidates, like the match-tosample technique (e.g., Smiley and Brown,
1979), will have to be explored. At least one
finding from the same-different task bears
noting, however. The fact that identical pairs
and different pairs from within the same category
produced the same high level of errors for both
adults and children (over 20%) suggests just how
difficult the discriminations were between items,
and is at least consistent with the hypothesis that
expansion effects at the boundary reflect
perceptual discrimination learning rather than

solely higher-order cognitive changes
(Livingston, et al., 1998).
One of the more interesting theoretical -- and
empirical, for that matter -- questions going
forward will be how the operation of a similarity
metric modification process like the one
described here maps onto other patterns observed
in the development of the child's system of
concepts. We earlier highlighted the similarities
between the concept learning of adults and
children, but interesting differences have been
noted and discussed in the developmental
literature. For example, how does one square a
compression-expansion mechanism with
variations in criteria for classification, which
have been said to shift from thematic to
taxonomic (Smiley and Brown, 1979), or
perhaps from basic-level taxonomic to thematic
and then to superordinate-taxonomic (Gelman,
Coley, Rosengren, Hartman, and Pappas, 1998).
To address this issue more fully would require a
more detailed analysis than is possible here, but
two possibilities are immediately apparent. The
first is that there is an important difference
between perceptual categorization and
conceptual categorization (Mandler, 2000), and
that the processes we are describing apply only
to the former. This is a highly controversial
distinction (see the numerous commentaries that
follow Mandler's paper), but if correct it would
make it all the more important to find ways to
pursue evidence for compression-expansion
effects in toddlers and infants, for whom highlevel conceptual processes are still poorly
developed. The other possibility is that there is
but a single process, mediated by changes in
similarity metrics, and that variations in
organizational structure, whether identified as
thematic, taxonomic, holistic, analytic, or whathave-you, reflect shifts in the pattern of attention
given to objects and events in the world, shifts
that establish the basic dimensionality of the
similarity space into which objects are sorted on
a given occasion.

Conclusion
The successful demonstration of learned
expansion in children shows that the
modification of psychological similarity space
that occurs in adult category learning operates
very early in life and may indeed constitute a
fundamental mechanism in concept acquisition.
We suggest that further work is needed to extend
these results to still younger children, and to
resolve important theoretical issues about how

the compression-expansion process is related to
known developmental changes in concept
learning during the childhood years.

Acknowledgments
Our thanks to the Wimpfheimer Nursery School
of Vassar College, the Poughkeepsie Day
School, the Vassar Undergraduate Research
Summer Institute, Krista Garver, Delia Hom,
Maria Jalbrzikowski,Elizabeth Kappler, Jennifer
Mason, and Erika Strochlic for their assistance
with this study.

References
Beale, J. M., & Keil, F. C. (1995). Categorical
effects in the perception of faces. Cognition,
57, 217–239.
Bruner, J. S., Goodnow, J. J., & Austin, G. A.
(1956). A study of thinking. New York: Wiley.
Damper, R.I. & Harnad, S. (2000). Neural
Network Modeling of Categorical Perception.
Perception and Psychophysics, 62, 843-867
Gelman, S. A., Coley, J. D., Rosengren, K. S.,
Hartman, E., & Pappas, A. (1998). Beyond
labeling: The role of maternal input in the
acquisition of richly structured categories.
Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 63 (1, Serial No. 253).
Goldstone, R. L, Lippa, Y., & Shiffrin, R. M.
(2001). Altering object representations through
category learning. Cognition, 78, 27-43.
Goldstone, R. L. (1994a). Influences of
categorization on perceptual discrimination.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
123, 178-200.
Goldstone, R. L. (1994b). The role of similarity
in categorization: Providing a groundwork.
Cognition, 52, 125-157.
Goldstone, R. L. (in press). Learning to perceive
while perceiving to learn. In R. Kimchi, M.
Behrmann, and C. Olson (Eds.), Perceptual
Organization in Vision: Behavioral and
Neural Perspectives. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Goldstone, R. L., Lippa, Y., & Shiffrin, R. M.
(2001). Altering object representations through
category learning. Cognition, 78, 27-43.
Goldstone, R. L., Steyvers, M., & Larimer, K.
(1996). Categorical perception of novel
dimensions. Proceedings of the 18th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum
Gutheil, G., Vera, A., & Keil, F. (1998). Do
houseflies think? Patterns of induction and

biological beliefs in development. Cognition,
66, 33-49.
Harnad, S., Hanson, S. J., & Lubin, J. (1995).
Learned categorical perception in neural nets:
Implications for symbol grounding. In V.
Honavar & L. Uhr (Eds.), Symbol processors
and connectionist network models in artificial
intelligence and cognitive modeling: Steps
toward principled integration Boston:
Academic Press, pp. 191–206.
Hutchinson, J. W., & Lockhead, G. R. (1977).
Similarity as distance: A structural principle
for semantic memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 3,
660–678.
Katz, P. A. (1963). Effects of labels on
children's perception and discrimination
learning.
Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 66, 423-428.
Kurtz, K. J. (1996). Category-based similarity.
In G. W. Cottrell (Ed.) Proceedings of the
Eighteenth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, 290.
Livingston, K. R., Andrews, J. K., & Harnad, S.
(1998). Categorical perception effects induced
by category learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 24, 732-753.
Mandler, J. M. (2000). Perceptual and
conceptual processes in infancy. Journal of
Cognition and Development, 1, pp. 3-36.
Quinn, P., Slater, A., Brown, E., & Hayes, R. A.
(2001). Developmental change in form
categorization in early infancy. B r i t i s h
Journal of Developmental Psychology 19, 207218
Rakison, D. H. & Cohen, L. B. (1999). Infants'
use of functional parts in basic-like
categorization. Developmental Science, 2, 423431.
Smiley, S. S., & Brown, A. L. (1979).
Conceptual preference for thematic or
taxonomic relations: A nonmonotonic trend
from preschool to old age. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 28, 437–458
Tijsseling, A. & Harnad, S. (1997). Warping
Similarity Space in Category Learning by
Backprop Nets. In: Ramscar, M., Hahn, U.,
Cambouropolos, E. & Pain, H. (Eds.)
Proceedings of SimCat 1997: Interdisciplinary
Workshop on Similarity and Categorization.
Department of Artificial Intelligence,
Edinburgh U.: 263 - 269.

