UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Is there evidence for unconscious reasoning processes?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6mf0t6mg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Author
Osman, Magda

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Is There Evidence for Unconscious Reasoning Processes?
Magda Osman (M.Osman@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University College London,
Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, UK

Abstract
Current theories of reasoning propose that reasoning is
governed by two systems: conscious and unconscious.
Conscious processing directs analytical thinking and
results in correct responding, while unconscious
processing employs heuristics that often leads to poor
performance in deductive reasoning tasks. The present
study uses a classic propositional task to examine the
properties that distinguish conscious from unconscious
reasoning. Overall, the study did not find support for
dissociable reasoning systems. Instead, the findings
suggest that the features exclusively attributed to each
system, by dual reasoning theorists, were equally
applicable to both.

Dual Process Theories
At present there are three theories of reasoning that
have divided the process into unconscious and
conscious components: Evans and Over s (1996) Dual
process theory; Slomans s (1966) Two systems theory
and Stanovich and West s (2000) Two systems theory.
Stanovich and West (1998) present a summary of the
general attributes that distinguish conscious from
unconscious reasoning processes. They propose that
unconscious processes are inaccessible, automatic,
inert, non-declarative, and non-verbalizable, while
conscious processes are accessible, controllable,
declarative, and verbalizable. The different
characteristics also imply that the two reasoning
systems serve different purposes, result in different
responses, and encode information differently. Many
studies developed to investigate the different systems
originate from Wason s (1966) conditional reasoning
task. One reason for this is that the general errors
individuals make when solving this task have been the
impetus for attributing unconscious mechanisms to
reasoning. The aim of the present study is to examine
the dual processes theories characterization of
deductive reasoning using Wason s (1966) conditional
reasoning task.
Wason (1966) developed a task (hereafter Wason s
selection task) that has now become the mainstay of
studies investigating deductive reasoning. It involves a
conditional statement if there is a vowel on one side of
the card, then there is an even number on the other
side . Participants are told that they have to discover

whether the statement is true by selecting cards to turn
over from an array of four (e.g., E, K, 2, and 5), which
are represented in logical notation as (P, ´P, Q, ´Q).
The correct solution requires the selection of the E (P)
and 5 (´Q) cards, because only this combination
provides a means of confirming and falsifying the
statement. Typically, only a small proportion of
participants solve the task correctly (e.g., 5-10%), while
most choose a range of alternative card combinations,
the most popular of which is E (P) and 4 (Q).
The appeal of this task comes from the robust results
it generates, in particular the regularity with which E
and 4 cards are selected. The matching bias theory
proposed by Evans (1972) and Evans and Lynch (1973)
is the most accepted explanation of this phenomenon.
They propose that instead of triggering reasoning
processes the selection task incites participants to
simply match their card choices with those named in the
statement. Evans (1972) developed a paradigm to
examine this by presenting participants negated
versions of the statement. He found that participants
still selected P and Q cards irrespective of the presence
of negations in the statement, thus leading to the
conclusion that the selection task is solved using simple
heuristics. A more detailed account proposed by Wason
and Evans (1975) explains the underlying processes that
motivate matching behavior. They suggested that
reasoning is comprised of two dissociated processes,
one of which is unconscious and based on quick-fix
strategies that are guided by particular preferences for a
response (i.e., biases). The second process is conscious
and rationalizes behavior, some of which the reasoner
has little control over. These proposals were based on
findings from protocols studies (Evans & Wason, 1976;
Wason & Evans, 1975), which required participants to
provide justifications for their card selections.
Participants showed a lack of awareness of the actual
processes involved in selecting cards, and
rationalizations of their behavior were found to be
independent of their actual card selections.
Following from Wason and Evans protocol studies, a
variety of techniques have been developed to uncover
unconscious reasoning processes e.g., transfer tasks
(e.g., Berry, 1983), and attentional biases (Evans, 1996;
Evans, Ball & Brooks, 1987; Roberts, 1997; Roberts &
Newton, 2001).

The findings from some of these designs suggest that
the characteristics attributed exclusively to one or other
of the two types of reasoning process are inaccurate.
For instance, Berry (1983) reported that participants
possessed insight into the processes motivating their
card selections, and that this knowledge contributed to
transfer of correct responding across different versions
of the selection task. This conflicts with the proposal
that individuals lack awareness of the processes that
contribute to solving the selection task, and that
protocols are actually post hoc rationalizations of card
choices (Evans and Wason, 1975).

The Present Study
The objective of this study is to examine three of the
claims made by the dual process theories of reasoning.
Evans, Ball and Brooks (1987) measured the order in
which cards were selected and rejected; they found that
decisions were made earlier for card selections than
rejections. They proposed that the reasons for this are
the result of unconscious biases that motivate
participants to focus their attention on cards that match
those named in the statement. However, attentional bias
has been inferred from measures of decision
making/card selecting behavior. There have been a
number of studies that have investigated aspects related
to attentional bias (e.g., Evans, 1996; Evans, Ball &
Brooks, 1987; Dominowski, 1995; Roberts, 1998;
Roberts & Newton, 2001), and in general the findings
are mixed. One of the objectives of this study is to
examine the prediction that attention is first directed to
cards that are selected first. Furthermore, there has been
no direct attempt to try and separate out attentional
processes from decision making processes, and the
present study attempts to remedy this.
The three dual process theories characterize
unconscious processing as inflexible, and this property
has been used to account for the poor rate of correct
responding following tutoring on conditional reasoning
(e.g., Wason & Johnson-Laird, 1970; Wason &
Shapiro, 1971). The present study investigates this
effect by including a tutoring session in the experiment
and measuring the extent to which performance is
improvement in subsequent versions of the selection
task.
Stanovich and West (2000) describe the emergence
of individual differences within the two reasoning
systems. They suggest that matched card selections are
motivated by the same unconscious bias, which also
implies that unconscious processes are ubiquitous and
not subject to variation. By contrast, individual
differences occur during conscious processing because
participants have overcome the tendency to select
matched cards, and have based their card choices from
their own construal of the statement, which in turn

results in a variety of construals and therefore card
combinations. However, this is a rather circular
argument, since evidence of individual differences is
supported by the view that they only emerge during
conscious processing, and similarly, conscious
processing is identified by the selection of cards that are
not matched to the rule. This study examines the
occurrence of individual differences in card selecting
behavior during different conditions.

Method
The present study combines a series of methods
designed to examine unconscious reasoning that have
not been used in combination in previous studies of the
selection task. Three techniques in particular have been
adapted for the purposes of this study.
Roberts and Newton (2001) developed a rapid
response task (hereafter RRT) that limited conscious
analytic processing in order to encourage automatic
responding in the selection task. During this task
participants were shown the example cards for 1
second, and asked to respond yes or no depending
on whether they would select the card or not. In the
present study participants were asked to study a
statement, which based on the typical presentation of
the conditional statement in standard versions of the
selection task. Then, participants were exposed to the
four cards A K 4 and 7 serially, for 90 msec.
They were then asked to decide after each card
presentation whether they would select the card or not,
and told to respond as quickly as possible. Participants
were also asked to rate how confident they were of their
decision on a 1-7 point scale (1 not confident , and 7
highly confident ). One problem that has pervaded this
type of design is that while participants are looking at
the cards they are also considering their selection, so it
is hard to infer attentional biases when the measure
might be contaminated by decision making processes as
well (Roberts, 1997). It should be noted that the present
study does not claim that the method elicits
unconscious processing, only that it encourages
attentional biases, and attempts to separate them from
decision making processes.
This study also includes a tutoring session and uses
some of the techniques developed by Green and
Larking (1995). In the present study participants were
asked to imagine what were the possible outcomes on
the underside of each of the four cards when they
turned them over. Participants were also asked to
suggest what implications the outcomes would have for
the conditional statement. After this, the experimenter
explained the concept of material implicature and the
necessity of falsification in order to solve the selection
task correctly.

A generation task was used to measure the extent to
which participants understood the concepts they were
introduced to during the tutoring session. This design
was originally used by van Duyne (1976) and later
incorporated into a study by Legrenzi (1980). The
general format of this task uses a conditional statement
but no given premises (e.g., if ____, then _____.), and
participants are required to generate their own
statement, devise the examples, and then test the
statement.

Participants
Forty-eight graduate and undergraduate students from
Brunel University took part in the experiment. Each
participant was screened for prior knowledge of the
selection task. They were assigned randomly to one of
the 48 possible permutations of the four cards
presentations in the RRTs.

Procedure
In the present study each participant completed the six
tasks, all of which were variations of the standard
abstract selection task. Participants were required to
solve the tasks in the same order starting with the first
RRT (Task 1), 3 versions of the abstract selection task
presented in a booklet (Tasks 2-4), followed by a
tutoring session, a second RRT (Task 5), and finally,
the generation task (Task 6). The instructions in the
second RRT task were identical to the first with
exception of the actual letters and numbers, and the
order in which they were presented for each participant.

Results
Card Selections
Table 1 reports the frequencies of all the cards
combinations selected in each of the six tasks. A loglinear analysis was favored over Pearson s chi-squared
in order to determine statistical regularities in the data.
The following analyses of card selecting behavior
across tasks are based on a collapsed version of Table 1.
This included separate frequencies for the main card
selections [P, P Q, P ~Q, Q, P Q ~Q], while the
remaining figures were classed as residuals. Significant
differences were found between the frequencies of card
combinations selected in the six tasks, G2 = 180.320
(25), p< .0001. On closer inspection there were no
significant differences between cards selected in the
three tasks presented in the booklet (Tasks 2-4), G2 (8)
= 7.960, p>.43, which suggests that the source of
difference was based specifically on responses to the
RRTs and the generation task.

Table 1: Frequencies of card selections for each of the
six tasks

P
PQ
P~P
P~Q
~P
~P~Q
~PQ
P~PQ~
Q
P~PQ
PQ~Q
P~P~Q
Q
~Q
Q~Q

Task
1
12
17
1
0
4
1
0
2

Task
2
4
34
0
1
1
0
0
1

Task
3
3
37
1
0
0
2
0
0

Task
4
5
37
0
1
0
2
0
0

Task
5
14
6
2
13
0
0
2
0

Task
6
4
8
2
17
0
1
0
1

2
2
2
2
0
3

0
0
0
7
0
0

0
0
0
4
1
0

0
0
0
3
0
0

2
6
1
0
0
2

1
11
2
0
0
1

Participants card selections in both
RRTs were
compared, this revealed a highly significant difference
between the two tasks, G2 (12) = 32.28, p< .001. A
comparison between the frequency of cards selected in
the second RRT, and the proceeding generation task
revealed no significant difference, G2 (4) = 8.257, p. >
.08. Thus, the responses to both tasks presented after
tutoring were not statistically different. A further
analysis between card choices for the first RRT and its
proceeding task (the first booklet task) showed there
was a highly significant difference, G2 (5) = 28.315, p<
.0005.
Analyzing correct card choices across the six task
revealed that significantly more correct responses were
made in tasks after the tutoring session, than preceding
it, G2 (5) = 63.013, p< .0001, thus suggesting that
tutoring facilitated correct responding.

Decision Latencies
The mean decision times for card selections and
rejections between the two RRTs were compared. This
analysis showed there was no significant difference, G2
(1) = 0.354, p >. 55. An analysis based only on decision
times of participants choosing the P and Q cards in both
RRTs was conducted, a summary of the mean decision
times for card selections and rejections is presented in
Table 2.

Tutoring
Table 2: Mean decision times for cards selected (PQ)
and rejected (´P´Q) in RRT 1 and RRT 2
Card
selections

RRT 1
10051.50
msec

RRT 2
8999.83
msec

Card
rejections

9665.59
msec

8877.94
msec

There was no significant difference between decision
times for rejected and selected cards, G2 (1) = 1.513,
p>.21. A further analysis was carried out on responses
to individual cards. A 2 (response type: selection vs.
rejection) x 4 (card type: P, ´P, Q, ´Q) analysis of
variance (ANOVA) revealed no significant main effect
for response type in the first RRT1, F (1, 46) = .003,
MSE = 61776.125, p>.95, and the same was found for
RRT2, F (1, 46) = 1.302, MSE = 28899003, p>.337.
There was also no significant main effect for card type
for RRT1, F (3, 138) = .803, MSE = 91337103, p>.504,
and RRT2, F (3, 138) = .817, MSE = 7774520, p>.506.
Finally, there was no significant interaction between
response types and card type for either tasks, RRT1 F
(3, 138) = 1.538, MSE = 14650821, p>.230, and RRT2
F (3, 138) = 1.928, MSE = 19278503, p>.196. These
finding suggest that there is no difference between the
decision times for cards selected and rejected and does
not support Evans, Ball and Brooks (1987) claim that
participants make earlier decisions for cards they select.
Along with measurements of decision times,
confidence ratings for each decision made were
recorded. The overall ratings were not significantly
different across both tasks, G2 (42) = 48.043, p>.24,
further analyses were carried out comparing both RRTs
based on ratings for individual cards. There was no
significant difference between the ratings for the P card,
G2 (6) = 5.218, p>.5; ´P card, G2 (6) = 4.065, p>.5;
and the ´Q card, G2 (6) = 3.112, p>.5. However
participants responded with higher confidence ratings
for the Q card in the second RRT compared to the first
RRT, and this was statistically significant, G2 (6) =
15.929, p< .01.
Analyses of confidence ratings between RRTs and
within each RRT, for both rejected and selected cards,
revealed significant differences only for the Q card.
Participants were significantly more confident when
deciding to select the Q card, G2 (6) = 15.209, p<. 01,
and to reject it, G2 (6) = 13.055, p<.05 in the second
RRT which proceeded tutoring. In the selection task
literature the Q card has been thought to generate
misunderstandings, which may account for the
significant results found for confidence and latency
measures based on this card.

During the tutoring sessions participants were asked to
consider the possible outcomes (i.e., true, false) for the
statement based on information represented on the
underside of each card. This technique was used to
gauge participants initial understandings of the
statement and cards.
All the participants assessed the statement correctly
according to the outcomes of information represented
on the underside of the P card. The majority of
participants reported that each outcome from turning
the ´P card was irrelevant and had no consequences for
the statement, which is an incorrect assumption. With
the exception of one, the remainder believed that
turning the Q card to reveal a P would imply that the
statement was true, which is also a commonly held
misconception. Approximately half correctly assumed
that discovering a P on the underside of the ´Q card
would suggest the statement was false.
In sum, participants have a correct understanding of
the P card, and they also appreciate that the ´Q card can
falsify the statement, but misunderstand its relevance,
evidenced in its absence from most participants card
choices prior to tutoring. The Q card was the most
misunderstood, and directly related to participants
difficulty in appreciating that a bi-conditional
interpretation (e.g., if and only if there is a vowel, then
there is an even number, which also implies that if
there is an even number, then there is a vowel ) could
not be assumed for the conditional statement.
The data from the tutoring sessions also suggest that
participants misunderstandings of the cards did not
correspond to previous responses in the booklet (Tasks
2-4). To illustrate, approximately 75% of participants
selected the PQ card combination in the booklet, the
corresponding misconception entails assuming that
turning a Q card and discovering a P would also verify
the statement, and that turning the same card over to
reveal a ´P would in turn suggest the statement was
false. However, comparing participants prior card
selections revealed that they displayed a variety of
misconceptions, and there was no significant
relationship between particular card choices (i.e., P and
Q) and its corresponding misinterpretation.

Discussion
The present study investigated unconscious deductive
processes based on the claims made by the three
theories, and the findings strongly imply that the
characterisation of unconscious processes is inaccurate.
The findings also challenge the extent to which
unconscious and conscious processes can be considered
as dissociated. However, it could be argued that the
present study did not adequately demonstrate
unconscious reasoning processes, and this is the reason

why the claims were not supported. Certainly there is
some doubt over what the methods used presently
actually demonstrate, but it was thought that the most
appropriate method of examining the proposals of dual
process theories was to use similar types of task
designs, the findings of which the theories have used to
support their claims.
Card Selections in the Rapid Response Tasks
The RRT tasks were designed to separate out
attentional processes from decision making processes.
Thus, the brief exposure of the cards did not allow
participants to think about selecting cards while
viewing them. The less restricted interval for choosing
enabled participants to reflect on their choices under
some degree of uncertainty as to what cards they saw.
The analyses suggested that participants differed in
their card selections during RRTs. If unconscious
processes are inflexible, then there should be a
correspondence between the cards selected in both
RRTs, and tutoring should have no effect, however this
was not found in the present study. Instead, the findings
suggest that tutoring influenced reasoning processes
employed in restricted as well as in free time tasks,
implying that unconscious processes are not inflexible.
Comparisons between card choices in the first RRT
and its proceeding task, which was a free time version
presented in the booklet, revealed significant
differences. Furthermore, 17/48 participants selected
matched card selections under restricted time
conditions, compared to 34/48 in the first booklet task.
If matched card selections are indicative of unconscious
reasoning processes then the proportion of matched
card selections should be the same for both tasks. 17/48
participants selected the same card combinations in the
first RRT and the first booklet task, (compared with
24/48 consistent card selections between the second
RRT and the generation task), however, 13/17
participants selected matched cards in these tasks.
While the later result lends some support to dual
process theorists view of matched card selections, the
other findings reported here provide a stronger case
against their proposals.
Decision Latencies
Attentional bias has been proposed as an explanation
for the longer latencies found for cards selected than
rejected in inspection time studies (e.g., Evans, 1996;
Evans, Ball, & Brook, 1987). The present findings
suggest that participants decision times were not
markedly different for different types of card selecting
decisions. There were, however, differences between
overall responses latencies in the RRTs. Participants
made quicker decisions during the second RRT
compared to the first. The tutoring participants received
before the second RRT may have influenced this result,

because they were better informed about the task
requirements. Furthermore, there were no differences
between the two RRTs based on confidence ratings.
However, the only significant difference was found for
ratings of the Q card, participants were more confident
of their decisions during the second RRT compared to
the first. One reason for this may have been the tutoring
received prior to the second RRT, suggesting that an
increase in understanding also results in an increase in
confidence.
Tutoring
There have been many examples of unsuccessful
attempts to tutor participants on conditional reasoning
(e.g., Wason, 1968; Wason & Johnson-Laird, 1970;
Wason & Shapiro, 1971). Wason (1968) first
introduced remedial procedures or ’therapies’ to invoke
insight into the task. Johnson-Laird and Wason (1970)
proposed that participants failed to solve the task
correctly because there was a disassociation between
participants selection and evaluation processes. Wason
and Johnson-Laird (1970) suggested that selecting is an
active process and occurs immediately before
evaluation because the evaluation process is effortful
and more cognitively demanding.
The lack of transfer reported in tutoring studies has
been used to demonstrate dissociations between
conscious and unconscious reasoning processes.
Participants inability to adopt new concepts, taken
together with the fact that they revert to previous card
choices, typically P and Q, suggest that either the
methods of tutoring are inadequate, or the processes
guiding card selections in the abstract task are
inflexible. The results from the present experiment
challenge both views.
A reduction in the proportion of matched card
choices (i.e., P Q) following tutoring, and an increase in
correct card selections (i.e., P~Q) suggest that tutoring
was effective, and that participants reasoning processes
are not inflexible. Also, individual differences were
revealed in the tutoring session, indicating that
participants held a variety of misconceptions of the
statement and the cards, which were corrected
following tutoring. Moreover, many participants did not
share the same misconceptions despite having selected
the same card combinations in previous tasks. Thus, the
selection of P and Q cards does not imply that
participants have the same understanding of the cards,
or that they are employing the same underlying
reasoning process.

Conclusions
The findings from this study do not support the claims
made by dual process theories of reasoning. However, it
is not possible to rule out the possibility that

unconscious processes are involved in reasoning. This
cautionary approach is based on problems concerning
methodology. The techniques used to expose
unconscious reasoning processes are not sufficiently
refined to decide whether the description of the
processes is inaccurate and that unconscious processes
are still present, or whether there are actually no
unconscious processes in reasoning.

Acknowledgments
The support of the Economic and Social Research
Council (ESRC) is gratefully acknowledged. The work
was part of the programme of the ESRC Research
Centre for Economic Learning and Social Evolution.

References
Berry, D. (1983). Metacognitive experience and transfer
of logical reasoning. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 35A, 39-40.
Dominowski, R. L. (1995). Content effects in Wason’s
selection task. In S. E. Newstead. &. J. S. B. T.
Evans. (Eds.), Perspectives on thinking and reasoning
(pp. 41-65). Hove, England: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Evans, J. S. B. T. (1972). Interpretation
and ’matching bias’ in a reasoning task. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 24, 193-199.
Evans, J. S. B. T. (1989). Biases in human reasoning:
Causes and consequences. London: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates Ltd.
Evans, J. S. B. T. (1996). Deciding before you think:
Relevance and reasoning in the selection task. British
Journal of Psychology, 87, 223-240.
Evans, J. S., B.T., Ball, L.J., & Brooks, P.G. (1987).
Attention bias and decision order in a reasoning task.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 51A,
811-814.
Evans, J. S. B. T., & Lynch, J. (1973). Matching bias in
the selection task. British Journal of Psychology, 64,
391-397.
Evans, J. S. B. T., & Wason, P.C. (1975). Dual
processes in reasoning? Cognition, 3, 141-154.
Evans, J. S. B. T., & Wason, P.C. (1976). (1976).
Rationalisation in a reasoning task. British Journal of
Psychology, 63, 205-212.
Green, D. W., & Larking, R. (1995). The locus of
facilitation in the abstract selection task. Thinking
and Reasoning, 1, 183-199.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Wason, P.C. (1970). Insight
into a logical relation. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 22A, 49-61.
Legrenzi, P. (1980). Relations between language and
reasoning about deductive rules. In G. B. Flore.
D’Arcais, and Levelt, W. J. M. (Eds.), Advances in

psycholinguistics. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Roberts, M. J. (1998). Inspection times and the
selection task: Are they relevant? Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 51, 781-810.
Roberts, M. J., & Newton, E. J. (2001). Inspection
times, the change task, and the rapid-response
selection task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 54, 1031-1048.
Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for two
systems of reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 322.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual
Differences in Reasoning: Implications for the
Rationality Debate. Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 22,
645-665.
Van Duyne, P. C. (1976). Necessity and contingency in
reasoning. Acta Psychologica, 40, 85-101.
Wason, P. C. (1966). Reasoning. In B. M. Foss (Ed.),
New horizons in psychology I (pp. 135-151).
Harmondsworth, Middlesex, England: Penguin.
Wason, P. C. (1968). Reasoning about a rule. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 20, 273-281.
Wason, P. C., & Evans, J.St.B.T. (1975). Dual
processes in reasoning? Cognition, 3, 141-154.
Wason, P. C., & Johnson-Laird, P, N. (1970). A
conflict between selecting and evaluating information
in an inferential task. British Journal of Psychology,
61, 509-515.
Wason, P. C., & Shapiro, D. (1971). Natural and
contrived experience in a reasoning problem.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 23A,
63-71.

