UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Logical Strategery

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6wm942tm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Morris, Bradley J
Schunn, Christian

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Logical Strategery
Bradley J. Morris (bjmorris@pitt.edu)
Christian Schunn (schunn@pitt.edu)
University of Pittsburgh, LRDC, 3939 OíHara St.
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA
Abstract
We propose a conceptual framework for explaining logical
reasoning in terms of competing strategies. Contrary to
previous approaches in which a single theory is suggested to
explain all logical reasoning, this framework suggests that the
core elements of existing theories constitute strategies, each
of which have unique processing demands. A strategy is more
likely to be used when its processing demands match a
problemís task demands. The framework specifies how each
strategy may be distinguished theoretically and empirically.

Overview
The study of logical reasoning has typically proceeded as
follows: researchers (1) discover a response pattern that is
either unexplained or provides evidence against an
established theory, (2) create a model that explains this
response pattern, then (3) expand this model to include a
larger range of reasoning situations. For example,
researchers typically investigate a specific type of reasoning
(e.g., deduction) using a particular variant on an
experimental task (e.g., the Wason selection task). The
experiments uncover a specific reasoning pattern, for
example, that people tend to match terms between the
premises and conclusions rather than derive valid
conclusions (Evans, 1972). Once a reasonable explanation is
provided for this response pattern, researchers typically
attempt to expand this explanation to encompass related
phenomena, such as, the role of ëbiasí in other reasoning
situations such as weather forecasting (Evans, 1989).
Eventually, this explanation may be used to explain all
performance on an entire class of reasoning phenomena
(e.g. deduction) regardless of task, experience, or age. We
term this the unified approach.
Unified approaches have traditionally suggested that
logical reasoning is either rule-based (application of
transformation rules that draw valid conclusions once fired;
Rips, 1994) or model-based (creating and searching
veridical representations of premises and possible
conclusions; Johnson-Laird, 1999). It seems possible,
however, given the range of problem types, task demands,
experience, and cognitive resources of the reasoner, that
there may be more than one approach to solving a class of
reasoning phenomena.
Logical reasoning tasks are quite varied, ranging from
simple tasks such as statement evaluation (e.g., ìIs my cat
black?î) to complex tasks such as predicate syllogisms (e.g.,
Some A are not B, Some B are C, Some C are not D, Are

some D A?). There is no evidence that logical reasoning
occupies a particular region of the brain (cite), that it is a
coherent process distinct from the rest of cognition
(Johnson-Laird, 1999), or that it involves the same cognitive
processes across different tasks. Moreover, cognitive
psychology has identified a variety of general cognitive
processes that are used to solve a wide variety of tasks (e.g.,
analogy, retrieval, guessing). Thus, it should not be
controversial to suggest a multiple strategy approach- that
several, general processes might be used to solve logical
reasoning problems in at least some situations, even if there
are special logical reasoning processes.
We propose an alternative to the unified approach in
which a series of simple strategies may be used rather than a
single complex theory. Thus, we propose a new framework
for explaining logical reasoning performance by
incorporating simplified versions of existing approaches as
possible strategies for solving logic problems. We list a
variety of alternatives that seem highly likely to be used in
at least some logical reasoning situations. It is not crucial to
the argument here that all strategies are actually used. We
will propose conditions under which various strategies may
be used, thus proposing a framework through which
strategies can be distinguished theoretically and empirically.
The multiple strategy approach has been suggested in the
domains of judgment and decision-making (see Bettman,
Johnson, Luce, & Payne, 1993, and Todd & Gigeranzer,
1999). Like the logical strategy model, these approaches
suggest competition between various strategies in which
selection is accomplished, in part, from an evaluation of
effort-accuracy tradeoffs. However, the logical strategy
model differs from these approaches in their function and
goals: (a) the function of the LSM is the creation and
evaluation of knowledge (inference) rather than selection
and evaluation of knowledge for decision making
(judgment), and (b) the goal of LSM is to establish (either
through production or evaluation) valid inferences while the
goal of other approaches is to return the most adaptive
decision (Todd & Gigeranzer, 1999).

The Strategy Approach to Logical Reasoning
What does it mean to think in terms of strategies? A
glance at the existing literature suggests that unified
approaches have difficulty accounting for differences in
performance between individuals and across tasks (for a
review see Rips, 1994; Johnson-Laird, 1999). We suggest
that differences in performance across individuals and

situations are due to the selection of a strategy and that
strategy selection is a function of the history of success with
each strategy and the match between processing demands of
the strategy and the task demands of the problem. We will
describe this match between the processing demands and
history of success of the strategy and the situation/task
demands as the situational niche.
As stated earlier, unified approaches have suggested that a
single theory can account for the range of human
performance. We suggest that the strategy selection
approach may explain the same phenomena by proposing a
series of specified approaches, each relegated to explaining
a subset of the total range of human deductive performance.
What do we gain from this approach? The strategy
approach allows established explanations to be incorporated
into a single model in which all are possible explanations of
behavior differing only in the extent to which the particular
strategy has been used in similar situations and matches the
task demands. The match between a particular strategy and
its situational niche may not be rational, but may help
explain individual and situational differences between
theories. For example, it is well established that familiar
content tends to improve performance on the Wason
selection task (Wason & Johnson-Laird, 1972). Hundreds of
experiments have investigated this phenomenon and have
led to the introduction of a variety of explanations (e.g.,
matching rules), which differ widely in the range of their
applicability. That is, some are specific to a particular set of
materials while others seek to explain a larger range of
reasoning behavior. What has rarely been investigated is the
influence of the situational niche on performance, or, more
specifically how is the task itself contributing to the
response pattern? For example, take two contrasting
approaches: in one, specific knowledge is required to solve
a problem, and in the other, abstract rules (excluding the
influence of knowledge) are used to solve problems.
Problem A is given in which a substantial amount of content
knowledge is given that is relevant to a solution. In this
case, we would expect the knowledge-based approach to be
better suited to solving this problem. If however a different
problem were given in which no background information is
proved, then we would predict that the second solution is
more likely to be used. We suggest that a strategy approach
allows flexibility in explanation by allowing for an
individual to display a range of possible approaches to a
problem set.
The logical strategy approach is in stark contrast to
unified approaches in which explanations for processing
logical statements are confined to one approach. A possible
criticism at this point is that that a unified approach is more
parsimonious than a strategy approach. That is, why suggest
a series of competing strategies, each of which demands
cognitive resources, when one approach would suffice? We
provide two responses. First, current unified approaches
have been unable to account for a range of performance
without many ad hoc additions. For example, Mental Logic
theory suggests that logical inferences are derived nearly

automatically by a set of content-free inferential rules (Rips,
1994; Braine & OíBrien, 1998). In order to explain the
effect of familiar content, Mental Logic theory incorporated
an additional step in the reasoning process, a pragmatic
filter, which determines if a statement is to be considered
logical or conversational. In the former, logical inferential
rules are applied, while in the latter case less formal
conversational inferential rules are applied. The result is that
the theory postulates an approach to reasoning that
undermines its own primary thesis, that logical inference is
a set of content-free rules applied as automatically as
syntax.
Second, the strategy selection approach does not require a
series of additional resources but can be accounted for by a
small set of general-purpose cognitive mechanisms. Within
the strategy selection framework a series of strategies can be
derived within minimal effort on the part of the cognitive
system from the experiences with the environment. For an
example, let us return to the example given above. To
account for reasoning in situations in which statements are
presented without familiar content and reasoning with
statements presented with familiar content, a strategy
selection framework could account for empirical findings by
the use of two strategies. The first does not use formal rules
but uses the content to derive a plausible conclusion related
to the specific content. In the second (without the presence
of familiar knowledge), inferential rules are used because
the most salient property of the problem is the relations
between elements, not the content of elements. The use of
each is specific to the situation in which both are presented.
In the sections that follow we will first outline seven
strategies and their corresponding task demands. We will
then examine the influence of task demands on their
selection. We first state that the following is an incomplete
model. There are many possible strategies and we are
suggesting a small number in this paper. Second, the
description of each is limited by space, thus does not cover
the full range of possible applications. Given the nature of
these limitations, the model is reasonably articulated for the
purposes of the paper.

Token Based (Mental Models)
Overview. The token based reasoning strategy has the
following characteristics: 1) information is represented as
tokens derived from natural language which correspond to
perceptual or verbal instantiations of possible states and 2)
ìlogicalî reasoning is achieved not through the application
of formal rules but by the creation, inspection, and
manipulation of tokens (Johnson-Laird, 1983; JohnsonLaird, Byrne, and Schaeken, 1992).
Outline of Processing/Processing Demands. Logical
inferences are derived from manipulations of models rather
than by using inferential rules. There are three steps in
processing token-based propositions: propositional analysis,
models generation, and model use. Propositional analysis

refers to language processing and is largely analogous to
representing the surface structure of a statement and
requires sufficient verbal/spatial working memory to encode
and parse language. Model generation refers to the creation
of tokens derived from the propositional analysis and
relevant information in the existing knowledge base and in
the environment. Generation requires verbal/spatial working
memory space to create and hold tokens. Model Use is the
process of searching and evaluating the set of models
created by the procedures outlined above and requires a
sufficient processing capacity to create veridical models of
the necessary information, creation and search for
counterexamples, and evaluations of truth-values. The
primary limitation on processing is the working memory
space required to create and search models for a solution.
The token-based strategy seems particularly useful in the
solution of problems in which there are spatial relations
because token-based representations can encode such
relations more easily than propositional representations
(Johnson-Laird, 1983, 1999). For example, in the transitive
problem ìBill is to the right of Fred, Fred is to the right of
Sam, Is Sam to the right of Bill?î) A token basedrepresentation would easily encode the relevant dimensions
as follows:
[Sam]

[Fred]

[Bill]

An obvious limitation of this strategy is that the number of
models needs to remain within the current working memory
limitations of the reasoner.

Verbal (Mental Logic)
Overview
Verbal logic approaches explain logical
reasoning as the result of content-free, logical
transformation rules applied to linguistically derived mental
structures (Rips, 1994; Braine & OíBrien, 1998).
Outline of Processing in Verbal Theories The core
elements of verbal theories share basic processing
characteristics. Input is represented and processed in a
verbal form (e.g., predicate-argument structures; Braine &
Rumain, 1983). Sufficient verbal working memory is
required to extract the formal elements and hold the
representation in a predicate argument structure.
Application of Transformation Rules are content-free
rules represented as either condition-action pairs (Rips,
1994) or as inferential schemas (Braine & OíBrien, 1997).
Once verbal input is represented, the content matches a
series of transformational rules that produce an output that is
either in the form of a conclusion, a statement that will be
operated upon by additional rules, or a statement that does
not match additional rules. Errors in processing are
attributed to a failure in applying the appropriate rule to the
statement.
The verbal strategy is most useful in solving abstract
statements in which the focus is on relationships between

elements. For example, in a version of the Wason selection
task the card content is related only by formal structure, not
by content (e.g., If there is a vowel on one side, there is an
odd number on the other side).

Knowledge Based Heuristics (KBH)
Heuristics are rules that do not utilize logical algorithms.
Such a strategy does not generate a valid conclusion but
may generate ìlogic-likeî performance (Cheng & Holyoak,
1985). KBH are easily implemented processing rules that
use content as the basis for deriving a conclusion. Unlike
algorithmic approaches (e.g. verbal strategy), these
conclusions are not necessarily valid (often violating logical
inference rules), yet are often pragmatically supported. An
example is Pragmatic Reasoning Schemas (PRS; Cheng &
Holyoak, 1985) in which social (permission rules) and
physical (causality) regularities form the basis of a series of
inferences schemas.
Outline of Processing in KBH
There are three processing steps in KBH: parsing
sentence, detection of relations, and solution output.
Sentence parsing refers to sentence comprehension and
includes verbal and nonverbal information. The detection of
relations occurs when the present content is similar to
content for which there are established rules. For example,
in permission relations, there are established rules (typically
phrased as conditionals) that suggest appropriate responses.
Matching content allows rules to be accessed. Once rules
are accessed, they are applied to the specific situation and a
solution output is produced.
The detection of specific relations determines if a
statement matches an existing schema. Cues such as
temporal sequence suggest obligatory or causal relations
between elements. For example, in the statement ìMow the
lawn and I will give you five dollarsî the condition is set in
the first clause while the consequent is set in the second
clause. Previous knowledge of other exchanges (in which
transactions are made on the basis of obligations) forms the
basis of these inferences.

Matching Heuristics
Overview- Matching heuristics are selective processing
strategies in which solutions are derived based on
superficial elements such as terms or common elements
(rather than on content as in KBH). Two well-known
examples of matching heuristics are Matching biases and
Atmosphere effects (Evans, 1989; Woodsworth & Sells,
1935).
Outline of Processing in Matching Heuristics
Matching heuristics specify rules of selective processing
differ from all previous strategies in that no specific
inferential content is accessed. These rules follow a basic
processing model as follows: 1) encode surface structure,
2) find key elements, and 3) match key elements. For

example, in the Wason selection task, subjects prefer to
choose cards named in the rules rather than cards that are
not named in the rules (Evans, 1972). In the first processing
step, the subject encodes the surface structure focusing on
the elements in the rule. Most likely this involves encoding
an IF! THEN rule. The key elements are identified. For
example, given ìIf an odd number on one side, then a vowel
on the other sideî the subject may focus on ìodd numberî
and ìvowelî as key elements. Then, when searching
possible solution states, the subject will attend to those
solution states that contain the key elements. Continuing
with the example above, the subject may be more likely to
select a card with an odd number and a card with a vowel
because they match elements in the rule. This general
processing model also applies to atmosphere effects.

Task-Specific Procedures
Overview- Like heuristic strategies, Task-specific
procedures are non-logical procedures that achieve correct
solutions on logical tasks without the use of formal
inferential rules. Task-specific procedures are reasoning
ìshort-cutsî that produce procedural solutions without
declarative understanding. The limitation of TSP procedures
is that they do not generalize beyond the specific type of
reasoning format in which they were induced. Logical
training (education and training studies) may produce these
procedures leading to an understanding of logical reasoning
analogous to the understanding of Chinese attributed to the
occupant of the Chinese room (Searle, 1990).
Outline of Processing in Task-Specific Procedures
The processing demands in task specific procedures can
be defined as two steps: (1) encoding the relevant problem
features and (2) implementing the appropriate algorithm.
For example, in a syllogism evaluation subjects concluded
that any syllogism with two ìsomesî in the premises was
invalid (Gallotti, Baron, & Sabini, 1986). Implementing a
solution algorithm requires sufficient working memory to
hold the encoded premises and to fire the appropriate
algorithm.

Pragmatic Acquiescence
Overview- Pragmatic acquiescence (PA) refers to response
patterns that are attempts to match the expectations of the
questioner. In a situation in which someone has little prior
knowledge, they may be inclined to seek social cues from
the questioner as to how to respond to a novel situation.
Rather than matching the conceptual features of the problem
as in matching heuristics, PA-based solutions are based on
the pragmatics of the problem/testing situation.
Outline of Processing PA- The PA strategy is used when
(1) the pragmatic cues are most salient or (2) other strategies
fail to produce a definitive solution.
The first step is encoding relevant cues. We suggest at
least four such cues: a) speaker status, b) language cues, c)

intonation cues, and d) gesture cues. Speaker status should
influence acquiescence in the following ways: the validity
of the response should increase as the authority of the
speaker increases. This also suggests an informal metric for
calculating the status of self and speaker. Language cues
may be the most obvious and suggest the type of response
that is expected (e.g., ìdonít you agreeî). The second step is
inferring possible solutions based on relevant cues.
Selecting the PA strategy should occur when other strategies
fail to match or when the pragmatic cues are most salient. In
both cases, this suggests that the reasoner lacks the
knowledge necessary to solve the problem at hand.
The final step is producing a solution. In this case, the
reasoner has encoded relevant cues and determined the cued
response. This response is given under any of the following
conditions: 1) if no other strategy matches, 2) if a strategy
produces a solution that is in conflict with the cued response
and fails to override this solution, or 3) if the cued response
is so highly activated that it overrides all other strategies.

Retrieval
Overview- Retrieval is accessing a previous solution from
long-term memory. Retrieval differs from all other proposed
strategies in that it is the only strategy that does not create
an on-line solution. We include this strategy because
solutions, once discovered, can be accessed from memory
rather than creating a new solution each time the same
problem is presented. Access to solutions will vary by the
time interval between discovery and access (recency), the
number of times the solution is accessed (frequency), and
the degree to which the current problem state is similar to
the problem state associated with the solution (fit). Guessing
is a loosely constrained form of retrieval in which a
response is produced on the basis of inaccurate or irrelevant
information.
Outline of Processing in Retrieval- As suggested above,
retrieval of previous solutions depends on a variety of
factors. The most crucial is the number of possible matches
to the current problem. IF there is only one match, then
retrieval is simple. Because there are often several possible
solutions to a particular problem, in order to retrieve a
solution, there must be a mechanism to determine which of
these possible solutions will be accessed at any given time,
or conflict resolution. We suggest three mechanisms. The
first is recency, or the time between when a solution has
been discovered and the time it is accessed (Anderson &
Lebiere, 1998). The second factor is the frequency of
access. The number of times a solution is accessed increases
the base activation level of the solution. The higher the base
level of activation, the more likely it is that a particular
solution will be accessed. The third factor is the degree to
which the problem state linked to a solution state is similar
to the current problem state, or fit. The degree of fit will
determine which of a set of possible solutions is most
similar to the current problem state.

Task Characteristics and Situational Niches
The previous section outlined the processing steps for
each strategy. As stated in the introduction to the paper, the
probability of a particular strategy being used is a function
of the processing demands of the strategy and the situational
niche. The following section will outline possible task
demands, processing demands and how these factors may be
related to the application of specific strategies.
The situational niche is similar to Todd & Gigeranzerís
(1999) notion of ecological rationality. Both approaches are
derived from Simonís (1957) concept of bounded rationality
in which reasoning proceeds on the basis of limited
information and both are content-sensitive, in that the type
of reasoning response is a function of the task demands.
While ecological rationality seeks the most adaptive
decision/judgment within an open system (i.e., one in which
a correct decision is indeterminate), a situational niche
represents the current context in which reasoning is
occurring and is a match between the processing demands of
the system and the task demands of the problem within a
closed reasoning system. Thus in a situational niche a
correct solution is possible.
The degree to which a problem is familiar will influence
the use of a particular strategy. Familiarity is contrasted on
two dimensions, the familiarity of the content and
experience with a particular problem type. The degree to
which content is familiar should increase the probability of
knowledge-based strategies. For example, it is a welldocumented finding that an invalid syllogism with a
believable conclusion is more likely to be accepted as true
than a valid syllogism with an unbelievable conclusion
(Evans, Barston, & Pollard, 1983). In this case the
familiarity of the conclusion may be the most salient
element, thus the element most likely to elicit a strategy
match. In the case of less familiar materials, for example a
syllogism with two ìsomesî in the premise, a reasoner may
rely on a task-specific heuristic to derive a conclusion
(Gallotti, Baron, & Sabini, 1986). When given a series of
unfamiliar, abstract materials a reasoner may rely strictly on
the formal elements of inference. For example given the
abstract version of the Wason task, a reasoner may be
unable to derive a series of valid conclusions (e.g. modus
tollens) but only able to infer modus ponens (Wason &
Johnson-Laird, 1972). In each of these cases the familiarity
of content may change the problemís situational niche,
resulting in different probabilities of matching a given
strategy.
In the second sense of familiarity, strategy selection may
also depend on the degree of experience a reasoner has with
the specific problem type. If a reasoner has a great deal of
experience with the specific problem type, they are more
likely to retrieve a solution or use the same strategy as used
on previous trials. As experience decreases, strategy
selection is more likely to be a function of other factors in
the situational niche (e.g., presentation format). Strategy

selection will be influenced by previous experiences with
the problem type and the nature of their outcome associated
with the use of priori strategies.
The presentation format also may influence the strategy
selected for a particular problem. Presentation formats may
be verbal, written, or visual. The type of representation may
illustrate or obscure problem characteristics crucial to a
correct solution (Larkin & Simon, 1987). Perhaps
differences in solutions differ as a function of both the
situational niche and the strategy that matches this niche.
In order to illustrate possible links between strategy
selection and situational niche, we present the following
example. Imagine a transitivity problem in which the basic
instructions are given as follows:
Four people are waiting in line at a movie theater with a
new seating policy. The new policy states that in order to
allow everyone to see the screen, all patrons have to be
seated by height. That is, shorter patrons are seated near
the front while taller patrons are seated near the back.
Five people, Homer, Marge, Bart, Lisa, and Maggie are
going to the theater. Based on their relative height
(including hair), place them in proximity to the screen.

Knowledge of the source material may influence the type
of strategy used. A reasoner with a great deal of knowledge
of the source material (The Simpsons) may simply retrieve
a solution (high content familiarity). One who cannot
simply retrieve a solution may use their knowledge to match
the task constraints as in a knowledge-based heuristic. In
this case, the reasoner may be able to place a few members
of the family in order without a transitive inference.
Those with no knowledge of the television show may
need to solve the problem using different strategies that may
depend on the presentation format. If presented pictorially,
the representational format reduces the amount of
information in working memory and allows a solution to be
derived from scanning the relative heights from the visual
array (see Figure 1).

Figure 1
If presented verbally, the task can be simplified by
ordering the information to align with task demands. For
example, if presented in an ordered format (as in Example
2), a simple scan of relations may allow a solution to be
derived. In this case, a matching heuristic may be devised in
which the tallest person is only on the left side of the text.
From here relations are structured after the tallest has been
identified.
Example 2
Homer is taller than Lisa.
Marge is taller than Bart.
Homer is taller than Bart.

Bart is taller than Lisa.
Lisa is taller than Maggie.
Marge is taller than Homer

When terms are randomly distributed in text (i.e.,
ordering is not aligned with task demands) then each
element must be encoded and compared to all other
components requiring greater working memory resources
(see Example 3). Such a presentation format may best match
a token-based strategy, in which pictures are easily
represented spatially as a series of tokens.
Example 3
Homer is taller than Lisa. Bart is taller than Lisa. Marge
is taller than Bart. Homer is taller than Bart. Lisa is taller
than Maggie. Marge is taller than Homer

The previous examples suggest a link between task
demands and processing resources. But how do task
demands and processing demands produce strategy
selection? Differences in processing demands and task
demands will lead to differences in the salience of problem
elements. Previous strategy use influences the probability
that a given strategy will be used. Using this framework, we
may be able to explain both inter- and intra-individual
change. For information about competition between existing
strategies, we will examine data one example of errors in
logical reasoning: performance differences based on the
presence of familiar content. In verbal strategies, errors in
processing are attributed to a failure in applying the
appropriate rule to the statement. There are at least two
conditions under which a rule is unavailable for processing.
Failure to retrieve a rule suggests that although the rule is
present in long-term memory, it is not retrieved for
processing the current information. Failure to match a rule
is typically explained by the presence of content effects
(Braine & OíBrien, 1998). That is, when the content is
either familiar or supports an inference beyond that of the
statementís form, then rule matching is either suppressed or
may match a different rule (Rips, 1994). Although failure to
match has been cited as a condition under which abstract
rules fail to apply, it is plausible that under these conditions
knowledge-based heuristics are more likely to be applied,
resulting in slightly different conclusions. Conversely,
knowledge-based heuristics rules often fail to fire when
given abstract elements (e.g., If A, then B) and are restricted
to induced relations (i.e., obligation and permission) (Cheng
& Holyoak, 1985; Rips, 1994). In both cases, there are
ranges of results that cannot be explained by each unified
theory, however, viewing each as a strategy allows the
inclusion of the seemingly conflicting empirical findings
into a single model.
The strategy approach maintains the explanatory power of
each theory while increasing the scope of explanation. The
strategy approach accounts for a range of results by
suggesting that each strategy possesses distinct processing
demands that are likely to match the task demands of
specific problem. By allowing multiple approaches within

individuals across time the strategy approach is maximally
flexible allowing the possibility of explaining differences
across tasks and individuals.

References
Anderson, J. R., & Lebiere, C. (1998). The atomic components of thought.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bettman, J.R., Johnson, E.J., Luce, M.F., & Payne, J.W. (1993). Correlation,
conflict, and choice. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 19(4), 931-951.
Braine, M. & OíBrien, D. (Eds.). (1998). Mental Logic. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Braine, M., & Rumain, B. (1981). Development of comprehension of ìOrî:
Evidence for a sequence of competencies. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 31, 46-70.
Cheng, P. W., & Holyoak, K. J. (1985). Pragmatic Reasoning Schemas.
Cognitive Psychology, 17, 391-416.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (1972). On the problems of interpreting reasoning data:
Logical and psychological approaches. Cognition, 1, 373-384.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (1989). The psychology of deductive reasoning. London:
Routledge.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Barston, J.L., & Pollard, P. (1983). On the conflict between
logical and belief in syllogistic reasoning. Memory and Cognition, 11, 295306.
Galotti, K.M., Baron, J., Sabini, J.P. (1986). Individual differences in syllogistic
reasoning: Deduction rules or mental rules? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 115, 16-25.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1999). Deductive Reasoning. In J. Spence (Ed.), Annual
Review of Psychology, Vol. 50 (pp.109-135). Palo Alto, CA: Annual
Reviews.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Byrne, R. M. J., & Schaeken, W. (1992). Propositional
reasoning by model. Psychological Review, 99, 418-439.
Larkin, J.H., & Simon, H.A., (1987). Why a diagram is (sometimes) worth ten
thousand words. Cognitive Science, 11, 65-100.
Rips, L. J. (1994). The Psychology of Proof. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Searle, J. R. (1984). Minds, brains, and science. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
Gigeranzer, G., & Todd, P.M. (1999). Simple heuristics that make us
smart. Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK.
Wason, P.C., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1972). The psychology of reasoning:
Structure and content. London: Batsford.
Woodworth, R.S., & Sells, S.B. (1935). An atmosphere
effect in syllogistic reasoning. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18,
451-460.

