UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling Driver Distraction from Cognitive Tasks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1wh9p6w0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Author
Salvucci, Dario D

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling Driver Distraction from Cognitive Tasks
Dario D. Salvucci (salvucci@mcs.drexel.edu)
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Drexel University
3141 Chestnut St., Philadelphia, PA 19104
Abstract
Driver distraction has become a critical area of study both
for research in investigating human multitasking abilities
and for practical purposes in developing and constraining
new in-vehicle devices. This work utilizes an integratedmodel approach to predict driver distraction from a
primarily cognitive secondary task. It integrates existing
models for a sentence-span task and driving task and
investigates two methods in which the resulting model
can perform multitasking. Model predictions correspond
well qualitatively to two of three measures of driver
performance as collected in a recent empirical study. The
paper includes a discussion of the potential for building
multitasking models in the framework of a productionsystem cognitive architecture.

Introduction
Computational cognitive modeling continues to mature
rapidly as an area for both theoretical advances in
understanding cognition and practical advances in
developing intelligent technology. Cognitive modeling has
grown from addressing only simple cognition in basic
psychological tasks to capturing integrated cognitive,
perceptual, and motor processes in large-scale complex,
dynamic tasks (e.g., Chong, 1998; Jones et al., 1999).
This paper investigates the application of cognitive models
to an extremely common yet complex task: driving.
Driving involves the continual multitasking of a number of
subprocesses that make use of the driver's cognition,
perception, and motor movements. This rich spectrum of
necessary skills makes driving an ideal task in which to
investigate how humans execute complex tasks and how
computational models can represent and predict the
multitasking behavior in these tasks.

Driver Distraction and Cognitive Modeling
One particular aspect of driver multitasking that has received
enormous attention from media and researchers alike is that
of “driver distraction” -- namely, the effects of multitasking
while performing some secondary task. Numerous studies
have now found that performing primarily perceptual-motor
tasks while driving (e.g., dialing a cellular phone) can
impair driver performance (e.g., Alm & Nilsson, 1995;
McKnight & McKnight, 1993). These studies generally
conclude, perhaps not surprisingly, that pulling a driver's
visual attention from the road and/or her hand(s) off the
steering wheel degrades the driver's ability to maintain a
central lane position, follow a lead car with a constant
headway, or react to potential hazards. Such studies have

subsequently led to legislation at all government levels to
restrict the use of potentially distracting secondary-task
devices. While driver distraction is generally associated
with effects on perceptual-motor processes, researchers have
also reported that “cognitive distraction” arising from purely
cognitive secondary tasks can adversely affect driver
performance (e.g., Alm & Nilsson, 1995). These results are
not fully conclusive and seem to depend highly on the
secondary task as well as the driving situation; nevertheless,
it is clear that even purely cognitive tasks can impact driver
performance in certain situations.
To better understand driver behavior and the sources of
driver distraction, researchers have attempted to develop
integrated driver models that capture driver behavior in a
computational manner (e.g., Aasman, 1995). These models
provide insight into the sources of distraction by elucidating
the exact processes by which a driver attends to the external
environment, processes this information cognitively, and
then reacts and manipulates the environment. In addition,
the computational models may be used to generate
predictions about the effects of distraction on driver
performance; for instance, the ACT-R driver model
(Salvucci, Boer, & Liu, 2001) has been integrated with
various models of cell-phone dialing to predict the impact
of dialing on lane-keeping performance (Salvucci, 2001;
Salvucci & Macuga, 2001). However, this previous work
has addressed only primarily perceptual-motor secondary
tasks with little cognitive component (like cell-phone
dialing); to date, no models have demonstrated the ability
to represent and generate “cognitive distraction” from
primarily cognitive tasks.

Modeling “Cognitive Distraction”
This paper describes the first attempt to predict cognitive
distraction with a computational cognitive model. This
work employs the same methodology as in previous work
for perceptual-motor distraction, namely the “integrated
model approach” based in a cognitive architecture (see
Salvucci, 2001). Cognitive architectures are computational
frameworks that incorporate built-in, well-tested parameters
and constraints on human cognitive and perceptual-motor
abilities. This work focuses on a particular architecture,
ACT-R (Anderson & Lebiere, 1998), that represents factual
knowledge as declarative chunks and procedural knowledge
as condition-action “production rules”. For our purposes,
the ACT-R architecture has two important benefits: (1) it
facilitates reuse and integration of multiple behavioral
models, and (2) it provides built-in interfaces and default
parameters that facilitate a priori predictions of real-world

metrics of human performance (e.g., reaction times,
keystrokes, eye movements).
The integrated model
approach takes advantage of these benefits to incorporate a
model of secondary-task behavior with the ACT-R driver
model to predict the effects of executing the secondary task
on the primary driving task.
The initial demonstrations of this approach (Salvucci,
2001; Salvucci & Macuga, 2001) examined a primarily
perceptual-motor task, namely dialing a cellular phone using
different modalities (e.g., manual button input versus
speech input). The work showed that an integrated drivingdialing model predicted degraded steering performance for
the modalities that required the driver to look at the cell
phone (i.e., manual dialing), thus drawing visual attention
away from the roadway.
The work presented here
generalizes the previous work in two important ways. First,
although it utilizes the same methodology to predict driver
distraction, it predicts distraction from a primarily cognitive
task — namely, a sentence-span task that involves rehearsal
and recall of a sequence of words. Second, unlike the
previous work, it makes use of an existing model for the
secondary task (with some necessary adaptation) as well as
an existing model for the primary driving task, thus
demonstrating the importance and benefits of model re-use.
This paper begins with a review of the driving and
secondary tasks modeled here, namely those from the
empirical work of Alm and Nilsson (1995) showing effects
of the sentence-span task on driver car-following
performance. It then provides an overview of the integrated
model approach incorporating existing models of both the
driving and secondary tasks, including two methods of
performing explicit multitasking between the individual
task models. Finally, it compares the model's predictions
with Alm and Nilsson's empirical results and discusses the
broader implications of the methodology to studying
multitasking in the framework of a cognitive architecture.

driver would report “yes” and “no” after each sentence
(respectively) and would then report the memorized list
“teeth,”, “newspaper,” etc. The sentence-span task itself
involves two concurrent activities, namely judging of
sentence sensibility and memorization (and rehearsal) of
final words. When combined with driving, the task puts a
substantial cognitive load on drivers as they attempt to
integrate the tasks.

The Sentence-Span and Driving Tasks

Alm and Nilsson’s (1995) empirical study included a total
of 40 participants in two experimental groups: a task group
that occasionally performed the sentence-span task while
driving, and a control group that did not perform the task.
In both groups, each driver negotiated four safety-critical
situations in which the lead vehicle would brake suddenly.
The timing of the events was randomized to either near the
start or near the end of the span task (in the task group) such
that drivers could not predict when the events would occur.
The driving task was performed in a high-fidelity
driving simulator to give participants as realistic an
impression of real-world driving as possible. The simulator
included a moving-base system (based on a Saab 9000 with
manual transmission), wide-angle visual system, vibration
generation, and temperature regulation.
The driving
environment comprised a simulated 80 km two-lane
highway (one lane in each direction) with oncoming traffic
in the opposite lane. The highway had a very low curvature
so that steering down the roadway was relatively
straightforward even at high speeds. The sentence-span task
was performed through an Ericsson hands-free telephone
mounted on the instrument panel to the right of the steering
wheel. Drivers needed only press one key to activate

The task and empirical results that will be used to validate
the model predictions are taken from Alm and Nilsson
(1995). Their study aimed to show exactly those effects
that we are attempting to model, namely effects of cognitive
secondary tasks on driver performance. For the purposes of
this paper, we would like to recreate this task for the
integrated model as closely as possible to facilitate later
comparison between model and empirical results.

Sentence-Span Task
Alm and Nilsson (1995) employed a sentence-span task that
involves the processing of sentences and the recall of words
in these sentences (see Daneman & Carpenter, 1980). The
task comprises two stages. In the first stage, drivers
listened to five sentences of the form “X does Y” — for
instance, “The boy brushed his teeth” or “The train bought a
newspaper.” They would also report after each sentence
whether the statement was generally sensible. In the second
stage, drivers were asked to state the last word of each
sentence in order. For instance, for the sentences “The boy
brushed his teeth” and “The train bought a newspaper,” the

Driving Task
As a realistic scenario in which to test interaction with the
sentence-span task, Alm and Nilsson (1995) used a carfollowing task where the lead vehicle would sometimes
perform unsafe maneuvers and leave the driver in a “safetycritical” situation. During the normal stages of the task, the
lead vehicle maintained a 75 m headway distance from the
driver’s vehicle. Occasionally, the lead car braked suddenly
with a deceleration of 4 m/s2 until its speed reached
50 km/hr (or until a maximum of 5 s of deceleration), then
accelerated at 3 m/s2 until its speed reached 90 km/hr. The
original study also included non-safety-critical situations in
which the lead vehicle would indicate a right turn and
eventually turn off the road; their analysis does not examine
these situations in detail and they are not discussed further.
The Alm and Nilsson study provided three metrics by
which they measured driver performance: (1) reaction time
to the braking event, measured as the time lapse between the
start of the event and the driver’s initial depression of the
brake; (2) lateral deviation, measured as the root-meansquared error of the driver’s vehicle position to the center of
the lane; and (3) headway distance, measured as the distance
between the driver’s vehicle and the lead vehicle. The
results section will compare the model’s predictions to the
empirical results from human drivers for all three metrics.

Empirical Study

(answer) the phone at the start of the task, and given practice
with the phone, drivers could easily activate the phone
without looking. Sentences were presented by means of a
tape recorder, and driver responses were recorded on a
second tape recorder.
The results of the empirical study will be discussed in a
later section to facilitate comparison with model
predictions. It should be noted that the original study also
included both younger and older drivers to demonstrate the
interactions of cognitive distraction with age. This paper
only addresses the data from the younger drivers (mean age
29); the existing driver model used in this paper has been
validated with data from younger drivers, and thus we
expect the model to better account for the younger-driver
data from the original study.

The Integrated Task Models
To model and predict the interaction of the sentence-span
and driving tasks, this work utilizes the “integrated model”
methodology employed in previous work (see Salvucci,
2001): Given an existing model of driver behavior, we
develop or acquire a model of behavior in the secondary
task, integrate the two models to perform multitasking, and
finally run the integrated model to generate behavioral data.
One critical element of this integration is the potential for
generating a priori predictions — that is, rather than fitting
the model to data by manipulating parameters, we carry over
defaults and parameter settings from existing models and
immediately use them in the integrated model. In addition,
we benefit from re-use of models that have been rigorously
tested in other studies. These and related issues will be
discussed further in later sections. This section describes
the individual task models as well as the two versions of
the final integrated model.

of new rules in this model, it should be noted that the first
six deal with particulars of the sentence-span task involving
hand movement and encoding of speech, and the final two
non-MODS rules simply terminate the articulation and
recall goals. The process of confirming whether or not the
sentence is sensible is not modeled in any detail, but rather
the model simply assumes that this process happens during
the listening productions and signals a confirmation by
firing the Confirm-sentence rule. In addition, the model
assumes that each sentence component (subject, verb,
object) requires one second of speech time.
Table 1: Sentence-span model production rules, with
markings for whether they are original MODS-model
rules and whether they pass control to driving in the
Single-Step (SS) and Group-Step (GS) models.
Production Rule
Move-hand-to-phone
Press-button
Move-hand-to-wheel
Hear-sentence-subject
Hear-sentence-verb
Hear-sentence-object
Confirm-sentence
Create-memory
Rehearse-memory
Done-articulate
Recall-span
No-recall
Say-item
Next-item
Done-recall

MODS

x
x
x
x
x
x

Passes Control
SS
GS
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Sentence-Span Model
The model for the sentence-span task comes from Lovett,
Daily, and Reder (2000), who developed an ACT-R
(Anderson & Lebiere, 1998) process model as part of their
investigation of individual differences in working memory.
Although the original model does not literally perform the
sentence-span task, it does perform a closely related task
called the MODS task in which people read strings of letters
while memorizing final digits for later recall. The original
model provides three critical components that are re-used in
the sentence-span model: (1) the positional representation
used to encode memorized items, (2) production rules that
perform rehearsal of memorized items, and (3) production
rules that retrieve and report the items in sequence.
Interested readers can refer to Lovett, Daily, and Reder
(2000) for a more detailed description of these components.
Given this core model, the sentence-span model
required two modifications: (1) the addition of production
rules to encode a sentence and decide whether it is sensible,
and (2) the incorporation of perceptual-motor productions to
hear and speak words (rather than read and type characters as
in the MODS task). Table 1 shows the production rules in
the final sentence-span model and indicates those rules taken
from the original MODS model. While there are a number

Driver Model
The model of driver behavior is an ACT-R model that
integrates control, monitoring, and decision making to
navigate highway environments with traffic (Salvucci, Boer,
& Liu, 2001). For control, the model employs a two-level
model of steering that uses a “far point” on the road to
guide predictive steering and a “near point” on the road to
center the vehicle. For monitoring, the model encodes its
surrounding environment using simulated eyes to maintain
situation awareness. For decision making, the model
checks the current situation and decides when to perform
maneuvers such as lane changes. Thus, the driver model
incorporates both lower-level perception and action for
vehicle guidance and higher-level cognition for awareness
and decision making. This driver model has been shown to
account for a number of aspects of human highway driving,
including nearing the inner curb during curve negotiation
and switching gaze to the destination lane at the start of a
lane change (see Salvucci, Boer, & Liu, 2001). Also, as
mentioned earlier, the driver model has been employed to
predict the effects of driver distraction from cell-phone
dialing in different modalities (Salvucci, 2001a, 2001b;
Salvucci & Macuga, 2001).

The complexities of the driver model make it infeasible
to describe here in any level of detail. However, it is
worthwhile to highlight two critical aspects of the model
that are essential to the endeavor of predicting driver
distraction. First, because of its implementation in the
ACT-R architecture, the model is constrained to a serial line
of cognitive processing. Thus, the cognitive integration of
perception, action, and decision making is done in a serial
loop: the model encodes relevant perceptual variables,
processes these variables, then issues motor commands to
manipulate the environment. When secondary tasks are
added into this main loop, they naturally have some impact
on the frequency with which the updating processes can
occur, and thus can affect driver performance. Second, the
driver model interacts with a simulated driving environment
and generates a full behavioral protocol, as would a human
driver navigating the same environment in a driving
simulator. This faithfulness to predicting real-world data
facilitates rigorous and straightforward comparison between
model predictions and empirical results.

Integrated Model
In general, integration of multiple models in a production
system such as ACT-R is rather straightforward: we can
simply add the sentence-span memory structures to the
driver model. However, two challenges arise that must be
dealt with. First, the integrated model must decide how to
multitask between the two component models. As in
previous applications of this methodology, there does not
yet exist a rigorous model of multitasking that we can
employ, but we can use reasonable heuristics to guide us.
Multitasking in the integrated model is performed explicitly
(instead of preemptively) in that each model must pass
control to the other, presumably at a fairly frequent interval.
Because driving is the primary task, we are most concerned
about when the secondary task model (i.e., the sentencespan model) will cede control back to driving. This paper
explores two approaches for attacking this problem. The
conservative approach would only allow the secondary task
to fire a single production, then immediately cede control
back to driving. A less conservative (though still fairly
conservative) approach would allow small logical groupings
of production firings to occur before passing control. These
approaches were used to develop two versions of the model
termed the Single-Step (SS) and Group-Step (GS) models,
respectively. Table 1 indicates which productions pass
control for each model. While every rule is marked for the
SS model, the GS model allows certain rules to continue:
the Rehearse-memory rule that rehearses memorized items in
rapid succession, and the threesome of rules that combine to
retrieve and report a memorized item. The choice of marked
rules for the GS model is admittedly somewhat arbitrary,
but at least in part guided by introspection as to how
humans would perform this task. Further development on
rigorous models of multitasking will help to formalize these
choices in future work.

The second major challenge for model integration, not
to mention model development on the whole, is the setting
of parameter values. ACT-R, like similar architectures, has
a number of “settable” parameters; however, all parameters
have default recommended values that have withstood the
test of time in modeling throughout the community.
Nevertheless, the original MODS model posed an
interesting problem in that it activated several learning
mechanisms (e.g., learning of chunk base-level activations
and production strengths) that were deactivated in the driver
model. Because the MODS model had undergone more
rigorous parameter testing with detailed data, it was decided
to incorporate its parameter values into the integrated
model, thus overriding the driver model’s global settings.
Fortunately (and perhaps surprisingly), this decision had no
apparent adverse effects on the normal operation of the
driver model, which proved rather robust to the different
parameter settings and activated learning mechanisms.

Model Simulations
The driver model was made to interact with a driving
simulation that mimicked the critical elements of the Alm
and Nilsson (1995) car-following task. A total of 15
simulations were run: 5 runs in the No-Task condition
without a secondary task, 5 runs in the Task-SS condition
with the Single-Step model performing the secondary task,
and 5 runs in the Task-GS condition with the Group-Step
model performing the secondary task. Each simulation
generated a detailed behavioral protocol at a rate of roughly
13 Hz including all relevant control and environmental data
as well as marks for the start and end of the braking events.

Model Predictions and Empirical Results
We can now compare the model predictions with Alm and
Nilsson’s (1995) empirical results. It should be emphasized
that the present study does not involve typical parameter
estimation for fitting the model to data; rather, it centers on
a priori predictions by simply integrating the models,
running simulations, and checking the results. The goal of
the study is thus to predict the effects of the secondary task
on driver performance primarily in qualitative terms and,
secondarily, in quantitative terms as much as possible.

Brake Reaction Time
The first and more important aspect of driver performance
examined is drivers’ brake reaction time, or the time lapse
between the start of the lead vehicle’s braking and the
initiation of braking by the driver. Figure 1(a) shows the
reaction times (means and standard deviations) predicted by
the model for the No-Task, Task-SS, and Task-GS
conditions. While the reaction time for the no-task
condition was approximately 2.5 s, the reaction times for
both task conditions were significantly higher at roughly
2.9 s, and thus the model predicts a significant impact of
the secondary task on drivers’ braking reaction.

3.5
Brake Reaction Time (s)

Brake Reaction Time (s)

3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0

3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0

No Task

Task,SS

Task,GS

Condition

(a)

No Task

Task
Condition

(b)

Figure 1: Brake reaction times for (a) model simulations and (b) empirical data.
Figure 1(b) shows the empirical results for brake
reaction time. These results also show a clear (and
significant) task effect, with an increase of reaction time
from 1.6 s without the task to 2.2 s with the task. The
model and empirical results therefore correspond well
qualitatively. Quantitatively, the model predictions are
roughly .7–.9 s too high; this discrepancy may be attributed
to the fact that the model uses only distance of the lead
vehicle to determines how it accelerates and decelerates,
whereas the human drivers could also attend to the lead
vehicle’s brake lights, providing the latter with additional
cues to initiate braking.

Lateral Deviation
The second aspect of performance is one of the most
common measures for driver distraction studies, namely the
lateral deviation of the driver’s vehicle — defined as the
root-mean-squared error of the vehicle’s center with the
central position in the lane. Figure 2 shows the model
predictions for lateral deviation in the three conditions.

Lateral Deviation (m)

0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
No Task

Task,SS

Task,GS

Condition

Figure 2: Lateral deviation for model simulations.

Interestingly, the SS model predicts no effect of secondary
task on lateral deviation. However, the GS model predicts
quite a large effect of approximately 50 cm.
Alm and Nilsson (1995) do not report specific numbers
for lateral deviation; however, they do report a statistical
analysis on these data that found no significant task effect
on lateral deviation (against their original hypothesis). The
predictions of the SS model thus support their results,
demonstrating how closely interleaved multitasking can, in
certain situations, have no significant effect on lateral
deviation. On the other hand, the predictions of the GS
model show that less conservative, “grouped” multitasking
can draw cognitive attention away from the driving task
enough to create a significant effect.

Headway Distance
The third aspect of performance is headway distance, or the
distance between the driver’s vehicle and the lead vehicle.
While headway was maintained at 75 m during normal
conditions, the lead vehicle’s braking would greatly reduce
this headway until the driver has a chance to react. Figure
3(a) shows the model predictions for the minimum headway
distance, a measure of how close the driver’s vehicle came
to the lead vehicle. In all three conditions, the model
exhibited a minimum headway of approximately 35 m.
Figure 3(b) shows the minimum distances reported in
the empirical study. Here there is a clear task effect: the
headway decreases significantly in the presence of the
secondary task. Thus, the model predictions are not
supported for the distance-headway measure. It seems that
although the model clearly reacts later in the task condition,
it also compensates for the late reaction by braking harder,
thus eliminating any potential task effect.

Conclusions
The SS model’s a priori predictions matched two of the
three measures qualitatively, correctly predicting an effect on
reaction time but no effect on lateral deviation. Given the
ambiguity in the driver-distraction literature on when such

Minimum Headway (m)

Minimum Headway (m)

50
48
46
44
42
40
38
36
34
32
30
No Task

(a)

Task,SS

Task,GS

Condition

50
48
46
44
42
40
38
36
34
32
30
No Task

(b)

Task
Condition

Figure 3: Minimum headway distance for (a) model simulations and (b) empirical data.
effects may occur, this is a strong result that demonstrates
the model’s ability to predict distraction for certain
measures and not others. However, the model did not
predict the effect on minimum headway, perhaps due in part
to the fact that the headways were large enough that human
drivers felt no dire need to closely maintain headway.
The GS model’s predictions were not as good, failing
to predict the absence of an effect on lateral deviation. Its
failing indicates one shortcoming of this work: although the
integration of models is mostly straightforward, there
remain too many degrees of freedom with respect to how
models can and should multitask. Combating this problem
requires a more rigorous treatment of multitasking, and
cognitive architectures such as ACT-R show promise in
being able to account for such a process. In particular,
architectures provide an opportunity to handle multitasking
at the “software level” through new models implemented as
production rules and/or at the “hardware level” through
changes to the architecture’s inner mechanisms. Recent
models of complex dynamic tasks, though not yet the
comprehensive models required for the long term, have
already demonstrated good ability in capturing some aspects
of multitasking (e.g., Chong, 1998; Jones et al., 1999).
As a related point, cognitive architectures also have the
substantial benefit of facilitating re-use of models,
parameters, and other components from one model to
another. This study exhibits this property primarily in the
re-use of two existing models for predicting distraction.
However, it also opens the door to predicting numerous
other aspects of behavior. For instance, Lovett et al.’s
(2000) treatment of their MODS model includes an
investigation of how ACT-R’s W parameter can represent
individual differences in working memory capacity.
Because their work addresses mechanisms fundamental to
the architecture, it can carry over directly into further
investigations of the effects of capacity differences on driver
distraction or even just on driving itself. This ability to
share ideas and mechanisms across domains offers enormous
explanatory and predictive power to architectural models in
new and existing domains of study.

Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Marsha Lovett for providing the MODS
model code and to Christian Lebiere, John Anderson, and
Lynne Reder for helpful comments and suggestions.

References
Aasman, J. (1995). Modelling driver behaviour in Soar.
Leidschendam, The Netherlands: KPN Research.
Alm, H., & Nilsson, L. (1995). The effects of a mobile telephone
task on driver behaviour in a car following situation.
Accident Analysis & Prevention, 27, 707-715.
Anderson, J. R., & Lebiere, C. (1998). The atomic components
of thought. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chong, R. S. (1998).
Modeling dual-task performance
improvement: Casting executive process knowledge
acquisition as strategy refinement. Doctoral Dissertation,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Michigan.
Daneman, M., & Carpenter, P. A. (1980). Individual differences
in working memory and reading. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 19, 450-466.
Jones, R. M., et al. (1999). Automated intelligent pilots for
combat flight simulation. AI Magazine, 20, 27-42.
Lovett, M. C., Daily, L. Z., & Reder, L. M. (2000). A source
activation theory of working memory: Cross-task prediction
of performance in ACT-R. Journal of Cognitive Systems
Research, 1, 99-118.
McKnight, A. J., & McKnight, A. S. (1993). The effect of
cellular phone use upon driver attention. Accident Analysis
& Prevention, 25, 259-265.
Salvucci, D. D. (2001). Predicting the effects of in-car interface
use on driver performance: An integrated model approach.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 55, 85107.
Salvucci, D. D., Boer, E. R., & Liu, A. (2001). Toward an
integrated model of driver behavior in a cognitive
architecture. Transportation Research Record, 1779.
Salvucci, D. D., & Macuga, K. L. (2001). Predicting the effects
of cell-phone dialing on driver performance. In Proceedings
of the Fourth International Conference on Cognitive
Modeling. Veenendaal, Netherlands: Universal.

