UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
On the Potential of Epistemic Actions for Self-Cueing: Multiple Orientations Can Prime 2D
Shape Recognition and Use

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/78h4032x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Maglio, Paul P
Wenger, Michael J

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

On the Potential of Epistemic Actions for Self-Cueing:
Multiple Orientations Can Prime 2D Shape Recognition and Use
Paul P. Maglio (pmaglio@almaden.ibm.com)
IBM Almaden Research Center
San Jose, California

Michael J. Wenger (mwenger1@nd.edu)
Department of Psychology
University of Notre Dame

Abstract
Epistemic actions are physical actions people take
more to simplify their internal problem-solving processes than to bring themselves closer to an external goal. Consider how when playing the video
game Tetris, experts routinely rotate falling twodimensional shapes more than is necessary to place
the shapes. One reason for such apparently unnecessary actions is that they actually help the player
make placement decisions. Such actions might facilitate placement decisions if additional previews
of the shape a↵orded by rotating it provide information about the board, particularly when there is
no direct perceptual match between the shape and
the board at the time of decision. The study presented here tests the hypothesis that several distinct
previews of a two-dimensional shape can improve
a person’s ability to recognize and use that shape
when it is not correctly oriented at the time of decision. Results show that indeed task performance
and recognition are faster with two di↵erent orientations than with only one. Thus, it is possible that
Tetris players rotate two-dimensional Tetris shapes
manually to see them in more than one orientation,
as this can lead to faster decisions.

Introduction
People playing the video game Tetris often take actions that are not strictly necessary but that serve
to simplify or speed up internal cognitive or perceptual operations (Kirsh & Maglio, 1994; Maglio &
Kirsh, 1996). Playing Tetris involves maneuvering
falling two-dimensional shapes into specific arrangements on the computer screen (see Figure 1). Even
as players become faster with practice, they tend
to over-rotate falling shapes, leading to backtracking as these over-rotations are corrected. To make
sense of such backtracking, Kirsh and Maglio (1994)
argued that sometimes physical rotation can serve
the same purpose as mental rotation, e↵ectively offloading mental computation onto the physical world
(see also Clark, 1997; Kirsh, 1995; Maglio, Matlock,
Raphaely, Chernicky & Kirsh, 1999). Such physical
actions—taken to simplify internal cognitive computation rather than to move closer to the external goal
state—are called epistemic actions.

Because shape identification can be facilitated
when primed with orientations di↵erent from the
target orientation (Cooper, Schacter, Ballesteros &
Moore, 1992; Srinivas, 1995), and because numerosity judgments can be facilitated even when test stimuli are not presented at the same orientation as
the originally learned patterns (Lassaline & Logan,
1993), memory for a target pattern might not require the retrieval cue be specifically oriented. Thus,
the epistemic function of physical rotation in Tetris
might be far more complex than is suggested by the
simple idea that physical rotation can substitute for
mental rotation, for instance, serving the function
of cueing retrieval (Kirsh & Maglio, 1994). Because
physically rotating a Tetris shape (which we call a
zoid) provides the player two views of it (i.e., in each
of two orientations), it is possible that seeing two
di↵erent views makes retrieval of relevant information easier than does seeing just one. In fact, we
found previously that when participants in a Tetrislike task are presented with two views of a zoid,
the time taken to decide whether it fits a particular
board is faster than when participants are presented
with only a single view, but this does not depend
on the orientation of the previews relative to one
another (Maglio & Wenger, 2000).
There are at least three potential functions of rotation for self-cueing in Tetris. First, seeing the
falling zoid in several di↵erent orientations may provide helpful information about the board, particularly when there is no direct perceptual match between zoid and board at decision time. That is, if
the orientation of the zoid floating above the board
does not match the orientation in which the zoid actually fits the board when the player must decide to
place it, then having previously seen the zoid in the
matching orientation might help the process of mentally matching zoid and board. Such an e↵ect might
be the result of having recently seen the zoid in its
fitting orientation, basing the decision as to whether
the zoid matches the board on memory rather than
on mental rotation. Let us call this potential epis-

Rotate
Translate

Drop

Filled
Row
Dissolves

Figure 1: In Tetris, two-dimensional shapes fall one
a time from the top of the screen, landing on the
bottom or on top of shapes that have already landed.
There are seven shapes, or zoids— , ,
,
,
,
, . As a zoid falls, it can be rotated, and moved
right or left. The object of the game is to fill rows of
squares all the way across. Filled rows dissolve and
all unfilled rows above move down.
temic function of rotation, the board-match function.
A second potential function of rotation for selfcueing might be to provide advance information
about the zoid itself, particularly when the several
previews coincide with the orientation of the zoid at
the time of decision. That is, if the orientation of
the zoid floating above the board matches the orientation in which the zoid fits the board when the
player must decide to place it, then having seen it
previously in that orientation might make recognition easier. In this case, such an e↵ect might be
the result of a complex memory retrieval process in
which multiple views of a shape lead to faster or
more reliable recognition of it (see Maglio & Wenger,
2000). Let us call this potential epistemic function
of rotation, the zoid-retrieval function.
A third potential function of rotation in Tetris
might relate to motor processes rather than to memory or perceptual processes. Because physically rotating objects can facilitate or inhibit mental rotation under certain conditions, it is possible that mental rotation and physical rotation share at least some
internal processes (e.g., Wexler, Kosslyn & Berthoz,
1998). Thus, the specific motor act Tetris players take in rotating the falling zoid might serve the
purpose of coordinating motor processes with other
internal processes to facilitate zoid placement decisions. Let us call this potential epistemic function,
the motor-process function.
These three epistemic functions of action—the

board-match function, the zoid-retrieval function,
and the motor-process function—are not mutually
exclusive. All are possible reasons for the overrotations observed in normal Tetris play. In this
paper, we explore only the board-match function.
Specifically, we test the hypothesis that seeing several di↵erent orientations of a falling zoid is better
than seeing just one when the final orientation of the
zoid does not match the region the zoid fits on the
contour of the board. As noted, any such facilitation
might result from matching the board to the memory of the previewed zoid rather than mentally rotating the zoid seen at test. Thus, our board-match
hypothesis is a kind of memory-retrieval hypothesis.
Retrieval demands while playing Tetris can be
thought of as indirect tests of memory in that they
allow for e↵ects of prior experience to be expressed
without requiring explicit memory for the original experience (e.g., Richardson-Klavehn & Bjork,
1988). Tasks requiring explicit memory for the original event—such as old/new recognition or recall—
are referred to as direct tests of memory. Because
direct and indirect tests are di↵erentially sensitive
to orientation, object symmetry, and other physical aspects of visual objects (Srinivas, 1995; Srinivas
& Schwoebel, 1998), the experiment presented here
used both direct and indirect assessments of memory
to determine how e↵ective previews are under different retrieval demands. Because the e↵ectiveness
of memory cues generally depends on the time that
elapses between presentation of cue and presentation
of the item to be retrieved, we also investigated the
e↵ect of various delays between final preview and
onset of test.

Method
To test whether two orientations of a falling zoid
leads to faster performance in Tetris than one orientation does, we created a controlled experimental
situation that shared many attributes with the game
of Tetris but that allowed fine-grained control over
the parameters of interest. In our experimental set
up, a Tetris configuration (a Tetris board and zoid
floating above it) is preceded either by none, one, or
two previews of the zoid in either the same or di↵erent orientations. The participant’s job is to quickly
and accurately determine at the time of test whether
the zoid floating above the board fits snugly on the
board. Thus, the task creates situations similar to
those faced by Tetris players during an actual game,
and also requires responses similar to those required
of players during an actual game. In all cases, in the
final Tetris configuration, the zoid and the region
it fits on the board contour (if it fits) are oriented

X

X

X

X

Preview
X

X

X

Participants
Twenty-nine participants were recruited from psychology courses and participated voluntarily in exchange for course credit: 15 in the indirect condition, and 14 in the direct condition. All participants
reported normal or corrected-to-normal vision.

Design

Test

Figure 2: Three trial types used, from left to right:
one preview, two previews in the same orientation,
and two previews in di↵erent orientations. An “X”
indicates display of an irrelevant zoid for the trial.
X

X

X

X

Preview

Test

Figure 3: The second preview zoid is oriented properly relative to the board in the trial on the left but
not in the one on the right.

The experimental design was fairly complicated so as
to control as many factors as possible. As described,
our main interest was in whether multiple previews
of the zoid primed recognition and use better than a
single preview when there was no perceptual match
between zoid and board at test. In addition, we
controlled whether the test zoid fit the test board,
whether the preview zoids were in the same or different orientations, the time between preview and
test, and whether memory was tested directly (asking whether the test zoid had been previewed) or
indirectly (asking only for a fit/no-fit judgment).
More precisely, the experiment was conducted as
a 4 (preview type: no previews, one preview, 2 previews same orientation, 2 previews di↵erent orientation) ⇥ 2 (orientation of the last preview relative to
the board: same, di↵erent) ⇥ 3 (retention interval
between last preview and target zoid, in frames: 0,
, ) ⇥ 2 (status of target
1, 2) ⇥ 2 (zoid type:
zoid relative to the board: fit, not fit) ⇥ 2 (type of
memory judgment at test: direct, indirect) mixed
factorial design. All factors except type of memory
judgment were manipulated within participants.

Materials
di↵erently, meaning there was no perceptual match
between zoid and board at test (see Figure 2). In
some cases, the last preview was oriented so as to
fit snugly on the board contour without rotation,
in which case memory for the previewed zoid might
facilitate the fit/no-fit decision (see Figure 3).
Participants spent about three hours playing our
experimental version of Tetris. Separate groups of
participants were required either (a) to make judgments about whether a target zoid fit in an accompanying board (indirect test), or (b) to make this judgment and indicate whether they remembered seeing
the test zoid in the set of zoids that were presented
prior to the target (direct test). Between 0 and 2
previews of the target zoid were presented in a sequence of zoids prior to the target, and the orientation of these previews (when present) varied relative
to the target. By placing the previews in a sequence
of events prior to the test, we were able to manipulate the interval over which the preview would have
to be retained in memory.

All zoids and boards were constructed from 20 ⇥ 20
pixel squares. Squares were outlined by light gray
lines, 1 pixel in width, and were filled in solid black.
The background for all displays was also solid black.
All zoid types were composed of four blocks. All
boards were six blocks in height and width. Four
“fit” boards were defined for each zoid type, corresponding to four ways in which the zoid could be
snugly placed. Each such board was used with equal
frequency. Materials were displayed on a 33 cm VGA
monitor controlled by a PC-compatible computer.
Onset and o↵set of each display was synchronized
to the monitor’s vertical scan. A standard keyboard
was used to collect and time (to ±1ms) responses.

Procedure
Participants were tested on two consecutive days, at
approximately the same time each day, with each
session lasting approximately 90 min. All sessions
were conducted in a darkened room, with participants seated an unconstrained distance from the

monitor, and began with a five min period for dark
adaptation. Participants were told that, on each
trial, they would see a sequence of zoids presented
very rapidly. The zoids in the sequence would begin
falling from a location near the top of the screen:
each successive zoid would appear below the one
before to create a sequence of falling zoids much
as in the Tetris game. Each zoid was present for
250 ms, and each sequence consisted of between five
and seven zoids, with the actual number determined
randomly (and with equal likelihood) on each trial.
At some random point in this sequence, participants
would be presented with a combination of a test zoid
and board, and would need to make one of two types
of responses, depending on whether they were in the
indirect or direct memory condition.
In the indirect condition, participants had to decide whether the zoid presented at test would fit
snugly into the board. Participants responded in the
affirmative using the index finger of the dominant
hand, and in the negative using the index finger of
the non-dominant hand, pressing either the “z” or
“/” keys on the lower row of the keyboard. In the
direct condition, participants had to indicate with a
single key-press both judgment about whether the
presented zoid fit snugly in the board and memory
for any occurrence of the test piece (in any orientation) in the sequence that preceded the target. Participants responded with the index finger of the dominant hand if the target piece fit and they remembered seeing this piece in the preceding sequence,
with the middle finger of the dominant hand if the
target piece fit and they did not remember seeing it
in the preceding sequence, and with the index finger
of the non-dominant hand if the piece did not fit.
Speed and accuracy were emphasized equally.

Results
Note that participants quickly became very good at
this task; by the end of the first day, overall error
rate was below 3%, indicating a high level of skill.
Now, to determine whether primes had an e↵ect,
correct reaction times (RT) were analyzed using two
,
) ⇥ 2 (preview: present, ab2 (zoid type:
sent) ⇥ 2 (status of the test zoid: does fit, does not
fit) repeated measures ANOVAs, one for each test
condition (direct, indirect). In both test conditions,
presence of a preview speeded responses (indirect,
556 ms vs. 691 ms, F(1,14) = 11995.0, MSE = 23.04;
direct, 867 ms vs. 1008 ms, F(1,13) = 1095.75, MSE
= 254.10). Both conditions also showed faster responses when the test zoid fit relative to when it did
not (indirect, 594 ms vs. 653 ms, F(1,14) = 43.67,
MSE = 1214.50; direct, 890 ms vs. 985 ms, F(1,13) =

Figure 4: Preview-present trials: interaction of lag
and fit status. Fit + indicates trials where the test
zoid fit, and Fit -, where the test zoid did not fit.
Lag is expressed in terms of the number of frames
intervening between last preview and test zoid.
120.27, MSE = 1039.34). Finally, the e↵ect of the
presence of a preview was dependent on the status
of the test zoid, with the preview e↵ect being larger
when the test zoid fit relative to when it did not
(indirect, 140 ms vs. 131 ms, F(1,14) = 10.87, MSE
= 31.12; direct, 148 ms vs. 133 ms, F(1,13) = 5.08,
MSE = 181.28).
Having established that a preview made a di↵erence, we next look to see whether having more than
one preview made a di↵erence, and whether the preview(s) had any interacting e↵ects with other aspects of the design. The preview-present data were
, ) ⇥ 3 (numanalyzed using two 2 (zoid type:
ber of previews: 1, 2) ⇥ 2 (orientation of the preview
relative to the test piece: same, di↵erent) ⇥ 3 (lag, in
frames, between the last preview and the test zoid:
0, 1, 2) ⇥ 2 (status of the test zoid: does fit, does not
fit) repeated measures ANOVAs, one for each of the
test conditions. A first result was an e↵ect of number of previews: participants were faster with two
previews than with one (indirect, 542 ms vs. 562
ms, F(1,14) = 101.02, MSE = 353.96; direct, 857 ms
vs. 872 ms, F(1,13) = 15.75, MSE = 1172.30). The

Figure 6: Preview-present trials, direct test condition: interaction of lag, number of previews, and
accuracy of the memory judgment.
Figure 5: Preview-present trials: interaction of lag,
fit status, and orientation of the test zoid.
lag between the last of the previews and the status
of the test zoid interacted in both test conditions
(see Figure 4): decreases in lag produced faster RTs
when the test zoid fit (indirect, F(2,28) = 73.19, MSE
= 379.39; direct, F(2,26) = 21.72, MSE = 1488.90)
but produced longer RTs when the test zoid did not
fit. Finally, there was an interaction among lag, status of the test zoid, and orientation of the preview
relative to the test zoid (see Figure 5), though this
interaction was reliable only for the indirect condition (F(2,21) = 4.21, MSE = 339.60).
We next examined trials on which there were two
previews. Half of these involved previews in one orientation and half involved previews in two orientations. Analysis revealed that seeing two orientations
led to faster responses than seeing one orientation in
both indirect (616 ms vs. 686 ms, t(28) = 4.23) and
direct (932 ms vs. 980 ms, t(26) = 4.18) conditions.
If epistemic actions serve the mnemonic purposes
we have suggested, then there might be a certain
awareness on the part of the player as to mnemonic
state while playing, which in turn suggests that the
ability to monitor memory state may modulate the
benefits of epistemic action. To assess this possibility, we examined the preview-present trials of the
direct test condition, treating accuracy of memory

judgment as a random e↵ect, using a 2 (memory ac, )
curacy: correct, incorrect) ⇥ 2 (zoid type:
⇥ 3 (lag between last preview and test zoid: 0, 1, 2)
⇥ 2 (number of previews: 1, 2) repeated measures
ANOVA. This analysis revealed the expected benefit
of increasing the number of previews (899 ms for two
vs. 946 ms for one, F(1,24) = 6.66, MSE = 1194.80).
It also revealed faster responses when participants
accurately remembered the preview relative to when
they did not consciously recall seeing a preview (855
ms vs. 997 ms, F(1,24) = 4.79, MSE = 96227.58). Finally, there was an interaction among lag, number of
previews, and the accuracy of the memory judgment
(see Figure 6; F(2,48) = 4.02, MSE = 1851.61).

Discussion
Our results show that when the test zoid and board
are not oriented properly with respect to one another, one preview of the zoid in any orientation with
respect to the board leads to faster responses than
does no previews, and two previews lead to faster
responses than does one preview. This was found
for both indirect Tetris-like fit/no-fit judgment task
as well as for direct memory recognition task. In
addition, two previews with two di↵erent orientations produced faster responses than did two previews with the same orientation. Thus, under certain conditions, several orientations can prime twodimensional shape recognition and use better than
a single orientation can.

Note that response time was speeded up by a single preview in any of the three orientations relative
to the test zoid and board. The benefit was not
restricted to a preview that shared orientation with
the test display. This finding is consistent with priming studies in which it was found that a prime need
not be presented in the same orientation as the target to facilitate recognition or identification (e.g.,
Cooper, Schacter, Ballesteros & Moore, 1992; Srinivas, 1995). However, we have gone a step further
than these by showing that priming with several orientations is more e↵ective than priming with a single
orientation under certain conditions.
The data also revealed that the benefit of previews, on trials in which the test zoid did fit, diminished as time elapsed between last preview and
time of decision. This attenuation of the positive
e↵ects of previews suggests that the benefit of rotation for self-cueing may be restricted to a small window of time just prior to the final decision, which
would be consistent with the reasonably rapid pace
at which the game proceeds for skilled players. In
contrast, on trials in which the test zoid did not fit,
temporal proximity between last preview and judgment appeared to extract a cost, suggesting a strong
specificity of the e↵ect of previews to particular conditions of the game. Moreover, the data from the direct test condition revealed that accurate, conscious
memory of a preview produced a benefit in responding, suggesting that players may have the ability to
monitor their mnemonic state—as well as the state
of the game—as play unfolds. One provocative idea
is that epistemic actions may occur in response to
players’ assessment of a need for additional cueing.
Returning to the specific idea epistemic action
in Tetris—the board-match function of rotation in
particular—these results suggest that by rotating
falling zoids, players may be able to e↵ectively cue
themselves, enabling quicker responses in a Tetris
situation. Previous research has established various
ways in which Tetris players take actions for their
epistemic e↵ects (Kirsh & Maglio, 1994; Maglio &
Kirsh, 1996). The data reported here show that several previews of the falling zoid sometimes speeds up
performance on a Tetris-like task, but the hypothesis that Tetris players over-rotate zoids in order to
speed up performance is not directly tested. It remains to be seen whether actually taking the action
of orienting the preview (i.e., physically rotating the
falling shape) is a critical component of performance,
independent of the presentation of the preview itself.
It also remains to be seen whether the time-cost of
making an extra move is more than compensated by
the benefit in RT. We are exploring both questions.

References
Clark, A. (1997). Being there: Putting body, brain,
and world together again. Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Cooper, L. A., Schacter, D. L., Ballesteros, S., &
Moore, C. (1992). Priming and recognition of
transformed three-dimensonal objects: E↵ects of
size and reflection. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory & Cognition, 18, 43–
57.
Kirsh, D. (1995). The intelligent use of space. Artificial Intelligence, 73, 31–68.
Kirsh, D. & Maglio, P. (1994). On distinguishing
epistemic from pragmatic action. Cognitive Science, 18, 513–549.
Lassaline, M. E. & Logan, G. D. (1993). Memorybased automaticity in the discrimination of visual
numerosity. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory & Cognition, 19.
Maglio, P. P. & Kirsh, D. (1996). Epistemic action
increases with skill. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, pages 391–396, Mahwah, NJ. LEA.
Maglio, P. P., Matlock, T., Raphaely, D., Chernicky,
B., & Kirsh, D. (1999). Interactive skill in Scrabble. In Proceedings of the Twenty-first Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pages
326–330, Mahwah, NJ. LEA.
Maglio, P. P. & Wenger, M. J. (2000). Two views
are better than one: Epistemic actions may prime.
In Proceedings of the Twenty-second Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Mahwah,
NJ. LEA.
Richardson-Klavehn, A. & Bjork, R. A. (1988). Measures of memory. Annual Review of Psychology,
39, 475–543.
Srinivas, K. (1995). Representation of rotated objects in explicit and implicit memory. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory &
Cognition, 21, 1019–1036.
Srinivas, K. & Schwoebel, J. (1998). Generalization
to novel views from view combination. Memory &
Cognition, 26, 768–779.
Wexler, M., Kosslyn, S. M., & Berthoz, A. (1998).
Motor processes in mental rotation. Cognition, 68,
77–94.

