UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Precipitate Replications: The Cognitive Analysis of Michael Faraday's Exploration of Gold
Precipitates and Colloids

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5dc557pn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Tweney, Ryan D
Mears, Ryan P
Gibby, Robert E
et al.

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Precipitate Replications: The Cognitive Analysis of Michael Faraday's
Exploration of Gold Precipitates and Colloids
Ryan D. Tweney (tweney@bgnet.bgsu.edu)
Ryan P. Mears (rmears@bgnet.bgsu.edu)
Robert E. Gibby (gibbyro@bgnet.bgsu.edu)
Christiane Spitzmülle r (spit@bgnet.bgsu.edu)
Yanlong Sun (suny@bgnet.bgsu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Bowling Green State University
Bowling Green, OH 43403 USA

Abstract
In 1856, Faraday conducted a long series of experiments
on the color of gold. We report replications of some of
his experiments, permitting an understanding of his
response to an important anomaly and the resulting
conceptual reorganization of his ideas.

Introduction
In 1856, Michael Faraday (1791-1867) carried out
nearly a year's worth of research on the optical
properties of thin gold films (Faraday, 1857). In the
course of this work, he discovered colloidal gold (the
first metallic colloid) and what is now known as the
“Faraday-Tyndall Effect,” the fact that colloids scatter
light. Colloids were an unexpected consequence of his
attempts to understand the unusual color properties of
thin films of gold. These, in turn, were an important
extension of his earlier attempts to understand the
interaction of light and matter, and his speculations
about the force-centered character of matter (James,
1985; Tweney, 2002).
The present project was initiated by the discovery of
over 600 surviving microscope slides and other
specimens made by Faraday as part of his research, and
now held at the Royal Institution in London (Tweney,
2002). The slides are numbered and indexed in
Faraday’s Diary and represent nearly the complete set
of metallic film specimens used by Faraday in 1856.
However, only a few of his colloidal specimens (and
none of his precipitates) survived; thus, one goal of the
present effort is to restore lost specimens for analysis.
Replication is also important even for specimens that
still survive -- Faraday often subjected the specimens to
destructive and/or damaging manipulations, and these
manipulations also need replication. Four general
procedures used by Faraday are currently being
replicated by our group: (1) Precipitation of gold from
solution, (2) “Deflagration” of gold wire, that is,
exploding gold wire using sudden surges of current, (3)
Producing colloids using reduction by phosphorous,

and (4) Producing thin metallic films of gold using
reduction by phosphorous.
Here we present our replications of Faraday's
precipitates. Besides restoring for analysis certain lost
specimens, these allow insight into the "tacit
knowledge" implicated in their preparation. More
importantly, preparation of our own precipitates
allowed analysis of aspects of Faraday’s research
previously hidden from view, helping to account for an
important conceptual change.
In earlier accounts of Faraday's research, our group
examined the way in which Faraday experimentally
traversed a problem space of hypothesized and real
results during his discovery of electromagnetic
induction in 1831 (Tweney & Hoffner, 1987). Our
analysis suggested that Faraday used a relatively
narrow search strategy in the 1831 experiments, one in
which potentially disconfirming evidence was initially
ignored and only evidence which supported
expectations was pursued. In later stages of the
research, he made explicit attempts to disconfirm. This
"confirm early-disconfirm late" strategy resembled
heuristics observed by Klahr in the "Big Trak" studies
(Klahr, 2000) and by Dunbar (1995) in an "in vivo"
study of laboratory molecular biologists.
Not all aspects of scientific thinking can be
characterized as search through multiple problem
spaces (Kurz & Tweney, 1998), and this is especially
true of Faraday’s work. For example, Gooding (1990)
replicated Faraday's 1821 discovery of electromagnetic
rotations and argued that identification of circular
rotatory motions could only have come about by means
of an "eye-hand-brain" interaction of a very dynamic
character. Rather than "testing hypotheses," Faraday
instead had to make the meaning of the otherwise
chaotic appearances presented by the experimental
apparatus. Similarly, Cavicchi (1997), partly by
conducting replications, showed that Faraday's
experimentation during his 1845 discovery of
diamagnetism proceeded "not by progressively refining

explanations, but by exp osing previously unnoticed
ambiguities in the phenomena, and uncertainties in
interpretation. This exposing deepens the space of [his]
confusions" (1997, p. 876). For Cavicchi, such
"confusions" (perhaps in response to a surprising result)
are a crucial aspect of the pattern-finding involved in
discovery. She was further able to show that Faraday's
"confusions" resembled those of a student exploring the
relationships between bar magnets and iron needles.
Our earlier examination of two of Faraday's papers,
one on acoustic vibrations and one on optical illusions
of motion, suggested that Faraday's constructive
perceptual processes imply a continuum of developing
representative explicitness. This continuum began with
the perceptual rehearsal of remembered events,
proceeded through the construction of "inceptual"
representations (that is, representations that abstract
away potentially irrelevant features, with an effort to
"see" what the results would look like), and finally
resulted in a mental model that even ni cluded nonperceivable features of phenomena (Tweney, 1992;
Ippolito & Tweney, 1995). Again, Faraday appeared to
be using an "eye-hand-mind" dynamic in constructing
new spaces. Similarly, Nersessian (1999) argued that
Faraday and Maxwell used analogies and imagery in a
process of generic abstraction, itself important in
conceptual generation and change.
Andersen (2002) argued that conceptual reorganization in science often requires a semantic shift, in
which exemplars change category. She showed that
such change was an important part of the resolution of
anomalies in particle physics in the 1930s. The present
paper extends the scope of Andersen’s argument, by
showing that Faraday’s work on precipitates was an
active source of a crucial conceptual change near the
beginning of his 1856 research on gold, perhaps
dependent upon the “confusions” engendered by some
of the appearances of gold (described below). The
dynamics of the reorganization depended upon
"epistemic artifacts" constructed by Faraday to serve as
active agents in exploration of a new domain.1
A distinguishing feature of all of Faraday’s research
was his determination to produce phenomena of such
clarity that his explanations of the phenomena would be
transparent to his audiences. “Seeing was believing” in
a deep sense for him (see, e.g., Fisher, 2001; Gooding,
1990), and his attention to anomalies in the present case
is especially important in explaining the cognitive
dynamics of the research. Thus, our replications can
potentially contribute to the understanding of the
cognitive dynamics of visual representation in scientific
1

The term “epistemic artifact” was used by Tweney (2002) to
suggest a blending of the term " cognitive artifact" used by
Zhang & Norman (1994) and “epistemic thing” used by
Rheinberger (1997).

research generally (see, e.g., Kulkarni & Simon, 1988;
Trickett, et al., 2000).

Why Gold?
Gold films interested Faraday because thin transparent
gold films manifest a different color by transmitted
light than by reflected light; green, blue, and purple are
the most frequent transmitted colors for gold leaf.
Faraday thought that gold was therefore a good place to
look for insight into the interactions of matter and light.
For him, the profoundly interesting question concerned
the manner in which such very thin (and apparently
continuous) films could so alter light. Although he
failed to achieve a definitive answer to this question, he
successfully showed that many of the optical properties
of metals in general could be produced by the
interaction of discrete particles with light. His discovery
of gold colloids was an integral part of this argument.
A colloid is a suspension of finely divided particles
of a substance held in suspension in a fluid. Colloids
differ from solutions in that solutions represent ionized
particles of atomic size, carrying an electrical charge.
Ions, the particles that form a solution, are much
smaller than colloidal particles and affect light in
different ways. Faraday's discovery that metals could
form colloids was a breakthrough, especially since he
also showed that the particles were pure gold,
chemically identical to the metal films. Note also that
colloids differ from precipitates, which are formed of
even larger particles than colloids. If a reducing agent is
added to a solution of a gold salt, then metallic gold
(Au) is precipitated as a solid. In modern notation;
Au +++ + 3 eAu 0 (solid)
Because the particles in a precipitate are far larger than
those in a colloid (sometimes being visible to the
unaided eye), they settle quite quickly. Colloidal
particles (which are far too small to be visible) do not
settle because, as Faraday speculated, they are lightly
bonded to a “cloud” of ionized particles that repel the
surrounding fluid media.
The chemistry of precipitates is more complex than
the formula given above suggests, since gold chlorides
exist in solution as [AuCl4 ]- ions and various
hydrolyzed ions as well.2 These more complex species
and reactions were not known to Faraday. As we
dis covered, however, the complexity of the reactions is
reflected in a very complex phenomenology when gold
salts are actually used. We had expected precipitating a
gold salt to be a simple and straightforward process -- a
“warm-up” exercise for us (as we thought it may have
been for Faraday). In reality, our replications opened a
new aspect of Faraday’s work on gold, one not visible
in the text of the diary itself. In the present paper, we
describe our replications of Faraday's precipitates and
compare them to colloids and solutions.
2

See Puddephatt, 1978, for this and other details of the
reactions of gold.

Faraday’s Diary
Faraday's diary is well known because of its relative
completeness, an aspect which permits reconstruction
of his research practices (e.g., Steinle, 1996). In some
cases, however, as in the case of his research on gold,
much of the diary is hard to interpret by itself, since the
visual context of Faraday’s work is absent. As we
show, even with that visual context present (in the form
of the surviving specimens), there is more to be learned
from the “manual” aspect.
Faraday wrote 1160 numbered entries on his gold
research, roughly 300 manuscript pages dated from the
2nd of February, 1856 to the 20th of December (Martin,
1936). The distribution of entries (Figure 1) is roughly
bimodal, the greatest density of entries occurring at the
beginning of the series and toward the end. The first 47
entries (in the first peak of the distribution) are
summaries of previous notes. They also include several
dozen entries in which Faraday speculates on possible
experiments, much as he had earlier kept an "idea
book" to record possible studies (Tweney & Gooding,
1991). Faraday's (1857) published paper on the topic
was submitted on November 15, 1856 and read before
the Royal Society on February 15, 1857. Indeed, the
character of the entries in the second peak suggests that
he was "mopping up" prior to ending the research -conducting some necessary control experiments, trying
again to resolve some inconsistencies, replicating key
preparations, and so on. His work with precipitates
occurs near the beginning of the series, on February 5,
and appears to record the first laboratory work on gold
conducted in his own laboratory (earlier entries
describe gold film preparations made at the home of a
friend, Warren De La Rue; see Tweney, 2002). Thus,
one question is why precipitates constituted the first
task undertaken by Faraday.
It has been suggested (e.g., Williams, 1965) that
Faraday's work on gold in 1856 manifests his
"declining powers" (whether due to aging alone or to
the effects of the many toxic exposures he was
subjected to over the years). This judgement may stem,

in part, from the seeming aimlessness of the
precipitation experiments, especially since these occur
at the beginning of the first burst of activity. Since the
precipitation reaction of gold was long-familiar by
1856, Faraday could learn nothing new here and the
text of the Diary alone does not indicate why he
initiated his gold research with what seems like a rather
prosaic procedure As we show, however, the
experiments with precipitates were far from trivial -- by
conducting the replications, we were able to detect a
"confusion" that served a heuristic role in the important
step of arguing that the colors of gold are due to
particles interacting with light.

Method
Faraday is vague about exactly how he prepared the
precipitates used in his research. In the Diary he
indicated only that he “Prepared a standard weak
solution of Gold” and a “standard solution of proto
sulphate of Iron … consist[ing] of 1 vol. saturated
solution at 54o F. plus 2 vols. Water, and a little
sulphuric acid to keep all in solution during the
changes” (Entry #s 14291 & 14292, 5 Feby. 1856).
“Proto sulphate of iron” is “Ferrous Sulfate” in modern
terms, and the fact that it was saturated allowed
reproduction of the exact substance used by Faraday.
But no clue is offered about the “standard weak
solution of Gold.” Thus, its concentration is unknown
and, more importantly, because of the complex
chemistry of gold salts and the solution processes by
which they dissolve, several possibilities had to be
explored for how to prepare the precipitates.
Today, “Gold Chloride” is typically sold in one of
two forms; as “Gold (III),” that is, as gold in the
valence state +3, in the form of “Tetrachloroauric Acid”
(HAuCl4 ), a yellow crystalline substance, or as “Gold
(I) Chloride” (AuCl; valence state +1), in the form of
yellowish-white crystals. Each was tried in turn as the
basis for gold ion in solution, but neither proved
satisfactory, in part because each is unstable. Further,

Figure 1

dissolving each in water is problematic; each leaves a
precipitated deposit. In the case of tetrachloroauric acid,
this is probably pure gold, an expected product when
the substance hydrolyzes, but (barring extensive
analytic procedures) we were unable to determine if the
deposit was the expected gold or simply an undissolved
portion of the original crystals. As a result, we could
not be sure of the strength of the solutions we were
preparing. “Gold (I) Chloride” (AuCl), in the presence
of water, oxidizes to the III valence state. This
substance seemed to dissolve readily, but again with
traces of a deposit. Here again, knowing the strength of
the resultant solutions was difficult. Accordingly, we
decided to begin with pure gold, dissolving it in such a
way that we could be sure of at least the quantity of
gold in the solution.
Pure gold wire (0.025” diameter, 99.99%) was
obtained from a vacuum technology supply house.3
Aqua Regia, a 3:1 combination of hydrochloric acid
and nitric acid, was used to dissolve a 3.5 cm length of
the wire, weighing 217 mg, to create gold chloride
solution.4 Fifteen minutes after addition, the gold wire
completely dissolved in the acid. The solution was then
boiled in order to remove the hydrochloric and nitric
acid. Water was added as needed to keep a constant
volume of about 10 cc. The solution was boiled until
the odor of the acids and the nitric oxide byproduct (all
of which are pungent in even slight quantities) was no
longer present.
To produce a gold colloid we used a modern method,
the reduction of gold chloride solution by citrate ion
(producing such colloids using Faraday’s methods is
part of an ongoing study and will be reported later).
Gold (III) chloride (i.e., tetrachloroauric acid) (3 mg)
combined with 10 ml of water produced the gold
chloride solution. Gold and excess gold chloride
remained at the bottom of the container. Ten mg of
sodium citrate, a source of citrate ion, was dissolved in
10 ml of water. The gold chloride solution was agitated
with a magnetic stirrer and heated to boiling
temperature. Citrate solution (0.015 ml) was slowly
added to the gold chloride and reacted immediately,
producing a very pale slate-blue solution. Over the
course of forty seconds the color of the solution
evolved from slate-blue to amethyst to ruby red. When
cooled, the product proved stable over many months.
Although we cannot be sure of the quantities of gold
that are actually in colloidal form, the properties of our
colloid were exactly as described by Faraday.
3

Gold wire, because of its malleability and lack of reactivity,
is used as a c omponent in high-vacuum O-ring seals. Jewelry
gold, unfortunately, is always alloyed with other metals.
4
Unlike other metals, gold will not dissolve in hydrochloric
acid (HCl) alone because it requires both an oxidant and a
ligand donor (Cl -, in this case). When Aqua Regia is used, the
result is AuCl 4- in solution and gaseous nitric oxide (NO).

The reduction of gold chloride solution by ferrous
sulfate solution was used to form gold precipitates. A
saturated solution was prepared by dissolving
crystalline ferrous sulfate (FeSO4 ) in heated water.
When cooled, three drops of ferrous sulfate solution
were added to 5 ml of gold chloride solution. No
immediate reaction was apparent, but on the following
day a yellow-orange residue of metallic gold had settled
at the bottom of the experiment tube and could be redispersed by shaking.

Results
The three preparations showed the expected appearance
in ambient (room) light; the solution was a clear, deep
yellow fluid, the colloid was a clear ruby-red fluid, and
the precipitate, when shaken, was a cloudy yellow-gold
suspension in which individual particles could be seen
in motion, and in which occasional glints of bright
metallic gold could be seen. Except for the overall
color, the solution and the colloid appeared to be very
similar, while the shaken precipitate had a very
different appearance.
The relative similarity of the three changed, however,
when directional lighting was passed through the fluids.
The principal results are summarized in Figure 2, which
shows the effect of a parallel beam of light produced by
a fiber-optic illuminator (entering from the left) on our
prepared gold colloid, a solution of gold chloride, and
the precipitated gold preparation, respectively. The
overall colors of the preparations are not shown here,
but can be viewed at http://personal.bgsu.edu/~tweney.
The precipitate was shaken just before the photograph
was taken. Note that the colloid shows a bright
“Faraday-Tyndall Effect,” that is, light is scattered to
the side, illuminating the path of the beam through the
colloid.

Figure 2. Colloid, Solution and Precipitate
The colloid (a ruby-red transparent fluid) tinges the
scattered light a faint pink. The solution scatters no
light, only some small reflections from the sides of the
glass test tube being visible in the photograph. The
precipitate scatters light rather more broadly than the
colloid, although some of that is an incidental result of
the widening of the initially parallel beam of light into a
cone, as a result of its passage through the two prior

preparations. The overall color of the scattered light
from the precipitate is a yellowish-gold, and individual
particles are easily visible. Obviously the colloid and
the precipitate resemble each other most closely under
these optical conditions, in contrast to the appearances
in ambient light. Although there is no record in the
diary of Faraday placing these three in one context (as
we have done in Figure 2), it is clear that he was
attending these differences very carefully -- they
constituted part of the basis for his conclusion that the
colloids were in fact metallic particles of gold.

Conclusions
The change in apparent similarity of the three kinds of
preparations when transmitted light is compared to
ambient light (Figure 3) suggests a possible
“confusion” (Cavicchi, 1997), and the need for a
reorganization of the phenomenological domain of
“divisible gold” (as Faraday referred to it in the 1857
paper). This confusion suggests an explanation for why
Faraday began with precipitates on February 5, an
explanation that corresponds with what Faraday does
say in the Diary.

Transmitted
Light

Solution
Colloid

Ambient
Light

Precipitate

Precipitate
Solution

Colloid

Figure 3. Taxonomy of Similarities
From the Diary, we learn that Faraday had visited De
la Rue the week prior to February 5th , and the two had
examined some gold leaf through the microscope;
Faraday recorded this visit in his first diary entry on
gold (#14243, 2 February 1856). On the 2nd , Faraday
received some thin gold films prepared by De la Rue,
who had used phosphorous to reduce the gold. On the
6th (one day after preparing his precipitates), Faraday
established a careful optical method for the examination
of precipitates, and recorded that, in the evening, he
went to De la Rue’s again, and observed how the thin
gold films were made. At this point, Faraday noticed
something odd; “A very fine red fluid is obtained
[from] the mere washing” (Diary, #14321). This, of
course, was a colloid, and Faraday saved the fluid,

returning to it two weeks later on the 18th (#14437),
after his experiments with precipitates and his first
examinations of thin films. At that point, he was able to
ask; “… the question is, is it [i.e., the gold] in the same
state as whilst apparently dissolved in the fluid”
(#14437, emphasis in original). It is interesting to note
that during this 16 day period he referred to the red
fluid using two terms interchangeably, “fluid” and
“solution”. Only later could he be sure that the red fluid
was not a solution, although he must have had the idea
very early.
The sequence of his ideas then must be something
like the following. He first compares thin films (which
he suspects are gold in a continuous state) to the
precipitates, which he knows to be discrete particles.
Since gold in a continuous state changes appearance in
transmitted light and reflected light, he develops an
“optical method” for examining precipitates under the
same two conditions. Note that, to prepare the
precipitates, he must have had before him the clear
solution of gold chloride. Then, at De la Rue’s, he
explicitly notices the clear red solution and this must
have suggested a comparison. He knew that the
substances used to produce the clear red solution
(phosphorous, carbon disulfide, and a gold chloride
solution) produced metallic gold. But why then did it
look like a solution? Resolving this “confusion” led him
to examine the red fluids more closely – and it would
be a natural extension to use both transmitted and
ambient light, just as he had done with the precipitates.
And the transmitted light (as our Figure 2 shows) would
make the red fluid look very different from the clear
solution. A real anomaly had been found, and a
reorganization became necessary; the “red fluid” must
be gold in a “divisible state,” like the precipitates.
There was, of course, still much to do. More work
was needed to explore the new optical effects, to
examine other kinds of divisible gold (e.g., that
produced by exploding gold wires), to examine other
substances, and, most importantly, to explain the
differences in the color of light produced by gold in
different states (a goal only partially realized). Yet the
anomalous appearance of the red fluids at the beginning
of the series of experiments provided Faraday with a
first important clue to the kind of inquiry he would need
to make. Far from constituting a record of “declining
powers,” the replications allow us to see that Faraday’s
ability to notice and exploit an anomaly was
undiminished in 1856.
Further, our replications revealed that the
precipitation experiments are more important than can
be discovered by examining the diary records alone,
because their role in recognizing the divisible state of
colloidal preparations is not evident otherwise. The text
of the diary alone does not reveal what was obvious,
visually, to Faraday – and was obvious to us only when

present as the result of our own “makings.” Only in this
fashion could we have noted a conceptual change
reminiscent of that seen by Andersen (2002) in her
analysis of 20th century particle physicists.
Faraday’s gold research in 1856 provided Faraday
with mental models based upon new conceptions about
the interaction between thin gold films and light. And
the differing visual properties of colloids, solutions, and
precipitates were a crucial first step, because they
showed that the particles of gold had specific optical
properties. These in turn led Faraday to reevaluate his
previous views of the distinction between continuous
and “divisible” matter. Thus, there are similarities
between the conceptual reorganizations we observed by
replicating Faraday’s precipitation experiments, and the
larger reorganizations that constituted the outcome of
t h e entire 1856 series of studies. Further replications
and text analysis are in progress to extend the reach of
this conclusion.

Acknowledgments
This research was partially supported by NSF Award
0100112.

References
Andersen, H. (in press, 2002). The development of
family resemblance concepts. In L. Magnani & N.J.
Nersessian (Eds.), Model-Based Reasoning: Science,
Technology, Values. New York: Kluwer Academic/
Plenum.
Cavicchi, E. (1997). Experimenting with magnetism:
Ways of learning of Joann and Faraday. American
Journal of Physics, 65, 867-882.
Dunbar, K. (1995). How scientists really reason:
Scientific reasoning in real-world laboratories. In R.
J. Sternberg & J. Davidson (Eds.), Mechanisms of
insight (pp. 365-396). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Faraday, M. (1857). Experimental relations of gold (and
other metals) to light. Philosophical Transactions,
1857, 145-181 (Read Feb. 5, 1857).
Fisher, H.J. (2001). Faraday’s Experimental researches
in electricity: Guide to a first reading. Santa Fe, NM:
Green Lion Press.
Gooding, D. (1990). Experiment and the making of
meaning: Human agency in scientific observation and
experiment. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Ippolito, M.F. & Tweney, R.D. (1995). The inception
of insight. In R.J. Sternberg & J.E. Davidson (eds.)
The nature of insight. (pp. 433-462) Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press.
James, Frank A.J.L. (1985). "The optical mode of
investigation": Light and matter in Faraday's natural
philosophy. In D. Gooding & F.A.J.L. James (Eds.),
Faraday rediscovered: Essays on the life and work of
Michael
Faraday,
1791-1867
(pp.137-162).
Basingstoke, UK: Macmillan.

Klahr, D. (2000). Exploring science: The cognition and
development of discovery processes. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Kulkarni, D. & Simon, H.A. (1988). The processes of
scientific discovery: The strategy of experimentation.
Cognitive Science, 12, 139-176.
Kurz, E.M. & Tweney, R.D. (1998). The practice of
mathematics and science: From calculus to the
clothesline problem. In M. Oaksford & N. Chater
(Eds.) Rational models of cognition, (pp. 415-438).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Martin, T., ed., 1936, Faraday’s Diary: Being the
various philosophical notes of experimental
investigation made by Michael Faraday during the
years 1820-1862, vol. 7, G. Bell, London.
Nersessian, N.J. (1999). Model based reasoning in
conceptual change. In L. Magnani, N.J. Nersessian,
& P. Thagard (Eds.), Model-based reasoning in
scientific discovery. New York: Kluwer/Plenum.
Puddephatt, R.J. (1978). The chemistry of gold.
Amsterdam: Elsevier Scientific.
Rheinberger, H.J. (1997). Toward a history of epistemic
things: Synthesizing proteins in the test tube.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Steinle, F. (1996). Work, Finish, Publish? The
formation of the second series of Faraday’s
“Experimental researches in electricity,” Physis, 33,
141-220.
Trickett, S.B., Fu, W.-T., Schunn, C.D., & Trafton, J.G.
(2000). From dipsy-doodles to streaming motions:
Changes in the representation of visual scientific
data. Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 959-964).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tweney, R. D. (1992). Stopping Time: Faraday and the
scientific creation of perceptual order. Physis, 29,
149-164.
Tweney, R.D. (in press, 2002). Epistemic artifacts:
Michael Faraday's search for the optical effects of
gold. In L. Magnani & N.J. Nersessian (Eds.),
Model-Based Reasoning: Science, Technology,
Values. New Yo rk: Kluwer Academic/ Plenum.
Tweney, R.D. & Gooding, D. (Eds.). (1991). Faraday's
1822 "Chemical Notes, Hints, Suggestions, and
Objects of Pursuit". Edited with an introduction and
notes by R. D. Tweney & D. Gooding. London: The
Science Museum & Peter Peregrinus, Ltd.
Tweney, R. D. & Hoffner, C. E. (1987). Understanding
the microstructure of science: An example. In
Program of the Ninth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, pp. 677-681. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Williams, L.P. (1965). Michael Faraday: A biography.
New York: Basic Books.
Zhang, J. & Norman, D.A. (1994). Representations in
distributed cognitive tasks. Cognitive Science, 18,
87-122.

