UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Sex, Myths, and Adolescents’ Conceptual Understanding of HIV

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4xf412ck

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Keselman, Alla
Patel, Vimla L

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Sex, Myths, and Adolescents’ Conceptual Understanding of HIV
Alla Keselman (ak454@columbia.edu) and Vimla L. Patel (patel@dmi.columbia.edu)
Laboratory of Decision Making and Cognition, Department of Medical Informatics, Columbia University
622 West 168th Street, VC-5, New York, NY, 10032-372
Abstract
Research on knowledge organization and how this
develops with education and training may provide
insight into the alarmingly limited effectiveness of
school HIV education curricula. The present study
investigates the nature of adolescent knowledge of HIV
and its relationship to reasoning. Middle and high school
students were interviewed about their understanding of
HIV and were also asked to critically examine problem
scenarios that contained myths about HIV. The findings
suggest that adolescents lack understanding of basic
biological concepts around which they could build wellstructured schemata of HIV. As a result, their HIV
knowledge exists as a collection of disjointed facts, not
conducive to effective application for reasoning. The
implications for school-based HIV interventions are
discussed.

Introduction
Despite growing awareness about HIV and AIDS, the
outbreak of the disease continues unabated. Current
assessments of the demographics of AIDS indicate that
the disease disproportionately hurts the young, the poor,
and urban minorities (CDC, 1999). Schools respond to
the problem by producing educational interventions,
aimed to teach adolescents about HIV risks and
prevention. In particular, the New York City Board of
Education mandates its schools to provide six hours of
HIV Education annually at every grade level.
Unfortunately, in spite of such educational efforts,
the statistics remain grim. Evaluations show that many
existing interventions, while succeeding in increasing
teenagers’ knowledge about HIV and AIDS, do not lead
to the decrease in high-risk behaviors (Brown et al.,
1992; Langer & Tubman, 1997). These failures lead
HIV educators to a conclusion, currently prevalent in
HIV education literature, that knowledge about HIV has
little bearing on real-life behavior.
We believe that in many previous studies, the
relationship between knowledge of HIV and its real-life
application was obscured by methodological
weaknesses of HIV knowledge assessment measures.
Typically, these studies assess knowledge as the ability
to answer simple factual questions by selecting from
true/false or multiple-choice answer options (Siegel et
al., 1995). Such measures do not provide any insight
into the nature and organization of adolescents’ HIV
knowledge which is critical to its applicability. The
present study addresses two questions. First, what is the

nature of adolescent knowledge about HIV? Second, to
what extent do adolescents apply this knowledge when
reasoning and evaluating information in the context of
HIV? Answering these questions employing cognitive
methods could provide important information for
improving HIV Education curricula for American
schools.
Research on expertise has long established that
differences between expert and non-expert knowledge
extend well beyond the difference in content richness.
Studies show that some forms of knowledge
organization are more suited for effective application
than others. Expert knowledge is coherent and is
organized in meaningful patterns around key concepts
and ideas (Chi et al., 1981). In contrast, novices
frequently organize their knowledge schemata around
superficial surface attributes, rather than big ideas (Chi
et al., 1982). Compared to novices', experts' knowledge
schemata also contain more interrelations among
individual concepts and ideas (Chi et al., 1981). As a
result, experts have more efficient methods of deciding
which chunks of information are essential for solving a
particular problem, of retrieving that information
efficiently and of applying it correctly. While novice
and expert knowledge represent two endpoints of the
trajectory, the development of expertise is a long
process, which may be conceptualized as a gradual shift
from flat and fragmentary to systematic and multilayered knowledge structures (diSessa, 1993). This
process is non-monotonic; often, an increase in
knowledge results in a temporary drop in performance,
while the new knowledge is being integrated with the
existing knowledge (Patel & Groen, 1991).
Studies of lay understanding of health and disease
provide us with domain-specific information about the
kinds of knowledge that lay people use when reasoning
about health issues. When reasoning about health, lay
adults frequently rely on their intuition, as well as
cultural,
social
and
experiential
knowledge
(Sivaramakrishnan & Patel, 1993). In doing so, they
often misattribute disease causality, viewing symptoms
or co-factors of diseases as their causes. Lay scientific
knowledge of relevant biological concepts is
dissociated from experiential and cultural knowledge,
fragmented and is often used opportunistically. This
results in low internal consistency, self-contradictions,
"loose ends", factual errors and misconceptions (Patel,
Kaufman, & Arocha, 1999).

Findings from research on expertise and health
cognition suggest that in order to assist effective reallife reasoning, adolescent models of HIV need to
integrate superficial factual knowledge, conceptual
biological knowledge, and experiential/practical
knowledge into a coherent, uniform system. However,
schools typically teach students about HIV within
health education curriculum, which is separated from
science/biology curriculum. HIV education is factual in
nature. Moreover, while HIV education is usually
introduced in early grades, the first comprehensive
biology course is taught in high school, with little
connection to adolescent real-life health concerns.
We hypothesize that in the prevalence of the current
educational practice, integration of different kinds of
knowledge and deep understanding of the mechanism
of HIV will not occur. Therefore, adolescents are likely
to have model of HIV that is incomplete and saturated
with misconceptions, based on practical analogies and
non-normative intuitive biology (Carey, 1985). In spite
of its deficiency, this model is likely to include accurate
factual knowledge of HIV risks and prevention factors.
As a result, reliance on this model of HIV is likely to
enable adolescents to successfully pass multiple-choice
survey assessments, but is not likely to help them
reason through complex real-life situations that require
deeper understanding. We also hypothesize that while
older adolescents may have more basic biological
knowledge than younger adolescents, their knowledge
is likely to be fragmented and not assimilated into
coherent conceptual model, essential for effective
reasoning and problem solving. As a result, adolescent
ability to reason about novel situations in the context of
HIV is expected to be limited. If confirmed, our
hypotheses have important implications for the
structure of knowledge-based HIV interventions.

risks and prevention, as well as their understanding of
the underlying biological concepts. Questions of the
interview were designed to cover the scope of HIV
issues without requiring specialized biological
knowledge. In the reasoning task, subjects were
presented with a simulated web site about HIV,
supposedly created by a group of high school students.
The site contained four passages that presented and
supported three erroneous claims and one accurate
claim about ways to reduce the risk of HIV infection.
Understanding the erroneous nature of the information
in the passages required basic knowledge about HIV
infection and disease progression. After reading each
passage, students had to express and justify their
opinion about the truthfulness of the information. This
paper presents analysis of students’ performance on one
of the erroneous passages which is presented below.
Passage 2
If you had unprotected sex, you can minimize the risk of
becoming HIV-positive by expelling the virus from
your body through urine and sweat.
As you probably know, HIV is transmitted through
bodily fluids: blood, sperm, etc. This means HIV lives
in those fluids and travels with them. If one person's
infected fluids get inside another person, the second
person also becomes infected. Logically, if infection
gets inside a body through fluids, it can also get out of
the body through fluids. Fluids that leave human body
are urine and sweat. So, if your condom broke, making
a lot of fluid leave your body can minimize your risk of
getting HIV. To lose fluids, drink lots of water (this will
make you go to the bathroom a lot); put on warm
clothes and do something physically active. The trick is
to do these things early, before the virus has a chance to
multiply and become strong.

Coding Scheme for Conceptual Understanding

Method
Subjects
The subjects include twenty adolescents from two New
York inner-city schools, including ten seventh-grade
middle school students (4 boys and 6 girls) and ten high
school students from grades 9 through 12 (5 girls and 5
boys). The subjects are referred to by the school level
(MS = middle school; HS = high school).

Procedure
Each subject participated in an individually
administered 45-minute session which included two
assessment measures, a semi-structured interview about
HIV and a reasoning task that required evaluating
information on a simulated website about ways to
reduce the risk of HIV infection. The purpose of the
interview was to assess students' knowledge about HIV

The analysis of students’ knowledge draws on cognitive
research in science education concerned with
characterizing
progressions
of
conceptual
understanding (e.g., Vosniadou, 1999) and on research
in the development of biomedical understanding (Patel
et al, 1995). Based on consultations with HIV
educators, pilot testing and students’ responses to the
interview, three conceptual models of HIV were
generated: advanced, intermediate, and naïve. The
models reflect students’ understanding of three
concepts: the nature of HIV, the mechanism of HIVinfection, and disease progression. Students were
assigned to a model, if at least two out of these three
concepts were consistent with the model description.
Two investigators scored a portion of the protocols, to
ensure satisfactory level of inter-rater reliability.

Advanced Model involves understanding of HIVrelevant biological structures and processes on the
cellular level, without requiring specialized biological
knowledge. This understanding should be evident on
the following dimensions: 1). Definition of HIV.
Students recognize that HIV is a virus with specific
cellular-level structural and functional components
(e.g., lacks organelles). 2). Mechanism of HIV
infection. HIV enters the body through exchange of
bodily fluids and penetrates T-cells of the immune
system. 3). Disease progression. HIV replicates within
T-cells and eventually destroys them and disables the
immune system.
Intermediate Model involves understanding of HIV on
systemic, but not on the cellular level, as reflected on
the following dimensions: 1). Definition of HIV. HIV is
a biological entity (details of the viral structure and
characteristics are not provided; replication is not
mentioned) 2). Mechanism of HIV infection. HIV
enters the body through exchange of bodily fluids.
Entering T-cells is not mentioned. 3). Disease
progression. HIV compromises the immune system, and
the body succumbs to opportunistic infections. The role
of T-cells may be mentioned, but without any notion of
intracellular processes.
Naïve Model does not employ relevant biological
concepts on either systemic or cellular level. Instead, it
is build around intuitive lay concepts of health and
disease. Scientific biological concepts are either not
known, or not integrated with HIV knowledge. Students
characterized by this model lack basic biological
concepts around which they could organize their
knowledge of HIV. This model, however, does not
preclude individuals who hold it from knowing an
extensive collection of facts about HIV risk factors and
prevention measures. The naïve model is reflected in
the following understanding of the three critical
concepts: 1). Definition of HIV. HIV is an illness. No
mention is made of the virus as a causal agent. 2).
Mechanism of HIV infection. HIV enters the body.
Bodily fluids are not implicated in the process. 3).
Disease progression. It makes the person sick. No
mention is made of the effect of HIV upon the immune
system.

Coding Scheme for the Reasoning Task
The method of semantic representations was chosen for
the analysis of excerpts of protocols of students'
reasoning and information evaluation. Semantic
network analysis is a formal method for representing
relations among concepts through directed, labeled
graph structures (Patel & Groen, 1986). In these
structures, nodes represent concepts and links
(directional arrows) represent relations among them

(see Figures 1 and 2 for examples). The relations are
binary relations, such as causal, conditional,
alternating or and exclusive or relations. Semantic
network is a method that allows one to analyze verbal
protocols for the direction of reasoning (forward vs.
backward), coherence and granularity of concepts.

Results and Discussion
The Results and Discussion section is organized into
two parts. The first part, Conceptual Understanding of
HIV, presents the analysis of students’ models of HIV
based on their responses to the semi-structured
interview. The second part of the results, Reasoning in
the Context of HIV, presents adolescents’ responses to
the reasoning task, described in the Methods section.

Conceptual Understanding of HIV
The classification of individual students' HIV models is
presented in Table 1. On the basis of the stated criteria,
9 middle (MS) and 2 high school (HS) students' models
were classified as naïve, 5 HS students were classified
as intermediate and 3 HS were designated as advanced.
Numbers in bold represent dimensions consistent with
the model assignment for that student.
Table 1: Classification of students' HIV models.
Virus
Middle

Naive

Intermed

1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9
1, 3, 2, 5

10

High
Infection
Middle 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10
High
1, 3, 9
Progress
Middle 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 9
High
1, 3, 6

Advanced

6, 8, 9

4, 7, 10

2, 5, 6, 8

4, 7, 10

1, 8, 10
2, 5, 8, 9

4, 7, 10

Understanding at the Naive-Model Level. The eleven
students assigned to this model (MS 1-9, HS1, HS3)
showed almost no understanding of the biological
concepts of virus, infection, and immune system,
crucial for developing a more advanced model of HIV.
When asked what a virus was, these students either
characterized it as "sickness" (MS1, MS2, MS4, MS9),
or provided specific examples (e.g., "stomach virus",
"coughing virus") (MS3, MS7, HS1, HS2). Students’
characterization of infection was similar to their
characterization of virus. Nine students (MS2, MS3,
HS1 and HS2) showed no evidence of having a
conception of the immune system. Only two students
(MS1 and MS8) were able to state that HIV destroyed

T-cells and weakened the immune system (e.g., MS1
described T-cells as “police officers” that help fight
diseases).
Not having a basic understanding of infection, these
students had no common theme that would unite
different routes of HIV transmission (e.g., exchange of
fluids). All the children associated HIV with sex. Older
children also associated it with drugs (HS2) and
exchange of blood (HS1 and HS2), thus illustrating that
an increase in HIV knowledge may not correspond with
an increase in understanding. Without seeing exchange
of fluids as the common theme in all of the routes of
transmission, adolescent’ understanding of how
protection measures work remains weak (e.g.,
Interviewer: “If you use a condom, can you still catch
HIV or not?” MS3: “I don’t know”). Such lack of
understanding of how exactly HIV is transmitted during
sexual intercourse may lead students to believe that
they can control HIV by regulating the amount of sex
that they have. Indeed, two adolescents (MS2 and MS4)
mentioned that people who had HIV could make
themselves feel better, if they stopped having sex.
Without perceiving a virus as a microorganism,
students had to find an alternative causal agent for the
disease. Some subjects avoided the challenge by
providing no causal agent at all, while two subjects
(MS4 and HS2) mentioned dirt. The following example
illustrates a 7th-grader’s (MS4) misconception about the
process of infection, which involves sex and dirt: “See,
most people, like, they don’t actually wash after having
sex. See, if the person is dirty, …, you know, like the
dirt, it goes into skin, like, it stays there for a long time,
then it starts to go further in, then it starts mixing with
blood, and that’s how AIDS could probably form." This
misconception makes students vulnerable to the
erroneous belief that washing after sex may prevent
infection. Additional potential misconceptions result
from students’ lack of understanding of the process of
disease. Not knowing how HIV affects the human body
over time, students in this model also typically did not
understand the connection between HIV and AIDS.
They referred to them as two different diseases, with
one being more dangerous than the other (MS1, MS2,
MS3, MS7, MS9, HS1, HS2).
Understanding at the Intermediate-Model Level.
The six students assigned to this level (MS10, HS2,
HS5, HS6, HS8 and HS9) had some biological
understanding of HIV at the systemic level. Although
none of the students could describe the viral structure or
life cycle, four of them realized that HIV was a particle
with physical properties, such as shape and size (e.g.,
HS6: “It might be a cell-looking thing”). Their
understanding that the process of HIV infection
involved exchange of fluids allowed them to unite
various routes of HIV transmission around a single

theme. Five of the students understood that HIV affects
the immune system - and thus destroys body’s defenses
- and defined AIDS as the advanced stage of HIV
infection (e.g., HS3: “AIDS is the sickness itself.”).
Overall, these students had conception of HIV that was
sufficiently biologically grounded to provide some
framework for organizing facts about HIV. As a
consequence, they did not share any of the
misconceptions, exhibited by the naïve students.
Understanding at the Advanced Model Level. The
three students who demonstrated this level of
understanding (HS4, HS7 and HS10) defined HIV as a
virus, and described the virus as a microorganism that
lacks organelles, but contains genetic material and can
replicate inside of a host. They knew that the virus
entered human body through exchange of fluids and
penetrated white blood cells, replicated inside of these
cells and eventually destroyed them. Both students
stated that as the number of viral cells increased and the
number of white blood cells decreased, the body
became unable to fight opportunistic diseases.

Reasoning in the Context of HIV
Reasoning at the Naive-Model Level. Refuting the
erroneous information in reasoning Passage 2 requires
understanding that most HIV particles are “anchored”
in white blood cells in the blood stream, and therefore,
can not be expelled from the body through fluids.
Students whose conception of HIV is at the naïve level
do not have this understanding: in their model, HIV
affects not specific cells that are located in the blood,
and (for most, though not all students in this group) not
even the blood in general, but “the body.” Sweat and
urine flow out of “the body”, so the scenario should
sound convincing to these students. The following
justification of the agreement with passage provided by
a seventh-grader (MS3) demonstrates the effect of
naïve model of HIV on reasoning, “It makes sense…
because the stuff is in the body, and you just need a
release, release all of it out... before it really catches
your body.” Semantic network of this student's
reasoning is provided in Figure 1. The network
illustrates how this student’s reasoning, while coherent,
involves the level of conceptual granularity that is too
crude to expose the fallacy of the myth.
Nine out of eleven naive-level students (MS 3-9, HS1
and HS2) agreed that HIV can be expelled through
urine and sweat. Some of these students (MS 7 and MS
8) initially said that HIV could not be expelled, but later
found the explanation in the passage convincing enough
to change their mind. One of the students (HS1) gave
additional support to his reasoning by providing an
experiential analogy to the case of a person defeating
cancer, “Yeah, this is true, this is true. Cause people can
stop it like that. By exercising, like they said. Like that

lady, like I told you, she exercised her way out of
cancer, so I think this is true, you can exercise your way
out of HIV probably.” Such opportunistic use of
practical knowledge is typical of lay reasoning about
health (Sivaramakrishnan & Patel, 1993). Notably, the
subject who provided the analogy had explicitly stated
in the course of the interview that HIV is incurable
(HS1: “Once you get HIV, it’s like, that’s it, there is no
coming back to it.”)
Stuff (HIV)

OR-EXC:
ACT:

Expel

COND:
TEM:ORD

LOC:

OR-ALT:

Sweat

Catch

Urinate

Body
RSLT:

Can’t Expel

ACT: Action, ALT: Alternative, COND: Conditional
Relation, EXC: Exclusive, LOC: Location, RSLT:
Result , TEM: Temporality
Figure 1: Semantic network of naive-model reasoning.
Two students showed resistance to the myth
presented in the passage, in spite of low biological
understanding of HIV. One student (MS2) rejected the
idea on the basis of common sense/practical reasoning,
asserting that had information in the passage been true,
HIV would have been defeated by now. However, she
also conceded that the information in the passage was
“a little-little true cause somebody wrote it.” This
illustrates that while common sense may be very useful
in everyday health reasoning, its effectiveness is
limited, if not supported by biological understanding.
Only one naive-level student (MS1) refuted the myth on
the basis of biological reasoning, stating that HIV could
not be expelled from the body through urine and sweat.
Reasoning at the Intermediate-Model Level.
Compared to the students assigned to the naïve model,
the adolescents in this group had deeper understanding
of the biological basis of HIV. However, the expertise
literature characterizes a stage of development in which
an increase in knowledge is accompanied by a
temporary decrement in performance. Patel and Groen
(1991) describe this as the intermediate effect,

characteristic of a period during which recent
knowledge is not yet fully assimilated. This phase of
temporary disorientation is evident in the reasoning of
intermediate level students. For example, unlike naïve
model students, most intermediate model students
understood the role of bodily fluids in HIV
transmission. However, they often failed to utilize this
information by inferring that different fluids contained
different amounts of virus and did not interact with one
another. As a consequence, four out of six students
assigned to this model still found the “in with fluids,
other with fluids” explanation convincing (e.g., HS6,
“A fluid is what makes you get AIDS… drinking gets
fluids out of your system… It probably would help.”)
Two students (HS2 and HS8) were able to refute the
myth, although with some hesitations. Overall,
intermediate model level understanding of HIV does
not yet provide sufficient conceptual basis for
consistent efficient reasoning in the context of HIV.
Reasoning at the Advanced-Model Level. All three
students characterized at this level (HS3, HS7, HS10)
rejected the myth with very high degree of certainty.
This is not surprising, given their relatively rich
conceptual model of HIV. In addition to knowing that
HIV could enter human body with fluids and travel
with them, these students also knew that the virus
entered the blood stream, penetrated white blood cells
and replicated within them. This allowed them to
understand how the majority of the HIV particles were
anchored in the bloodstream, thus uncovering the flaw
of the passage, e.g., “AIDS virus, it’s found in sweat…
but only in minor quantities, so you can’t just expel it,
if you do it, there is going to be virus still in your blood
that will just keep replicating.”
AIDS Virus

LOC:
(Found in)
Quantity:
Small

Sweat

PRT:
ACT:

Cells
Replication
(Continues)

COND:

Can’t
Expel

LOC:
(Found in)

Blood

ACT: Action, ALT: Alternative, COND: Conditional
Relation, EXC: Exclusive, LOC: Location, PRT: Part
Figure 2: Semantic network of advanced model reasoning.

Figure 2 provides a semantic network of that
student’s (HS7) reasoning. The figure illustrates that
while the complexity of the reasoning is comparable to
that of the naïve model in Figure 1, the explanatory
reasoning and use of conceptual knowledge
demonstrates a greater degree of understanding.

Conclusions
In this study, students with adequate factual knowledge
of HIV risks and prevention often lacked genuine
conceptual understanding of HIV. With little
conceptual understanding, students had difficulty
evaluating dubious claims and reasoning about practical
issues in the context of HIV. The dissociation between
factual knowledge and conceptual understanding of
HIV parallels the dissociation between HIV and science
education in the schools. With biology taught separately
from factual HIV education and introduced in later
grades, adolescents have little understanding of the
concepts of virus and immune system, which are
critical to building accurate conceptual models of HIV.
As a consequence, HIV knowledge remains in the form
of a disjointed and sometimes erroneous collection of
facts, which have minimal applicability to problem
solving. When adolescents enroll in a high school
biology course, they receive some grounding in the
concepts that are relevant to understanding HIV.
However, they do not receive an opportunity to
integrate this biological knowledge with factual
knowledge and the biological knowledge remains inert.
The present study cautions researchers against
making a hasty conclusion about the lack of connection
between knowledge of HIV and sexual behavior. We
are not implying that understanding of HIV is the only
factor that influences sexual risk taking. Non-cognitive
factors (e.g., sexual arousal) can exert strong influence
on decision-making (Lowenstein, 1996). However, indepth understanding of basic HIV concepts is crucial to
the success of any educational intervention. This study
is part of a research program designed to impart robust
conceptual understanding of HIV to adolescents.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by American Educational
Research Association postdoctoral fellowship award to
the first author. We thank student who participated in
this study, the educators who gave us their enthusiastic
support and the schools that provided us with research
sites. This paper has greatly benefited from critical
comments and discussions provided by David
Kaufman.

References
Brown, L.K., DiClemente, R.J., & Park, T. (1992).
Predictors of condom use in sexually active
adolescents. Journal of Adolescent Health 13, 651657.
Carey, S., (1985). Conceptual change in childhood.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (1999).
Young people at risk: HIV/AIDS among America’s
youth. www.cdc.gov/hiv/pubs/facts/youth.htm.
Chi, M.T.H., Feltovich, P.J., & Glaser, R., (1981).
Categorization and representation of physics
problems by experts and novices. Cognitive Science,
5, 121-152.
Chi, M.T.H., Glaser, R., & Rees, E., (1982). Expertise
in problem solving. In R.J. Sternberg (Ed.). Advances
in the psychology of human intelligence (vol. 1).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
diSessa, A.A. (1988). Towards an epistemology of
physics. Cognition and Instruction, 10 (2 & 3), 105225.
Langer, L.M., & Tubman, J.G. (1997). Risky sexual
behavior among substance-abusing adolescents:
psychosocial and contextual factors. American
Journal of Orthopsychiatry 67, 315-322.
Lowenstein, G. (1996). Out of control: visceral
influences on behavior. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 65(3), 272-292.
Patel, V.L., & Groen, G.J. (1986). Knowledge-based
solution strategies in medical reasoning. Cognitive
Science, 10, 96-116.
Patel, V.L., & Groen, G.J. (1991). Developmental
accounts of the transition from student to physician:
some problems and suggestions. Medical Education,
25, 527-535.
Patel, V.L., Kaufman, D.R., & Arocha, J.F. (1999).
Conceptual change in the biomedical and health
sciences domain. In R. Glaser (Ed.), Advances in
Instructional Psychology, 5, Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Siegel, D., DiClemente, R., Durbin, M., Krasnovsky,
F., & Saliba, P. (1995). Change in junior high school
students’ AIDS-realated knowledge, misconceptions,
attitudes, and HIV-preventive behaviors: Effects of a
school-based intervention. AIDS Education and
Prevention, 7(6), 534-543.
Simon, D.P., & Simon, H.A., (1978). Individual
differences in solving physics problems. In R. Siegler
(Ed.), Children's thinking: what develops? Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Sivaramakrishnan, M., & Patel, V.L. (1993). Reasoning
about childhood nutritional deficiencies by mothers
in rural India: A cognitive analysis. Social Sciences
and Medicine, 37 (7), 937-952.
Vosniadou, S (1999). Conceptual change research:
State of the art and future directions. In W. Schnotz,
S. Vosniadou, & M. Carretero (eds.) New
Perspectives on Conceptual Change. Amsterdam:
Pergamon Press.

