UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Subject Omission in Children’s Language: The Case for Performance Limitations in Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/29q6c17v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Freudenthal, Daniel
Pine, Julian
Gobet, Fernand

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Subject Omission in Children’s Language:
The Case for Performance Limitations in Learning
Daniel Freudenthal (DF@Psychology.Nottingham.Ac.Uk)
Julian Pine (JP@Psychology.Nottingham.Ac.Uk)
Fernand Gobet (FRG@Psychology.Nottingham.Ac.Uk)
School of Psychology, University of Nottingham
University Park, Nottingham, NG7 2RD UK
Abstract
Several theories have been put forward to explain the
phenomenon that children who are learning to speak
their native language tend to omit the subject of the
sentence. According to the pro-drop hypothesis, children
represent the wrong grammar. According to the
performance limitations view, children represent the full
grammar, but omit subjects due to performance
limitations in production. This paper proposes a third
explanation and presents a model which simulates the
data relevant to subject omission. The model consists of
a simple learning mechanism that carries out a
distributional analysis of naturalistic input. It does not
have any overt representation of grammatical categories,
and its performance limitations reside mainly in its
learning mechanism. The model clearly simulates the
data at hand, without the need to assume large amounts
of innate knowledge in the child, and can be considered
more parsimonious on these grounds alone. Importantly,
it employs a unified and objective measure of processing
load, namely the length of the utterance, which interacts
with frequency in the input. The standard performance
limitations view assumes that processing load is
dependent on a phrase’s syntactic role, but does not
specify a unifying underlying principle.

Subject Omission
Children who are acquiring English often produce
sentences with missing subjects, like those shown
below.
Hug Mummy
Play Bed
Writing Book
See Running
While these examples clearly do not adhere to adult
English grammar, many contemporary theories of child
language assume that children produce their sentences
on the basis of an abstract grammar. Theories differ
with respect to how much the hypothesized grammar
differs from the adult grammar. According to the prodrop hypothesis (Hyams, 1986; Hyams & Wexler,
1993), children represent a grammar that is different
from the adult grammar in that it allows null subjects.
In this respect, children’s grammar resembles that of

adult Italian and Spanish speakers. Other authors have
argued that children actually possess the correct adult
grammar, but drop subjects because they have difficulty
expressing the (correct) underlying form due to some
kind of processing bottleneck (L. Bloom, 1970; L.
Bloom, Miller & Hood, 1975; Pinker, 1984; P. Bloom
1990; Valian, 1991). Thus, a child producing an
utterance is thought to represent a grammatically
correct underlying structure, but, due to performance
limitations, some elements have a lower probability of
being expressed than others.
A number of phenomena have been cited as evidence
for the performance limitations view. P. Bloom (1990)
showed that, in utterances with a subject, the length of
the Verb Phrase (VP) is shorter than it is in utterances
without a subject. The load associated with the
provision of a subject is thought to decrease the
likelihood of expressing a longer verb phrase. Along
similar lines, the length of the VP is greater when the
subject is a pronoun, than when it is a noun. This is
thought to result from the fact that pronouns are
phonetically shorter, and the fact that non-pronominal
subjects may be longer than pronominal ones. L. Bloom
(1970) has also found that subject omission is more
likely in negated sentences or in sentences with
relatively new (unfamiliar) verbs. Presumably, the load
associated with negation and novel verbs is such that it
induces subject omission.
While the performance limitations view makes sense
from an information-processing point of view, it is not
very precise in its predictions (Theakston, Lieven, Pine
& Rowland, 2001). Performance limitations accounts
also tend to be rather ad hoc in nature. Given the
imprecise nature of performance limitations, it becomes
all too easy to posit a greater processing load whenever
the provision of a certain element leads to a greater
likelihood of the omission of another, especially when
there is an interaction with frequency. Furthermore, it is
not clear whether an explanation of the patterns in the
data requires a limitation in production coupled with
full knowledge of a language’s grammar (as the
performance limitations view typically has it). In fact,
as Theakston et al. point out, performance limited
learning of lexical items (independent of syntactic
complexity) may well give rise to the same pattern of

results without the need to assume a full representation
of the grammar, and a different processing load for
various types of grammatical roles. The present paper
aims to test these claims by seeing to what extent a
performance limited distributional analysis of
naturalistic input can account for the pattern of
omission and provision of grammatical categories that
is found in children’s speech. To this end, we aim to
simulate the effects that P. Bloom (1990) attributes to
performance limited production. We will now introduce
the model we have used for these simulations.

development of the net through the three presentations
of the sentence.

MOSAIC
MOSAIC (Model of Syntax Acquisition In Children) is
an instance of the CHREST architecture, which in turn
is a member of the EPAM family of models. CHREST
models have successfully been used to model
phenomena such as novice-expert differences in chess
and computer programming. In language acquisition,
MOSAIC has been applied to the modelling of the use
of optional infinitives in English and Dutch, the
learning of sound patterns and the Verb Island
phenomenon. Due to space limitations, we refer the
reader to another paper in this volume for the relevant
references (Freudenthal, Pine & Gobet, 2002).
The basis of the model is a discrimination net, which
can be seen as an index to Long-Term Memory. The
network is an n-ary tree, headed by a root node.
Training of the model takes place by feeding utterances
to the network, and sorting them (see Figure 1).
Utterances are processed word by word. When the
network is empty, and the first utterance is fed to it, the
root node contains no test links. When the model is
presented with the utterance He walked home, it will
create on its first pass three test links from the root. The
test links hold a key (the test) and a node. The key holds
the actual feature (word or phrase) being processed,
while the node contains the sequence of all the keys
from the root to the present node. Thus, on its first pass,
the model just learns the words in the utterance. When
the model is presented with the same sentence a second
time, it will traverse the net, and find it has already seen
the word he. When it encounters the word walked it will
also recognize it has seen this word before, and will
then create a new link under the he node. This link will
have walked as its key, and he walked in the node. In a
similar way, it will create a walked home node under
the primitive walked node. On a third pass, the model
will add a he walked home node under the he walked
chain of nodes. The model thus needs three passes to
encode a three-word phrase with all new words. (For
expository purposes, here we assume that a node is
created with a probability of 1. As is explained under
learning rate, this probability is actually lower and
dependent on a number of factors). Figure 1 shows the

Figure 1: MOSAIC learning an input.
As the model sees more input, it will thus encode
longer and longer phrases. Apart from the standard test
links between words that have followed each other in
utterances previously encountered, MOSAIC employs
generative links that connect nodes that have a similar
context. Generative links can be created on every cycle.
Whether a generative link is created depends on the
amount of overlap that exists between nodes. The
overlap is calculated by assessing to what extent two
nodes have the same nodes directly above and below
them (two nodes need to share 10% of both the nodes
below and above them in order to be linked). This is
equivalent to assessing how likely it is that the two
words are preceded and followed by the same words in
an utterance. Since words that are followed and
preceded by the same words are likely to be of the same
word class (for instance Nouns or Verbs), the
generative links that develop end up linking clusters of
nodes that represent different word classes. The
induction of word classes on the basis of their position
in the sentence relative to other words is the only
mechanism that MOSAIC uses for representing
syntactic classes.
The main importance of generative links lies in the
role they play when utterances are generated from the
network. When the model generates utterances, it will
output all the utterances it can by traversing the network
until it encounters a terminal node. When the model
traverses standard links only, it produces utterances or
parts of utterances that were present in the input. In
other words, it does rote generation. During generation,
however, the model can also traverse generative links.
When the model traverses a generative link, it can

supplement the utterance up to that point with a phrase
that follows the node that the current node is linked to.
As a result, the model is able to generate utterances that
were not present in the input. Figure 2 gives an example
of the generation of an utterance using a generative
link.

has been provided by Naigles & Hoff-Ginsberg (1998)
and has been attributed to prosodic highlighting of the
sentence final position (Shady & Gerken, 1999). In
contrast to the standard performance limitations view,
processing load in MOSAIC does not vary as a function
of grammatical role. Also note that the version of
MOSAIC used for these simulations is identical to that
which Freudenthal, Pine & Gobet (2002) used for the
simulation of the optional infinitive phenomenon in
Dutch. No free parameters were fitted to obtain these
results.

Subject Omission in MOSAIC

Figure 2: Generating an utterance. Because she and he
have a generative link, the model can output the novel
utterance she sings. (For simplicity, preceding nodes are
ignored in this figure.)

Learning Rate
MOSAIC does not simply learn all the utterances it
encounters. The probability of the creation of a node is
dependent on the size of the net and the length of the
utterance it encodes. This has the effect of making the
learning process frequency sensitive. If an utterance is
seen more often, it has a higher probability of being
created. Finally, phrases that occur in an utterance final
position in the input (have an end marker) have a higher
probability of being encoded. The precise formula
governing learning rate is given elsewhere in this
volume (Freudenthal, Pine & Gobet, 2002).

Performance Limitations in MOSAIC
The only performance limitations in MOSAIC are the
following:
•

•
•
•

Frequency: high frequency items have a higher
likelihood of being encoded, and thus feature in
longer utterances
Short phrases have a higher likelihood of being
encoded than long phrases
Utterance final phrases have a higher likelihood of
being encoded.
An utterance will only be produced (generated) if
its final phrase has occurred in sentence final
position in the input.

It may be appropriate to point out that these
performance limitations are plausible from general
theorizing in the cognitive psychology and learning
literature. Huttenlocher et al. (1991) provide evidence
for the effect of frequency on vocabulary learning.
Evidence for the importance of sentence final position

MOSAIC creates utterances without subjects because
the model can output partial utterances, provided that
the utterance final element has occurred in a sentence
final position in the input. As a consequence,
constituents that take a position early in the sentence,
have a higher probability of being omitted than those
that take a position further downstream. Since the
subject takes first position in English, it has the highest
likelihood of being omitted. However, this prediction is
not tied to the English language. MOSAIC would
generate utterances with omitted subjects in all
languages that have the subject as the first element in
their underlying word order.

Method
In order to simulate the data presented by P. Bloom
(1990), two MOSAIC models were trained using
corpora of maternal speech available in the CHILDES
database (MacWhinney & Snow, 1990). We used the
files of Anne and Becky. The mean length of utterance
(MLU) in the output generated from the models was
2.87 for Anne’s model, and 3.41 for Becky’s model. In
line with Bloom’s analysis, we limited our analysis to
utterances which could not be interpreted as
imperatives. This is necessary as subjectless sentences
in English are grammatical as imperatives (e.g. Put it
down). Bloom selected a list of nonimperative verbs
and past tense verbs for his analysis. Since these verbs
cannot be used in an imperative form, sentences which
contain a verb from these lists, and do not contain a
subject, are true examples of subject omission. Tables 1
and 2 give the lists of verbs that were used for these
analyses.
Table 1: Nonimperative verbs used for analysis
Care
Laugh
Miss
Cary
Laughs
Need
Fall
Like
See
Falls
Live
Sneeze
Forget
Lives
Want
Grow
Love
Wants
Know
Loves

In line with Bloom’s analysis, we removed from our
samples all questions, all utterances that contained the
words not or don’t, all utterances where the verb was
not used in a productive way, and all utterances where
the target verb was part of an embedded clause.
Table 2: Past tense verbs used for analysis
Ate
Fixed
Saved
Bit
Folded
Saw
Bought
Forgot
Sent
Broke
Found
Sharpened
Brought
Gave
Spilled
Came
Goed
Stepped
Caught
Ironed
Stopped
Closed
Left
Thought
Cooled
Lost
Throwed
Covered
Made
Took
Cried
Melted
Tored
Drinked
Pee-peed
Tripped
Dropped
Pulled
Turned
Dropt
Rode
Washed
Falled
Said
Went
Fell
Sat
Wrote
Table 3 gives the data for three children that Bloom
reports and the two simulations (Anne’s and Becky’s
model). It can be seen that for the children, the Verb
Phrase length in utterances with a subject is shorter than
in utterances without a subject. It can also be seen that
MOSAIC readily simulates this result, and the size of
the effect is quite comparable to that in the children.
The difference in verb phrase length is statistically
significant for both Anne’s model (t(330) = 4.82, p <
.001), and Becky’s model (t(314) = 4.64, p < .001).
Table 3: Mean length of Verb Phrases in
sentences with and without subjects
Child
With
Without
Subject
Subject
Adam
2.33
2.60
Eve
2.02
2.72
Sarah
1.80
2.46
Anne’s Model
Becky’s Model

2.14
2.58

2.76
3.31

MOSAIC obtains this result because the probability
of learning an item in MOSAIC is dependent only on its
frequency and length, and not on its grammatical role.
There is thus no reason (apart from differences in
frequency), why sentences with subjects should, on
average, be longer (or shorter) than those without. The
fact that verb phrases in utterances with subjects should
be longer than verb phrases in utterances without a
subject is a straightforward consequence of this fact.

A second analysis performed by Bloom was to look
at the length of the verb phrase as a function of the type
of subject (no subject, pronoun or non-pronoun). The
reasoning was that, since the processing load of a
subject is higher than that of a missing subject, and the
processing load of a non-pronoun subject is higher than
that of a pronoun (since the pronoun is both
phonetically shorter as well as shorter in word length),
this should again result in length effects on the Verb
Phrase. The results of this analysis are shown in table 4.
Table 4: Mean length of Verb Phrase as a
function of subject size
No Subject Pronoun
NonPronoun
Adam
2.60
2.55
2.25
Eve
2.75
2.30
2.00
Sarah
2.45
1.90
1.50
Anne’s Model
Becky’s Model

2.76
3.31

2.45
2.93

1.60
1.67

Again, it is clear that MOSAIC has no difficulty in
simulating these results (though the size of the effect in
MOSAIC appears to be slightly larger than in the
children that Bloom analysed). The difference in verb
phrase length between utterances with a pronoun
subject and those with a non-pronominal subject is
statistically significant for both Anne’s model (t(64) =
3.45, p < .001) and Becky’s model (t(104) = 4.40, p <
.001). There are two possible reasons why MOSAIC
might simulate this result. Firstly, non-pronoun subjects
are on average slightly longer than pronoun subjects.
Pronouns are by definition one word long, while nonpronoun NP’s can contain determiners and adjectives.
In fact, Bloom indicates that the average non-pronoun
subject for the children he analysed was 1.16 words
long. Secondly, pronouns have a higher frequency of
occurrence than non-pronominal subjects. In MOSAIC,
this increases the likelihood that they will be learnt, and
the likelihood that they will feature in longer utterances.
We decided to test these two explanations in MOSAIC
by performing the analysis on non-pronominal subjects
of length one and greater separately. As it turned out,
only a small proportion of the non-pronominal subjects
had a length greater than one. For non-pronominal
subjects of length one, the size of the VP was 1.58 for
Anne’s model, and 1.88 for Becky’s model1. Both
values are smaller than the VP length for pronoun
1

One would expect the length of the verb phrase to increase
when limiting this analysis to subjects of length 1. This is the
case for Becky’s model, but not for Anne’s model. This is due
to the fact that, for Anne’s model, there were relatively few
long non-pronominal subjects, but one of those that did occur
had a particularly long verb phrase.

subjects. Given the low incidence of long nonpronominal subject in both these and Bloom’s data, this
clearly indicates that the lower complexity effect that
Bloom attributes to the fact that pronouns are
phonetically shorter, can be explained by frequency in
the input. Note that MOSAIC does not employ a
phonetic component. Phonetic differences can therefore
not have contributed to MOSAIC’s simulation of the
effect.
The importance of frequency in the input as an
explanation for the difference between pronouns and
non-pronouns is also highlighted by a point made by
Hyams & Wexler (1993). Though pronouns may be
phonetically shorter, the process of assigning the
referent to a (potentially ambiguous) pronoun may
actually result in its processing load being higher, rather
than lower. This would predict a shorter Verb Phrase
length for pronominal than for non-pronominal
subjects.

Subject versus Object Omission
It has often been shown that subjects are omitted more
often than objects. In order to test how often objects are
omitted, Bloom selected utterances which contain verbs
that require an object, and calculated the proportion of
object omission from these obligatory contexts. Table 5
shows this list of verbs.
Table 5: Verbs that take obligatory objects.
Bought
Ironed
Saved
Broke
Like
Saw
Brought
Love
See
Caught
Loves
Sharpened
Covered
Made
Thought
Drinked
Miss
Throwed
Fix
Need
Took
Folded
Pulled
Want
Found
Rode
Wants
Gave
Said
Washed
Table 6 compares the proportion of omitted subjects
and objects from obligatory contexts (verbs from tables
1 and 2 for subjects, verbs from table 5 for objects). It
can be seen that the proportion of subject omission is
considerably higher than the proportion of object
omission. The subject-object asymmetry was significant
for both Anne’s model (X2 (1, N = 560) = 98.83, p <
.001), and Becky’s model (X 2(1, N = 548) = 125.97, p
< .001). Bloom suggests several possible causes for this
asymmetry. Firstly, it may be due to pragmatic factors.
Since subjects typically convey given information,
while objects convey new information, it may be more
pragmatically appropriate to omit subjects when
processing capacity is limited. A second possible cause
might be that there is a ‘save the heaviest for last’ bias.

This would result in subjects having a higher processing
load than objects, and as a result, in them being omitted
more often.
Table 6: Omission from obligatory contexts
Subjects
Objects
Adam
57%
8%
Eve
61%
7%
Sarah
43%
15%
Anne’s Model
Becky’s Model

64%
60%

21%
14%

The explanation for the effect in MOSAIC is simple.
As a result of MOSAIC’s performance limitations, a
constituent is less likely to be omitted when it occurs
further toward the end of the sentence. Since subjects
take first position, and objects usually come after the
verb, the probability of omitting an object is smaller
than the probability of omitting a subject. Bloom goes
on to suggest that the hypothesized processing
asymmetry should cause other differences between
subjects and objects. For example, since pronouns exert
less of a processing load, more pronouns will occur in
subject position than in object position. Table 7 shows
the relevant data, both for Bloom’s analysis, and
MOSAIC’s simulations. Again, the assymmetry is
significant for Anne’s model (X2 (1, N = 243) = 8.08, p
< .01), and Becky’s model (X2(1, N = 292) = 27.53, p <
.001).
Table 7: Proportion of overt pronominal Noun Phrases
Subjects
Objects
Adam
41%
25%
Eve
36%
14%
Sarah
91%
33%
Anne’s Model
Becky’s Model

47%
72%

27%
40%

There is no specific reason why MOSAIC would
predict this effect, but the pragmatic factors that Bloom
mentions may well explain this result. Subjects tend to
convey given information, and objects tend to convey
new information. It certainly makes sense to introduce
new information using a non-pronoun NP. The use of a
pronoun requires the listener to resolve the referent of
the pronoun. The use of a non-pronoun NP is usually
less ambiguous, which aids the resolution process. In
fact, several authors have argued that this is the
preferred argument structure for English (Clancy,
2001). As such, it is not just a feature of child language,
but is actually the preferred structure in adult language.
The fact that MOSAIC simulates this result is simply a

reflection of the fact that it mimics the distribution of
the input.

Conclusions
MOSAIC clearly simulates all the results that Bloom
reports. MOSAIC is not an ad hoc model of subject
omission, as it has already been shown to account for
several phenomena in children’s speech, and is firmly
grounded in the CHREST/EPAM framework. Though
MOSAIC has performance limitations, these reside
mainly in the learning mechanism. Unlike the standard
performance limitations view, MOSAIC does not
assume full competence. In fact, MOSAIC has no built
in knowledge regarding grammatical categories or
roles. The effects arise in MOSAIC through a
combination of performance limited distributional
learning, and frequency sensitivity. Effects that are
present in the input (such as a higher proportion of
pronominal subjects than objects), are mimicked in
MOSAIC’s output because of the fact that it is a
distributional analyser.
On a theoretical level, MOSAIC has two main
strengths over the standard view of performance
limitations. Firstly the definition of processing load in
the standard view is somewhat ad hoc. If the provision
of certain elements leads to a higher rate of subject
omission, this is seen as evidence for a relatively high
processing load of these elements. The actual reason for
this high processing load then varies from effect to
effect. Within MOSAIC, processing load is a function
of the interaction of two objectively measurable
variables: frequency in the input, and length of the
phrase being encoded. When an item is more frequent
in the input, it has a higher likelihood of being encoded,
and therefore features in longer utterances that have a
higher likelihood of being grammatical (i.e. including
the subject). If two utterances have equal overall
frequency, and one of the two includes a longer element
(verb phrase), then some other element will necessarily
be omitted. Since the subject is the first element in the
sentence, this has a higher likelihood of being omitted.
Secondly, the standard performance limitations view
assumes a large amount of innate knowledge in the
child. For the simulation of these results, MOSAIC
assumes no innate syntactic knowledge.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the Leverhulme Trust
under grant number F/114/BK.

References
Bloom, L. (1970). Language Development: Form and
Function in Emerging Grammars. Cambridge, MA:
MIT press.

Bloom, L., Miller, P. & Hood, L. (1975). Variation and
reduction as aspects of competence in language
development. In A. Pick, (ed.): The 1974 Minnesota
Symposium on Child Psychology, Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Bloom, P. (1990). Subjectless sentences in child
language. Linguistic Inquiry, 21, 491-504.
Clancy, P. (2001).
The lexicon in interaction:
Developmental origins of preferred argument
structure in Korean. In J.W. DuBois, L.E. Kumpf &
W.J. Ashby (Eds), Preferred argument structure:
Grammar as architecture for function. Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Freudenthal, D. Pine, J. & Gobet, F. (2002). Modelling
the development of Dutch optional infinitives in
MOSAIC. This Volume.
Huttenlocher, J. Haight, W., Bryk, A. Seltzer, M. &
Lyons, T. (1991). Early vocabulary growth: relation
to language input and gender. Developmental
Psychology, 27, 236-248.
Hyams, N. (1986). Language Acquisition and the
Theory of Parameters, Dordrecht: Reidel.
Hyams, N. & Wexler, K. (1993). On the grammatical
basis of null subjects in child language. Linguistic
Inquiry, 24, 421-59.
MacWhinney, B. & Snow, C. (1990). The child
language data exchange system: An update. Journal
of Child Language, 17, 457-472.
Naigles, L. & Hoff-Ginsberg, E. (1998). Why are some
verbs learned before other verbs. Effects of input
frequency and structure on children’s early verb use.
Journal of Child Language, 25, 95-120.
Pinker, S. (1984). Language Learnability and Language
Development, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Shady, M. & Gerken, L. (1999). Grammatical and
caregiver cue in early sentence comprehension.
Journal of Child Language, 26, 163-176.
Theakston, A.L., Lieven, E.V.M., Pine, J.M., Rowland,
C.F. (2001). The role of performance limitations in
the acquisition of verb-argument structure: An
alternative account. Journal of Child Language, 28,
127-152.
Valian, V. (1991). Syntactic subjects in the early speech
of American and Italian children. Cognition, 40, 2181.

