UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Teaching with Dialectic Arguments vs. Didactic Explanations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4tv0c8wj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Desai, Ravi
Ashley, Kevin D

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Teaching with Dialectic Arguments vs. Didactic Explanations
Ravi Desai (rpdst6@pitt.edu)
Intelligent Systems Program, University of Pittsburgh,
LRDC, 3939 O’Hara Street
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA

Kevin D. Ashley (ashley@pitt.edu)

Learning Research and Development Center, University of Pittsburgh
3939 O’Hara Street
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA
Abstract
We compared two automated approaches to teaching
distinguishing, a skill that involves assessing the
relevant differences among cases in a context -sensitive
way. We implemented the two approaches in two
versions of an Intelligent Tutoring System designed to
teach law students basic skills of case-based legal
argument. The original version of CATO employs
didactic explanation. The newer version, CATO-Dial,
teaches the same skill with a simulated dialectic
argument in a courtroom setting. We hypothesized that
students would learn the skill better by engaging in the
simulated argument than by receiving interactive
explanation. We expected that dialectic argument
would help students to construct the target knowledge
on their own as they developed responses to
arguments, and that this would lead to more robust
learning. We showed that students in the dialectic
argument simulation group performed significantly
better on a section of the post-test aimed at assessing
transfer of their skills of distinguishing. We discuss a
number of cognitive and motivational benefits that
may explain this effect

Introduction
The skill of distinguishing is important in
dialectical domains such as law, applied ethics,
policy analysis, and business, where arguments
by analogy are routinely employed in
professional
education
and
practice.
Distinguishing is a way to respond to an
analogical argument. The argument claims that a
target problem should be decided in the same
way as a cited source case by virtue of their
relevant similarities, that is, factual patterns the
cases share that form the basis of legal reasons
for deciding them in the same way. A distinction
is a factual difference underlying a legal reason
to decide the target problem differently from the
cited case. There may be many differences, but
only those that give rise to legal reasons for
treating the cases differently are distinctions.
A distinction may be a factual strength of a
side (i.e., a party, either plaintiff, the one who
commences suit, or the defendant) in the target

problem not shared in the source case, or a
factual weakness in the source case not shared in
the target. For the cases in our experiment,
students play the role of the defendant’s attorney;
a distinction is defined as a pattern of facts that
strengthens defendant’s legal argument in the
problem not found in the cited-case, or a fact
pattern that weakens defendant’s side in the
cited-case not found in the problem.
In order to distinguish effectively, one must
be sensitive to the argument context in which a
case has been used. The context includes the role
a relevant difference plays in an argument, its
underlying legal significance both in absolute
terms and relative to the other combinations of
facts in the target problem and cited precedent.
Professors note that law students often
demonstrate only a shallow understanding of the
concept of a distinction. Students may be able to
find different facts but fail to realize that only
some differences are distinctions. Students may
also ignore which side a difference favors, or
they fail to view the significance of a difference
in the context of the other facts in the problem
and cited-case. Because of their shallow
knowledge, students may make arguments citing
differences that hurt, rather than help, their side’s
argument.
Ideally, students “pick up” the skill of
distinguishing through the trial-and-error
experience of making arguments. In a law school,
students engage in arguments in the classroom.
Sometimes, however, students are reluctant to
expose themselves in class by making arguments,
and, in any event, could benefit from additional
instruction outside the classroom. In an effort to
meet this need, Aleven and Ashley (1997)
developed the CATO program (i.e., Case
Argument TutOrial), an Intelligent Tutoring
System designed to teach basic case-based
argument skills, including how to distinguish
cases (see also Aleven, 1997).
In designing an ITS to teach dis tinguishing,
one may try two approaches. Didactic
explanation involves presenting good and bad
examples of distinguishing. The system explains

why the examples are instances of successful or
unsuccessful argument. The bad examples
illustrate the various kinds of shallow knowledge.
This is how CATO teaches distinguishing.
Dialectic argument attempts to teach
students distinguishing by engaging them in
arguments, affording an opportunity to learn the
skill through a process of trial-and-error.
Technically, it is harder to design this kind of
pedagogical interaction. Before undertaking to
develop a large-scale dialectic argument system,
we wanted to see whether it was likely to
improve students’ learning. We therefore
developed a variation of CATO, called CATODial, which employs dialectic argument to teach
distinguishing.
We hypothesized that students would learn
better to distinguish by engaging in dialectical
argument than in didactic explanation. We
speculated that students engaged in role -playing
and arguing would encounter information in a
more relevant context and would be motivated to
process the information more thoroughly. They
would develop deeper knowledge of the role a
difference plays in the argument context, its
interactions with other facts in the target problem
and source case and the underlying reasons why
it matters. Our experiment tested this hypothesis.
In aiding students to learn deeper
knowledge, we also hoped that CATO-Dial
would promote better transfer of knowledge. A
major problem in knowledge transfer is that
people tend to access prior knowledge that bears
superficial rather than structural similarity to the
problem at hand (Thompson et al., 2000).
Legal argument is not as determinate a form
of problem-solving as, say, physics or geometry.
Legal problems rarely have provably correct
answers; there may be reasonable arguments on
both sides of a dispute based on analogies to
competing cases (Ashley, 1990). CATO-Dial
attempts to engage students in argument
dialogues that focus them on comp aring cases.
Law school professors engage students in
Socratic dialogues about cases in the casebooks.
Some of the earliest ITSs used Socratic dialogue
and an inquiry teaching method to teach subject
matter such as geography (SCHOLAR
(Carbonell, 1970)) or meteorology (WHY
(Collins and Stevens, 1982)). A subsequent
tutoring system (Wong et.al, 1997) incorporated
the inquiry teaching method into an ITS shell and
geography tutor. The OLIA ITS (Retalis et al.,
1996) used a related argument dialogue strategy,
playing devil’s advocate. Research suggests that
students tutored manually with Socratic dialogues

learned targeted physics concepts (i.e., rules)
better than those taught with more didactic
dialogues (Rose et. al, 2001). In the latter, the
human tutor provided more explanation before
asking questions but asked fewer open-ended
questions.

CATO vs. CATO-Dial
CATO is one of the few case-based
Intelligent Tutoring Systems that teaches a process
of case-based reasoning. (Aleven, 1997, pp. 1978). It provides a set of specialized tools, accessible
through an X-server connection to CATO running
on a Unix workstation, and a web-accessible
Casebook and Workbook. The Casebook presents
excerpts from important legal case opinions in
trade secret law. A small set of argumentation and
discussion questions follows each case, much like
an ordinary legal casebook. The Workbook helps
students use CATO’s tools to analyze and respond
to the argumentation and discussion questions.
Experiments show that CATO is an effective
teacher (Aleven & Ashley, 1997; Aleven, 1997).
Students work with CATO’s textual case
summaries and abstract representations of cases in
terms of factors. Each factor represents a
stereotypical collection of facts, which tends
normally to strengthen or weaken a conclusion
that a side should win a particular kind of legal
claim (Ashley, 1990). A Factor Hierarchy
represents legal reasons why a factor makes a
difference to the legal claim (Aleven, 1997).
CATO helps students analyze target problems
and compare them to past cases. It teaches novices
to identify factors in a target problem, test
hypotheses about their significance against cases
in its database, and make legal arguments about
how to decide the target problems citing cases.
Students encounter problems based on real
litigated cases. Novice users identify conflicting
factors in the problem, which give rise to
conflicting reasons for decision. CATO teaches
them how to make arguments to resolve such
conflicts.
CATO's Argument Maker tool provides a
tutorial on distinguishing. To enable CATO to
employ dialectic argument, we developed CATODial, a modification of the program that engages
novice users in courtroom-style arguments about
target problems. In using the CATO-Dial version
of the tutorial on distinguishing, students
encounter examples like the Lynchburg Lemonade
case.1 With the Case Analyzer tool, students have
1

In the Lynchburg Lemonade case, Tony Mason, the
plaintiff, developed a cocktail he dubbed “Lynchburg

identified conflicting factors in the Lemonade
problem and have begun to consider the
conflicting factor-based legal reasons about how
to decide its outcome. For comparing cases, the
Case Analyzer presents them in a tabular form as
in Figure 1. The problem has six factors, four of
which favor the plaintiff (p) and two of which
favor the defendant (d). The Boeing case, won by
plaintiff (p), shares two of these factors, the
relevant similarities (marked with “=”). The
relevant differences (i.e., distinctions) are the four
unshared factors marked with “*”. These favor
deciding the Lemonade case for the defendant
(i.e., differently from Boeing). Note that F16
strengthens the defendant in the Lemonade case
and is not found in Boeing, whereas F4, F12 and
F14 strengthen the plaintiff’s position in Boeing
and are not found in the Lemonade case. F10, F15
and F18 are also unshared factors, but they are not
distinctions because they favor deciding the
Lemonade case for plaintiff (i.e., the same as in
Boeing).
With CATO-Dial, students play the role of an
advocate, Perry Mason, who has to argue a case in
court. As shown in Figure 2, the student may put
arguments in the mouth of Perry Mason by
selecting argument moves and values from a
menu. CATO-Dial responds on behalf of the
Judge, who mediates the proceedings, Hamilton
Burger, Perry’s opposing counsel, and Della
Street, Perry’s savvy assistant, who offers helpful
hints.
In the dialogue, Mr. Burger’s responses (such
as step 5 in Figure 2), generated by CATO-Dial,
take advantage of any weaknesses in Mr. Mason’s
argument, based on the students’ menu selections.
The Judge’s reaction emphasizes the student’s
mistake, and Della’s hints, also generated by
CATO-Dial, provide instruction on how to correct
them. CATO-Dial can engage in dialogues like
this for any pair of relevant cases in its database.

Lemonade”. Since Tony took some measures to protect his
recipe's secrecy, and since his was the only tavern producing
this drink, we say factors F6, Security-Measures, and F15,
Unique-Product, apply; both tend to favor the plaintiff (p).
On the other hand, Tony disclosed his recipe in negotiations
with a sales agent of the defendant, Jack Daniel's Distillery.
Thus, F1, Disclosure-In-Negotiations, applies, a factor that
tends to favor the defendant (d). The agent was aware,
however, that the recipe was a “secret formula”, so F21,
Knew-Info-Confidential, also applies, tending to favor the
plaintiff. Without compensating Tony, the defendant started
marketing exactly the same kind of cocktail; F18, IdenticalProducts applies and favors plaintiff. Finally, the recipe could
have been obtained by reverse engineering the cocktail; F16,
Info-Reverse-Engineerable, applies and favors the defendant.

CATO-Dial’s dialectic argument contrasts
with CATO’s didactic explanation. Originally,
CATO’s tutorial engaged students in an
interactive
exercise
employing
didactic
explanation. In these explanations, CATO did
not engage the student in as direct a manner.
Instead, the student was presented with an
argument that a hypothetical opponent could
make. Below is an excerpt from CATO’s
original version of the dialogue of Figure 2.
First, CATO makes the same argument as in
Step 1 of Figure 2 and invites the student to
select the factors that he would emphasize in
distinguishing the Boeing case on behalf of the
defendant. Second, the student again selects
three differences (i.e., factors F15, 516, and
F18) which though not shared between the two
cases, actually strengthen the argument that
plaintiff should win in the problem situation.
CATO then responds as follows:

3. CATO: Suppose defendant made the following
argument: The Boeing case is distinguishable, because
in the Lynchburg Lemonade case, defendant's product
was identical to plaintiff's [F18] and plaintiff was the
only manufacturer making the product [F15]. This was
not so in Boeing. Would this really help defendant?
When you have answered this question for yourself,
please click on “Continue”.
4. STUDENTS : (Continue)
5. CATO: Plaintiff could respond to defendant's
argument, as follows: Your Honor, as defendant's
counsel correctly pointed out, in the current problem,
defendant's product was identical to plaintiff's [F18]
and plaintiff was the only manufacturer making the
product [F15]. Boeing, which was won by plaintiff,
does not have these strengths on plaintiff's part but is
otherwise similar to the problem at hand. Where these
additional strengths are present, a decision in favor of
plaintiff is warranted even more strongly than it was in
Boeing. In short, even though factors F18 and F15 are
differences, defendant cannot use them to distinguish
Boeing. Defendant needs to focus on other differences,
namely, on those differences that make the Lynchburg
Lemonade case look stronger for defendant than
Boeing. Please click on “Continue”. See (Aleven,

1997 at 141f).
The argument that CATO uses to show the
inadequacy of the student’s initial selection of
distinctions is the same in both versions; the
difference lies in the manner in which it is
presented to the students and the way in wh ich
students are engaged in the task

Description of Experiment
We compared the impact of teaching
distinguishing to senior undergraduates using the
two versions of CATO. The students had all been
accepted into law schools and were receiving

preparatory instruction through a summer
institute. The students were randomly assigned to
two groups. The experimental group used the
dialectic argument version of CATO-Dial and
initially numbered 22 students. The control group
worked with the didactic explanation version of
CATO and initially numbered 23 students. Each
group worked in a series of eight two-hour
sessions over a span of about one month from
June 5 through July 11, 2000. For each session a
student was paired with a different partner from
the same group.
Lynchburg Lemonade Case
= Fl Disclosure-In-Negotiations (d)
= F6 Security-Measures (p)
F15 Unique-P roduct (p)
* F16 Info-Reverse-Engineerable (d)
F18 Identical-Products (p)
= F21 Knew-Info-Confidential (p)
= shared factor

* distinction

Prior to the series of instructional sessions, all
students took a pre-test comprising three questions
designed to assess argumentation skills. For
Questions 1 and 2, students read a problem
situation and three short cases. Students were asked
to make and respond to arguments about the
problem given the cases. Question 3 asked them to
define the concepts of a relevant similarity and
relevant difference.

Boeing (p)
= Fl Disclosure-In-Negotiations (d)
* F4 Agreed-Not-To-Disclose (p)
= F6 Security-Measures (p)
F10 Secrets-Disclosed-Outsiders (d)
* F12 Outsider-Disclosures-Restricted (p)
* F14 Restricted-Materials-Used (p)
= F21 Knew-Info-Confidential (p)

Figure 1: Case Comparison In Terms of Factors
Court is in session…
1. Mr. Burger for Plaintiff (CATO): Your Honor, where plaintiff adopted security measures [F6] and defendant knew
that plaintiff's information was confidential [F21], even though plaintiff disclosed its product information in
negotiations with defendant [Fl], plaintiff should win a claim of trade secrets misappropriation, as in The Boeing
Company v. Sierracin Corporation, 108 Wash.2d 38, 738 P.2d 665 (1987).
2. Judge (to Defendant’s counsel): Your response, Mr. Mason?
3. <STUDENT (selecting from menu): Distinguish Boeing [F15] [F16] [F18] (Continue)>
Mr. Mason for Defendant (Student): The Boeing Company v. Sierracin Corporation is distinguishable, Your
Honor, because in the Lynchburg Lemonade case, plaintiff's product information could be learned by reverseengineering [F16]. This was not so in Boeing. Boeing is also distinguishable, because in the Lynchburg Lemonade
case, unlike Boeing, defendant's product was identical to plaintiff's [F18] and plaintiff was the only manufacturer
making the product [F15].
4. Judge (to Plaintiff’s counsel): Mr. Burger?
5. Mr. Burger for Plaintiff (CATO): Your Honor, as Mr. Mason concedes, in the current problem, defendant's
product was identical to plaintiff's [F18] and plaintiff was the only manufacturer making the product [F15].
Boeing, which was won by plaintiff, does not have these strengths on plaintiff's part but is otherwise similar to the
problem at hand. Where these additional strengths are present, a decision in favor of plaintiff is warranted even
more strongly than it was in Boeing.
6. Judge (to Defendant’s counsel): I am sorry, Mr. Mason, but I am afraid I have to agree with Mr. Burger.
7. STUDENT: Help! (Continue)>
8. Della Street (whispering into Perry’s ear): Here is a hint. Even though factors F18 and F15 are differences,
defendant cannot use them to distinguish Boeing. Defendant needs to focus on other differences, namely, on those
differences that make the Lynchburg Lemonade case look stronger for defendant than Boeing.
9. <STUDENT (selecting from menu): Distinguish Boeing [F4][F12] [F14] [F16] (Continue)>
Mr. Mason for Defendant (Student): Boeing is distinguishable, because in Boeing, defendant used materials that
were subject to confidentiality restrictions [F14], plaintiff's disclosures to outsiders were subject to confidentiality
restrictions [F12], and defendant entered into a nondisclosure agreement with plaintiff [F4]. This was not so in the
Lynchburg Lemonade case. Also, in the Lynchburg Lemonade case, plaintiff's product information could be
learned by reverse-engineering [F16]. This was not so in Boeing.
10. Judge (to Plaintiff’s counsel): Mr. Burger?
11. Mr. Burger for Plaintiff (CATO): Uhh. Well, as you know, Your Honor, Boeing, is not the only case we cite in
our brief.
12. Della Street (whispering into Perry’s ear): Brilliant job, Perry!
Figure 2: Sample Dialectic Argument in CATO-Dial

During the first six sessions, the experimental and
control groups were treated identically. In Sessions 1 to 4,
both groups of students familiarized themselves with the
factor based representation system and the CATO
environment. In Sessions 5 and 6 all students learned how to
use the Argument Maker tools.
The control group and experimental group were treated
differently in Sessions 7 and 8. These two sessions focused
on teaching students how to distinguish cases. During both
Sessions 7 and 8, students were expected to complete eight
pair-wise case comparisons involving distinguishing. The
eight pairs of cases were the same in both groups. The only
difference was the manner in which CATO and CATO-Dial
taught the lesson. The experimental group worked with
CATO-Dial’s simulated courtroom dialogues like that in
Figure 2. The control group worked with the original CATO
didactic explanations.
After Session 8, all students took a post-test comprising
six questions. The first three questions were worded
identically to the pre-test questions, but Questions 1 and 2
involved a different problem and cases. The other three
questions tested the following transfer skills:
•
•

•

responses to the three pre-test questions were summed, and
the mean response of students in the experimental group
was compared to that of students in the control group, using
a two-tailed t-test. Results showed no statistically significant
difference between the two groups. Since the students were
paired with different partners across sessions, we used the
individual student rather than the pair as the unit of analysis
for both pre-test and post-test analyses.
Post-test scores were also analyzed for the 22 students
who provided both pre-test and post-test data. A two-tailed
t-test indicated no significant difference in the mean posttest scores of the experimental and control groups with
respect to the first five questions. For question 6, however,
the mean post-test score of the experimental group was
significantly higher than that of the control group (t (7.1)
=3.87, p < .05, effect size of 1.57). 2 On question 5, the mean
post-test score of the experimental group was nearly
statistically significantly higher than that of the control
group (t (20) = 1.39, p =0.052, effect size of 0.62). While
the difference was not significant the experimental group
scored substantially higher on question 4 with an effect size
of 0.88.

Question 4 put students in a new role – instead of
making arguments they critiqued an argument.
Question 5 tested students' recall of a particular problem
situation they had encountered in the instruction. This
problem had been used extensively in the teaching
sessions as a basis of the argumentation lessons. Students
were asked to make and respond to an argument about
the problem, which they had to recall from memory, by
analogizing it to and distinguishing it from a new case
presented with the question.
Question 6 tested students’ ability to apply skills they
had learned to an unfamiliar new domain: the copyright
law doctrine of Fair Use. As such, this question is a
telling measure of their ability to distinguish cases.

The director of the University of Pittsburgh School of
Law legal writing program graded all but one of the pre-test
and post-test questions. The grader was provided a one-page
summary of grading criteria and instructed to assign a
gestalt grade (between 1 and 10) to each question. He was
blind as to the identity of the test writers, but did know
which were pre-tests and which were post-tests. The
exception was Question 5, the recall question, for which we
developed an objective grading scheme. Students were
awarded a maximum of ten possible points on the basis of
how many of the factors in the problem they referred to in
their argument.

Analysis
Post-test data were available for only 22 of the 45
students, 15 in the experimental group and 7 in the control
group. The rest of the subjects either dropped out before the
end of the experiment or did not complete enough work in
Sessions 7 and 8, the only sessions involving differential
treatment of the two groups.
Pre-test scores were analyzed for the 22 students, who
provided both pre-test and post-test data. For each student,

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q5

Q6

Experimental

7.07

6.2

7.4

4.6

6.47

6.4

Control

6.71

6.29

8

2.14

5.14

2

Figure 3: Comparison of Mean Post-Test Scores

Discussion and Conclusion
Our hypothesis was that students would learn the skill
of distinguishing better by engaging in simulated dialectical
argument than in interactive didactic explanation. The data
confirmed our hypothesis in an interesting way. Whereas
dialectic argument was not more effective than didactic
explanation in teaching argumentation skills, it was more
effective in helping students transfer the skills they learned
to new tasks and significantly better in helping students
apply the skills to an unfamiliar legal domain. Dialectical
argument may have induced students to construct a schema
for making and responding to arguments, resulting in deeper
knowledge and thus better performance on transfer skills.
Experimental students also appeared to have a better
understanding of the importance that context plays in the
task of finding distinctions. The grader also evaluated the
2

Degrees of freedom for this test were reduced from 20 because Levene’s
test for equality of variances indicated that the variances of scores in the
experimental and control groups were not equal.

answers in terms of four grading criteria, each involving a
simple binary positive-or-negative scale. Two differences
emerged. Students in the experimental group were more
often rated positively on the criteria “Avoids making
opponent’s argument” and “Avoids errors regarding which
side strengths favor”. These results support the conclusion
that the experimental manipulation helped students to learn
better when a difference is a distinction.
It is intriguing that the rather superficial transformation
from CATO to CATO-Dial in the presentation of the lesson
on distinguishing had such a dramatic benefit. After all,
both programs presented the same basic information. The
critical difference, we believe, is that CATO-Dial’s
dialectical argument simulation provided that information in
a more useful way. The dialectical argument offers several
potential benefits, any or all of which may explain the
observed difference in transfer scores.
Students may have found the increased level of
involvement and the competitive element in the courtroom
simulation motivating and thus conducive to paying
attention and learning.
Furthermore students may have found it easier to
understand the program’s responses in CATO-Dial than in
CATO. It is awkward for CATO to explain the quality of a
student’s response by example. The dialectical argument
simulation, by contrast, provides a more natural context for
illustrating the effect in an ongoing dialogue regarding a
student’s choices. Students in the experimental group did
report finding the dialogues somewhat (though not
significantly) more helpful than did those in the control
group. When asked, “When CATO did provide instructional
feedback, how helpful was it?”, the CATO-Dial students
rated it as more helpful than did the CATO students (Ms =
6.76 and 5.56 out of 10, respectively).
Role -playing in a courtroom argument, with its
cognitive and emotional expectations, may also be
important. Courtroom simulation explicitly prompts the
student. An interactive style of human tutoring, in which
tutors prompted students, supported learning even when
tutors did not provide explanations and feedback (Chi et al.,
2001). Having been prompted to participate, students may
have been more likely to argue the merits to themselves, a
task cognitively similar to self-explanation (Chi et al.,
1989). Dialectical argument may also induce a student to
feel worse about making a mistake than does didactic
explanation. If so, students are more likely to pay attention
and to care about learning in the former context. Roleplaying may also induce students to compare the cases more
carefully, helping the transition from shallow to deeper
knowledge. In a recent investigation, business school
students who compared cases in a study phase were three
times more likely to transfer the cases’ implicit principle to
a new application than were those who simply read the
cases for the purposes of advice-giving (Thompson et al.
2000).
The results suggest that the CATO-Dial approach is
potentially quite valuable. Since laws change, law

professors value students’ ability to transfer skills. Our
subsequent work will focus on converting as much of the
CATO curriculum as possible to a dialectical format.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant No. 9720359. We thank
Professor Kevin Deasy, University of Pittsburgh School of
Law, for his many contributions to this work.

References
Aleven, V. (1997) Teaching Case-Based Argumentation
Through a Model and Examples, Ph.D. Diss., U. Pgh,
LRDC.
Aleven, V. & Ashley, K.D. (1997) “Teaching Case-Based
Argumentation Through a Model and Examples”. In
Proc. 8th World Conf. AI in Education Society. pp. 87-94.
IOS Press: Amsterdam. Kobe, Japan. August.
Ashley, K.D., (1990). Modeling Legal Argument:
Reasoning with Cases and Hypotheticals. The MIT Press:
Cambridge.
Carbonell, J.R. (1970). “AI in CAI: An Artificial
Intelligence approach to Computer Aided Instruction”.
IEEE Transactions on Man Machine Systems 11(4) 190202.
Chi, Michelene T.H., S. Silver, H. Jeong, T. Yamauchi, &
R. Hausmann (2001) “Learning From Human Tutoring”
in Cognitive Science, Vol. 25, pp. 471-533.
Chi, Bassock, Lewis, Reimann & Glaser (1989), “Self
Explanations: How students study and use examples in
learning to solve problems”, Cognitive Science, 5,145-182
Collins, A. & Stevens, A. L. (1982). “Goals and Strategies
of inquiry Teachers”. In Advances In Instructional
Psychology, R Glaser (ed.) pp. 65-119. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Retalis, S., H. Pain & M. Haggith. (1996) “Arguing with the
Devil; Teaching in Controversial Domains”. In Intelligent
Tutoring Systems, 3d Int’l Conf., ITS ’96, 659-667.
Berlin: Springer.
Rose C. P., J. D. Moore, K. VanLehn, D. Allbritton. (2001)
“A Comparative Evaluation of Socratic versus Didactic
Tutoring”, 2001 LRDC Tech Report LRDC-BEE-1.
Thompson, L., Gentner, D. and Loewenstein, J. (2000)
“Avoiding Missed Opportunities in Managerial Life.” in
Org. Behavior and Human Decision Proc., 82, No. 1. May.
pp. 60-75.

