UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Consciousness in Second Language Acquisition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5d25b3t2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Torlakovic, Edina
Brook, Andrew

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Consciousness in Second Language Acquisition
Edina Torlakovi! (edina_@scs.carleton.ca)
Institute of Interdisciplinary Studies; Cognitive Science, Carleton University
2214 Dunton Tower, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, ON
K1S 5B6

Andrew Brook (abrook@ccs.carleton.ca)
Institute of Interdisciplinary Studies; Cognitive Science, Carleton University
2216 Dunton Tower, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, ON
K1S 5B6

Abstract
In this paper we argue that in order to resolve the controversy in
Second Language Acquisition research concerning whether or
not direct instruction is needed for second language acquisition,
we need to use a broader sense of ‘consciousness’ than is used
by second language researchers. Block's classification of
consciousness into Access and Phenomenal consciousness
seems promising. We associate Phenomenal consciousness with
explicit knowledge and suggest that explicit instruction is
useful. It enhances linguistic competence.

Introduction
This paper addresses a question that is of great importance for
Second Language Acquisition (SLA) research. The question is
'what should the role of consciousness in second language (L2)
acquisition be?' It is important to answer this question in order
to resolve one of the biggest debates in the field of SLA,
namely whether or not direct instruction is necessary or even
valuable in L2 acquisition.
SLA researchers interested in consciousness should start by
considering what others have to say about it. This is necessary
to develop a comprehensive picture of consciousness. The
debate in SLA needs to be informed by an adequate notion of
what consciousness is. Only in this way can we reach an
adequate view about its role.
One place to start is to consider what is said about
consciousness in philosophy. We will start by comparing the
different definitions of consciousness used by SLA researchers
and by philosophers. Next we will introduce the controversy
over whether L2 learners need to be conscious of grammar
rules to learn the target language. Then we will examine
Block’s well-known distinction between access (A)
consciousness and phenomenal (P) consciousness and where
language, or more specifically second language, fits into this
categorization. With this, we might be one step closer to
understanding the role of consciousness in L2
learning/acquisition.

Issues and Positions
Definition(s) of Consciousness
How do SLA theorists and philosophers think about
consciousness? As it turns out, quite differently. Let us look
at some of the similarities and differences.
When SLA theorists talk about consciousness, they use the
term in a quite narrow sense. Schmidt (1995), for example,
points out that there are three different senses of the term
'consciousness' as it is used in SLA theory: levels of
perception, noticing, and understanding. By contrast,
philosophers have a broader understanding of the term.
According to Clark (2001), the possibilities include
wakefulness, self-awareness, availability for verbal report,
availability for control of intentional action, and qualia.
To determine if all these terms are discussing the same,
complex entity, they need to be further defined. If one
desires to apply concepts of one discipline to another
(philosophy to SLA in this case), this is something that we
need to know.
According to Schmidt, ‘levels of perception’ could be
defined as levels of a process of obtaining and perhaps
processing information. Schmidt defines ‘noticing’ as
rehearsal in short-term memory, while by ‘understanding’ he
refers to rule understanding, i.e., grasping the meanings of
rules and becoming thoroughly familiar with them.
Definitions of the terms from Clark's list of possibilities
might go as follows: wakefulness is defined as a state in
which we are sensitive to our surroundings and in which we
can process incoming information and respond to it
appropriately. Self-awareness he defines as a capacity to
represent ourselves and to be conscious of ourselves 'as
distinct agents'. Availability for verbal report is the capacity
to access our own inner states and to describe them using
natural language, while qualia concerns how things feel to us.
From the above, one can conclude that SLA theorists take
consciousness to be something narrower than philosophers

believe. Perception and wakefulness may refer to (or be
contained in) the same aspect of consciousness, while noticing
and understanding could be seen as part of availability for
verbal report. However, self-awareness and qualia are missing
from the SLA picture of consciousness. Yet in second
language learning (SLL) and acquisition, self-awareness and
qualia may play an important role. It is well known that
language is closely associated with consciousness in the
broader understanding that we find in Clark and other
philosophers. If so, this broader notion of consciousness needs
to be considered by SLA theorists. We will return to this
topic. For now, let us simply note that SLA researchers use a
narrow notion of consciousness.1

Consciousness and SLA
Next we want to consider a group of related issues: the role of
consciousness in various SLA theories the debate in SLA and
L2 pedagogy about its proper role, the role of Universal
Grammar (UG) in L2 acquisition , and the respective roles of
implicit and explicit learning in SLA.
According to Robinson (1996), current debate in SLA is
centred on the role of consciousness in L2 development. This
controversy is centred in turn on the question of whether or not
grammatical instruction is effective for L2 acquisition and if so
what kind of grammatical instruction is best. There are
researchers who argue that grammatical instruction has only
minimal effect on L2 acquisition, Krashen (1981) for example.
According to him, L2 development is largely an unconscious
process. Krashen does allow that there are two processes
involved in L2 development, a conscious process of learning
and an unconscious process of acquisition. The conscious
process of learning is a system based on rules and their
application, while the unconscious process of acquisition is a
system responsible for language production. According to
Krashen, conscious learning is limited to a small set of simple
rule-governed domains. By contrast, development of the much
more substantial acquired system is fostered by avoiding
instruction and the provision of L2 rules. In his view, learners
only have to be exposed to comprehensible language input in
order to acquire grammar.
On the other side, there are researchers who argue that
comprehensible input alone is not enough for optimal
acquisition of the different aspects of grammar and that
conscious grammatical instruction is necessary if learners are
to have the data they need to acquire grammar (Strozer, 1994).
In particular, Schmidt (1994) argues that consciousness of
input at the level of noticing is a necessary condition for L2
development. Many other researchers support this view. They
use terms such as focus-on-form (Long, 1994), consciousness-

1

It is important to mention that the above are not the only
definitions of consciousness in either discipline. However, they
are the most common ones.

raising (Ellis 1993, Fotos and Ellis 1991, Rutherford, 1987),
and input-enhancement (Sharwood Smith, 1991). In one way
or another, all of these terms are about directing learners'
attention to grammatical form in order to help them
internalize the L2 system. According to these researchers,
teaching should include opportunities for learners to focus on
form and consciously notice features of the L2 they are
learning.

Universal Grammar and L2 Acquisition
It might appear that because there is little or no need for
conscious instruction in L1 acquisition, there is little or no
need for it in L2 acquisition either. However, it is well known
that the two processes are quite different from one another.
Let us compare the two in terms of the theory of Universal
Grammar (UG).
According to Chomsky (1980), all of us have an innate
capacity for language and we cannot chose not to learn
language. We have a mental faculty for language that simply
‘grows’ as any other organ of our body grows. All that we
need is a triggering cause, namely, a language environment.
For L1 acquisition, little or no direct teaching is needed.
According to Flynn (1996), the theory of UG does not
make any direct claims about L2 acquisition. However, it is
important to know whether or not L2 learners in the process
of L2 acquisition have access to UG. Ellis (1997) points out
that different theories deal with this issue differently.
However, there is some good evidence for the a Partial
Access Hypothesis, which holds that only the parameters of
UG that are common to L1 and L2 are accessible to an L2
learner. According to this view, an L2 learner needs to learn
everything else by using general problem-solving strategies.
If this is so, there is clearly room for direct conscious
instruction in L2 learning.

Explicit and Implicit Knowledge and SLA
It is obvious that in L2 acquisition, both explicit and
implicit learning are present. But that is not the same thing as
direct conscious instruction being necessary for L2 learning.
Nor does it say anything about the effects of each type of
learning. So let us look these two kinds of learning and their
connection(s) to consciousness. Before we enter this inquiry,
let us define the two types of knowledge that these two types
of learning yield.
According to Ellis, explicit knowledge is “the L2
knowledge of which a learner is aware and can verbalize on
request”, while the implicit knowledge is “the L2 knowledge
of which a learner is unaware and therefore cannot verbalize.”
(Ellis, 1997,139). We can report explicit knowledge, while
we are not aware of implicit knowledge.
Hulstijn and Graaff (1994) attempt to determine to what

extent SLA and acquisition of implicit knowledge can be
assisted by explicit learning (instruction). According to them,
learning varies from spontaneous discovery by a learner to
explicit instructions by a teacher. They argue that in fluent
speakers, knowledge of L2 is mostly implicit. That, however,
does not settle the question of whether, before native-like
fluency in L2 is reached, there is a need for explicit instruction.

of A-consciousness is representational. The latter enters into
reasoning, behavioural control, etc. The second difference is
that A-consciousness is defined in terms of functions in a
cognitive system while P-consciousness is not. The third
difference is in the paradigms of each type of consciousness.
The paradigmatic cases of P-consciousness are sensations,
while those of A-consciousness are propositional attitudes.

There are two positions concerning the question, ‘how fluent
can a speaker become without explicit knowledge?’. They are
the Noninterface Position, which argues that implicit
knowledge is not influenced by explicit knowledge, and the
Interface position, which urges that the acquisition of implicit
knowledge may be influenced by explicit knowledge. The
Interface Position is divided into a Strong-Interface Position
and a Weak-Interface Position. According to the Strong
Position, explicit knowledge becomes implicit knowledge
through practice. This position is derived from skill
acquisition theory; L2 acquisition is seen as the automatization
of the application of explicit grammar rules. According to the
Weak Position, explicit knowledge only aids the acquisition of
implicit knowledge. If a learner is ready for the new
knowledge, his conscious knowledge will become implicit.
Application of implicitly knowledge can merely be improved
through explicit instruction (Ellis, 1993).

As for the relationship between A-consciousness and Pconsciousness, Block argues that even though Aconsciousness and P-consciousness are separate entities, they
do interact, influence one another and might even be the
product of one another. A P-consciousness change in what is
figure and what is ground, for example, might have functional
effects on what one comes to believe or do. However, lack of
one type of consciousness does not guarantee lack of the
other. We will return to the issue of whether it is possible to
have A-consciousness without P-consciousness or vice-versa.

Let us now turn to philosophical definition(s) of
consciousness.

Consciousness in Philosophy
The initial task of this paper was to consider what philosophers
have to say about consciousness in order to search for
conceptual issues that may ease and perhaps resolve the
current debate in SLA related to the role of consciousness in
L2 learning and/or acquisition. Let us return to the issue of
what philosophers have to say about consciousness.
Block (1999) introduced an interesting categorization of
consciousness into A-consciousness and phenomenal Pconsciousness.
Block argues that A-consciousness is
informational processing and control of thought and action.
According to him "a state is A-conscious if it is poised for
direct control of thought and action, .. for free use in reasoning
and for direct ‘rational’ control of action and speech." (Block,
1999). By contrast, he defines P-consciousness as what we
see, smell, taste, and feel. According to Block, Pconsciousness is what it is like to have sensations, feelings,
perceptions, thoughts, wants, and emotions: “what makes a
state phenomenally conscious is that there is something it is
like to be in that state” (Block, 1999). P-consciousness is what
we ordinarily call experience.
Block points out that there are three main differences
between A-consciousness and P-consciousness. The first
difference concerns content. P-consciousness content is
phenomenal (it is like something to have it) while the content

Let us now examine how L2 acquisition and language in
general fit into the Block’s distinction.

Philosophical Views of Consciousness and
the Issue of Conscious Instruction
So far we have laid out the controversy in SLA on the
question of whether L2 learners benefit from direct grammar
instruction and we had looked at a philosophical view of
consciousness. Let us now try to connect the two. The hope
is that philosophy can help us to ease this controversy. How
does L2 acquisition fit into the distinction between Aconsciousness and P-consciousness?
A-consciousness plays an important role in reasoning and
information processing. It is closely related to 'knowing how
to do something'. P-consciousness, by contrast, is 'it being
like something to be in some state’. And, as we saw, however,
different these two notions are, the two kinds of
consciousness interact. In particular, one can be P-conscious
of knowing how to do something. Similarly, the way
something feels to you can make a difference to cognitive
functioning. What we now need to consider is how the two
types of consciousness relate to our knowledge of language,
in particular our knowledge of the syntactic structure of the
language.
Let us introduce Chomsky’s distinction between
competence and performance. Competence refers to a
speaker’s knowledge of the language while performance is
the actual use of language and reflects not only competence
but also such other factors as ability to utilize competence,
time constraints, and so on. Performance is the actual use of
language in different situations, how we actually speak, use,
or manipulate language. Linguistic performance is part of a
lot of A-consciousness. Competence, ‘ speaker’s/hearer’s
knowledge of language', is not tied in the same way to Pconsciousness. Most of our competence is in this sense

unconscious. Still, there is a relationship between competence
and P-consciousness, as we will see. To bring out this
relationship, let us connect A-consciousness and Pconsciousness to implicit and explicit knowledge. We will
argue that P-consciousness is similar, if not identical, to
explicit knowledge and that explicit instruction which eases the
acquisition of implicit knowledge enhances competence.
Start with UG. If UG is innate, it is not dependent on Pconsciousness. What is developed after the triggering effect of
the language environment is at least A-consciousness, ‘poised
for control of thought and action’. A-consciousness of
language is not present at birth. A-consciousness of language
is indirectly influenced by P-consciousness of language with
which it interacts even during the developmental phase
because children not only come to use language, it is like
something for them to have language (in the usual, P-conscious
sense of the term, they are conscious of the language they
know), and this consciousness has effects on how they use
language. The two types of consciousness of language develop
roughly simultaneously. However, that does not show yet that
P-consciousness of language enhances any of acquisition,
competence, or performance.
Time to bring L2 acquisition back onto the stage. Does Pconsciousness have a special role to play in it? We think it
does. The Partial Access Hypothesis introduced earlier in this
paper shows why. If an L2 learner needs to learn all the
parameters of UG that are not common to his L1 and L2, that
means that the parameters peculiar to his L2 are not included
in his current linguistic competence. If all UG parameters are
present at birth, then the UG parameters peculiar to the L2
were lost at some point during or after the process of L1
acquisition. These missing parameters is a major difference
between L1 and L2 acquisition. Put in terms of the language of
consciousness, the parameters that have dropped out are in
neither the subject’s A-consciousness or P-consciousness of
language. (An implication of this is that, not surprisingly,
consciousness of language is language specific.)
We should agree with Krashen when he points out that there
are two different processes in L2 development, namely
learning and acquisition. However, it does not follow that
acquisition is fostered by avoiding explicit instruction. Recall
that in L2 learning, both implicit and explicit knowledge are
present. It is plausible to suggest that if a required piece of
linguistic competence is no longer part of the current
competence of a learner, then he will need to learn it explicitly
in order to (re)gain an implicit, automatized ability to use it
again.
Earlier in this paper Ellis’ definition of explicit and implicit
knowledge with regard to L2 learners was accepted. However,
the definition of the two types of knowledge needs to be
modified in terms of P-consciousness and A-consciousness of
language. Explicit knowledge is something that a learner is Pconscious of and can verbalize on request. By contrast, though

some implicit knowledge is A-conscious, it is by definition
never P-conscious. Even though we are not P-conscious of
our implicit knowledge, the latter can be influenced by
explicit, P-conscious knowledge, just because Aconsciousness can be influenced by P-consciousness.
Now that we have presented arguments that linguistic
performance consists (at least often, maybe always) in Aconsciousness of language and P-consciousness of language
can enhance implicit, A-conscious competence and
performance, let us now look at their interaction in a bit more
detail, to try to see where explicit instruction fits.
We presented the Interface Positions earlier in this paper
and said that according to the Weak Position explicit
instruction in L2 directly influences explicit knowledge which
aids the acquisition of implicit knowledge. Given the
connection between A-consciousness of language and implicit
knowledge and P-consciousness and explicit knowledge, the
Weak Position and Block’s (1999) view that P-consciousness
can influence A-consciousness are in line with one another.
In L1 acquisition, there is no need for direct instruction.
During this process implicit knowledge of language,
including A-consciousness of it and P-consciousness or
explicit knowledge of language are present. On the one hand,
native speakers can always judge whether on not a sentence
is grammatically acceptable. However, in most cases they
cannot explain why. They have explicit knowledge of the
sentence’s grammaticality, only implicit knowledge of why.
In the case of L2 learners, the situation is quite the opposite.
If they can judge the grammaticality of a sentence, they can
also cite the relevant rules. Implicit knowledge of rules plays
little role since the necessary competence is not innate and yet
the acquisition process has not yet rendered it automatic and
implicit. Indeed, it is not rare that an L2 learner is capable of
explicitly spelling out a grammatical rule of his L2 and yet
cannot apply it in his spoken or written L2 productions. To
sum up, explicit grammar instruction, essential
for
acquisition of explicit knowledge (P-consciousness), can also
enhance implicit linguistic competence and performance. For
that reason, it should be used in L2 teaching (see Figure 1).

• P-consciousness of language can enhance linguistic
competence by improving implicit knowledge.
The relationship of all this to explicit instruction in L2
teaching is as follows. Explicit instruction influences explicit
knowledge, obviously. Having explicit knowledge means
being P-conscious. But having explicit knowledge or Pconsciousness of language can influence one's Aconsciousness of it. In this way, P-consciousness can enhance
L2 competence and implicit knowledge (see figure 1).
This paper tries to provide a theoretical base for the value
of explicit grammar instruction in L2 training. What needs to
be examined next is the form of the instruction. One of us
has pointed out elsewhere that instruction in grammar should
take the form of task-based, form-focussed instruction that
contains both positive and negative evidence (Torlakovi!,
2001).
Figure 1: Indirect effect of explicit instruction in L2 on
linguistic competence

Conclusion
In this paper we examined an important question for SLA
theory, namely, the role of consciousness in L2 acquisition.
This question was examined in order to determine whether or
not explicit instruction in grammar is advantageous during this
process.
We first compared the definitions of consciousness accepted
in the two disciplines and concluded that perhaps SLA
theorists need to consider consciousness in a broader sense
than they do.
We next looked at how different SLA theories view the role
of consciousness and we examined the controversy in SLA
theory concerning the value of explicit instruction in grammar.
In this connection, we paid special attention to the role of UG
in L2 acquisition and role of implicit and explicit knowledge
in use of UG.
This led us to Block's distinction between A-consciousness
and P-consciousness. We examined how L2 acquisition and
language in general fit this categorization. We suggested the
following:
• linguistic performance is a form of A-consciousness, often
at least,
• subjects can be both A-conscious and P-conscious of
language, including UG,
• A-consciousness of language can be language specific,
• A-consciousness of language is a form of implicit
knowledge, while P-consciousness of language is explicit
knowledge,
• P-consciousness can influence A-consciousness, and,

References
Block N. (1999). On a Confusion About a Function of
Consciousness. In N. Block, O. Flanagan, and G. Guzeldere
(eds.), The Nature of Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 375-416.
Burge , T. (1999). Two Kinds of Consciousness. In N.
Block, O. Flanagan, and G. Guzeldere (eds.), The Nature of
Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 427-434.
Clark, A. (2001). Mindware: An Introduction to the
Philosophy of Cognitive Science. Oxford, Oxford
University Press.
Chomsky, N. 1980. Rules and Representations. The
Behavioral and Brain Sciences. 3. 1-61.
Ellis, R. The Structural Syllabus and Second Language
Acquisition. TESOL Quarterly. 27. 91-113.
Ellis. R. 1997. Second Language Acquisition. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Flynn, S. 1996. Parameter Setting Approach. In Ritchie, W.
and T. Bhatia. Handbook of Second Language Acquisition.
San Diego: Academic Press.
Fotos, S., & Ellis, R. (1991). Communicating About
Grammar; A Task-based Approach. TESOL Quarterly, 25,
87-112.
Hulstijn, J. H. and R. Graaff. 1994. Under What Conditions
Does Explicit Knowledge of a Second Language
Facilitate the Acquisition of Implicit Knowledge. Aila
Review. 11, 97-113.
Jackson, F. (1999). What Mary Didn't Know. In N. Block,
O. Flanagan, and G. Guzeldere (eds.), The Nature of
Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 567-570.
Krashen, S. (1981). Second Language Acquisition and
Second Language Learning. Oxford: Pergamon Press.

Robinson, P. (1996). Consciousness, Rules, and Instructed
Second Language Acquisiton: Theoretical Studies in Second
Language Acquisition. New York: Peter Lang Publishing Inc.
Rutherford, W. (1987). Second Language Grammar:
Learning and Teaching. London, New York: Longman.
Schmidt, R. (1995). Consciousness and Foreign Language:
A Tutorial on the Role of Attention and Awareness in
Learning. In R. Schmidt (ed.), Attention and Awareness in
Foreign Language Teaching and Learning, pp. 12-55.
University of Hawaii at Manoa: Second Language Teaching
and Curriculum Center Technical Report # 9.
Schmidt, R. 1994. Deconstruction Consciousness in Search
of Useful Definition for Applied Linguistics. Aila Review.
11.11-26.
Sharwood Smith, M. (1991). Speaking to Many Minds: On
the Relevance of Different Types of Language Information for
the L2 Learner. Second Language Research, 7. 118-132.
Strozer, J. 1994. Language Acquisition After Puberty.
Washington: Georgetown University Press.
Torlakovi!, E. (2001). Application of a CALL System in the
Acquisition of Adverbs in English. Carleton University, MA
thesis.

