The Quality of Test Context and Contra-evidence as a Moderating Factor
in the Belief Revision Process
Kristien Dieussaert (kristien.dieussaert@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
University of Leuven, Department of Psychology
Tiensestraat 102, Leuven, Belgium

Walter Schaeken (walter.schaeken@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
University of Leuven, Department of Psychology
Tiensestraat 102, Leuven, Belgium

Gery d’ydewalle (gery.dydewalle@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
University of Leuven, Department of Psychology
Tiensestraat 102, Leuven, Belgium
Abstract
In this study, we describe the influences of qualitative
changes to the reasoning problem on the reasoning
process. The first manipulation is the quality of the test
context: A rule is learned in a certain context and
contradicted in another. The belief in the rule is then
measured in the learning context, the contradictory
context, and a new context. The second manipulation is
the quality of contradiction: The contradictory rule can
neutralize or inverse the learned rule. Both qualitative
changes influence the belief revision process.

Introduction
Research in Artificial Intelligence is often conducted
to develop systems that think/act rationally (or like
humans, depending on the approach). Minsky (1975)
was one of the first to point out the problem with
deductive systems, and from then on, several
researchers developed non-monotonic reasoning
systems (for an overview, see Brewka, Dix, &
Konolidge, 1997).
While these systems can be very interesting from the
viewpoint of an engineer, Rips (1994) mentions two
main reasons why these nonmonotonic logics are less
than ideal for cognitive purposes: They do not lend
themselves to simple implementations (higher order
logics are incomplete) and they do not seem to reflect
the deliberations that actually underlie human reasoning
with defaults. He (1994, p. 299) stated: “For purposes
of philosophy (and perhaps AI), we need normative
rules about how to change our minds in the face of
conflicting evidence; for purposes of psychology, we
also need descriptive information on how people deal
with the same sort of conflict.”
Elio and Pelletier (1997) wrote a pioneering article on
this topic. In their experiments, they first presented
participants with a conditional premise and a
categorical premise that affirmed the antecedent [or
denied the consequent]. Then, they added a third piece
of information, which conflicted with the conditional

and the categorical premise. This piece of information
was a categorical premise denying the consequent [or
affirming the antecedent]. The three pieces of
information together are in contradiction with the valid
Modus Ponens [Modus Tollens] argument: If A then B,
A, thus B [If A then B, not-B thus not-A].
Participants were asked to resolve the contradiction
by rejecting one of the two first pieces of information.
Elio and Pelletier (1997) observed that participants
chose to disbelieve the conditional premise rather than
the categorical one when resolving the contradiction.
Their results were refined by Dieussaert, Schaeken,
De Neys, and d’Ydewalle (2000) and by Politzer and
Carles (2001). They found that the initial belief in the
conditional premise influenced the belief revision
choice that participants prefer to make. When
participants had a strong belief in the conditional
premise, the preferred to reject (doubt) the categorical
premise, when the conflicting information is added.
When participants had a weak belief in the conditional
premise, the results of Elio and Pelletier (1997) were
confirmed: In this case, participants prefer to reject
(doubt) the conditional premise.
This shows that it is important in belief revision
research to be aware of the belief state participants hold
before conflicting information is presented. Therefore,
we conducted a measure of the initial belief state in the
following experiments, before adding conflicting
information.
The following experiments were inspired by research
in the field of conditioning. Among others, Bouton
(e.g., 1988, 1994) showed that the extinction of
behavior does not necessarily means the rejection of a
learned rule. One of the phenomena that confirm this
hypothesis is ‘renewal’: When a behavior is learned in
context A, and extinguished in context B, the behavior
might show up again with a new test in context A.
Bouton explains this phenomenon as follows:
Individuals learn a dominant rule and exceptions to this
rule in certain contexts (see also: Holyoak, Koh, &

Nisbett, 1989). As a consequence, a stimulus that has
lost his value as a reinforcer, becomes an ambiguous
stimulus from which the specific value is determined by
the context. In other words, Bouton points to the
importance of the presence of a certain context as an
indicator of the belief in the (conditional) rule when an
individual is confronted with conflicting information to
that rule. In the forthcoming experiments, we will also
work with context embedded situations, to gain more
insight in the relative value of the contra-evidence.
Another uniqueness of the present experiments is that
the participants’ belief state is measured by the
behavior they pose, and not by what they say their
belief is. We think it is as important to know how
individuals act on their beliefs, as it is to know how
they describe their beliefs. Moreover, De Neys,
Dieussaert, Schaeken, and d’Ydewalle (2000) found a
strong correspondence between what participants say
about their beliefs and how they actually act upon these
beliefs, in experiments comparable with the ones
presented below.
Briefly, on a technical level, the following
experiments are designed as follows: first, the initial
belief in a rule is tested. Then, contradictory evidence is
presented in a different context, and finally, the belief in
the rule is again evaluated by examining participants'
manifested behaviours. On the content level, the
experiments describe the influence of qualitative
changes to the reasoning problem on the belief revision
process.

Experiment 1: Pilot study
In this part, we describe a study that tests whether
formerly used instantiations of the quality of contraevidence were well chosen.
Before that, we explain the two hypotheses that are at
issue in this manuscript and we depict the important
role that the pilot study has regarding the second
hypothesis. Subsequently, we give a brief overview of
the content of the experiments.
Two hypotheses are evaluated in this manuscript. The
main hypothesis is that when a conditional rule is
acquired in a first context (A) and contradicted in a
second context (B), the belief in the conditional is not
affected by the contradictory information when tested in
the first context (A) or in a new context (C). Indeed, if
the rule acquired in the first context really is a dominant
rule, and if the conflicting information learned in a
second context is perceived as exceptional, one should
also apply the dominant rule in a new context.
A second hypothesis is that the quality of the
contradictory information plays a role in the belief
revision process. Bouton (1988) focused on the
extinction of learned rules. With extinction, a learned
rule is often only neutralized (e.g. food – no food). Our

hypothesis is that when the conflicting information has
a stronger impact (compare with: food – shock), this
may affect the belief revision process in a different
way. More precisely, we hypothesize that when the
contradictory information merely neutralizes the
acquired conditional rule, its effect on the belief
revision process is smaller than when it reverses the
acquired conditional rule. Or, in other words, we
suppose that when the acquired rule is reversed, this
might affect the final belief state tested in context A and
C anyway, despite the fact of a buffering context
element (B) when the contradictory information is
provided.
It is made very clear in the fore mentioned examples
that the absence of an appetitive stimulus (neutralizing)
is not the same as the presence of an aversive stimulus
(reversing). An adequate test of the second hypothesis
is only possible if both stimuli are well chosen.
In a former series of experiments (Dieussaert,
Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle, 2002), the manipulation of
the quality of the contra-evidence did not result in
significant differences, contrary to our second
hypothesis.
Before
drawing
any
theoretical
consequences from this finding, we examine whether
those instantiations were appropriately chosen. The
pilot study (Experiment 1) was set up to test this
hypothesis.
To convey a good understanding of this pilot study
and its consequences possible, we briefly describe the
content of the former experiments (Dieussaert et al.,
2002). The motivation behind the experiment is related
to that behind the conditioning experiments of Pineño,
Ortega, and Matute (2000). Participants are in a war
area, leading a rescue mission. They are told they
should rescue as many refugees as possible from a
building and they can do this by loading the refugees on
a truck. Importantly, they should only fill the truck with
refugees if the road is free of mines. They can learn
whether the road is safe because coloured lights
indicate it. Therefore, they should learn as fast as
possible the meaning of these lights.
The participants learn the meaning of the lights in a
first location (context), and then move to a second
location where they learn that the meaning of some
lights is reversed or neutralized. For example, a green
light in the first location might indicate that the road is
safe, while in the second location it indicates that the
road is mined (reversal) or that no information about the
road is available (neutralizing). Finally, they move to a
third location. At this location, identical or different
from one of the former contexts, the participants’ belief
regarding the meaning of the lights is examined.
In this pilot study (Experiment 1), we manipulate the
feedback that participants received in the test phase.
Three forms of feedback were distinguished: clearly

positive feedback, clearly negative feedback, and the
feedback ‘no information available’. The hypothesis is
that participants interpret the latter feedback as
negative.

Method
Participants. The 36 participants are candidate
students at the University of Leuven, Department of
Psychology and they participated as a partial fulfillment
of a course requirement. Each student was randomly
attributed to one of two groups (12 per group).
Design One variable was manipulated between
subjects: Feedback. The three levels of this variable
were manipulated in the test phase.
The dependent variable is the number of times
participants press on the space bar during a fixed time
interval when the cue light appears. The meaning of a
space bar press is that a person is put in the truck. Each
press is thus equivalent to the saving of one person.
This dependent variable is measured in the three phases
of the experiment: the confirmation phase (9 blocks),
the contradiction phase (9 blocks) and the test phase (4
blocks). This behavioral measure is taken as a measure
of belief state. The idea behind it is that the more the
participant believes that the road is free of mines, the
more persons (s)he will put in the truck.
Each block consists of four trials. A trial lasts four
seconds. During these four seconds, a colored light is
shown (green, blue, red or white). The sequence of the
lights is randomized within each block. Participants
learn the meaning of these lights (see below) by
pressing the spacebar. One of these lights is the cue
light, one is the neutral light and the other two do not
have a fixed meaning. Each light’s meaning is
counterbalanced between participants.
The first eight blocks are considered as learning
blocks; they are not included in the analysis. All
participants acquired a constant pressing level for the
cue light within these blocks. The cue light indicates a
safe road. The neutral light indicates that the road is
closed. The meaning of the other lights differs
randomly over blocks; they can indicate that the road is
mined, safe, or closed. The context is a location, which
we refer to as context A.
The confirmation phase consists of nine blocks. The
meaning of the lights is equal as in the learning blocks.
The context does not change either.
The contradiction phase consists of nine blocks.
Here, the cue light indicates a mined road. The neutral
light indicates that the road is closed. The meaning of
the other lights differs randomly over blocks; they can
indicate that the road is mined, safe or closed. The
context is a location, which we refer to as context B.
The test phase consists of four blocks. The test phase
always takes place in the same context as the
confirmation phase (A), but the feedback varies
between groups. For the ABA/+/ group, the message ‘n

persons saved’ is displayed after the cue light lit up in
the test phase, while for the ABA/-/ group and the ABA
group, the messages are ‘n persons died’ and ‘no
information available’, respectively. The neutral light
indicates that the road is closed. The meaning of the
other lights differs randomly over blocks; they can
indicate that the road is mined, safe, or closed.
Procedure The experiment was carried out
individually, on computer. All participants received the
same instructions. They were told to imagine that they
were in charge of a rescue mission. Refugees were
hiding in a building that could be attacked by the
enemy. Furthermore, these people can only be rescued
safely, by placing them in a truck, if the road is free of
mines. People are loaded in the truck by pressing the
spacebar. To know whether the road is safe, the
participants have to learn the meaning of the lights that
appear on each trial. Some of the four lights have a
fixed meaning (road safe, road mined, road closed);
other lights are distracters and have no fixed meaning.
The feedback they receive is ‘n persons saved’, ‘n
persons died’, or ‘road closed’.
Moreover, sometimes no information is available
about the situation of the road, so that the participants
do not know whether the persons they placed in the
truck were saved. It was stressed that they should only
press the spacebar continuously in case they were very
sure that the people would be saved in that trial.
Finally, they were told that different rescue missions
could take place and that a beep sound signaled the start
of a new mission. The importance of keeping in mind
the location (context) where the rescue mission took
place was stressed. They were told that the lights could
have different meanings in different locations.

Results
Table 1 shows the mean number of space bar presses,
(i.e., persons put in the truck) within a fixed time
interval. Neither in the confirmation phase, nor in the
contradiction phase, did we observe any differences
between the groups.
Table 1: Mean number of presses per phase per group.

ABA/-/
ABA
ABA/+/

CONFIR
MATION
PHASE
34.9
45.5
42.6

CONTRA
DICTION
PHASE
7.1
2.5
4.9

TEST
PHASE
14.9
27.5
39.1

An ANOVA shows a main effect of Feedback
(F(2,33) = 7.80, p<.005). The ABA group scores higher
in the test phase than the ABA/-/ group (F(1,33) = 4.20,
p<.05), but does not differ from the ABA/+/ group. The
latter group differs strongly from the ABA/-/ group
(F(1,33) = 15.58, p<.0005).

A more detailed planned comparison analysis on the
four blocks of the test phase moderates the picture. The
three groups do not differ from each other in the first
block. The ABA group differs significantly from the
ABA/-/ group in the second block (36.7 vs.9.4; F(1,33)
= 14.24), p<.001), but differs significantly from the
ABA/+/ group in the third and fourth block of the test
phase (17.8 vs. 42; F(1,33) = 10.54, p<.005 and 18.7
vs.36.3; F(1,33) = 5.51, p<.05, respectively). For these
last two blocks, no difference with the ABA/-/ group
could be observed.

Discussion
The feedback message ‘no information available’
does not function well as a neutralizer of a conditional
rule. The message is not interpreted as the absence of an
appetitive stimulus, but rather as the presence of an
aversive stimulus. Indeed, after a few trials the effect of
this feedback message does not differ from other
negative feedback, such as the message ‘n persons
died’.

Experiment 2
Now that we have shown that the message ‘no
information available’ is interpreted as negative rather
than as neutral feedback, we have good reasons to
believe that it was not appropriate to use this message
as an instantiation of the neutralizing level as was done
in former experiments (see: Dieussaert et al., 2002).
In the present experiment (Experiment 2), we test the
two hypotheses at issue, and focus on the more
appropriate qualitative manipulations of the contraevidence. Our main hypothesis is that a conditional rule
acquired in a first context functions as a dominant rule.
Conflicting information learned in a second context is
perceived as exceptional. Therefore, one should also
apply the dominant rule in a new context.
Our second hypothesis is that the quality of the
contradictory information plays a role in the belief
revision process. More precisely, we suppose that when
the acquired rule is reversed by contradictory evidence,
this might nonetheless affect the final belief state in
both context A and context C, despite the existence of
the buffering context element (B).

Method
Participants Seventy candidate students at the
University of Leuven, Department of Psychology,
participated in this experiment. They did not participate
in the former experiment and participated as a partial
fulfillment of a course requirement. Each student was
randomly assigned to one of six groups (11 in the ABBand ABC-Weak group; 12 in the other groups).
Design The independent variables, Test Context and
Contradiction Level, were manipulated between

subjects. We distinguish three instances of the variable
Test Context: The context in the test phase can be the
same as the context in the confirmation phase (ABA), it
can be the same as the context in the contradiction
phase (ABB) or it can differ from both (ABC).
The second independent variable, Contradiction
Level, consists of two instances: The contradiction can
be Strong, when the meaning of the rule is reversed, or
can be Weak, when the meaning of the rule is
neutralized.
The dependent variable is the same as in Experiment
1: The number of times participants press on the space
bar during a fixed time interval when the cue light
appears. Again, this variable is measured in the three
phases of the experiment: the confirmation phase (9
blocks), the contradiction phase (9 blocks) and the test
phase (4 blocks). This behavioral measure is taken as a
measure of belief state.
Each block consists of four trials. A trial lasts four
seconds. During these four seconds, a colored light is
shown (green, blue, red, or white). The sequence of the
lights is randomized within each block. Participants
learn the meaning of these lights (see below) by
pressing the spacebar. One of these lights is the cue
light, one is the neutral light and the other two do not
have a fixed meaning. Each lights’ meaning is
counterbalanced over the participants.
The first eight blocks are considered as learning
blocks; they are not included in the analysis. All
participants acquired a constant pressing level for the
cue light within these blocks. The cue light indicates a
safe road. The neutral light indicates that the road is
closed. The meaning of the other lights differs
randomly over blocks; they can indicate that the road is
mined, save, or closed. The context is a location, which
we refer to as context A.
The confirmation phase consists of nine blocks. The
meaning of the lights is equal as in the learning blocks.
The context does not change either.
The contradiction phase consists of nine blocks.
Here, the cue light indicates a mined road in the Strong
contradiction level. In the Weak contradiction level, the
message ‘road closed’ is displayed with a cue light. The
neutral light indicates that the road is closed. The
meaning of the other lights differs randomly over
blocks; they can indicate that the road is mined, save or
closed. The context is a location, which we refer to as
context B.
The test phase consists of four blocks. In this phase,
simultaneously with the cue light, the message ‘no
information is available’ is displayed. The neutral light
indicates that the road is closed. The meaning of the
other lights differs randomly over blocks; they can
indicate that the road is mined, save, or closed. The
context varies over groups: It can be the same as in the
confirmation phase (A), the same as in the contradiction
phase (B) or different from those two (C).
Procedure See Pilot study (Experiment 1)

Results
No differences between the groups could be observed
in the confirmation phase. This was expected since at
that moment no manipulation was introduced yet. In the
contradiction phase, the Strong groups scored lower
than the Weak groups, as we hypothesized (2.4 vs.7.6;
F(1,64) = 7.6, p<.01). Within the same level of
contradiction, no differences were observed. Table 2
shows the means for each group.

first and the second hypothesis are thus confirmed: The
belief is not influenced by the contradictory information
in context B, when this conflicting information
neutralizes the learned information, but it is influenced
when the conflicting information reverses the learned
information.
However, this conclusion would be false because for
each Contradiction level, the belief in the rule remains
low when it is tested in a new context (C). If the
‘dominant rule’ hypothesis were correct, the belief in
the new context should be as high as in the
confirmation phase, at least for the Weak level group.

Table 2: Mean number of presses per phase per group.

ABA
ABB
ABC
ABA
ABB
ABC

Strong
Strong
Strong
Weak
Weak
Weak

CONFIRMATION
PHASE
45.5
41.2
41.0
44.0
44.0
46.2

CONTRA
DICTION
PHASE
2.5
1.8
2.8
10.9
8.3
3.6

TEST
PHASE
27.5
2.1
2.5
40.4
7.3
2.9

An ANOVA shows a main effect of Test Context
(F(2,64)=73.21; p<.00001). The score of participants
from the ABA group (33.9) is higher than the score of
participants from the ABC group (2.69; F(1,64) =
118.36, p<.00001) and the ABB group (4.70; F(1,64) =
98.65, p<.00001).
The manipulation of Contradiction Level resulted in a
main difference between both levels (10.69 vs. 16.87
for the Strong and Weak contradictions respectively;
F(1,64) = 6.71, p<.05) in the expected direction.
Neither the ABB group, nor the ABC group has a
different score in the Strong and Weak group. The main
effect results from the difference in the ABA Strong
and Weak group (F(1,64) = 10.05, p<.005).
The ABA Weak score in the test phase does not differ
from it’s score in the confirmation phase, while the
ABA Strong score does (F(1,64) = 19.79, p<.00005).

Discussion
The effect of Contradiction Level is now adequately
obtained due to an appropriate choice of the
instantiation of the Weak level. Only the groups where
learning and test context are the same, are affected by
the Contradiction Level manipulation: When the
contradiction merely neutralizes (i.e., does not reverse)
a previously learned rule, no belief revision takes place.
When the contradiction is strong, the belief in the rule
decreases compared to the learning phase. This
observation is surprising given that the contradiction
takes place in another context, and could therefore be
easily neglected.
On a theoretical level, it would be tempting to
conclude that the rule acquired in context A can be
considered as a dominant rule. One could state that the

General Discussion
We manipulated two qualitative factors, Test Context
and Contradiction Level, to test their influence on the
belief revision process. Regarding Test Context, we
hypothesize that when a conditional rule is acquired in a
first context (A) and contradicted in a second context
(B), the belief in the conditional is not affected by the
contradictory information when subsequently tested in
the first context (A) or in a new context (C).
This hypothesis was inspired by Bouton (1988,
1994), who stated that an acquired rule is protected
against extinction when the conflicting information is
presented in another context than the learning context,
because individuals interpret the first rule as the
dominant rule and other one as the exception.
Regarding Contradiction level, the hypothesis was
that the quality of the contradictory information plays a
role in the belief revision process. We supposed that
when the acquired rule is reversed, this might affect the
final belief state tested in context A and C anyway,
despite the buffering context (B) of the contradictory
information.
The influence of the variable Test Context is clear:
Given the same learning (and confirmation) and test
context, less belief revision takes place after
contradictory information is presented in a different
context, than when learning and test contexts differ.
The influence of the variable Contradiction Level is
also clear. Given an appropriate choice of the absence
of an appetitive stimulus (road closed) and of the
presence of an aversive stimulus (road mined), the
manipulation resulted in a significant difference
between the Weak and the Strong level. This effect was
mainly due to the effect in the ABA group. For this
group, no belief revision took place when the
contradiction neutralized the learned rule, but belief
revision was observed when the contradiction inversed
the learned rule.
Although this effect on the ABA group confirms both
hypotheses, one should not be too optimistic about the
theoretical consequences because no such effect was

found for the ABC group, which plays an important
role as a control group.
Therefore, the results may put serious question marks
on the theoretical translation into ‘dominant’ and
‘exception’ rules. The results of these experiments may
indicate that different rules are learned within each
context.
However, from an economical viewpoint on the
learning process, this idea does not seem very fruitful.
Learning and applying conditional rules would become
a very heavy task if every new context implied a new
rule.
An interesting distinction, that was not made thus far,
could be between conditional rules that are learned (and
mostly applied) in one restricted context and
conditional rules that are learned (and applied) in a
wide range of different contexts.
Our experiments investigated the former situation. It
might be that in the latter situation rules that are
applicable in more contexts may become dominant
rules and rules that are only applicable in one or a few
contexts may become exceptional rules. Surely, this
idea needs supplementary testing.
In sum, the results of these experiments indicate that
the belief revision process is influenced by various
qualitative characteristics of the problems. More
precisely, this study shows the effect of contradictory
context and the level of contradiction. Although the
theoretical consequences of these results are not clear
for the time being, some handouts for further testing are
provided.
Sharing the considerations of Rips (1994) regarding
human reasoning, we conclude with an amendment to
his statement: For purposes of psychology, we need
more descriptive information and theoretical
explanations on how people deal with conflicting
information.

Acknowledgments
This study was carried out with support from the
IUAP/PAI P4 and from the Fund for Scientific
Research Flanders Project G.0239.02 .
We wish to thank the reviewers and Uri Hasson for
their helpful comments.

References
Bouton, M. E. (1988). Context and ambiguity in the
extinction of emotional learning: implication for
exposure therapy. Behavior Research and Therapy,
26, 137-149.
Bouton, M. E. (1994). Conditioning, remembering, and
forgetting. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Animal Behavior Processes, 20, 219-231.
Brewka, G., Dix, J., & Konolidge, K. (1997).
Nonmonotonic reasoning: an overview. Stanford:
CSLI Lecture Notes 73.

De Neys, W., Dieussaert, K., Schaeken, W. &
d’Ydewalle, G. (2000). Assessing belief revision in a
game context. Poster presentation, 4th International
Conference on Thinking, Durham.
Dieussaert, K., Schaeken, W., De Neys, W., &
d’Ydewalle, G. (2000). Initial belief state as predictor
of belief revision. Current Psychology of Cognition,
19, 277-288.
Dieussaert, K., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G.
(2002). A study of the belief revision process: The
value of context and contra-evidence (Tech. Rep.
N°291). Leuven, Belgium: University of Leuven,
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology.
Elio, R., & Pelletier, F. (1997). Belief change as
propositional update. Cognitive Science, 21 (4) , 419460.
Holyoak, K. J., Koh, K., & Nisbett, R.E. (1989). A
theory of conditioning: Inductive learning within
rule-based default hierarchies. Psychological Review,
96, 315-340.
Minsky, M. L. (1975). A framework for representing
knowledge. In Winston, P.H. (ed.), The psychology of
computer vision (pp. 211-277). NY: McGraw-Hill.
Politzer, G., & Carles, L. (2001). Belief revision and
uncertain reasoning. Thinking and Reasoning, 7(3),
217-234.
Pineño, O., Ortega, N., and Matute, H. (2000). The
relative activation of associations modulates
interference between elementally trained cues.
Learning and Motivation, 31 (2), 128-152.
Rips, L. J. (1994). The psychology of proof. Cambridge,
MA: Routledge.

