UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Pragmatics of Number

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5f1200ds

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Papafragou, Anna
Musolino, Julien

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Pragmatics of Number
Anna Papafragou (anna4@linc.cis.upenn.edu)
Institute for Research in Cognitive Science, 3401 Walnut Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA

Julien Musolino (musolino@indiana.edu)
Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences, 200 S. Jordan Avenue
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Abstract
In terms of their semantic and pragmatic properties,
number expressions (one, two, three…) have standardly
been considered similar to quantifiers (some, a few, all).
For instance, both kinds of expression form a scale:
typically, an assertion containing a weaker member of
the scale (Some/Two of the dwarfs loved Snow White)
can be used to implicate that the stronger term of the
scale doesn’t apply (Not all/No more than two of the
dwarfs loved Snow White). We report here results from
two experiments with young speakers of Modern Greek
which support the opposite conclusion: namely, that
number terms and quantifiers behave differently in terms
of the scalar inferences they support. We discuss
implications of these findings for linguistic theories of
the semantics/pragmatics of numerals, as well as for
developmental theories of the acquisition of number
words.

Introduction
In terms of their semantic and pragmatic properties,
number expressions (one, two, three…) have standardly
been considered as scalar expressions similar to
quantifiers (some, a few, all). Semantically, both
numerals and quantifiers have been assigned an ‘at
least’ meaning (Horn, 1972; Grice, 1989): on this
'minimalist' analysis, two means at least two and some
means some (and possibly all). Pragmatically, both
numerals and quantifiers can be used to give rise to socalled scalar implicatures. Such implicatures arise
when a speaker uses a weak member of the numerical
or quantificational scale in order to implicate that the
stronger term of the scale does not hold. For instance,
an utterance such as (1) is typically used to implicate
(2):
(1) Some/Two of the dwarfs loved Snow White.
(2) Not all/No more than two of the dwarfs loved
Snow White.
The derivation of scalar implicatures is generally
assumed to follow Gricean lines: for instance, if the
speaker knew that the more informative statement with
all (or a higher numeral) were true and relevant, other

things being equal, s/he would have preferred to use it.
The fact that s/he didn't offers grounds for assuming
that such a more informative statement isn't true.
More recently, several objections have been raised
to the view that the scalar semantic/pragmatic profile of
numerals is identical to that of quantifiers (Carston,
1985; 1998; Horn, 1992). First, it has been observed
that cardinals, but not 'inexact' quantifiers, can feature
in contextually induced reversals of scale: in (3), three
is used to communicate at most three:
(3) These houses are big enough for families with three
kids.
But it is not possible to use some in a similar way (e.g.
to implicate at most some). Second, number terms are
regularly used with an 'exact' interpretation in
mathematical statements (Two plus three makes five), a
fact which is hard to reconcile with an 'at least'
semantics for numerals (unless we assume that
cardinals are ambiguous). Third, the scalar properties of
numerals disappear under incorporation: a four-sided
figure has exactly (not at least) four sides. Finally,
approximation seems to work differently with
numerals: I have $300 is more likely to receive an 'at
least' interpretation than its unrounded counterpart I
have $300.17. For these and related reasons, it has been
proposed that cardinals are, in fact, distinct from other
scalar expressions. According to these proposals,
numerals do not have an 'at least' semantics upperbounded by a scalar implicature; rather, they are best
analyzed as underspecified among an 'at least', 'exact'
and 'at most' reading. Pragmatic considerations then are
used to determine which reading is more appropriate in
a specific context.
There is by now a vast linguistic literature which
attempts to adjudicate between the 'minimalist' proposal
and alternative theories for number terms (for reviews,
see Carston, 1998; Levinson, 2000). The outcome of
this debate is important, since theories of scalar
predication are a valuable source of insights about how
semantic information and contextual cues co-ordinate
with each other and contribute to utterance meaning.

In this paper, we present the results from two
developmental studies which compare the semanticpragmatic properties of both cardinals and quantifiers.
Our goal is to use the scalar behavior of numerically
modified and quantified phrases in child language to
shed light on the theoretical debate surrounding these
predicates. To preview our discussion, we find that
number terms and quantifiers behave differently in
child language in terms of the scalar inferences they
support. We take these results to be incompatible with
’minimalist’ semantic accounts of numerals. Thus we
show that developmental data offer an additional piece
of evidence for the different status of numerals and
quantifiers within semantic/pragmatic theories.
Our experiments build on previous cross-linguistic
studies of the acquisition of scalar predicates (for
English, see Chierchia, Crain, Guasti, Gualmini &
Meroni, 2001; Gualmini, Crain, Meroni, Chierchia &
Guasti, 2001; Musolino & Lidz, in press; for French,
see Noveck, 2001). Even though they were not
concerned with the pragmatics of number terms, these
studies have shown that preschoolers have difficulty
with the pragmatics of other scalar expressions such as
quantifiers (even though they seem to know the
semantics of such quantifiers). In our experiments, we
turn to Modern Greek for further evidence. Since the
scalar inferences associated with numbers and
quantifiers apply universally, we should expect to see
cross-linguistic similarities in the acquisition of the
pragmatics of scalar predicates.

Experiment 1
Methods
Participants. Participants were a group of 20 Greekspeaking 5-year-olds between the ages of 4;11 and 5;11
(mean 5;3) and a group of 20 adult native speakers of
Greek. The children who participated in this study were
recruited from daycares in the Athens area. The adults
were all undergraduate students at the University of
Athens.
Procedure and Materials. In this experiment, we
asked children (and adults) to offer pragmatic
judgements on sentences containing either the
numerical scale <three, two> or the quantifier scale
<all, some>.1 We used a slightly modified version of
the Truth Value Judgment Task (Crain & Thornton,
1998). The TVJT typically involves two experimenters.
The first experimenter acts out short stories in front of
the subjects using small toys and props. The second
experimenter plays the role of a puppet (in this case
1

For ease of exposition, we provide English glosses
throughout. The Greek terms are <tris, dio> and <oli,
meriki> respectively.

Minnie) who watches the stories alongside the subjects.
At the end of the story, the puppet is asked to say what
happened in the story. In our version, instead of asking
subjects if the puppet is ‘right’ or ‘wrong’ (as in the
original TVJT), we then asked whether the puppet
‘answered well’ (i.e., Apantise kala;, 'Did-(she)-answer
well?'). This modification was made since we were
interested in felicity, not truth. Finally, the subjects
were asked to justify their answers by explaining why
they thought that Minnie answered well or not.
The children were tested individually in a quiet
room away from the class. Adult subjects were shown a
videotaped version of the stories witnessed by the
children, including the warm-up stories. They were
given a score sheet and were instructed to indicate, for
each story, whether Minnie had ‘answered well’ or not.
They were also asked to provide a brief justification for
their answers.
For each scale, subjects were asked to judge four
statements like the ones in (4-5):
(4) Meriki apo tus dinosavrus efagan dedra.
'some of the dinosaurs ate trees'
(5) Dio apo tus dinosavrus efagan dedra.
'two of the dinosaurs ate trees'
In each case, these utterances were used to describe
situations which satisfied the truth conditions of
utterances containing stronger terms on the respective
scales, i.e., all, three. The critical stories were identical
for both scales. For instance, for both (4) and (5), a
group of three dinosaurs went to get something to eat.
After contemplating other options, all three dinosaurs
ended up eating trees. In this context, assuming an 'at
least' semantics for the scalar predicates, both
utterances in (4) and (5) express a true but
pragmatically infelicitous proposition.
Before the main phase of the experiment, each child
received two ‘warm-up’ stories, one designed to elicit a
‘Yes’ answer and the other a ‘No’ answer. Furthermore,
in addition to the critical statements, and for each scale,
subjects were asked to judge four control statements
like the ones in (6-7):
(6) Donald cleaned some of the cars/airplanes.
(7) Donald cleaned two of the cars/airplanes.
The purpose of these controls was to ensure that
subjects, and in particular children, could accept or
reject the puppet’s statements when appropriate and,
more importantly, that they could do so when these
statements involved felicitous uses of terms like some
and two. For each control statement, the experimenter
had a choice between two versions: one that was a
correct description of the story and would therefore
elicit a ‘Yes’ response and one that was an incorrect

description of the story and would therefore elicit a
‘No’ response. The experimenter selected the version of
the control statement (correct or incorrect description)
based on the child’s response of the preceding critical
statement. If the child had rejected the puppet’s
statement on the previous critical trial, the experimenter
selected the version of the control statement that would
elicit a ‘Yes’ response, and vice-versa. This step was
taken to keep a balance between ‘Yes’ and ‘No’
responses.
Subjects (5-year-olds and adults) were randomly
assigned to one of two conditions, determined by scale
type (i.e., <all, some>, <three, two>) which gave rise
to a 2X2 design with age and scale type as between
subject factors and 10 subjects per cell. The age range
and mean ages for the 10 children assigned to each
scale condition, i.e. <all, some> and <three, two>, are
5;0 to 5;11 (mean 5;4) and 4;11 to 5;10 (mean, 5;3)
respectively. In each condition, subjects received four
critical trials and four control trials administered in a
pseudo-random order. Within each condition, order of
presentation was counterbalanced between subjects.

Results
Beginning with test trials, we found that adult subjects
overwhelmingly rejected the puppet’s statements in
each of the two conditions, i.e. 92.5% of the time in the
<all, some> and 100% of the time in the <three, two>
condition. Statistical analysis revealed no reliable
difference between these rejection rates (t(18) = 1.96, p
= 0.06). By contrast, we found that while 5-year-olds
rejected the puppet’s statements in the case of <three,
two> 65% of the time, they did so reliably less often in
the case of <all, some> i.e., 12.5% of the time (t(18) =
3.47, p < 0.01) .The proportions of ‘No’ responses were
entered into an analysis of variance (ANOVA) with two
factors: age (5-year-olds vs. adults) and scale type
(<all, some> vs. <three, two>). The analysis revealed a
main effect of age (F(1,36) = 54.41, p < 0.0001), a main
effect of scale type (F(1,36) = 14.81, p < 0.001) and a
reliable interaction between age and scale type (F(1,36)
= 8.33, p < 0.01).
Recall that subjects in this study were also asked to
provide justifications for their answers. Adults in 98%
of the justifications they offered for rejecting a
statement made reference to the stronger term of the
scale, as expected. That is, they said that the puppet was
wrong that some or two of the dinosaurs ate a tree
because ALL or THREE of them had eaten a tree.
Children’s justifications for rejecting a numerically
modified statement always invoked the pragmatically
more appropriate stronger numeral. The same is true for
the few cases in which a quantified statement with some
was rejected by children.

On control trials, adults gave correct responses
100% of the time in the <all, some> condition and 80%
of the time in the <three, two> condition. No reliable
difference was found among these means (t(18) = 1.92,
p = 0.07). On the same items, children gave correct
responses 90% of the time for <all, some> and 95% of
the time for <three, two>. Again, no reliable differences
among the means were found (t(18) = .77, p = 0.44).

Discussion
Two main conclusions emerge from the first
experiment. First, children are much less likely to
compute scalar implicatures than adults. This finding
comports well with previous research showing that
preschoolers cross-linguistically have difficulties
understanding scalar inferences, especially those
associated with quantifiers (Chierchia et al., 2001;
Gualmini et al. 2001; Musolino & Lidz, in press;
Noveck, 2001). Second, and more crucially for present
purposes, 5-year-old children are more successful in
drawing scalar inferences triggered by numerals than by
quantifiers. This finding is even more remarkable given
that our critical trials with some and two used identical
scenarios and props. This result is unexpected given
standard 'minimalist' semantic accounts, since it points
to a difference in status between numerals and inexact
quantifiers such as some.
On the basis of the available evidence on children's
performance with scalar inferences, previous literature
has concluded that children are generally incapable of
deriving scalar implicatures on-line (Chierchia et al.,
2001). It might be tempting to interpret our results (at
least for some) in a similar way. However, there are
alternative hypotheses which are worth pursuing. For
instance, it is possible that children's failures are not
due to an inability to derive the implicatures but to a
misunderstanding of the nature of the task. Perhaps
children (unlike sophisticated adult communicators)
treat this as a truth-value judgement task. Since no
special motivation is provided for drawing the scalar
inferences, children may be more willing to let the
puppet score an appropriate response if she has simply
given a true (albeit infelicitous) description of what
happened. This inability to correctly assess the
experimental
demands
may
therefore
make
preschoolers in our study appear less pragmatically
savvy than they really are (for similar explanations of
children's 'failures', see Shipley, 1979; Gelman &
Greeno, 1989). Our aim in designing Experiment 2 was
to investigate whether a methodologically improved
version of the same task might raise children's overall
performance with scalar terms. We were also interested
in testing whether such a task would yield a similar
asymmetry between cardinals and quantifiers.

Experiment 2
Methods
Participants. 20 Greek-speaking children ranging in
age between 5;1 and 6;3 (mean 5;6) participated in this
experiment. These children were recruited at daycare
centers in the same Athens area as the children used in
Experiment 1.
Materials and Procedure. Experiment 2 introduces
several modifications to the design of our previous
study. First, we included a training phase, in which we
presented children with four warm-up stories designed
to enhance their awareness of the fact that they were
being asked to produce pragmatic judgments. Children
were told that the puppet, Minnie, sometimes said ‘silly
things’ and that the purpose of the game was to help
Minnie ‘say things better’. For example, Minnie would
be shown a toy dog which she would describe using the
truth-conditionally accurate - but pragmatically
infelicitous - statement ‘This is a little animal with four
legs’. The child would then be asked whether ‘Minnie
answered well’ and whether ‘we can say it better’. In
case the child failed to correct the puppet and provide a
better description, the experimenter eventually
corrected Minnie and provided the appropriate
description, i.e. ‘Minnie didn’t say that very well. This
is a DOG’.
The second change we introduced concerns the test
scenarios. As before, subjects witnessed four test stories
in which they were asked to judge statements
containing the scalar terms some and two in situations
which satisfied the truth conditions of the stronger
terms of the respective scales, i.e. all and three.
However, the stories in Experiment 2 were all based on
scenarios in which the main character was involved in a
contest or a challenge. The main character’s
performance therefore became the focal point of the
stories and at the end, the puppet was asked to comment
on how well the character in question had done, ‘How
did X do?’ (Pos ta pige o X?). In one of the stories for
example, one of the characters claims that he is very
good at throwing hoops around a pole and he
challenges Mickey to try and do the same with three
hoops. Mickey really concentrates hard and he’s able to
put all the hoops around the pole. At the end of the
story, Minnie is asked “How did Mickey do?” and she
answers by saying that “Mickey put some of the hoops
around the pole”. The idea behind this manipulation is
to make clear the demands of the communicative
situation: given that Mickey’s performance is being
directly evaluated, only an answer making reference to
all the hoops would satisfy the expectations of the
hearer.

Children heard four test stories and four control
stories administered in a pseudo-random order. As
before, order of presentation was counterbalanced
between subjects within a single condition. Finally, as
in Experiment 1, subjects were randomly assigned to
either of the two scale conditions. The age range for the
10 children assigned to the quantifier scale condition
was 5;1 to 6;2 (mean 5;6). For the number scale
condition, the range was 5;4 to 6;3 (mean 5;7).

Results
As before our dependent measure was children’s
Yes/No responses to the puppet’s statements. We found
that the manipulations described above led children to
reject the puppet’s statements much more often than in
Experiment 1. Nevertheless, the difference between
scales persisted: children answered correctly 52.5% of
the time for the <all, some> scale, and 90% of the time
for the <three, two> scale (t(18) = 2.39, p = 0.02). We
compared the rejection rates from Experiment 1 and
Experiment 2 by entering them into a 2 (training vs. no
training) by 2 (scale type) ANOVA. The analysis
revealed a main effect of training (F(1,36) = 8.92, p <
0.01), a main effect of scale type (F(1,36) = 17.1, p <
0.001) and no reliable interaction between training and
scale type (F(1,36) = 0.47, p = 0.49). On control items,
children gave correct responses 85% of the time in the
quantifier condition and 95% of the time in the number
condition. No reliable differences between these means
were found (t(18) = 0.89, p = 0.38). Finally, the
justifications children offered for their rejections in the
overwhelming majority of cases (93%) made explicit
reference to the stronger term of the scale (just like
adults’ justifications in Experiment 1).

Discussion
The results from this Experiment show that children's
sensitivity to scalar inferences improves dramatically if
children are provided with clear contextual cues about
the communicative expectations of the task.2 This is an
important and novel finding in itself (see Papafragou &
Musolino, 2001, for discussion). For present purposes,
a more pertinent finding is that the asymmetry found in
the previous experiment persists: in child language,

2

Children in Experiment 2 are slightly older than those in
Experiment 1. However, there are strong reasons to think that
the differences in performance are not due to these small age
differences. First, in the <all, some> case, the age difference
is not reliable (mean 5;4 vs. 5;6, t(18) = 0.985, p= .33) but the
difference in performance persists. Second, and more
importantly, previous studies have reported children’s
difficulties with scalar implicatures well beyond the age of
5;0 (and up to the age of 10;0).

numerically modified phrases give rise to scalar
inferences much more readily than quantified phrases.

General Discussion
As we mentioned in the introduction, there are several
theoretical reasons for considering cardinals as distinct
from quantifiers and other scalar terms, and our
experimental data seem to confirm this difference. Our
studies demonstrate that, in child language, inexact
quantifiers such as some are assigned a lower-bounded
reading (’at least some’, or ’some and possibly all’) and
the associated scalar inferences are ignored in the
absence of strong contextual cues. By contrast,
preschoolers
typically
reject
lower-bounded
interpretations of numerals and are very attentive to the
scalar properties of number terms. Since the test
environment was identical in both situations, this
difference in interpretive preferences points to a
difference in the semantic/pragmatic status of numbers
and quantifiers. Specifically, it suggests that, while a
minimalist semantics may be plausible for quantifiers
and other scalar predicates, cardinals may best be
analyzed in terms of either an ’exact’ or an
underspecified semantics.
An interesting observation which arises from our
experiments is that children often used the counting
routine as a means of formulating their responses. For
instance, when Minnie offered Two of the dinosaurs ate
trees, several children protested by saying No, one, two,
THREE dinosaurs ate trees (while at the same time
pointing to and counting the dinosaurs one by one).
Explicit counting of this sort offers a specific and
precise way of verifying statements containing number
terms (by placing the referents of the corresponding
NPs in a one to one correspondence with objects in the
world). Counting games may also encourage an ’exact’
interpretation of the numerals. Notice that neither of
these steps is available for the inexact some.
There is additional evidence that the observed
asymmetry between quantifiers such as some and
numerals is related to the difference between discrete
and non-discrete (vague) scalar predicates. Papafragou
(2002) tested Greek preschoolers’ understanding of the
scalar modifier half (e.g. The bear built half of the
tower). This modifier resembles numerals in that it is
discrete (it denotes a precise partitioning of a quantity
into two equal parts). By means of the same
methodology as the second experiment reported above,
it was found that young Greek learners rejected lowerbounded interpretations of the modifier half in contexts
which licensed scalar implicatures. For instance,
children overwhelmingly rejected the statement The
bear built half of the tower in cases where a whole
tower had been built. This pattern reinforces the
conclusion that discrete quantity modifiers (e.g. half,

numerals) have distinct properties from inexact
quantifiers and other scalars (e.g. some, a few).
Although our results can be taken as evidence
against a minimalist semantics for numerals, they leave
open the question of whether number terms in natural
language have an exact or an underspecified semantics.
It is worth pointing out that, in the considerable
developmental literature which looks at children’s
acquisition of number terms (Carey, 2001; Gelman &
Gallistel, 1978; Wynn, 1992; Bloom & Wynn, 1997,
among many others), it is usually assumed that children
ultimately arrive at an ’exact’ semantics for number
terms (which is the correct adult meaning). Moreover,
according to one influential position, children assign
meaning to cardinal expressions in natural language by
placing them in a one-to-one correspondence with an
innate conceptual ’integer list’ (Gelman & Gallistel,
1978). The results reported in this paper, even though
not univocally in favor of an ’exact’ over an
underspecified semantics for numerals, are certainly
consistent with these positions.
To conclude: Throughout this paper, we have
assumed that aspects of child language can be
instructive about the nature of the semantic
representations in adults. This position accepts some
fundamental continuity in the representational systems
of children and adults - here, in the specific domain of
number. It thus allows us to bring acquisition data to
bear on theoretical debates about the architecture of the
semantic-pragmatic system in adults. Even though
several interesting questions remain unresolved about
both the adult system and its acquisition by young
learners, we hope to have shown that an approach
which treats numbers as regular scalar predicates
alongside quantifiers misses important generalizations
about their developmental properties.

Acknowledgments
We wish to thank Lila Gleitman, Henry Gleitman, John
Trueswell, and the members of the CHEESE seminar at
the University of Pennsylvania for comments and input.
Thanks go to the teachers and children at the 3rd and 5th
daycares at Vrilissia (Athens), and to Profs. D. ChilaMarkopoulou, D. Theofanopoulou-Kontou and S.
Hoidas for the experiments conducted at the University
of Athens. This research was supported by NSF-STC
Grant #SBR-89-20230, and by NIH Grant #1-R01HD37507-01L.

References
Bloom, P. & Wynn, K. (1997). Linguistic cues in the
acquisition of number words. Journal of Child
Language, 24, 511-533.

Carey, S. (2001). Cognitive foundations of arithmetic:
Evolution and ontogenesis. Mind and Language, 16,
37-55.
Carston, R. (1990). Quantity maxims and generalized
implicature. UCL Working Papers in Linguistics 2: 131. Reprinted in Lingua, 96 (1995), 213-244.
Carston, R. (1998). Informativeness, relevance and
scalar implicature. In R. Carston & S. Uchida (Eds.),
Relevance theory: Applications and implications.
Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Chierchia, G., Crain, S., Guasti, M., Gualmini, A., &
Meroni, L. (2001). The acquisition of disjunction:
Evidence for a grammatical view of scalar
implicatures. Proceedings from the 25th Annual
BUCLD (pp. 157-168). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla
Press.
Gelman, R. & Gallistel, R. (1978). The child’s
understanding of number. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Gelman, R. & Greeno, J. (1989). On the nature of
competence: Principles for understanding a domain.
In L. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing and learning: Essays in
honor of Robert Glaser. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Grice, P. (1989). Studies in the ways of words. Harvard:
Harvard University Press.
Gualmini, A., Crain, S., Meroni, L., Chierchia, G., &
Guasti, M. (2001). At the semantics/pragmatics
interface in child language. Proceedings of SALT 11.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University.
Horn, L. (1972). On the semantic properties of logical
operators in English. Doctoral dissertation,
Department of Linguistics, UCLA. Distributed by
IULC.
Horn, L. (1992). The said and the unsaid. Proceedings
of SALT 2 (pp. 163-191). Department of Linguistics,
Ohio State University.
Levinson, S. (2000). Presumptive meanings.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Musolino, J. & Lidz, J. (in press). Preschool logic:
Truth and felicity in the acquisition of quantification.
Proceedings of BUCLD 26. Somerville, MA:
Cascadilla Press.
Noveck, I. (2001). When children are more logical than
adults. Cognition, 78, 165-188.
Papafragou, A. (2002). Scalar implicatures in language
acquisition: Some evidence from Modern Greek. To
be presented at the 38th Annual Meeting of the
Chicago Linguistics Society, University of Chicago,
25-27 April 2002.
Papafragou, A. & Musolino, J. (2001). Scalar
implicatures: Experiments at the SemanticsPragmatics Interface. IRCS Technical Report 01-14.
Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania,
Institute for Research in Cognitive Science.

Shipley, E. (1979). The class inclusion task: Question
form and distributive comparison. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 8, 301-331.
Wynn, K. (1992). Children’s acquisition of the number
words and the counting system. Cognitive
Psychology, 24, 220-251.

