UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The /s/ morpheme and the compounding phenomenon in English

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/671417f1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Hayes, Jenny
Murphy, Victoria
Davey, Neil
et al.

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The /s/ morpheme and the compounding phenomenon in English
Jenny Hayes1 (J.Hayes@herts.ac.uk)
Victoria Murphy1 (V.A. Murphy@herts.ac.uk)
Neil Davey2 (N.Davey@herts.ac.uk)
Pamela Smith1 (P.M.Smith@herts.ac.uk)
Lorna Peters2 (L.Peters@herts.ac.uk)

Departments of Psychology 1 and Computer Science 2, University of Hertfordshire, College Lane, Hatfield, AL10 9AB,
United Kingdom.

Abstract
Compound words with irregular plural nouns in first
position (e.g. mice-eater) are produced far more frequently
than compound words with regular plural nouns in first
position (e.g. *rats-eater), (Gordon, 1985). Using
empirical evidence and neural net modelling, the studies
presented here demonstrate how a single route, associative
memory based account might provide an equally, if not
more, valid explanation of this phenomenon than the
standard dual mechanism based theory (Marcus,
Brinkmann, Clahsen, Weise & Pinker, 1995).

1. Introduction
1.1 The Compounding Phenomenon
Psycholinguistic research has shown that English
compound words with irregular plural nouns in first
position (e.g. mice-eater) are produced far more
frequently than compound words with regular plural
nouns in first position (e.g. *rats-eater), (Gordon, 1985).

1.2 The Dual Mechanism Model’s Explanation of
Compounding
The dual mechanism model (Pinker, 1991 ), proposes that
irregular nouns and their plurals are stored as memorised
pairs of words in the mental lexicon (e.g. mouse-mice) but
that regular plurals are produced by the addition of the
/s/ morpheme to the regular stem at a post lexical stage
(e.g. rat + s = rats). Compounds are created in the lexicon.
Thus as irregular plurals are stored in the lexicon they are
available to be included within compound words.
However, as only the singular stems of regular nouns are
stored in the lexicon the plural form is never available to
be included within compound words (Marcus et al, 1995).

1.3 A Single Route Associative Memory Based
Explanation of Compounding
An alternative explanation of this compounding
phenomenon based on the frequency and patterns of
occurrence of items in the linguistic input has not been
explored fully. However an explanation of this sort may

explain the treatment of both regular and irregular plurals
in compounds (Murphy, 2000). Frequency counts of a
sample of the CHILDES (Child Language Data Exchange
System) corpora (McWhinney & Snow, 1985) have
shown that the plural /s/ morpheme is a perfect predictor
of word finality and furthermore, the plural /s/ morpheme
is never followed by a second noun. Importantly, the
reverse pattern is found with the possessive /‘s/ morpheme
since it is always followed by a second noun. Therefore, it
might be that a noun rarely follows the regular plural /s/
morpheme (i.e. patterns such as “*rat/s/ chaser” do not
occur ) because the pattern “noun – morpheme /s/- noun”
is reserved for marking possession (such as rat’s tail).
Interestingly in other languages that do not have this
competition between the plural and possessive morpheme
such as Dutch (Schreuder, Neijt, van der Weide &
Baayen, 1998) and French (Murphy, 2000), regular
plurals are allowed within compounds. Irregular plurals
may, however, appear in English compounds as they are
not formed by the addition of the plural /s/ morpheme.
Thus, irregulars do not compete with the possessive
structure and as such may be followed by a second noun
in a compound. This polyfunctionality of the /s/
hypothesis is explored here using three neural net
simulations and an empirical study.

2. Neural Net Modeling
An associative memory-based account of inflectional
morphology has been investigated in numerous
connectionist models. Several models have successfully
simulated the putative dissociation between regular and
irregular inflection for both verbal morphology
(Daugherty & Seidenberg, 1994) and plural morphology
(Plunkett & Juola, 1999) using a single learning
mechanism and no explicit rules. Furthermore, as well as
being able to learn mappings from input to output,
connectionist models have also been able to learn
sequential mappings (Elman 1990). Thus it is predicted
that a single route associative memory system could learn
that the inclusion or omission of the regular plural
morpheme /s/ is influenced by where that /s/ morpheme
occurs in a sequence of language input. Three neural net

models are considered here. The first investigates whether
the presence of /s/ predicts word finality. The second and
third models analyse whether learning about the word that
follows an /s/ morpheme is sufficient to drive learning
about compound formation in English.

2.1 Experiment 1.
Experiment1, was designed to test the degree to which /s/
indicates word finality in a stream of concatenated letters.
A neural network was trained on a concatenated stream of
200 sentences of child directed speech taken from
CHILDES (MacWhinney & Snow, 1985). A word-ending
marker was attached to each word and the words
(including a word-ending marker) were concatenated to
form a stream of 3596 letters. The network was trained on
200 passes through the sequence of letters. Each letter
was encoded using one of 26 random 5-bit vectors (one
for each letter in the alphabet). The word-ending marker
was encoded using a 27th 5-bit vector. The network was
required to predict the next letter it expected to occur
given the letters it had seen previously. The network
consisted of 5 input units, 30 hidden units, 5 output units
and 35 context units. A fully recurrent and a SRN (Elman,
1990) architecture were tested and produced similar
results. It was hypothesised that on a next letter prediction
task of this kind, a neural network would learn that after
the input /s/ there was a high probability that the next
input would be a word ending marker.
Test Set And Results: As predicted, at the beginning of a
word the error was high but as more letters were presented
to the network the error decreased until it was at its lowest
at the end of the word. The network’s ability to learn that
[–s] is a good predictor of word finality was tested using
19 unseen words that ended in /s/ and 19 unseen words
that ended in other letters. The network was more
accurate (i.e. the error was lower) at predicting a word
ending marker after an /s/ than after all other letters
combined (t=-2.08, df =18, p<0.05). This simulation was
completed to confirm that a model with a single learning
mechanism and no explicit rules, trained on child directed
speech, could learn that after /s/ there was a high
expectancy that the next item would be a word-ending
marker. Interestingly, /s/ is associated with word finality
even though /s/ appears in the middle of numerous words.
This overwhelming pattern of /s/ at the end of a word may
influence language learners to omit /s/ from the middle of
words such as compounds.

2. 2 Experiment 2.
The aim of this experiment was to examine how highly
consistent patterns in the input (i.e. that a plural noun is
never followed by another noun while a possessive noun
is always followed by a second noun) might drive
learning about how to manipulate plurals within nounnoun compounds. The network was required to predict the

next word it expected to occur given the words it had seen
previously. It was impossible for the network to predict
the exact word that followed in the input. However, the
network was expected to learn which syntactic category
the next item would come from. Thus the network was
expected to make a first order distinction between the
function of nouns and verbs, determiners and adjectives
(Elman, 1990). Furthermore from these induced syntactic
categories the network was expected to learn a second
order distinction that only “verbs” could appear after
some /s/ morphemes and only “nouns” could appear after
other /s/ morphemes. It was impossible for the network to
distinguish between the possessive and the plural /s/ as
both were encoded in exactly the same manner in the
input. However, the network was trained on one group of
words that were represented as having the properties of
possessives, plurals and singulars, a second set was only
represented as singulars and plurals and a third group was
only represented as singulars and possessives. It was
predicted that the tokens making up these three groups of
words would cluster together as three distinct sets in the
hidden layer representations. The network was trained on
a concatenated stream of 2000 legitimate English
sentences constructed from a lexicon of 38 words. A
sentence-ending marker was attached to each sentence and
the sentences (including the sentence-ending marker)
were concatenated to form a stream of 14,600 words. The
network was trained on 10 complete passes through the
sequence of words. Each word (including the sentenceending marker) was encoded using a 39-bit localist coding
scheme. The presence or absence of /s/ at the end of a
word was also explicitly coded. A simple recurrent
network was used so that at any point in time the state of
the hidden units at the previous time step were used as
additional input (Elman, 1990).
Results: Figure 1, shows a typical representation of the
first two principal components of the hidden unit
representations. The dotted line superimposed on the
PCA diagram shows the divide between the way nouns
and verbs are represented in the hidden units. The network
has also represented determiners and adjectives
separately. Most interestingly, nouns which were included
in the training set as both “plurals and possessives”, items
that were only included as “possessives” and items which
were only included in the “plural” form are all represented
separately within the cluster of words ending in /s/.
Therefore, Experiment 2 showed that a neural net was
able to make some differentiation between the plural and
possessive /s/ depending on the words that followed it in
the input even though the two types of /s/ had exactly the
same encoding characteristics.

Nouns

Verbs

position but plural nouns are now represented quite
separately. Interestingly, both plurals and singulars i.e.,
items that may be followed by a verb lie in similar
positions on the x axis, while the possessives are
clustering with adjectives i.e., with other items that are
followed by nouns. Therefore, Experiment 3 shows that
learning about the different functions of the /s/ morpheme
is enhanced with the addition of the very minimum of
semantic information

Determiners
Verbs

Nouns
Singulars

Adjectives

determiners

plurals

Figure 1. First two principal components of the hidden
layer representations in Experiment 2. Area 1 corresponds
to the representational area occupied by items that
appeared in the context of both plurals and possessives.
Area 2 corresponds to the representational area occupied
by items that appeared only in a possessive context and
area 3 corresponds to the representational area occupied
by items that appeared only in the plural context.

2. 3 Experiment 3.
In Experiment 2, the network was able to group nouns
that in the training set were behaving as “plural and
possessive” or as “plural” or “possessive” only. However,
the network could not totally disambiguate plurals from
possessives. In this third simulation, the network that was
used in Experiment 2 was amended to include an extra
input unit that encoded whether the subject of the sentence
in which the word occurred was either a plural or a
singular noun. Hence, although both “plural” and
“possessive” words were coded as ending in /s/, only
plural items were encoded as ending in /s/ and being
plural, as possessive words were encoded as ending in /s/
but being singular. The same training set and task from
Experiment 2 was employed. With the addition of this
minimal semantic information, the network is expected to
disambiguate “plural” nouns from “possessive” nouns. It
was predicted that in the hidden units, the plural and
possessive nouns would be represented separately.
Results: Figure 2, shows a typical representation of the
first two principal components of the hidden unit
representations. From the PCA it is evident that once
again nouns, verbs, determiners and adjectives are
represented separately in the hidden units. With the
addition of the semantic information it is now evident that
singular, plural and possessive nouns are all represented
separately. Singular and possessive nouns (both of which
are actually singular nouns) are located in a similar

singulars

adjectives

possessives

Figure 2. First two principal components of the hidden
layer representations in Experiment 3

2.4 Discussion of Neural Net Modelling
From Experiment 1, it is evident that a neural net
model trained on child directed speech was able to learn
that /s/ is strongly associated with word-finality (even
though /s/occurs frequently in the middle of words). This
overwhelming pattern of /s/ at the end of words might
influence English language learners to omit /s/ from the
middle of words such as compounds. Experiment 2,
showed that the net was able to learn that /s/ followed by
one set of words was different from /s/ followed by a
different set of words even though the /s/ was encoded in
exactly the same way in the input. The same might be true
for the language learner. Both the possessive /s/ and the
plural /s/ sound the same phonetically but the patterns in
which the two different types of morpheme appear in the
input may be sufficiently distinct as to indicate that one
type of morpheme performs a specific linguistic function
and the other performs another type of linguistic function.
From Experiment 3, it is evident that learning that the
plural and possessive morphemes are only legal in certain
sequences may be refined as the child learns that
semantically, the plural morpheme refers to many things
while the possessive morpheme usually refers to one
thing.

Table 1: Examples of Compounds used as stimuli in Experiment 4.
Group

Example of contextualising sentence

Examples of compounds

(1) Possessive nouns

Last week, I left my purse in a London taxi.
Luckily, I managed to signal to the

taxi’s driver

(2) Regular plural nouns

I feed four cats, a Burmese, a Siamese and two
lovely old Persians. I enjoy being a

cats feeder

(3) Irregular plural nouns

Women always get lowly jobs. In the nursery
rhyme the farmer’s wife is nothing more than a

mice chaser

(4) Comparatives or superlatives

biggest seller

(5) singular nouns
ending in phoneme /s/

Greg is very modest. He was amazed to hear that
his song is still the record company’s
We’ll have a larger lawn and mowing the grass
will take longer. I’m thinking of employing a

(6) singular nouns
ending in a phoneme other than /s/

Stephen is so skilled at mixing cocktails that the
hotel want him to work permanently as a

drink server

grass cutter

3. Experiment 4:Compound Processing Study
The compounding phenomenon was further tested by
asking 22 native adult English speakers to process “nounnoun” compounds as part of an “on-line” lexical decision
(LD) task. This is important as most research has focussed
on production (e.g., Gordon, 1985; Murphy, 2000). In this
experiment, participants were required to categorise 216
compounds as being words or non-words having seen
them presented visually on a computer screen and
proceeded by a contextualising sentence. The mean
response time for processing different types of compound
(see stimuli) was examined in a within subjects design.
Two hypotheses were tested to examine the associative
explanation of compounding. These were:- (1) If, as the
first neural net simulation (Experiment 1) confirmed,
language users associate /s/ with word finality, then
compounds in which the first noun ends in /s/ should be
processed more slowly than compounds that do not
include a first noun ending in /s/. (2) If, as the
polyfunctionality hypothesis indicates, /s/ appearing in the
middle of a compound made up of two nouns is
interpreted as indicating possession rather than plurality,
then compounds containing possessive nouns should be
processed more quickly than compounds containing plural
nouns.
Two further hypotheses were investigated to test the
dual mechanism model’s explanation of compounding. (1)
Pinker (1991) stated that:
“because it categorically distinguishes regular from
irregular forms, the rule-association hybrid predicts that
the two processes should be dissociated from virtually
every point of view…..[including] reaction time ……. ”
(p 253).

However, the dual mechanism model makes no
directional prediction as to which type of morphology
might be processed more quickly. Beck (1997) asked
native adult English speakers to supply the past tense of a
series of present tense regular and irregular verbs. Beck
found that both low (mean response time 477 msec) and
high (mean response time 508 msec) frequency regulars
were produced more quickly that both low (mean
response time 581) and high (mean response time 535
msec) frequency irregulars. By collecting reaction times
in Experiment 4, it was possible to test the speed at which
the two types of morphology were processed within
compounds in a lexical decision task. The following two
hypotheses were tested, (1) compounds containing
irregular morphology and compounds containing regular
morphology will be processed at different speeds (2) more
specifically, compounds containing irregular plurals and
compounds containing regular plurals will be processed at
different speeds.

3.1 Stimuli
The first noun in each compound was taken from one of
six groups. These were: - (1) possessive nouns (2) regular
plural nouns (3) irregular plural nouns (4) comparative or
superlatives (5) singular nouns which ended in phonetic
/s/ (6) singular nouns which ended in a phoneme other
than /s/. Each group of first nouns were matched for
frequency. The second noun in each compound was a
deverbal noun, i.e., a noun that is formed from a verb
(e.g.s, walker, chaser ). All second nouns were matched
for frequency. Table 1.shows examples of each type of
compound tested. The apostrophe was omitted from all
the possessive nouns thus making it impossible to

distinguish between the plural and possessive nouns (cf.
the neural net used in Experiment 2). However, each
compound was preceded by a contextualising sentence,
(cf. the neural net used in Experiment 3) which pilot work
had shown would lead the first noun in the compound
(e.g., rats in *rats eater) to be interpreted appropriately.
To ensure uniform treatment of all stimuli, contextualising
sentences also preceded the first noun even where they
were not taken from the plural or possessive groups (see
Table 1. for examples of contextualising sentences).

3.2 Results
Table 2. Mean reaction times
Mean
reaction time
in
milliseconds

Comparisons to test the
associative account
All groups
1285
ending in /s/
Final phoneme
1205
other than /s/

Standard
deviation of
Mean
reaction time

Difference
between
means in
milliseconds

3.3 Discussion
465
455

80*

Regular plurals

1277

492

Possessives
All groups
containing
regular
morphology
Irregular plurals

1191
1231

437
450

86*

1339

470

108*

Regular plurals

1277

492

Irregular plurals 1339
470
Comparison to test the time difference between
processing plurals and processing other types of
morphology
Regular and
irregular
plurals
All other items

regular plurals than compounds containing possessive
nouns (t=2.195, df=21, p<0.05). These two findings
support the outcomes of the neural net simulations in
Experiments 1,2 and 3. Two planned comparisons were
conducted to test the dual mechanism model’s explanation
of compounding. All types of regular morphology were
processed more quickly that irregular plurals (mean
difference of 108 milliseconds) (t=3.22, df=21, p<0.05). It
took participants an average of 62 milliseconds longer to
process irregular plurals than regular plurals but this
difference was not found to be reliable. A post hoc
analysis was also conducted to test the difference between
the time taken to process compounds containing both
types of plural and the time taken to process compounds
containing other types of morphology (mean difference of
103 milliseconds). A Tukey’s HSD test found this
difference to be reliable (F=11.29, df=21, p<0.05).

1291

479

1188

424

62

103*

of morphology
* Difference reliable at alpha = 0.05
Mean reaction times in milliseconds are shown in Table 2.
Two planned comparisons were conducted to test the
associative explanation of compounding. Firstly,
compounds with a first noun ending in /s/ were processed
more slowly than compounds where the first noun ends in
another letter (a mean difference of 80 milliseconds)
(t=4.41, df =21, p<0.05). It took participants an average of
86 milliseconds longer to process compounds containing

Consider first the two hypotheses that tested the
associative explanation of compounding. It took longer to
process compounds in which the first noun ended in /s/
than compounds which did not include a first noun ending
in/s/. Language users, like the network in Experiment 1,
found it harder to process /s/ in the middle of a word.
Furthermore, possessive nouns are easier to process than
plural nouns in the middle of compounds even though
they share exactly the same phoneme. The /s/ morpheme
in the middle of a word seems to indicate possession not
plurality. Consider next the two hypotheses that tested the
dual mechanism’s explanation of compounding. Similar
to Beck’s (1997) production data, it took participants in
this experiment less time to process all types of regular
morphology than it took them to process irregular plurals
(the only type of irregular morphology tested). However,
no difference was found in the time taken to process
regular and irregular plurals, despite Pinker’s (1991)
prediction that the two types of morphology should be
dissociated “from virtually every point of view” (p 253).
Interestingly, a reliable difference was found when
reaction times to both types of plural were collapsed
together and compared with reaction times to
comparatives and superlatives and possessives (all items
of regular morphology) collapsed together. Adult
language users find it relatively difficult to process either
type of plural in the middle of compounds. However,
contrary to the predictions of the dual mechanism model,
adults seem to have no difficulty processing other items of
regular morphology (i.e., items which are produced at a
post-lexical stage) within compounds (cf. Marcus et al,
1995). It has been argued elsewhere, that due to the
competition with the possessive structure, language users
omit regular plurals from compounds. Furthermore,
guided by this template, i.e., that plurals do not occur
within compounds, mature language users also begin to

omit irregular plurals from compounds, (Hayes, Smith &
Murphy, unpublished manuscript)

4. General discussion
Experiment 1 showed that /s/ is associated with word
finality. Furthermore, participants in the empirical study
took longer to process compounds which contained /s/
than compounds that did not contain /s/ (regardless of
what type of /s/ it was). Both strands of evidence would
seem to indicate that /s/ is linked to word finality despite
the fact that /s/ occurs frequently in the middle of many
words. This overwhelming pattern of /s/ at the end of
words might influence language learners to omit /s/ from
the middle of words such as compounds. Evidence from
Experiment 2, showed that a neural network was able to
learn that /s/ followed by one set of words was different
from /s/ followed by a different set of words even though
the /s/ was encoded in exactly the same way in the input.
From Experiment 3, it was evident that learning that the
plural and possessive morphemes are only legal in certain
sequences may be refined as the child learns that
semantically, the plural morpheme refers to many things
while the possessive morpheme usually refers to one
thing. The empirical evidence also showed that one type
of /s/ morpheme was processed more quickly within
compounds than another type of /s/ morpheme, although it
was denoted by same phoneme. Both the possessive /s/
and the plural /s/ sound the same phonetically but the
patterns in which the two different types of morpheme
appear in the input seem to be sufficiently distinct to
indicate that one type of morpheme performs a specific
linguistic function and the other performs another type of
linguistic function. As well as providing support for the
associative account Experiment 4 also calls into question
the dual mechanism model’s explanation of
compounding. No difference was found between the time
taken to process regular and irregular plurals. However,
participants were able to process some items of regular
morphology within compounds relatively quickly. It
seems to be plurals (of either kind), rather than items of
regular morphology, that adults find difficult to process
within compounds.
The three models taken together with the
empirical work provide evidence for an associative
account of compounding. In this associative account the
language user relies on properties of the linguistic input
itself and not on distinct ways of representing “rules”
versus associations to drive linguistic behaviour. More
specifically in the case of compounding, the language user
learns that the /s/ morpheme tends to nearly always occur
at the end rather than in the middle of a word.
Furthermore, the language learner is sensitive to the fact
that the same /s/ morpheme occurs in different patterns in
the input. With the addition of the absolute minimum of
semantics, namely the numerical context in which the
phrase is uttered, the language learner seems able to

differentiate between the plural and the possessive
morpheme. The possessive morpheme may be followed
by a second noun but the plural morpheme may not be
followed by a second noun. When faced with a noun-noun
compound the language user may delete the plural
morpheme from the end not because regular items of
morphology are different in kind from irregulars and
represented as rules but simply because this pattern is
used to denote possession not plurality. Thus the
dissociation between the treatment of regular and irregular
morphology in compounds may result form the fact that
one type of morphology is subject to competition with the
possessive morpheme but the other is not. As this
alternative hypothesis is explored further, it may become
apparent that this plural dissociation in compounds is not
good evidence to support the dual mechanism model.

References
Beck, M-L., (1997). Regular verbs, past tense and
frequency: tracking down a potential source of NS/NNS
competence differences. Second language Research, 13,
93-115.
Daugherty, K. G. & Seidenberg, M. S. (1994). Beyond
rules and exceptions. In S. D.Lima, R. L. Corrigan &
G. K.
Iverson (Eds.), The reality of linguistic rules.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Elman, J. L. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive
Science, 14, 179-211.
Gordon, P. (1985). Level-ordering in lexical development.
Cognition, 21 , 73-93.
Hayes, J.A., Smith, P.M., Murphy, V.A. (Unpublished
manuscript). Modality effects in compounding with
English inflectional morphology.
Marcus, G.F., Brinkmann, U., Clahsen, H., Weise, R. &
Pinker, S., (1995). German inflection: The exception
that proves the rule. Cognitive Psychology, 29, 189-256.
MacWhinney, B. & Snow, C. E. (1985). The Child
Language Data Exchange System. Journal of Child
Language, 12, 271-296.
Murphy, V.
A. (2000). Compounding and the
representation of inflectional morphology. Language
Learning, 50, 153-197.
Pinker, S. (1991). Rules of language. Science, 253, 530535.
Plunkett, K. & Juola, P. (1999). A connectionist model
of English past tense and plural morphology. Cognitive
Science, 23, 463-490.
Screuder, R., Neijt, A., van der Weide, F. and Baayen,
R.H., (1998). Regular plurals in Dutch compounds:
Linking graphemes or morphemes? Language and
Cognitive Processes, 13, 551-573.

