UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Theories and Similarity: Categorization under Speeded Conditions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0fn473bm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Luhmann, Christian C
Ahn, Woo-kyoung
Palmeri, Thomas J

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Theories and Similarity: Categorization under Speeded Conditions
Christian C. Luhmann (christian.luhmann@vanderbilt.edu)
Department of Psychology, Vanderbilt University
301 Wilson Hall, Nashville, TN 37203 USA

Woo-kyoung Ahn (woo-kyoung.ahn@vanderbilt.edu)
Department of Psychology, Vanderbilt University
301 Wilson Hall, Nashville, TN 37203 USA

Thomas J. Palmeri (thomas.j.palmeri@vanderbilt.edu)
Department of Psychology, Vanderbilt University
301 Wilson Hall, Nashville, TN 37203 USA
Abstract
A largely accepted view in the categorization literature is that
similarity-based reasoning is faster than theory-based
reasoning. In the current study, we explored whether theorybased categorization behavior would continue to be observed
when people are forced to make category decisions under
time pressure. As a specific test of the theory-based view to
category representation we examined the causal status
hypothesis, which states that properties acting as causes are
more important than properties acting as effects when
categorizing an item. Subjects learned four categories of
items composed of three features and learned causal relations
between those features. In two experiments we found that
participants gave more weight to cause features than to effect
features even under rapid response conditions. We discuss
implications of these findings for categorization.

Introduction
When posed with categorization tasks in everyday life
people recruit information from a variety of sources. In
general, previous work on categorization has focused on two
sources of information: similarity and theories. One family
of categorization theories has centered on the notion of
similarity (e.g., Kruschke, 1992; Nosofsky, 1986; Smith &
Medin, 1981; Rosch & Mervis, 1975). On this view
concept learning and use is based on computing the
similarity between an object to be categorized and a stored
representation of a category (e.g., exemplars, Nosofsky,
1986; or prototypes, Hampton, 1995).
An alternative view assumes that people have theories
that embody relations between properties and influence
categorization behavior (Carey, 1985; Keil, 1989; Murphy
& Medin, 1985; Rips, 1989). An illustrative example comes
from Keil’s (1989) discovery experiment. When presented
with an animal that had the appearance and behavior of a
horse but the insides and lineage of a cow, adults would
categorize the animal as a cow. This behavior suggests that

lineage has a special status above and beyond perceptual
features, presumably reflecting the importance of lineage in
our lay theory of biology. Similarly, Medin and Shoben
(1988) showed that people would rather accept a square
cantaloupe than a square basketball, presumably because
“being round” is more central in naïve theories of physics
(i.e., the domain in which basketballs are grounded) than in
naïve theories of biology (i.e., the domain in which
cantaloupes are grounded).
The similarity-based and theory-based views are not
necessarily incompatible (e.g., Sloman & Rips, 1998). In
fact, many proponents of either view allow for, or even
advocate, the operation of both kinds of processes (e.g.
Sloman, 1996; Smith & Sloman, 1994). However, these
proposals typically put the two views on unequal footing. A
persistent bias present in these ‘hybrid’ models is that
similarity-based categorization is primary. For instance, in
the developmental literature, it has been argued that theorybased mechanisms cannot precede similarity-based
mechanisms in development because theories must be
acquired through similarity-based mechanisms (Quine,
1977; Vygotsky, 1962; but see Keil, Smith, Simons, &
Levin, 1998). Thus, only after sufficient experience has
been obtained may theories be developed and used,
amending (or supplanting) similarity-based information.
In addition to the idea that similarity-based categorization
is developmentally primary, there is a notion that similaritybased information is accessed more rapidly, and perhaps
more automatically, than theory-based information. This
assumption may be motivated by the observation that
novices (e.g., children) use similarity-based reasoning and
thus it is a somehow simpler mode of reasoning (cf. Keil et
al, 1998). Smith and Sloman (1994) make this argument
explicit by assuming that theory-based reasoning is a type of
rule-based reasoning, arguing that rule-based reasoning is,
“more analytic and reflective than similarity-based
categorization” (pp. 377-378).

To test this assumption Smith and Sloman designed a
study to examine the effect of time constraints on theorybased (or rule-based) categorization. Smith and Sloman’s
subjects performed a forced-choice task in which each item
consisted of a description of an object paired with two
possible categories (task and stimuli adapted from Rips,
1989). Each item had one response that corresponded to a
rule-based (i.e. theory-based) decision and one that
corresponded to a similarity-based decision. For example,
“Circular object with a 4 inch diameter” could be
categorized as a pizza or a quarter. Calling this object a
pizza would signify theory-based understanding of the
minting process whereas calling this object a quarter would
signify a similarity computation because a circular 4-inch
object is more similar to quarters that to most pizzas (but see
Nosofsky & Johansen, 2000). Rips (1989) found that
people tended to choose the theory-based response.
However, when asked to respond as quickly as possible,
subjects in Smith and Sloman’s study failed to reproduce
this result. Only when instructed to talk aloud while
categorizing did subjects tend to answer in accordance with
the theory-derived rules. Thus, Smith and Sloman
concluded that a “…possible constraint…is that the
situation encourage people to articulate and explain their
reasons for categorization, rather than encourage rapid
judgments” (p. 383).
One problem with this interpretation is that the use of
either similarity or theories resulted the in subjects
accepting bizarre objects as category members. For instance,
participants had to decide whether a circular object with a 4inch diameter that is silver colored is a pizza or a quarter.
This is a rather strict test of theory-use and may not
represent a naturalistic situation in which to test the
influence of speed.
More recent studies have suggested that theory-based
categorization may be at least as fast as (and perhaps as
automatic as) similarity-based categorization. For example,
Lin and Murphy (1997) pitted perceptual similarity against
knowledge of an object’s function during speeded
categorization. For instance, an object with a loop was
either described as a tool used to hunt animals where the
loop is placed around the animal’s neck, or a pesticide
sprayer where the loop was used to hang it when not in use.
Thus, the loop should have been viewed as central to the
category in the former condition and more peripheral in the
latter condition. Even when category responses had to be
made within a one-second deadline, or when the picture of
the object to be categorized was presented for only 50ms
and then masked, subjects continued to be influenced by
domain knowledge (e.g., the object’s described function).
Palmeri and Blalock (2000) reported a similar pattern of
results. Extending the findings of Wisnewski and Medin
(1994), they had subjects categorize drawings supposedly
drawn by children described as either ”creative” or ”noncreative.” Subjects were able to categorize using this
background knowledge (e.g., by the amount of emotional

expression) even when the pictures were shown for only
200ms. Their study demonstrated that theory-use did not
require lengthy periods of reflection.
The main goal of the current study was to build upon
these recent findings and to examine speeded theory-based
categorization at a finer level. As a specific test of the
theory-based view we have chosen to examine the causal
status hypothesis (CSH; Ahn, Kim, Lassaline, & Dennis,
2000; Ahn, 1998). This hypothesis was developed in
response to the valid criticisms that specific mechanisms
underlying theory-based categorization had not been
explicated. CSH states that features of an object that act as
causes in one’s domain theory are more important than
features that act as effects, ceteris paribus. This measure,
referred to as causal depth, makes explicit why some
features are more central to one’s theory than others.
As a test of the CSH, Ahn et al. (2000) provided subjects
with novel categories that possessed features at different
causal depths. When asked to classify possible category
members, each of which was missing a single characteristic
feature, subjects rated those missing an effect feature as a
better category member than those missing a cause feature.
In the current study we employed a similar methodology to
test the effects of time pressure on the causal status effect.

Experiment 1
Method
Adapting the paradigm from Ahn et al. (2000), our stimuli
consisted of four fictional animals (see Fig. 1). Each animal
was described as possessing three features. The features
were described as having a causal chain structure such that
feature A causes feature B, and feature B causes feature C.
It is crucial to ensure that, in the absence of causal
information, the three features did not vary in salience.
Otherwise, any obtained causal status effect could not be
solely attributed to the causal background knowledge but
could instead be attributed to some other factor (e.g.,
physiological feature versus behavioral feature). To
eliminate this possibility we pre-tested the stimuli on a
separate set of subjects, using the animal descriptions
without the explicit causal information. Subjects were then
asked to rate the likelihood of category membership of items
missing a single feature (see Fig. 2). The results of this pretest showed no significant differences between the ratings of
items missing the first feature, items missing the second
feature, and items missing the third feature (all p’s>.4).
Thus, we concluded that the features were equated for a
priori strength.
In the categorization tasks used by Ahn et al. (2000),
subjects were allowed to view the animal descriptions
(along with the causal structure information) while they
were making their category judgments. To allow for

speeded responses, subjects in our study were instead
required to learn and memorize the four animals, their
features, and the causal relations between the features.
First, subjects were given the opportunity to study the
description of each animal at the beginning of the
experiment. While studying each description subjects were
instructed to “write about how you think each feature causes
the next,” in an attempt to force subjects to think causally
about the features (instead of as a simple ordered list). To
help subjects further learn the items, they were then
presented with 6 blocks of trials, during which they were
prompted with the name of one of the animals and were
required to select (using a mouse-click) the features of that
animal from an array containing the features of all 4
animals. They were required to select those features in the
appropriate causal order. Successfully responding to the
entire set of animals twice allowed subjects to move on to
the next block. In the first two blocks responses were
unspeeded, while in the last four blocks responses had 5second deadlines (any response not meeting the deadline
was counted as incorrect). This speeded-learning procedure
was added so that the novel causal background knowledge
would be sufficiently internalized, thereby approximating
real-life lay theories. In addition, on half of the blocks,
subjects were asked for the causal relations in the forward
order (e.g. A, B, C) and on the other half in the backward
order (e.g. C, B, A). The order manipulation alternated
across blocks and subjects, always beginning with a forward
block.

For the unspeeded trials we expected to find results
similar to those of Ahn et al. (2000). That is, items missing
the terminal effect feature should be rated as more likely
category members than those missing the initial cause
feature. The critical question was whether this causal status
effect would disappear during the speeded trials, as
suggested by Smith and Sloman (1994).

Kehoe?
does not have a low body temp
has a small heart

Figure 2: A sample transfer item from Experiment 1

Results and Discussion
Before analyzing the subjects’ category ratings, we verified
the instructional speed manipulation. The RTs in the
speeded blocks (M = 1560ms) were indeed significantly
faster than the RTs in the unspeeded blocks (M = 3202ms),
p<.05, Tukey’s HSD.
6

Kehoes

hibernate in winter
Figure 1: A sample animal with causal links
Once subjects completed these six blocks they proceeded
to the experimental transfer task. Subjects were presented
with items missing a single feature and were asked to rate
the likelihood that the item belonged to its target category
on an 8-point scale (with 1 being “Definitely Unlikely” to 8
being “Definitely Likely”). Features of each transfer item
were presented in a triad as shown in Figure 2, with the
position of the features randomized.
There were 4 blocks of trials in the transfer task. In two
of the blocks, subjects were instructed to answer as quickly
as possible. In the other two blocks, they were told to take
as much time as needed. The speed condition alternated
across blocks and was counterbalanced across subjects.

Missing First Feature
Missing Second Feature
Missing Third Feature

5

Rating

have a small heart
have a low body temp

hibernates in winter

4
3
2
1

Speeded

Unspeeded

Figure 3: Results from Experiment 1
The results for subjects’ categorization responses are
summarized in Figure 3. A 2 (speed condition: speeded vs.
unspeeded) X 3 (item type: missing first feature vs. missing
second feature vs. missing third feature) repeated measures
ANOVA was performed on the data. We observed a
significant main effect of item type, F(2, 56)=22.69,
p<.0001, demonstrating that subjects categorized in
accordance with the causal status hypothesis. In addition,
we observed no main effect of speed, F(1,28)=2.89, p>.05,
and the speed X item type interaction was also not
significant, F(2,56)=1.03, p>.05.

Planned comparisons were carried out to examine
differences between item types. In both the speeded and
unspeeded conditions items missing the third feature were
rated significantly higher than those missing the first or
second features (p’s<.05, Tukey’s HSD). The difference
between items missing the first feature and those missing
the second feature was not significant (p’s>.05, Tukey’s
HSD), possibly because the second feature also served as a
cause of another feature, making the difference between the
first and the second feature less pronounced (see also Kim
and Ahn, 2002).
Overall, these results demonstrate that it is possible to
categorize using causal knowledge even when time for
lengthy reflection is not allowed. It is tempting to contrast
our findings with those of Smith and Sloman (1994). In
their experiment, subjects needed unspeeded conditions and
to talk aloud while making the judgment in order to
demonstrate theory-based behavior. It is possible that the
paradigm used by Rips (1989) and Smith and Sloman
(1994) created a situation in which theory-use was more
difficult to apply than our situation (see above).
Nevertheless, our findings clearly question the assertion that
theory-use is relegated to situations in which reflection and
analytic thought is permitted.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 1, subjects were simply asked to respond as
quickly as possible to the “speeded” items. Given this
freedom, some subjects responded very quickly but others
responded significantly more slowly. Although the speed
manipulation we used in Experiment 1 is naturalistic, in that
participants carried out what they thought to be a rapid
decision making process, forcing participants to respond
within a specific deadline would ensure uniform time
pressure across all subjects. Therefore, in Experiment 2, we
imposed stricter control over subjects’ response times by
enforcing deadlines on their category decisions.
One methodological complication with establishing
appropriate response deadlines is that it is difficult to
determine beforehand whether a particular deadline is short
enough to challenge the categorization system but not so
short as to make accurate responses impossible. That is, if
the speeded condition does not show the causal status effect,
it can be because theory-based reasoning does not take place
during rapid categorization or because the deadline is too
short to produce any reasonable responses.
For this reason, we also tested whether similarity
information could be used under similar deadlines. By
testing both kinds of knowledge, the casual status effects
can be compared to similarity-based categorization at each
deadline. In this way it can be inferred whether any
breakdown of the causal status effect is due to the inability
to complete the processes necessary for theory-based

categorization or if reasonable responses at that deadline are
impossible for both kinds of categorization.
Similarity is frequently calculated based on how many
attributes an item has in common with other members of the
category (e.g., Tversky, 1977). Therefore, as a similaritybased determinant for feature weighting, we manipulated
the relative base rates of each feature within a category (i.e.,
what percentage of category members possess a feature), a
measure also known as category validity. In fact, category
validity has been shown to be positively correlated with
typicality ratings (Rosch & Mervis, 1975).
Experiment 2 contains a similarity condition that provides
category validity information in much the same way causal
information was provided in Experiment 1. Using this
condition as a point of comparison, and with the addition of
strict response deadlines, we hope to provide a more
rigorous test of the causal status effect under speeded
conditions.

Methods
Subjects in the Causal condition were given the same
stimuli and accompanying causal information as used in
Experiment 1. Subjects in the Base-Rate condition were
given the same stimuli but were instead given information
about the relative base rates of each feature. Thus, each
category was described as having three features (e.g. A, B,
and C) such that 100% of category members possessed
feature A, 80% of possessed feature B, and 60% possessed
feature C. In our parlance, the Causal condition represents a
theory-based situation whereas the Base-Rate condition
represents a similarity-based situation. Paralleling the
results of Experiment 1, items in the Base-Rate condition
missing the third (60%) feature should be rated as better
category members those missing the first (100%) feature.
This is because those missing the third feature share more
features with more category members than those missing the
first feature.
The learning phase for the Causal condition was identical
to that used in Experiment 1. Subjects in the Base-Rate
condition did not have to generate explanations but instead
categorized exemplars into one of the four animal
categories. For this task, each exemplar always possessed
the first feature of its category, possessed the second feature
on 80% of the trials, and the third feature 60% of the time
(thus mirroring the stated base rates). When a given feature
did not appear in an exemplar, a feature from one of the
other animals was substituted. Feedback was given after
each trial.
Blocks of 30 such trials alternated with blocks of the
“selection task” used in the Causal condition. The only
difference was that features were selected in an order
(forward or backwards) dictated by their base rate rather
than their position in the causal chain.

The transfer phase for both conditions was nearly
identical to that used in Experiment 1 except for a modified
speed manipulation. Instead of an instruction to respond
quickly, Experiment 2 employed a signal-to-respond
technique (Lamberts, 1998). Thus, each trial presented the
feature triad (Fig. 2) for a specified duration (see below).
When the triad was removed from the screen subjects made
their response. If a response was made more than 300ms
after the disappearance of the triad, subjects were told to
respond more rapidly.
There were four blocks of trials. Each block used one of
four presentation durations (1500ms, 750ms, 500ms, and
300ms). These blocks were ordered randomly for each
subject.

Missing First Feature
Missing First Feature

6

5

5

4

4

Rating

Rating

6

significant effect on categorization. For simplicity, we only
report comparisons between items missing the first feature
and those missing the third, the differences that CSH
predicts to be the largest. For the Base-Rate condition,
items missing the first (100%) feature significantly differed
from items missing the third (60%) feature in the 1500ms
condition, t(29)=3.43, p<.005, and the 750ms condition,
t(29)=2.41, p<.05, but not in the 500ms, t(29)=.3, p>.05, or
300ms, t(29)=1.59, p>.05, conditions. In the Causal
condition, items missing the first (initial cause) feature
differed from those missing the third (terminal effect)
feature in the 1500ms, t(29)=2.22, p<.05, the 750ms,
t(29)=2.86, p<.01, and the 500ms conditions, t(29)=2.06,
p<.05, but not the 300ms condition, t(29)=.81, p>.05.

3
2

Missing First Feature
Missing Third Feature

3
2

1

1
1500ms

750ms
500ms
Response Deadline

300ms

Figure 4: Results from Causal Condition

Results and Discussion
The results from the categorization task can be seen in
Figures 4 and 5. A 2 (knowledge condition: Causal vs.
Base-Rate) X 4 (speed condition: 1500ms vs. 750ms vs.
500ms vs. 300ms) X 2 (item type: missing first feature vs.
missing third) ANOVA was performed with repeated
measures on the latter two factors. We observed a
significant main effect of item type, F(1, 58)=15.14,
p<.0005, that did not interact with knowledge condition,
F<1, demonstrating that both background conditions had the
predicted effect on categorization behaviors. No significant
main effect of speed was observed, F(3, 174)=1.88, p>.05,
but this main effect must be interpreted in light of a
significant interaction between speed and item type, F(3,
174)=6.26, p<.001, which will be further examined below.
No significant main effect of background condition was
observed, F(1, 58)=3.43, p>.05, and this factor did not
interact with either of the other two factors. The three-way
interaction between background condition, speed, and item
type also failed to reach significance, F(3, 174)=1.93, p>.05.
Planned comparisons were carried out to determine at
what response deadlines the background information had a

1500ms

750ms
500ms
Response Deadline

300ms

Figure 5: Results from Base-Rate condition
In light of these results, it is clear that theory-driven
causal knowledge can be utilized to categorize stimuli under
even faster conditions than those created in Experiment 1.
Subjects in this experiment were able to categorize
according to their theory even when allowed only 800ms to
view the exemplar and make a response. This is impressive
considering that this condition was 200ms condition faster
than the speeded condition used by Lin and Murphy (1997;
Experiment 4) – their stimuli were pictures whereas ours
were verbal descriptions. Furthermore, our results indicate
that the base rate information, which has been considered a
key determinant of similarity (Rosch & Mervis, 1975), did
not result in differential responses under this deadline. The
results taken together provide strong evidence that theorybased categorization cannot be slower than similarity-based
categorization.

Conclusion
The current experiments demonstrated two important
findings: First, theory-based categorization, as measured by
the causal status effect, did not necessarily require excessive
periods of deliberation in order to exert an influence on

behavior. Second, the latencies at which theory-use is
possible are comparable to those of similarity-use. These
findings bolster the idea that use of similarity is not
necessarily more primary than theory-use. Instead, it
appears that people’s use of theories and similarity may be
inexorably intertwined, not just during development (Keil,
et al., 1998) but during the course of a single category
decision as well.
One open question concerns the type of reasoning that
takes place when subjects actually categorize transfer items.
Was any causal reasoning taking place during the transfer
tasks, or were subjects simply retrieving pre-compiled
notions about feature importance derived during learning?
Future studies on this issue will help us develop more
detailed processing accounts of theory-based categorization.
The current results, at the very least, clearly demonstrate
that previously acquired causal knowledge influences later
categorization judgments even when rapidly categorizing
objects.

References
Ahn, W. (1998). Why are different features central for natural
kinds and artifacts?: The role of causal status in
determining feature centrality. Cognition, 69, 135-178.
Ahn, W., Kim, N. S., Lassaline, M. E, & Dennis, M. J. (2000).
Causal status as a determinant of feature centrality.
Cognitive Psychology, 41, 361-416.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Hampton, J. A. (1995). Testing prototype theory of concepts.
Journal of Memory and Cognition, 34, 686-708.
Keil, F. C. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and cognitive
development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Keil, F. C., Smith, W. C., Simons, D. J., & Levin, D. T.
(1998). Two dogmas of conceptual empiricism:
Implications for hybrid models of the structure of
knowledge. Cognition, 65, 17-49.
Kim, N. S., & Ahn, W. (2002). The influence of naïve causal
theories on lay concepts of mental illness. American
Journal of Psychology, 115, 33-65.
Kruschke, J. K. (1992). ALCOVE: An exemplar-based
connectionist model of category learning. Psychological
Review, 99, 22-44.
Lamberts, K. (1998). The time course of categorization.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 24, 695-711.
Lin, E. L., & Murphy, G. L. (1997). Effects of background
knowledge on object categorization and part detection.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 23, 1153-1169.
Medin, D. L., & Shoben, E. J. (1988). Context and structure in
conceptual combination. Cognitive Psychology, 20, 158190.

Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories in
conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92, 289316.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 14, 510-520.
Nosofsky, R.M., & Johansen, M.K. (2000). Exemplar-based
accounts of “multiple-system” phenomena in perceptual
categorization. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 375402.
Palmeri, T. J., & Blalock, C. (2000). The role of background
knowledge in speeded perceptual categorization.
Cognition, 77, B45-B57.
Quine, W. V. (1977). Natural kinds. In Schwartz, S.P. (Ed.),
Naming, Necessity, and Natural Kinds. Cornell
University Press, Ithaca, NY.
Rips, L. J. (1989). Similarity, typicality, and categorization. In
S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity analogical
reasoning (pp. 21-59). New York: Cambridge Univ.
Press.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. (1975). Family resemblances: Studies
in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of
reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 3-22.
Sloman, S. A. & Rips, L. J. (1998). Similarity as an
explanatory construct. Cognition, 65, 1-15.
Smith, E. E. & Medin, D. L. (1981). Concepts and
Categories, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Smith, E. E., & Sloman, S. A. (1994). Similarity- versus rulebased categorization. Memory and Cognition, 22, 377386.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological
Review, 84, 327-352.
Vygotsky, L. S., (1962). Thought and language (E. Hanfmann
and G. Vakar, Trans.), MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Wisnewski, E. J. & Medin, D. L. (1994). On the interaction of
theory and data in concept learning. Cognitive Science,
18, 221-281.

