UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Three-year-old Children’s Use of Category Labels and Motion in Drawing Inferences about
Animal Kinds

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9tq5h4rq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Mak, Benise S.K.
Lo, Lap Yan
Vera, Alonso H

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Three-year-old Children’s Use of Category Labels and Motion in
Drawing Inferences about Animal Kinds
Benise S.K. Mak (benise@hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, The University of Hong Kong,
Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, PR China

Alonso H. Vera (avera@arc.nasa.gov)
Cognition Lab, NASA Ames Research Center,
Mailstop 262-4, Moffett Field, CA 94035-1000, USA

Lap Yan Lo (h9605361@hkusua.hk)
Department of Psychology, The University of Hong Kong,
Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, PR China

Abstract
Linguistic labels, information about category memberships,
have been found to be more important than perceptual
information in guiding young children’s inferences about
animal kinds. However, perceptual information of static
shape cues has often been stressed. A recent study has
shown that young children tended to use dynamic
perceptual cues, such as motion, more often than static
shape cues to make categorical judgments. The overriding
effects of linguistic labels over perceptual information in
young children’s inferences need to be re-examined. This
paper was an attempt to examine how 3-year-old children
use category labels and motion cues to draw inferences
about animal kinds. Data showed that preschool children
tended to use motion more often than labels when
confronted with a choice between labels and motion. This
provides support for our view that the role of category
labels in young children’s categorical judgments is not as
important as what has been suggested in previous studies.

Introduction
The Importance of Category Labels
The importance of linguistic information in preschool
children’s inductive inferences about animal kinds has
well been demonstrated in a series of studies by Gelman
and her colleagues (e.g., Gelman & Markman, 1986,
1987; Gelman & Coley, 1990). In their studies, the
extent to which children use category labels and
perceptual appearance was examined. For instance, 2½
years old children were found to be more likely to
assign a property, e.g., “lives in a nest”, from a bluebird
to an atypical bird, dodo, which looked different from
the target but shared the same label “bird” than to a
dinosaur which looked similar to the bluebird but
carried a different label “dinosaur” (Gelman and Coley,
1990). However, when the stimuli were not labeled,

they tended to draw inferences based more on
perceptual similarity than on the similarity of verbal
labels. The young children were able to go beyond
perceptual appearance and use linguistic labels to draw
inferences, suggesting that linguistic information is
more powerful than perceptual information for
preschoolers to draw accurate categorical judgments.
As Gelman and Coley (1990) stated that for young
children “language conveys important information
beyond that which meets the eye” (p.804).
Despite of this, the role of category labels remains to
be determined as perceptual characteristics have
generally been taken as static perceptual cues in
Gelman et al.’s studies. Perceptual cues should also
include dynamic properties, such as motion.

The Importance of Motion Information
In a recent study by Mak and Vera (1999), 4- and 7year-old children have been found to categorize animals
based more on motion similarity than on static shape
similarity.
For instance, they were more likely to
categorize, for example, a donkey with an antelope than
with a horse when the antelope and the donkey were
shown to jump in the same manner even thought the
donkey looked more similar to the horse than to the
antelope. The children tended to infer that the donkey
shared the same property of “having poor vision” that
was ascribed to the antelope rather than the property of
“having good vision” ascribed to the horse. The role of
motion information has been stressed.
As such, this paper tried to look further into the role
of category labels and include motion information to
study young children’s inductive inferences about
animal kinds. We will argue that the effectiveness of
verbal labels is not as important as Gelman et al. have
suggested.

Effectiveness of Category Labels?
Doubts have been raised about the significance of
verbal
labels
in
guiding
children’s
categorical
judgments.
Although Gelman and Coley’s (1990)
studies found that young children were ready to draw
inferences about animals based more on label similarity
than on static shape similarity, their use of linguistic
information seems to rely on the correspondence
between the label and the perceptual information of the
animal stimuli.
If children find the labels are not
congruent with the animal stimuli, they would not use
the linguistic information.
They would do so only
when they believe that the labels and the stimuli match
with one another. This has been illustrated in some of
Gelman et al.’s studies.
For instance, Davidson and Gelman (1990) found that
young children did not use familiar verbal labels to
draw inferences about novel animal categories. In this
study, 4- and 5-year-old children were tested with some
imaginary animals; in one of the experimental
conditions, familiar category labels (e.g., “cow” and
“deer”) were used. Results, which were different from
those in Gelman and Coley’s (1990) study, showed the
preschool children tended not to draw inferences based
more on label similarity than on perceptual similarity.
This might be due to the fact that the children did not
find the labels “cow” and “deer” congruent with the
imaginary stimuli and therefore did not make judgments
based on the labels.
Even when novel linguistic labels (e.g., “zav” and
“traw”) were used, the children did not use the novel
labels and were more likely to use labels than
perceptual appearance to draw inferences.
The
children, in this instance, might not to be able to relate
the novel labels to the imaginary animals; confronted
with a choice between perceptual and linguistic
information, they opted for static perceptual cues.
Therefore, if children find that the familiar labels and
the animal stimuli do not match with one another, they
would not use category labels.
Only when children
believe that the labels go well with the stimuli do they
begin to find the linguistic information useful. Here are
some more examples.
In Gelman and Markman’s (1987) study, familiar
animal categories (e.g., “cat” and “skunk”) were used.
Three- and 4-year-old children were found to be more
likely to assign a property, “can see in the dark”, from a
target cat to another cat (which was shown in different
coloring and posture) than to a skunk (which looked
similar to the target cat) when the animal stimuli were
labeled accordingly.
However, the children also
succeeded in doing so even when verbal labels were not
provided. A follow-up study showed that children were
able to determine the categorical memberships of the
stimuli perceptually when the stimuli were not labeled.
The animal stimuli seemed to be too familiar to the
young children that they could make use of the subtle
Table 1

perceptual cues to draw accurate inferences and did not
need to rely on the linguistic information (Gelman &
Markman, 1987).
Gelman and Markman (1987)
unexpectedly found that familiar linguistic labels could
not help the 3- and 4-year-olds. Only when 2½
-yearold children were tested did they begin to find that
verbal labes could help young children to draw
inferences about familiar animals (e.g., “bird” and
“dinosaur”). This may be due to the fact that the 2½year-olds were somewhat but not completely familiar
with the animal stimuli. They were not able to use the
subtle perceptual cues to determine the category
memberships of the stimuli and needed to rely on the
category labels provided to draw accurate inferences.
This may also be true in the 3- and 4-year-olds in
Gelman and Markman’s (1986) study who were found
to be guided by the similarity and dissimilarity of
linguistic labels in drawing inferences about familiar
animals (e.g., “bat”, “bird”, “dolphin”, “fish”). In the
experiment, young children were shown, for example, a
“bird” set which included two target animals, a
flamingo and a bat (which looked very different from
one another, and a test animals), a blackbird (which
looked more like the bat than the flamingo). In the
conflict condition where the flamingo and the blackbird
were labeled a “bird” and the bat a “bat”, the children
were more likely to categorize the blackbird with the
flamingo than with the bat even though the blackbird
looked more similar to the bat than to the flamingo.
However, in the no-conflict condition where the bat and
the blackbird were labeled a “bat” and the flamingo a
“bird”, the children tended to categorize the blackbird
and the bat together.
In other words, the children
tended to make categorical judgments based more on
linguistic similarity than on perceptual similarity. They
were more likely to categorize the blackbird and the
flamingo together when they shared the same label
“bird” than when the blackbird was labeled a “bat”
instead of a “bird”, suggesting that the young children
were not so familiar with the animal categories, birds
and bats, that they were willing to accept the names,
“bird” and “bat”, to be used to label the blackbird. If
the stimuli were completely familiar to them, they
would not have been guided by the similarity and
dissimilarity of verbal labels, like the 4- and 5-year-olds
in Gelman and Markman’s (1987) later study.
To summarize, the effectiveness of familiar linguistic
labels in guiding young children’s inferences is rather
limited, which relies on two major factors – whether
children find the familiar linguistic labels and the
perceptual information of the animal stimuli match with
one another and their familiarity with the stimuli. Only
when children believe that the linguistic labels are not
in conflict with the stimuli and they are somewhat but
not completely familiar with the stimuli does the
linguistic information become useful.
Otherwise,
linguistic labels cannot help children to draw accurate

Animation items, category labels and target properties used.
Pair Test displays
Target displays
Animal
Motion
Label
Animal
Motion
Same/Different
1
Horse
Walk
“Horse”
Donkey
Walk/Jump

Label
Same/Different
“Horse”/ “Donkey”

Good vision

2

“Quail”/ “Sparrow”

Good hearing

Quail

Walk

“Quail”

Sparrow

inferences.
The effectiveness of linguistic labels in
guiding children’s inferences is not as significant as
Gelman et al. have proposed.

The Present Study
In view of the above, it seems to be reasonable to
believe that perceptual information, including both
static and motion cues, may not be relatively
unimportant in comparison to familiar verbal labels. It
is evident that young children not only rely on linguistic
labels but also use perceptual characteristics to draw
inferences about animal kinds. In this paper, we would
like to like to examine to what extent young children
use familiar linguistic labels and motion cues to draw
inferences.
It is postulated that young children, such as 3-yearold children (who have been found to be ready to draw
inferences based on the similarity and dissimilarity of
familiar linguistic labels), would use both verbal labels
and motion cues to draw inferences about animals.
However, when confronted with a choice between
labels and motion, they would tend to use motion
information more often than linguistic information.

Method
Design
To examine the extent to which 3-year-olds use familiar
linguistic labels and motion cues to draw inferences
about animal kinds, an inductive methodology used in
previous studies (Gelman & Markman, 1986, 1987;
Gelman & Coley, 1990; Mak & Vera, 1999) was
adopted.
Here, young children were required to
consider a pair of animals, a target and a test. They
were taught a new property about the target animal and
were asked whether the target property was true for the
test animal.
The independent variable was three motion/label
conditions: label and motion, label only and motion
only. The dependent measure was children’s responses
on the inference questions: whether they would
generalize the target properties to the test animals.

Participants
Two hundred and twenty 3-year-old children from three
kindergartens in Hong Kong participated: 110 girls and
110 boys, ranging in age from 3 years to 3 years 11
months with a mean age of 3 years 7 months.

Walk/Hop

Property

Stimuli
There were two pairs of animal stimuli: (1) a donkey
and a horse, and (2) a sparrow and a quail. Each pair
consisted of animals with similar appearance and two
series of animations: same and different movement.
The movement of the animals in the animations was
slightly slower than the corresponding real motion, but
they all moved in the same speed. Also, all the stimuli
were drawn in the same brown color with black outline.
The drawings of the animal stimuli used for the
animations are shown in Fig. 1, and the details of the
animation items are shown in Table 1.

Pair 1
Pair 2
Figure 1
The drawings of animal stimuli used for the animation
items.

Control Studies
Property Controls
Some control studies were run to make certain if 3year-old children have any biases in assigning the target
properties to the test animals which were shown to be
static or with certain movement and linguistic labels. In
these controls, children were shown the test animals
alone (i.e., the horse and the quail) one at a time and
were asked if the target properties (i.e., “good vision”
and “good hearing”) were true for the horse and the
quail respectively. Results are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2
Percentages of “yes” responses for 3-year-old children
in the Property Controls.
Control Condition
Percentage
Static
52.5
Label only
57.5
Motion only
52.5
Label and Motion
55
n=20 (half boys and half girls)

Data showed that 3-year-olds performed at about
chance level in saying that the target properties were
true for the test animals, showing no biases in giving
“yes” responses to the test animals.
Static Controls
Two animals of similar appearance were adopted. To
confirm if young children were ready to draw
inferences based on the static perceptual similarity of
the animal stimuli, a static control study was also
conducted. In this control, 3-year-old children (10 boys
and 10 girls) were presented with two sets of animals
but one set at a time without motion. Children were
tested to see if they would generalize the target
properties to the test animals based on static shape
information alone.
Data showed that the young
children were willing to do so 85% of the time, which
was significantly above chance level, p<.0005 (1tailed), suggesting that 3-year-olds were ready to draw
inferences based on the static shape similarity of the
animal stimuli.

Procedure
This was a between-subject design, so that a child (e.g.,
being assigned to the Same-Label and DifferentMovement condition) was tested with two pairs of
animals.
One was the donkey/horse pair; both were
labeled a “horse” but were shown to move in different
manners (i.e., the donkey jumped and the horse
walked). The other one was the sparrow/quail pair;
both shared the same name “quail” but were shown to
move differently (i.e., the sparrow hoped and the quail
walked). The presentation order of the two pairs was
counterbalanced across participants.
Each child was
tested individually.
Throughout the experiment,
instructions were given in Cantonese, the major
Chinese dialect used in Hong Kong. Each child was
tested individually
Children were shown two pairs of animals, one pair
at a time. They were first taught a new property about
the target animal in each pair and were then asked to
infer whether the target property applied to the test
animal. The animal stimuli were labeled according to
the label conditions. Taking the donkey/horse pair in

the Same (Different) Label conditions as an example,
the experimenters first pointed to the donkey and said,
“See this horse (donkey). This horse (donkey) has good
vision; it can see things clearly at a great distance.” The
experimenter then pointed to the horse and said, “See
this horse (horse). Does this horse (horse) have good
vision, like this horse (donkey) (referring to the donkey)
that can see things clearly at a great distance? Or, this
horse (horse), unlike this horse (donkey), does not have
good vision?”
At the end of the experiment, children in the Same
Label groups, who were given somewhat misleading
labels for the target animals, were shown the stimuli
again and were told that the experimenters had made a
mistake in saying that the donkey (sparrow) was a horse
(quail).
The experimenters further explained to the
children that its proper name should be donkey
(sparrow) instead of horse (quail).

Results
Children’s responses on the inference questions
were coded as 1 when they said “yes” (i.e., generalizing
the target properties to the test animals) and 0 when
they said “no” (i.e., not generalizing the target
properties to the test animals).
These scores were
summed within participants, and the score for each
participant ranged form 0 to 2. For each condition, a
one-sample t-test was conducted to examine if children
performed significantly above or below 50% chance
level. Results are summarized in Table 3.

Motion only condition
Data in these conditions clearly show that 3-year-old
children were ready to draw inferences about the animal
stimuli based on the similarity and dissimilarity of the
motion information. When two animals with similar
appearance were shown to move in the same manner,
the young children tended to infer that the test animals
shared the same property ascribed to the target animals
(87.5% of the time, significantly above chance level);
when the two animals moved differently, the children
tended not to do so (20% of the time, significant ly
below chance).

Table 3
Percentages of “yes” responses for 3-year-old children in Label only, Motion only and Label and Motion conditions.
Condition
Percentage
Motion only
Same
87.5
***
Different
20
++
Label only
Same
90
***
Different
15
+++
Label and Motion
Same Label/Different Motion
10
+++
Different Label/Same Motion
82.5
***
n=20 (half boys and half girls)
***
above chance, P<.0005, one-tailed
+++
below chance, P<.0005, one-tailed

below chance, P<.005, one-tailed

Label only condition
Three-year-old children were also found to draw
inferences based on the similarity and dissimilarity of
the linguistic labels provided in the experiment. When
two animals with similar appearance shared the same
name, the 3-year-olds tended to agree that the target
properties were also true for the test animals (90% of
the time, significantly above chance). The children did
not do so (15% of the time, significantly below chance)
when the two animals were labeled with different
names.

In these conditions, label similarity and motion
similarity were in contrast with one another. Results
indicate that the 3-year-olds were more likely to draw
inferences about the animal stimuli based on motion
information than on linguistic information. When two
animals moved in the same manner, the children tended
to draw inferences 82.5% of the time (significantly
above 50% chance level) even though the stimuli were
labeled with different names; when two animals moved
in different manners, they tended to draw inferences
20% of the time (significantly below chance) although
the animal stimuli shared the same name.
In order to have a clearer picture of how children
changed their choices between linguistic and motion
information, 3-year-old children’s responses in Label
only and Label and Motion conditions are shown in
Figure 2.
Percentages of "yes" responses

Same Label

90%

Diff Label
Same Motion

80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%

Same Label
Diff Motion

However, 3-year-olds did not change much about
their choice of motion information when additional
contrasting
label
information
was
introduced.
Children’s responses in Motion only and Label and
Motion conditions are shown in Figure 3.
100%

Label and Motion condition

100%

inferences 15% of the time when two stimuli were
labeled with different names in the Label only
condition, while they gave “yes” responses 82.5% of
the time when the stimuli were shown to move in the
same manner even though they were labeled with
different names in the Label and Motion condition.

Diff Label

10%
0%

Percentages of "yes" responses

++

90%
80%
70%

Same Motion
Same Motion
Diff Label

60%
50%
40%
30%

Diff Motion
Diff Motion
Same Label

20%
10%
0%

Motion Only

87.5%

20%

Label and Motion

82.5%

10%

Figure 3
Percentages of “yes” responses for 3-year-old children
in Motion only and Label and Motion conditions
This figure shows that children drew inferences 87.5%
of the time when two animals moved in the same
manner in the Motion only condition and did likewise
82.5% of the time even when different labels were
ascribed to the stimuli in the Label and Motion
condition.
Moreover, when two animals moved in
different manners in the Motion only condition, children
made inferences only 20% of the time, and they drew
inference 10% of the time even though the same label
was ascribed to the stimuli in the Label and Motion
condition.

Discussion

Label Only

90%

15%

Label and Motion

10%

82.5%

Figure 2
Percentages of “yes” responses for 3-year-old children
in Label only and Label and Motion conditions.
This figure shows that 3-year-olds tended to shift their
choices from linguistic labels to motion when
contrasting motion information was introduced in
addition to the linguistic information.
Children drew
inferences 90% of the time from a target to a test animal
when two animal stimuli shared the same name in the
Label only condition, whereas they made inferences
only 10% of the time when additional different
movement patterns were introduced to the stimuli in the
Label and Motion condition. Moreover, children drew

The current findings provide support for our hypothesis
that linguistic information may not be relatively more
important than perceptual information, including both
static and dynamic characteristics, in guiding young
children’s inferences about animal kinds.
Data show
that 3-year-old children were ready to use both category
labels and motion information to draw inferences.
However, having to make a choice between labels and
motion, children tended to use motion more often than
familiar category labels.
Also, this seems to provide support our view that the
effectiveness of category labels in guiding young
children’s inferences about animals may be rather
limited. The importance of linguistic labels that has
been suggested by previous studies need to be rethought.

Although to what extent children use category labels
and motion was compared in this study, we are not
suggesting that linguistic and perceptual information
play distinct roles in young children’s inferences (for
this argument, see also Gelman & Medin, 1993; Jones
& Smith, 1993). Evidence has shown that children use
both linguistic and perceptual (including static and
dynamic) information to draw inferences.
However,
how static shape cues, motion and linguistic labels
interact to guide children’s inferences remains to be
determined in future studies.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a CRCG Grant
(#10203543) from the Hong Kong University Research
Committee.

References
Davidson, N.S., & Gelman, S.A. (1990). Inductions
from novel categories: The role of language and
conceptual structure. Cognitive Development, 5, 151176.
Gelman, S.A., & Coley, J.D. (1990). The importance of
knowing a dodo is a bird: Categories and inferences
in 2-year-old children. Developmental Psychology, 26
(5). 796-804.
Gelman, S.A., & Markman, E.M. (1986). Categories
and induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183209.
Gelman, S.A., & Markman, E.M. (1987). Young
children’s inductions from natural kinds: The role of
categories and appearances. Child Development, 58,
1532-1541.
Gelman, S.A., & Medin, D.L. (1993). Commentary:
what’s so essential about essentialism? A different
perspective on the interaction of perception, language
and conceptual knowledge. Cognitive Development,
8, 157-167.
Jones, S.S., & Smith, L.G. (1993). The place of
perception
in
children’s
concepts.
Cognitive
Development, 8, 113-139.
Mak, B.S.K., & Vera, A.H. (1999). The role of motion
in children’s categorization of objects. Cognition, 71,
B11-B21.

