UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What is universal in event perception? Comparing English &amp; Indonesian speakers

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5jd5w5c8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Boroditsky, Lera
Ham, Wendy
Ramscar, Michael

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What is Universal in Event Perception? Comparing English & Indonesian Speakers
Lera Boroditsky (lera@mit.edu)
NE20-456, MIT, 77 Mass Ave
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Wendy Ham (wendyham@mit.edu)
NE20-456, MIT, 77 Mass Ave
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Michael Ramscar (michael@dai.ed.ac.uk)
University of Edinburgh, 2 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh, EH8 9LW Scotland

Abstract
Does the language you speak shape the way you think about
the world? Four studies investigate how English and
Indonesian speakers encode and represent action events.
Unlike English, Indonesian verbs do not include tense
markers. Indonesian speakers are not required to indicate
whether an event has already occurred, is happening now, or
will occur in the future. Does needing to include tense to
speak English grammatically change the way English
speakers pay attention to, encode and remember events? We
find cross-linguistic differences in memory and similarity
judgments between English and Indonesian speakers, as well
as between Indonesian-English bilinguals tested in English
and Indonesian.

Introduction
Humans communicate with one another using a dazzling
array of languages, and each language differs from the next
in innumerable ways (from obvious differences in
pronunciation and vocabulary to more subtle differences in
grammar). For example, to say that ìthe elephant ate the
peanutsî in English, we must include tense - the fact that the
event happened in the past. In Mandarin and Indonesian,
indicating when the event occurred would be optional and
couldnít be included in the verb. In Russian, the verb would
need to include tense and also whether the peanut-eater was
male or female (though only in the past tense), and whether
said peanut-eater ate all of the peanuts or just a portion of
them. In Turkish, one would specify (as a suffix on the
verb) whether the eating of the peanuts was witnessed or if
it was hearsay. Speakers of different languages have to
attend to and encode strikingly different aspects of the
world in order to use their language properly (Sapir, 1921;
Slobin, 1996). Do these quirks of languages affect the way
their speakers think about the world?
Do English,
Mandarin, Russian, and Turkish speakers end up attending
to, partitioning, and remembering their experiences
differently simply because they speak different languages?
The relationship between language and thought is one
of the most central questions in Cognitive Science. The
universality of mental representations (whether or not

speakers of different languages think differently about the
world) has long been at the center of a controversy
attracting thinkers from Plato to Chomsky, but despite much
attention and debate, definitive answers have not been
forthcoming. The idea that thought is shaped by language is
most commonly associated with the writings of Benjamin
Lee Whorf (Whorf, 1956). Whorf, impressed by linguistic
diversity, proposed that the categories and distinctions of
each language enshrine a way of perceiving, analyzing, and
acting in the world. In so far as languages differ, their
speakers too should differ in how they perceive and act in
otherwise objectively similar situations.
This strong
Whorfian viewóthat thought and action are entirely
determined by languageóhas long been abandoned in the
field. However, definitively answering less deterministic
versions of the ìdoes language shape thoughtî question has
proven a very difficult task. Some studies have claimed
evidence to the affirmative (e.g., Boroditsky, 2001;
Bowerman, 1996; Davidoff, Davies, & Roberson, 1999;
Gentner & Imai, 1997; Levinson, 1996; Lucy, 1992;
Dehaene, Spelke, Pinel, Stanescu, & Tsivkin, 1999;
Hermer-Vasquez, Spelke, & Katsnelson, 1999; Spelke &
Tsivkin, 2001), while others report evidence to the contrary
(e.g., Heider, 1972; Malt, Sloman, Gennari, Shi, & Wang,
1999; Li & Gleitman, in press).
One possible resolution to this debate might be that some
conceptual domains are more susceptible to linguistic
influence than others. For example, Gentner and Boroditsky
(2001) have argued that the effect of language should be
most apparent in the conceptualization of relations
(typically encoded by verbs and spatial prepositions). In
general, the lexicalization of actions and relations varies
much more cross-linguistically than does the lexicalization
of object categories, and picking out the extent and
generality of a relational concept requires considerable
experience with language. Recent research has supported
this view (Gillette, Gleitman, Gleitman, & Lederer, 1999).
For example, in one study, adults watched silent films of
mothers talking to their children and tried to guess what was
being said. Given only the silent film, adult participants
were able to correctly guess nouns three times more often

than verbs (45% and 15% correct respectively). Further,
concrete activity verbs like 'push' were much more easily
guessed from silent observation than from the syntactic
frames in which they were used (50% and 15%
respectively), whereas verbs that denote more abstract
activities like 'think' were much more easily guessed from
syntax than from observation (90% and 0% respectively). It
appears that acquiring representations of actions, relations,
and events requires experience with language.
This
suggests that the eventual form of these concepts may be
importantly shaped by the language experience.
This paper examines a cross-linguistic difference in verb
syntax between Indonesian and English, and its effects on
peopleís representations of action events.
Unlike English, Indonesian verbs do not include tense
(they do not indicate whether the event or action took place
in the past, is taking place in the present or will take place in
the future). While Indonesian speakers may use other
temporal words (e.g., just now, or soon) to communicate
this information, these temporal markers are optional, and
the tense of an action is often left to be inferred from
context.
For example, in order to describe the three pictures shown
in Figure 1, an English speaker might say (from left to right)
ìJohn is about to kick the ball,î ìJohn is kicking the ball,î
and ìJohn has kicked the ball.î In Indonesian all three
pictures would likely be described by the same sentence,
roughly ìJohn kick ball.î Does this difference between how
English and Indonesian speakers talk about action events
lead to differences in how the two groups attend to, encode,
and represent the events?
We report four studies aimed at uncovering differences
and similarities between Indonesian and English speakers in
terms of how they encode and represent actions and events.

speakers will rate same-tense pairs more similar than will
Indonesian speakers, but will rate different-tense pairs less
similar than will Indonesian speakers.

Methods
Participants 14 native English and 12 monolingual
Indonesian speakers participated in this study in exchange
for payment. The English speakers were recruited and
tested at MIT, and the Indonesian speakers were tested in
Jakarta. None of the Indonesian speakers had learned
English.
Materials A set of 90 pictures served as stimuli for this
experiment. The pictures portrayed 10 different actions,
each action performed by three different actors. For each
actor performing a particular action there were 3 versions
showing the actor about to perform the action, doing the
action, and having done the action (as shown in Figure 1).
The actions were: kicking a ball, throwing a frisbee, eating a
banana, drinking orange juice, ripping a sheet of paper,
cutting a rope, hula-hooping, lifting a very large ball,
pouring dark liquid out of a clear container, and opening an
umbrella. The actions were chosen to be sufficiently
different from one another to ensure generality.

Figure 1: Example of action in three different tenses.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 examined whether speaking a tensed language
makes English speakers think of actions in different tenses
as less similar, and actions in the same tense as more
similar. English and monolingual Indonesian speakers were
shown pairs of pictures that show either two different actors
performing the same action in the same tense, or the same
actor performing the same action in two different tenses (as
shown in Figure 2). Subjects were asked to rate the
similarity of a large set of such pairs (on a 9 point scale
where 1=not similar and 9=very similar). The linguistic
difference between the two languages predicts that English

Figure 2: Examples of picture-pairs used.
Design A set of 180 picture pairs were created. Half of
these showed the same actor performing the same action in
different tenses (as shown in Figure 2A), and half showed
two different actors performing the same action in the same
tense (as shown in Figure 2B). All possible combinations of
pictures that yielded such pairs were used (a total of 180
pairs).

Procedure Participants were tested individually in a quiet
room. English speakers were given instructions in English,
and Indonesian speakers were given instructions in
Indonesian. The English instructions were: ìYou will see
two pictures each time. Your task is to rate how similar
those two pictures are. In rating them, use the numbers 1
through 9: 1 for NOT similar at all, 9 for VERY similar.î
The Indonesian instructions were: ìSetiap kali, Anda akan
melihat dua gambar. Kami minta agar Anda mengatakan
seberapa mirip dua gambar itu. Gunakan angka 1 sampai
dengan 9. 1 untuk SANGAT TIDAK MIRIP, 9 untuk
MIRIP SEKALI.î
The participants were also told that all of the pairs
would be pretty similar, but they should still try to use the
whole range of similarity ratings from 1 to 9.
A computer presented the 180 pairs in a new random
order for each subject. Each pair stayed on the computer
screen until the subject pressed a key (1 through 9) to
indicate their similarity rating.

Discussion
English and Indonesian speakers appeared to focus on
different aspects of action scenes in making their similarity
comparisons. English speakers seemed to hone in on tense,
judging actions in the same tense but performed by different
actors (as shown in Figure 2b) to be more similar than
actions performed in different tenses but by the same actor
(as shown in Figure 2a). The Indonesian speakers showed
the opposite pattern, appearing to ignore similarity of tense
in favor of similarity of actor.
This raises two further questions: (1) Do Indonesian
speakers who learn the English tense system change the way
they think about events? and (2) Do Indonesian-English
bilinguals think differently when speaking Indonesian than
when speaking English? Experiment 2 tested IndonesianEnglish bilinguals both in Indonesian and in English on the
same task as described in Experiment 1.

Experiment 2

Results
Results are shown in Figure 3. As predicted, English
speakers rated same-tense pictures (involving different
actors) more similar than did Indonesian speakers (M=6.34
for English speakers, and M=4.82 for Indonesian speakers),
t=2.07, df=24, p<.05. Further, as predicted, English
speakers rated different-tense pictures less similar than did
Indonesian speakers (M=5.56 for English speakers, and
M=6.64 for Indonesian speakers), t=1.71, df=24, p<.05. The
difference between the two language groups was confirmed
as an interaction between comparison type (between-tense
or within-tense) and language (English or Indonesian) in a
2x2 repeated measures ANOVA, F(1,24)=4.41, p<.05. This
pattern of findings suggests that using the English tense
system may change English speakersí representations of
actions, making differently tensed actions appear more
distinct and actions in the same tense appear more similar.

Methods
All of the materials, design and procedure were exactly as
described for Experiment 1. Seventeen Indonesian-English
bilinguals participated in this study. Seven were tested in
English and ten were tested in Indonesian. All of the
participants were native speakers of Indonesian and were
matched on their amount of experience with English.

Results and Discussion
same actor, different tense
different actor, same tense

8

same actor, different tense
different actor, same tense

similarity rating (1=not similar)

8

7

6

similarity rating (1=not similar)

7

6

5

4

3
tested in English

tested in Indonesian

5

Figure 4: Results of Experiment 2.
4

3
English speakers

Indonesian speakers

Figure 3: Results of Experiment 1.

Results are shown in Figure 4. Indonesian-English
bilinguals rated same-tense pictures (involving different
actors) more similar when they were tested in English than
when tested in Indonesian, (M=6.64 when tested in English,
and M=5.27 when tested in Indonesian).
Further,
Indonesian-English bilinguals rated different-tense pictures
less similar when they were tested in English than when

Experiment 3
Although the findings of Experiments 1 & 2 are very
suggestive, the similarity-ratings task used is subjective and
may tell us more about the participantsí cognitive
preferences than about their cognitive performance. Could
cross-linguistic differences lead to difference in cognitive
performance and not just preference?
Experiment 3 was designed to test Indonesian and
English speakersí ability to remember action events.
Subjects were shown pictures of people performing actions
(the same pictures were used as in Experiments 1 & 2).
During the learning phase, each subject saw a person
performing an action in one of three tenses (e.g., they may
have seen only the middle panel of Figure 1). During the
test phase, subjects were shown pictures of that person
performing the action in all three tenses (as shown in Figure
1) and asked to choose which one they had seen previously.
We predicted that English speakers should be better than
Indonesian speakers at encoding and remembering the tense
in which they witnessed an action.

Methods
Participants 13 native English and 18 monolingual
Indonesian speakers participated in this study in exchange
for payment. The English speakers were recruited and
tested at MIT, and the Indonesian speakers were tested in
Jakarta. None of the Indonesian speakers had learned
English.
Materials and Design All of the same pictures as described
for Experiment 1 were used. During the learning phase,
subjects were shown 30 of the 90 pictures (1 picture of each

person doing each action in only one of the possible 3
tenses). At test, subjects were shown all three pictures of a
person performing an action in all 3 tenses (all three pictures
were presented simultaneously) and asked to choose which
one they had seen earlier.
Procedure Participants were tested individually in a quiet
room. English speakers were given instructions in English,
and Indonesian speakers were given instructions in
Indonesian. Participants were told to simply look at the
pictures and try to remember everything they saw.
Participants were not instructed to encode the pictures
linguistically.
A computer presented the pictures in a new random
order for each subject (both for the learning and test sets).
During the learning, each picture was shown only once and
stayed on the screen for 3 seconds. During the test, the
pictures stayed on the screen until the subject made a
response (by pressing 1, 2, or 3 on the keyboard to
correspond to which picture they thought they had seen
previously).

Results
Results are shown in Figure 5. As predicted, English
speakers were better able to remember which of the three
tense versions of a picture they had seen before. English
speakers were able to pick the correct answer 41% of the
time, as compared to Indonesian speakers who only
succeeded 31% of the time, t=1.72, df=29, p<.05.
Indonesian speakers were not better than chance at
recognizing the picture they had seen before
(chance=33.3%).
0.5

English speakers
Indonesian speakers

0.45

percent correct recognition

tested in Indonesian (M=5.11 when tested in English, and
M=5.42 when tested in Indonesian). The difference between
the two groups was confirmed as an interaction between
comparison type (between-tense or within-tense) and
language of testing (English or Indonesian) in a 2x2
repeated measures ANOVA, F(1,15)=4.40, p<.05.
This pattern of findings suggests two things. First, it
appears that bilinguals do think differently when speaking
different languages. Even though the task was conducted in
pictures, setting a linguistic context by providing
instructions either in English or in Indonesian changed the
way Indonesian-English bilinguals reasoned about the
action events in this study.
Second, it appears that learning a new language can
change the way one thinks. The Indonesian-English
bilinguals who were tested in Indonesian showed a pattern
that was somewhere in-between the pattern shown by
monolingual Indonesian speakers and the pattern shown by
English speakers. Even though they were tested entirely in
Indonesian it appears that having learned English may have
changed the way they think about action events. Further
studies will be necessary to explore this possibility in more
detail.

0.4

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

Figure 5: Results of Experiment 3.

tested in English
tested in Indonesian

0.5

Discussion

Experiment 4
In Experiment 4, Indonesian-English bilinguals were tested
either in Indonesian or in English in the same memory task
as described for Experiment 3.

Methods
All of the materials, design and procedure were exactly as
described for Experiment 3. Eighteen Indonesian-English
bilinguals participated in this study. Seven were tested in
English and eleven were tested in Indonesian. All of the
participants were native speakers of Indonesian and were
matched on their linguistic and educational background.

Results and Discussion
Results are shown in Figure 6. As predicted IndonesianEnglish bilinguals were better able to remember the tense of
actions when they were tested in English (40% correct) than
when they were tested in Indonesian (26% correct), t=1.76,
df=16, p<.05. When they were tested in Indonesian,
Indonesian-English bilinguals did not perform better than
chance (in fact, slightly worse).
These results suggest that even something as subtle as
linguistic context (whether instructions were given in
English or Indonesian) can have an effect on how people
encode and represent events. Even though subjects were not
asked to encode the events linguistically (and the entire task
was conducted in pictures), peopleís ability to remember the
tense of events they had witnessed (whether they saw
someone about to kick a ball or having already kicked a
ball) depended on whether or not tense distinctions were
required in the language in which they had been greeted and
given instructions just prior to the task.

0.45

percent correct recognition

Results of Experiment 3 suggest that experience with
particular languages may affect not only peopleís cognitive
preferences, but also aspects of their performance on basic
cognitive tasks (such as memory). However, it is possible
that differences in memory performance between English
and Indonesian speakers observed in this task are not due to
linguistic differences, but rather to other differences in
cultural upbringing or education. It is quite possible that the
English speakers included in this sample (mostly MIT
undergraduates) have received more training in
memorization than the Indonesian speakers in our sample.
In order to control for such differences, Experiment 4 tested
Indonesian-English bilinguals (who were matched on
educational and cultural background) either in English or in
Indonesian in the same task as described for Experiment 3.
By keeping constant educational and linguistic background
and only varying the language of testing we can test whether
speaking one language versus another can really affect
aspects of oneís cognitive performance.

0.4

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

Figure 6: Results of Experiment 4.

Summary
Four studies investigated the effect of linguistic experience
on how people attend to, encode, and represent action
events. The results suggested that experience with the
English tense system makes English speakers think of
actions in the same tenses as more similar and action in
different tenses as less similar. Unlike English speakers,
Indonesian speakers did not appear to value tense in making
their similarity judgments. Further, English speakers were
better able to remember the tense of an action they had
witnessed than were Indonesian speakers (who did not
perform above chance on the memory task).
Studies that tested Indonesian-English bilinguals in
either English or Indonesian provided further insights about
how language may affect thinking. Both in memory and
similarity ratings, the language that bilinguals were tested in
had an effect on the subjectsí performance in the task.
Indonesian-English bilinguals looked just like English
speakers when tested in English, and much more like
Indonesian speakers when tested in Indonesian. Further,
results of the similarity study suggested that learning a new
language can change the way one thinks ñ IndonesianEnglish bilinguals tested in Indonesian showed a pattern of
results that was somewhere in-between the Englishspeakersí pattern and that shown by monolingual
Indonesian speakers.
Overall, it appears that representations of action events
are not universal. Experience with the English tense system
appears to segment actions into distinct temporal categories
that are not basic or universal to human cognition. Further,
even something as subtle as linguistic context (here, the
language in which instructions are given for a non-linguistic
task) appears to have a striking effect on how people encode
and represent their experiences.
It appears that speakers of different languages do attend
to, partition, and remember their experiences differently,
simply due to the implementational differences of the
languages they speak.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Tracy Alloway for
discussion of this work and Shijun Xi and Mindy Chang for
help with data collection. The authors would also like to
thank Webb Phillips, Daniel Casasanto and the other
citizens of Cognation for discussion and help with
assembling the stimuli.

References
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does Language Shape Thought?
Mandarin and English speakers conceptions of time.
Cognitive Psychology, 43(1), 1-22.
Bowerman, M. (1996). The origins of childrenís spatial
semantic categories: cognitive versus linguistic
determinants. In J. Gumperz & S. Levinson (Eds.),
Rethinking linguistic relativity. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press, 145-176.
Davidoff, J., Davies, I., & Roberson, D. (1999). Colour
categories in a stone-age tribe. Nature, 398, 203-204.
Dehaene, S., Spelke, E., Pinel, P., Stanescu, R., & Tsivkin,
S. (1999). Sources of mathematical thinking:
Behavioral and brain-imaging evidence. Science,
284, 970-974.
Gentner, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2001). Individuation,
relational relativity and early word learning. In M.
Bowerman & S. Levinson (Eds.), Language
acquisition and conceptual development. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D. & Imai, M. (1997). A cross-linguistic study of
early word meaning: Universal ontology and
linguistic influence. Cognition 62, 2, 169-200.
Gillette, J., Gleitman, H., Gleitman, L., Lederer, A. (1999).
Human simulations of vocabulary learning.
Cognition, 73(2), 135-176.
Heider, E. (1972). Universals in color naming and memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 93, 10-20.
Hermer-Vasquez, L., Spelke, E. S. & Katsnelson, A. S.
(1999). Sources of flexibility in human cognition:
Dual-task studies of space and language. Cognitive
Psychology, 39, 3-36.
Kay, P., & Kempton, W. (1984). What is the Sapir-Whorf
hypothesis? American Anthropologist, 86, 65-79.
Levinson, S. (1996). Frames of reference and Molyneux's
question: Crosslinguistic evidence. In P. Bloom &
M. Peterson (Eds.), Language and Space.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 109-169.
Li, P. & Gleitman, L. (in press). Turning the tables.
Cognition.
Lucy, J. (1992). Grammatical categories and cognition: a
case study of the linguistic relativity hypothesis.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Lucy, J., & Shweder, R. (1979). Whorf and his critics:
Linguistic and nonlinguistic influences on color
memory. American Anthropologist, 81, 581-618.

Malt, B., Sloman, S., Gennari, S., Shi, M., & Wang, Y.
(1999). Knowing versus naming: Similarity and the
linguistic categorization of artifacts. Journal of
Memory and Language, 40, 230-262.
Sapir, E. (1921). Language, New York, NY: Harcourt,
Brace, and World.
Slobin, D. (1996). From ìthought and languageî to
ìthinking for speaking.î In J. Gumperz & S.
Levinson (Eds.), Rethinking linguistic relativity.
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 70-96.
Spelke, E., & Tsivkin, S. (2001). Language and number: A
bilingual training study. Cognition, 78(1), 45-88.
Whorf, B. (1956). Language, Thought, and Reality:
selected writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf, ed. J.B.
Carroll. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

