UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What’s a Science Student to Do?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2jc1t41v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
O’Reilly, Tenaha
McNamara, Danielle S

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What’s a Science Student to Do?
Tenaha O’Reilly (toreilly@odu.edu)
Danielle S. McNamara (dmcnamar@odu.edu)
and The Strategies Lab
Psychology Department, Old Dominion University
Norfolk, VA 23529 USA

Abstract
This study examined the influence of cognitive ability and
student activities on high-school students’ science
achievement. Students (n=1651) from four high schools in
three states were assessed in terms of their cognitive abilities
(i.e., science knowledge, reading skill, and metacognitive
reading strategies), course involvement, reading interest, and
TV habits. Science achievement was measured in terms of
students’ course grade, comprehension of a science passage,
and performance on a statewide standards of learning (SOL)
test. Course involvement significantly predicted only course
grade, whereas reading interest predicted SOL scores and
science passage comprehension. Cognitive abilities and TV
habits predicted all three of the student achievement
measures. However, the effects of these cognitive variables
interacted in interesting ways.

Introduction
In recent years, scientists have become increasingly
interested in uncovering factors that are important for
predicting educational success (e.g., Buckner, Bassuk, &
Weinreb, 2001; Herman & Tucker, 2000). For example,
researchers have reliably predicted academic achievement
with measures of student personality (Paunonen & Ashton,
2001; Stewart, Bond, Deeds, Westrick, & Wong, 1999),
parental influence (Hoge, Smit, & Crist, 1997), social
economic status (Jimerson, Egeland, & Teo, 1999), and
school demographics (Sutton & Soderstrom, 1999). While
this line of research has certainly shed light on how student
personality and social factors can impact a child’s
education, the utility of this information is questionable if
the goal of scientific inquiry is to improve scholastic
prosperity. Most personality characteristics and social
factors are relatively stable; very few introverts quickly turn
into extroverts, and even fewer people increase their level
of social economic status overnight. In contrast, the
investigation of more mutable influences such as cognitive
abilities may provide a promising direction for improving
academic performance. The purpose of this work was to
examine the impact of three cognitive factors on students’
success in their science courses: reading skill, science
knowledge, and knowledge of metacognitive reading
strategies.
It is generally assumed that reading skill is a critical
component of academic achievement. Skilled readers are
more likely to monitor their comprehension and use active
reading strategies such as previewing, predicting, making
inferences, drawing from background knowledge, and

summarizing (Long, Oppy, & Seely, 1994; McNamara,
2001; Oakhill, 1984; Oakhill & Yuill, 1996). In addition,
skilled readers tend to have more knowledge about the
world – most likely from reading more often.
Readers’ domain knowledge can have a dramatic impact
on how well new information is acquired (Bransford &
Johnson, 1972). For instance, many school texts are
incomplete because they fail to make relations amongst
concepts in the text explicit (Beck, McKeown & Gromoll,
1989). Accordingly, domain knowledge can facilitate
comprehension by providing the reader with the necessary
resources to fill in conceptual gaps (McNamara, Kintsch,
Songer, & Kintsch, 1996). In addition, readers with greater
prior knowledge are more likely to use effective reading
strategies (Lundeberg, 1987) and convey greater interest in
the reading material than low-knowledge readers (Tobias,
1994; Zhang, & Zhang, 1996). Collectively, these findings
suggest that learners’ prior knowledge critically determines
their ability to learn and understand new information.
Metacognition refers to the ability to think about,
understand and manage one’s learning (Schraw &
Dennison, 1994). In essence, metacognition is the capacity
to monitor comprehension, and the initiative to correct
misunderstanding. Recent research has revealed the
significance of metacognitive awareness in learning. For
instance, learners who score high on measures of
metacognition are more strategic (Garner & Alexander,
1989), more likely to use problem-solving heuristics (Artzt
& Armour-Thomas, 1992), better at predicting their test
scores (Vadhan & Stander, 1994), and generally outperform
learners who score low on metacognitive measures
(Pressley & Ghatala, 1990).
More importantly, research has demonstrated the value of
metacognition in predicting academic achievement. For
example, greater metacognitive ability has been linked to
grade point average (Everson & Tobias, 1998), math
achievement (Maqsud, 1997), and reading skill (van
Kraayenoord & Schneider, 1999). Moreover, McNamara
and Scott (1999) demonstrated that providing metacognitive
reading strategy training improved comprehension and
course scores in college-level science courses.
The purpose of this investigation was to examine the
influence of science knowledge, reading skill, and
metacognitive reading strategies on high school students’
achievement in science. While the individual effects of
these factors on learning have been examined in separate
studies, to the best of our knowledge, no single study has
simultaneously measured the influence of all three variables

on students’ comprehension and achievement in a
classroom setting. Furthermore, we were interested in
determining how course involvement, reading interest, and
TV habits would influence science performance, and how
well these variables would predict student success in
comparison to the cognitive factors. Finally, we
investigated whether reading skill or metacognitive reading
strategies could compensate for knowledge deficits. In this
study, science achievement was assessed by the student’s
science course grade, comprehension of a science passage,
and a statewide measure of students’ science achievement
(Virginia’s Standards of Learning, SOL). It was
hypothesized that both the cognitive and student activity
measures would reliably predict science achievement; but
overall, it was hypothesized that the cognitive measures
would better predict performance than measures of student
activity.
In line with other work (Perfetti, 1989), it was
hypothesized that either reading skill or metacognitive
reading strategies would compensate for science
knowledge. While some researchers have argued that
reading skill and domain knowledge can compensate for
each other (Perfetti, 1989), there is little consensus as to
whether metacognitive reading strategies could make up for
meager science knowledge. On the one hand, one might
infer that high metacognitive reading strategies could help a
learner offset a low level of science knowledge because
research has shown that metacognition can compensate
various cognitive abilities (Swanson, 1990). On the other
hand, others have argued that metacognition has strong
knowledge requirements; that is metacognition is not
knowledge free (Schwartz & Bransford, 1998) and
consequently, one might not expect metacognitive reading
ability to compensate for low science knowledge. In any
event, the issue is unclear and further investigation is
required.

Method

drawing from background knowledge; and summarizing.
The Cronbach’s Alpha for the MSI was α=.68. Science
knowledge was measured with an 18-item multiple choice
test on general science information. The test consisted of
questions concerning experimental methods, mathematics,
and meteorology. Cronbach’s Alpha for the science
knowledge was α=.63. Reading skill was measured by a
modified version of the Gates-MacGinitie reading skill test
for grades 10-12. The test consisted of 40 multiple choice
questions designed to assess student comprehension on
several short text passages. The reliability of the gatesMacGinitie is typically between α=.85-.92 (Phillips, Norris,
Osmond, & Maynard, 2002).
Students were given a questionnaire concerning their
course involvement, reading interest and TV habits. The
participants were required to rate the following statements
related to their course involvement on a one to five-point
scale: “How much do you enjoy learning science, or
scientific concepts?”; “How much time per week do you
generally spend reading and studying for this science
course?” and “How much effort have you devoted to this
science course?”. For reading interest, the following
questions were asked “How much do you enjoy reading?”;
and “How many books do you read each year that are not
required by your teachers?”. TV habits were assessed by
two questions: “How many hours of television do you
watch during a school day?”; and “How many hours of
television do you watch on the weekend?”. The scales were
designed such that higher numbers indicated larger amount
of the entity in question.
Finally, participants were given an 844-word passage on
meteorology (Flesch-Kincaid grade level of 6.7). The
passage covered the types and origins of air masses as well
as their impact on weather patterns. An accompanying set
of 8 multiple choice and 12 open-ended comprehension
questions were created for the passage. Cronbach’s Alpha
for the open ended questions was α=.72, while alpha level
for the multiple choice questions was α=.57.

Participants

Design and Procedure

The sample consisted of 1651 high school students from
four schools. Four hundred and ninety-eight students were
from an inner city high school in Norfolk, Virginia; 372
were from a rural high school in Americus, Georgia; 364
were from a rural Appalachian high school in Prestonsburg,
Kentucky; and the remaining 417 were from a suburban
high school in Williamsburg, Virginia. Students’ grade
level ranged from 9 to 12, and the average age of the
students was 16.25 years.

The students were tested during regular classroom hours in
a 90-minute class period, or two 50-minute class periods,
and all testing was conducted near the end of the academic
year. The complete set of materials were presented in a
single booklet with “stop’’ pages inserted between each
measure. If a student finished a particular test early, they
could recheck their answers, but could not go on to the next
section. The participants completed the measures in the
following order and time frame: Science passage and
questions (20 minutes), Gates reading test (20 minutes),
prior knowledge test (10 minutes) MSI (10 minutes), and
the student activity questionnaire (5 minutes). At the end of
the academic year, the students’ science course grade and
their Standards of Learning science scores were collected.

Materials
Metacognitive reading strategy use was measured by a
modified version of the Metacognitive Strategies Index
(MSI) adapted for use with high-school students (Forget,
1999). The MSI is a 25-item multiple-choice questionnaire
which is designed to measure six factors associated with
metacognitive reading strategy use: predicting and
verifying; previewing; purpose setting; self-questioning;

Results
The following results were significant at the p < .001 level
unless noted otherwise. It was verified for all analyses
reported here that students’ age differences did not alter the
pattern of results.

What’s More Important?
A factor analysis was conducted to determine whether the
predictors used in this study could be grouped into smaller
subset of factors (e.g., Cognitive ability, reading interest,
etc.). All 10 measures of student ability and activity were
entered into the analysis using the principal components
method of extraction. Predictors with Eigenvalues over 1
were retained in the analysis, and the Varimax procedure
was used as the method of rotation. The analysis revealed
four distinct factors that accounted for 68% of the overall
variance. Science knowledge, reading skill and
metacognitive reading ability loaded on factor 1, Cognitive
Ability (loadings=.800, .760, .692; Eigenvalue=2.67), and
accounted for 27% of the variance. The number of books
read and reading enjoyment loaded on factor 2, Reading
Interest (loadings=.891, .849; Eigenvalue=1.90), and
accounted for 19% of the variance. The amount of TV
watched on a school day and the amount watched on a
weekend loaded on factor 3, TV Habits, (loadings=.890,
.890; Eigenvalue=1.20) and explained 12% of the variance.
Finally course effort, time spent reading and studying the
textbook, and enjoyment of learning science loaded on
factor 4, Course Involvement (loadings=.807, .684, .638;
Eigenvalue=1.07), and explained 11% of the variance.
Thus, the factor analysis provided support for our initial
categorical distinction of the predictors.
The four factors were regressed onto each of the
measures of science achievement. For the students' course
grade, the overall model accounted for 13% of the
variance, F(4,1295)=49.57. Reading interest did not predict
course grade, whereas cognitive ability, t(1295)=10.15,
=.263, and course involvement t(1295)=9.43, =.244 were
strong predictors. TV habits significantly predicted course
grade but the relationship was small t(1295)=-2.43, = .063, p= .015.
For students' SOL score, the overall model accounted for
38% of the variance, F(4,618)=94.09. Course involvement
did not predict SOL scores, whereas cognitive ability,
t(618)=16.24, =.516, TV Habits, t(618)= -9.23, =-.294,
and reading interest t(618)=5.06, =.160, were significant
predictors.

Table 1 Correlations between science achievement and
student activities.
Factor
Cognitive
Ability

Course
Involvement

Reading
Interest
TV Habits

Individual
Measure

Course
Grade

SOL

Open
Ended
Comp.

Multiple
Choice
Comp.

Reading Skill

.24

.58

.64

.53

Science
Knowledge
Metacognitive
Reading Strat.
Enjoy Learn
Science
Time Reading
& Studying
Effort Given
to Course
Number of
Books Read
Enjoyment of
Reading
Hrs. TV
School day
Hrs. TV
Weekend

.25

.59

.55

.51

.20

.15

.26

.24

.18

.16

.13

.14

.12

N.S.

N.S.

N.S.

.30

N.S.

N.S.

N.S.

N.S.

N.S.

N.S.

.11

.12

.16

.14

.16

-.13

-.34

-.25

-.23

N.S.

-.27

-.23

-.23

In terms of science passage comprehension scores, the
model accounted for 42% of the variance for open-ended
questions, F(4,1213)=219.79, and 33% for multiple-choice
questions, F(4,1292)=158.81. For both comprehension
measures, cognitive ability (t(1213)=27.44,
=.600;
t(1292)=22.56, =.514); reading interest (t(1213)=5.01,
=.110; t(1292)=5.46, =.124); and TV habits (t(1213)
=-9.83, =-.215; t(1292)=-9.58, =-.218) were significant
predictors, whereas course involvement was not significant.
In summary, cognitive ability and TV habits were
significant predictors for all of the student achievement
measures. Course involvement reliably predicted only
course grade, whereas reading interest reliably predicted
SOL scores and science passage comprehension.
Table 1 presents the Pearson correlations between the
students’ science achievement performance (i.e., course
grade, SOL, open-ended and multiple choice
comprehension questions) and the 10 predictors used in this
study. Correlations are significant at the p< .001 level
unless specified otherwise. Several trends emerge from the
analysis. First, the correlations between science
achievement and the individual measures of cognitive
ability are moderate to high. In contrast, the correlations
between achievement and the individual measures of
student activity were generally low. However, there were
two exceptions, the amount of effort given to the course
was moderately correlated with course grade
(r(1472)=.298). In fact, of the measures used in this study,
effort had the highest simple correlation with course grade.
Second, the amount of TV watched on a school day and the
weekend (with the exception of course grade) was
moderately, but negatively correlated with science
achievement. The magnitude of the correlations ranged
from small for course grade (r(1493)=-.125 to moderate for
SOL (r(693)=-.337).

Can You Compensate for Low Knowledge?

460
440
SOL Score

Our second question was whether either reading skill or
metacognitive strategies would compensate for science
knowledge. Hence, we conducted ANOVAs for each
measure including science knowledge and reading skill in
the first set, and science knowledge and metacognitive
reading strategies in the second set. (The three variables
could not be included in one analysis because there were
cells with too few participants.) Students scoring in the top
and bottom thirds for each cognitive ability measure were
included in the analyses. The dependent variables included
course grade, SOL score, open-ended questions, and
multiple-choice performance.

480

420

Low
Metacognitive
Reading Strategy
High
Metacognitive
Reading Strategy

400
380
360
340
Lo w Kno wledge

High Kno wledge

Science Knowledge

0.9

Proportion Correct

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

Low Reading
Skill

Figure 2. SOL score as a function of science knowledge and
metacognitive reading strategy.

High Reading
Skill

Discussion

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Low Knowledge High Knowledge

Science Knowledge

Figure 1. Proportion of multiple-choice comprehension
questions correct as a function of science knowledge and
reading skill.
The first set of analyses, including science knowledge
and reading skill, yielded significant effects for all of the
dependent measures. The results were significant at p<.001
unless otherwise specified. There was a significant
interaction of science knowledge and reading skill only for
students’
performance
on
the
multiple-choice
comprehension questions, F(4,1368)=7.85 (see Figure 1).
This interaction indicates that neither science knowledge
nor reading skill had a major impact on comprehension
unless the student possessed both.
The second set of analyses, including science knowledge
and metacognitive reading strategies, yielded significant
effects of science knowledge for all of the depended
measures. Metacognitive strategies was significant for all of
the measures except SOL. However, in this case, there was
significant interaction of science knowledge and strategy
use, F(4,659)=2.52, p=.04. As shown in Figure 2, greater
metacognitive ability helped compensate for a student's low
level of science knowledge. [No other interactions were
significant.]

One goal of the current investigation was to uncover some
of the factors that are important in promoting high-school
students’ science achievement. A factor analysis of our ten
measures of abilities and activities revealed that there were
four distinct categories of variables: cognitive ability, TV
Habits, reading interest, and course involvement. The
results indicated that all four factors were important in
predicting science achievement; however, some factors
differentially predicted the measures of science
achievement. Cognitive ability, and TV habits reliably
predicted all measures of science achievement, while course
involvement reliably predicted only course grade. In turn,
reading interest predicted both SOL scores and passage
comprehension.
A more detailed examination of the correlations between
the individual components of the factors and science
achievement revealed that all measures of cognitive ability
and TV habits were relatively strong predictors of science
achievement, while the individual measures of reading
interest and course involvement were generally weak
predictors. The major exception was the correlation
between course effort and course grade, which proved to be
the best single correlation with the students’ grade.
The second goal of the study was to determine whether
reading skill or metacognitive reading strategies could
compensate for science knowledge (see also, Cottrell &
McNamara, 2002). With multiple choice questions, science
knowledge and reading skill interacted. In this case, neither
science knowledge nor reading skill had a major impact on
passage comprehension unless the learner had high levels of
both cognitive abilities. This interaction is counter to the
belief that reading skill and prior knowledge compensate
for each other (e.g., Perfetti, 1989). If science knowledge
and reading skill were compensatory, one would expect that
a high level reading skill would make up for a low level

prior knowledge. Nevertheless, it is notable that the
multiple-choice measure was the only dependent measure
of science achievement for which an interaction occurred.
In the other three cases (Sol score, open ended questions,
and course grade), both reading skill and knowledge aided
the students, and did not interact. So, in those cases, either
reading skill or prior knowledge were beneficial – and thus
could compensate for one another. Having both, of course,
is the best scenario. Similarly, for the most part, either prior
knowledge or metacognitive reading strategies were
beneficial to students. In contrast, for SOL scores,
metacognitive reading strategies and science knowledge
interacted. High-knowledge students did not benefit from
reading strategies. Yet, students with low science
knowledge were presumably able to compensate for this
knowledge deficit with reading strategies. The results
support the notion that metacognitive reading strategies can
compensate for a low level of domain knowledge.
So, what’s a science student to do? The results of this
study suggest several things. First, students should simply
read more. Research has shown that an increase in exposure
to print is associated with an increase in reading skill (see,
McNamara, 2001). Accordingly, the current findings
support the notion that reading skill is important for science
achievement. In fact, reading skill was one of the best
single correlates of student performance. Second, students
should make informed decisions on the courses they take.
For, example if a student is interested in taking biology
courses, they should plan to take as many courses related to
biology and chemistry in high school as possible. Prior
knowledge is important in determining how well new
information is learned. Thus the more elementary courses
one has in a domain, the easier it will be to learn more
advanced courses in the same domain.
However, as we well know, students will often find
themselves in courses for which they are ill prepared. In
that case, knowing and using metacognitive reading
strategies can help the learner to partially overcome
knowledge deficits. Hence, the results of this study suggest
that students should increase their metacognitive awareness.
Unfortunately, students do not automatically engage in such
processing (Garner, 1990). Consequently, the solution is to
discover and implement techniques that promote
metacognitive strategy use (e.g., McNamara & Scott, 1999).
Finally, our findings suggest that parents and students
should find a healthy balance between the amount of TV
watched and the amount of effort the student puts into the
course. Of the measures of student activity, TV habits
seemed to be one of the best predictors of science
performance: TV viewing was reliably related to all four of
our measures of science achievement. However, the
relationship between TV viewing and science achievement
was negative. This result is congruent with research on TV
viewing, which suggests that TV viewing can have a
negative impact on reading comprehension (e.g., Koolstra,
van der Voort, & van der Kamp, 1997). Conversely, our
results underscore the importance of student effort on
course performance; students’ effort was the best single
correlate of course performance. While readers often prefer

the path of least resistance (McNamara et al., 1996) it is
important to encourage students to expend effort into their
academic endeavors.
It is important to note that these results were based on
correlation, and therefore should be interpreted with
caution. Despite this limitation, the conclusion we draw
from this work is that both cognitive ability and student
activities are important for science achievement. Moreover,
it is important to develop ways to promote reading, and
interest in reading, as well as ways to increase course
involvement. These findings also recommend that parents
should play an active role in educating children to balance
their TV viewing and academic endeavors. Finally, the
results suggest the need for the development and
implementation of strategies to promote metacognitive
awareness.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the members of the ODU Strategy
Lab who helped to conduct this study, including Kim
Cottrell, Meghan Depont, Karen Fuller, Erin McSherry,
Raymond Morgan, Grant Sinclair, Danny Simmons, Karen
Stockstill, and Paul Walker, This project was supported by
an NSF IERI grant (REC-0089271) to the second author.
Both authors can be contacted at the University of
Memphis.

References
Artzt, A., & Armour-Thomas, E. (1992). Development of a
cognitive-metacognitive framework for protocol analysis
of mathematical problem solving in small groups.
Cognition and Instruction, 9, 137-175.
Beck, I., McKeown, M., & Gromoll, E. (1989). Learning
from social studies texts. Cognition and Instruction, 6,
99-158.
Bransford, J., & Johnson, M. K. (1972). Contextual
prerequisites for understanding some investigations of
comprehension and recall. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 11, 717-726.
Buckner, J., Bassuk, E., & Weinreb, L. (2001). Predictors
of academic achievement among homeless and lowincome housed children. Journal of School Psychology,
39, 45-69.
Cottrell, K. G., & McNamara, D. S. (2002). Cognitive
precursors to science comprehension. Proceedings of the
Twenty-fourth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum
Everson, H. & Tobias, S (1998). The ability to estimate
knowledge and performance in college: A metacognitive
analysis. Instructional Science, 26, 65-79.
Forget, M. A. (1999). Comparative effects of three methods
of staff development in content area reading instruction
on urban high school teachers. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation. Old Dominion University.
Garner, R. (1990). When children and adults do not use
learning strategies: Toward a theory of settings. Review
of Educational Psychology, 60, 517-529.

Garner, R., & Alexander, P. (1989). Metacognition:
Answered and unanswered questions. Educational
Psychologists, 24, 143-158.
Herman, K., & Tucker, C. (2000). Engagement in learning
and academic success among at-risk Latino American
students. Journal of Research & Development in
Education, 33, 129-136.
Hoge, D., Smit, E., & Crist, J. (1997). Four Family Process
Factors Predicting Academic Achievement in Sixth and
Seventh Grade. Educational Research Quarterly, 21, 2742.
Jimerson, S., Egeland, B., & Teo, A. (1999). A longitudinal
study of achievement trajectories: Factors associated with
change. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91, 116-126.
Koolstra, C., van der Voort, T., & van der Kamp, L. (1997).
Television's impact on children's reading comprehension
and decoding skills: A 3-year panel study. Reading
Research Quarterly, 32, 128-152.
Long, D., Oppy, B., & Seely, M. (1994). Individual
differences in the time course of inferential processing.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
and Cognition, 20, 1456-1470.
Lundeberg, M. (1987). Metacognitive aspects of reading
comprehension: Studying understanding in legal case
analysis. Reading Research Quarterly, 22, 407-432.
Maqsud, M. (1997). Effects of metacognitive skills and
nonverbal ability on academic achievement of high
school pupils. Educational Psychology, 17, 387-397.
McNamara, D. (2001). Book Review. Reading
comprehension difficulties: Processes and Intervention.
Journal of Pragmatics, 33, 943-956.
McNamara, D. S., & Scott, J. L. (1999). Training reading
strategies. Proceedings of the Twenty-first Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum. pp. 387-392
McNamara, D., Kintsch, E., Songer, N., & Kintsch, W.
(1996). Are good texts always better? Interactions of text
coherence, background knowledge, and levels of
understanding in learning from text. Cognition and
Instruction, 14, 1-43.
Oakhill, J. (1984). Inferential and memory skills in
children's comprehension of stories. British Journal of
Educational Psychology, 54, 31-39.
Oakhill, J., & Yuill, N. (1996). Higher order factors in
comprehension disability: Processes and remediation. In
C. Cornaldi & J. Oakhill (Eds.), Reading comprehension

difficulties: Processes and Intervention. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Paunonen, S., & Ashton, M. (2001). Big Five predictors of
academic achievement. Journal of Research in
Personality, 35, 78-90.
Perfetti, C. (1989). There are generalized abilities and one
of them is reading. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing,
learning, and instruction: Essays in honor of Robert
Glaser (pp. 307-336). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.
Phillips, L., Norris, S., Osmond, W., & Maynard, A.
(2002). Relative reading achievement: A longitudinal
study of 187 children from first through sixth grades.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 94(1), 3-13.
Pressley, M, & Ghatala, E. (1990). Self-regulated learning:
Monitoring learning from text. Educational Psychologist,
25, 19-33.
Schraw, G. & Dennison, R. (1994). Assessing
metacognitive awareness. Contemporary Educational
Psychology, 19, 460-475.
Schwartz, D. & Bransford, J. (1998). A time for telling.
Cognition and Instruction, 16, 475-522.
Stewart, S., Bond, M., Deeds, O., Westrick, J., & Wong, C.
M. (1999). Predictors of high school achievement in a
Hong Kong international school. International Journal of
Psychology, 34, 163-174.
Sutton, A., & Soderstrom, I. (1999). Predicting elementary
and secondary school achievement with school-related
and demographic factors. Journal of Educational
Research, 92, 330-338.
Swanson, H. L. (1990). Influence of metacognitive
knowledge and aptitude on problem solving. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 82(2), 306–314.
Tobias, S. (1994). Interest prior knowledge and learning.
Review of Educational Research, 64, 37-54.
Vadhan, V., & Stander, P. (1994). Metacognitive ability
and test performance among college students. Journal of
Psychology, 128, 307-309.
van Kraayenoord, C., & Schneider, W. (1999). Reading
achievement, metacognition, reading self-concept and
interest: A study of German students in grades 3 and 4.
European Journal of Psychology of Education, 14, 305324.
Zhang, K., & Zhang, B. (1996). Impact of interest on text
comprehension. Acta Psychologica Sinica, 28, 284-289.

