UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Why do metaphors seem deeper than similes?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6h2528r2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 24(24)

Authors
Zharikov, Sergey S
Gentner, Dedre

Publication Date
2002-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Why do metaphors seem deeper than similes?
Sergey S. Zharikov (s-zharikov@northwestern.edu)
Northwestern University, Department of Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Northwestern University, Department of Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Abstract
Figurative expressions in metaphor form (e.g., Marriage
is a journey) seem stronger and deeper than expressions
in simile form (e.g., Marriage is like a journey). We ran
a study to examine the nature of these judgments.
Participants read short paragraphs describing either
object attributes or relational structure and then made a
forced choice of the grammatical form of a figurative
expression mentioning the target concept referred to in
the passages. The results showed that the metaphor form
was chosen more often (1) for expressions with
conventional bases, and (2) when figurative statements
followed contexts containing relational information. We
speculate about a possible linkage between
conventionalization and relationality.

Introduction
Nominal figurative statements can be expressed in two
ways – in simile form (X is like Y) and in metaphor
form (X is Y). Although the two grammatical forms
largely serve the same purpose (showing that one entity
is figuratively similar to another), people report that
expressions in metaphor form feel more profound and
express stronger claims than expressions in simile form.
For example, saying Her heart is a stone feels deeper
than Her heart is like a stone. Further, several studies
(Gibb & Wales, 1990; Bowdle, 1998; Aisenman, 1999)
have found that if people are asked to make a choice
between an expression in metaphor form or the same
expression in simile form, the simile form is chosen
more often. It appears that people are more
conservative in using metaphors than in using similes.
The greater force of the metaphoric form was noted
by Glucksberg and Keysar (1990), who proposed that
the metaphor form is the basic form of figurative
statements and that similes are understood as variants of
metaphors. Noting that the grammatical form of
metaphors matches that of category inclusion
statements, they suggested that metaphors in fact
function as category inclusion statements, where the
category is an abstraction that can be accessed or
created from the metaphor’s base concept. (We will use
the terms target and base, respectively, for the X and Y

terms, of a figurative expression X is [like] Y.) There
has been debate concerning the processing implications
of this theory, but for our purposes the key point is
Glucksberg and Keysar’s insight that the grammatical
form of figurative statements has psychological force,
with metaphor being the stronger, more categorical
form. This paper examines the reasons for this
phenomenon.
Two recent theories have proposed different
explanations for the simile-metaphor difference. One
account singles out the conventionality of the base
term; the other, the relationality/attributionality of the
metaphor’s interpretation. The first account, the Career
of Metaphor hypothesis (Bowdle & Gentner, 1999;
Gentner & Bowdle, 2001) suggests that the difference
lies in the conventionality of the base term: figuratives
with conventional bases are expressed as metaphors,
and those with novel bases are expressed as similes.
The second account, Aisenman’s (1999) Relational
Precedence hypothesis, suggests that the difference is
due to the kind of interpretation the expression receives:
relational interpretations are stated as metaphors, and
attributional interpretations are stated as similes.
In their research on metaphor processing, Gentner
and Wolff (1999) proposed an important distinction
between newly minted figuratives and conventionalized
figuratives. According to the Career of Metaphor
hypothesis, figuratives with novel bases, such as An
encyclopedia is (like) a uranium mine, are processed by
comparison between the target and the literal meaning
of the base. In contrast, figuratives with conventional
bases, such as An encyclopedia is a goldmine, can be
processed by alignment with a conventional abstraction
(e.g., a source of something valuable) associated with
the base term. The key difference between novel and
conventional bases is that the representations of
conventional bases include a secondary metaphoric
meaning along with the original literal meaning. They
have become polysemous. In contrast, representations
of novel bases contain only a literal meaning.
Gentner and Wolff (1997) proposed that
conventional metaphoric meanings are created over
time as a result of repeated comparisons of different

target terms with the same base. The idea is that
through progressive alignments of the base, a set of
properties or a relational schema belonging to the base
emerges as a separable abstraction. This can become an
additional word sense – a kind of metaphoric category
associated with the base.
Bowdle’s Grammatical Concordance principle links
the Career of Metaphor hypothesis with the similemetaphor distinction. It states that metaphoric
expressions are interpreted by the process of structural
alignment (Gentner & Markman, 1997), but the nature
of the invited alignment differs for metaphors and
similes. The simile form invites directly aligning the
literal base and target concepts (e.g., encyclopedia and
gold mine in the above example), whereas the metaphor
form suggests that the listener should first access the
abstraction associated with the base – e.g., source of
something valuable -- and then align it with the target
representation. Consistent with this explanation,
Gentner and Bowdle (2001) found that novel metaphors
are slow to process. This follows from the claim that
such statements lead to a false start in processing. For
example, hearing That encyclopedia is a uranium mine
is infelicitous, because there is no conventional
abstraction associated with uranium mines.
Thus, the claim is that (1) repeated alignments can
lead to the formation of an abstraction, and (2)
figurative statements can occur in metaphor form only
when there is existing abstraction (or metaphorical
category) associated with the base. Perhaps the most
striking evidence for this claim is Bowdle’s (1998)
study showing ‘in vitro’ conventionalization. After
seeing novel bases in parallel comparisons with three
target terms in simile form, subjects preferred to
express further statements involving that base in
metaphor form. They also (mis) recalled the statements
they had seen as having been in metaphor form.
Gentner and Bowdle (2001) found that as figurative
statements became increasingly conventional, there is a
shift in people’s preference from the simile form to the
metaphor form.
A second explanation for the subjective differences in
perception of similes and metaphors was recently
offered by Aisenman (1999). She extended Gentner’s
(1988; Gentner & Clement, 1988) distinction between
attributional and relational comparisons and suggested
that people primarily use the metaphor form to
highlight common relations between the base and
target, and the simile form to highlight common
attributes (Aisenman, 1999). Thus, the metaphor form
is likely to convey a deep common system of relations.
This theory fits well with the intuition that metaphors
often seem more profound than similes. In her study,
Aisenman presented subjects with base and target terms
and asked whether they would be more likely to put
sentences with those terms in simile or metaphor form.

When the base and target shared mostly surface
attributes (e.g., The sun is (like) an orange – both are
round and orange), participants preferred to state
sentences in simile form. When the base and target
shared common relational structure (e.g., Television is
(like) a magnet - both attract), participants were more
likely to use the metaphor form. Aisenman’s results
suggest that the metaphor form is preferred for
relational commonalities.
There are thus two accounts for form differences in
figurative language: metaphors tend to be preferred
over similes (a) when the base is conventional or (b)
when the interpretation is relational. To compare these
accounts, we varied both factors – conventionality of
the base and the type of commonalities between the
base and target – and obtained people’s preferences for
stating figurative expressions in simile or metaphor
form.

Experiment 1. Context Priming
We selected 20 metaphors from prior metaphor studies
(Ortony, 1979; Gentner & Clement, 1988; Aisenman,
1999). The metaphors used were classified as double
metaphors (Gentner & Clement, 1988) in that they
permitted
both
attributional
and
relational
interpretations. We presented subjects with short
paragraphs describing the target, focusing either on its
attributes or on its relational structure. Examples of
relational and attributional contexts are listed in Table
1. Then, participants were asked to choose which of the
two figurative sentences they preferred. Both sentences
featured the target coupled with the same base and
differed only in that one of them was a simile and one
was a metaphor. Half the bases were novel, and half
were conventional. Conventionality of the base was
operationalized as having the metaphoric meaning
listed in the Merriam-Webster Collegiate dictionary.
The base terms never appeared in the contexts
preceding the simile and metaphor statements. Table 1
shows a sample stimulus with a conventional base.
The Career of Metaphor account predicts that people
would be more likely to prefer the metaphor form for
statements with conventional rather than novel bases.
Aisenman’s Relational Precedence hypothesis predicts
that people would be more likely to prefer the metaphor
form when given the paragraph priming the relational
interpretation.

Method
Sixty-four Northwestern University undergraduates
were presented with 20 short paragraphs. Each
paragraph supported either an attributional or relational
interpretation of a figurative expression. After reading
the paragraph, participants chose between simile and
metaphor forms as shown in Table 1 and were asked to
choose the sentence they preferred by circling it. Four

random orders were used across participants. Whether
the sentence in simile or metaphor form was presented
on the left side of the page was counterbalanced.
Table 1: Example of attributional and
relational contexts
Conventional base
Attributional interpretation:

removed items that were put in metaphor form by less
than seven participants (2 with novel bases and 2 with
conventional bases). An ANOVA performed on the
remaining items yielded a significant effect of context
type (F1, 31 = 5.10, MSE = 0.16, p < 0.05) in addition to
the significant effect of base conventionality (F1, 31 =
10.15, MSE = 0.32, p < 0.01). The interaction between
base conventionality and context type was not
significant.

Mr. White, a sociologist, is writing an article about
poverty in urban America. He considers poverty a horrible
blight on our society and argues that the government must
intervene with a welfare reform. He thinks that
Poverty is like a disease.

Relational interpretation:
Mr. White, a sociologist, is writing an article about
poverty in urban America. He considers poverty to be
increasing and argues that, unless the government
intervenes with a welfare reform, poverty will spread
further. He thinks that
Poverty is like a disease.

Poverty is a disease.

percent of metaphor choices

Poverty is a disease.

Attributional
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

novel

Results
We computed the number of metaphor choices by
coding preference for simile form as 0 and preference
for metaphor form as 1. Analysis of variance performed
with base conventionality and context type as betweensubjects factors showed a significant effect of base
conventionality (F1, 39 = 7.50, MSE = 0.31, p < 0.01).
The proportion of metaphor form choices was
significantly higher for statements with conventional
bases (MC = 0.39) than for statements with novel bases
(MN = 0.22). The number of metaphor preferences was
significantly lower than chance for both novel and
conventional bases (p < 0.05).
We also obtained a marginally significant effect of
preceding context type (F1, 39 = 3.66, MSE = 0.15, p =
0.06). Statements following relational contexts were
preferred in metaphor form more often than statements
following attributional contexts (MR = 0.37, MA = 0.24).
The number of metaphor preferences was significantly
lower than chance for both relational and attributional
contexts (p < 0.05). The results are summarized in
Figure 1.
The preference for metaphoric form for relational
information was only marginally significant. However,
an item analysis indicated a disparity in the quality of
the items used. Some items were strongly preferred in
simile form (e.g., only one out of 64 participants chose
to put Titanium chips are (like) diamonds in metaphor
form). It thus seemed possible that not all the items
were suitable as metaphors. To ensure that the
Relational Precedence view was fairly tested, we

R elational

conventional

base conventionality

Figure 1: Proportion of metaphor choices for
novel and conventional bases. Error bars show
standard error.

Experiment 2
The results of the first study offered support for both
the Career of Metaphor account – in which the
metaphor-simile distinction is one of conventionality –
and the Relational Precedence hypothesis. However,
one concern here is to what extent the results simply
reflect the nature of the materials. First, although the
figurative expressions used in Experiment 1 allow both
relational and attributional interpretations, it is possible
that people may prefer one kind of interpretation over
the other. Previous studies have demonstrated that
people find relational interpretations of figurative
expressions more interesting and apt (Clement &
Gentner, 1988). Second, and more importantly, it is
possible that the conventional metaphors we used were
biased in favor of either relational or attributional
interpretations, relative to the novel metaphors.
To calibrate the materials, we gave the figurative
expressions used in Experiment 1 to a new group of
participants, either in simile or metaphor form, and
asked the participants to rate how much they agreed
with the relational and attributional interpretations.
Both interpretations were shown together for each
figurative statement, but participants rated each

separately. Thus they were free to assign high or low
ratings to both the relational and attributional
interpretations if they chose.

Table 2. Mean interpretation ratings and
number of interpretations that received high
ratings (in parentheses)

Method
Thirty-two Northwestern University undergraduates
were presented with 28 statements: 20 figurative
statements taken from Experiment 1, and 8 fillers. The
statements were blocked so that each participant saw
either all statements in simile form or all statements in
metaphor form. Two random orders were used. After
each statement, a relational and attributional
interpretations of the statement appeared. The order of
the interpretations on the page was counterbalanced.
The participants were asked to rate how much they
agree with each of the interpretations on a 1 to 7 scale.

Results
We computed the scores for the relational and
attributional interpretations for each item. Table 2
shows mean ratings for each of the four item categories,
along with the number of relational and attributional
interpretations that received ratings of 4 or greater (out
of 7). Consistent with prior research, relational
interpretations are preferred over attributional
interpretations overall (Gentner, 1988; Gentner &
Clement, 1988).
The key question for our purposes is whether the
materials were skewed such that conventional
metaphors had more or better relational interpretations
than the other categories. This does not appear to be the
case. Relational interpretations received high ratings (4
or above) for 8 out of 10 items in each of the four item
categories -- conventional metaphors, novel metaphors,
conventional similes, and novel similes. (Attributional
interpretations were rated lower overall, as shown in
Table 2.) It appears that the intended relational
interpretations were highly apt for both metaphor and
simile forms. These data offer some reassurance that
the shift towards relationality in metaphor preference
was not simply determined by disproportionate
availability of relational interpretations for metaphors
over similes.
We also created a relational preference score (Rpref),
which was the difference between the relational rating
and the attributional rating. An analysis of variance
with base conventionality (novel or conventional) and
grammatical form (simile or metaphor) as betweensubjects factors revealed no significant differences in
relational preference scores (F3, 636 = 1.25, MSE =
13.07, p < 0.3).

Attributional

Relational

3.81 (5)
4.35 (6)

4.95 (8)
4.74 (8)

3.68 (4)
3.81 (4)

4.51 (8)
4.78 (8)

Conventional
Metaphor
Simile
Novel
Metaphor
Simile

Discussion
As predicted by the Career of Metaphor hypothesis,
participants in Experiment 1 were likely to choose the
metaphor form for figurative statements with
conventional bases, and the simile form for those with
novel bases. Aisenman’s Relational Precedence
hypothesis also received support: the metaphor form
was chosen more often for relational meanings (i.e.,
following a relational context) than for attributional
meanings (following an attributional context).
Might both claims be true? Some intriguing
possibilities arise if we consider the implications of
these two patterns taken together. Suppose that, as in
the Career of Metaphor hypothesis, nominal figurative
expressions are initially phrased as similes. As these
expressions become conventionalized, the metaphor
form becomes more felicitous. Suppose further that
relational meanings of novel bases have more potential
to get conventionalized. Then we would find a
preponderance of relational meanings among
conventional bases. An informal survey of the literature
using conventional metaphors suggests that most of
them do convey relational meanings. For example, the
metaphors used by Ortony (1979) and by Glucksberg
and Keysar (1990) are primarily relational (e.g.,
Cigarettes are time bombs; Some jobs are jails;
Sermons are sleeping pills). Assuming that these
stimuli are roughly typical of conventional metaphors,
we might speculate that there is a preponderance of
relational
figuratives
within
the
class
of
conventionalized metaphors. How might such a link
between relationality and conventionality have come
about?
One possibility is that different forms are used for
conventionalized relational and attributional figurative
statements. English has a special form for conventional
bases that is often used for property attribution – “as X
as Y,” where X is the shared attribute, and Y is the base
term – for example, as white as snow; as strong as an
ox (Ortony, 1979). Perhaps conventional attributional
meanings are siphoned off by this dedicated form.

However, relational adjectives can enter the as X as Y
frame as well (e.g., as delicious as an apple; as fierce
as a tiger). The only requirement for the descriptor X
seems to be that it be orderable on some dimension.
Thus a possible special form for attributive figuratives
does not seem like a viable explanation for the
preponderance of conventional relational metaphors.
Another possibility is preemption by existing terms.
Over the course of development, languages have
developed names for attributes, which preempt the
creation of new ones (Clark, 1992). On this account,
creation of attributional metaphoric meanings might be
less likely simply because we already have names for
attributes. However, this explanation carries the hidden
assumption that the number of attributes we want to
express is smaller than the number of relations.
This brings us to the third and most speculative
possibility. There is evidence that (1) people find
shared relational structure more interesting or important
than shared attributes; and that (2) relational meanings
are relatively slow to emerge in cognitive development
(Gentner & Rattermann, 1991; Halford, 1993) and
arguably in the history of science. Applying this to the
evolution of metaphor suggests that new relational
abstractions are more likely to become entrenched than
attribute meanings. Coherent relational systems are
likely to be preserved in comparison processing, and
this may carry over into the conventionalization of
meanings and the formation of new categories
(Gentner & Bowdle, 2001; Ramscar & Pain, 1996;
Shen, 1992). On this account, a simile that expresses
shared relational structure is more likely to give rise to
parallels than one that expresses an attributional
likeness. This would lead to differential likelihoods of
conventionalization for relational and attributional
figuratives.
Some evidence for this account can be obtained from
studies of word meaning extension over time. One of
the ways one can extend the meaning of a word is by
analogy. For example, words like bridge and sanctuary
initially had only concrete meanings, but now can
denote metaphoric categories such as something
connecting two points and a safe place, respectively.
Table 3 shows the timeline of the first occurrences of
the literal and figurative meanings of sanctuary, as
listed in the Oxford English Dictionary, as well as other
sample occurrences. (All senses are written exactly as
in the OED.)
For sanctuary, the literal meaning of a holy building
appears in 1340. Extensions to the church or the body
of believers also appear in the 14th century. The first
figurative usage appears two centuries later, in 1568.
Interestingly, the first figurative use is signaled by an
explicit comparison phrase “counted as a sanctuary”.
The first ‘metaphorical’ occurrence, unmarked by a
comparison phrase, occurs considerably later, in 1685.

Table 3. Timeline of occurrences of literal and
figurative meanings for sanctuary.
[Initial literal meaning]
I. a holy place – a building or place set apart for the
worship of God or of one or more divinities: applied, e.g.,
to a Christian church, the Jewish temple and the Mosaic
tabernacle, a heathen temple or site of local worship, and
the like; also fig. To the church or the body of believers
1340…in that sanctuary oure lord sall be kynge…
1382 And thei shulen make to me a seyntuarye, and Y shal
dwelle in the myddil of hem.
1530. Sanctuarie, a place hallowed and dedicate vnto god.
II.a – a church or other sacred place in which, by the law
of the medieval church, a fugitive from justice, or a
debtor, was entitled to immunity from arrest. Hence, in a
wider sense, applied to any place in which by law or
established custom a similar immunity is secured to
fugitives.
1374 To whiche Iugement they nolden nat obeye but
defendedyn hem by the sikernesse of holy howses, that is
to seyn fledden in to sentuarye.
1463-4 Eny persone..that shall dwelle or inhabit within
the Sayntwarie and Procyncte of the same Chapell.
[First figurative meaning]
1568 Vsing alwaise soch discrete moderation, as the
scholehouse should be counted a sanctuarie against feare.
[First unmarked figurative meaning]
1685 My house is your Sanctuary, and here to offer you
violence, wou’d prejudice myself.
1770 The reformation was preceded by the discovery of
America, as if the Almighty graciously meant to open a
sanctuary to the persecuted in future years…

Table 4. Timeline of occurrences of literal and
figurative meanings for bridge.
[Initial literal meaning]
I. A structure forming or carrying a road over a river, a
ravine, etc., or affording passage between two points at a
height above the ground.
c1000 theos brycg
1131 Men weorth on adrencte and brigges to brokene.
c1449 The brigge of Londoun.
1660 This was so severe a bill upon the Women, that, if a
bridge was made from Dover to Calais, the women would
all leave this kingdom.
[Figurative]
1225 The beoth ouer thisse worldes see, uppen the brugge
of heouene.
1742 Faith builds a bridge from this world to the next.
1863 The bridge for thought to pass from one particular to
the other.
1874 Gestures… forming the bridge by which we may pass
over into spoken language.

The pattern for bridge, shown in Table 4, is similar.
The first literal meaning of bridge as a structure
affording passage between two points above the ground
goes back to the 11th century. However, the figurative

uses are not listed until the middle of the 18th century,
except for a single reference to the bridge of heaven
(which may have been meant literally) in 1225.
These patterns suggest that, at least in some cases, the
more abstract, figurative meanings appear later in
written language. In both cases, these figurative
meanings are relational in nature. Interestingly, at least
for sanctuary, the derived category no longer seems
metaphoric; it has become a literal sense.
We suggest that the Relational Precedence account
and the Career of Metaphor account may both be
operative in the evolution of metaphor, and that they
interact. Beginning with a pool of novel figuratives, the
Career of Metaphor hypothesis states that for some of
these the base term is repeatedly used in parallel
comparisons, so that a conventional abstraction
becomes associated with the base. What we suggest is
that figurative expressions that yield coherent relational
systems are most likely to be found novel and useful.
Their bases are thus most likely to be reused and
thereby conventionalized. For example, the simile The
cloud is like a marshmallow elicits common attributes
of the target and base, such as fluffy and white. But the
potential abstraction ‘white and fluffy’ is unlikely to
become a conventionalized word sense, both because of
lexical preemption (we already have words for white
and fluffy) and because the category it suggests is
simply not very interesting. (Indeed, the conventional
use of marshmallow as a metaphor is relational, as in
That boxer turned out to be a marshmallow.)
Metaphors are a source of polysemy in language –
they allow words with specific meanings to take on
additional, related meanings (e.g., Glucksberg &
Keysar, 1990; Lakoff, 1987; Lehrer, 1990; Miller,
1979; Murphy, 1996). We suggest that mappings that
focus on relational structures are more likely to
generate stable abstractions than mappings that focus
on object attributes. In sum, conventionalization of
relational meanings may fulfill an important cognitive
function in creating new abstractions.

References
Aisenman, R. A. (1999). Structure-mapping and the
simile-metaphor preference. Metaphor and Symbol,
14, 45-51.
Bowdle, B. F. (1998). Conventionality, polysemy, and
metaphor comprehension. Doctoral dissertation,
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University.
Bowdle, B. F., & Gentner, D. (1999). Metaphor
comprehension: From comparison to categorization.
In Proceedings of the Twenty-first Annual Meeting
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 90-95),
Vancouver, B.C.
Clark, E. V. (1992). Conventionality and contrast:
Pragmatic principles with lexical consequences. In A.

Lehrer & E. F. Kittay (Eds.), Frames, fields and
contrasts. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gentner, D. (1988). Metaphor as structure mapping:
The relational shift. Child Development, 59, 47-59.
Gentner, D., & Bowdle, B. F. (2001). Convention,
form, and figurative language processing. Metaphor
and Symbol, 16, 223-247.
Gentner, D., & Clement, C. (1988). Evidence for
relational selectivity in the interpretation of analogy
and metaphor. In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology
of learning and motivation, advances in research and
theory. New York: Academic Press.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structuremapping in analogy and similarity. American
Psychologist, 52, 45-56.
Gentner, D., & Rattermann, M. J. (1991a). Language
and the career of similarity. In S. A. Gelman & J. P.
Brynes (Eds.), Perspectives on thought and
language: Interrelations in development (pp. 225277). London: Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D., & Wolff, P. (1997). Alignment in the
processing of metaphor. Journal of Memory and
Language, 37, 331-355.
Gibbs, H., & Wales, R. (1990). Metaphor or simile:
Psychological determinants of the differential use of
each sentence form. Metaphor and Symbolic Activity,
5, 199-213.
Glucksberg, S., & Keysar, B. (1990). Understanding
metaphorical comparisons: Beyond similarity.
Psychological Review, 97, 3-18.
Halford, G. S. (1993). Children's understanding: The
development of mental models. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire, and dangerous things.
Chicago: University of Chicago.
Lehrer, A. (1990). Polysemy, conventionality, and the
structure of the lexicon. Cognitive Linguistics, 1,
207-246.
Miller, G. A. (1979). Images and models, similes and
metaphors. In A. Ortony (Ed.), Metaphor and
thought (1st ed.).
Cambridge:
Cambridge
University.
Murphy, G. L. (1996). On metaphoric representation.
Cognition, 60, 173-204.
Ortony, A. (1979). Beyond literal similarity.
Psychological Review, 86, 161-180.
Oxford
English
Dictionary,
online
edition
http://www.oed.com/.
Ramscar, M., & Pain, H. (1996). Can a real distinction
be made between cognitive theories of analogy and
categorization? In Proceedings of the Eighteenth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Shen, Y. (1992). Metaphors and categories. Poetics
Today, 13, 771-794.

