A core-affect model of decision making in simple and complex tasks
Othalia Larue (Othalia.Larue@Wright.Edu), Alexander Hough (hough.15@Wright.Edu), and Ion Juvina
(Ion.Juvina@Wright.Edu)
Wright State University
Department of Psychology, 3640 Colonel Glenn Hwy
Dayton, OH 45435 USA
Abstract
When it comes to decision making, the dominant view
suggests that engaging in a detailed analytical thought process
is more beneficial than deciding based on one’s feelings.
However, there seems to be a tradeoff, as the complexity and
amount of elements on which to base the decision increases,
decisions based on affect seem to be more accurate than
decisions based on a thorough analytical process in specific
contexts. In those last cases, an affective modulation of
memory may help to make better decisions in complex tasks
that exceed human’s limited cognitive capacities. Some dual
process
accounts,
‘‘deliberation-without-attention’’
hypothesis (Dijksterhuis et al., 2006), oppose a cognitive (i.e.,
conscious) route to an affective (i.e., unconscious) route.
Since most dual process accounts suggest one type of process
is better than the other, the interaction and integration of
affective and more conscious analytical processes in decision
making have been understudied. To address this issue, we
propose an explanation of the dynamics and interaction of
cognitive (i.e., explicit) and affective (i.e., implicit) encoding
and retrieval of elements in memory, using a unified theory
based on core affect (Russell, 2003), in the shape of a
cognitive model in the ACT-R cognitive architecture.

described through the valence (i.e., negative or positive) and
arousal (i.e., intensity) values. Our hypothesis here is that
core affect modulates memory. The modulation would place
emphasis on the objective value of an attribute (i.e., good or
bad) rather than details (e.g., higher than average gas
mileage), simplifying the information and allowing for more
efficient use of cognitive resources. The core affect
experienced by participants while implicitly considering
options cumulates and later leads to a decision illustrating
the emotion-cognition interaction. This, we think, proves to
be a better strategy when the limit of memory capacity is
reached (e.g., complex task). This hypothesis was tested
using a cognitive architecture based on a unified theory of
cognition, ACT-R. We previously used this core affect
model to explain the impact of affective valence and arousal
on memory and memory decay using participant’s memory
of negative and positive emotion words after different time
periods (Juvina & Larue, 2016). However, here the focus is
on the role of affect in decision making. This allows for an
explanation of how core affect and cognitive mechanisms
are meshed.

Keywords: Core affect; ACT-R; decision making; dual
process theory; memory modulation; implicit strategy

Background
The concept of emotion has been a subject of interest for
quite some time. However, theories have only recently
attempted to explain their role in cognitive processes using
empirical research. Appraisal theories (Lazarus & Folkman,
1984; Ortony, Clore and Collins, 1990) have emerged as the
dominant approach to emotions in the last few decades.
Appraisal has been defined as the personal meaning and
significance to well-being that is constructed from
evaluations of situational factors and knowledge. While this
trend of theories clarifies the route by which humans
evaluate their environments (e.g., in a bottom-up way), they
do not clarify how ongoing affect influences the encoding
and retrieval of information in an implicit manner.
In response to this incompleteness, core affect theory
(Russell, 2003), “feeling is for doing” (Zeelenberg &
Pieters, 2006), and the somatic marker hypothesis
(Damasio, 1994) have attempted to bridge the gap between
emotion and behavior. The latter particularly addresses the
domain of decision making.
Russell (2009) believes that most phenomena attributed to
emotions can be explained in more simple terms (e.g., core
affect) without the need for emotion. Core affect is a
visceral state that happens before the emotion is consciously
identified: feeling good or bad, lethargic or energized
(Russell, 2009). Russell’s core affect theory suggests

Introduction
In a set of experiments, Dijksterhuis et al. (2006) and
Mikels et al. (2011) show how being focused on the details
of provided information, rather than feelings, affects
accuracy in a decision making task. According to these
results, being feeling focused in a more complex, memoryoverloading task proves to lead to better performance.
Until recently, the influence of emotion has been
neglected in the judgment and decision making literature,
with the focus initially being put on the biases emotions
enable (Kahneman & Tversky 1979). Gradually, the focus
has shifted toward the positive role of emotions in decision
making, as suggested by neurological evidence (Damasio,
1994; Bechara, Damasio, & Damasio, 2000). In parallel,
core affect theory (Russell, 2003) in emotion research, and
the somatic marker hypothesis (Damasio, 1994) in decision
making research, have emerged to explain how emotion can
guide behavior towards a positive outcome.
In this paper we suggest that the results from Dijksterhuis
et al. (2006) and Mikels et al. (2011) (i.e., being feelingfocused in a more complex task leads to better performance)
can be explained with a core-affect model. Core affect
(Russell, 2009) is a neurophysiological state accessible to
consciousness as a simple non-reflective feeling and can be

718

Core affect and memory

underlying values for valence and arousal are more
important than emotion, which he believes is socially
constructed. The core affect is the central notion of this
theory. Previous events change the core affect, which can
occur before the event is actually consciously perceived by
the subject and persists during the episode. It also influences
the other elements of the emotional episode.
In the domain of decision making, some researchers
(Gigerenzer & Selton, 2002) view heuristics, not only
affective ones, as strategies that lead to sufficient decisions.
Implicit strategies for decision making have previously been
studied in ACT-R with Instance Based Learning (Gonzalez,
Lerch & Lebiere, 2003). In this paper, another type
of implicit strategy involved in decision making – an
affective strategy – is investigated.
Existing computational models of affect and emotion are
based on appraisal theories and tend to be pre-programmed
and hardwired based on the specifications of a particular
theory (e.g., Marsella & Gratch, 2009; Marinier, Laird, &
Lewis, 2009). Previous attempts have been made in ACT-R
to add biological roots of emotions (Dancy et al., 2015)
effect of emotion on learning and decision making
(Belavkin, 2003) and stress (Ritter, Reifers, Klein, &
Schoelles, 2007) by overlaying the architecture.
Since core affect is implicit, more primitive, and more
general than the construct of emotion (Russell & Feldmann
Barrett, 1999; Russell, 2009), it could be particularly
adapted to be included in a cognitive architecture. When
meshed with existing cognitive mechanisms, it could add to
existing unified theories of cognition. The resulting model
would increase the explanatory power of the core affect
theory by clarifying different aspects of the emotion–
cognition interaction.

We present a summarized version of the core affect
mechanism to facilitate the understanding of our model. An
extended version of the core affect mechanism can be found
in Juvina and Larue (2016). The original equation
(Anderson, 2007) that computes the activation of a
declarative memory chunk is:
A i = B i + Si + P i + εi
•
•
•
•

•

(1)

Ai is the activation of the chunk i.
Bi is the base-level term and reflects the recency and
frequency of use of chunk i.
Si is the spreading term and reflects the effect of the
context on the retrieval of chunk i.
Pi is the partial matching term and reflects the degree to
which the chunk i matches the specification of the
retrieval request.
εi is a noise or variability component.

Activation of a chunk reflects its use, and decays over
time if the chunk is not used. Retrieval time and the retrieval
probability of a chunk are determined by activation (e.g.,
chunks under a certain retrieval threshold cannot be
retrieved). However, the selection process is impacted by
noise. The chunk with the highest activation has the highest
probability of being selected, but other chunks get the
opportunity as well allowing some exploration behavior in
ACT-R.
In the current ACT-R architecture, reward based learning
affects procedural memory. However, subjective values
(e.g., pleasant or unpleasant) might actually be carried by
declarative memory as affectively charged representations,
which are easier/harder to retrieve according to these values
(Smith, Most, Newsome, & Zald, 2006). A new ACT-R
module called “Valuation” was developed to add valuation
and core affect capabilities into ACT-R. In theory, core
affect is a diffuse affective state that is not necessarily
linked to any specific event and is characterized as a point in
a two-dimensional space, where the two underlying
dimensions are valence (i.e., pleasure-displeasure) and
arousal (Russell, 2009). In our implementation, core affect
is defined as two accumulators called core-affect-valuation
(Valuation) and core-affect-arousal (Arousal), which are
sub-symbolic quantities computed by the “Valuation”
module. It also maintains the parameters and history
information that are needed for these computations. Both
values affect the probability that a chunk can be retrieved
from declarative memory. Valuation is an indicator of the
affective valence of a particular stimulus or fact learned
through interaction with the environment. Arousal is an
indicator of the importance or priority that is given to a
particular stimulus or fact; it is the absolute value of
valuation. Relying on the existing memory mechanisms
from the ACT-R theory, valuation and arousal are just two
separate terms added to the general activation equation
previously introduced:

Core affect and memory: theory and
implementation
ACT-R and memory
To capture the core affect modulation of memory and its
impact on decision making, we support our model with
ACT-R (Adaptive Control of Thought – Rational;
Anderson, 2007), a unified theory of human cognition.
ACT-R is also a cognitive architecture that is used to
develop computational models of various cognitive tasks.
ACT-R is composed of various modules: goal, imaginal,
visual, aural, manual, vocal, and two memory modules:
declarative memory (i.e., facts) and procedural memory
(i.e., how to do things). The declarative memory module,
which stores facts (i.e., know-what), is the one the core
affect directly modulates. Declarative memory includes both
symbolic structures (i.e., memory chunks) and sub-symbolic
quantities that control the operation of the symbolic
structures in the equations. The valuation and arousal
values, which help to define the core affect, are subsymbolic quantities added to the current sub-symbolic
equations of ACT-R.

719

Ai = Bi + Si + Pi + Vi + Ari + εi
•
•

with the core affect theory (Russell & Feldmann Barrett,
1999; Russell, 2009).
Our hypothesis is that this is all that is necessary to
include at the architectural level to model the interaction
between cognition and affect.

(2)

Vi is the valuation term and reflects the rewards
received by the model after referencing chunk i.
Ari is the arousal term which reflects the importance of
chunk i and is computed as the absolute magnitude of
the valuation term.

Model
Conditions

The learning of valuations occurs when a reward is
triggered: the valuations of all chunks that been referenced
within a time window are updated. This is compatible with
findings of overlapping neural substrates between the
attribution of subjective value to stimuli and reward-based
learning (Paton, Belova, Morrison, & Salzman, 2006). The
effective reward of a chunk i is the reward value received at
time n minus the time since the last reference of chunk i.
The learning of valuations for a chunk i is controlled by
the following equation:
Vi(n) = Vi(n-1) + αv[Ri(n) – Vi(n-1)]

The procedure used here was derived from an experiment by
Dijksterhuis et al. (2006) and replicated by Mikels et al.
(2011). During these experiments, participants were given
information about four different car options (i.e., Car A, Car
B, Car C, and Car D) and were instructed to choose which
car they believed to be the best choice. Simple attributes,
framed as either positive or negative (e.g., this car gets
good/bad gas mileage), were provided one at a time for each
car option. The best choice was defined as the car with the
most positive attributes. The best choice had 75% positive
attributes, two cars had 50% positive attributes, and one car
had 25% positive attributes. The design consisted of one
dependent variable (i.e., car choice) and two independent
variables
(i.e.,
focus
and
complexity).

(3)

Vi(n) is the valuation of chunk i after its nth update.
Vi(n-1) is the valuation of chunk i prior to its nth
update.
• αv is the learning rate for valuations.
• Ri(n) is the effective reward value received by chunk i
before its nth valuation update.
• Vi(0) is determined based on initial parameter settings.
Reward signals allow the model to learn valuation and
arousal values for elements according to what is presented
in the environment.
Additional parameters make it possible to weight valuation
and arousal independently in the equation. Values used in
this paper can be seen in Table 1:
• Valuation weight (:vw) is a scale parameter for the
valuation term in the general activation equation.
• Arousal weight (:aw) is a scale parameter for the
arousal term in the general activation equation.
• Valuation time window (:vtw) is a time window over
which to update the valuations. It determines how many
chunks are updated.
•
•

Figure 1. Experiment procedure and memory
representations across task in detail-focus vs feeling-focus
conditions
Participants were split into four conditions based on the
two independent variables (i.e., feeling-focus simple,
feeling-focus complex, detail-focus simple, and detail-focus
complex). Those in the feeling-focus conditions were
instructed to rate how they felt about each attribute and
make their choice while focusing on their feelings. In the
detail-focus conditions, participants were instructed to rate
how well they were remembering the attributes and make
their decision based on the details of the attributes. Simple
conditions had four attributes for each car option, whereas
complex conditions had 12 attributes per car option.
All conditions completed a memory recall task at the end
of the trial. Results from a chi-square analysis indicated that
participants in the detail-focus simple condition performed
better than participants in the feeling-focus simple
condition, although this difference did not reach
significance. However, participants in the feeling-focus
complex condition significantly outperformed those in the
detail-focus complex condition. There was no difference
between focus conditions for memory recall, but there was a
difference between simple and complex conditions. Both
Dijksterhuis et al. (2006) and Mikels et al. (2011) concluded

In the architecture, core affect is the weighted
accumulation of valuation and arousal values for all
retrievable chunks, and weights are probabilities of retrieval
reflecting chunk activations. This value is implicitly
maintained by the architecture.
In this implementation, affect phenomena are not
hardwired in the cognitive architecture but learned from the
interaction among various architectural components and
between architecture and environment. Only primitive
affective mechanisms: valuation (i.e., valence obtained
through interactions) and arousal, were included in the
cognitive architecture. Valuation and arousal are added as
terms in the general activation equation and influence the
probability of a chunk to be retrieved. This is consistent

720

that focusing on your feelings leads to better complex
decisions compared to more deliberate thinking.
Table 1. Model parameters
:rt
:vw
:aw
:av
:vtw

by the model as the best car choice (Evaluation phase in
“Detail-focus” in Figure 1). The significantly higher number
of reasoning steps in the detail-focus condition (Table 2)
results from the thorough analytical process that participants
were assumed to engage in during this condition.

-2.4
1.0
2.0
0.2
0.5

Table 3. Strategy in the feeling-focus condition
Step
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Encoding across conditions
Encoding mechanisms used are the same, but:
• In the detail-focus, the strategy used makes you
consider all features and ratings associated to those
features.
• In the feeling-focus condition, the strategy used gives
more value to the ratings (i.e., good/bad) than their
features..

8
9

Table 2. Model strategy in the detail-focus condition
Step
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

10
11
12
13
14

Strategy in the detail-focus condition
Presentation phase
“Car-feature-value” triplet is displayed
See car
Encode car
See feature
Encode feature
See value
Encode value
Clear imaginal (enter chunk in declarative
memory)
Go back to step 1 until all cars have been
displayed
Evaluation phase
Pick a car that has not been evaluated yet
Retrieve triplet (car-feature-value) with a “good”
judgment
Count the positive values for this car
Go back to step 10 until there are no cars left
Decide the car with the highest count

Detail-focus condition (Table 2). Stimuli consisting of
three elements (car – feature - rating) are presented one at a
time to the model The model looks at each element
separately and encodes them as a memory chunk of the
following association: car – feature – rating. Car is also a
memory chunk (Presentation phase in “Detail-focus” in
Figure 1).
When all stimuli have been presented to the model, it
proceeds to the evaluation through a tallying heuristic
(Gigerenzer, 2016): by interrogating its memory on features
for each car, counting all chunks for which it can retrieve an
association with a “good” rating for a feature. The car with
the highest overall number of “good” rating-feature-car
associations that could be retrieved is the one that is named

Strategy in the feeling-focus condition
Presentation phase
“Car-feature-value” triplet is displayed
See car
Retrieve chunk car
See value
Trigger reward depending on value
Update valuations
Go back to step 1 until all cars have been displayed
Evaluation phase
Retrieve car with highest activation
Decide (highest valuation car is the one with the
most “good” features)

Feeling-focus condition (Table 3). The same stimuli are
presented to the model randomly; but the model is going to
follow a different strategy. It only looks at the car and
rating, as shown in Table 3 (Presentation phase in “Feelingfocus” in Figure 1). The model retrieves the car chunk
associated with the presented car, and according to the
rating “good” or “bad”, sends a reward signal. This reward
affects the valuation of this specific car without it being
necessary to encode all the features of the car. When the
reward signal is sent, all the valuations of chunks that were
retrieved in this time window are updated. Recall the
explanation in the previous section (detail-focus condition)
that the memory representation includes the car chunks.
Thus, if the car to which this rating was attached is in the
time window, it gets a valuation update.
When all stimuli have been presented to the model, it
proceeds to the evaluation by retrieving one of the
previously presented cars (Evaluation phase in “Feelingfocus” in Figure 1). The retrieved car is the one with the
highest activation, which likely has the highest rating
because valuation was updated positively during the first
stage of car presentations.

Results and Discussion
Results in Figure 2 are shown for 50 runs of the model
(stable performance, based on cumulative standard
deviation, was reached after 43 runs).
There was a significant difference in accuracy between the
two feeling focus conditions (i.e., simple and complex),
t(97.89) = 2.67, p < 0.01. A significant difference in
accuracy was also found between the detail-focus complex
condition and feeling-focus complex condition, t(83.1) =
6.001, p < .001. These same differences were observed in
the original experiments.

721

The model also captured participant’s better performance in
the detail-focus simple condition compared to the feelingfocus simple condition (difference is not significant like in
the original results). However, while still within the
standard error range, the detail-focus complex condition
appears lower than in the original experiments. This could
be explained by something that is not captured in the
strategy of our model. When uncertain, human participants
could have guessed more accurately (compared to random
guesses by the model) based on prior knowledge. For
instance, a participant may have eliminated options based on
memory that certain options had fewer positive attributes.

fewer features and less reward opportunities. The activation
equation has a noise parameter. Due to this noise the chunk
with the highest valuation might not be the one with the
highest activation (thus, not the one retrieved). Therefore,
when retrieval from memory is initiated, decay and noise
might make the activation number obtained through the
activation equation close but higher for another car than the
one who received the highest rating. This happens more
often in the simple condition where you will have chunks of
very close valuations. Figure 3 illustrates the differences in
valuation between the chunk representations of the car
options. The gap in valuation between options is more
visible in the complex condition.
In contrast to the detail-focus condition, retrieving the
highest rated car in the Feeling-condition is a very simple
and fast process. It only requires one retrieval of the car
with the highest activation (no features retrieval involved),
therefore there is less decay of activation for the chunks and
therefore less ground for retrieval mistakes.

Figure 3. Evolution of the chunk valuation of each cars in
feeling-focus condition across rounds, simple vs complex
conditions

Figure 2. Accuracy in feeling-focus vs. detail-focus in
complex and simple conditions for the original experiments
and our model

General Discussion and Conclusion

Model dynamics in detail-focus condition

In this paper we presented a mechanism for core affect in
ACT-R. This mechanism specifies how affect modulates
memory (e.g., reducing information or emphasizing the
positive or negative value) compared to attempting to
remember the entire set of attributes in the detail-focus
condition (i.e., high memory load). It also shows that
implicit decisions might lead to better decisions than
explicit decisions in certain contexts.
We model affect in a cognitive architecture as a
phenomenon, which emerges from the dimensions of the
core affect theory (i.e., valence and arousal) and is learned
through the interaction with the environment. We interpret
valence as valuation. Valuation is a sub-symbolic quantity
for chunks learned through interactions with the world.
Arousal is the absolute value of valuation. Core affect is the
weighted accumulation of valuation and arousal values for
all retrievable chunks, and weights are probabilities of
retrieval reflecting chunk activations. Parameters given to
the ACT-R architecture, existing reward mechanism of the
architecture, and usage information about the chunks are
used to compute valuation and arousal values. The core
affect values are implicitly maintained by the architecture.
Valuation and arousal are added as terms in the general
activation equation and influence the probability of a chunk

In the simple condition, the model has a performance close
to the feeling-focus condition. However, in the complex
condition more features are memorized for each car. In this
condition, more words are forgotten as the experiment is
longer and there are more words to remember. Activation of
those unused chunks decay over time. Therefore, when
going through all the cars and remembering the features,
there are more chances of memory retrieval failures.
The forgetting time is also amplified by the length of the
recall strategy, contributing to future retrieval failures. The
model may be forgetting features of the next car while
listing the elements of the current car. This explains the
poorer performance of the model in the complex condition.
It is important to note that the model does not account for
possible confusions in the car and feature-rating
associations.

Model dynamics in feeling-focus condition
The model performs better in the complex condition than in
the simple condition. In the complex condition, while the
proportion of good features is the same, the overall number
of features per cars is higher. This gives the model more
opportunity for rewards. In the simple condition, there are

722

to be retrieved. We rely on the existing general activation
equation of ACT-R to integrate our model in a unified
theory of cognition.
While the core affect theory has been present in theories
of emotion, and the role of emotions has been considered in
the domain of decision making, very little has been done to
connect the work on core affect theory to decision making.
We hypothesized and demonstrated that those
mechanisms that allow for an affect phenomenon to emerge,
were sufficient to account for the behavior encountered in
Mikels et al. (2011)’s experiment. Engaging in a detailed
analytical thought process might be as beneficial as deciding
based on your feelings in a simple environment (i.e., low
cognitive load). However, there is a tradeoff. As the amount
of elements on which to base your decision increases,
exerting a high load on your declarative memory, decisions
based on affect seem to be more accurate than decisions
based on a thorough analytical process in those complex
environments. We demonstrated that an affective
modulation of memory by core affect, which simplifies the
amount and complexity of information, could explain this
phenomenon. Therefore, core affect may help individuals
make better decisions in complex tasks, which exceed
limited cognitive capacities by reducing the need to
memorize each element included in the decision. Instead,
the interaction with the elements a decision is supposed to
be based on, can be implicitly processed in conjunction with
affect, and the resulting decision can be based on those
affects. Furthermore, we showed that an implicit mechanism
(core affect) allows us to make an efficient decision.

Gigerenzer, G., & Selten, R. (2002). Bounded rationality:
The adaptive toolbox. MIT press.
Gigerenzer, G. (2016). Towards a Rational Theory of
Heuristics. In Minds, Models and Milieux (pp. 34-59).
Palgrave Macmillan UK.
Gonzalez, C., Lerch, J. F., & Lebiere, C. (2003). Instancebased learning in dynamic decision making. Cognitive
Science, 27(4), 591-635.
Juvina, I. & Larue, O. (submitted 2016) Modeling core
affect in a cognitive architecture: The impact of arousal
and valence on memory. Cognitive Systems Research.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: an
analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica: Journal of
the Econometric Society, 263-291.Lazarus, R. S., &
Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal, and coping. New
York: Springer Publishing Company.
Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal, and
coping. New York: Springer Publishing Company.
Marinier, R. P., Laird, J. E., & Lewis, R. L. (2009). A
computational unification of cognitive behavior and
emotion. Cognitive Systems Research, 10, 48-69.
Marsella, S. & Gratch, J. (2009). EMA: A Process Model of
Appraisal Dynamics. Journal of Cognitive Systems
Research, 10, 70-90.
Ortony, A., Clore, G. L., & Collins, A. (1990). The
cognitive structure of emotions. Cambridge university
press.
Paton, J. J., Belova, M. A., Morrison, S. E., & Salzman, C.
D. (2006). The primate amygdala represents the positive
and negative value of visual stimuli during
learning. Nature, 439(7078), 865-870.
Ritter, F. E., Reifers, A. L., Klein, L. C., & Schoelles, M. J.
(2007). Lessons from defining theories of stress for
cognitive architectures. Integrated models of cognitive
systems, 1, 254.
Russell, J.A. & Feldman Barrett, L. (1999). Core affect,
prototypical emotional episodes, and other things called
emotion: Dissecting the elephant. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 76(5), 805–819.
Russell, J. A. (2003). Core affect and the psychological
construction of emotion. Psychological review, 110(1),
145.
Russell, J.A. (2009). Emotion, core affect, and
psychological construction. Cognition and Emotion,
23(7), 1259-1283.
Smith, S. D., Most, S. B., Newsome, L. A., & Zald, D. H.
(2006). An emotion-induced attentional blink elicited by
aversively conditioned stimuli. Emotion, 6(3), 523.
Zajonc, R. B. (2001). Mere exposure: A gateway to the
subliminal. Current directions in psychological science,
10(6), 224-228.
Zeelenberg, M., & Pieters, R. (2006). Feeling is for doing: a
pragmatic approach to the study of emotions ineconomic
behavior. In D. DeCremer, M. Zeelenberg & J. K.
Murnighan (Eds.), Social psychology and economics (pp.
117–137). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by The Air Force Office of
Scientific Research grant number FA9550-14-1-0206 to IJ.

References
Anderson, J. R. (2007). How can the human mind occur in
the physical universe? New York: Oxford University
Press.
Bechara, A., Damasio, H., & Damasio, A. R. (2000).
Emotion, decision making and the orbitofrontal cortex.
Cerebral cortex, 10(3), 295-307.
Belavkin, R. V. (2003b). On emotion, learning and
uncertainty: A cognitive modelling approach. PhD Thesis,
The University of Nottingham, Nottingham, NG8 1BB,
United Kingdom.
Damasio, A. (1994). Descartes’ error: Emotion, reason and
the human mind. New York: Putnam Press.
Dancy, C. L., Ritter, F. E., Berry, K., & Klein, L. C. (2015).
Using a cognitive architecture with a physiological
substrate to represent effects of psychological stress on
cognition. Computational and Mathematical Organization
Theory, 21(1), 90-114.
Dijksterhuis, A., Bos, M. W., Nordgren, L. F., & van
Baaren, R. B. (2006). On making the right choice: The
deliberation-without-attention effect. Science, 311, 1005–
1007.

723

