A Domain-Independent Approach of Cognitive Appraisal Augmented by Higher
Cognitive Layer of Ethical Reasoning
Suman Ojha (Suman.Ojha@student.uts.edu.au)
Jonathan Vitale (Jonathan.Vitale@uts.edu.au)
Mary-Anne Williams (Mary-Anne.Williams@uts.edu.au)
University of Technology Sydney – Centre For Artificial Intelligence
Innovation and Enterprise Research Lab (The Magic Lab), 15 Broadway, Ultimo NSW 2007, Australia
Abstract
According to cognitive appraisal theory, emotion in an individual is the result of how a situation/event is evaluated by the
individual. This evaluation has different outcomes among people and it is often suggested to be operationalised by a set of
rules or beliefs acquired by the subject throughout development. Unfortunately, this view is particularly detrimental for
computational applications of emotion appraisal. In fact, it requires providing a knowledge base that is particularly difficult
to establish and manage, especially in systems designed for
highly complex scenarios, such as social robots. In addition,
according to appraisal theory, an individual might elicit more
than one emotion at a time in reaction to an event. Hence, determining which emotional state should be attributed in relationship to a specific event is another critical issue not yet fully
addressed by the available literature. In this work, we show
that: (i) the cognitive appraisal process can be realised without
a complex set of rules; instead, we propose that this process
can be operationalised by knowing only the positive or negative perceived effect the event has on the subject, thus facilitating extensibility and integrability of the emotional system;
(ii) the final emotional state to attribute in relation to a specific
situation is better explained by ethical reasoning mechanisms.
These hypotheses are supported by our experimental results.
Therefore, this contribution is particularly significant to provide a more simple and generalisable explanation of cognitive
appraisal theory and to promote the integration between theories of emotion and ethics studies, currently often neglected by
the available literature.
Keywords: Cognitive appraisal theory; computational emotion model; emotion combination; ethics

Introduction
The attribution of an emotional state to self or others can occur when a complex state of the organism is accompanied by
variable degrees of awareness, often referred to as appraisal
(Scherer, 2001). Two levels of appraisal can be distinguished
(Lambie & Marcel, 2002): a first-order phenomenological
state and a conscious second-order awareness. Both states
can be either self-directed (first-person perspective) or worlddirected (third person perspective) (Vitale, Williams, Johnston, & Boccignone, 2014). The present work will be concerned in discussing the nature of the conscious second-order
appraisal process, known as cognitive appraisal process of
emotion.
Traditional literature in emotional processing studies suggests that this cognitive appraisal process may underlie the
evaluation of a set of variables called appraisal variables
(Ortony, Clore, & Collins, 1990; Lazarus, 1991; Roseman,
Spindel, & Jose, 1990; Scherer, 2001). Appraisal variables
can be understood as the criteria used to assess a situation
in relation to emotion elicitation process. For example, in

appraisal theory of Ortony et al. (1990), core appraisal variables1 considered are desirability - which assesses how desirable an event is, praiseworthiness - which measures how
praiseworthy the action of an agent is and appealingness which measures how appealing is the agent to the appraising
individual. Appraisal theories suggest that individuals converge to an emotional state depending on the evaluation of
these variables. This position is further supported by the majority of existing computational explanations of cognitive appraisal (Dias & Paiva, 2005; El-Nasr, Yen, & Ioerger, 2000;
Velasquez, 1997). However, the proposed accounts offer limited perspectives addressing only domain specific situations
and making use of knowledge shaped as a set of pre-defined
rules (Dias & Paiva, 2005; El-Nasr et al., 2000). Thus, (i)
the available literature in cognitive appraisal theory currently does not provide a clear computational explanation for
domain-independent cognitive appraisal mechanisms. This is
a significant research problem for both cognitive science and
computer science research communities; in fact, on one hand,
having a computational theory of domain-independent cognitive appraisal mechanisms can assist cognitive science researchers in addressing open research gaps in emotional processing studies, and, on the other hand, this computational
account can be more easily integrated in disparate intelligent systems without the need of defining a complex set of
domain-dependent rules.
However, this is not the only limitation presented by currently available explanations of cognitive appraisal theory.
According to cognitive appraisal theory of emotion, an event
can elicit more than one emotions simultaneously with varying intensities (Ortony et al., 1990). Nevertheless, (ii) it is
not clear yet what is the best strategy to select an emotional
state for attribution following this appraisal process. This
is again a significant research problem. In particular, having
a mechanism able to determine the final optimal emotional
state is a highly desirable feature for intelligent systems interacting with humans, such as social robots (Williams, 2012),
since this is a necessary skill for being proficient in emotional
intelligence (Mayer & Salovey, 1993). For example, it has
been widely documented that the appraised emotional state
of an individual has direct impact on decision making and action selection (Isen & Means, 1983; Loewenstein & Lerner,
1 Note that there are other appraisal variables proposed by the
theory. Describing all the appraisal variables and their meanings is
out of the scope of this paper.

2833

2003). Thus, without an appropriate mechanism able to determine the final optimal emotional state, the intelligent system
cannot take socially acceptable and ethical actions (Vitale,
Williams, & Johnston, 2014).
This paper aims to present a computational model of emotion processing that adds a higher layer of cognition to appraisal mechanism. The significance of this paper is further
increased by this novel approach going beyond the domain of
emotion theories and embracing the strengths of ethical theories. Although, the literature includes previous studies suggesting interactions between theories of emotions and ethics
(Callahan, 1988; Gaudine & Thorne, 2001), to our knowledge, there are no computational explanations addressing the
interactions between ethics and emotion processing mechanisms (Ojha & Williams, 2016). Therefore, in this paper we
aim to:
(i) Provide a computational model of cognitive appraisal of
emotion able to elicit appropriate emotional states without the need of defining pre-determined rules, but rather by
using a general domain-independent approach facilitating
easy extensibility of the emotionally intelligent systems;
(ii) Provide a novel computational process inspired by ethical theories for the selection of the optimal emotional state
among the elicited ones.
The offered outcomes will provide valuable insights to
gather a better understanding on how integrating ethical theories in emotion processing mechanisms can improve existing
computational models of emotions. This in turn will advance
the understanding of the role of cognition in emotion.

Computational Models of Cognitive Appraisal
Theories from cognitive science and psychology have been
implemented in various computational models of cognition.
In this section, we will present some of the computational
models of emotions implementing cognitive appraisal theory
of emotion that are related to our discussion and identify their
current limitations.
The models available in literature use evaluation criteria
called appraisal variables (Ortony et al., 1990; Lazarus, 1991;
Roseman et al., 1990; Scherer, 2001) to assess or evaluate
the events for the generation of emotion. The choice of appraisal variables depends on the appraisal theory used and
also on the application of the model. One common limitation of the existing accounts is their heavy specificity to the
considered application domain and the determination of the
elicited emotional states by means of pre-defined rules (Dias
& Paiva, 2005; El-Nasr et al., 2000). This approach likely
leads to low extensibility of the system.
One available account is Fuzzy Logic Adaptive Model
of Emotions (FLAME), a fuzzy logic based computational
model of emotion (El-Nasr et al., 2000) inspired by appraisal
theories suggested by Ortony et al. (1990) and Roseman et
al. (1990). The main strategy used by FLAME is the evaluation of if-then rules in order to assess the considered appraisal

variables. As we already discussed, this approach leads to a
particularly poor extensibility of the system, since adding a
new rule would require to consequently revise and adapt the
entire knowledge base.
EMotion and Adaptation (EMA) (Gratch & Marsella,
2004; S. C. Marsella & Gratch, 2009) borrows the ideas from
the cognitive motivational appraisal theory of Lazarus (1991).
It stands out from other existing computational models of
emotion in that it is able to compute emotions irrespective
of the experiment domain. However, this model is not able
to achieve this only by using the perceived positivity or negativity of an event like our model, which will be discussed
later.
Another related account is Fearnot AffecTIve Mind Architecture (FAtiMA), a computational model of emotion proposed by Dias and Paiva (2005). It is significantly inspired
by appraisal theory of Ortony et al. (1990). FAtiMA considerably uses domain specific scenarios built on top of predefined appraisal rules in order to appraise the desired situation without clearly suggesting how to easily generalise the
proposed appraisal mechanisms for different domains.
Beside not providing a valid and easy strategy to integrate
the suggested computational model in disparate application
domains, the available accounts do not offer an effective way
to determine the final emotional state in response to an event
in a specific situation. This is still an open research problem since most appraisal theories do not explain how this can
be achieved (see, for example, Ortony et al. (1990); Scherer
(2001)). Some strategies propose to select the emotional state
exhibiting (i) highest intensity (Gratch & Marsella, 2004) or
driven by the higher motivational state (i.e. hunger, thirst,
pain, and fatigue) (El-Nasr et al., 2000), whereas other strategies propose to (ii) blend the elicited intensities of multiple
emotions in order to determine the final emotional state (see
Reilly (2006) for more details on the strategy used). In the
Evaluation section, we shall discuss why these approaches
might not be desirable methods to reach to a final emotional
state.
As previously discussed, an emotion processing model developed by using a rule-based approach is unlikely to offer
easy extensibility and high integrability in disparate emotionally intelligent systems among different application domains.
Thus, in this paper we provide computational mechanisms
general enough to be used in different domains without the
need of re-implementing or adapting the proposed model, but
at the same time able to appraise the appropriate emotional
states for the considered situation. In addition, we suggest
to use ethical theories to determine the final emotional state
among the ones elicited by the cognitive appraisal process.
Determining this state is particularly important to drive socially acceptable behaviours.

Hypotheses
Consider a social interaction between two subjects. In this
work we will call sender the subject producing a behavioural

2834

response directed to the other subject, which we will call re(B,C)
ceiver. Denote with Sreceiver a value determining how negative or positive the behaviour B of the sender is perceived
(B,C)
by the receiver in a given context C. Sreceiver is a plausible computational representation summarising within a single
valanced value the somatovisceral reactions of the body to the
given situation (B, C) following the first-order phenomenological stage of emotional processing (Bechara, Damasio, &
Damasio, 2000). As previously mentioned in the introduction
of this paper, this work is not concerned with discussing the
implementation of first-order phenomenological processes.
(B,C)
Denote with C (Sreceiver ) a cognitive appraisal process able
to appraise the intensities I = {ie1 , . . . , ien } of a set of n considered emotional states {e1 , . . . , en } given the first-order phe(B,C)
nomenological reaction of the receiver Sreceiver . Thus, our
first hypothesis is that:
(B,C)

Hypothesis 1 The value Sreceiver is a sufficient information to
perform a cognitive appraisal process C able to elicit the intensities of the considered emotional states and consequently
promoting the selection of a final emotional state resembling
human cognitive appraisal.
(B,C)

Importantly, the value Sreceiver is completely independent
from other pre-existing values S already available by the system and concerning different behaviours and contexts. In
other words, adding a new value S to our model, thus extending the knowledge of the system, will not require to adapt the
pre-existing knowledge and it will not necessitate to modify
the parameters of the computational model.
Denote with E (I, θethics ) and with E (I) two processes able
to provide a final emotional state given the set of the elicited
emotion intensities I realised by the cognitive appraisal process C . E (I, θethics ) includes parameters operationalising
ethical theories, whereas E (I) uses a generic strategy without considering the ethical dimension of the given situation.
Therefore, our second hypothesis is that:

the individual. In the context of our computational model of
emotion, if we denote these goals, standards and attitudes as
an internal parameter θint and the perceived knowledge of the
environment that the system receives when an event occurs as
K env , then a function for computing appraisal variable can be
represented as:
vi = Vi (K env , θint )

Which means that the quantitative value of an appraisal
variable is the function of the event knowledge gathered from
the environment (K env ) and the internal goals, standards and
attitudes (θint ). This computation is done by an Appraisal
Mechanism component, as shown in Figure 1. Each computed appraisal variable contributes in the generation of one
or more emotions (Ortony et al., 1990) and helps in estimating the intensities of the considered emotions3 .
The majority of available computational models of emotion compute vi by using domain-specific rule-based functions (Dias & Paiva, 2005; El-Nasr et al., 2000; Velasquez,
1997). Because of this, when the application domain or input
parameters (K env ) change in those models, the internal representation of goals, standards and attitudes (θint ) also needs
to be changed. In our model, K env is modelled as a set of
valanced scores S providing an interpretation of the negative or positive connotation of the experienced events. Importantly, the scores S are completely independent from θint .
Thus, extending our model with new knowledge or adapting previous one will not necessitate to modify the model’s
parameters θint . In this paper we will not provide implementation details and we consequently limit our contribution
to this functional description, since this is sufficient for the
validation of the proposed hypotheses. The detailed mechanism of computation of appraisal variables in our computational model can be found in another paper (Ojha & Williams,
2017).

Hypothesis 2 The cognitive appraisal process augmented by
ethical reasoning mechanisms E (I, θethics ) converge to more
accurate emotional states compared to cognitive appraisal
processes augmented by generic reasoning mechanisms E (I).
In the remainder of this paper we will offer the functional
level description of our computational account and experimental results validating our hypotheses.

(1)

Figure 1: General Appraisal Mechanism.

Cognitive Appraisal Process. The process of emotion generation in our computational model2 is shown in Figure 1. As
mentioned earlier, when an event occurs, its appraisal (evaluation) is done by using a set of variables called appraisal variables. Ortony et al. (1990) state that these appraisal variables
are computed based on the goals, standards and attitudes of

Emotional State Selection. Next crucial step is determining the final emotional state of the system. Our proposition is
that when more than one active emotions are generated, then a
final emotional state is best determined by a higher cognitive
layer of ethical reasoning.
Figure 2 shows more details of the Emotion Combination
Mechanism included in Figure 1 and suggests the mechanism
to determine the final emotional state for attribution. The
emotions e1 , e2 , e3 ,.....and en with respective intensities ie1 ,

2 Our computational model is inspired by the work of S. Marsella,
Gratch, and Petta (2010) but implemented with completely different
computation mechanism.

3 Currently, our model can generate and express eight different
emotions described by (Ortony et al., 1990) namely Joy, Distress,
Appreciation, Reproach, Gratitude, Anger, Liking and Disliking.

Model Implementation

2835

153 responses (male=82, female=71). Importantly, the subjects were randomly attributed to either the action scoring
task or the mind-reading task.

Scenario Design
In order to avoid ad-hoc scenarios facilitating our model, we
did not design the scenarios ourselves. Rather, we requested
4 naı̈ve adults, without any knowledge about the objectives of
the present research, to cooperate in designing six scenarios
under the following conditions:

Figure 2: Ethical Emotion Combination Mechanism.
ie2 , ie3 ,.....and ien output from the Affect Generation component are processed by applying the concepts of deontological
and consequentialist ethics (Hooker, 1996) in order to determine the final emotional state. Deontological ethics says that
one should satisfy owns duties before making a choice of action/decision and consequentialist ethics says that one should
consider the consequences to all the relevant parties before
making a decision (Hooker, 1996). Functionally, our ethical
emotion combination mechanism is shown in 2.
eethical = E (I, θethics )

(2)

Where, eethical ∈ {e1 , e2 , e3 , ..., en } is the final emotional
state. I is the set of emotion intensities and θethics represents
ethical standards.
ehigh = Ehigh (I)

(3)

eblended = Eblended (I)

(4)

Equations 3 and 4 represent the functions computing respectively the final emotional states for highest intensity approach and blended intensity approach, which were introduced earlier. Clearly, these functions only take the intensities of various emotions for the determination of the final
emotional state. However, our model reaches to a final emotional state with the help of higher cognitive mechanism of
ethical reasoning (as shown in 2).
The emotional responses of our computational model
based on: (1) Highest Intensity Approach, (2) Intensity
Blending Approach and (3) Ethical Reasoning Approach will
be compared with emotion data obtained from human participants in the Evaluation section.

Evaluation
In order to operationalise our model and to consequently validate our hypotheses, we designed two sets of web-based surveys requiring two tasks: an action scoring task and a mindreading task. In both the experimental conditions we provided a set of stories concerning social exchanges between
two individuals, a sender and a receiver, as previously denoted.
Participants covering a broad set of countries were invited
on Facebook or through mailing lists to take our surveys. The
surveys were completely anonymous. We received a total of

• The scenario shall include the interactions of two subjects,
one of them denoted as sender and the other as receiver;
• A minimum of 5 and a maximum of 10 actions of the
sender directed to the receiver describing a plausible social
interaction between two persons shall be provided;
• At the beginning, each scenario shall provide the contextual information about the designed situation and the two
considered subjects. Moreover, additional contextual information could be provided during the development of the
described social exchanges, whenever this information is
necessary to contextualise the remaining interactions;
• No contextual information suggesting the potential emotional state of the receiver shall be provided for individual
interactions, with the exception of the contextual information provided at the beginning of the scenario.
The result of this process was a set of scenarios used during
both the action scoring and the mind-reading tasks mentioned
earlier. The scenarios included interactions between (1) two
strangers (a male and a female) interacting on a bench of a
park, (2) two close friends (both males) meeting at a beach,
(3) a husband and a wife having an argument about forgetting the birthday, (4) an elderly woman affected by dementia
and her nurse (both females) experiencing a distressful moment, (5) a guy having argument with his brother, and (6) an
interaction between a customer of a café and a waiter (both
males). In total, the scenarios included 48 social exchanges
of the senders directed to the receivers.

Action Scoring Task
The experimental subjects participating in the action scoring
task were asked to guess, for each scenario, how positive or
negative each social exchange performed by the sender would
be perceived by the receiver in that specific context. The
rating was based on 7-point Likert scale: Extremely Negative, Very Negative, Negative, Neither Negative Nor Positive, Positive, Very Positive, Extremely Positive. We numerically evaluated the responses by attributing a weight to
each point of the scale (i.e. -1, -0.66, -0.33, 0, 0.33, 0.66
and 1 respectively). We averaged the responses obtaining a
value S for each of the considered social exchanges B in the
specific context C. In this way we were able to provide the

2836

(a)

(b)

Figure 3: Results of the experiments. (a) The cumulative rank-distances of the models’ predictions from human assessment.
(b) The rank-distances of the models’ predictions from human assessment.
necessary input knowledge to our system (i.e. a set of numeric scores S ∈ [−1, +1]) and to consequently perform cognitive appraisal processes estimating the emotional state of
the receivers in each considered scenario. Recall that this process did not require any changes to our computational model,
which provides a valid domain-independent approach of cognitive appraisal process.

Mind-Reading Task
In order to compare the emotional response of our computational model, we asked to the subjects participating in the
mind-reading task to guess, for each interaction of the sender,
what would have been the chances that the receiver would
happen to be in a particular emotional state, based on the
just happened interaction and the previously occurred social
exchanges and contextual information. Therefore, for each
of the eight considered emotional states the rating was based
on 6-point Likert scale: Not at all, Very Low, Low, Medium,
High and Very High. The additional rating “Not at all” was
necessary to allow the participants to express no chances to
attribute such emotional state to the receiver. We numerically
evaluated the responses by attributing a weight to each point
of the scale (i.e. 0.0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8 and 1.0 respectively).
Average score given by the participants to various emotions
was calculated by performing the weighted average of the ratings.

Results
Based on the results of the mind-reading task, the emotions
for each interaction of each scenario were ranked from 1 to 8,
with the emotion having the highest average score ranked as
1 and the one with lowest score ranked as 8.
We considered three strategies to computationally predict
the final emotional state of each interaction: choosing the
emotional state with highest intensity, blending the emotional
intensities to determine the final emotional state as described

by Reilly (2006), and our suggested approach based on ethical reasoning. Each of these three strategies followed a
common domain-independent cognitive appraisal process, as
discussed in the model implementation section. We compared these computational predictions against the gathered
human assessments (i.e. emotions ranked 1) by computing
their rank-distances, suggesting how close the computational
model was compared to human assessment. The results are
summarised in Table 1.
Table 1: Descriptive statistics of the gathered results.

High intensity
Blended emotion
Ethical reasoning

Mean
2.4167
2.3125
2.0833

Median
2
2
1

Std
2.3232
2.0228
2.3140

In order to demonstrate that the proposed common stage
of domain-independent cognitive appraisal was able to elicit
emotional intensities similarly to human cognitive appraisal
process (Hypothesis 1), we analysed the human responses of
the mind-reading task. We noticed that for most of the considered interactions some of the emotions resulted in very close
averaged scores. Therefore, given ε = 0.1, for each interaction we counted the number of emotions having an average
score of greater than or equal to the score of highest scored
emotion minus ε for that interaction. ε was chosen to be equal
to half of the score attributed to each point of the Likert scale
(i.e. 0.2), thus being able to group emotions plausibly ranked
with similar likelihood by most of the human assessors. The
average number of similarly rated emotional states among all
the 48 interactions was 3.2, thus suggesting that on average
human cognitive appraisal promoted 3 comparable emotional
states to attribute to the receiver. From Figure 3a it is clear to
see that for distances less than 2 ranks to the human assessment (i.e. predictions among the first 3 higher scored emo-

2837

tions) our cognitive appraisal model was able to promote the
selection (using all the three considered strategies) of approximately 70% of the emotional states plausibly attributed by
humans participants to the receivers described in the mindreading task scenarios.
In addition, we can also observe that the cognitive process augmented by the proposed ethical reasoning mechanism
converges to more accurate emotional states compared to the
other investigated strategies (Hypothesis 2). Figure 3b further suggests that the proposed ethical reasoning mechanism
reduces average rank-distances from human appraisal. Therefore, the present results support both the proposed hypotheses.

Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we presented our computational model of emotion based on appraisal theory that is able to generate emotions using the expected degree of positivity or negativity associated with an action/event. This allowed our model to be
completely independent of the application domain and efficiently appraise a situation for the elicitation of various emotions. In addition, our model adds a higher layer of cognition in the emotion mechanism by integrating an ethical
reasoning capability for the determination of the final emotional state when more than one emotions are generated by
the model. Experimental results support our first hypothesis proposing that cognitive appraisal is possible without
prior domain knowledge and second hypothesis suggesting
that ethical reasoning is a better strategy to explain human
emotional state attribution process.
Yet, our computational model still has some room for improvement. For example, it is important to consider that people with different personality generate emotions in different
ways. Thus, in the future, we aim to use the concept of personality and examine how the difference in personality makes
difference in ethical standards and hence in emotion generation.

References
Bechara, A., Damasio, H., & Damasio, A. R. (2000). Emotion, decision making and the orbitofrontal cortex. Cerebral cortex, 10(3), 295–307.
Callahan, S. (1988). The role of emotion in ethical decisionmaking. Hastings Center Report, 18(3), 9-14.
Dias, J., & Paiva, A. (2005). Feeling and reasoning: A computational model for emotional characters. In Progress in
artificial intelligence (p. 127-140). Springer.
El-Nasr, M. S., Yen, J., & Ioerger, T. R. (2000). Flame - fuzzy
logic adaptive model of emotions. Autonomous Agents and
Multi-agent systems, 3(3), 219-257.
Gaudine, A., & Thorne, L. (2001). Emotion and ethical decision-making in organizations. Journal of Business
Ethics, 31(2), 175-187.
Gratch, J., & Marsella, S. (2004). A domain-independent
framework for modeling emotion. Cognitive Systems Research, 5(4), 269-306.

Hooker, J. (1996). Three kinds of ethics.
Isen, A. M., & Means, B. (1983). The influence of positive
affect on decision-making strategy. Social cognition, 2(1),
18-31.
Lambie, J. A., & Marcel, A. J. (2002). Consciousness and the
varieties of emotion experience: a theoretical framework.
Psychological review, 109(2), 219.
Lazarus, R. S. (1991). Emotion and adaptation. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Loewenstein, G., & Lerner, J. S. (2003). The role of affect in
decision making. Handbook of affective science, 619(642),
3.
Marsella, S., Gratch, J., & Petta, P. (2010). Computational
models of emotion. In A blueprint for an affectively competent agent: Cross-fertilization between emotion psychology, affective neuroscience, and affective computing (p. 2146). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Marsella, S. C., & Gratch, J. (2009). Ema: A process model
of appraisal dynamics. Cognitive Systems Research, 10(1),
70-90.
Mayer, J. D., & Salovey, P. (1993). The intelligence of emotional intelligence. Intelligence, 17(4), 433–442.
Ojha, S., & Williams, M.-A. (2016). Ethically-guided emotional responses for social robots: Should i be angry? In
International conference on social robotics (p. 233-242).
Springer.
Ojha, S., & Williams, M.-A. (2017). Emotional appraisal
: A computational perspective. In Annual conference on
advances in cognitive systems.
Ortony, A., Clore, G. L., & Collins, A. (1990). The cognitive
structure of emotions. Cambridge University Press.
Reilly, W. S. N. (2006). Modeling what happens between
emotional antecedents and emotional consequents. In Eighteenth european meeting on cybernetics and systems research (p. 607-612). Vienna, Austria: Austrian Society for
Cybernetic Studies.
Roseman, I. J., Spindel, M. S., & Jose, P. E. (1990). Appraisals of emotion-eliciting events: Testing a theory of
discrete emotions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59(5), 899.
Scherer, K. R. (2001). Appraisal considered as a process
of multilevel sequential checking. Appraisal processes in
emotion: Theory, methods, research, 92, 120.
Velasquez, J. D. (1997). Modeling emotions and other motivations in synthetic agents. In Aaai/iaai (p. 10-15).
Vitale, J., Williams, M.-A., & Johnston, B. (2014, October). Socially impaired robots: Human social disorders and
robots’ socio-emotional intelligence. In 6th international
conference on social robotics (p. 350-359).
Vitale, J., Williams, M.-A., Johnston, B., & Boccignone, G.
(2014). Affective facial expression processing via simulation: A probabilistic model. Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures, 10, 30-41.
Williams, M.-A. (2012). Robot social intelligence. In Social
robotics (pp. 45–55). Springer.

2838

