A Hebbian account of entrenchment and (over)-extension in language learning
Vsevolod Kapatsinski (vkapatsi@uoregon.edu)
Zara Harmon (zforough@uoregon.edu)
Department of Linguistics, 1290 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403 USA

Abstract
In production, frequently used words are preferentially
extended to new, though related meanings. In comprehension,
frequent exposure to a word instead makes the learner
confident that all of the word’s legitimate uses have been
experienced, resulting in an entrenched form-meaning
mapping between the word and its experienced meaning(s).
This results in a perception-production dissociation, where the
forms speakers are most likely to map onto a novel meaning
are precisely the forms that they believe can never be used
that way. At first glance, this result challenges the idea of
bidirectional form-meaning mappings, assumed by all current
approaches to linguistic theory. In this paper, we show that
bidirectional form-meaning mappings are not in fact
challenged by this production-perception dissociation. We
show that the production-perception dissociation is expected
even if learners of the lexicon acquire simple symmetrical
form-meaning associations through simple Hebbian learning.
Keywords: Hebbian learning; word learning; mental lexicon

Introduction
Extension of frequent forms to novel uses is one of the most
common processes in language change, and results in the
robust correlation between frequency and polysemy: upon
examining a dictionary, it quickly becomes evident that it is
the most frequent words that have the largest number of
uses (compare get vs. obtain, Piantadosi et al., 2012; Zipf,
1949). Extension of familiar words and constructions to new
uses is also one of the major mechanisms driving
grammaticalization, a largely unidirectional process through
which grammatical morphemes evolve out of lexical sources
(Bybee, 2003, 2010). A well-studied example in English is
the verb will, which was gradually extended from volitional
lexical uses (e.g., I will it to happen) to grammatical future
tense uses that no longer imply volition (e.g., I will get fired
for suggesting this).
Extension can be observed not only in diachrony but also
in online language use. In particular, novel extensions are
frequently observed in children’s use of both referential
terms and verb-argument structure constructions. For
example, a child may name a cow a kitty or extend the verb
giggle to transitive use, as in don’t giggle me (e.g. Naigles
& Gelman, 1995; Pinker 1989). The words that are so
overextended tend to be the frequent ones, or else ones that
are highly accessible in the moment because they have just
been used (Gershkoff-Stowe et al., 2006; for adults, see also
Ferreira & Griffin, 2003; Burke et al., 2004). These patterns
parallel the diachronic tendency for frequent words to
acquire novel uses.

Crucially, a child can overextend a word in production
without overextending it in comprehension. When presented
with a word she over-extends in production and asked to
pick out all the objects the word can refer to, the child often
does not select the objects to which she over-extends the
word in production as its possible referents (Naigles &
Gelman, 1995).
In fact, frequency appears to have opposite effects in
comprehension and production. Whereas frequent words are
extended to new uses in production, frequent words are
likely to be restricted to the uses in which they have been
experienced. For example, Xu & Tenenbaum (2007) show
that experiencing fep paired with a Dalmatian once leads
children to think it plausible that fep refers to all dogs, but
three fep-Dalmatian pairings are enough to restrict the set of
referents to Dalmatians (see also Ambridge et al., 2008;
Brooks & Tomasello, 1999; Theakston, 2004; Wonnacott et
al., 2008, for related results with syntactic constructions).
Frequent exposure to a form-meaning pairing appears to
convince learners that the form always co-occurs with this
meaning.

The Data
In recent work, we have confirmed the existence of this
dissociation in adult learners of a miniature artificial
language (Harmon & Kapatsinski, submitted; Experiment
1). In our study, participants were exposed to a language
with two plural suffixes (-dan and -sil) and two diminutive
suffixes (-nem and -shoon). For each participant, one suffix
was more frequent than others. Each participant was tested
on both comprehension and production.
Participants experienced the language through passive
exposure, with nouns bearing the suffixes (e.g. ostodan,
zutishoon) presented auditorily, paired with pictures of their
referents. Each trial began with a picture of the referent,
followed 500 ms later by the spoken word. After the offset
of the spoken word, the experiment advanced to the next
trial, which began 400 ms later.
Nouns bearing plural suffixes were paired with pictures
of multiple large creatures (with the kind of creature
determined by the stem), whereas each noun bearing a
diminutive suffix was paired with pictures of a single small
creature.
For half of the participants (n = 35), those in the Dan
condition, the form -dan was more frequent than the others.
For the other half, assigned to the Nem condition (n = 35),
the frequent form was -nem. The competing -sil and -shoon

2366

Probability of Choosing a Form

PL

DIMPL

DIM

1.00

novel meaning. In this task, participants were less likely to
click on the novel meaning given a form that was frequent
during exposure (Figure 2; χ2(1)= 17, p = .000037). As in
production, these effects could not be accounted for by the
relative frequencies of the meanings because the synonym
of a frequent form was significantly more likely to be
mapped onto the novel meaning than the synonym of the
infrequent form (p <.001). Thus, participants are not simply
more likely to click on the more familiar meanings, rather
they are more likely to click on familiar meanings in
response to the forms that have been frequently paired with
them in training. For forms that have been paired with the
frequent meaning less frequently, the novel meaning is
preferred, despite the fact that these forms are as frequent as
synonyms of infrequent forms.
-dan
Probability of Choosing a Meaning

forms were always equally frequent. The unsuffixed stems
constituted the singular non-diminutive form of the noun.
After exposure, participants were tested on both
production and comprehension. In the production test, were
presented with meanings and asked to express them.
Crucially, one of the meanings was a novel one, plural
diminutive (multiple small creatures). Each trial began with
the presentation of the picture of a novel singular object on
the computer screen. The name of the novel object was
presented auditorily over headphones as in the training
stage. Once the sound finished playing, the picture was
removed and replaced with a display of four pictures
representing four different meanings: a single object of the
same type, a miniature version of the same object, multiple
objects of the same type, and multiple miniature objects of
the same type. Three of these pictures disappeared, leaving
the participants with the one target picture to name (i.e.,
meaning to express). Participants were asked to generate the
form for the target meaning using the stem that was
presented and say the form aloud. They had five seconds to
do so.
Data were analyzed using logistic mixed-effects models
with maximal random-effects structure using the lme4
package (Bates et al., 2015) in R (R Core Team, 2015).
Significance was assessed by comparing models with and
without a predictor using a log likelihood test. Participants
were significantly more likely to use a given form if it was
the frequent form during exposure (Figure 1; χ2 (1) = 21, p <
.0001). This was not simply an effect of semantic feature
frequency, i.e. DIM.PL in Dan, where PL was frequent, was
not simply interpreted as PL: the synonym of a frequent
form (-sil in Dan and -shoon in Nem) was no more likely to
be used to express the novel meaning than the synonym of
the infrequent form (-sil in Nem and -shoon in Dan; p = .9).

-nem

1.00

0.75

Response
DIMPL
PL
DIM

0.50

0.25

0.00

Dan

Nem

Dan

Nem

Figure 2: An illustration of the comprehension test and
the corresponding results from Harmon & Kapatsinski
(submitted). Responding ‘DIMPL’ meant clicking on
multiple small creatures; ‘PL’ meant clicking on multiple
large creatures, and ‘DIM’ meant clicking on a single small
creature. When a suffix occurred frequently in training (-dan
in Dan Condition and -nem in Nem Condition), it became
less likely to be mapped onto the novel meaning, DIMPL,
and more likely to be mapped onto the meaning it was
paired with during exposure.

0.75

Response

-dan
-nem

0.50

0.25

0.00

Dan Nem

Dan Nem

Dan Nem

Figure 1: An illustration and results of the production test.
A suffix is produced more often when it has been
experienced more frequently (-dan in Dan and -nem in
Nem), both to express the meaning with which it was
experienced and to express the novel related meaning
(DIMPL)
In the comprehension test, participants were presented
with forms and asked to click on the corresponding meaning
using the four-picture display briefly flashed in production.
The meanings included the familiar meanings as well as the

The results therefore show a production-comprehension
dissociation: the forms participants were most likely to use
to refer to the novel meaning in production were the forms
they were least likely to map onto the novel meaning in
comprehension.
Thus, frequency of a form-meaning pairing appears to
have opposite effects in production and comprehension.
These results therefore appear, at first glance, to be
problematic for simple Hebbian models of word learning
(McMurray et al., 2012; Yu & Smith, 2012) that learn
symmetrical bidirectional form-meaning mappings based on
form-meaning co-occurrence as well as for the notion,
nearly universally accepted in linguistics (cf. Ramscar et al.,
2010), that linguistic contructions, whether lexical or
grammatical, are Saussurean signs – i.e., that there is a form
representation that mediates the auditory-to-semantic
mapping in comprehension and the semantic-to-articulatory
mapping in proeuction. The aim of the present paper is to

2367

show that, somewhat counterintuitively, the observed
dissociation actually falls out of simple Hebbian learning of
bidirectional form-meaning associations.

The baseline model: Frequency counter
According to Hebb (1949), neurons that fire together wire
together. We assume a distinction between cues and
outcomes, where outcomes follow cues. On every trial,
associations between the cues present on that trial and the
following outcomes strengthen. How much they strengthen
is determined by the salience of the cue, the salience of the
outcome, and the learning rate. During the exposure trials in
Harmon & Kapatsinski (submitted), forms began 500 ms
into the presentation of the referent. Therefore, we assume
cues to be the semantic features of the referents (BIG,
SMALL, MANY and ONE) plus a context cue, present on
every trial (Pavlov, 1927; Rescorla & Wagner, 1972). This
order of presentation was chosen to reflect the temporal
dynamics of real-life word learning (Pereira et al., 2014).
Unlike error-driven models such as Rescorla & Wagner
(1972), we did not multiply the increment in association
strength by prediction error. This is part of what makes the
model Hebbian: it does not learn less on trials with
unsurprising (or no-longer-surprising) outcomes, and would
not exhibit cue competition effects such as blocking or
overshadowing.
In essence, this base model is simply counting frequencies
of form-meaning mappings. When it encounters a cue
(meaning) followed by an outcome (form), it simply
increases the weight of the link between them by a constant
number, which we set to 1 in order to emphasize the
model’s nature as a simple frequency counter. The results
do not change depending on what the number is.

Linking hypotheses
In order to connect the model’s knowledge to the
experimental results, we need a set of linking hypotheses
connecting the weights and activations of the model to the
participants’ responses in the experimental tasks. We
assumed that production involves activating forms given the
semantic features present on that test trial and the context
cue. The activation of a form is simply the sum of
connection strengths from the semantic and context cues
present on the test trial to that form. The choice of the form
is then determined stochastically (Luce, 1963): the form is
chosen in proportion to its activation value relative to the
sum of all forms’ activation values given the cues present.
Stochastic choice implements probability matching, an
empirical universal in tasks that demand repeatedly
choosing between the same alternatives (Azab et al., 2016).
The linking hypothesis for comprehension is more
controversial. Note that the model, like the subjects, was
trained only in the meaningform direction. However, the
comprehension task required participants to choose
meanings given forms, reversing the cueoutcome
mappings they were trained on. Participants were extremely
accurate in the comprehension task, suggesting that they

were able to bring the knowledge they acquired to the task.
The model must be able to do the same. We propose that the
associations participants learn obey the Symmetry Principle:
a cueoutcome association is as strong as the
corresponding outcomecue association (Asch &
Ebenholtz, 1962; Kahana, 2002). This is another way in
which the proposed model differs from models that perform
using prediction error, such as Rescorla & Wagner (1972).
This difference, however, is crucial for the model’s ability
to simulate the comprehension data.
We assume that a choice between two meanings depends
on the difference in activations between the two meanings’
contrasting features. For example, the probability of clicking
on [small;plural] rather than [big;plural] when presented
with -dan is proportional to the difference in association
strengths between –dan~SMALL (=SMALL ~ -dan) and dan ~ BIG (=BIG ~ -dan). The bigger this difference, the
more likely participants are to click on the meaning that
actually was paired with the form in training (Miller &
Matzel, 1988).

Models between frequency and contingency
Besides the connections between the cues and outcomes
present on a particular trial, there are three other sets of
connections that could potentially be updated. Alternative
theories of associative learning differ in their claims about
whether these connections are indeed updated.
First, there are connections from the cues present on a
trial to the outcomes absent from that trial. It is usually
thought that these connections’ weights are reduced, so that
cues that are consistently paired with the absence of a
certain outcome develop inhibitory connections to that
outcome, with the subject learning the negative contingency
present in the environment. Second, there are connections
from the absent cues to the present outcomes. These
connections are assumed not to be updated by Rescorla &
Wagner (1972). However, van Hamme & Wasserman
(1994) and Tassoni (1995) argued that – if participants
know the set of cues that could occur on every trial – the
absence of a cue could be salient. In other words, learners
may notice the consistent absence of a cue on trials
containing a certain outcome and develop a negative
association between that cue and the outcome. Finally, one
could argue that connections from absent cues to absent
outcomes may also be updated, gaining strength: when a cue
and an outcome are absent together, the learner is in a
position to learn that absence of the cue predicts absence of
the outcome (Tassoni, 1995). Thus, models of learning can
be arranged from simplest (wiring together present cues and
outcomes only) and least veridical – least able to faithfully
reproduce environmental contingencies – to most complex
and most veridical (updating all connections on every trial).
In what follows, we examine the types of updating that are
needed to capture the experimental results by independently
varying whether each distinct set of connections undergoes
updating. Table 1 summarizes the possible models from a
simple frequency counter that updates only the connections

2368

between present cues and present outcomes to a fully
veridical contingency tracker that updates all four sets of
connections (in the normative direction). We will refer to
the models we evaluate with the abbreviations shown on the
left sides of the table cells. For example, the RescorlaWagner model updates only the sets of connections in the
top row and can therefore be abbreviated as (p c).

Table 2: Activations of the frequent suffix, its synonym,
and the other two suffixes given the novel diminutive plural
meaning under alternative models.

Table 1: The four distinct sets of cue-outcome
connections on every trial and whether their weights should
become more positive (+) or more negative (-) in a model
that is able to capture environmental contingencies
veridically. The two subscripts c and o refer to cue and
outcome respectively. Presence is denoted by p and absence
by a.

Cue Present
Cue Absent

Outcome Present
(pcpo)
+
(acpo)
-

out not to matter much: ac does not overpower pc even if
absences are as salient as presences. All extant models of
learning agree that absent stimuli are no more salient than
stimuli that are actually presented and therefore all predict
(over-)extension of frequent forms to related meanings in
production.

DIM.PL
Frequent
Synonym
Other

Outcome Absent
(pcao)
(acao)
+

p cp o
72
24
24

p ca o
-42
-66
-66

a cp o
-18
-6
-6

a ca o
15
21
21

pc
30
-42
-42

all
24
-12
-12

Entrenchment in comprehension

Extension of frequent forms in production
Table 2 shows predicted activations of the frequent suffix,
its synonym, and the two other suffixes (which are always
activated equally) by the semantic features of the novel
meaning (MANY and SMALL) under all logically possible
models of associative learning. The left column represents
the simplest possible model, a frequency counter (Bybee,
2010). Columns 2-4 represent association sets that can be
added to the frequency counter in order to make
contingency learning more veridical, incorporating learning
of connections involving absent cues and/or outcomes.
Column 5 is the model that learns only from present cues (a
Hebbian version of Rescorla & Wagner, 1972). Column 6 is
the full model that learns about all associations, including
associations between absent cues and absent outcomes (a
Hebbian version of Tassoni, 1995). Extension of frequent
forms to novel meanings is predicted if the activation of the
frequent form exceeds that of all other forms, including the
frequent form’s synonym. In other words, a preference to
extend the frequent form to novel meanings is predicted
whenever the largest number is in the top row.
As seen in Table 2, extension of the frequent form is
predicted by increasing the weights of connections from
present cues to present outcomes, as well as by decreasing
the weights of connections from present cues to absent
outcomes. Updating connections from absent cues (in the
normative direction) acts against extension.
For the simulations reported in this table, it was assumed
that an absence of a cue or outcome is noticed only half the
time while its presence is always noticed. Associative
learning in conditioning paradigms tends to be slower when
reinforcement is signaled by the absence of a cue than when
it is signaled by the presence of a cue (e.g. Wasserman et
al., 1990). However, one might question whether absences
are missed or ignored that often, and wonder whether
noticing absences more would eliminate extension. It turns

Table 3 reports activation differences between features that
distinguish the novel meaning from the familiar meaning
paired with a form in training. Because of the Symmetry
Principle, the activation differences correspond to
meaningform connection weights involving the semantic
features in question. For example, the activation difference
between the non-diminutive and diminutive plural for –dan
is the weight of the connection between –dan and BIG
minus the weight of the connection between –dan and
SMALL. The activation difference between the singular and
plural diminutive for –nem is the weight of the connection
between –nem and ONE minus the weight of the connection
between –nem and MANY (cf. Miller & Matzel, 1985).
Entrenchment is observed if this difference is larger (more
positive) for a frequent form compared to the ‘other’ forms,
i.e. if the value in the top row in Table 3 is larger than the
value in the bottom row.
Table 3: Comprehension effects. Each cell contains
activation difference between the meaning paired with a
form in training and the novel, diminutive plural, meaning.
Activations of shared features of the competing meanings
cancel out. Therefore, for plural suffixes this is the
difference in activations between BIG and SMALL, and for
diminutive suffixes it is the difference between ONE vs.
MANY. Entrenchment is predicted if Frequent > Other.
Right-New
Frequent
Synonym
Other

p cp o
36
12
12

p ca o
0
-12
12

a cp o
36
12
0

a ca o
6
-6
0

pc
36
0
24

all
78
6
24

Table 3 shows that entrenchment is favored by
strengthening pcpo connections between present cues and
present outcomes, weakening acpo connections between
absent cues and present outcomes, and strengthening acao
connections between absent cues and outcomes. Because
updating pcpo and pcao weights pull in different directions,
entrenchment only occurs if absent outcomes are less salient

2369

than present outcomes. In other words, weights of
connections to absent outcomes must change less than the
weights of connections to present outcomes. This appears to
be a reasonable assumption (e.g. Tassoni, 1995), though not
all extant models make it. For example, the Naïve
Discriminative Learner (Baayen et al., 2011), which uses
equilibrium equations for the Rescorla & Wagner (1972)
model from Danks (2003: 116), does not show
entrenchment because the learning rates for present and
absent outcomes in Danks’ equations are equal, a
simplifying assumption (Danks, 2003: 115-116).

Conclusion
Studies of comprehension suggest that frequently
encountering a form-meaning pairing convinces the learner
than the form cannot be used in any other way (Braine &
Brooks, 1995; Brooks & Tomasello, 1999; Regier & Gahl,
2004; Stefanowitch, 2008; Xu & Tenenbaum, 2007).
Nonetheless, frequent forms are the ones most likely to be
extended to new uses. Using a frequent form in a novel way
seeds the process of language change because that novel use
can then be picked up by others, spreading through the
speech community. As the novel use diffuses through the
community, it becomes conventional. Over historical time,
extension of frequent forms results in the well-documented
correlation between frequency of use and number of senses:
in every language, it is the most frequent forms that are
most polysemous (Piantadosi et al., 2012; Zipf, 1949).
Conventionalization of extensions is the primary
mechanism
behind
the
diachronic
process
of
grammaticalization (Bybee, 2010; Heine, 2011). The
importance of this diachronic process can hardly be
overstated as it is the primary source of grammar: almost all
grammatical morphemes, whether bound affixes or
independent functors like prepositions, determiners or
auxiliaries are former lexical words that have been gradually
extended to new and new uses (Bybee, 2003; 2010;
Christiansen & Chater, 2016).
Despite the correlation between frequency and semantic
extension,
the
causal
mechanisms
behind
grammaticalization remain controversial. For example,
Haspelmath (1999) has argued that increases in frequency
seen in grammaticalization are caused by the extension of
the grammaticalizing form to new uses, which are in turn
caused by semantic broadening. Bybee (2003) agrees that
semantic broadening causes extension but suggests that high
frequency causes semantic broadening. Like Haspelmath
(1999), Heine (2011) does not allocate frequency a causal
role in the process but suggests that extensions result in
broadening.
In our recent experimental work, we have documented
that the same speaker may extend a frequent form to a new
meaning in production despite being least likely to map it
onto the new meaning in comprehension. This suggests that
the speaker may extend a form to a new meaning, thereby
seeding the process of language change, without necessarily
considering the form to be the best way to express that new

meaning. Use in a new context can therefore be caused by
high frequency and precede semantic broadening.
In the present paper, we have argued that this productioncomprehension dissociation falls out of simple, Hebbian
associative learning models, which acquire symmetrical
form-meaning associations based on cue-outcome cooccurrence (Hebb, 1949; Miller & Matzel, 1985; see also
McMurray et al., 2012; Yu & Smith, 2012). While such
dissociations have previously been used to support the idea
that formmeaning associations are distinct from
meaningform associations (Kapatsinski, 2009), the
present results indicate that a single set of bidirectional
associations suffices.
Remarkably, all that is required to obtain the divergence
between frequency effects in production and comprehension
– entrenchment of the frequent in comprehension, and
extension in production – is the assumption that cue and
outcome absences to be less salient than present cues and
outcomes, an uncontroversial assumption (Tassoni, 1995;
Wasserman et al., 1990) that is also normatively justified:
almost every stimulus is absent more often than it is present,
hence the presence of a stimulus is typically more
informative about the contingencies in the learner’s
environment than its absence (McKenzie & Mikkelsen,
2007). Despite being surprising to human theorists,
frequency-driven semantic extension is predicted by every
associative learning theory.

References
Ambridge, B., Pine, J. M., Rowland, C. F. & Young, C. R.
(2008). The effect of verb semantic class and verb
frequency (entrenchment) on children’s and adults’
graded
judgments
of
argument-structure
overgeneralisation errors, Cognition, 106(1), 87-129.
Asch, S. E., & Ebenholtz, S. M. (1962). The principle of
associative symmetry. Proceedings of the American
Philosophical Society, 106(2), 135-163.
Azab, H., Ruskin, D., & Kidd, C. (2016). Adults’ guesses
on
probabilistic
tasks
reveal
incremental
representativeness biases. Proceedings of the Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 38, 2831-36.
Baayen, R. H., Milin, P., Đurđević, D. F., Hendrix, P., &
Marelli, M. (2011). An amorphous model for
morphological processing in visual comprehension based
on
naive
discriminative
learning. Psychological
Review, 118(3), 438-481.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B. M. & Walker, S.
(2015). Fitting Linear Mixed-Effects Models Using lme4.
Journal of Statistical Software, 67(1), 1-48.
Braine, M. D. S. & Brooks, P. (1995). Verb argument
structure and the problem of avoiding an overgeneral
grammar. In M. Tomasello & W. Merriman (Eds.),
Beyond names for things: Young children’s acquisition of
verbs (pp. 353-376). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Brooks, P., & Tomasello, M. (1999). How children
constrain their argument structure constructions.
Language, 75(4), 720-738.

2370

Burke, M. D., Kester Locantore, J., Austin, A. A., Chae, B.
(2004). Cherry pit primes Brad Pitt: Homophone priming
effects on young and older adults’ production of proper
names. Psychological Science, 15(3), 164-170.
Bybee, J. (2010). Language, usage and cognition.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Bybee,
J.
(2003).
Cognitive
processes
in
grammaticalization. In M. Tomasello (Ed.), The new
psychology of language: Cognitive and functional
approaches to language structure (Vol. 2, 145-167).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Christiansen, M. H., & Chater, N. (2016). Creating
language: Integrating evolution, acquisition, and
processing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Danks, D. (2003). Equilibria of the Rescorla–Wagner
model. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 47(2), 109121.
Ferreira, V. S., Griffin, Z. M. (2003). Phonological
influences on lexical (mis)selection. Psychological
Science, 14(1), 86-90.
Gershkoff-Stowe, L., Connell, B., & Smith, L. (2006).
Priming overgeneralizations in two-and four-year-old
children. Journal of Child Language, 33(3), 461-486.
Harmon, Z., & Kapatsinski, V. (In preparation). Putting old
tools to novel uses: The role of form accessibility in
semantic extension.
Haspelmath, M. (1999). Why is grammaticalization
irreversible? Linguistics, 37(6), 1043-1068.
Heine, B. (2011). Grammaticalization in African languages.
In H. Narrog & B. Heine (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of
grammaticalization (pp.696-707). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Hebb, D. O. (1949). The organization of behavior: A
neuropsychological approach. Malden, MA: Wiley.
Kahana, M. J. (2002). Associative symmetry and memory
theory. Memory and Cognition, 30(6), 823-840.
Kapatsinski, V. (2009). Adversative conjunction choice in
Russian (no, da, odnako): Semantic and syntactic
influences on lexical selection. Language Variation and
Change, 21(2), 157-173.
Luce, R. D. (1963). A threshold theory for simple detection
experiments. Psychological Review, 70(1), 61-79.
McKenzie, C. R., & Mikkelsen, L. A. (2007). A Bayesian
view
of
covariation
assessment. Cognitive
Psychology, 54(1), 33-61.
McMurray, B., Horst, J. S., & Samuelson, L. K. (2012).
Word learning emerges from the interaction of online
referent
selection
and
slow
associative
learning. Psychological Review, 119(4), 831-877.
Miller, R. R., & Matzel, L. D. (1988). The comparator
hypothesis: A response rule for the expression of
associations. The
Psychology
of
Learning
and
Motivation, 22, 51-92.
Naigles, L. G., & Gelman, S. A. (1995). Overextensions in
comprehension and production revisited: Preferentiallooking in a study of dog, cat, and cow. Journal of Child
Language, 22(1), 19-46.

Pereira, A. F., Smith, L. B., & Yu, C. (2014). A bottom-up
view of toddler word learning. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 21(1), 178-185.
Piantadosi, S. T., Tily, H., & Gibson, E. (2012). The
communicative
function
of
ambiguity
in
language. Cognition, 122(3), 280-291.
R Core Team (2015). R: A language and environment for
statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL http://www.Rproject.org/
Ramscar, M., Yarlett, D., Dye, M., Denny, K., & Thorpe, K.
(2010). The effects of feature‐label‐order and their
implications
for
symbolic
learning. Cognitive
Science, 34(6), 909-957.
Regier, T., & Gahl, S. (2004). Learning the unlearnable: The
role of missing evidence. Cognition, 93(2), 147-155.
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A theory of
Pavlovian conditioning: Variations in the effectiveness of
reinforcement and nonreinforcement. In A. H. Black &
W. F. Prokasy (eds.), Classical conditioning II: Current
research and theory, 64-99. New York: AppletonCentury-Crofts.
Stefanowitsch, A. (2008). Negative entrenchment: A usagebased approach to negative evidence. Cognitive
Linguistics, 19(3), 513-531.
Tassoni, C. J. (1995). The least mean squares network with
information coding: A model of cue learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 21(1), 193-204.
Theakston, A. L. (2004). The role of entrenchment in
children’s and adults’ performance limitations on
grammaticality judgment tasks, Cognitive Development,
19(1), 15-34.
van Hamme, L. J., & Wasserman, E. A. (1994). Cue
competition in causality judgments: The role of
nonpresentation of compound stimulus elements.
Learning and Motivation, 25(2), 127-151.
Wasserman, E. A., Dorner, W. W., & Kao, S.-F. (1990).
Contributions of specific cell information to judgments to
interevent contingency. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 16, 509521.
Wonnacott, E., Newport, E. L., Tanenhaus, M. K. (2008).
Acquiring and processing verb argument structure:
Distributional learning in a miniature language. Cognitive
Psychology, 56(3), 165-209.
Xu, F., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). Word learning as
Bayesian inference. Psychological Review, 114(2), 245272.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2012). Modeling cross-situational
word–referent learning: Prior questions. Psychological
Review, 119(1), 21-39.
Zipf, G. K. (1949). Human behavior and the principle of
least effort: An introduction to human ecology. Oxford:
Addison-Wesley.

2371

