A hierarchical Bayesian model of “memory for when”
based on experience sampling data
Simon Dennis(simon.dennis@gmail.com)
Hyungwook Yim (hyungwook.yim@newcastle.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of Newcastle, Australia

Vishnu Sreekumar (vishnu.sreekumar85@gmail.com)
Surgical Neurology Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
National Institutes of Health, USA

Nathan J. Evans (nathan.j.evans@uon.edu.au)
Paul Garrett (paul.garrett@uon.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of Newcastle, Australia

Per Sederberg (sederberg.1@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, USA
Abstract

original event they can deduce the timing of the subsequent
event. Again, Friedman argues that judgements based on
relative order information are rare.
More common, according to Friedman, are judgements
made using location-based strategies. Location-based
processes rely on the retrieval of information associated
with the cues that can be used to draw inferences about the
timing of an event. For instance, suppose you are asked
when you last saw your friend Mary. You might recall that
you share a Psychology-101 class with Mary. Furthermore,
you know that Psychology-101 occurs on Mondays and
Wednesdays at 2pm. It is now Saturday, so you infer that it
was Wednesday at 2pm when you last saw Mary.
Sometimes, however, the necessary knowledge to make an
inference is not available. In these circumstances, Friedman
argues one resorts to a distance-based strategy.
Distance-based strategies rely on some quality of the
memory that changes as a function of time. For instance,
one might judge strong memories as having occurred more
recently.
There is a substantial literature that has asked people to
report on the time at which events occurred (see Friedman,
1993 and Thompson, Skowronski, Larsen & Betz, 1996, for
reviews). Much of this literature has involved the memory
for events that occurred outside of the laboratory, but which
can be dated because they are part of the public record or
have been recorded in personal diaries (Kemp, 1999).
Generally, people are very poor at identifying when events
occurred showing a bias to report events as being too recent
when they occurred remotely in time - forward telescoping
(Huttenlocher, Hedges, & Prohaska, 1988) or too remote
when they occurred recently - backward telescoping
(Hinrichs & Buschke, 1968).
Early distance-based theories proposed that the
psychological representation of time was logarithmically
compressed, much as other psychophysical dimensions are

Participants wore a smartphone, which collected GPS, audio,
accelerometry and image data, in a pouch around their necks
for a period of two weeks. After a retention interval of one
week, they were asked to judge the specific day on which
each of a selection of images was taken. To account for
people’s judgements, we proposed a mixture model of four
processes - uniform guessing, a signal detection process based
on decaying memory strength, a week confusion process and
a event confusion process in which the sensor streams were
used to calculate the similarity of events. A model selection
exercise testing all possible subsets of the processes favoured
a model that included only the event confusion model. GPS
similarities were found to be the most significant predictors,
followed by audio and accelerometry similarities and then
image similarities.
Keywords: ​memory, experience sampling, hierarchical
Bayesian model

Introduction
Friedman (1993, 2004) argued that people typically employ
one of four strategies to identify when events occurred. On
some occasions, people can directly retrieve declarative
knowledge about the event. For instance, many people can
recall that the attacks on the Twin Towers occurred on
September 11th 2001. Friedman argues, however, that such
declarative knowledge is quite rare and is reserved for
events of global or personal significance. On other
occasions, people have relative order information that they
can use to make a judgement. If one were asked when
George W. Bush initiated military action in Afghanistan,
one may not know the date, but one can make an inference.
The military action in Afghanistan occurred as a
consequence of the September 11th attacks and therefore
was most likely to have been in late 2001. There is a natural
order in which these events occurred and provided someone
has the order information and access to the time of the

295

(Ferguson & Martin, 1983). These theories are able to
account for the decrease in accuracy that occurs with
retention interval, but have been discounted because
well-known remote events are often dated accurately. If it
were the time axis itself that was compressed, dating
accuracy should always be directly related to recency
(Huttenlocher et al., 1988). Alternatively, the accessibility
of the memory trace could be used to infer the time of
occurrence. Some evidence suggests that better known
events are dated more recently (Brown, Rips & Shevell,
1985). However, there is substantial subsequent evidence
that this does not occur (Thompson et al. 1988). Again,
better known events are reported more accurately.
Furthermore, people are often capable of accurately
reporting the day of the week an event occurred, while
struggling to faithfully retrieve the month or year (Friedman
& Wilkins, 1985). If people were using distance-based
strategies, accuracy at smaller temporal scales ought to be
worse than at larger temporal scales. The existing literature
has tended to conclude that location-based strategies are far
more commonly employed than distance-based strategies
(Friedman, 1993; Thompson et. al. 1996).
There are two main models of time reporting that have
been proposed (Huttenlocher, Hedges & Prohaska, 1988;
Kemp, 1999). The first of these, by Huttenlocher, Hedges,
and Prohaska (1988), proposes that events are associated
with time information, which is unbiased but subject to error
that increases with time. Bias is introduced because answers
are constrained to lie within the reference period either
implicitly or explicitly defined by the memory query thus
generating forward and backward telescoping. In addition,
the theory posits that memory units are organized
hierarchically - (e.g. day, month, year) and that events may
be associated with any of these levels. The model provides a
good quantitative fit to data they collected on judgements of
when movies that were part of a campus initiative were
shown.
Kemp’s (1999) theory is similar to Huttenlocher’s in that
the representation of time is not systematically distorted and
that reconstruction of this time information is the basis of
memory judgements. Rather than suggesting that temporal
information is distorted with age, Kemp (1999) proposed
that when time information is available it is accurate
regardless of age. However, only a small number of
memories have stored time information. Events of a similar
kind are associated with each other and retrieval proceeds
by retrieving similar events until one is found for which
time information has been stored. An inference is then made
on the basis of this information.
Both the Huttenlocher and Kemp theories are typically
construed as location-based theories because they rely on
the retrieval of time information (i.e., a location in time) and
inference proceeds on the basis of that information.
However, another possibility is that the time information to
which they refer evolves in a continuous fashion on multiple

time scales simultaneously. This kind of model is commonly
employed to account for grouping effects in short term serial
recall (e.g., Henson, 1998)​. ​Furthermore, it is possible that
what is retrieved from memory is a combination of specific
content on which conscious inferences can be drawn
(location-based) and this more graded hierarchical form of
context (distance-based).
Although it has long been argued that memory research
that is focused solely on laboratory work is futile (Neisser,
1976), the difficulty has been how to proceed when the
experience of the participant before they enter the laboratory
cannot be rigorously captured. Today, however, technology
provides us with entirely new options. Easy to carry and
able to monitor multiple sensor streams, smartphones can
provide a convenient and ubiquitous window into the events
of the life of an individual. We had participants wear a
phone around their necks for two weeks and collected
image, audio, GPS and accelerometry data. We then
developed a hierarchical Bayesian model to capture distance
and location based processes.

Method
Participants
A total of 18 adult participants were recruited from flyers
posted at the University of Newcastle and received $100
compensation.

Procedure
In prior work, we built a system that consists of an Android
app, server infrastructure and user interfaces. The app
acquires image, time, audio (obfuscated), GPS,
accelerometer and orientation information at approximately
five minute time intervals. The app runs in the background
as a service and users carried the phone in a pouch attached
to a neck strap from morning till evening (see Figure 1).
Participants could turn off the app anytime they needed
privacy. When the phone detects WiFi and is charged, it
sends the stored data automatically to a remote server. This
usually happened once per day at the end of the day when
users charge the phone overnight.
Participants were instructed to wear the phone for two
weeks. They returned to the laboratory on the Friday of the
3rd week and were presented with images one at a time and
were required to determine on which of the week days each
image was taken (participants were informed that the
images only came from the week days). Each participant’s
test was based on images drawn from their own lifelogs. We
selected images that came from distinct episodes as much as
possible, and also avoided using images that were blurred
due to excessive motion. The number of stimuli varied
between participants since the available data depended on
individual lifestyles. A presented image remained on the
screen while they made the day judgment and they could
use as much time as they needed to respond.

296

Figure 1. Android phone worn by a participant during the
experience sampling phase of the study.
Figure 2. The distance based model.

Modeling

Location (sensor) model

To account for people’s judgements, we proposed a mixture
model of four processes - (1) random (uniform) guessing,
(2) a signal detection process based on decaying memory
strength (distance), (3) a week confusion process (location)
and (4) a event confusion process (location) in which the
sensor streams were used to calculate the similarity of
events. We start by describing the distance and location
(sensor) models and then outline the mixture model
incorporating all four processes.

The location (sensor) model assumed that events were
stored in memory and that the likelihood of confusing the
representation of the correct event with the stored
representation of another event is determined by the
similarity of those events. Each day was divided into hour
periods and image, GPS, audio and accelerometry
representations of those events were calculated. For a given
sensor stream the distance of an image’s event to a given
day for a given stream was taken to be the minimum Jenson
Shannon distance from the event to the events of that day
(see Figure 3).

Distance model
Figure 2 depicts the distance based model we employed.
Mean memory strength (μ) elicited at retrieval was assumed
to decay exponentially with scale, α, asymptote, β, and rate,
λ. Variability around this mean was assumed to be Gaussian
with standard deviation, σ. The probability of a response
occurring given that the presented stimulus was taken on a
given day, is given by the probability density that falls
between criteria that separate it from the neighbouring days.
The nine criteria that determined the response probabilities
for each day were fixed to the mid-point of μ values of each
neighbouring day (to alleviate sampling issues that resulting
from attempting to estimate these as free parameters). We
used Bayesian hierarchical modeling to fit the model, with
each individual’s parameters being constrained by a group
level distribution. All parameters were sampled on a double
infinite scale, meaning that we sampled the inverse Probit of
α and β, and the natural logarithm of λ and σ, and that all
group level distributions were, therefore, normal.

Figure 3. The sensor model.
These distance scores for each of the streams entered into a
conditional logit model to determine the probability that the
participant would respond with a given day. Missing data

297

were assumed to have a prior of a truncated normal
distribution.
Like the distance model, the parameters were estimated in
a hierarchical fashion, with the natural logarithm of the
weights being estimated, making the group-level
distributions normal.

Mixture model
To estimate the probability of a participant's response we
assumed a mixture model of the distance and location
(sensor) models described previously as well as a random
(uniform) guessing model and a location (week) model that
assumed that participants correctly inferred the day of the
week on which the event occurred, but had a certain
probability of incorrectly determining the week (the kind of
model that one might assume if people are relying on their
schedules to make judgements).
A model selection exercise testing all possible subsets of
the processes was conducted using the common model
selection metric WAIC, which attempts to weigh both the
goodness of fit to the data and the complexity of the model,
in order to approximate the leave-one-out cross validation
metric. The preferred model was the location (sensor) model
although the location (sensor) + random model also
performed well (see Table 1).

Figure 4. Data confusion matrix

Table 1: Models tested and corresponding WAICs
Model

WAIC

Location (sensor)

-1544

Location (sensor) + Random
Location (sensor) + Distance
Location (sensor) + Distance + Random

-1546
-1557
-1565

Distance + Random
Location (week) + Random
Distance + Location (week)
Random
Distance
Distance + Location (week) + Random
Location (week)

-1649
-1958
-2161
-2544
-2688
-2812
-∞

Figure 5. Distance only confusion matrix

To understand the performance of the models, it is useful
to compare the posterior confusion matrices they produce to
the data. Figure 4 shows the confusion matrix of responses
accumulated over participants. The x-axis show the days on
which the events actually occurred, and the y-axis shows the
participants’ responses. The diagonal represents correct
responses, while responses off the diagonal are errors. The
matrix is dominated by correct responses, with cells close to
the major diagonal (representing adjacent days) showing
significant mass particularly in week one.

The distance only model is able to explain the structure off
the diagonal by estimating a large standard deviation for the
strength distributions (see Figure 5). However, a large
standard deviation prevents the model from capturing the
proportion of correct responses on the diagonal.
The distance model performs much better when it is mixed
with the uniform distribution (see Figure 6). The structure
off the diagonal is captured by the uniform component,
while the structure on and adjacent to the diagonal is
captured by the distance model. The observation that counts
adjacent to the diagonal are larger in week one is
accommodated naturally by the model because in the first

298

week the gradient of the strength is small, which makes it
more difficult to distinguish between adjacent days.

Figure 8. Sensor confusion matrix
The best model is the sensor model (see Figure 8). Unlike
the distance and week models the sensor model did not
require the random component in order to provide a good fit
to the data. In fact, adding the random component decreases
the WAIC slightly as the model is penalized for additional
complexity (i.e. the mixture probability). While the distance
and week models are informed only by the day on which the
event occurred, the sensor model constructs a representation
of the event that captures where the participant was (GPS),
what the participant was hearing (audio), what the
participant was doing (accelerometry) and what the
participant was seeing (images) and compares it with
representations of all other events. The importance of these
features can be inferred from the weights associated with
each of the data streams.

Figure 6. Distance + Random confusion matrix
The week only model does poorly. The model assigns no
probability to cells that are neither on the diagonal nor
exactly a week out (the off diagonals five above and below
the main diagonal). As there are observations in those cells,
the WAIC is negative infinity. When mixed with the
random model, the model does better, but still has a
tendency to predict more week out responses than appears in
the data (see Figure 7).

Figure 7.: Week + Random confusion matrix
Figure 9. The posterior distributions of the sensor weights.

299

Figure 9 shows the posterior distributions of these
weights. The GPS stream has the strongest weights followed
by the audio stream and the accelerometry stream, which are
approximately equal. The image stream has the lowest
weights. That the image stream should have the lowest
weights is counter intuitive. The participants are presented
with the image as a retrieval cue, and so one might have
expected the visual information to be salient.
There are multiple possible interpretations of this result.
It may be that the image representation that we chose
(GIST; Oliva & Torralba, 2001) does not carry the
information that participants rely upon when making
memory judgements. Another possibility is that it is the
static nature of the images or the fact that they are not
synchronized with the direction of gaze that compromised
this stream. While head mounted video technologies exist
they are currently difficult to deploy for the duration of
recording required for the time scales we explore here.
Furthermore, they introduce additional ethical hurdles that
need to be considered. A third possibility is that the result is
not artifactual, but is a reflection of the information
employed by the memory system. While the visual domain
seems salient perhaps it is other aspects of experience that
drive the retrieval and inferential systems that people
employ to make location based judgements.

Conclusions
When people are asked to determine when an event
occurred, Friedman (2004) argues that people use a
combination of distance based and location based processes,
with location based processes being the most common. The
current work supports this assertion.
Furthermore, we have demonstrated that it is possible to
predict the responses people will make to images taken from
their personal experience in the world outside the laboratory
on a stimulus by stimulus basis. We believe this work
establishes a new benchmark for what models of episodic
memory should achieve and provides the promise of a more
quantitatively
rigorous,
ecologically
valid
and
translationally relevant memory science.

Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge the funding from the
Australian Research Council (DP150100272) and Air Force
Office of Scientific Research (FA9550-09-1-0614).

References
Chalnick, A., & Billman, D. (1988). Unsupervised learning
of correlational structure. ​Proceedings of the tenth annual
conference of the cognitive science society ​(pp. 510-516).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Feigenbaum, E. A. (1963). The simulation of verbal learning
behavior. In E. A. Feigenbaum & J. Feldman (Eds.),
Computers and thought.​ New York: McGraw-Hill.

Ferguson, R. P., & Martin, P. (1983). Long-term temporal
estimation in humans. ​Perception and Psychophysics, 33​,
585-592.
Friedman, W. J. (1993). Memory for the time of past events.
Psychological Bulletin, 113​(1), 44-66.
Friedman, W. J. (2004). Time in autobiographical memory.
Social Cognition, 22​(5), 591-605.
Friedman, W. J., & Wilkins, A. J. (1985). Scale effects in
memory for the time of past events. ​Memory and
Cognition, 13​, 168-175.
Henson, R. N. A. (1998). Short-term memory for serial
order: The start-end model. ​Cognitive Psychology, 36,
73-137.
Hill, J. A. C. (1983). A computational model of language
acquisition in the two-year old. ​Cognition and Brain
Theory, 6​, 287-317.
Huttenlocher J., Hedges L., & Prohaska V. (1988).
Hierarchical organization of ordered domains: Estimating
the dates of events. ​Psychological Review, 95,​ 471–484.
Huttenlocher J., Hedges L., & Prohaska V. (1992). Memory
for day of the week: A 5 + 2 day cycle. ​Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 121​(3), 313-325.
Kemp, S. (1999). An associative theory of estimating past
dates and past prices. ​Psychonomics Bulletin and Review,
6​, 41-56.
Matlock, T. (2001). ​How real is fictive motion? ​(Unpublished
doctoral dissertation), Psychology Department, University
of California, Santa Cruz.
Neisser, U. (1976). ​Cognition and reality: Principles and
implications of cognitive psychology.​ New York: Freeman.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). ​Human problem solving.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Ohlsson, S., & Langley, P. (1985). ​Identifying solution paths
in cognitive diagnosis ​(Tech. Rep. CMU-RI-TR-85-2).
Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon University, The Robotics
Institute.
Oliva, A., & Torralba, A. (2001). Modeling the shape of the
scene: A holistic representation of the spatial envelope.
International Journal of Computer Vision, 42​(3), 145-175.
Shrager, J., & Langley, P. (Eds.) (1990). ​Computational
models of scientific discovery and theory formation. San
Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Sreekumar, V., Dennis, S., Doxas, I., Zhuang, Y., & Belkin,
M. (2014). The geometry and dynamics of lifelogs:
discovering the organizational principles of human
experience.​ PloS one, 9​(5), e97166.
Thompson, C. P., Skowronski, J. J., & Lee, D. J. (1988).
Reconstructing the date of a personal event. In M. M.
Gruneberg, P. E. Morris, & R. N. Sykes (Eds.), ​Practical
aspects of memory: Current research and issues: Vol. 1.
Memory in everyday life.​ Chichester: Wiley.
Thompson, C. P., Skowronski, J. J., Larsen, S. F., & Betz, A.
L. (1996). ​Autobiographical memory: Remembering what
and remembering when.​ Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

300

