A Rational Approach to Stereotype Change
Jake Spicer (J.Spicer@warwick.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Humanities Building,
University of Warwick, Coventry, UK

Adam Sanborn (A.N.Sanborn@warwick.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Humanities Building,
University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
Abstract
Existing theories of stereotype change have often made use of
categorisation principles in order to provide qualitative explanations for both the revision and maintenance of stereotypical
beliefs. The present paper examines the quantitative methods
underlying these explanations, contrasting both rational and
heuristic models of stereotype change using participant data
and model fits. In a comparison of three models each simulating existing descriptions of stereotype change, both empirical
data and model fits suggest that stereotypes are updated using
rational categorisation processes. This presents stereotype use
as a more rational behaviour than may commonly be assumed,
and provides new avenues of encouraging stereotype change
according to rational principles.
Keywords: Stereotypes; Categorisation; Rational Behaviour

Introduction
Stereotypes have often been found to be resistant to change,
with beliefs and expectations regarding a group often persisting even when faced with directly contradictory information (Hilton & von Hippel, 1996). This presents a problem when trying to combat stereotypes underlying prejudice
or discrimination through out-group exposure as has often
been suggested by theories such as the Contact Hypothesis
(Allport, 1954), as there is no assurance that simply demonstrating the inaccuracy of these beliefs will be effective in
encouraging revision. It is therefore necessary to examine
the processes by which stereotypes are updated with experience, and, in cases of stereotype persistence, determine how
counter-stereotypical information can be disregarded in order
to develop better methods to encourage change.
Past research into this field has offered three possible processes of stereotype revision: book-keeping, in which the
stereotype is slowly adjusted with each relevant observation;
conversion, in which the stereotype can undergo sudden and
drastic changes in response to particularly notable contradictory exemplars; and subtyping, in which counter-stereotypical
evidence is isolated from the rest of the category in a distinct subgroup, ignored when making category judgements.
This presents three potential explanations for stereotype persistence: stereotype-incongruent exemplars may be noted via
book-keeping but remain out-weighed by prior stereotypical
beliefs; these exemplars may not have been sufficiently significant to evoke change via conversion; or these exemplars
may have been excluded entirely via subtyping.
This distinction was examined by Weber and Crocker
(1983) by manipulating the presentation format of counterstereotypical evidence in summaries of lawyers: equal

amounts of stereotype-incongruent evidence were either concentrated into only a few exemplars, or dispersed across many
exemplars. This generates three competing expectations between the three models: conversion suggests that these concentrated exemplars would act as extreme disconfirmers, encouraging significant revision to the stereotype. Conversely,
subtyping would suggest that concentrating incongruent evidence should make it easier to isolate, thereby preserving
existing stereotypical beliefs. Book-keeping, meanwhile, focuses only on the amount of data rather than the presentation format, and so suggests no difference between these
conditions. Measures of the strength of stereotypical beliefs following exposure to these exemplars were found to be
stronger in the concentrated condition, supporting the subtyping model, an effect that has since been replicated in a number of studies (Bott & Murphy, 2007; Johnston & Hewstone,
1992).
This depicts stereotype persistence as an issue of categorisation, occurring where counter-stereotypical group members
are placed in a distinct subgroup rather than integrated into
existing structures. The mechanisms underlying stereotype
revision could then be well described by existing models
of categorisation, particularly those which perform a similar
process of partitioning a category into lower-order subgroups.
One key example of such a model is the Rational Model of
Categorisation (RMC) developed by Anderson (1991), which
organises a category into ‘clusters’ of exemplars based on
similarities in observed features. The organisation of these
clusters then determines the impact of stored data on subsequent judgements, with larger clusters tending to have more
influence on expectations of given traits appearing in the category.
The subtyping effect could therefore be seen as the result
of standard categorisation processes creating partitions of the
category based on observed data patterns which determine
the impact of incongruent information on later judgements:
isolating this information leads to subtyping, diminishing its
impact, while integration of congruent and incongruent information leads to book-keeping, and so greater stereotype
revision. If so, subtyping may not be the result of a bias towards ignoring counter-stereotypical data in order to preserve
stereotypical beliefs, but a rational incorporation of all available data under certain data patterns which happens to mitigate the influence of stereotype-incongruent information. As
such, subtyping could be considered a more rational process

1102

than it may initially seem, and so could be fought using similarly rational mechanisms to encourage stereotype change.
The present study therefore presents a rational approach
to stereotype use; in the following paper, we develop several
candidate models to approximate the existing depictions of
stereotype revision, contrast the predictions of these models
with participant data to assess their accuracy, and use these
findings to offer some insight into the process of stereotype
change.

new group member exhibiting a congruent trait value on any
dimension. This is done by taking an average of the rate of
congruent traits in each cluster weighted by the probability of
that cluster:
p(con) = ∑ p(k)p(con|k)
(5)
k

where p(con|k) follows the format of Equation 4, focussing
on congruent trait values. This explains how isolating incongruent data in a distinct subtype mitigates its impact: smaller
clusters provide less evidence to outweigh prior expectations,
here represented by the α parameter. As such, there is less
confidence that future members of the incongruent cluster
will demonstrate similar trait values, while the larger congruent cluster carries more certainty. To illustrate, consider
a case in which 30 exemplars, 20 congruent and 10 incongruent, are either integrated or segregated. For the purposes
of this illustration, α = 1 for both congruent and incongruent
traits, and c = 1, meaning no new cluster is considered:

Model Details
We began by developing an edited version of the RMC in
order to examine the categorical explanation proposed for the
subtyping effect. This made use of the standard version of
the RMC using discrete exemplar dimensions as defined by
Anderson (1991), chosen for its reasonable level of simplicity
and ease of application to the design of Weber and Crocker
(1983). The RMC assigns exemplars sequentially to a cluster
based on similarities in observed features using a Bayesian
model to approximate the ideal partition:
p(k| f ) =

p(k)p( f |k)
∑k p(k)p( f |k)

(1)

where k is the cluster and f is the feature set of the exemplar
under consideration. This posterior probability is calculated
for all existing clusters as well as a new potential cluster, with
the highest probability determining assignment. Following
Anderson (1991), the prior probability was defined as:

cnk

 (1 − c) + cn if k is old
p(k) =
(2)
(1 − c)


if k is new
(1 − c) + cn
where nk is the number of exemplars in cluster k, n is the total
number of members assigned to the partition, and c is a coupling parameter describing the probability of two exemplars
being grouped together independent of any observations.
The likelihood also followed the format of Anderson
(1991):
p( f |k) = ∏ pi ( j|k)
(3)
i

where the exemplar’s features are divided into dimensions i
holding values j. As stated above, the discrete form of this
probability was used, in keeping with the exemplar structure
used by Weber and Crocker (1983):
pi ( j|k) =

nj +αj
nk + α0

(4)

where n j is the number of exemplars in cluster k showing trait
value j on dimension i, nk is the number of cluster members
showing a value on that dimension and α j is a parameter reflecting the prior expectation of the occurrence of that value,
while α0 is the sum of these alpha values.
Once a partition has been generated, the model is then able
to calculate a probability value measuring the likelihood of a

As this shows, stereotype-congruency is estimated to be
more probable in the segregated case because the α values
are more impactful in the smaller cluster, offsetting the actual
ratio of traits to a greater degree.

Stereotypes as Prior Clusters
As the category in question is a familiar social group with
which participants are likely to have previous experience, the
model included a cluster of exemplars added to the partition
before exposure to the main exemplar set in order to simulate
this prior knowledge. This also provided a more valid depiction of the origins of the group stereotype by making the
members of this prior cluster stereotype-congruent, as well
as allowing for potential interactions between prior knowledge and new information, as have been observed in other
categorical modelling studies (Heit, Briggs, & Bott, 2004).
Exemplars in the prior cluster therefore displayed stereotypecongruent values on all stereotypical dimensions, as well as
group membership on a separate dimension, while the number of cluster members was added as an additional model parameter.

Alternative Models
While the above demonstration does show that the RMC
is able to predict a subtyping effect, in order to determine
whether this is truly the result of a rational process, the RMC

1103

must be compared with a more heuristic depiction of the subtyping mechanism. A second model was therefore developed
in which the segregated incongruent data is ignored rather
than simply mitigated, essentially redrawing category boundaries to exclude counter-stereotypical information. This was
achieved by restricting the clusters considered when making probability estimates to only the cluster with the highest
posterior probability. This restriction was based on the findings of Murphy and Ross (1994), which suggested that participants often only considered the most likely cluster when
making probability estimates rather than all generated clusters. This creates an additional candidate model for assessment, labelled the Restricted Rational Model of Categorisation (RRMC).
In addition, as a counterpoint to this ‘extreme subtyping’
model, a third model was developed in which book-keeping
was enforced; this was achieved by limiting the RMC to using only a single cluster by fixing the c parameter at 1, forcing
all exemplars to be grouped together despite any differences
in features. This ‘Single Cluster Model’ (SCM) therefore removes the possibility of segregating incongruent data, eliminating any influence of data format and focussing entirely on
the ratio of traits in the partition.
These three models therefore present three different mechanisms of stereotype revision: while both the RMC and
RRMC use a partition that flexibly adapts to observed data
patterns, the RRMC subsequently simplifies this partition by
focussing on only one cluster, heightening any effects this
representation may have generated, while the RMC remains
more moderate. Conversely, the SCM focuses on trait ratios
rather than data pattern, thereby dismissing any effects that
may be predicted by the other candidate models.
There is, however, a key distinction between these rational
and heuristic models which can be used to determine their validity: in the RMC, the subtyping effect is dependent on the
smaller size of the subtype cluster, meaning that increasing
the size of the subtype by adding more incongruent members
should reduce and ultimately eliminate this effect. In contrast,
the RRMC will continue to ignore the subtype regardless of
its size unless the subtype becomes so large that it is selected as the most likely cluster, at which point estimates will
change drastically to reflect the subtype’s much lower rate of
congruency. This could essentially reverse the subtyping effect at higher volumes of incongruent evidence, focussing on
counter-stereotypical rather than stereotypical clusters, and
so bearing a closer resemblance to the conversion-effect described above. The SCM, meanwhile, is unable to exclude
incongruent data at all, and therefore predicts no subtyping
effect at any volume of incongruent information.
The accuracy of these models can therefore be contrasted
according to the change in the subtyping effect with further
exposure to stereotype-incongruent evidence: the RMC predicts a reduction in subtyping at higher volumes of counterstereotypical data; the RRMC predicts a stable subtyping effect until a sudden reversal; and the SCM predicts no sub-

typing effect at any point. The following experiment therefore set out to compare these model predictions by extending the concentration design of Weber and Crocker (1983)
across a higher total volume of evidence and taking measures
of stereotypical beliefs throughout exposure. This also provided direct behavioural data for use in assessing the fit of
the candidate models for a more complete test of these predictions.

Experimental Data
Method
Participants One-hundred-and-sixteen participants were
selected from a University of Warwick undergraduate psychology class as part of a course requirement. The sample included 102 females and 14 males, while age ranged between
18 and 27 years, with a mean of 19.
Design and Materials The experiment followed the concentration design of Weber and Crocker (1983) with an additional within-subjects manipulation of data volume: measures of stereotypical beliefs were taken at fixed intervals during the observation of a set of exemplar descriptions where
stereotype-incongruent information was either concentrated
in a subset of exemplars or dispersed across all exemplars.
Two exemplar sets were therefore created for use in the experiment, each containing 90 total exemplars displaying four
trait dimensions: the first dimension described the occupational label, and so was identical for all exemplars, while
the remaining three dimensions described personality traits
with three possible values (stereotype-congruent, stereotypeincongruent or neutral). In both sets, two-thirds of the 270
total traits were incongruent, one-sixth were congruent and
one-sixth were neutral; incongruent traits made up the majority in order to allow for a potential incongruent cluster to be
larger than any other in the category. In the concentrated exemplar set, these incongruent traits were concentrated such
that 60 exemplars each displayed incongruent traits on all
three personality dimensions, with the congruent and neutral
traits being distributed equally between the remaining exemplars. In the dispersed exemplar set, all traits were distributed
as equally as possible.
As in Weber and Crocker (1983), exemplars were said to
come from the category of lawyers; exemplars were therefore transformed into member summaries for use in the experiment by assigning each value on the three personality dimensions a unique trait label. Sixteen total labels were used:
5 congruent (Intelligent, Industrious, Neat, Out-going and
Well-dressed), 5 incongruent (Incompetent, Lazy, Messy, Shy
and Slovenly) and 6 neutral (Warm, Religious, Jovial, Obnoxious, Reserved and Meditative). These labels were taken
from Weber and Crocker (1983), being based on pilot tests
determining stereotypical and counter-stereotypical traits for
the target category of lawyers. Three labels of each trait type
were randomly selected at the start of each run of the experiment for use in exemplar summaries. Summaries were also
assigned randomly selected names to assist in individuation.

1104

Procedure Upon arriving at the lab, participants were first
randomly assigned to one of the two concentration conditions, determining which set of exemplars would be viewed;
this was balanced to provide equal numbers, meaning 58
participants were allocated to each condition. Participants
were told the experiment tested how perceptions of a group
changed with experience, involving both viewing summaries
of group members and answering questions about the traits of
the group in general.
The experiment began by asking participants to estimate
the likelihood of certain traits appearing in the category of
lawyers according to the number of members in a sample of
100 lawyers displaying that trait. Estimates were requested
for all 16 possible personality traits, though only 9 were used
in the subsequent member summaries. This first question
block therefore provided a measure of baseline beliefs before
any experimental exemplars were viewed.
After providing estimates for all traits, participants began a
presentation block in which member summaries were shown
on screen for the participants to examine. In order to maintain
attention on this information, participants were asked to rate
the pleasantness of each group member on a scale of 1-10,
though this measure was not used during analysis.
At set intervals of presentation, the test block was repeated,
and participants were again asked to estimate the likelihood
of each of the 16 traits appearing in the category to measure
any changes in expectation. This occurred after viewing 6,
18, 36, 60 and 90 total exemplars, with the ratio of traits
within each interval being consistent with that of the complete exemplar set. At the start of each test block, participants were informed that though some of the questions had
been asked before, they should answer based on how they felt
at that point in time.
After viewing all 90 lawyer summaries and completing the
final test block, the experiment ended, and participants were
debriefed as to the aims and expectations of the study.

= 2.50, p = .014) and incongruent ratings (β = 12.6, t(114)
= 3.19, p = .001), with congruent ratings being higher and
incongruent ratings lower in the concentrated condition. Finally, the interaction between concentration and volume was
found to significantly differ between congruent and incongruent ratings (β = -2.21, t(5086) = 3.76, p < .001), potentially
indicating differences in the level of the subtyping effect over
the task.
This was investigated further using two additional mixed
linear regression models for each trait type, both including
the factors of condition and evidence volume. Coefficient estimates from the congruent ratings model suggested evidence
volume to be a significant predictor (β = -3.11, t(1620) = 6.63,
p < .001), but concentration condition to be non-significant
(β = -3.63, t(114) = 1.24, p = .218), with no significant interaction between these factors (β = .58, t(1620) = .88, p =
.379). Conversely, the incongruent ratings model suggested
a significant effect of volume (β = 4.48, t(1620) = 7.79, p <
.001) and condition (β = 7.40, t(114) = 2.40, p = .018), with
a near-significant interaction (β = -1.52, t(1620) = 1.87, p =
.062). The findings of the general model are therefore most
evident in the incongruent ratings when the two trait types are
separated, while congruent ratings do not display such strong
effects.

Model Comparison
Participant data was compared with model predictions made
by the three candidate models to determine which provided
the most accurate depiction of behaviour in the task. This
used a grid search function across the three parameters, with
the considered values being: for c, 0.01 to 0.99 in steps of
0.01; for α, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25 and 30;
and for membership frequency of the prior cluster, 0 to 50 in
steps of 1. The models were run through the same exemplar
sets given to participants at each combination of parameter

Results
Data Analysis
The results of the experiment were analysed using a mixed
linear regression model including the factors of evidence volume, concentration condition and trait type. As the first test
block was intended to provide a baseline, being unaffected by
either volume or concentration, ratings from this round were
not included in the regression model. This was confirmed using independent t-tests, finding no significant difference between conditions in either congruent ratings (t(114) = .190, p
= .850) or incongruent ratings (t(114) = .296, p = .768) in the
first test block.
The regression model showed significant effects for volume in both congruent (β = -2.23, t(5086) = 6.41, p < .001)
and incongruent ratings (β = 6.49, t(5086) = 15.6, p < .001),
with congruent ratings decreasing and incongruent ratings increasing over the task. Similarly, condition is shown to be
a significant predictor for both congruent (β = -6.36, t(114)

Figure 1: Trait ratings for both trait types in both concentration conditions across the 6 test blocks. Error bars show 95%
CI.

1105

values to generate estimates of the probability of both congruency and incongruency in new category members at each
of the six exemplar intervals. These values were then used
to calculate model likelihoods assuming identical parameter
values for all participants in order to allow the model to fit
both conditions simultaneously. Likelihoods were calculated
in each of the six test blocks according to the product of the
probability of all participant ratings for that trait type in that
test block; these probabilities were defined according to a
normal distribution using the model probability estimate as
a mean and variance fit to maximise the final product. These
values were then transformed into log likelihoods before being summed across test blocks and concentration conditions
to create a single model log likelihood for all participants at
that set of parameter values. Maximum log likelihoods from
each model were then used to calculate BIC values for comparison. The RMC was found to have the lowest BIC score
(11926, α = 0.5, c = 0.01, prior membership = 21), indicating
this model had a better fit to the experimental data than either
the RRMC (11937, α = 10, c = 0.09, prior membership = 50)
or the SCM (11929, α = 10, prior membership = 50).
Interestingly, when the predictions for this best fit for the
RMC are examined, probability estimates for both measures
are in fact identical between conditions; this is because all
experimental exemplars were assigned to separate, singlemember clusters despite any similarities in features, mitigating all exemplars equally in both sets. This suggests that the
differences observed in participant ratings between concentration conditions were sufficiently small such that the data
could be best fit by identical behaviour in both conditions. As
previously described, this is in fact a tenet of the SCM, which
ignores the concentration of data via full integration of all exemplars; however, the SCM shows a steeper curve in both
measures compared to the RMC, therefore predicting greater
stereotype revision. As such, the scattering behaviour of the
RMC better corresponds with the greater degree of maintenance observed in the data.
It is also notable that the best fit of the RRMC matches that
of the SCM, as the maximum likelihood of the RRMC was
found when all exemplars were grouped in a single cluster.

Figure 2: Trait probability estimates from the best fits of the
three candidate models. Due to equality in estimates between
conditions for all models, only one line is used for each measure.

As such, the RRMC also predicts greater revision than was
observed in the experiment; however, because the SCM does
not use a coupling parameter, the SCM holds a lower BIC
value than the RRMC despite equal log likelihoods. It should
be noted however that this comparison reveals only the best
fit of the three candidate models rather than an absolute description of behaviour in the task; more complex models may
therefore be needed to reflect the subtle differences observed
in the participant data.

Discussion
The results of the experiment provide three key findings:
firstly, ratings of trait likelihood for both congruent and incongruent traits became less stereotypical over the course of
the experiment, indicating that higher volumes of incongruent
evidence were effective in evoking greater revision of stereotypical beliefs. Secondly, ratings were more stereotypical in
the concentrated condition compared to the dispersed condition, as would be expected by subtyping. Thirdly, this concentration effect differed somewhat in size across the task,
showing smaller differences between groups at higher volumes of evidence. When the trait types are separated, these
findings are seen to be stronger in the incongruent ratings,
while congruent ratings did not demonstrate the condition or
interaction effects.
In general, these results appear to partially correspond with
previous depictions of the subtyping effect: beliefs are more
stereotypical where incongruent information is more easily
segregated from existing category structures, whereas data
patterns aiding integration demonstrate greater stereotype revision. This also matches with the categorical explanations
for subtyping offered by both the RMC and RRMC, as both
suggest that category partitions which place incongruent data
in a separate cluster diminish the impact of this data on subsequent probability estimates, thereby leading to more stereotypical expectations.
There is, however, an additional aspect to the subtyping effect observed in this task which distinguishes between these
models: the interaction between volume and concentration,
while not quite reaching a significant effect in the separated
regression models, does suggest that the subtyping effect did
not remain entirely consistent across the task, but in fact
dropped off in later test blocks, with incongruent trait ratings
in particular appearing to converge between the two conditions. This finding corresponds with the predictions of the
RMC made in the introduction to this study: because the subtyping effect in the RMC is the result of greater uncertainty
in the data pattern of the subtype cluster due to its smaller
size, increasing the size of this cluster attenuates the subtyping effect by providing more confidence in this pattern. This
is in contrast to the RRMC’s hypothesised cross-over from
subtyping to conversion at higher volumes of incongruent evidence where the subtype becomes the most likely cluster due
to its size, an effect which was not observed in the data.
The RMC therefore appears to provide the most accurate

1106

theoretical account of the observed results, suggesting participants were most likely using a rational categorisation process to guide their judgements in this task. This suggestion
is further supported by the RMC having the best fit to the
behavioural data in the above model comparison, though it
is notable that this best fit did not accurately capture the observed differences between concentration conditions. Even
so, the RMC does still provide a better fit to the experimental
results than either the RRMC or SCM, potentially suggesting the present findings are more likely to be due to standard
rational processes than these more extreme depictions.

Implications
The present study therefore provides evidence from both behavioural data and model fits that the maintenance of stereotypical beliefs generated by subtyping does appear to be the
result of a rational incorporation of all available data rather
than a heuristic strategy of stereotype preservation: isolating
incongruent data in a distinct subtype does not completely
exclude this information from consideration during category
judgements, but instead mediates its impact according to the
size of the subtype.
As such, the subtyping effect could be considered to be a
normal aspect of standard categorisation processes operating
on social groups, occurring where a particular data pattern
inadvertently diminishes the impact of counter-stereotypical
data. If so, stereotype change could be encouraged by using
similarly rational techniques to circumvent subtyping, primarily by aiding the integration of incongruent data into preexisting clusters. More broadly, this finding provides a basis
for a rational system underlying stereotyping, allowing for
the generation of further predictions regarding stereotype use
based on the principles of such rational models to be tested in
future studies; such tests would be valuable in further developing the current model to provide a more complete depiction
of rational stereotype use.
The current data also demonstrates that stereotype change
can be drawn from even slight encounters with incongruent
evidence in sufficient volume, with the effects observed in the
experiment being based solely on the observation of member
summaries rather than any significant interaction with actual
counter-stereotypical group members. This is in contrast to
past theories such as the Contact Hypothesis which often require intensive, long-term interaction with out-group members to generate a reduction in stereotypical beliefs (Allport,
1954). This is not to say that prior expectations have been
completely overcome: revision still does not reach the level
suggested by conversion (or indeed the actual ratio of evidence in the experimental data sets); even so, this does still
provide limited evidence that stereotype maintenance can be
counteracted through increased exposure to incongruent data.
The current design may therefore present a more economic
path to combating prejudice, requiring less time and effort
than some existing methodologies. What is more, the effects
observed in this study could in fact be greater at more significant forms of encounter, potentially counteracting subtyping

at even lower volumes of incongruent data. It is not clear how
the significance of an encounter should be represented within
the current version of the model, but one basic option would
be to represent a significant encounter as multiple observations in the partition, essentially viewing that individual as
providing more data than a single exemplar. This suggestion
should, however, be pilot tested to determine the validity of
this representation before being incorporated into the model.

Conclusion
The present study provides the starting point for a rational approach to stereotype use, providing both theoretical and empirical evidence that a rational model of stereotype change,
while not universally accurate, does provide a reasonable account of behaviour both in this experiment and previous studies into stereotype maintenance. We therefore hope that this
study can act as a foundation for continued work in this field,
allowing subsequent research to further refine the presented
models to provide a more accurate depiction of behaviour.
This will serve to provide greater clarity regarding the operations underlying stereotype maintenance, and so aid in finding
more potential methods for encouraging stereotype change.

References
Allport, G. W. (1954). The nature of prejudice. Cambridge,
Mass: Addison-Wesley.
Anderson, J. R. (1991). The adaptive nature of human categorization. Psychological Review, 98, 409–429.
Bott, L., & Murphy, G. L. (2007). Subtyping as a knowledge preservation strategy in category learning. Memory &
Cognition, 35, 432–443.
Heit, E., Briggs, J., & Bott, L. (2004). Modeling the effects of prior knowledge on learning incongruent features
of category members. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 30, 1065–1081.
Hilton, J. L., & von Hippel, W. (1996). Stereotypes. Annual
Review of Psychology, 47, 237–271.
Johnston, L., & Hewstone, M. (1992). Cognitive models of
stereotype change: 3. subtpying and the perceived typicality of disconfirming group members. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 28, 360–386.
Murphy, G. L., & Ross, B. H. (1994). Predictions from uncertain categorizations. Cognitive Psychology, 27, 148–193.
Weber, R., & Crocker, J. (1983). Cognitive processes in the
revsion of stereotypic beliefs. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 45, 961–977.

1107

