A Study on the Impact of Chess Training on Creativity of Indian School Children
Ebenezer Joseph (emmanuelchess@gmail.com)
University of Madras,
Department of Psychology, WCC, College Road, Chennai, 600006, India.

S. Sundar Manoharan (ssm@karunya.edu)
Karunya University
Coimbatore, 641114, India.

Veena Easvaradoss (veenadoss@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Women’s Christian College
College Road, Chennai, 600006, India.

David Chandran (davidbeulah@gmail.com)
Emmanuel Chess Centre
Kasthuri Ranga Road Chennai, 600018, India.

Abstract
Creativity is the ability to produce work that is both novel and
appropriate. The study, funded by Indian government,
analyzed the effect of one-year chess training on the creativity
of children. A pretest and posttest with control group design
was used, with 31 children in experimental and 32 in control
group. The experimental group underwent weekly chess
training. Wallach-Kogan Creativity Test (Indian Adaptation)
was used. Analysis revealed that only the experimental group
had statistically significant gains in total creativity and two
nonverbal subtests. The authors conclude that systematic
chess training inculcates in the child the ability to think
divergently and creatively.
Keywords: Abstract Thinking; Chess Training; Creativity;
Innovation; Divergent Thinking

Introduction
Creativity is defined as the tendency to generate or
recognize ideas, alternatives, or possibilities that may be
useful in solving problems, communicating with others, and
entertaining ourselves and others (Franken, 1982). Typically
creativity is defined as “the ability to produce work that is
both novel (i.e. original, unexpected) and appropriate (i.e.
adaptive concerning task constraints)” (Sternberg, 1999).
These definitions emphasize both the concept of fluency and
novelty in the responses that have been generated.
Most theorists agree that the creative process involves a
number of components, most commonly:
1. Imagination
2. Originality (the ability to come up with new and
original ideas and products)
3. Productivity (the ability to generate a variety of ideas
through divergent thinking)
4. Problem solving (application of knowledge and
imagination to a given situation)
5. The ability to produce an outcome of value and worth
Creativity is commonly utilized divergent thinking. A
creative or divergent thinker is described as the person who

pushes the boundaries of ability and knowledge and is able
to reconsider the problem to find different perspectives and
solutions and ignore distractions that can negatively affect
his or her productivity (Saccardi, 2014). Creativity among
children emerges gradually between grades one to three
(Torrance, 1964). In general, the broad and complex
multidimensional concepts of creativity can be measured by
the Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking (TTCT: Torrance,
1964, 1990a, 1990b) and the Wallach–Kogan Creativity
Tests (WKCT: Wallach & Kogan, 1965).
There is a fairly common belief that creativity can be
developed through training. Various recent studies that have
assessed the effects of programs for stimulating creativity
confirm this belief (Antonietti, 2000; Fleith, Renzulli, &
Westberg, 2002; Komarik & Brutenicova, 2003; Saxon,
Treffinger, Young, & Wittig, 2003). Consequently, many
countries are increasingly placing a high priority on
stimulating creative thinking at the school level.
Since chess helps in developing strategic thinking and
problem-solving skills of children, it may also be effective
in improving their cognitive skills (Sigirtmac, 2016). Chess
builds problem-solving abilities, enhance strategic thinking
skills, and even improves self-esteem as well as higherorder thinking skills, which are known as meta-cognitive
skills. In countries, where chess is intensely played by
students, practicing students become among the top students
in mathematics and science and they are able to recognize
complicated patterns (Milat, 1997).
While a number of other models of creativity have
brought out the steps involved in the creative process, Avni
(1998) posited a four-step model specific to chess playing.
According to him, an intelligent process in playing chess
consists of four different steps: synthesis (opinion forming
and plan shaping), gathering (collecting the raw materials
during position evaluation), enlightenment (a sudden
observation of an idea), and realization (translating the idea
into practical lines of play). Thus, these four steps can be

2333

used for a creative process that could also work in some
other areas (Bushinsky, 2009).
India has a long history of chess playing but there are
only a few studies on chess as a strategy to increase
cognitive abilities. Further, there are no studies assessing the
impact of chess intervention on the creativity of children. If
research can establish that chess training can facilitate
creativity, it can significantly impact educational programs
to increase creative thinking.
The objective of the study was, therefore, to analyze the
effect of one-year chess training program on the creativity
of school-going children of both genders and to assess its
effect on the verbal and nonverbal components of creativity.
It was hypothesized that chess training would significantly
increase creativity in children.

was summed to obtain the subtest totals. The total creativity
scores comprised the sum of the subtest scores.
Chess Training Methodology

Methodology
The research design used for the study was pretest and
posttest with control group design. The independent variable
was the Chess training program, and the dependent variable
was Creativity of children.
The sample consisted of 63 children, 31 in the
experimental group and 32 in the control group. The
children in the experimental group were selected
purposively and comprised children who volunteered for the
chess program. The children in the control group were
randomly selected using random numbers table generated
online. The children in the control group were selected on
the basis of no chess knowledge and were not given chess
training. During the time of chess intervention for the
experimental group, the control group children were
engaged in other activities such as music, arts and in
outdoor sports such as cricket, football, basketball, etc. The
mean age for experimental group was 11.86 years (SD =
1.44) and for control group was 12.03 years (SD = 1.14).
The experimental group consisted of 9 girls and 22 boys,
and the control group consisted of 7 girls and 25 boys.

Tools
Creativity was assessed by Indian adaption of WallachKogan Creativity Test. The WKCT (Wallach & Kogan,
1965) is similar to the TTCT in that it focuses on divergent
thinking and assesses both visual and verbal content. It
includes three verbal subtests—Instances (e.g., name all the
round things you can think of), Alternative Uses (e.g., for a
newspaper), and Similarities (e.g., How are a cat and mouse
similar?)—and two figural subtests—Pattern Meanings and
Line Meanings (interpreting abstract patterns and lines). It is
scored for fluency (number of ideas) and uniqueness (ideas
not offered by others in the group being tested). Wallach
and Kogan’s (1965) major contribution was their belief that
standardized test procedures were not conductive to creative
performance and their insistence on a more relaxed and
game-like atmosphere. The test is given individually, and no
time limits are imposed. However, in the present
administration, a time limit of three minutes was given for
each subtest. The number of valid responses for each subtest

The children were grouped into small clusters based on the
chess ability and learning capacity and were trained for an
hour starting from the basics. The training methodology
comprised Winning Moves Chess Learning Program
(Joseph, 2008) Episodes 1–22, lectures with the
demonstration board, on-the-board playing and training,
chess exercise through workbooks (Chess School 1A, Chess
School 2, and tactics), and working with chess softwares.
Further students’ games were mapped and analyzed using
score sheets and Chess software. The children were taught
the ideas behind chess openings, and exposure to classical
games was also given. The children participated in mock as
well as regular tournaments. On an average, the children
underwent one hour per week chess intervention for about
25-30 sessions. One coach was assigned for 8 students.

Procedure
Baseline creativity assessment was done after obtaining
informed consent, from the parents and the school
authorities. The research was carried out on the approval of
government of India, department of science and technology,
Task force and the doctoral committee. Reassessment was
carried out after an average duration of one year. The
assessment environment was quiet without any disturbance
and kept standardized. Psychologists were trained to
administer the test in a uniform standardized method to
minimize the testing error.
Clustering technique was used to form the training groups
of six to eight children. The chess training consisted of
once-a-week chess classes conducted for one hour during
the end of school hours for a year (about 30 hours of chess
training). The children were given a standardized Winning
Moves Chess Learning Program (Joseph, 2008), and they
played at tournaments also.

Results
The analysis was carried out using SPSS. Paired t-test was
carried out to analyze differences within groups, and
independent t-test was used to assess differences between
groups in the mean total creativity scores and mean subtest
scores. Pre-intervention equivalence of groups on creativity
was established for total creativity scores and the subtest
scores.
Table 1: The Significance of the Difference between the
Means of the Experimental and Control Groups on the
Creativity Test using the Independent t-Test.

2334

Scores

Total
creativity

Assess
ment

Pre
Post

Instances

Pre
Post

Alternate
Uses

Pre
Post

Similariti
es

Pre
Post

Line
Drawing

Pre
Post

Pattern
Meaning

Pre
Post

Mean and
Standard
Deviation
Experi Control
mental
54.19
53.93
16.98
12.38
16.90
52.40
18.77
17.12
13.74
15.81
6.34
5.26
17.41
16.78
6.79
5.92
9.09
10.09
3.66
3.03
10.87
9.46
3.66
4.22
7.74
7.96
3.51
3.52
9
7.93
4.47
3.74
11.77
9.96
4.98
3.99
12.12
8.65
4.22
4
11.83
10.09
4.68
3.74
12.80
9.87
4.81
4.11

t

0.06
2.09*
-1.41
0.39
1.17
1.40
0.25
1.01
1.58
3.34**
1.63
2.59**

*p < .05; **p < .01.
Table 1 indicates that there was a significant difference
between the means of the post-intervention total creativity
scores (p < .05) Cohen’s d indicated an effect size of (0.52),
indicating that chess training had significantly increased
creativity. Significant differences between the postintervention means were observed on the Line Drawing
subtest (p < .01) Cohen’s d effect size (0.84) and the Pattern
Meaning subtest (p < .01) Cohen’s d effect size (0.68) ,
indicating that chess training had significantly increased the
scores on these two subtests. No significant differences were
observed on any other subtest.

Discussion
It can be inferred from Table 1 that systematic chess
intervention increases creativity in children. As research has
clearly established, chess is a game that stimulates cognitive
processes and strengthens intellectual abilities and cognitive
skills (Aciego, García, & Betancort, 2012; Bilalic, McLeod,
& Gobet, 2007; De Bruin, Kok, Leppink, & Camp, 2014).
Moreover, it has shown that the intellectual gains have
translated into increases in both IQ and academic scores
(Aydın, 2015; Barrett & Fish, 2011; Joseph, Easvaradoss, &
Solomon, 2016; Romano, 2011). Large Effect Sizes for
Total Creativity (0.52), Line Drawing (0.84) and Pattern
Meaning (0.68) where seen, indicating that chess had a
significant impact on Total Creativity, Line and Pattern

subsets of the experimental group. This finding was in line
with Sigirtmic (2016), findings who found a statistically
significant difference between elaboration, resistance to
premature closure and total creativity score of children in
favour of those who received chess training.
In the present study, the children were taught chess
systematically. They did not merely play chess but were
strongly encouraged to challenge their own standards and
also to play competitively. They analyzed their own games,
identified their strengths, and understood their mistakes.
They were also given opportunities to pit their skills against
others as they played in tournaments. It is clear that the
outcome of this rigorous, yet enjoyable, training
methodology was the enhanced cognitive abilities that were
reflected in increased creativity scores.
The intellectual strategies underlying chess playing have
been spelt out by Avni (1998). According to him, chess
playing involves an intelligent process that consists of four
different steps: synthesis (opinion forming and plan
shaping), gathering (collecting the raw materials during
position evaluation), enlightenment (a sudden observation of
an idea), and realization (translating the idea into practical
lines of play). The child thinks beyond the usual solutions
using divergent thinking, thinking abstractly, weighing
options, evaluating outcomes, and making decisions.
Insightful thinking also appears to play a role.
The Wallach-Kogan Test, which was used in the present
study, requires the child to think divergently, quickly, and
fluently, generating as many responses as possible on the
different tasks. It is evident that similar abilities are utilized
in playing chess where innovativeness and accuracy and
both broad-based and precise thinking are required. The
experimental group, which had undergone one-year training,
in chess appears to have acquired these skills as indicated by
a significant increase in overall creativity compared to the
control group. Earlier studies have pointed to the positive
impact that chess has had on academic scores, especially
language and reasoning (Joseph et al., 2016). The
components of creativity studied on the test are the ability to
name objects that have common properties involving
abstraction ability (Instances), to identify multiple uses for
common objects involving divergent thinking (Alternate
Uses), to perceive similarities between two different objects
utilizing generalizing and abstracting ability (Similarities),
to perceive meaning in meaningless stimuli involving
innovativeness (Line Drawing), and to perceive meaning in
structures stimuli involving the ability to form association
(Pattern Drawing). The children in the experimental group
have shown increases in all the post-intervention scores,
though not all increments have reached significance.
Significant increases have been observed on the Line
Drawing subtest (p < .01) and the Pattern Meaning subtest
(p < .01) as seen in Table 1. On the Line Drawing subtest,
the child is shown a line drawing for 30 seconds and is
asked to generate as many responses as possible about what
the drawing means to him or her. On the Pattern Meaning
subtest, the child is shown a design (which is more

2335

structured) and is asked to generate as many responses as
possible about what the design means to him or her. This
test measures fluency and the ability to uncritically generate
ideas and possibilities, both commonplace and unique. The
game of chess uses primarily visuospatial strategies.
Systematic chess training inculcates in the child the ability
to think divergently, visualizing the pros and cons of the
various chess moves.
Garaigordobil (2006) studied the impact of a play
program on the verbal and graphic-figural creativity. Results
showed a positive effect of the intervention, as the
experimental participants significantly increased their verbal
creativity and graphic-figural creativity. This research
primarily focused on structured cooperative play. The chess
intervention in the present study also has structural
characteristics that corroborate the finding of other studies
that had indicated positive effects of play on the
development of creativity. This structured quality helps the
child to systematically visualize all the possible options and
outcomes available to him or her. This ability, which has
been acquired through chess training, has led to the
increased total creativity scores and the increases on the
visuospatial subtests.

References

Implications
It is evident that systematic chess intervention increases
creativity in children. The child thinks beyond the usual
solutions—using divergent thinking, thinking abstractly,
weighing options, evaluating outcomes, and making
decisions. Significant improvement in the Line Drawing and
Pattern Meaning subtest substantiates the fact that the game
of chess primarily uses visuo-spatial strategies. Systematic
chess training inculcates in the child the ability to think
divergently, visualizing the pros and cons of various chess
moves. It allows the child to conceptualize all the possible
options and outcomes available to him or her. Increasing the
creativity of children has possible far-reaching benefits for
academic performance and generally for life skills.
Systematically learning chess as part of school activities
appears to have a broad spectrum of positive outcomes. The
child who develops the ability to think in creative ways in
playing chess is likely to transfer this learning to dealing
with life challenges creatively.

Acknowledgement
This research was supported by (1) the funding provided
by the Department of Science and Technology, Cognitive
Science Research Initiative, Government of India; (2) travel
grant received from Ministry of Sports and Youth Affairs,
HRDS, Government of India. Authors acknowledge the
financial assistance.

Aciego R., García, L., & Betancort, M. (2012). The benefits
of chess for the intellectual and social-emotional
enrichment in schoolchildren. The Spanish Journal of
Psychology, 15(2), 551–559.
Antonietti, A. (2000). Enhancing creative analogies in
primary school children. North American Journal of
Psychology, 2, 75–84.
Avni, A. (1998). Creative chess. London: Everyman
Publishers.
Aydın, M. (2015). Examining the impact of chess
instruction for the visual impairment on mathematics.
Educational Research and Reviews, 10(7), 907–911.
Barrett, D. C., & Fish, W. W. (2011). Our move: Using
chess to improve math achievement for students who
receive special education services. International Journal
of Special Education, 26(3), 181–193.
Bilalic, M., McLeod, P., & Gobet, F. (2007). Does chess
need intelligence?—A study with young chess players.
Intelligence, 35, 457–470.
Bushinsky, S. (2009). Deus Ex Machina—A higher creative
species in the game of chess. AI Magazine, 30(3), 63–70.
Retrieved
from
http://dx.doi.org/10.1609/aimag.v30i3.2255
De Bruin, A. B. H., Kok, E. M., Leppink, J., & Camp, G.
(2014). Practice, intelligence, and enjoyment in novice
chess players: A prospective study at the earliest stage of
a chess career. Intelligence, 45, 18–25.
Fleith, D. S., Renzulli, J. S., & Westberg, K. L. (2002).
Effects of a creativity training program on divergent
thinking abilities and self-concept in monolingual and
bilingual classrooms. Creativity Research Journal, 14,
373–386.
Franken, R. (1982). Human motivation. Monterey, CA:
Brooks/Cole Publishing.
Garaigordobil, M. (2006). Intervention in creativity with
children aged 10 and 11 years: Impact of a play program
on verbal and graphic–figural creativity. Creativity
Research Journal, 18(3), 329–345.
Joseph, E. (2008). Patent No. L-32958/2009, India.
Joseph, E., Easvaradoss, V., & Solomon, N. J. (2016).
Impact of chess training on academic performance of
rural Indian school children. Open Journal of Social
Sciences,
4,
20–24.
Retrieved
from
http://dx.doi.org/10.4236/jss.2016.42004
Komarik, E., & Brutenicova, E. (2003). Effect of creativity
training on preschool children. Studia Psychologica, 45,
37–42.
Milat, M. (1997). The role of chess in modern education.
Retrieved
from
http://southernchessclub.org/site/documents/TheRoleofCh
essinMode rnEducation.pdf

2336

Romano, B. (2011). Does playing chess improve math
learning? Promising (and inexpensive) results from Italy.
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
Saccardi, M. (2014). Creativity and children’s literature:
New ways to encourage divergent thinking. Santa
Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Saxon, J. A., Treffinger, D. J., Young, G. C., & Wittig, C.
V. (2003). Camp invention (R): A creative, inquiry-based
summer enrichment program for elementary students.
Journal of Creative Behavior, 37, 64–74.
Sigirtmac, A. D. (2016). An investigation on the
effectiveness of chess training on creativity and theory of
mind development at early childhood. Academic
Journals, 11(11), 1056–1063.

Sternberg, R. J. (Ed.). (1999). Handbook of creativity. New
York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Torrance, E. P. (1964). The Minnesota studies of creative
thinking: 1959–1962. In C. W. Taylor (Ed.), Widening
horizons in creativity (pp. 125–144). New York: John
Wiley & Sons.
Torrance, E. P. (1990a). Torrance tests of creative thinking
norms—Technical manual (figural). Bensenville, IL:
Scholastic Testing Service.
Torrance, E. P. (1990b). Torrance tests of creative thinking
norms—Technical manual (verbal). Bensenville, IL:
Scholastic Testing Service.
Wallach, M. A., & Kogan, N. (1965). Modes of thinking in
young children: A study of the creativity intelligence
distinction. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

2337

