A Two-Stage Model of Solving Arithmetic Problems
Vladimir V. Glebkin (gleb1514@gmail.com)
Russian Presidential Academy of National Economy and Public Administration,
Prospect Vernadskogo, 82, Moscow, Russian Federation 119571;
Gymnasium 1514,
Krupskoi Street, 12, Moscow, Russian Federation 119311

Alexander E. Kovtunenko (sanyka390@yandex.ru),
MGIMO University,
76, Prospect Vernadskogo, Moscow, Russia, 119454

Ekaterina A. Krysova (katerina_a_a@mail.ru),
UWC Red Cross Nordic,
Flekke 6968 Norway

Abstract

This paper examines a process of solving different types of
counterfactual arithmetic problems (problems contradicted a
visual experience, an experience of temperature,
encyclopedic knowledge, etc.) in comparison with their
‘real’ counterparts by different types of subjects (e.g.,
educated in math and educated in humanities). As a result, a
two-stage model of solving arithmetic problems is outlined
in the paper.
Keywords: situated cognition; counterfactual reasoning;
arithmetical problem; two-stage model; four-levelcognitive-development theory.

Introduction
This research has been carried out at the junction of two
sets of problems. The first one is concerned with
counterfactual reasoning 1. This issue has been discussed
intensively in recent decades (e.g., Pearl 2000; Fauconnier
& Turner 2002, p. 17–59; Hiddleston 2005; de Vega et al.
2007; de Vega 2008; Ferguson & Sanford 2008; de Vega
& Uritta 2011; Rips & Edwards 2013), but some aspects
thereof have not been touched so far. ‘Situated cognition’
is a blanket term for the second set (e.g., Clancey 1997;
Kirshner & Whitson 1997; Watson & Winbourne 2007;
Robbins & Aydede 2009). This paper examines the role of
situated cognition in counterfactual reasoning. A
distinguished work of A. Luria (1976) was a starting point
for that. When investigating cognitive skills of dekchans
of Central Asia in 1930th he encountered a curious
phenomenon. His subjects were not able to solve
counterfactual problems, whereas they solved quite easily
similar problems consistent with their everyday life.
Importantly, trying to solve counterfactual problems
subjects addressed their day-to-day experience. Some
striking examples thereof are given in Luria's monograph
(1976, p. 131):
1

There are two basic interpretations of the concept
counterfactual in cognitive science: ‘contrary to reality’ (Pearl
2000; Hiddleston 2005; Rips & Edwards 2013), and ‘possible,
but not implemented in some situation’ (Roese & Olson 1995;
Roese 1997). For this paper only the first interpretation is actual.

A ‘conditional’ problem that conflicts with actual
experience is given:
[Exp.] Suppose it were to take six hours to get
from here to Fergana on foot and a bicycle was
twice as slow?
[Sub.] Then a bicycle would get there in three
hours!
Solution on a level corresponding to practical
reality.
[Exp.] No, a teacher gave this problem as an
exercise – suppose that the bicycle were twice as
slow.
[Sub.] If the cyclist makes good time, he will get to
Fergana in two and a half or three hours.
According to your problem, though, if the bicycle
brakes down on the way, he’ll arrive later, of
course. If there’s a breakdown, he’ll be two or
three hours late.
From the perspective of cultural psychology (Vygotsky,
Luria, Cole, Tulviste, etc.), this and similar facts are
usually interpreted as a difference between ‘situational’
thinking and ‘abstract’ thinking. The subjects of Luria’s
investigation were people of so-called ‘sympractical’
culture, in which ‘situational’ thinking based on day-today experience is supposed to be the only way of
reasoning (Cole & Scribner 1974, p. 160-168, 178-179;
Luria 1976; Tulviste 1991). In that, Luria’s dekchans
endeavored to reinterpret abstract problems as stories from
their everyday life.
Indeed, people of modern industrial cultures can
solve counterfactual problems; meanwhile, situated
cognition is an important part of their everyday life, and,
therefore, it may influence their way and speed of solving
counterfactual problems. The overall objective of our
research was to test some obstacles they may encounter in
this process.
It is worth noting that there are two basic models of
counterfactual reasoning in contemporary cognitive
science (Pearl 2000; Hiddlesston 2005; Rips & Edwards
2013). The first model is called ‘pruning theory’. From
this perspective, when modeling counterfactual situation,
subject changes the only element (in particular, in famed
If Clinton were the T i t a n i c , the iceberg would sink

2091

Clinton replaces iceberg), all others being the same. The
second model is named ‘minimal network theory’. In its
scope, a change of one element entails a number of
changes in elements close to this one. Importantly, both
models look formal and do not distinguish between
situated cognition and abstract knowledge.
A preliminary hypothesis of this research was as
follows. Given some discrepancies between situated
cognition and a counterfactual situation in arithmetic
problems, people of modern industrial cultures face a
number of difficulties when solving counterfactuals.
These difficulties would engender an extended period of
time needed for solving counterfactual problem in
comparison with ‘real’ one and also more errors in that.
Perhaps, the most intriguing issue in this scope is a
particular way of how situated cognition is involved in the
process of solving. There are two basic options. From the
first perspective, situated cognition is actual for the whole
period of solving; from the second perspective, it is at
work only in the first stage, in which an abstract model of
the task is built, whereas in the second stage only formal
operations are processed. If the first option is true,
difficulties caused by a counterfactual situation can be
drawn forth at any moment of reasoning; if the second
option works, they are present early in stage, and then
there is no difference, other things being equal, in solving
counterfactual and ‘real’ problems.
One of the ways to test these options is to compare
mean Δtcr (the difference between the time needed to
solve a counterfactual problem and the time needed to
solve its ‘real’ equivalent) for people who solve problems
faster (aka ‘experts’) and slower (aka ‘amateurs’).
‘Experts’ superiority over ‘amateurs’ may be a result of
more developed computational skills (factor a), of higher
speed of transformation of a task into a system of abstract
symbols (factor b), and of a combination of these factors.
If mean Δtcr for ‘experts’ is less than for ‘amateurs’, the
factor b is important; if the difference between mean Δtcr
is not significant, the factor a dominates.
The lack of difference between mean Δtcr can be also
an argument for the two-stage model with the following
interpretation: in the first stage there is no difference
between ‘experts’ and ‘amateurs’, the process in this stage
is determined by situated cognition; in the second stage
situated cognition is out of work, subjects only perform
computational
operations
with
formal
objects.
Importantly, it does not exactly mean that perception is
also out of work in the second stage; it may also mean that
in this stage perception works in quite a specific way,
distant from day-to-day experience.
Another intriguing issue is a correlation between
mean Δtcr and a type of problem. Counterfactual situation
can be concerned with various perceptive channels
(vision, hearing, taste, etc.) as well as with some
theoretical knowledge. To find out which channel causes
maximum Δtcr is useful to clarify the structure of basic
elements of situated cognition. The priority of perceptual
channels over encyclopedic knowledge was our working
hypothesis in this case (e.g., Zacks 2015, p. 95-107).
The framework of the experiments to carry out was
determined by a problem field represented above.

Experiment 1
Method
Subjects. A total of 25 students of Moscow high schools,
15-16-year-old were the subjects of Experiment 1. We
argued for this choice by fewer discrepancies in solving
arithmetical problems for students than it would be for
adult participants.
Material. The subjects were suggested to solve 16 simple
arithmetical problems divided into 8 groups: a) problems
which contradict a social experience, and their ‘real’
counterparts (e.g., A 24-page notebook costs 20 roubles
more than a 96-page notebook. What is the price of the
24-page notebook if the price of 96-page notebook is 10
roubles? , and A 96-page notebook costs 20 roubles more
than a 24-page notebook. What is the price of 96-page
notebook if the price of 24-page notebook is 10
roubles?) ; b ) problems which contradict a visual
experience, and their ‘real’ counterparts (e.g., A cyclist
moves 10 times faster than a car driver. Please, work out
the speed of the car if the speed of the cyclist is 80 km/h;
and A cyclist moves 10 times slower than a car driver.
Please, work out the speed of the car if the speed of the
cyclist is 8 km/h); c) problems which contradict hearing,
and their ‘real’ counterparts (e.g., In normal conditions, a
shout covers a distance of 10 metres; this is 40 metres less
than the distance covered by a whisper. Please work out
the distance that a whisper covers, and In normal
conditions, a shout covers a distance of 50 metres; this is
40 metres more than the distance covered by a whisper.
Please work out the distance that a whisper covers); d)
problems which contradict an experience of temperature,
and their ‘real’ counterparts; e) problems which contradict
an experience of taste, and their ‘real’ counterparts; f)
problems which contradict laws of biology, and their
‘real’ counterparts (e.g., A father is 20 years younger than
his son. How old is the son if the father is now 17 years
old?; and A mother is 20 years older than her daughter.
How old is the daughter if the mother is now 37 years
old?); g) problems which contradict encyclopedic
knowledge, and their ‘real’ counterparts; h) problems
which contradict an experience of weight, and their ‘real’
counterparts. Each problem was printed on a special card.
Procedure. Each subject worked out the problems
individually. Each subject solved firstly 16 counterfactual
problems, randomly given to him/her (2 from each group),
and then, a month after, 16 their ‘real’ counterparts. We
endeavored, as seen, to minimize any text difference in
each pair of problems in order to avoid ‘noise
interference’. Before the main procedure the subjects
solved two control problems to make sure that they had no
difficulties in that. Time from receiving a card to reporting
the answer was measured for each problem.
The data was processed as follows. Firstly, Δtcr was
counted for each pair of problems. Then, a total of
positive and negative Δtcr was calculated, and the
significance of the difference between positive and
negative Δtcr alongside with the significance of the
difference between a total of ‘counterfactual’ errors and
that of ‘real’ errors was estimated with Pearson’s chisquared test. After that, for more detailed analysis

2092

comparative data for all pairs of groups of problems were
processed with one-way ANOVA.

Results & Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 provided strong evidence for
supporting the hypothesis that subjects will encounter
more obstacles when solving counterfactual problems than
real ones: only 5 Δtcr from 400 had a negative value
(χ2(1)=380.25; p<0.0001).
Some complementary evidence for supporting
general hypothesis was also provided by the analysis of
the errors: a total of 34 for counterfactual problems; a total
of 10 for ‘real’ ones (χ2(1)=380.25; p<0.01).
Mean Δtcr and standard deviation for each group of
problems are presented in Table 1.

SH was under discussion. If significant difference
between them could be interpreted in different ways and
demanded further investigations to draw a more minute
description, then the lack of such difference would testify
for the two-stage model.
Let us take a more detailed look at this. The influence
of a counterfactual situation is obviously concerned with
situated cognition. The same Δtcr show that such influence
does not depend on computational skills being an
invariant, at least, for a particular age. Then, if situated
cognition is actual for the whole process of working out a
problem, its equal influence on SM and SH will be
represented in equal ε (the ratio Δtcr:treal), but not Δtcr.
Equal Δtcr is an argument for the two-stage model.

Experiment 2

Table 1: Mean Δtcr for the groups of problems (sec.)
a)
8.12±5.89
e)
10.30±12.62

b)
11.95±15.66
f)
6.30±2.95

c)
10.62±6.04
g)
6.15±5.25

d)
8.32±10.93
h)
8.39±12.70

The first remarkable result in this table is a gross
standard deviation engendered by a big dispersion of
results for different participants. The minimal standard
deviation holds for the groups f), g), a), and c). This may
be connected with a computational complexity of a
particular problem: in particular, other things being equal,
multiplication leads to higher dispersion than addition;
multiplication by eight – to higher dispersion than
multiplication by two, etc.
Because of high dispersion, there is no significant
difference in Δtcr for almost all pairs. The only exception
is pairs (c, f) and (с, g) (p<0.01). However, this
information is also useful as an argument for the
hypothesis of the perceptual channels priority over
encyclopedic knowledge: problems contradictory with
hearing need more time to comprehend the task than
problems contradictory with biological laws and
encyclopedic knowledge.
By and large, the results of Experiment 1 gave clear
evidence to support the basic hypothesis of more
difficulties in solving counterfactuals than in solving their
‘real’ counterparts. Meanwhile, they raised a number of
significant questions for further research. Firstly,
Experiment 1 gave no evidence pro or contra the twostage-model. The way of how a counterfactual situation
matters the process of reasoning needed a fine-grained
analysis. Secondly, the hypothesis of the perceptual
channels priority over encyclopedic knowledge required a
more detailed investigation.
The framework of Experiment 2 was determined by
these issues. To examine the two-stage-model by
engaging two groups of subjects with different skills of
solving arithmetical problems was its objective. In that,
students specialized in mathematics (SM) and their peers
specialized in humanities (SH) were chosen to participate
Experiment 2. As mentioned above, SM were expected to
solve both ‘real’ and counterfactual problems faster than
SH. Given that, the comparison of mean Δtcr for SM and

Method
Subjects. A total of 40 students of Moscow high schools,
15-16-year-old – 20 SM students and 20 SH students –
were the subjects of Experiment 2. None of them
participated Experiment 1.
Material. The subjects were suggested to solve ten
arithmetical problems: five problems contradicting a
visual experience (type b) and five problems contradicting
encyclopedic knowledge
(type g). The problems
suggested were the same as the problems of this type in
Experiment 1.
Procedure. It was the same as that of Experiment 1.
The data was processed in a following way. Firstly,
similar to Experiment 1, Pearson’s chi-squared test was
applied to estimate the significance of the difference
between positive and negative Δtcr alongside with the
significance of the difference between a total of
‘counterfactual’ errors and that of ‘real’ errors. After that,
a correlation between a group of subjects (SM and SH)
and treal, tcf, Δtcr was checked with one-way ANOVA.
Finally, one-way ANOVA was used to check a correlation
between Δtcr and the type of problem (type b vs. type g).

Results
In accordance with Experiment 1, both SM and SH
needed more time to solve counterfactual problems in
comparison with their ‘real’ counterparts (p<0.0001).
As predicted, SM solved both ‘real’ and
counterfactual problems faster than SH (p<0.001).
The difference between ΔtcrSM and ΔtcrSH was not
significant. In Table 2 mean ΔtcrSM, ΔtcrSH and standard
deviation are presented for each problem (problems 1-5
are concerned with visual experience, problems 6-10 with encyclopedic knowledge).
Table 2: Mean ΔtcrSM , ΔtcrSH, P for each problem

2093

№

ΔtcrSM, sec.

ΔtcrSH, sec.

P

1
2
3
4
5

5.9±5.9
4.5±4.0
3.8±4.0
7.8±6.2
5.2±5.1

11.2±10.0
4.2±9.6
5.8±7.5
3.5±3.2
8.1±7.2

0,037
0,883
0,521
0,010
0,123

6
7
8
9
10

4.6±3.3
4.7±3.6
4.6±2.5
4.8±4.8
4.5±3.7

7.0±7.3
4.6±7.5
5.4±2.6
4.5±7.3
4.6±4.1

0,197
0,970
0,319
0,782
0,951

As seen, only the results for problem 1 and problem 4
are more or less significant; at that, for problem 1
ΔtcrSM<ΔtcrSH and for problem 4 ΔtcrSM>ΔtcrSH .
Mean Δtcr for problems contradicting a visual
experience (№ 1-5) is more than that for problems
contradicting encyclopedic knowledge (№ 6-10)(Δtcr15=6.24±7.07; Δtcr6-10=4.91±5.42; p=0.046).

Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 provide some evidence to
support the two-stage-model. A higher level of
computational skills entailing a higher speed to work out a
problem does not lead to less Δtcr. As noticed above,
constant Δtcr is evidence of the same – at least, for the
groups of subjects involved in the experiment – stage of
the process. This stage is likely to be connected with the
constructing a formal model of the problem, put another
way, with the transforming a particular situation into the
system of abstract symbols. Situated cognition dominates
in this stage, whereas the next stage is concerned with
computational operations with such system.
The results of Experiment 2 also support the
hypothesis of the priority of perceptual channels over
encyclopedic knowledge. The subjects face more
difficulties in the situation contradicting their visual
experience than in the situation contradicting their
encyclopedic knowledge. These data are consistent with
some observations in different fields, e.g., with the
decisive role of perception in categorization (this idea is
represented by the concept of basic level category; see,
e.g., Rosch 1978; Lakoff 1987).
As mentioned, subjects of Experiment 1 and
Experiment 2 were 15-16-year-old students. Such a choice
was determined by a higher level of homogeneity in
computational skills for that group in comparison with
adults. Nevertheless, in order to verify the results on
another age group, Experiment 3 was carried out.

Experiment 3
Method
Subjects. A total of 20 high-educated adults (age 35–60;
mean age – 48), half with education in math and physics
(EM), and half with education in humanities (EH) were
subjects of Experiment 3.
Material and procedure coincided with that of Experiment
2.

Results and discussion
As it was hypothesized, dispersion for adults was much
more significant than for students, because of notable

difference in practice. Nevertheless, the main results of
Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 were confirmed.
Subjects solved counterfactual problems longer than
‘real’ ones (χ2(1)=26.27; p<0.0001 for EM; χ2(1)=7.19;
p<0.01 for EH).
Although EM subjects solved the problems of both
types faster than EH ones (р<0.005) the difference
between ΔtSM and ΔtSH was not significant (р=0.33).

General discussion
Returning to the issues represented in the introduction it is
worth stressing again that the obstacles which Luria's
dekchans faced when working out counterfactual
problems also characterize people of modern industrial
societies in similar situation. These obstacles are not as
crucial, however, they lead to longer time needed to solve
counterfactual problem in comparison with their ‘real’
counterparts as well as to more solving errors. These
results are consistent with some data from other research
fields. Thus, works by Frumkina and colleagues (see
Frumkina & Mikheev 1996 as a summary) gave clear
evidence that ‘complex thinking’, which is, according to
Vygotsky, a feature of preschool-age children and people
of hunter-gatherer cultures, can also characterize people
of modern industrial culture in some situations (e.g., in
classification tasks). The only difference is that modern
people can change their mind and shift from complex
thinking to more abstract cognitive models after some
clarifications of an experimenter.
In order to generalize these and similar observations,
it is worth addressing the four-level-cognitivedevelopment theory (Glebkin 2015, Glebkin 2015a). This
theory singles out four basic cognitive levels, which hold
also a framework for cultural-historical typology: Level
A characterizes great apes; Level B − prehistoric culture
and hunter-gatherer culture; Level C − early theoretical
cultures; Level D − Modernity in Europe and modern
industrial cultures. Importantly, these levels build on each
other, but do not interchange with each other; modern
people, guided by circumstances, can operate on all levels.
In particular, a majority of everyday skills (swimming,
navigation in space, etc.) demand Level A and Level B;
Level C is actual for, e.g., working out problems of school
geometry; Level D − for abstract algebraic operations. By
and large, conceptual systems on Level C operate with
objects of natural/social world and their direct
representations (historical events, social and political
actions, natural objects, etc.). Unlike that, systems on level
D operate with abstract objects which have no direct
connections with natural/social world (e.g., non-Euclidean
geometry, quantum field theory, etc.).
From this perspective the two-stage-model of
working out arithmetic problems, developed in this paper,
might be interpreted as a shift from Level C, basic in the
first stage, to Level D dominating in the second stage. It
means that humans can change cognitive levels not only
by changing problems but also when solving the same
problem.
Finally, it is worth noting that a two-stage model was
also suggested by Maruyama et al. (2012) to account for a
process of performing nested calculations (e.g. 8 + (5 − (3

2094

+ 1)) ). Both an analysis of eye-movements of subjects
and magneto-encephalography data give some evidence
for that. This means that such a model may work not only
for arithmetical problems but also for other types of
problems in mathematics.

References
Clancey, W. (1997). Situated cognition: on human
knowledge and computer representations. Cambridge;
N.Y.: Cambridge University Press.
Cole, M. & Scribner, S. (1974). Culture and thought.
New York: Wiley.
de Vega, M. (2008). Levels of embodied meaning: From
pointing to counterfactuals. In M. de Vega, A. Glenberg &
A. Graesser (eds.), Symbols and embodiment: debates on
meaning and cognition (pp. 285–308). Oxford; New York:
Oxford University Press.
de Vega, M. & Uritta, M. (2011). Counterfactual
sentences activate embodied meaning: An action–sentence
compatibility effect study. Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 23 (8), 962–973.
de Vega, M., Uritta, M. & Riffio, B. (2007). Canceling
updating in the comprehension of counterfactuals
embedded in narratives. Memory and Cognition, 35,
1410–1421.
Fauconnier, G. & Turner M. (2002). The Way We Think.
Conceptual Blending and the Mind's Hidden
Complexities. N. Y.: Basic Books.
Ferguson, H. & Sanford, A. (2008). Anomalies in real and
counterfactual worlds: An eye-movement investigation.
Journal of Memory and Language, 58, 609–626.
Frumkina, R. & Mikheev, A. (1996). Meaning and
categorization. New York: Nova Science.
Gibbs, R. W. Jr. (2006). Embodiment and cognitive
science. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Glebkin, V. (2015). The Problem of Cultural-Historical
Typology From the Four-Level-Cognitive-Development
Theory Perspective.
Journal of Cross-Cultural
Psychology, 46 (8), 1010–1022.
Glebkin, V. (2015a). A cognitive view on culturalhistorical typology. In G. Airenti, B. G. Bara, G. Sandini
(Eds.) Proceedings of the EuroAsianPacific Joint
Conference on Cognitive Science. Torino, Italy,
September 25–27, 738–743.
Hiddleston, E. (2005). A causal theory of counterfactuals.
Nous, 39, 632–657.
Kirshner D. & Whitson J. A. (eds.) Situated cognition:
social, semiotic, and psychological perspectives. Mahwah:
L. Erlbaum, 1997.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, Fire and Dangerous Things.
Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press.
Landy, D. & Goldstone, R. L. (2009). How much of
symbolic manipulation is just symbol pushing? In N.A.
Taatgen & H. van Rijn (eds.), Proceedings of the 31th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
1318–1323). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Luria, A. (1976). Cognitive Development: Its Cultural and
Social Foundations. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press.

Maruyama, M., Pallier, C., Jobert, A., Sigman, M. &
Dehaene, S. (2012).The cortical representation of simple
mathematical expressions. Neuroimage, 61, 1444–1460.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Rips, L. & Edwards, B. (2013). Inference and Explanation
in Counterfactual Reasoning. Cognitive Science, 37,
1107–1135.
Robbins, Ph. & Aydede, M. (eds.) The Cambridge
handbook
of situated cognition. Cambridge;
N.Y.:
Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Roese, N. (1997). Counterfactual thinking. Psychological
Bulletin,121, 133–148.
Roese, N. & Olson, J. (1995). Counterfactual thinking: A
critical overview. In What might have been: The social
psychology of counterfactual thinking (pp. 1-55).
Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Rosch, E. (1978). Principles of Categorization. In
Cognition and categorization (pp. 27–48). Hillsdale, N.J.:
L. Erlbaum Associates; N.Y.: Halsted Press.
Shapiro, L. (2008). Symbolism, embodied cognition, and
the broader debate. Symbols and embodiment: debates on
meaning and cognition. In M. de Vega, A. Glenberg & A.
Graesser (eds.), Symbols and embodiment: debates on
meaning and cognition (pp. 55–74). Oxford; New York:
Oxford University Press.
Tulviste, P. (1991). The cultural-historical development of
verbal thinking. Commack, N.Y.: Nova Science
Publishers.
Vankov, I. & Kokinov, B. (2011). Embodied Comparison
of Functional Relations. In B. Kokinov, A. KarmiloffSmith & N. J. Nersessian (eds.), European Perspectives
on Cognitive Science. Sofia: New Bulgarian University
Press.
Watson, A. & Winbourne, P. 2007. (eds.).
New directions for situated cognition in
mathematics
education. N.Y.: Springer.
Zacks, J. (2015). Flicker. Your Brain on Movies. Oxford,
New York: Oxford University Press.

2095

