Against the group actor assumption in joint action research
Ed Baggs (e.baggs@ucl.ac.uk)
Bartlett School of Architecture, University College London, 22 Gordon Street, London WC1H 0QB
Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45221
Abstract

asserts that this groupness will play a crucial role in explaining whatever it is that we wish to explain about some phenomenon of interest. The group actor assumption invites us
to divide the world, a priori, into individual actions and joint
actions, and says that the latter type requires an additional
layer of explanation over and above what is required for the
former.
I will provide evidence for all of these claims below. But
first it will be useful to consider a specific example of the
kind of joint action that we might want to study. I will use
this to argue that the group actor assumption leads to an unnecessarily narrow research programme. In the second half of
the paper, I outline an alternative approach which avoids the
problems identified, appealing to the concept of the ecosystem.

A central assumption in joint action research is that in order to
explain how individuals act as part of a group, we must first
explain how the group comes into existence. This assumption has led to an unnecessarily narrow research programme:
research has focussed largely on interpersonal coordination
mechanisms. I outline an alternative approach predicated on
a dynamic conception of the ecosystem. On this view, there
is no need to assume that actors must first constitute a group
agent with their fellows before entering into coordinated action. Such coordination can be more efficiently explained by
recognizing that all actions perturb the structure of the ecosystem itself in a manner that can alter the action possibilities
available to neighbouring actors. This move allows us to overcome entrenched debates over the nature of shared intentionality, and to instead focus on practical interventions in multiactor settings.
Keywords: joint action; shared intentionality; ecosystems;
ecological psychology

Case study 1: Children’s soccer training

Introduction: The group actor assumption
The group actor assumption is not a commonly-used term;
it is a term I introduce here to characterize the way that researchers working in the joint action tradition typically understand their project (Sebanz, Bekkering, & Knoblich, 2006).
The assumption might be analysed into the following four
claims:
1. the basic form of action is individual action
2. the group is to be understood as a set of constraints and
structures placed on individual action (the tactic here might
be to reduce joint action to structures in individual minds,
or, alternatively, it might be claimed that the group itself is
an emergent structure that constrains the individual components)
3. the existence of the group must be explained in terms of
the nature of the individuals involved, and the coordination
activities they engage in
4. the group must come into existence first before a joint action can be implemented
I do not, however, wish to make a fetish out of these four
items. So let us immediately simplify this analysis by replacing it with the following statement:
‘The group actor assumptions reifies the group’
That is to say, under the group actor assumption, it is understood that the study of activity involving multiple actors
requires a special mode of analysis. The group actor assumption says that the group is a real entity, and, furthermore, it

When young children, say around age five, are first corralled
onto a soccer pitch they can easily enough be divided into
two teams and encouraged to act out a soccer game. What
one will notice, however, is that these teams exhibit a striking
absence of structure. The ball will be propelled in some direction, whereupon the children will chase the ball en masse,
and then different children will try to coordinate the necessary
limb movements in order to make some decisive connection
with the ball. At the end of this process, the ball is propelled
in some new direction, and the cycle begins again. What is
going on here? Here is a succinct explanation: ‘A child’s basic urge is to run and chase the ball’ (Quinn & Carr, 2006).
The children’s chasing-urge, coupled with the quasi-random
trajectory of the ball at a given moment, produces a situation
in which all of the action appears to be reactive to the current
spatial configuration; indeed, the ball itself almost appears to
be driving the action.
Contrast this with an accomplished team performance
played to a high degree of skill. Take the goal scored by Esteban Cambiasso for Argentina against Serbia and Montenegro at the 2006 World Cup. This is a famous goal because it
came after the team had completed a sequence of 24 uninterrupted passes, and it thus serves as an object lesson in dominant possession-based soccer. But let’s consider just the last
four passes here. For each of these passes the player receiving
the ball is already on the move and the passing player, detecting this movement, plays the ball into the space just in front
of where the recipient is going to be. The whole sequence of
four passes goes off in a fluid, continuous fashion. In contrast to the five-year-olds’ game, we are no longer tempted
to claim that the ball is driving the action. The ball is still
central, of course, but it has now come under the control of a

1568

disciplined, structured team.
The question is: What has changed between these two soccer games? How does one get from the five-year-olds’ skill
level to something approaching that of the Argentinian players? What does the learning process look like? How can we
understand the skilled version of the game in a way that allows us to do useful things like come up with effective training interventions?
It would be reasonable to expect that research on joint action should give us something to say about such matters. A
joint action research programme worth the name ought to provide us with some guidance about how to go about formulating and answering appropriate questions. Does it?

From the study of the individual to the study of
the group: Where did the action go?
Joint action research has its origins in attempts to expand the
traditional, individualistic cognitivist research programme to
encompass the study of interpersonal phenomena, such as
discourse-level activities in spoken language. For the sake
of clarity, here is a definition of that individualistic research
programme: ‘Cognitivism in psychology and philosophy is
roughly the position that intelligent behavior can (only) be
explained by appeal to internal “cognitive processes,” that is,
rational thought in a very broad sense’ (Haugeland, 1978).
This immediately raises a problem. Any attempt to deal
with multi-actor activities within cognitivism runs straight
into an apparent contradiction: how can we appeal exclusively to internal processes when the ‘inside’ is distributed
across multiple individuals? The way that researchers have
typically dealt with this is through accepting the group actor
assumption.
In perhaps the most widely-cited paper on the topic in recent years, Sebanz et al. (2006) frame the problem thus: ‘As
a working definition, joint action can be regarded as any form
of social interaction whereby two or more individuals coordinate their actions in space and time to bring about a change
in the environment.’ Gilbert (1990) discusses the case of two
people going for a walk, and insists that ‘in order to go for
a walk together, each of the parties must express willingness
to constitute with the other a plural subject of the goal that
they walk along in one another’s company.’ Bratman (1992)
identifies as one of the characteristic features of joint activity
that each actor has an ‘appropriate commitment’ to the joint
activity. Marsh, Johnston, Richardson, and Schmidt (2009),
who are not themselves cognitivists, go as far as to describe
the group as a hybrid organism or ‘chimera’, an entity ‘that
has an implausible wholeness, despite the disparateness of the
parts that compose it.’ Searle (1990) provides a clear-eyed
analysis of the problems associated with appealing to intentionality in the group setting, but he also posits a version of
the group actor assumption: ‘Intuitively, in the collective case
the individual intentionality, expressed by “I am doing act A,”
is derivative from the collective intentionality, “We are doing
act A.” ’

What can be seen in all of these statements is an acceptance of the view that the group must be understood as a real
entity—a set of constraints or structures which are imposed
on individual action and which must come into existence first
before the joint action can be implemented. Debate within
the joint action tradition can largely be read as a series of
disagreements about what we should expect these constraints
and structures to look like.1
In practice, this has led to the most intense research effort
being directed at the question of interpersonal coordination
(Vesper et al., 2017): How is it that a dispersed set of individual actors becomes a group? The ancillary assumption
driving such investigations is that we should be able to identify a single, general mechanism which applies in all cases
and which allows multiple individuals to coordinate with one
another, no matter the activity they are actually engaging in.
In this vein, Tomasello et al. (2005) attribute the set of behaviours they consider to be uniquely human, such as language and culture, to an entity they call ‘shared intentionality’. Tomasello notes at the end of his 2014 book that a ‘particularly big’ open question remains concerning ‘the nature
of the jointness or collectivity or “we-ness” that characterizes
all forms of shared intentionality.’ He favours an appeal to
recursive mind-reading of the he-thinks-that-she-think-thathe-thinks variety, a solution similarly favoured by other researchers (e.g., Clark, 1996). On this account, a joint action
can proceed only when all participants to the action understand themselves to be participating in the action as part of
the group. The group exists in the minds of its members.
The most common alternative to recursive mind-reading
hypotheses are contagion-based theories which posit that the
group comes into existence automatically, as a result of lowlevel synchronization phenomena (e.g., Pickering & Garrod,
2004; Marsh, Richardson, Baron, & Schmidt, 2006). On such
accounts, joint action is made possible—the group is able to
act—because the individuals have already, spontaneously, become organized into a coordinated unit. The group exists precisely in the coordination of its members.
But notice that, in its pursuit of general mechanisms driving interpersonal coordination, the joint action research programme has indefinitely postponed the study of any particular
action phenomenon as an instance of what it says it is: action.
Nowhere does the group actor assumption lead researchers to
ask the kinds of questions suggested above, about how to understand the movements of skilled soccer players, or how to
come up with useful training interventions. The research programme appears to be misnamed, because what is actually being studied—interpersonal coordination—is understood only
as a prerequisite to the real action. Where did the action go?
1 One research tradition which arguably falls outside these
debates is the distributed cognition research programme (e.g.,
Hutchins, 1995a). While distributed cognition is explicitly cognitivist, it succeeds in avoiding the group actor assumption by
analysing individual actions as part of a larger system encompassing
physical artefacts as well as actors within a space (Hutchins, 1995b).

1569

Case study 2: Group hunting in wolves and
chimpanzees
In the wild, wolves are observed to hunt in packs, chasing
large prey such as buffalo. A buffalo is a dangerous animal
for a wolf: it has horns and powerful legs, which the wolf
must avoid. Rather than attack the buffalo directly, the wolves
chase the prey animal until it tires and collapses, whereupon
the wolves will surround the prey on all sides, cutting off potential escape routes. Muro, Escobedo, Spector, and Coppinger (2011) were able to reproduce this behaviour in a computer simulation, modeling the wolves as agents following
two rules: 1) get as close as possible to the buffalo without
putting yourself directly in its path (i.e., avoid being trampled
on or skewered), and 2) maximize your distance from neighbouring wolves.
Now, we might be tempted to conclude from this that the
wolves are literally following a couple of simple rules. But
the rules here are written as they are only because this is a
computer simulation and it therefore requires explicit, symbolic rules in order to produce any output. In reality, the
wolves cannot be following rules; the action must be driven
by perception. What an individual wolf sees is a vista containing a potential prey animal along with a number of other
wolves, all of which are already moving. The whole scene
is perceived as a set of threats and opportunities which are
continually rearranged as the situation unfolds. The question
is, what aspects of this whole structure must a wolf learn to
attend to and to exploit in order to successfully act?
A somewhat more structured type of group hunting behaviour has been observed in chimpanzees, who hunt monkeys (Boesch & Boesch, 1989). It is attested that one chimpanzee will instigate the hunt, chasing the monkey from some
direction, whereupon further chimpanzees will join in from
the sides, driving the monkey into a space where eventually
an ambushing chimpanzee will be in a position to catch and
kill the monkey.
Boesch (2002) posits that the chimpanzees are able to coordinate this behaviour because they each adopt a specific
‘role’. He identifies four roles: chimpanzees can act as driver,
chaser, blocker, or ambusher. The suggestion is that these
roles have some normative significance: a chimpanzee’s role
determines the share of the meat that they are entitled to. If
this is the case, then some form of mind-reading must be involved, as each chimp would need to know what role the other
chimps are playing.
Tomasello (2014) disputes this description, arguing that, in
fact, each individual chimp’s behaviour can be explained by
selfish motives: ‘chimpanzees in a group hunt are engaged in
a kind of co-action in which each individual is pursuing his
own individual goal of capturing the monkey’.
For Boesch, then, the group is reified as a set of normative role assignations. For Tomasello, the group simply does
not exist because for it to exist the chimpanzees would have
to have a human-like understanding of themselves and their
fellows—the very idea is anathema.

But seeking to explain these hunting behaviours in terms
of the reified group (or the absence of a group) draws our
attention away from the actual action. It draws our attention away from the physical structures, movements, events,
and reconfigurations that must necessarily be invoked in a description of the hunting behaviours: the chase, the closing in
from the sides that narrows the monkey’s escape possibilities, the space where the ambush can occur. In other words,
the group actor assumption causes us to overlook the world
itself. So let us reformulate our earlier critique:
‘The group actor assumptions reifies the group while
neglecting the world’
Perhaps ‘the world’ is too imprecise a term here. Below, it
will be replaced with the concept of the ecosystem.

The late appearance of the individual in
evolution and development: from public action
to private action
So far, we have left untouched the special position of individual action, generally understood as action in its most basic
form. This assumption, too, must be challenged.
When we take a historical perspective on cognition, we
note that the individual, as self-aware, symbol-using actor,
is in fact a rather late achievement, in evolutionary terms as
well as in terms of development within the human lifespan.
Indeed, the notion that the individual should be treated as a
given is only a self-evident truth when the matter is considered from within the cognitivist research programme.
One approach to psychology which rejects this progression
from individual to joint action is that developed by Vygotsky and his followers. According to Vygotsky (1978), the
child develops into a competent language-using being not by
silently contemplating the actions and utterances of others,
but by actually engaging in action: ‘Prior to mastering his
own behavior, the child begins to master his surroundings
with the help of speech. This produces new relations with the
environment in addition to the new organization of behavior
itself.’ Through the repetition of actions that were initially
directed outwards, the child eventually starts to direct his actions inwards, at himself. Lake (2012) gives the example of
a child speaking to himself as he looks at paint: ‘I need the
green paint.’ Here, the speech is performed ‘out loud’ but is
directed at regulating the child’s own behaviour, not directed
outwards to an audience.
Through continued practice, the child will eventually learn
to regulate his behaviour without needing to say the words out
loud. His private, self-directed speech becomes inner speech.
This process is what Vygotsky referred to as ‘internalization’.
It should be noted that what has been internalized here is not
some arbitrary symbol, or some Platonic notion of greenness,
but the self-regulatory action. What was an action when it
was carried out publicly remains an action when it is directed
inwards and carried out privately: ‘internalization reflects not
“content” poured into a person’s psychological structure, it is

1570

how that structure is formed’ (Lake, 2012). In other words,
it is only through the mastery of externally-oriented actions
that the individual arises.
But here we are talking about the development of speech.
What does this have to do with joint action?
The difficulty is that as adult humans we are inescabably
also language-users. Think back to the two soccer teams described above. While the five-year-olds have a limited vocabulary for explaining to themselves what they are doing,
this is not the case for skilled adult players. Soccer players are barked at repeatedly on the training pitch year after
year: “keep the ball moving”, “give your teammates options”,
“don’t get caught ball-watching”, etc. The public behaviour
of skilled soccer players is modified and channeled through
private self-regulating actions and instructions.
The point here is that private action need not be taken as
the starting point for the activity of groups. If action in its basic form is a public activity, directed outwards at the world
and having immediate effects in changing the structure of
that world itself, then perhaps the central contradiction driving joint action research—the contradiction which drives researchers to accept the group actor assumption—need never
arise. The problem of explaining group action in terms of internal processes can be dissolved by recognizing that those internal processes do not arise until late in evolution and development. Private, self-directed behaviour is the consequence
of public action, not a prerequisite for it.

Does this mean that the wolf has direct perceptual access
to the ecosystem? It does not. An ecosystem is not the kind
of thing that can be perceived. Here it is necessary to make a
distinction between the ecosystem and the environment.
James Gibson (1979) developed a psychology of perception that has as a central claim that perception cannot be
thought of as something that an animal does on it own, merely
in response to an environment; perception must instead be
thought of as a process enacted within an animal-environment
system. The animal’s environment is already structured. If it
is to survive, the animal must learn to make use of this structure in adaptive ways. Moving forwards creates an optic flow
pattern which can be used to direct locomotion. This pattern
only exists when the action is implemented and useable structure is present in the environment—the pattern does not exist
for an animal that has never moved, nor is it present for an
animal whose environment is filled with thick fog. For the
pattern to exist requires both the animal and the environment
to be in a certain relation, hence the animal-environment system.
An under-appreciated implication of this view is that it
requires us to adopt a view of the environment as animalspecific. That is, it requires us to conclude that there are precisely as many environments in the world as there are animals
(for a related argument about the concept of information see
van Dijk, Withagen, & Bongers, 2015). At the very start of
his 1979 book, Gibson says the following about the animal
and its environment:

An ecosystems view of action: Reinstating
space and movement
At the level of biology, an ecosystem is thought of as a rather
slow-moving thing: a stable configuration of species, niches,
soil types, atmospheric conditions, and so on that exist in
some sort of equilibrium (Sarkar, 2016). At the level of psychology, the ecosystem must be thought of as a dynamic system, one in which every public action made by an animal
alters, or perturbs, the configuration of the ecosystem itself.
Moreover, because the ecosystem contains multiple actors,
all public actions are inherently social, in the sense that the
action changes the whole system in a manner which may be
relevant to other animals: it may create new opportunities,
erase previously existing ones, reveal threats, etc.
Consider the wolves again. After the pursuit of the buffalo the wolves surround their prey. Now, at this point any
movement that a given wolf makes—an anti-clockwise rotation around the buffalo, say—alters the layout of opportunities for the neighbouring wolves, just as it changes the shape
of the potential escape gaps for the buffalo. The second wolf
may respond to the first movement in any number of ways.
In no sense, though, would this response require an ‘understanding’ of what the first wolf was doing. It is enough to
point out that the spatial configuration has changed. If we
wish to understand the wolf’s behaviour we should investigate what is going on in the relationship between the animal
and its surroundings—that is, at the level of public action.

[I]t is often neglected that the words animal and environment make an inseparable pair. Each term implies
the other. No animal could exist without an environment
surrounding it. Equally, although not so obvious, an environment implies an animal (or at least an organism) to
be surrounded. This means that the surface of the earth,
millions of years ago before life developed on it, was
not an environment, properly speaking. The earth was
a physical reality, a part of the universe, and the subject
matter of geology. [...] We might agree to call it a world,
but it was not an environment.
So what can we say about what the wolf sees? What it
sees is a perspective on the ecosystem. But this is only to
say that what is seen is a partial view of the structure that
exists in the world. If an environment is the complement of
an animal, then an environment it is what is experienced from
a first-person perspective. An ecosystem, by contrast, is an
analyst’s label. It is a tool for capturing some of the structure
in the world in a manner that can guide our investigation of
certain phenomena of interest.
In the case of joint action research, the ecosystems concept is a tool that allows us to understand how multiple actors
are able to negotiate a space that is populated with other actors. It allows us to move beyond the interpersonal coordination paradigm by making clear that such coordination is not
necessarily something the animals must do. A basic level of

1571

Figure 1: A pedestrian, represented by the black circle, waits
to cross the road. In (a) the crossing will take 15 s, and the
pedestrian must be attentive to potential threats 200 m down
the road. In (b) the task difficulty is drastically diminished:
with the crossing reduced to 5 s, the pedestrian now only
needs to be aware of potential vehicles up to 67 m away.
coordination is already present by virtue of the fact that the
animals already exist within a single ecosystem, whose structure is instantiated in just so many first-person perspectives.
The real question, though is whether the ecosystems view
of action actually has any value in terms of its ability to generate practical research. I believe that it does. One example is
in its potential application to the design of spaces for multiple
actors, such as urban streetscapes.

Case study 3: Pedestrian road crossing
Navigating an urban environment entails continuously coordinating with other actors. An urban design approach that
has been popular in Europe in recent years, the shared space
approach, argues that interpersonal coordination can be not
only necessary but sufficient for managing urban traffic flows.
This reasoning has led the UK government to publish design
guidelines encouraging the removal of formal infrastructure
elements such as kerbs and traffic signs, with the aim of forcing drivers to be more attentive to their immediate surroundings (Department for Transport, 2011). This approach has
been criticized because it often renders these spaces less accessible for elderly and visually impaired pedestrians (Moody
& Melia, 2014). To see why this is the case, it is useful to
adopt an ecosystems perspective on the activities of the road
users. Here we will consider a simple instance in which a
pedestrian wishes to cross a road that carries vehicle traffic.
We will focus only on the pedestrian’s task.2
2 It might be argued that this is not really a joint action phenomenon at all. Just as Tomasello argued that the individual chimpanzees were all merely hunting in parallel, all in their own self-

The first thing to notice is that while this is an interpersonal
coordination phenomenon, it is an asymmetrical one. Should
a collision occur here, it is likely to be more disastrous for the
pedestrian than for the driver of the car. The pedestrian thus
has an immediate interest in being especially cautious.
The pedestrian’s task here involves prospective control: it
requires the pedestrian to be attentive to ongoing, or unfolding, movements in her environment (Von Hofsten, 1993).
This is illustrated in Fig. 1. In order to decide whether to
begin crossing, the pedestrian needs to take into account the
movements of vehicles in the road that are on course to intercept her path. This decision task is made easier or harder
depending on a number of factors, which include: how wide
the road is, how fast the pedestrian is able to cross it, and
the speed of the traffic. If the pedestrian can only move
slowly (or has far to cross), as in (a), then that pedestrian
must be aware of vehicles that are much further away compared to a pedestrian who is able to cross quickly (b). The
difficulty of the decision-making task (how far the pedestrian
has to look down the road) is proportional to the pedestrian’s
time-to-cross. Prospective control refers to the organization
of behaviour with reference to perceived future movement,
i.e. with reference to where objects are going to be, as the
action unfolds. Older, slower-moving pedestrians have particular difficulty in crossing roads (Langlois et al., 1997), and
Fig. 1 makes clear why this is the case: the slower one is able
to move, the further one has to be able to see in order to control one’s movements. In practice, for very wide roads or for
very slow pedestrians it becomes impossible to perceive safe
crossing opportunities.
From the fact that the crossing time is proportional to the
distance one has to be able to see down the street, we can
immediately derive a general design principle: for the road
to be crossable by a given pedestrian, the crossing width, in
seconds, can be no longer than the time it will take for a car to
appear from beyond the horizon of visible space to intersect
the pedestrian’s path. In practical terms, this means that in
order to make a road accessible to the widest possible range of
pedestrians the crossing width should be kept to a minimum,
and visibility maximized. This gives theoretical grounding
to recent traffic design manuals that recommend just these
measures (e.g., World Health Organization, 2013).
While the activity of crossing a road can certainly be described as an interpersonal coordination phenomenon, this is
not all that it is. The ecosystems perspective allows us to
reach a deeper understanding of the space in terms of: 1)
the first-person perspective of the road users (pedestrians and
drivers); 2) the movement capabilities, and vulnerabilities, of
these actors; 3) the time-extended quality of the action; 4) the
actual layout of the street. Some promising potential areas
interest, so one might argue that the pedestrian’s activity and the
driver’s activity are merely two individual action phenomena that
happen to overlap in space. But this sort of argument again commits
us to dividing the world up a priori into individual and joint actions.
The argument is only valid, in other words, if we already accept the
group actor assumption.

1572

of application are in designing roads to be inclusive for people of diverse capabilities and in redesigning ‘accident black
spots’, which are spaces that are inherently unsafe.

Implications for joint action research
The group actor assumption has restricted research on multiactor activities to the study of an unnecessarily narrow range
of interpersonal coordination phenomena. Rejecting it is a
liberating move: it frees researchers from having to address
unsolvable questions about shared intentionality. The adoption of an ecosystems perspective, meanwhile, enables an
investigation of multi-actor activities for what they are: instances of action. It gives us tools for addressing real-world
problems in practical ways. There are some pitfalls to be
avoided. I have barely touched on issues of language-use
here, but human actions are inherently language-involving.
For now, let us restate that internal language use is a kind
of private action, and it is derived from public action. This
public–private distinction is more useful, and less misleading, than the traditional individual–joint distinction. And let
us restate also the ecosystem–environment distinction. The
latter is a first-person perspective on the former, which itself
is the setting of all social activity.

Acknowledgments
This project has received funding from the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under
grant agreement No 706432

References
Boesch, C. (2002). Cooperative hunting roles among Taı̈
chimpanzees. Human Nature, 13(1), 27–46.
Boesch, C., & Boesch, H. (1989). Hunting behavior of wild
chimpanzees in the Taı̈ National Park. American Journal
of Physical Anthropology, 78(4), 547–573.
Bratman, M. E. (1992). Shared cooperative activity. The
Philosophical Review, 101(2), 327–341.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Department for Transport. (2011). Local transport note 1/11:
Shared space. Norwich, UK: The Stationary Office.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.
Gilbert, M. (1990). Walking together: A paradigmatic social
phenomenon. Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 15(1), 1–14.
Haugeland, J. (1978). The nature and plausibility of cognitivism. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1(2), 215–226.
Hutchins, E. (1995a). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995b). How a cockpit remembers its speeds.
Cognitive science, 19(3), 265–288.
Lake, R. (2012). Vygotsky on education. New York: Peter
Lang.
Langlois, J. A., Keyl, P. M., Guralnik, J. M., Foley, D. J.,
Marottoli, R. A., & Wallace, R. B. (1997). Characteristics

of older pedestrians who have difficulty crossing the street.
American Journal of Public Health, 87(3), 393–397.
Marsh, K. L., Johnston, L., Richardson, M. J., & Schmidt,
R. (2009). Toward a radically embodied, embedded social psychology. European Journal of Social Psychology,
39(7), 1217–1225.
Marsh, K. L., Richardson, M. J., Baron, R. M., & Schmidt,
R. (2006). Contrasting approaches to perceiving and acting
with others. Ecological Psychology, 18(1), 1–38.
Moody, S., & Melia, S. (2014). Shared space: Research,
policy and problems. Proceedings of the Institution of Civil
Engineers - Transport, 167(6), 384–392.
Muro, C., Escobedo, R., Spector, L., & Coppinger, R. (2011).
Wolf-pack (Canis lupus) hunting strategies emerge from
simple rules in computational simulations. Behavioural
Processes, 88(3), 192–197.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic
psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
27(2), 169–190.
Quinn, R., & Carr, D. (2006). Developmentally appropriate
soccer activities for elementary school children. Journal of
Physical Education, Recreation & Dance, 77(5), 13–17.
Sarkar, S. (2016). Ecology. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2016 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
Searle, J. R. (1990). Collective intentions and actions. In
P. R. Cohen, J. L. Morgan, & M. E. Pollack (Eds.), Intentions in communication (pp. 401–415). Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press.
Sebanz, N., Bekkering, H., & Knoblich, G. (2006). Joint
action: bodies and minds moving together. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10(2), 70–76.
Tomasello, M. (2014). A natural history of human thinking.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., Moll, H., et
al. (2005). Understanding and sharing intentions: The origins of cultural cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
28(5), 675–690.
van Dijk, L., Withagen, R., & Bongers, R. M. (2015). Information without content: A gibsonian reply to enactivists’
worries. Cognition, 134, 210–214.
Vesper, C., Abramova, E., Bütepage, J., Ciardo, F., Crossey,
B., Effenberg, A., . . . Wahn, B. (2017). Joint action: Mental representations, shared information and general mechanisms for coordinating with others. Frontiers in Psychology, 7, 2039.
Von Hofsten, C. (1993). Prospective control: A basic aspect
of action development. Human Development, 36(5), 253–
270.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
World Health Organization. (2013). Pedestrian safety: a
road safety manual for decision-makers and practitioners.
Geneva: WHO Press.

1573

