Age differences in language comprehension during driving:
Recovery from prediction errors is more effortful for older adults
Katja Häuser (khaeuser@coli.uni-saarland.de)
Saarland University
Campus C7.4
66123 Saarbrücken
Germany

Vera Demberg (vera@coli.uni-saarland.de)
Saarland University
Campus C7.4
66123 Saarbrücken
Germany

Jutta Kray (j.kray@mx.uni-saarland.de)
Saarland University
Campus A1.3,
66123 Saarbrücken
Germany

Abstract
Prior research yielded conflicting findings regarding
whether older adults show a greater processing cost than
younger adults when encountering unpredicted semantic
material during language processing. Here, we
investigated whether age-related differences in recovery
from prediction error are influenced by increased
demands on working memory. We used a dual task
design: a primary sentence comprehension task in which
semantic predictions were fulfilled or violated, and a
concurrent driving task, thought to limit working memory
resources in resolving prediction errors. In the dual task,
older participants showed an increase in comprehension
accuracy for sentences with semantic violations, while
demonstrating a decrease in driving accuracy. Thus, when
working memory resources were limited, older adults
focused exclusively on the language task and neglected
the driving task. This could be related to an age-related
increase in generating semantic predictions, or to a
general inability among older adults to divide attention
between two cognitively demanding tasks.
Keywords: aging, semantic expectancy, dual tasking,
attention allocation

Introduction
Prediction of upcoming linguistic material is pervasive
during language comprehension. Recent theories hold that
expectations at higher levels of processing (e.g., syntactic,
contextual) generate hypotheses and facilitate low-level
processing, for example in word recognition (Kuperberg &
Jaeger, 2016).

Frequently, however, people encounter unpredicted
linguistic content and must recover from unexpected events
that violate their expectations. Indeed, research has shown
that this recovery phase often involves a processing cost.
For example, Federmeier and Kutas (1999) analyzed the
N400 EEG component (for review, see Kutas & Federmeier,
2000) to index comprehension difficulties when participants
were reading unexpected sentence continuations. Sentences
contained either an expected word, an unexpected word
from the same semantic category, or an unexpected word
from a different semantic category (e.g., They wanted to
make the hotel look more like a tropical resort. So along the
driveway, they planted rows of palms (expected) / pines
(unexpected same category) / tulips (unexpected different
category)). According to the results, the N400 was reduced
for expected and semantically related words, indicating that
processing of predicted (palms) and semantically related
words (pines) was facilitated. In contrast, for semantically
unexpected words (tulips) the N400 amplitude was high,
suggesting comprehension difficulties among participants
when predictions based on context were violated.
However, an unanswered question is whether older adults
(65 years or older) use context to anticipate upcoming
content during language processing in a similar fashion as
younger adults do. Some studies have shown that older
adults are more disturbed by unpredicted semantic material
than younger adults, which suggests that older adults may
rely more heavily on prediction making during language
processing (DeLong, Groppe, Urbach, & Kutas, 2012;
DeDe, 2014; Rayner, 2006; Borges & Coco, 2015). For
example, Borges and Coco (2015) investigated age
differences in visual object detection by using a priming
paradigm in which prime and search scene were either

2156

congruent (e.g., kitchen-kitchen) or not (e.g., bathroomkitchen). In addition, visual target objects (e.g., bread
basket) were presented in a semantically consistent
condition (e.g., on a restaurant table) or in an inconsistent
condition (e.g., on a pool table). According to the results,
older adults were less successful at detecting target objects
when prime and search scene were semantically congruent,
but the target was inconsistent with the search scene. The
authors concluded that older adults rely more heavily on
contextual expectations than younger adults by generating
very specific predictions based on consistent information.
Consequently, they showed a greater processing cost when
expectations based on context and new information are
inconsistent.
Other studies, in contrast, have shown that older adults
generally appear less likely than younger adults to use
context and engage in pre-activating information during
sentence processing (e.g., Federmeier & Kutas, 2005;
Federmeier, Kutas, & Schul, 2010). For example,
Federmeier and Kutas (2005) compared younger and older
adults’ N400 amplitude for sentence-final words in highly
and weakly constraining contexts (e.g., highly constraining:
No one at the reunion recognized Dan because he had
grown a beard; weakly constraining: At the children’s park
next to the beach she saw a man with a beard). Even though
both age groups showed a similar N400 for weakly
constraining sentences, the older adults' brain response for
strongly constraining sentences was delayed and diminished
in shape. The authors concluded that older adults were
unable to make use of the richer information available from
strongly constraining contexts to guide semantic processing;
possibly because age-related declines in working memory
prevented older adults from quickly constructing and
updating an ongoing message-level representation while at
the same time processing new input (see Huettig & Janse,
2016, for a similar account).
Given Federmeier and Kutas’ (2005) implication of
working-memory capacity, the goal of the present study was
to examine whether age-related changes in predictive
processing are influenced by increasing demands on
working memory. We used a dual-task paradigm with a
primary language comprehension task and secondary
driving task, thought to limit cognitive resources that
participants can expend to resolving semantic prediction
errors. To our knowledge, only one previous study has
investigated how aging affects dual-task performance during
language processing and driving, and that particular study
found an age effect that was limited in scope.
Becic et al. (2010) investigated story-retelling ability in
younger and older adults while participants were engaged in
a secondary driving task. According to the results, younger
adults achieved high accuracy in both story retelling and
driving, suggesting high capacity in this participant group to
divide attention between the language and the driving task.
For older adults, no reliable effects emerged in the primary
analysis. However, there was a trend in the data (revealed
by post-hoc tests), which suggested that better driving (less

variability in velocity and lane keeping) was associated with
worse retelling. In other words, older adults who drove
better also performed more poorly in the language task.
Since the group of older adults showed worse story-retelling
ability overall, it seemed that older adults primarily focused
on getting the driving task right, while neglecting the
language task. The authors suggested that, due to agerelated declines in working-memory capacity, older adults
may be more likely to protect their driving by giving up on
the story retelling task. However, the Becic et al. (2010)
study remains somewhat mute with respect to age
differences in predictive processing (the primary focus of
the present study), since this question was not specifically
addressed by that paper.
In the present study, we sought to adress age-related
differences in recovery from prediction error more directly,
by presenting stimuli in a low- vs. high-surprisal condition
(e.g., Since Petra didn’t have anything to wear for the
barbeque, she bought a dress (low surprisal) in a nearby shop;
vs. Since Petra didn’t have anything to drink for the
barbeque, she bought a dress (high surprisal) in a nearby shop).
High-surprisal sentences were thought to induce a strong
cognitive conflict since the second clause violated semantic
predictions based on contextual information provided by the
first clause (i.e., drink-dress).
Based on prior research on semantic surprisal in younger
adults (DeLong, Troyer, & Kutas, 2014; Kutas &
Federmeier, 2000), we predicted that younger adults should
be sensitive to violations of semantic expectancies
(probably indexed by lower accuracy for high-surprisal
sentences in the language comprehension task). In addition,
we expected stable performance in this participant group
regardless of whether sentences were processed in the single
or dual task, indicating high capacity in younger adults to
divide attention even under conditions of high linguistic
load (cf. Becic et al., 2010).
In contrast, for older adults our predictions were less clear
based on previous research. If, on the one hand, older adults
generate more specific predictions during language
processing, we expected to find large processing costs in
response to high-surprisal sentences, in particular under
dual-task conditions, when less cognitive resources are
available to resolve the semantically unexpected event. If,
on the other hand, older adults are less efficient at
generating predictions, we expected only minimal
processing costs for high-surprisal sentences, with only
small differences between single and dual-task condition.

Method
Participants
Thirty-six older adults (mean age = 72 yrs; 18 female) from
the Saarbrücken community participated for compensation.
The control group consisted of 34 younger adults (mean age
= 23; 20 female), mostly students at UdS. All participants
were native speakers of German, reported no hearing
problems and had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.

2157

Procedure
We investigated age-related differences in recovery from
prediction errors while participants were engaged in a single
and dual task. The dual task consisted of a language
comprehension and continuous driving task. The single task
consisted of the driving or language task only. Overall, the
experiment consisted of six major blocks – two dual-task
blocks for simultaneous language comprehension and
driving, two single-task blocks for single driving, and two
single task blocks for language comprehension.
Language Task. The language comprehension task
consisted of a sentence verification task for 192 spoken
sentences, half of them presented in a low-surprisal
condition (low processing effort) and high-surprisal
condition (high processing effort). Each sentence was
constructed of two clauses, with the verb of the first clause
providing a semantic context and the noun of the second
clause either matching (low-surprisal condition) or violating
this semantic context (high-surprisal condition), for
example, Since Petra didn’t have anything to wear (low
surprisal) / drink (high surprisal) for the barbecue, she bought a
dress in a nearby shop. Participants were instructed to
carefully listen to the sentences, which were presented to
them over speakers, and asked to judge whether each
sentence was meaningful and correct by verbally answering
“Yes” or “No”, while the researcher recorded their
responses. In order to minimize prosodic differences among
items, all sentences were synthesized prior to the
experiment using MARY TTS (Schröder, Charfuelan,
Pammi, & Turk, 2008) and pauses manipulated so that the
duration of the disambiguating word (dress) was always
identical. To avoid stereotyped responses, we also presented
72 filler items in a low- and high-surprisal condition,
involving syntactic violations. All items were randomized
using a Latin Square randomization, with surprisal (highlow) as blocking factor, to ensure that each participant
encountered each experimental item in only one of its
experimental conditions.
Driving Task. We used the Continuous Tracking and
Reaction Task (ConTRe Task; Mahr, Feld, Moniri & Math,
2012), a highly controlled driving task which measures
rapid changes in steering deviation from a target. As such,
the ConTRe task allows for continuous and very finegrained measurement of online changes in task performance
over time (e.g., Becic, Dell, Bock, et al., 2010; Demberg,
Sayeed, Mahr, & Müller, 2013). Participants were seated in
front of a steering wheel and saw a 3D road on a screen,
with two vertical color bars moving laterally across the
screen at a continuous speed. Participants were instructed
that they could control one of the bars (the blue one) by
turning the steering wheel whereas the other bar (the yellow
one) was controlled by the computer. Their task was to
continuously track the yellow bar so as to keep the distance
between the two bars minimal at all times. Participants’
driving performance was assessed by measuring their

steering deviation (indicated in meters) when processing
low- and high-surprisal sentences.

Results
We constructed separate linear mixed effects models for
response accuracy and steering deviation, as implemented in
the lme4 library (Bates & Sarkar, 2007) in R (R
Development Core Team, 2013). Fixed effects for response
accuracy were sentence type (low surprisal vs. high
surprisal), task condition (single vs. dual), and age group
(younger vs. older). Fixed effects for steering deviation
were sentence type and age group. Since raw steering
deviation was coded in positive and negative values,
indicating left- and right-sided deviations, we squared its
values to obtain a final measure. For the LMER model for
steering deviation, p-values were approximated from the
model coefficients using the normal distribution (see Barr,
Levy, Scheepers, & Tily 2013). Categorical predictors were
sum coded. All models contained participants and items as
crossed random effects, and random slope adjustments for
subjects and items. In the event that a model failed to
converge, we simplified the random slope structure
progressively until convergence was achieved (for
guidelines, see Barr et al., 2013). Higher-order interactions
involving the factor age group were followed up with
planned model splits between younger and older adults.

Response accuracy
The model for response accuracy showed a significant
interaction between sentence type and age group, as well as
a significant interaction between sentence type and task
condition (see Table 2). To locate the source of these
interactions, we computed two follow-up models in which
items were split by age group. Thus, we computed one
model for younger adults, and another model for older
adults.
The model for the younger adults showed nothing but a
significant main effect of sentence type (b = -0.62, SE =
0.14, t = -4.29, p < .001 ***), indicating that, regardless of
task condition, younger adults responded less accurately to
high-surprisal than low-surprisal sentences (see Figure 1,
left panel). In contrast, the model for the older adults
showed a significant interaction between sentence type and
task condition (b = -0.86, SE = 025, t = -3.4, p < .001 ***).
An inspection of the plot for this interaction (see Figure 1,
right panel) suggested that older adults responded equally
accurately to high- than low-surprisal sentences in the single
task condition, but showed a selective increase in response
accuracy for high-surprisal sentences in the dual-task
condition. These observations were confirmed by additional
follow-up models, in which we split items by task condition:
As predicted, only the model for the dual-task condition
showed a significant main effect of sentence type (b = 0.77,
SE = 0.18, t = 4.28, p < .001 ***), indicating an increase in
response accuracy for high-surprisal sentences.
Thus, the data for response accuracy showed two main
things of interest: First, younger adults responded less

2158

accurately to high-surprisal sentences, regardless of task
condition, indicating stable performance in this participant
group even when working-memory load was high (i.e. the
dual-task condition). Older adults, in contrast, responded
more accurately to high-surprisal sentences in the dual-task
condition, indicating that they selectively focused on
resolving the semantic conflict in these items (cf. Becic et
al., 2010), presumably by giving up driving. To support this
view, we now turn to the driving performance in both age
groups.

performance regardless of whether sentences were highly
surprising or not, whereas older adults demonstrated higher
steering deviations when high-surprisal sentences were
presented. To confirm these observations, we again
computed follow-up models in which we split items by age
group. As expected, only the model for older adults showed
a main effect of sentence type (b = 0.24, SE = 0.06, t = 4.05,
p < .001***; younger adults: b = -0.02, SE = 0.03, t = -0.70,
p > .05).
Thus, the analysis of the driving data supported our
hypothesis based on the response data. First, younger adults
showed constant steering deviations regardless of semantic
violations, suggesting that even under conditions of high
linguistic load, they maintained high driving acuity. Older
adults, in contrast, demonstrated greater steering deviations
in response to high-surprisal sentences, suggesting increased
effort to recover from semantic violations.
In sum, whereas younger adults maintained a stable
pattern of performance even under conditions of high
linguistic load, older adults devoted all attentional resources
to resolving semantic violations, while neglecting the
driving task.

Figure 1: Response accuracy (± SEM) in younger and older
adults, depending on task condition and sentence type.
Table 1: Effect sizes (b), standard errors (SE), t-values, and
p-values for the logistic LMER model for response
accuracy. Significance codes: *** .001 | ** .01 | * .05

Sentence Type
Task Condition
Age Group
SentType:Task
SentType:Group
Task:Group
SentType:Task:Group
Random Effects
Subject

b
-0.12
-0.03
0.34
-0.58
-0.98
-0.24
0.59

SE
t
0.10 -1.26
0.10 -0.35
0.15 2.24
0.19 -3.03
0.19 -5.11
0.19 -1.27
0.38 1.53
Variance
0.23

p
ns
ns
*
**
***
ns
ns

Figure 2: Steering deviations in the dual task (± SEM) for
younger and older adults, depending on sentence type.

Table 2: Effect sizes (b), standard errors (SE), t-values,
and bootstrapped p-values for the logistic LMER model for
steering deviation.

Steering deviation
The model for squared steering deviations showed a
significant interaction between sentence type and age group
(see Table 2). The plot of this interaction (see Figure 2)
suggested that younger adults showed stable driving

Sentence Type
Age Group

2159

b
0.11
0.31

SE
0.03
0.17

t
3.53
1.80

p
***
ns

SentType:Group
Random Effects
Subject
SentType | Subject
Item
Age Group | Item

0.26

0.06 4.18
Variance
0.50
0.06
0.01
0.05

***

Discussion
Prior research has yielded conflicting findings with respect
to predictive processing in aging. Some studies have shown
that older adults are impaired at using context to generate
predictions about upcoming content during language
comprehension. Other studies have indicated that older
adults form strong and semantically specific predictions
during language processing, resulting in effortful recovery
when such predictions are violated.
In this study, we investigated age-related differences in
recovery from prediction error under conditions of increased
working-memory load. By using a secondary driving task,
we limited working-memory resources participants could
devote to resolving prediction errors. To manipulate
prediction error, we presented sentences in a high- and lowsurprisal condition. In high-surprisal sentences, participants
were expected to experience integration difficulties when
encountering unpredicted semantic content. Low-surprisal
sentences, in contrast, were thought to induce only minimal
processing effort.
Two key findings emerged. First, even though younger
adults were sensitive to violations of semantic predictions
overall (indicated by lower response accuracy for highsurprisal sentences), they maintained a stable behavioral
pattern in both response accuracy and driving performance.
Thus, younger adults were able to resolve the semantic
violation in high-surprisal sentences without experiencing
trade-off effects between primary and secondary task. This
suggests high working-memory capacity in this participant
group to split attention even under conditions of maximal
linguistic load. Second, we found that older adults allocated
all processing resources towards resolving the unexpected
sentence continuation in high-surprisal sentences. This
increased their response accuracy in the sentence
verification task, but it came at the expense of driving
accuracy: When high-surprisal sentences were presented,
older adults demonstrated a strong increase in steering
deviation.
Thus, our results are more in line with studies suggesting
that older adults form strong predictions during language
processing, and that violations of these predictions induce
maximal processing effort to resolve the prediction error.
Unlike younger adults, however, older adults may not have
sufficient working-memory capacity to integrate
semantically unexpected material into an unfolding sentence
context and to additionally perform a secondary task
without a substantial drop in task performance.
A second interpretation of our results is that older adults
are inable to successfully divide attention between two
cognitively demanding tasks. Thus, they might globally

shift attentional resources towards one cognitive goal when
multiple tasks have to be performed at the same time. This
interpretation is in line with prior research suggesting that
older adults can relevel their task priorities in a case-by-case
manner that follows principles of selective optimization, by
taking into account the subjective difficulty of each task and
choosing the one which is most likely to garner success (see
Li, Baltes, Staudinger, & Lindenberger, 1999; Miles &
Stine-Morrow, 2004; Stine-Morrow, Miller & Hertzog,
2006). Here, older adults might have adopted a strategy of
selective performance optimization, by neglecting the high
demands in the bar-tracking task and focusing exclusively
on the sentence verification task. Overall, the language task
may have seemed more likely to yield success, given older
adults’ increased verbal knowledge and linguistic capacity
(Glisky, 2007).
Finally, a somewhat open question is to what extent our
data have real-life implications on older adults’ car driving
security. On the one hand, our results are supported by prior
studies using simulated but also naturalistic driving
scenarios, suggesting that driving ability suffers most under
conditions of high working-memory load (Cantin,
Lavallière, Simoneau, et al., 2009; Strayer, Cooper, Turrill,
et al., 2013), and that older adults are more likely to adapt to
such situations by selectively focusing their attention on one
task and disregarding the other (Becic et al., 2010). In
addition, there is evidence from research on car driving
safety (Strayer et al., 2013) indicating that behavioral results
obtained in simulated driving environments are largely
identical to real-life driving.
On the other hand, car driving involves a range of
cognitive-behavioral demands the bar tracking task in the
present study was lacking, for example reactions to road
signs or traffic lights, overtaking maneuvers and lane
changes, or braking for other cars. In fact, the contrast
between the present results and those obtained by an earlier
study using a similar dual-task paradigm (Becic et al.,
2010), shows that differences in design might impact the
results to a large extent. According to the results of Becic et
al. (2010), older adults showed a reversed pattern of task
prioritizing than observed here, by focusing exclusively on
the driving task and neglecting the language task. However,
the experimental set-up in Becic et al. (2010) was more
naturalistic than the one in the present study, since that
study used an actual car dummy and a wrap-around
projection screen that displayed realistic images of road
situations and naturalistic driving scenarios. This set-up
might have induced a more realistic feeling of car driving,
where accidents can actually be fatal. The older adults in
that study might have employed a task solving strategy that
followed the rule of safety-first, by focusing their attention
on the task which seemed most dangerous to them. In
contrast, poor performance in the bar tracking task in the
present study had no such real-life implications, possibly
rendering this task somewhat negligible to older adults.
In sum, our data support studies arguing that recovery
from prediction errors is more effortful for older adults, and

2160

that older adults allocate attentional resources differently
from younger adults when task demands are high, by
prioritizing one cognitive goal over others. We discussed
two possible causes for these age-related differences, i.e.
older adults' increased rate of forming semantic predictions
based on context, and/or impaired working-memory
resources normally associated with aging. Future work in
our lab will further investigate these possibilities by also
exploring the pupillary response as a measure of cognitive
load, and by taking into account individual differences in
executive functions.

References
Bates, D.M. & Sarkar, D. (2007). lme4: Linear mixedeffects models using S4 classes, R package version
0.99875- 6.
Becic, E., Dell, G. S., Bock, K., Garnsey, S. M., Kubose, T.,
& Kramer, A. F. (2010). Driving impairs talking.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 17, 15-21.
Borges, M., & Coco, M. I. (2015). Access and Use of
Contextual Expectations in Visual Search during Aging.
In G. Airenti, B. Bara, & G. Sandini (Eds.). Proceedings
of the EuroAsianPacic Joint Conference in Cognitive
Science.
Cantin, V., Lavallière, M., Simoneau, M., & Teasdale, N.
(2009). Mental workload when driving in a simulator:
Effects of age and driving complexity. Accident Analysis
and Prevention, 41, 763-771.
DeDe, G. (2014). Sentence comprehension in older adults:
evidence for risky processing strategies. Experimental
Aging Research, 40, 436-454.
DeLong, K. A., Groppe, D. M., Urbach, T. P., & Kutas, M.
(2012). Thinking ahead or not? Natural aging and
anticipation during reading. Brain and Language, 121,
226-239.
DeLong, K. A., Troyer, M., & Kutas, M. (2014).
Pre‐ processing in sentence comprehension: Sensitivity to
likely upcoming meaning and structure. Language and
Linguistics Compass, 8, 631-645.
Demberg, V., Sayeed, A., Mahr, A., & Müller, C. (2013).
Measuring linguistically-induced cognitive load during
driving using the ConTRe task. Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces
and Interactive Vehicular Applications (pp. 176-183).
ACM.
Federmeier, K. D., & Kutas, M. (1999). A rose by any other
name: Long-term memory structure and sentence
processing. Journal of Memory and Language, 41, 469495.
Federmeier, K. D., & Kutas, M. (2005). Aging in context:
Age-related changes in context use during language
comprehension. Psychophysiology, 42, 133–141.
Federmeier, K. D., Kutas, M., & Schul, R. (2010). Agerelated and individual differences in the use of prediction
during language comprehension. Brain and Language,
115, 149-161.

Glisky, E. L. (2007). Changes in cognitive function in
human aging. In D. R. Riddle (Ed.), Brain Aging: Models,
Methods, and Mechanisms. New York: CRC Press.
Huettig, F., & Janse, E. (2016). Individual differences in
working memory and processing speed predict
anticipatory spoken language processing in the visual
world. Language, Cognition & Neuroscience, 31, 80-93.
Kuperberg, G. R., & Jaeger, T. F. (2016). What do we mean
by prediction in language comprehension? Language,
Cognition and Neuroscience, 31, 32-59.
Kutas, M., DeLong, K. A., & Smith, N. J. (2011). A look
around at what lies ahead: Prediction and predictability in
language processing. In M. Bar (Ed.), Predictions in the
brain: Using our past to generate a future. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Li, K. Z., Lindenberger, U., Freund, A. M., & Baltes, P. B.
(2001). Walking while memorizing: Age-related
differences in compensatory behavior. Psychological
Science, 12, 230-237.
Mahr, A., Feld, M., Moniri, M. M., & Math, R. (2012). The
contre (continuous tracking and reaction) task: A flexible
approach for assessing driver cognitive workload with
high sensitivity. Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and
Interactive Vehicular Applications (pp. 88–91). ACM.
Miles, J. R., & Stine-Morrow, E. A. (2004). Adult age
differences in self-regulated learning from reading
sentences. Psychology and Aging, 19, 626.
R Development Core Team. (2013). R: A language and
environment for statistical computing. [Computer
Software]. Vienna, Austria: R Foundation for Statistical
Computing.
Rayner, K., Reichle, E. D., Stroud, M. J., Williams, C. C., &
Pollatsek, A. (2006). The effect of word frequency, word
predictability, and font difficulty on the eye movements
of young and older readers. Psychology and Aging, 21,
448-465.
Schröder, M., Charfuelan, M., Pammi, S., & Türk, O.
(2008). The MARY TTS entry in the Blizzard Challenge
2008. In Proceedings of the Blizzard Challenge
Stine-Morrow, E. A., Miller, L. M. S., & Hertzog, C.
(2006). Aging and self-regulated language processing.
Psychological Bulletin, 132, 582.
Strayer, D. L., Cooper, J. M., Turrill, J., Coleman, J.,
Medeiros-Ward, N., & Biondi, F. (2013). Measuring
cognitive distraction in the automobile.

2161

