An Investigation of Factors that Influence Resource Allocation Decisions
Percy K. Mistry (pkmistry@uci.edu)
Department of Cognitive Sciences, University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697-5100 USA
Jennifer S. Trueblood (jennifer.s.trueblood@vanderbilt.edu)
Department of Psychology, Vanderbilt University, 111 21st Ave S Nashville, TN 37240 USA
Abstract
We investigate how people allocate a limited set of resources
between multiple risky prospects. We found that only a small
percentage of decisions followed some form of naive diversification or mean-variance optimization. In general, people were
less mean-variance optimal than a naive 1/N heuristic. Aspects of choice sets, such as domain, skew, and second order
stochastic dominance, affected resource allocation decisions in
a similar manner to their influence on single choice gambles.
Individual traits traditionally linked to risk propensity seem to
manifest in terms of the degree to which people are inclined
to diversify. Lower risk aversion and higher risk seeking traits
are linked to increasing diversification. Risk congruency, the
degree to which peoples’ self-reported and elicited risk aversion matches, moderates how susceptible people are to cost
framing nudges. We find evidence for heterogeneous clusters
where people either under-weight or over-weight segregated
costs, leading to the same nudge producing opposite behavioral results within two risk incongruent groups.
Keywords: resource allocation; risk tolerance; risky
choice; individual differences; nudges

Introduction
There are many instances where people have to distribute
a limited set of resources between multiple choice options.
These can be personal (e.g. investment in a set of retirement
funds; constructing a stock portfolio; budgeting household
expenses) or institutionalized (e.g. capital allocation, bank
lending decisions, government budgets) monetary decisions.
These could also be non-monetary decisions such as distribution of labor, time, bandwidth, etc. The choice options often vary in terms of their potential costs and benefits, which
are probabilistic in nature. Each choice option may thus be
represented as a risky prospect which has some probabilistic
distribution of outcomes. There is a large amount of literature
that examines the decision making process when people have
to select only one out of 2 or more risky prospects, that is,
where all resources are invested in a single prospect.
There are limited studies however, that extend this to a
resource allocation paradigm, namely, how do people distribute a limited set of resources between 2 or more such risky
prospects? Some studies suggest that people follow the 1/N
heuristic, which proposes that people tend to naively diversify
allocation across the available prospects (Benartzi & Thaler,
2001; Bardolet, Fox, & Lovallo, 2011), although this is often
the case only for a subset of the people making these decisions. The normative version of this problem is extensively
studied in economics - what optimal strategies should people
adopt? However there is limited research examining whether
people come close to adopting such optimal strategies.
It is important to understand how people deviate from optimality, and to understand what aspects of choice sets influ-

ence the resource allocation process. We highlight that measuring optimality and sensitivity to choice sets is more complex in resource allocation tasks compared to simple choice
gambles. For simple choice gambles, a cognitive account will
typically entail valuation of different prospects, and specification of a deterministic or probabilistic decision rule to compare these valuations. The decision rule for resource allocation needs to be more complex to allow for allocation weights
to be placed for each gamble. It needs to take into account
aspects such as choice bracketing - whether the valuation of
choices is performed at an aggregate portfolio or segregated
choice level. These aspects may influence whether drivers
of decision making that explain single choice behavior can
also explain resource allocation decisions. Further, choice
bracketing may also affect how sensitive people are to cost
framing nudges, where outcomes are re-framed into a gross
higher outcome, set-off by a corresponding cost element. We
report an experimental study on resource allocation and show
how manipulation of different design factors affects the allocation behavior. The main questions we ask are (1) do people
naively diversify?, (2) how sensitive are people to choice set
manipulations?, (3) how well do measures of risk traits explain individual differences in resource allocation behavior?,
(4) how sensitive are people to cost framing nudges?and (5)
how optimal (or sub-optimal) is allocation behavior?

Experiment
In this experiment we test people’s preferences for distributing a fixed set of resources between multiple risky prospects.
50 undergraduate students from Vanderbilt University participated in the experiment. The cover story for the task was that
participants had to play the role of the head of a company that
had the opportunity to invest a fixed amount of money (hypothetical $100,000) into one or more of 4 possible projects.
Participants were advised that all projects had the same expected time to completion and their objective was to maximize the return on the invested amount. They were required
to invest all the money, but could distribute this in any proportion between the 4 projects, including allocating no resources
to one or more projects. Each project had two possible outcomes - success or failure. They were provided with the
probability of success (pS ) and failure (pF = 1-pS ) for each
project, as well as the percentage returns on their investment
depending on whether a project succeeded or failed. A successful project always had a positive return, whereas a failed
project resulted in either a lower positive or a negative return.
The 4 projects always varied in terms of the variability (standard deviation) of return outcomes. Participants were given

2741

ing risky choices (Beattie & Loomes, 1997). Participants in
group 2 received a fixed payout of $5 plus an incentive ranging from $0 to $10 that was linked to their performance on
the task. For group 2, at the end of the experiment, one of
the trials was randomly selected. The incentive component
was calculated as $5 plus or minus $0.10 times the %returns
achieved on that trial, but limited to the range $0-$10. For
example, achieving a loss of 20% resulted in an incentive of
$5 - 0.1(20) = $3, and achieving a gain of 20% resulted in an
incentive of $5 + 0.1(20) = $7. This allowed for the incentive to be framed as reductions for losses and increments for
gains. The total payout including fixed and incentive components ranged between $5-$15.

Figure 1: Example interface where participants allocate a fixed set
of resources between 4 risky prospects using either text inputs or a
moving slider scale.

(B) Within-subjects factorial design
Each participant completed 36 portfolio choice decisions.
There were 12 unique decisions based on a 2 (second order
stochastic dominance - present vs absent) X 2 (domain - gains
vs mixed) X 3 (skew - none, positive, negative) within-subject
factorial design. Each of these 12 decisions was repeated in
3 blocks, with the order randomized within blocks. Although
the underlying decision remained equivalent across blocks,
the three blocks varied in terms of a cost framing effect. The
details of the choice set manipulation are given below:

Figure 2: Example interface of how participants receive feedback
for each individual prospect after each trial. The proportion of green
to red balls is based on the ratio of probability of success to failure.
One of the balls is chosen at random to generate a realized outcome.

an example and a practice trial to familiarize themselves with
the interface (see Figure 1). After each trial, participants were
provided feedback on the outcome. The outcome was based
on the described probability of success and dynamically (randomly) picked by the computer program. The process of realization of the outcome for each project was graphically displayed to the participants. For each project they were shown a
box containing 100 X pS green balls and 100 X pF red balls.
The computer program randomly traversed the box space and
eventually picked one of the balls. A green ball implied success and a red ball implied failure (see Figure 2). The returns on the investment for each project were updated based
on these outcomes before moving on to the next trial.

(A) Between-subjects conditions
Participants were split into 2 groups of 25 students each. The
between subjects design entailed different rewards, with the
rest of the design factors being identical between the two
groups. Group 1 participated for course credit, and group 2
for financial compensation. This between-subjects condition
tests whether financial incentives affect resource allocation
behavior. There is mixed evidence for this in tasks involv-

Second order stochastic dominance (SOSD; 2 levels): In
the first level, all prospects in a trial had equal expected value,
but the 4 prospects had progressively higher standard deviation. As a result, each prospect had SOSD over the subsequent riskier prospects. In the second level, the prospects
were not mean preserving, and riskier prospects (higher standard deviation) also had higher expected values. Thus there
was no SOSD. Any behavioral account that is based on a
weakly increasing concave utility function, or mean-variance
optimization, predicts that prospects with SOSD over other
prospects will be a dominated preference. Accordingly, optimal resource allocation under such an assumption would imply allocating 100% of the resources to the safest prospect.
SOSD present choice sets allow a parameter free estimation
of deviation from mean-variance optimal allocation. On the
other hand, choice sets that do not involve SOSD choices
allow measuring the level of risk tolerance within a meanvariance optimization framework.
Domain (DM; 2 levels): In the first level, all-gain domain,
all outcomes including project failures resulted in positive
returns. In the second, mixed domain, the average returns
across prospects on failure were negative. Domain manipulation allows us to test for the effects of asymmetric gain-loss
utilities within the portfolio choice framework.
Skew (SK, 3 levels): In the first level, all prospects had zero
skew, that is, success and failure were equally likely. In the
second, all except the safest prospect had negative skew, that
is, failure outcomes were more likely. In the third, all except the safest prospect had positive skew, that is, success
outcomes were more likely. Symmonds, Wright, Bach, and

2742

Purchase cost framing nudges (PC, 3 levels): In the first
level, there are no extraneous purchase costs. In the second and third levels, the outcomes from the first level were
translated and re-framed into higher gross outcomes accompanied by an appropriate purchase cost. This re-framing
led to prospects that were expected-value-equivalent to the
prospects presented in the first level. In the second level, the
amount of re-framing was increasingly higher with increasing variability (risk) of prospects outcomes. In the third, the
re-framing decreased with increasing variability (risk). The
trials were presented in a blocked design with three blocks
corresponding to the 3 purchase costs conditions, with the order of the 12 problems in each being randomized. The theory
of mental accounting suggests that people may account for
re-framed outcomes and corresponding costs in a segregated
manner, including under or over weighting the cost component relative to the outcomes. The re-framing thus can act as a
nudge, pushing people towards allocation to riskier prospects
in the second level and safer in the third level if they underweigh the re-framed costs. The direction of the nudge would
be reversed if people over-weigh re-framed costs.

(C) Testing for risk traits
After the allocation task, participants were required to complete one set of paired lottery choices (Holt & Laury, 2002),
summarized as HL, with a higher score indicating greater
elicited risk aversion. They also completed the DOSPERT financial risk-taking (DF) subscale (Blais, 2006), with a higher
DF score indicating higher self-reported risk seeking behavior, and a locus of control (SL) scale (Rotter, 1966), with
higher SL scores indicating a higher self-reported external locus of control. All of these influence risky decision making
in single choice tasks.

(D) Defining the dependent variables
The simplest way of measuring a resource allocation decision is to look at the allocation weights (wi ) for each (ith )
prospect, where ΣNi=1 wi = 1, and N is the total number
of choices available. Lopes and Oden (1999) proposed that
there are individual differences in whether people approach
risky decision making from a perspective of security (protecting low outcomes) or potential (maximizing high outcomes).
A simplistic measure of people’s security and aspiration levels are measured by the weight allocated to the two extreme
prospects - safest (S) and riskiest (R) respectively. In addition, the Herfindahl index (H) = ΣNi=1 w2i , where N is the total
number of prospects in the choice set, measures the degree of
diversification (Rhoades, 1993). When all weights are equal,
H takes the minimum value of 1/N (maximum diversification) and when all resources are allocated to a single prospect,

H=1. For N=4, values close to 0.25 indicate naive diversification, values close to 0.5 indicate some form of conditional diversification (equal allocation to 2 of 4 prospects), and values
close to 1 indicate concentration in a single prospect. These
measures S, R, and H reflect segregated measures based on
attention paid to individual prospects.
Often, the emergent characteristics of the aggregated portfolio are of greater interest than the individual choices. Most
normative theories of portfolio choice are based on optimizing some function of the portfolio characteristics. Since a
portfolio can be represented as a probability distribution over
outcomes, the most common characteristics are derived from
the moments of the resulting portfolio. We calculate the expected value (V ), and the standard deviation (D) of the aggregate portfolio.
Finally, we test for differences between the 2 cost framing conditions. The framing conditions are setup so that correctly accounting for the costs and translation of outcomes
should result in no difference between behavior across the
three conditions. However, discounting of the costs framed
separately would result in a preference for prospects with a
higher degree of framing. In one condition, riskier prospects
are subject to higher framing (we denote this condition as F1 ),
and in the other, safer prospects are subject to higher framing,
denoted as F2 . Discounting the costs would result in higher
selection of riskier prospects in the first and safer in the second framing condition. We calculate susceptibility to nudges
as, N = mean[(SF2 − SF1 ), (RF1 − RF2 )]. A value of N close
to 0 indicates that people are not susceptible to cost framing
nudges. A high positive value indicates that people underweight separately framed costs, and thus are nudged towards
options with higher framing (larger translation of outcomes).
A high negative value indicates that people over-weight separately framed costs, and thus are nudged towards options with
lower framing (smaller translation of outcomes).

Results
(1) Is there evidence for naive diversification?
Diversification is directly measured using the Herfindahl index (H). The left panel in Figure 3 shows the distribution of H
Herfindahl index & Number of unique prospects selected
1

2

3

4

0.1

% of choices

Dolan (2011) showed that risk and skewness are differently
encoded in the brain. People have been shown to be relatively
averse to negatively skewed gambles (Deck & Schlesinger,
2010). Manipulation of skew allows us to test whether these
effects extend to the portfolio choice paradigm.

0.05

0
0.25

0.5

0.75

1

Herfindahl Index

Figure 3: Distribution of Herfindahl index across participants and
trials. The color shading shows the number of unique prospects (1
to 4) selected on each trial.

2743

Table 1: Mean values of dependent behavioral measures by design factor. Differences are tested using a Bayesian repeated measures ANOVA
for main effects of design factors. Significant differences, measured by log Bayes factors (LBF) ≥ 2.3 are highlighted in bold.

Herfindahl Index (H)
%Safest (S)
% Riskiest (R)
Expected value (V)
Standard deviation (D)
Susceptibility to nudges (N)
MPT-error (dε )
Risk tolerance (Qε )

SOSD
(Yes) (No)
0.48 0.47
0.37 0.31
0.25 0.29
2.50 3.98
3.83 4.42
0.01 0.04
0.31 0.18
63.7

Domain
(Gain) (Mixed)
0.48
0.47
0.29
0.39
0.30
0.24
5.84
0.64
2.06
6.19
0.00
0.05
0.31
0.18
19.9
107.5

across participants and trials. The color shading also shows
the distribution of the number of unique prospects selected
on any trial. A naive diversification strategy would indicate
a value of H = 0.25. A large mass of the distribution lies
between the range of 0.25 and 0.5, with further peaks at 0.5
and 1.0 indicating choices where people selected 2 of the 4
prospects equally, or invested all their resources in a single
prospect, respectively. The 1/N heuristic (naive diversification), proposes that people tend to split allocations evenly between available choices. A variant of this strategy called the
conditional 1/N heuristic (Huberman & Jiang, 2006) proposes
that people split allocations evenly across a small number of
choices rather than the total number of choices available. Using thresholds suggested by Huberman and Jiang (2006), 11%
of the choices can be summarized as single prospect concentration, 7% as a conditional diversification into 2 prospects,
and 4% as naive diversification into all 4 prospects.

(0)
0.46
0.34
0.26
3.23
4.38
0.02
0.24
64.7

Skew
(Neg)
0.48
0.37
0.28
3.25
3.60
0.03
0.22
52.4

(Pos)
0.49
0.31
0.27
3.24
4.39
0.02
0.27
73.9

(None)
0.44
0.32
0.27
3.27
4.23
0.22
67.0

Cost framing
(Riskier)
0.49
0.33
0.28
3.26
4.32
0.26
76.1

(Safer)
0.49
0.36
0.26
3.19
3.83
0.25
48.0

with domain and SOSD by design. There is no evidence for
a main effect of skew on V , but there is evidence (LBF 6.9)
for a main effect of skew on D. Participants exhibit the lowest D (mean 3.6) in the negative skew condition and highest
D (mean 4.39) in the positive skew condition, indicating a
marked preference for lower variability in the negative skew
condition.

(3) Trait-based individual differences

(2) Sensitivity to choice set manipulations:
The mean values of the dependent behavioral variables
grouped by experimental factors (which define the type of
choice sets) are summarized in Table 1. We conduct a
Bayesian repeated measures ANOVA analysis (JASP-Team,
2016) testing for main effects of these design factors. A log
Bayes factor, LBF ≥ 2.3 is considered significant, and highlighted in bold in Table 1. There is no evidence that the incentive condition had any effect on S, R, H, V , or D, hence
the remainder of the analysis combined data from the course
credit and financial incentive conditions. There is no evidence that the level of diversification as measured by H is
affected by the domain, skew, or SOSD manipulations. There
is evidence for a main effect of domain (LBF 28.1), SOSD
(LBF 12.8), and skew (LBF 3.2) on S. Allocation to S is
higher in the mixed domain (mean 39%) than in the gains domain (mean 29%), higher in the SOSD (mean 37%) compared
to non-SOSD (mean 31%) condition, and higher in negative
skew (mean 37%) than positive skew (mean 31%) conditions.
There is evidence for a main effect of domain (LBF 9.6) and
SOSD (LBF 4.3) on R. Allocation to R is higher in the gains
domain (mean 30%) than in the mixed domain (mean 24%),
and higher in the non-SOSD (mean 29%) compared to the
SOSD (mean 25%) condition. V and D are expected vary

To test if the measured traits influence behavior in the portfolio allocation task, we use a Bayesian ANCOVA analysis
treating the between and within subject choice manipulation
factors as random effects and testing for the effects of covariates locus of control (SL), risk aversion (HL), and financial
risk seeking (DF). We find evidence of an effect of HL (LBF
5.7) and DF (LBF 2.9) on S, and an effect of HL (LBF 13.2)
on R. These indicate that higher risk aversion (higher HL
and lower DF scores) are linked to higher allocation to the
safest prospect and lower allocation to the riskiest prospect,
as might be expected. Testing for effects of the locus of control (SL), we find evidence of an effect on S (LBF 3.7), and
on R (LBF 6.2). These indicate that increasing external locus of control is also linked to higher allocation to safest and
lower to the riskiest prospect. Directionally, this is in contrast to findings based on risky gambles (Rotter, 1966) which
showed that increasing external locus of control was associated with waging more money on riskier bets.
Figure 4 shows the joint density of % allocations to R and
S. The color coding in the three panels shows the mean level
of trait scores. Areas in the centre indicate diversificationlike behavior. Interestingly, all 3 mean scores are pretty similar for both extreme decisions (R = 100% and S=100%),
but are different for the central areas representing diversification (lower HL scores and higher DF scores). It seems that
risk aversion and risk seeking measures are more indicative
of how extreme (concentration vs diversification) people are
in their allocations, rather than whether they prefer safer or
riskier prospects. We find evidence of an effect of HL (LBF
1.4) and DF (LBF 13.4) on H. These indicate that higher
risk aversion is linked to lower diversification. This behavior
is however contrary to the popular notion that diversification
leads to reduced risk.

2744

4.3

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.6
0.4

5.25

0.2

0.6
0.4

3

0.2

0
0.5

0.4

0

1.5

0

0.6

0.2

0

5

% Safest (S)

1

Mean DF score

1

% Safest (S)

1

Mean HL score

12

9

% Safest (S)

Mean SL score

19

1.3

1

0

% Aspirational (R)

0.5

1

% Aspirational (R)

0

0.5

1

% Aspirational (R)

Figure 4: Joint density of % allocation to safest vs aspirational prospects. The size indicates the % of all trials. The 3 panels plot the same
density data, with the color coding in the 3 panels showing the mean level fo risk trait scores (SL, HL, and DF respectively).

(4) Sensitivity to cost framing nudges:

(5) How optimal is allocation behavior?

Testing for differences between the framing and no framing
conditions, we find a significant effect (LBF 10.3) of whether
or not there is some cost framing on H, so that framing of
either type reduces diversification, with mean H increasing
from 0.44 in the no framing condition to 0.49 in both the cost
framing conditions. One hypothesis is that the introduction
of an additional cognitive element induces people to reduce
their diversification. This is supported by the observation that
in the no framing condition, people selected all 4 prospects on
55% and either 1 or 2 prospects on 22% of the trials. Compared to this, in the framing conditions (combined), people
selected all 4 prospects on 45% and either 1 or 2 prospects on
33% of the trials.
Testing for differences between the two cost framing conditions F1 (higher risk framing) and F2 (higher safety framing), a Bayesian repeated measures ANOVA shows evidence
that there is no effect on H (LBF -2.7), S (LBF -0.4) or R
(LBF -1.9) . Similarly, there is no effect of choice set conditions on N. This seems to indicate that people are not susceptible to differential cost framing effects and adequately account for segregated costs and translation of outcomes. However, we find that risk traits are significant moderators of susceptibility to nudges. We have two measures of risk aversion, a self-reported DF and elicited HL. When these two are
congruent, that is, people show both high (low) self-reported
and elicited risk aversion, the susceptibility to nudges is lowest, at 0.04. When these are incongruent, and people selfreport higher risk aversion but elicited preferences show riskseeking behavior, the susceptibility to nudges is higher, at
0.06, showing a higher discounting of segregated costs. Most
interestingly, when these are incongruent, and people selfreport lower risk aversion but elicited preference show higher
risk aversion, the susceptibility to nudges is in the reverse direction, at -0.11. This can be interpreted as an over-weighting
of segregated costs, leading to a nudge away from choices that
had a higher framing effect. The combination of risk congruency and self-reported risk aversion have a significant (LBF
4.7) effect on susceptibility to nudges, and represents a source
of significant heterogeneity.

One of the most popular normative theories of resource allocation is modern portfolio theory (MPT), characterized by
mean-variance optimization (Markowitz, 1952). It states that
people should select weights that optimize the balance between the expected value and standard deviation of the resulting portfolio. The optimization is a function of a risk tolerance factor Q, with lower values of Q indicating preference
for safer portfolios and high values of Q indicating preference
for riskier portfolios. Given a set of prospects, the theory proposes an efficient frontier of possible weight allocations that
result in optimization between the desired portfolio mean (V )
and variance (standard deviation D). Given an implicit objective to maximize V and minimize D, the frontier represents
portfolio choices such that no other combination of weights
can result in an increase in V without an increase in D, or a
decrease in D without a decrease in V . Note that the efficient
frontier does not depend on risk preference Q, but where the
selected portfolio lies along the efficient frontier is dependent
on the individual preference parameter Q. The set of weights
(x) on the efficient frontier for a particular value of Q can be
found by minimizing the expression : xT Σ x − Q E T x. Here
E is a vector of expected returns on the individual prospects
and Σ is the covariance matrix for the returns on the prospects.
Actual portfolios constructed by participants may not lie
on the efficient frontier. For any observed portfolio allocation
we can calculate the minimum distance of the observed portfolio characteristics from the efficient frontier, which gives
the smallest distance to optimality. This distance is dependent
on the mean and SD values of individual prospects within a
choice set. To enable comparison across choice sets and analyze the impact of factors we calculate the ratio of minimum
distance to optimality for the observed portfolio to the largest
possible minimum distance to optimality for any combination
of weights in the choice set. This is denoted as MPT-error, dε .
The risk tolerance value corresponding to the closest point on
the efficient frontier is denoted Qε , and can be inferred to be
the risk tolerance level for that choice. Note that in SOSD trials, all prospects have the same EV, and the efficient frontier
is a single point that coincides with 100% allocation to the

2745

safest prospect. Thus, SOSD trials provide a parameter free
estimate of dε , but do not allow an estimate for Qε .
Table 1 provides the mean MPT-error and risk tolerance levels by design factor levels. Conducting a Bayesian
ANOVA analysis and comparing against a null model that included participants as random effects, we find evidence for
the effect of SOSD (LBF ∞), domain (LBF ∞), and skew
(LBF 2.3) on dε . We find evidence for the effect of domain
(LBF 36.7) and cost framing (LBF 1.1) on Qε . The distance
to optimality dε measured as a percentage of the largest possible distance to optimality has a mean of (31%; 18%) for
SOSD and non-SOSD choice sets; (31%; 18%) for gains and
mixed domains; and (24%; 22%; 27%) for no skew, negative skew and positive skew choice sets. As a comparison, dε
for a 1/N portfolio would be (28%; 13%) for SOSD and nonSOSD sets, (25%; 16%) for gains and mixed domains, and
20% for all skew sets. On an average, the actual allocations
that people make are less optimal from a mean-variance optimization standpoint than what a simple 1/N heuristic would
result in. The mean dε is (22%; 26%; 25%) in the no-framing,
and 2 framing conditions. Although the differences are not
statistically significant, directionally, framing conditions lead
people further away from mean-variance optimality.
The mean inferred risk tolerance Qε is 20 in the gains
domain and 107 in the mixed domain, indicating that risk
tolerance is highly contextual, rather than a stable trait.
The mean inferred value of risk tolerance Qε is 67 in the
no-framing condition, 76 in the higher-riskier-framing condition, and 48 in the higher-safer-framing condition, reflecting
sensitivity of risk tolerance to framing effects. Measures of
risk traits (SL, HL, DF) do not have any effect on the closest
distance to optimality. Evidence is inconclusive (LBF 0.9)
for the effect of SL on Qε .

Conclusion
The key findings can be summarized as: (1) Only a very small
subset of participants follow a naive diversification or 1/N
heuristic. (2) Design factors such as domain, skew and SOSD
across options influence the allocation that people make in extreme (safest or riskiest) prospects, directionally similar to the
effect that these factors have in single choice gambles. (3) We
show that individual traits traditionally linked to risk propensity seem to manifest in terms of the degree to which people
are inclined to diversify. Lower risk aversion and higher risk
seeking traits are linked to increasing diversification. These
traits do not seem to be consistently linked to risk tolerance
when measured within the MPT framework, and do not seem
to influence the relative levels of risk and safety observed in
resource allocation behavior. The results are counter-intuitive
to the popular notion that diversification is linked to a reduction of risk. (4) We find that cost framing nudges affect the
level of diversification. While the effect of nudges seems insignificant at an overall level, a deeper analysis shows traitbased clusters. We find that risk congruency, whether peo-

ples’ elicited and self-reported risk aversion are congruent, is
a strong moderator for susceptibility to nudges. We find evidence for heterogeneous clusters where people either underweight or over-weight segregated costs leading to the same
nudge producing opposite behavioral results in the two risk
incongruent groups. (5) We find that people are not optimal
under a mean-variance optimization objective, and that on an
average, a 1/N heuristic is closer to mean-variance optimization than the actual observed behavior.

References
Bardolet, D., Fox, C. R., & Lovallo, D. (2011). Corporate capital allocation: A behavioral perspective. Strategic
Management Journal, 32.
Beattie, J., & Loomes, G. (1997). The impact of incentives
upon risky choice experiments. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 14.
Benartzi, S., & Thaler, R. H. (2001). Naive diversification
strategies in defined contribution saving plans. American
economic review.
Blais, A.-R. (2006). A domain-specific risk-taking (dospert)
scale for adult populations. Judgment and Decision Making, 1(1), 33–47.
Deck, C., & Schlesinger, H. (2010). Exploring higher order
risk effects. The Review of Economic Studies, 77.
Holt, C. A., & Laury, S. K. (2002). Risk aversion and incentive effects. American economic review, 92(5).
Huberman, G., & Jiang, W. (2006). Offering versus choice in
401 (k) plans: Equity exposure and number of funds. The
Journal of Finance, 61(2), 763–801.
JASP-Team. (2016). Jasp (version 0.8.0.0). [Computer software].
Lopes, L. L., & Oden, G. C. (1999). The role of aspiration
level in risky choice: A comparison of cumulative prospect
theory and sp/a theory. Journal of mathematical psychology, 43.
Markowitz, H. (1952). Portfolio selection. The journal of
finance, 7.
Rhoades, S. A. (1993). The herfindahl-hirschman index. Fed.
Res. Bull., 79, 188.
Rotter, J. B. (1966). Generalized expectancies for internal
versus external control of reinforcement. Psychological
monographs: General and applied, 80.
Symmonds, M., Wright, N. D., Bach, D. R., & Dolan, R. J.
(2011). Deconstructing risk: separable encoding of variance and skewness in the brain. Neuroimage, 58.

2746

