Analogical Abstraction in Three-Month-Olds
Erin M. Anderson (erinanderson2014@u.northwestern.edu)
Yin-Juei Chang (alixyj@gmail.com)
Susan J. Hespos (hespos@northwestern.edu)
Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Rd.
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Abstract
This research tests whether analogical processing ability is
present in 3-month-old infants. Infants are habituated to a series
of analogous pairs, instantiating either same (e.g., AA, BB,
etc.) or different (e.g., AB, CD, etc.), and then tested with
further exemplars of the relations. If they can distinguish the
familiar relation from the novel relation, even with new
objects, this is evidence that for analogical abstraction across
the study pairs. In Experiment 1, we did not find evidence of
analogical abstraction when 3-month-olds were habituated to
six pairs instantiating the relation. However, in Experiment 2,
infants showed evidence of analogical abstraction after
habituation to two alternating pairs (e.g., AA, BB, AA, BB…).
Further, as with older groups, rendering individual objects
salient disrupted relational learning. These results demonstrate
that 3-month-old infants are capable of analogical comparison
and abstraction. Our findings also place limits on the conditions
under which these processes are likely to occur. We discuss
implications for theories of relational learning.
Keywords: cognitive development, relational processing,
infants

Introduction
Analogical ability – the ability to make relational
comparisons between objects, events, or ideas, and to see
common relational pattern across different sets of objects – is
a cornerstone of higher reasoning abilities. Learning by
analogy is a powerful way of acquiring and transferring new
information. Equally important, analogical comparison
facilitates the formation of abstract categories and rules
(Doumas & Hummel, 2013; Gentner & Medina, 1998; Gick
& Holyoak, 1983). Indeed, recent theoretical perspectives
have asserted that analogical ability is the key capacity
supporting higher-order cognition and differentiating human
cognitive capacity from that of other primates (Gentner,
2003; 2010; Penn, Holyoak, & Povinelli, 2008).
The relational abilities of adult humans are astounding. But
there are many contributors to the sophistication of adult
cognition. Adults have had the benefit of cultural
transmission of knowledge – skills, cultural technologies of

various sorts, and symbol systems such as language and
mathematics. In addition, adults have broad domain
knowledge—another contributor to understanding relations
(Gentner, 1988). It is therefore impossible to disentangle the
roots/sources of our cognitive power by studying adults. To
gain understanding of the nature and origin of our
extraordinary relational ability, we must investigate infants
who have not yet acquired these resources.
Although little is known about the very early development
of human analogical ability, there has been considerable
research on the development of analogical ability from
preschool to adulthood. Analogical processing shows a
relational shift (Gentner, 1988; Gentner & Toupin, 1986;
Halford, 1992; Richland, Morrison, & Holyoak, 2006) with
young children focusing on object matches and older children
focusing relational matches and capable of using relational
similarity in problem-solving (Chen, 1996). This shift has
been attributed to increases in relational knowledge (Gentner
& Rattermann, 1991), to maturational increases in processing
capacity (Halford, 1992) and to increases in executive ability,
including inhibitory control (Doumas, Hummel, &
Sandhofer, 2008; Richland et al., 2006; Thibaut, French, &
Vezneva, 2010), and it is possible that all three play a role.
This work has also revealed characteristic patterns of
relational learning, including factors that support or hinder it.
One signature component of relational learning is that the
ability to perceive abstract relational matches can be
enhanced by comparing different instances of a relation. For
example, Gick and Holyoak (1983) found that comparing two
stories that had the same causal structure enabled people to
transfer that structure to a further situation. Preschool
children have shown similar benefits from comparison (e.g.,
Christie & Gentner, 2010; Honomichi & Chen, 2006). These
findings are consistent with other research suggesting that the
act of comparison entails a structural alignment process that
highlights the relational commonalities between the
compared items (Markman & Gentner, 1993). The influence
of structural alignment is a defining characteristic of
analogical reasoning in adults (Doumas & Hummel, 2013;
Gentner, Holyoak, & Kokinov, 2001), and the evidence of its
influence in children as young as 3 years of age suggests that
there may be continuity in the signature components of

1544

relational learning through human development.
A second signature component of relational learning is that
attention to individual objects can interfere with relational
processing. Preschool children perform far worse on
relational matching tasks when competing object matches are
present (Gentner & Toupin, 1986; Richland et al., 2006),
especially if the objects involved are rich and distinctive
(Gentner & Rattermann, 1991; Paik & Mix, 2006). The
finding that attention to objects can overshadow attention to
relations extends to very young age groups (Casasola, 2005;
Maguire, Hirsh-Pasek, Golinkoff, & Brandone, 2008).
The following experiments aim to trace the development of
relational learning processes in infants. We focused on the
same-different relation because it is among the simplest and
most basic relations in the human repertoire. Additionally,
Ferry, Hespos, & Gentner (2015) found that 7- and 9-month
infants can learn same-different relations from four
exemplars of same or different toy pairs (e.g., AA, BB, CC,
DD or AB, CD, BC, DA). The key finding was that infants
discriminated between the relation they had experienced and
the novel relation, even when both were instantiated with new
objects. Further, infants failed to discriminate between the
learned relations when the test pairs contained objects that
have been rendered individually salient prior to habituation.
This was consistent with the findings among older children,
for whom object salience interferes with analogical
comparison (Gentner & Toupin, 1986; Richland et al., 2006).
These findings suggest that by 7 months, infants show the
basic characteristics of analogical learning. In the present
research, we took this investigation to even younger infants.

Experiment 1
To fully understand the ontogenetic development of
relational processes, we need to test for relational abstraction
at the earliest age possible. This will this provide evidence as
to when in development relational processing becomes
possible. Further, it will serve as a base for capturing
developmental changes in the learning process across age
groups.
The key dependent measure in this study is whether infants
can differentiate the familiar relation (e.g., same if habituated
to same) from the unfamiliar one (different) when they see
test pairs composed of new objects. The specific predictions
are that if infants are learning via structural alignment, then
(a) relational encoding and abstraction should benefit from
comparing a series of exemplars and (b) relational encoding
should be hampered for pairs that contain a highly salient
object (based on findings that object focus interferes with
relational encoding (Gentner & Toupin, 1986; Richland et al.,
2006)).

Participants. The participants were 31 healthy, full-term 3month-old infants (17 male and 14 female) with an average
age of 3 months, 2 days. Sixteen infants were assigned to the
same condition and 15 to the different condition. Seventeen
additional infants were tested but eliminated from the final
analysis for fussiness (defined as fussy or crying on 4 or more
test trials by two independent coders), breaks longer than 8
minutes, or because they looked the maximum amount of
time on 7 out of 8 test trials, making their data
uninterpretable.
Materials and Procedure. Coding and analysis procedure
was closely modeled on Ferry et al. (2015). In Experiment 1,
infants received training on either same or different relations.
During test trials, infants saw pairs of objects instantiating the
same and different relations (See Figure 1). The key question
was whether infants would differentiate the familiar relation
from the novel relation at test. Each infant saw four types of
test trials, composing a 2x2 within-subject design. The first
type consisted of entirely new objects (New). These trials
tested the main prediction: whether infants had abstracted the
relation across the habituation pairs and applied this relation
to new instances. The second test type consisted of objects
that had been rendered individually salient in the waiting
room prior to habituation, but not shown in habituation trials
(Object Experience only). These trials investigated whether
object salience would disrupt relational processing. The third
type was made up of objects that had been rendered
individually salient in the waiting room and had subsequently
appeared as part of pairs during the habituation trials (Object
Experience + Pair Habituation). These trials tested whether
repeated alignment across pairs would overcome initial
object salience. The fourth test trial type was made of objects
that were not seen in the waiting room, but were viewed in
pairs during habituation trials (Pair Habituation only). These
trials provided a check on whether infants recognized
identical pairs. If infants failed to discriminate between a pair
that they had seen in habituation and a novel pair, this would
suggest failure to learn the exemplars even at a concrete level.
A small camera captured video of the infant’s face while
they watched an experimenter raise, lower and tilt a pair of
objects in tandem on the stage. Two research assistants in a
separate room viewed the image, each pressing a button when
the infant attended to events on stage and releasing the button
when the infant looked away. A software program recorded
the looking times. Each trial ended when the software
signaled that the infant had looked away from the stage for
more than two consecutive seconds. If coder agreement was
less than 90%, recordings of the trials were re-coded by two
new coders.

Methods

1545

diamonds represent the mean. The horizontal line inside the
rectangle represents the median. The area above and below
the median represents the 1st and 3rd quartiles respectively.

Results
The results depicted in Figure 3 show no evidence of
generalization to new pairs: infants did not distinguish novel
from familiar relations on the test pairs with new objects. An

Figure 1. Schematic of events in Experiment 1. A) In the
waiting room before the experiment, infants were shown a
subset of individual objects used in the experiment. (B)
During habituation trials, infants were either shown pairs of
same objects or pairs of different objects. (C) during test
trials, infants saw pair of objects presented sequentially.
There were four types of test trials that systematically varied
the infants' object experience with the objects to measure the
influence on performance. To give a sense of the variation
across the stimuli, three sets of same and different pairs are
shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2 Examples of the same and different pairs.
Pair habituation trials. When the screen was raised at the
start of every trial, a pair of objects rested on the cardboard
tray on the stage. To engage infants’ attention, in both
habituation and test trials, the experimenter grasped one
object in each hand and raised the objects, tilted them to the
left and right, then paused on the tray. This 8-s cycle repeated
continuously until the trial ended.
Test trials. Infants viewed eight test trials. In each test trial,
infants viewed one pair of objects, presented in the same
motion pattern as in the habituation trials, while their looking
time was recorded. Each infant received test trials with both
same and different pairs of objects, presented in alternation,
with order counterbalanced across infants.
Figure 3. Test trial looking times for Experiment 1.
Looking durations to novel and familiar pairs for each test
type were collapsed across same and different conditions. The

ANOVA testing the between-subject factor of habituation
condition (same or different), and the within-subject factor of
relation (novel or familiar) failed to show a significant effect
of relation across all test trials, F(1,30) = .967, p = .333.
Critically, there was no evidence that either group—same
or different—had abstracted the relation, because they
showed no difference in looking time between novel and
familiar relations when the relations were composed of new
objects, t (30) < 1, p = .628. This pattern suggests that infants
recognized pairs they had seen previously, but did not
generalize the relation.

Discussion
Given infants' failure to generalize the relation to the novel
objects in Experiment 1, there are at least three possible
interpretations. First, three months-old infants may not yet be
able to engage in analogical learning. Second, they may not
be able to form abstract relations like same and different.
However, a third possibility is that these young infants do
already possess the relational learning processes, but that the
training set used in Experiment 1 (i.e., six unique pairs of
exemplars) was not adequate. For example, the range of
exemplars given in habituation may have been too limited.
Perhaps these very young infants need more variation and
more exemplars to abstract the relation. This would be
consistent with the standard assumption in learning theories
that high variability in training enhances transfer, and with
evidence that generalization improves when the number and

1546

range of examples increases (e.g. Gerken, 2006; Quinn &
Bhatt, 2005; Xu & Tenenbaum, 2007). The six exemplars we
showed in Experiment 1, though, is already a larger training
set than the four exemplars 7 – and 9-month-olds saw in
Ferry, et al. (2015). This larger set did not appear to benefit
the 3-month-olds.
A second route—the one we pursued—is to show infants
fewer pairs during habituation. Although this choice may
seem counterintuitive, there is evidence that in early learning,
fewer exemplars of a relation can lead to better learning of
the relation. For example, Casasola (2005a) found that infants
were better able to learn and generalize the spatial category
of support when they were given two alternating exemplars
of the relation than when they were given six exemplars of
the relation (see also Maguire, et al., 2008). This pattern can
be understood in terms of the general finding that relational
alignment can be impeded by attention to objects (Gentner &
Medina, 1998; Gentner & Toupin, 1986; Paik & Mix,
2006)—particularly when the objects are rich and distinctive
(Casasola & Park, 2013).

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we presented infants with only two pairs
during habituation--–either two same pairs (alternating
between AA and BB) or two different pairs (AB and CD).
The idea is that alternating between just two pairs could allow
that infants to become familiar enough with the objects to be
able to attend to the relation between them. As in our previous
studies, prior to habituation we showed the infants some of
the objects (singly, not in pairs) in order to render those
objects individually salient. This serves as a test of whether
object salience disrupts relational learning in 3-month-olds.
Thus, this study tests whether 3-month-old infants can
abstract the same-different relation and generalize it to new
test pairs and whether their ability to do so will be impeded
for pairs containing high-salient objects (see Figure 4).

Methods
Participants. The participants were 32 healthy, full-term, 3month-old infants (19 male and 13 female) average age 3
months and 16 days, ranging from 2 months 10 days to 4
months 15 days. Half of the infants were assigned to the same
condition; the other half, to the different condition. Ten
additional infants were tested but eliminated from the final
analyses (using the same criteria as Experiment 1).
Procedure. As in Experiment 1, there were three types of test
trials, varied according to infants' experience with the objects.
Because fewer objects were used in habituation, we reduced
the number of test trial types from four to three, dropping the
Pair Habituation only trials (see Figure 4). The remaining
test trial types were as in Experiment 1.

Figure 4. Schematic of events in Experiment 1. A) In the
waiting room before the experiment, infants were shown a
subset of individual objects used. (B) During habituation
trials, infants were shown either alternating pairs of either
same or different objects. (C) During test trials, infants saw
six pairs of objects, presented sequentially.

Results
The results (Figure 5) fit the predictions of an analogical
learning account. First, infants looked significantly longer at
the novel relation than at the familiar relation during test.
Critically, this novelty preference held for test pairs
containing new objects, demonstrating that the infants had
abstracted the relation and could apply it to objects they had
not seen before, t(29) = 3.616, p < .001. Second, as predicted,
prior experience with individual objects interfered with
noticing the relation: there was no significant difference in
looking time between the novel and familiar relations for
pairs containing objects seen in the waiting room. This was
true whether these salient objects appeared only in test or in
pair habituation as well as test.

Figure 5. Test trial looking times for Experiment 2.
Looking durations to novel and familiar pairs for each test

1547

type collapsed across same and different conditions. The
diamonds represent the mean. The horizontal line inside the
rectangle represents the median. The area above and below
the median represents the 1st and 3rd quartiles respectively.
The * indicates p <.01.

Discussion
The findings in Experiment 2 are evidence for early
relational learning. Critically, infants were able to distinguish
the familiar relation from the novel relation even on pairs
composed of new objects—the gold standard for testing
whether infants abstracted the same and different relations.
Consistent with other findings on analogical learning, infants
performed significantly worse on test trials containing
objects that had been seen prior to habituation. These findings
show that the key signatures of analogical learning are
already present by 3 months of age.
At the same time, the knowledge of the specific relations
same and different in 3-month-olds appears to be learned:
Experiments 1 & 2 show strong limits to the situations in
which they could generalize these relations. Infants
performed best with fewer exemplars. Even then, the infants
did not discriminate between novel and familiar relations
when they saw pairs that contained salient objects. Unlike
with 7-month-olds in Ferry et al. (2015), 3-month-olds failed
to overcome their object focus even after seeing the waiting
room objects in pairs during habituation.

General Discussion
There are two key findings. First, the results show that
analogical learning processes are present in 3-month old
infants. In Experiment 2, the infants showed two key
signatures of analogical learning: (a) the ability to abstract a
common relation across a sequence of pairs and (b) the
detrimental effects of individual object salience. These
findings suggest that the ability to abstract relations is an
innate mechanism in human infants. If so, then analogical
processing would join association and other domain-general
processes as part of the core cognitive apparatus of humans.
The second key finding is that these young infants showed
more learning when given just two pairs during habituation
than when given six distinct pairs.
This pattern runs counter to the general finding that
increasing the variability within a set of training stimuli
increases learners’ level of abstraction and therefore the
range of transfer (Gerken, 2006; Gómez, 2002; Quinn &
Bhatt, 2005).
However, there is precedent for this kind of “less is more”
finding (Casasola, 2005; Casasola & Park, 2013; Maguire et
al., 2008). What these studies have in common is that the
objects participating in the relations are of high salience.
Under these conditions, a participant given a series of
different exemplars may attend only to the novel objects in
each pair, and fail to attend to the relations. In this case,

reducing the range of instances so that a small set of
exemplars is seen repeatedly may lead to better relational
learning. As Casasola and Park (2013) note, although
increasing the range of exemplars can help learners to isolate
the relevant structures, “… the need for fewer exemplars
arises when the relevant features, such as a spatial relation,
risk becoming obscured by […] the objects depicting that
relation.”
The finding then raises the question of when this pattern
holds. As discussed earlier, many developmental studies have
found better learning with more exemplars than with fewer
(e.g., Bulf & Johnson, 2011; Casasola & Park 2013; Gerken
2006). Further, in our previous studies we found that 7- and
9-month-olds successfully abstracted same and different
relations when given four repeated exemplars (Ferry et al.,
2015). Clearly, a goal for future research will be to
understand the range of exemplar variability that best
supports early relational learning across development.
Implications for learning theories. As noted above, a
surprising finding is that in order for 3-month-old infants to
learn the relations, they needed comparison across two
repeating pairs rather than comparison across a greater
variety of pairs. How do we square this finding with the many
findings that greater variability during training leads to
greater abstraction and transfer? We think that the key is that
the current studies focus on relational learning. When the
desired abstraction is at the level of overall exemplar
similarity (e.g., learning a basic-level category such as dog,
or learning a distribution of line lengths), then increasing the
range of exemplars in learning should increase the level of
generalization. However, if the desired generalization is a
relational pattern, then it is crucial that the learner be able to
compare and align the exemplars (Christie & Gentner, 2010).
In this case, whether the learner can align the exemplars may
matter more than the amount of information potentially
available. This leads us to suggest an amended learning
principle: in relational learning, breadth of alignable training
predicts breadth of transfer.
Summary. Together, the evidence from our experiments
points neither to core knowledge of same or different nor to a
process that arises entirely from experience, but to structural
alignment as an early learning mechanism that becomes
elaborated over development and with increases in language
and domain knowledge.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by NSF Grant BCS-1423917
to Susan J. Hespos, NSF SLC Grant SBE-0541957 awarded
to the Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center (SILC), and
by ONR Grant N00014-92-J-1098 to Dedre Gentner. We are
indebted to parents whose infants participated in the research.
We thank members of the Infant Cognition Lab for help with
data collection, and Ruxue Shao, Christian de Hoyos and
Christine Schlaug for their insightful comments.

1548

References
Bulf, H., Johnson, S. P., & Valenza, E. (2011). Visual
statistical learning in the newborn infant. Cognition,
121(1), 127-132.
Casasola, M. (2005). When Less Is More: How Infants
Learn to Form an Abstract Categorical
Representation of Support. Child Development,
76(1), 279-290.
Casasola, M., & Park, Y. (2013). Developmental changes in
infant spatial categorization: When more is better
and less is enough. Child Development, 84, 10041019.
Chen, Z. (1996). Children's Analogical Problem Solving:
The Effects of Superficial, Structural, and
Procedural Similarity. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 62(3), 410-431.
Christie, S., & Gentner, D. (2010). Where hypotheses come
from: Learning new relations by structural
alignment. Journal of Cognition and Development,
11(3), 356-373.
Doumas, L. A. A. & Hummel, J. E. (2013). Comparison and
mapping facilitate relation discovery and
predication. PLOS One, 8 (6), e63889.
Doumas, L. A. A. & Hummel, J. E., & Sandhofer C.M.
(2008). A theory of the discovery and predication
of relational concepts. Psychological Review, 115,
1–43.
Ferry, A., Hespos, S. J., & Gentner, D. (2015). Prelinguistic
Relational Concepts: Investigating Analogical
Processing in Infants. Child Development, 96(5),
1386–1405.
Gentner, D. (1988). Metaphor as structure mapping: The
relational shift. Child Development, 59, 47–59.
Gentner, D. (2003). Why we're so smart. Language in mind:
Advances in the study of language and thought. In
D. Gentner & S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language
in mind: Advances in the study of language and
thought (pp. 195-235). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Gentner, D. (2010). Bootstrapping the mind: Analogical
processes and symbol systems. Cognitive Science,
34(5), 752-775.
Gentner, D., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Reasoning and
learning by analogy: Introduction. American
Psychologist, 52, 32-34.
Gentner, D., & Medina, J. (1998). Similarity and the
development of rules. Cognition, 65, 263-297.
Gentner, D., & Rattermann, M. (1991). Language and the
career of similarity. In S. A. Gelman & J. P. Byrnes
(Eds.), Perspectives on language and thought:
Interrelations in development (pp. 225-277).
London: Cambridge University Press.

Gentner, D., & Toupin, C. (1986). Systematicity and surface
similarity in the development of analogy. Cognitive
Science, 10, 277-300.
Gerken LA. (2006). Decisions, decisions: Infant language
learning when multiple generalizations are
possible. Cognition, 98, B67–B74.
Honomichi, R. D, & Chen, Z. (2006) Learning to align
relations: The effects of feedback and selfexplanation. Journal of Cognition and
Development, 7(4), 527–550.
Halford, G. (1992). Analogical reasoning and conceptual
complexity in cognitive development. Human
Development, 35, 193–217.
Maguire, M. J., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R. M., &
Brandone, A. C. (2008). Focusing on the relation:
Fewer exemplars facilitate children's initial verb
learning and extension. Developmental Science,
11(4), 628-634.
Paik, J.H. & Mix, K.S. (2006). Preschooler’s Use of Surface
Similarity in Object Comparisons: Taking Context
into Account. JECP, 95(3), 194-214.
Penn, D. C., Holyoak, K. J., & Povinelli, D. J. (2008).
Darwin's mistake: Explaining the discontinuity
between human and nonhuman minds. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 31(2), 109-130.
Quinn, P. C., & Bhatt, R. S. (2005). Learning perceptual
organization in infancy. Psychological Science, 16,
515-519.
Richland, L. E., Morrison, R. G., & Holyoak, K. J.
(2006). Children's development of analogical
reasoning: Insights from scene analogy
problems. JECP, 94, 249-271.
Thibaut, J.-P., French, R. M., & Vezneva, M. (2010). The
development of analogy making in children:
Cognitive load and executive functions.
JECP, 106(1), 1-19.
Xu, F. and Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). Sensitivity to sampling
in Bayesian word learning. Developmental Science
10(3), 288-297.

1549

