Attractor Dynamics in Delay Discounting: A Call for Complexity
Martin Schoemann (martin.schoemann@tu-dresden.de)
Department of Psychology, Technische Universität Dresden,
01062 Dresden, Germany

Stefan Scherbaum (stefan.scherbaum@tu-dresden.de)
Department of Psychology, Technische Universität Dresden,
01062 Dresden, Germany

process, though, is necessary in order to fully understand the
way decisions are made. To fill this gap, recent
developments aim to uncover the process dynamics leading
to a final decision in delay discounting (Dai & Busemeyer,
2014; Rodriguez, Turner, & McClure, 2014; Scherbaum et
al., 2016). Specifically, the attractor model approach
(Figure 1) has recently been proved useful to uncover the
process dynamics leading to a final choice outcome on
different time scales, that is within and across sequential
intertemporal choices (Scherbaum et al., 2016).
In this study, we will use the attractor model and the
experimental paradigm as proposed by Scherbaum et al.
(2016) to derive and validate qualitative predictions on the
inter-trial dynamics of sequences of intertemporal decisions.
More detailed, the attractor model of decision making in

Abstract
The outcomes of intertemporal choices indicate that people
discount rewards by their delay. These outcomes are well
described by discounting functions. However, to fully
understand the decision process one needs models describing
how the process of decision-making unfolds dynamically over
time. Here, we validate a recently published attractor model
that extends discounting functions through a description of
the dynamics leading to a final choice outcome within and
across trials. We focus on the decision dynamics across trials.
We derive qualitative predictions for the inter-trial dynamics
of sequences of decisions that are unique to this type of
model. We test these predictions in a delay discounting game
where we sequentially manipulated subjective values of
options across all attribute dimensions. Results confirm the
model’s predictions. We discuss future challenges on
integrating attractor models towards a general attractor model
of delay discounting to enhance our understanding of the
processes underlying delay discounting decisions.
Keywords: decision making; delay discounting; process
dynamics, attractor dynamics; hysteresis; neural attractor
model

Introduction
Many everyday choices involve options that pose a conflict
between immediate, but small gains, and delayed, but larger
or more beneficial gains. This conflict occurs on many time
scales. For example, you might wonder whether to enjoy
spending your money now or saving it for a pension. Or you
might be tempted to take the tasty pizza – which is
immediately very tasty – instead of the light salad – which
might be better for your cardiovascular system in the longterm. In such intertemporal choices (for a review, see
Frederick, Loewenstein, & O’Donoghue, 2002), humans
discount the offered gain by the delay of delivery. This
delay discounting is well described by utility discounting
models which assume that the greater the delay in delivery
of a reward, the more the utility of a reward is discounted.
Hence, these discounting models represent the subjective
value of a reward as a function of its delay (see Doyle, 2013
for an overview). While these mathematical models offer a
good description of the average outcome of the decision
process – the final choice – they mostly leave open how the
exact decision process unfolds in time. Decoding this

Figure 1: Sketch of possible attractor layouts given different
values of the control parameter c. This parameter depends
on the relative difference in subjective value (attractiveness)
of the options for a subject and hence configures the system
for each potential combination of SS and LL: An increase in
attractiveness for the LL option results in a negative control
parameter which, in turn, increases the depth of the attractor
representing the LL option (left panel). In contrast, an
increase in attractiveness for the SS option results in a
positive control parameter which, in turn, increases the
depth for the attractor representing the SS option (right
panel). Inherently, the control parameter c is primarily
dependent on the values and delays of the presented
options, but also on a subject’s tendency to discount. Within
this potential landscape, the current system state (marked by
a red dot) tends to move to the bottom of the potential wells
and travels through all intermediate states on its way to a
stable final choice.

1041

Figure 2: Inter-trial dynamics in the attractor model.
Choosing the LL option in a first trial leads to a bias in a
second trial due to slow relaxation (e.g. inertia) of the system
state during the inter trial interval (ITI, in this study 1.3
seconds).
delay discounting assumes that the depth of the attractors
and hence the stability of its end-states is determined by a
combination of each option’s reward value and delay. By
varying either both or one of those properties, the depth of
the attractors can be manipulated. To that end, the depth of
the attractors represents the relative attractiveness of each
option, and that is, the respective subjective (discounted)
value, within the attractor model (Figure 1). Hence, the
difference in relative attractiveness between the two options
determines the systems preference towards either option and
is summarized by the control parameter, which we will call
c. Figure 1 depicts three kinds of possible attractor layouts
given three prototypical specifications of c. The attractors
itself picture stable neural representations of the available
options. So, the left and right panel of Figure 1 reflect
almost exclusive activation of one option’s representation,
and hence illustrate configurations of the system with a
preference towards one option (c ≠ 0). Accordingly, the
special case where c = 0 (Figure 1 middle panel) reflects
varying amounts of concurrent activation in which the
system has not settled into a decision yet, and hence
represents a decision in which both options receive an
identical input and are thus equally attractive. In this special
case scenario, a neutral starting state would keep the system
indifferent until slight differences in input (or random noise)
tips the system to one side or the other, resulting in a more
or less arbitrary decision which was not driven by the
systems preference. A major advantage of attractor models
is that the decision is not only determined by the current
attractor layout, which is in turn determined by the currently
offered options, but also through the history of the system’s
previous decisions (Scherbaum, Dshemuchadse, & Kalis,
2008; Townsend & Busemeyer, 1989). This is due to the
genuine assumption that the attractors are formed by the
offered options and, hence, these attractors are not present
between trials. The inertia of neural systems causes the
system to temporally recline in the area where it ended up
previously—in the vicinity of the vanished attractor
representing the recent choice—and to relax only slowly to
the neutral start state under no input. For example, if the

model chose one option in a first decision trial, it would
remain in the vicinity of this option’s attractor in the inter
trial interval. In a second decision trial, it would hence start
the decision with a bias to the previously chosen option,
even if this trial comprises the other option being more
attractive (see Figure 2).
Scherbaum et al. (2016) used this premise to predict and
validate hysteresis effects (Tuller, Case, Ding, & Kelso,
1994), which are also known as path-dependence, in
intertemporal choice. Hysteresis or path-dependence occur,
when the decision for one option biases the next decision in
favor of the same option (see Figure 2). Hence, in a series of
choices in which the initially unchosen option becomes
increasingly more attractive (i.e. sequential manipulation of
the difference in the relative attractiveness), people stick to
the initially chosen option and switch to the now more
attractive option much later than they would if their choices
were unbiased. However, the sequential manipulation of the
difference in the relative attractiveness was merely
operationalized by variation of the delay, though the
attractor model predicts the same hysteresis effects when the
manipulation is realized through a variation of the reward
value or even a combination of delay and value. We hence
hypothesized that the emergence of hysteresis effects is
independent from the attribute dimension which is used to
sequentially manipulate the difference in the relative
attractiveness between both options (intervals, value
difference, or both together).
To provide an insight into hysteresis effects in delay
discounting, we applied the same non-verbal delay
discounting task as used in the original study. This task
redresses the problem that in standard intertemporal choice
tasks the sequential manipulation of reward values or delays
is simply too obvious (Scherbaum et al., 2016; Scherbaum,
Dshemuchadse, Leiberg, & Goschke, 2013). In this task,
subjects collect coins of different reward values with an
avatar which they move on a checkered playing field by
clicking with the computer mouse (Figure 3). The playing
field stays constant across trials—except the options which
change from trial to trial—and the avatar started each trial
from the position of the previously chosen option. The goal
is to collect as much reward as possible in the allotted
amount of time. In each trial of the task, subjects have to
choose between two reward options of different magnitude
(small vs. large) at different distances (near vs. far fields).
Therefore, this task translates delays into distances, which
allows for a more implicit sequential manipulation of the
relative attractiveness of options.
To implement the sequential manipulation of different
attributes, we used this task in a modified, two-step
procedure: In the first part, we measured the individual
amount of discounting (the measurement block). Based on
this amount of discounting, we created individually tailored
sequences of decision to study hysteresis in the following
part (the manipulation block). We expected the hysteresis
effect to be present in all variants of sequential
manipulations.

1042

Methods
Subjects
43 students (65% female, mean age = 22.98 years) of the
Technische Universität Dresden took part in the experiment
that lasted approximately 50 minutes. All subjects had
normal or corrected to normal vision. Three out of 43
subjects were excluded from any subsequent analysis due to
individual discounting behavior in the measurement block
not allowing for a sufficient hysteresis manipulation in the
manipulation block. Subjects gave informed consent to the
study and received a 2.50 € show-up fee and the money they
collected within the experiment (Mean = 3.17, SD = 0.39).

Apparatus and Stimuli
The experiment was presented on a 17-inch screen (1280 x
1024 pixels, 85 Hz). As presentation software, we used
Psychophysics Toolbox 3 (Brainard, 1997; Pelli, 1997) in
Matlab 2010b (the Mathworks Inc.), running on a Windows
XP SP2 personal computer. Responses were carried out by
moving a high precision computer mouse (Logitech Laser
Mouse USB).
Subjects moved an avatar on a playing field divided into
20 x 20 fields (Figure 3). To move the avatar, subjects
clicked with the mouse in one of four horizontally or
vertically adjacent movement fields, as signaled by a white
border surrounding the fields. On each trial two reward
options were presented as coins on fields marked with a red
border: One reward was near but small, the other reward
was far but large. The two options’ positions were always
chosen so that the first move into one direction decreased
the distance to one option but increased the distance to the
other option. This way, the first move of the avatar already
represented a clear preliminary decision for one option and
against the other option.
For both options, a number posed within each coin
represented the reward value and the horizontal and vertical
distance of the reward field to the field of the avatar
represented the distance of the option. Reward values
ranged from 1 to 99 credits and distances ranged from two
to fifteen fields. For better comprehensiveness in the context
of intertemporal choice, we maintain in the following the
standard description of the time dimension using “soon”,

Figure 3: Detail of the dynamic delay discounting
paradigm.

“late”, “delay”, and “interval”, although in our scenario time
delay is represented by spatial distance. The relation
between the two reward values can be characterized as the
ratio of the higher and smaller reward value and will be
denoted by “difference”.
Above the avatar (Figure 3) subjects could see the
remaining time within one block, as well as below the
collected credits in Euro (1 credit = 1/10 € cent), but only in
the very moment when either reward was collected.

Procedure
Subjects’ task was to collect as much reward as possible
within the allotted time limit. In each trial, they had to
choose between two reward options (one soon but small, SS,
one late but large, LL; see design). They collected the
selected reward by moving their avatar with the mouse
across the playing field.
A trial started with an inter trial interval (ITI) of 1.3
seconds. Within this interval, the mouse cursor was locked
in the center of the field containing the avatar. After the ITI,
the two options were presented. As soon as the two options
appeared, participants could click on the adjacent movement
fields to move their avatar towards the chosen option
(Figure 3). When the avatar reached one option, both
options disappeared, the value of the selected option was
added on the collected credits, and the next trial started.
The experiment consisted of four blocks, with one block
lasting eight minutes. Between blocks, subjects were
informed about the credits collected and were instructed to
rest briefly before the self-paced start of the next block.
Before the start of the experimental blocks, subjects
worked through a test block of two minutes to get used to
the virtual environment, handling of the mouse, as well as
the range of spatial distances and reward values.

Design
The experiment consisted of four blocks with the first block
(measurement block) being conceptually different from the
three subsequent blocks as its aim was to measure the
subjects’ individual discounting behavior. In each of the
three subsequent blocks (manipulation blocks) we realized a
unique adaptive hysteresis manipulation constituting an
interval block, a value block, and a combined block. Each
subject’s session started with the measurement block
followed by the manipulation blocks. The sequential
arrangement of the manipulation blocks was fully varied
and balanced between subjects.
In the measurement block, reward values ranged from 11
to 99 and distances from three to 15. That was given by
orthogonally varying the intervals (1, 4, 8, and 12 fields),
the differences (20, 50, 70, 80, 88, 93, 97, and 99%), and the
delay of the sooner option (2 and 3 fields). Additionally, the
reward values of the late option were randomly chosen from
a discrete uniform distribution between 55 and 99 credits.
The combination of 8 differences, 2 distances of the SS
options and 4 intervals between the SS and the LL option
yielded a complete set of 64 trials. We generated 5 such

1043

sets, with a randomized order of trials within each set. The
measurement block’s time limit ensured that subjects could
work through the complete design matrix, that is one of
those 5 sets, at least one time.
To realize the adaptive hysteresis manipulation, we
calculated the subjects’ individual discounting curve from
which we adaptively derived trials compatible to the
respective hysteresis manipulation (see Results). The
structure of an adaptive hysteresis manipulation is to
sequentially change subjects’ preference from the SS
towards the LL option, or vice versa. In our adaptive trial
sequences, we aimed to change subjects’ preference in 12
steps as indicated by the differences between the subjective
value ratio (SS/LL) in the trials and the indifference points
(-0.3000, -0.2455, -0.1909, -0.1364, -0.0818, -0.0273,
0.0273, 0.0818, 0.1364, 0.1909, 0.2455, 0.3000), that is the
manipulation points.1 It is imperative that a negative
manipulation point indicates a preference for the LL option
and a positive manipulation point a preference for the SS
option. Furthermore, it applies that the higher the absolute
manipulation point, the more distinct are the relative
attractiveness of both options. Hence, a manipulation point
of zero represents no preference, that is the indifference
point. Please note that the interpretation of the manipulation
point is analog to the interpretation of the control parameter.
We then applied this manipulation in three different subblocks. First, in the interval block we consecutively
increased or decreased the delay of the LL option to the
avatar while keeping all other factors constant within the
sequence. For each sequence the delay of the sooner option
and the reward value of the late option were randomly
chosen from discrete uniform distributions between 2 and 3
fields, and 55 and 99 credits, respectively. The reward value
of the sooner option was randomly drawn from the uniform
distribution between subjects’ two indifference points at the
intervals 6 and 7. Furthermore, we varied the direction of
these sequences (direction = ascending or descending) and
created eight sequences for each direction. This resulted in
16 possible sequences, and hence 192 trials.
Second, in the value block we consecutively increased or
decreased the reward value of SS option while keeping all
other factors constant within the sequence. Again, for each
sequence, the delay of the sooner option and the reward
value of the late option were randomly chosen. The delay of
the LL option to the avatar was drawn randomly between all
intervals at which subjects’ indifference point was
positioned in such a way that all 12 manipulation points
were valid, that is, did not exceed 1 or fall below a value of
0. For each trial within the sequence, the reward values of
the SS option were then calculated. Again, we also varied
the direction of these sequences and created eight sequences

For instance, a subject’s indifference point at interval 1 is 0.8
(see Figure 4). Given a manipulation point of -0.3, the respective
manipulated trial must yield a subjective value ratio (SS/LL) of 0.5
at an interval of 1. The same logic applies over all manipulation
points and intervals.
1

Figure 4: Subjects’ indifference points in the measurement
block, depicting the decrease in subjective value of the latelarge option as a function of intervals between the two
options. Indifference points are the subjective value ratio
(SS/LL) at which subjects chose indifferently between the
two options, i.e., the probability of choosing LL over SS is
50%. Note: Error bars indicate standard errors. The curve
displays the fitted hyperbolic functions.
for each direction. This resulted in 16 possible sequences,
and hence 192 trials.
Third, in the combined block we consolidated the former
manipulations and varied both the delay of the LL option to
the avatar and the reward value of the SS option in such a
way that the manipulation points consecutively increased or
decreased within the sequence. Again, for each sequence the
delay of the sooner option and the reward value of the late
option were randomly chosen. For each trial within the
sequence, the delay of the LL option was randomly chosen
from the set of intervals in which the respective
manipulation point was valid. The reward values of the SS
option were then calculated. Again, we also varied the
direction of these sequences and created eight sequences for
each direction. This resulted in 16 possible sequences, and
hence 192 trials.
In sum, we applied a 2 (direction: ascending, descending)
x 3 (manipulation type: interval, value, combined) full
factorial within-subjects design.

Results
On average, subjects completed 134 trials (SD = 23) in the
measurement block. Hence, subjects ran through at least two
out of five sets of 64 trials. The aim of the measurement
block was to measure subjects’ individual discounting
behavior indicated by subjects’ indifference points as
depicted by Figure 4. As an estimate of the indifference
point, the point of inflection of a logistic function was fitted
to the individual choices as a function of increasing value

1044

Figure 5: Average hysteresis plots between manipulation
types. Plots depict subjects’ mean response pattern over
intervals (panel a) or manipulation points generated by
variation of rewards only (panel b) and a combination of
rewards and intervals (panel c). Note: Error bars indicate
standard errors. The separate colors indicate whether mean
responses were derived from ascending or descending
sequences. The blue line represents descending sequences
(LLSS). The red line represents ascending sequences
(SSLL).
differences was determined.2 To evaluate subjects’
discounting behavior in one parameter, we extracted the kparameter by fitting a hyperbolic function to each subject’s
indifference points over the different intervals. Data
revealed an average k-parameter of the hyperbolic
discounting curve with M(SD) = 0.23(0.19), bootstrapped
95% CI = [0.18, 0.30], indicating a very strong discounting
behavior. The hyperbolic model had a good fitting
2
The fitting of the logistic regression model was
performed using the StixBox mathematical toolbox by Anders
Holtsberg (http://www.maths.lth.se/matstat/stixbox/). The fit was

based on the model log [

𝑝

1−𝑝

] = 𝑋𝑏, where p is the probability that

the choice is 1 (SS) and not 0 (LL), X represents value differences,
and b represents the point estimates for the logistic function.

performance over all subjects, indicated by a high average
R², M(SD) = .87(.10).3
In the manipulation blocks, subjects completed 387 trials
(SD = 67) on average. Hence, on average, subjects ran
through 32 hysteresis sequences (SD = 6), consisting 16
ascending (SD = 3) and 16 descending (SD = 3) sequences.
The SS option was chosen in 48.37% (SD = 22.19) of the
trials, indicating only a slight decision bias which was not
predicted by the model.
The core prediction of the model was that subjects show
identical hysteresis effects irrespective of the specific
hysteresis manipulation, that is, whether the sequential
manipulation of the attractiveness of both options was
realized through varying intervals, differences or a
combination of both. Figure 5 depicts the hysteresis effect
for each manipulation type. The plots indicate that the
hysteresis effects are very similar between manipulation
types, but show the qualitatively best pattern for the interval
manipulation (Figure 5, panel a). In order to test model’s
predictions, we conducted a two-factorial Repeated
Measures ANOVA (direction x manipulation type) on
subjects’ mean choice. As expected, we solely found a main
effect of direction (F(1,39) = 17.44, p < .001, η²= 0.31),
indicating that hysteresis emerged irrespectively of
manipulation types. Thus, neither the main effect of
manipulation type (F(2,78) = 3.03, p = .054, η² = 0.07) nor
the interaction (F(2,78) = 1.22, p = .302, η² = 0.03) were
statistically significant. In order to focus the analysis on the
hysteresis effect, that is, eliminating the variance of the
absolute level of LL choices, we summarized hysteresis
effects into one hysteresis parameter. The hysteresis
parameter was given by calculating the differences between
subjects’ mean choice in ascending and descending
hysteresis sequences for each manipulation type. An
additional one-factorial Bayesian Repeated Measures
ANOVA on the hysteresis parameter revealed that the data
show substantial evidence in favor of the null hypothesis
(BF01 = 4.64) claiming that the hysteresis effect does not
vary systematically between all three manipulation types.
Therefore, we consider the predictions of the model as
confirmed.

Discussion
In this study, we tested predictions of the attractor model of
delay discounting in a recent developed non-verbal delay
discounting paradigm. Our results validated the model in
such a way that its predictions concerning hysteresis effect
in delay discounting were confirmed. Specifically, when
sequentially varying the attractiveness of both options from
a very strong preference towards the SS option to a very
strong preference towards the LL option, and vice versa,
hysteresis effects occur irrespectively of how the
3

The fit of the hyperbolic function was based on minimizing the
summed squared errors (SSE). R² is defined as the ratio of the sum
of squares of the regression (SSR) and the total sum of squares
(SST). Since SST is defined as SSR+SSE, R² is defines by 1SSE/SST.

1045

attractiveness of any option is varied within the sequence.
Therefore, the current study both replicated and added
empirical evidence for the validity of the attractor model of
delay discounting.
One might object that the predictions of the model were
merely derived through a qualitative, argumentative manner.
This is obviously true, but not a weakness of the current
study. First, concerning the interval manipulation, it was
already shown that the exact same predictions can be
derived by means of computational simulation based on a
competitive neural-network (Scherbaum et al., 2016), hence
running a computational simulation with the same model
would not provide any new information. Second, and this
point is genuine, the model does not allow for reasonable
separate simulations of all manipulation types. This is due to
the fact that the model merely uses subjective values for
each option. The emergence of those subjective values,
however, is not covered within the model.
Leaving the emergence of subjective values open the
model proves to be useful for predicting intra- and inter-trial
dynamics in delay discounting, when a specific discounting
function is already given, but it does not explain the
emergence of discounting functions. This gap has also been
argued for recently by others, reasoning that intertemporal
choice consists of two processes (Rodriguez et al., 2014):
First, the process of delay discounting, and second, the
process of choice. This gap between the two processes could
be closed by connectionist models, which have already been
used to explain how different discounting functions emerge
by linking discounting behavior with aspects of self-control
(Scherbaum, Dshemuchadse, & Goschke, 2012).
The two models provide insights into the dynamics of
delay discounting and the dynamics of choice, respectively.
Integrating these two models into one general connectionist
model of delay discounting could provide insights into the
interacting process dynamics of preference (delay
discounting) and choice. Such an integration could therefore
enhance our understanding of the processes underlying
delay discounting decisions and, hence, complement our
knowledge about decision outcomes.

Acknowledgments
This research was partly supported by the German Research
Council (DFG) (grant SFB 940/2 2016, project A8). We
would like to thank Paula Marie Henneberg, Judith Herbers,
Marie Gotthardt, and Natalja Schmidt for their efforts in
data collection and management. We gratefully
acknowledge helpful comments on this article by Ulrike
Senftleben.

143(4), 1489–1514. http://doi.org/10.1037/a0035976
Doyle, J. R. (2013). Survey of Time Preference, Delay
Discounting Models. Judgment and Decision Making,
8(2), 116–135. http://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1685861
Frederick, S., Loewenstein, G., & O’Donoghue, T. (2002).
Time Discounting and Time Preference: A Critical
Review. Journal of Economic Literature, 40(2), 351–
401.
Pelli, D. G. (1997). The VideoToolbox software for visual
psychophysics: transforming numbers into movies.
Spatial Vision, 10(4), 437–442.
http://doi.org/10.1163/156856897X00366
Rodriguez, C. A., Turner, B. M., & McClure, S. M. (2014).
Intertemporal choice as discounted value
accumulation. PLoS ONE, 9(2).
http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0090138
Scherbaum, S., Dshemuchadse, M., & Goschke, T. (2012).
Building a bridge into the future: Dynamic
connectionist modeling as an integrative tool for
research on intertemporal choice. Frontiers in
Psychology, 3(NOV), 1–14.
http://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00514
Scherbaum, S., Dshemuchadse, M., & Kalis, A. (2008).
Making decisions with a continuous mind. Cognitive,
Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 8(4), 454–474.
http://doi.org/10.3758/CABN.8.4.454
Scherbaum, S., Dshemuchadse, M., Leiberg, S., & Goschke,
T. (2013). Harder than Expected: Increased Conflict
in Clearly Disadvantageous Delayed Choices in a
Computer Game. PLoS ONE, 8(11), e79310.
http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0079310
Scherbaum, S., Frisch, S., Leiberg, S., Lade, S. J., Goschke,
T., & Dshemuchadse, M. (2016). Process dynamics in
delay discounting decisions : An attractor dynamics
approach. Judgement and Decision Making, 11(5),
472–495.
Townsend, J. T., & Busemeyer, J. R. (1989). Approachavoidance: Return to dynamic decision behavior. In C.
Izawa (Ed.), Current Issues in Cognitive Processes:
The Tulane Flowerree Symposion in Cognition. NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Tuller, B., Case, P., Ding, M., & Kelso, J. A. S. (1994). The
nonlinear dynamics of speech categorization. Journal
of Experimental Psychology. Human Perception and
Performance, 20(1), 3–16.
http://doi.org/10.1037/0096-1523.20.1.3

References
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spatial
Vision, 10, 433–436.
http://doi.org/10.1163/156856897X00357
Dai, J., & Busemeyer, J. R. (2014). A probabilistic,
dynamic, and attribute-wise model of intertemporal
choice. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,

1046

