Beyond Distributed Cognition: Towards a Taxonomy of Nonreductive Social
Cognition
Zachariah A. Neemeh (zachariah.neemeh@gmail.com)
Department of Philosophy, University of Central Florida
4000 Central Florida Blvd., Orlando, FL 32816 USA

Luis H. Favela (luis.favela@ucf.edu)
Department of Philosophy, Cognitive Sciences Program, University of Central Florida
4000 Central Florida Blvd., Orlando, FL 32816 USA

social cognitive concept that did not reduce explanations to
events in the brain. In his “cognitive ethnography,” the
entire system of sailors and nautical instruments constitute a
cognitive system. Navigation of the ship is achieved only
through the combined efforts of these actors and tools.
While distributed cognition has provided a nonreductive
lens by which to understand social cognition, it is rooted in
a highly specific prototypical case of social and instrumental
organization. We outline the properties of distributed
cognitive systems and give an example of a nonhuman
social system (wolf packs) in which distributed cognition is
operating. We then argue that not all social cognitive
systems are cases of distributed cognition. We argue that
other forms of social cognition exist, such as swarm
intelligence, via a case study of bird flocks.

Abstract
Studies of social cognition often assume a reductionist,
computational-representational
conceptual
framework.
Distributed cognition is one of the few extant conceptual
frameworks for a nonreductive understanding of social
cognition. This concept’s prototypical cases are exclusively of
technical-scientific human institutions, including ships,
cockpits, and the Hubble Space Telescope. In the first part of
the paper, we outline the properties of distributed cognitive
systems. We look at the case of wolf (Canis lupus) packs as
an instance of distributed cognition in nonhuman systems.
Nevertheless, a broad range of social cognitive phenomena
across human and animal populations may not fit into this
conceptual framework. We present a case study of bird flocks
as a counterexample to distributed cognition. We propose
“swarm intelligence” as an alternative concept of
nonreductive social cognition. This is not to replace
distributed cognition as a concept, but to add to and diversify
the taxonomy of nonreductive social cognitive systems.

Distributed Cognition

Keywords: social cognition; distributed cognition; swarm
intelligence; bird flocks; wolf packs; nonreductive
explanations

Introduction
As a field of research, social cognition grew out of a social
psychology that was influenced by the cognitive revolution
and its adherence to the computational-representational
understanding of mind (CRUM; Gilbert, 1999; Thagard,
2005). CRUM holds that cognition consists of a series of
computations performed upon representations. CRUM
approaches to social cognition are reductionist in that social
phenomena are explained by recourse to the mental or
neural mechanisms of individuals. In other areas of the
cognitive sciences, nonreductive and systems approaches
have been developed as alternatives to CRUM, e.g.,
ecological psychology (e.g., Gibson, 1979/2015), extended
cognition (e.g., Clark & Chalmers, 1998), embodied
cognition (e.g., Rowlands, 2010), radical embodied
cognitive science (e.g., Chemero, 2009), and radical
embodied cognitive neuroscience (e.g., Favela, 2014).
The primary example of a nonreductive understanding of
social cognition is Edwin Hutchins’ distributed cognition.
Hutchins (1995a) analyzed the cognitive structure of a navy
ship’s navigation across a network of agents (sailors) and
navigational instruments. This study introduced an early

Distributed cognition is a nonreductive account of social
cognition that includes both agents and tools. Social
cognition is not limited to mental events or brain activity in
the individual agents who happen to constitute a social
network. That is not to say that individual mental or neural
events are irrelevant. However, the unit of analysis is the
entire organization of agents and tools oriented around
specific group tasks, such as a navy ship being navigated
(Hutchins, 1995a) or an airplane cockpit being piloted
(Hutchins, 1995b).
In Hutchins’ studies of distributed cognition, the
paradigm cases are of vehicles operated by two or more
human agents. An airplane cockpit’s cognitive organization
consists of two agents (pilot and copilot) and an array of
navigational instruments. An orthodox CRUM account of
the social cognition of the cockpit would analyze the mental
and neural events occurring in the brains of the two pilots.
For Hutchins, however, the cognitive phenomena of
perception and locomotion of the airplane as a whole occur
as a coupled system of the pilots and their instruments.
Giere (2006) offers the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) as
another prototypical case of distributed cognition. The HST
is not merely a vehicle to be navigated or piloted, but a
complicated instrument measuring ultraviolet, visible, and
infrared spectra in deep space (Shayler & Harland, 2016).
Its operators are human, but it is orientated and programmed
with commands and algorithms rather than piloted or

2796

navigated. The HST itself consists of a vast array of
complex, specialized instruments. Significantly, not only
does it produce images of deep space objects, but it also
provides higher-level scientific outputs such as
“authenticated claims about the age of the universe” (Giere,
2006, pp. 712-713). In this respect, the HST is more
cognitively complex than a ship or cockpit. The HST
collectively produces these scientific outputs as a system of
instruments, engineers, and scientists. No one instrument or
operator is sufficient to produce any one of these outputs.
For example, claims about the age of the universe cannot be
substantiated without the HST’s spectral analyses of
galactic redshifts. Likewise, galactic redshifts cannot be
measured without human programmers or the scientists who
requested such measurements to, for example, confirm the
Hubble constant.
Giere treats the HST as more than a deep space telescope.
It is a scientific institution producing empirical claims about
the universe. Nevertheless, like Hutchins’ navy ship and
airplane cockpit, it remains constituted by a network of
agents and nonagentic instruments and tools. Kirsh (2006)
provides a similar framework for distributed cognition,
altering the methodological focus from a systems analysis to
one of both individuals and systems, i.e., a “bottom-up topdown model” (p. 250). We provide a formalized list of the
components of distributed cognitive systems consistent with
Hutchins (1995a, 1995b), Giere (2006), and Kirsh (2006).

Properties of Distributed Cognitive Systems
Distributed cognitive systems are not explained reductively.
They are emergent in the sense that they are not merely the
sum of the individual cognition of its components.
Crucially, the actors are agentic (Giere, 2006). The sailors
of the navy ship, pilots of the cockpit, and engineers and
scientists of the HST exhibit significant degrees of agency.
These agents maintain their agency even as members of
the system actively participate in its system-wide goals and
joint tasks (cf. Amon & Favela, 2017). Significantly, the
cognitive behavior of a distributed cognitive system is not
limited to perception and locomotion. Giere’s HST system
is not merely orientated towards celestial objects to capture
images. The HST (the physical HST and its operators)
produces falsifiable scientific claims. The following is
modified from Amon and Favela (2017).
S is a distributed cognitive system if:
D1. S is emergent.
D2. There is continuous coordination of agents and
nonagentic tools as members of S.
D3. Each agent maintains a degree of individual agency
within S.
D4. Each agent actively participates in the overall goal or
joint task in which S is engaged.
D5. There is specialization of functions among members
of S.
D6. The cognitive behavior of S is complex and not
limited to perception and locomotion.

In the following, we discuss wolf packs as an example of
distributed cognition in the nonhuman animal world. We
then present the case of bird flocks as a counterexample of
social cognitive systems that are not distributed cognitive
systems. We propose a new concept for nonreductive social
systems for cases not in lieu of, but along with, distributed
cognition.

Wolf Packs as Distributed Cognitive Systems
Many paradigm cases of distributed cognition are
anthropocentric and limited to human technical-scientific
institutions (e.g., navy ship, airplane cockpit, and HST).
However, social cognition is not limited to humans or such
institutions. In some cases, collective animal systems may
indeed be described by this anthropocentric concept. Wolf
(Canis lupus) packs on the hunt1 are one such case of
distributed cognitive systems in the animal world.
Wolves hunting in pack formation consist of four to 30
individual members, with hunting efficiency negatively
correlated to increasing pack size (Mech, Smith, &
MacNulty, 2015). They are loosely organized around a
breeder (“alpha” in older literature) but do not operate by a
command structure. Individuals converge upon the prey
and, assuming a successful hunt, a single wolf ultimately
makes the kill (Tang, Fong, Yang, & Deb, 2012).
Pack hunting patterns, organization, and coordination are
emergent (D1). Several apparent hunting strategies have
been noted, including encircling, ambushing, and relay
hunting (Mech et al., 2015). Mech (2007) notes that wolves
express a degree of mutual comprehension. He concludes
from this that wolves communicate hunting strategies. This
hypothesis assumes the existence of communication
mechanisms that have yet to be discovered. Current
evidence provides a more parsimonious account: The
observed hunting patterns are wholly explicable in terms of
a set of basic perceptual and locomotive procedures
operating on the individual level and giving rise to a global
structure. This simple process constrains the position of
individual wolves so as to be neither too far away from nor
too close to other wolves of the pack. Furthermore,
individual wolves coordinate their own positions relative to
both their prey and relative to the breeder (Muro, Escobedo,
Spector, & Coppinger, 2011). Global hunting patterns, such
as encirclement, are not premeditated, directed, or otherwise
centrally controlled. They emerge from these basic
processes of local interaction (see Figure 1).
Within the pack, there is a continuous coordination of
wolves (D2). Simulations by Muro and colleagues (2011)
found that emergent hunting patterns can arise from the
coordination of spatial positions in real time. Individual
wolves coordinate their positions relative to those of both
the breeder and the prey (see Figure 1). No advanced

1 Wolf packs are only distributed cognitive systems in the
context of the hunt. Outside of this context, they retain only a loose
association and they do not otherwise share in joint tasks.

2797

communication of ideas or intentions is necessary to
produce these patterns.

Figure 1: D1. Individual wolves continuously coordinate
their movements based on the spatial positions of the
breeder (top right) and prey (center). D2. This can result in
emergent hunting patterns, such as encirclement (after Tang
et al., 2012). Credit: Ahmed Labban.
Each wolf maintains a degree of individual agency within
the pack (D3). As noted, the association of the pack is very
loose. During the hunt, individual wolves often take
individual initiatives, such as cutting off the prey (Mech et
al., 2015). Each wolf actively participates in the overall goal
or joint task in which the pack is engaged (D4). In this case,
the focus is on hunting. The collective task of hunting may
be the only activity around which the pack becomes
cohesive enough to be considered a distributed cognitive
system. Otherwise, a reductive account as is standard in
accounts of social cognition may be appropriate.
There is a specialization of functions among the members
of the pack (D5). The pack is hierarchical with the breeders
at the top of the hierarchy (Mech et al., 2015). During the
chase, the breeder serves as one of the two reference points
for other wolves. Therefore, there are at least two functional
differentiations among the wolves of the pack.
The cognitive behavior of the pack is complex and not
limited to perception and locomotion (D6). Hunting is a
goal-oriented process of gathering food. The wolf pack does
not merely perceive and move towards the prey. It actively
seeks to slay it in order to consume it. The hunt itself is a
complex and demanding task and each individual actively
engages in the task. Certainly this is far less complex of
behavior than making falsifiable scientific claims about the
age of the universe. Nevertheless, it is beyond the mere
perception and locomotion that may characterize the
simplest of cognitive systems (cf. Maturana & Varela, 1980;
Thompson, 2007).

Non-Distributed Social Cognition in Flocks
The prototypical cases of distributed cognition are of very
specific types of human institutions. Social cognition is not
necessarily circumscribed to such specialized technicalscientific institutions or setups. The social cognition
exhibited by wolf packs is appropriately treated as

distributed cognition.2 However, not all social systems,
human or nonhuman animal, may be compatible with this
concept. We present bird flocks as an example of
nonreductive, but non-distributed, social cognition.
Flocks of birds vary in size across species and
environments. They can range from less than a hundred to
many hundreds of thousands of individuals. Quelea quelea
flocks, for example, typically range from several to 500
birds but occasionally coalesce to form swarms of biblical
proportions with comparable plague-like effects on
agriculture (Crook, 1960). They migrate, evade predators,
locate food and water, and navigate to roosts.
Flocks do exhibit some of the features of distributed
cognition, but not all. Flocks are emergent (D1). Selfpropelled particle (SPP) models, as well as empirical vector
analyses captured by computerized cameras, have for the
first time made possible the study of cognition as a property
of collective systems (Baglietto, Albano, & Candia, 2013).
SPP models show that global flock patterns and behavior
can arise from a simple set of procedures governing the
local interactions of individual birds (Bialek et al., 2012). In
this respect, they are similar to wolf packs.
Bialek and colleagues (2012) model starling (Sturnus
vulgaris) flocks by a set of procedures of alignment
synchronization. Individual birds each align themselves
with several proximal birds, henceforth coordinators (see
Figure 2). The number of birds used for alignment
synchronization is small, especially relative to the
potentially enormous size of the flock itself. An increase in
this parameter to a larger set of coordinators increases the
entropy of the system, destabilizing the flock and breaking it
apart into several smaller flocks (Castellana, Bialek,
Cavagna, & Giardina, 2016).
There is a continuous coordination of birds within the
flock (D2). The procedures of alignment synchronization
are simple and consist of successive zones of attraction,
repulsion, and orientation (Couzin, 2008). If the coordinator
is too far away, the bird moves towards it (or is “attracted”
to it). If the coordinator is too close, the bird moves away
from it (or is “repulsed” by it). If it is neither too close nor
too far, it maintains its orientation (cf. Couzin, Krause,
James, Ruxton, & Franks, 2002). Kattas and colleagues
(2012) find similar results in homing pigeons (Columba
livia domestica) using a different method than Bialek and
colleagues (2012), creating a model directly from recorded
flight data. These local processes produce an emergent
global order of flock movement (Cavagna, Giardina, &
Ginelli, 2013). The apparently wispy and erratic movements
characteristic of flocks are effects of the inherent noise
arising from imperfect alignments (Cavagna, Duarte
Queirós, Giardina, Stefanini, & Viale, 2013). This global

O’Donnell and colleagues (2015) describe wasp swarms as
distributed cognitive systems, a usage inconsistent with the
established definitions. This is an example of how the lack of an
array of different concepts of nonreductive social cognition can
leave some researchers forcing square pegs into round holes.

2798

2

order in turn affects individual flight trajectories in local
regions of birds.
Individual agency, to the degree to which it may exist to
begin with, is not preserved in the flock. This violates D3.
Individual birds within the flock, insofar as they constitute
the flock, are not agentic in the same sense that a captain is
free to abandon their ship. Nor do they express anything
akin to the minimal agency of wolves in a pack. Individual
wolves operate as a pack by a loose association and often
act upon individual initiative (Mech et al., 2015). Birds in a
flock, on the other hand, act predictably according to the
basic processes of attraction, repulsion, and orientation.
While flocks are noisy, the system’s noise is constituted by
the imperfect coordinating efforts of the birds.

Figure 2: Individual birds within a flock coordinate their
movements relative to the positions of a small number of
proximal birds. Credit: Ahmed Labban.
In violation of D4, each bird does not actively participate
in the overall goal or joint task in which the flock is
engaged. When a flock evades a hawk, for example, the
entire flock does not necessarily perceive the predator. This
is especially true of larger flocks of tens of thousands of
members or more. To evade the raptor, it is sufficient that a
local group within the larger flock perceive and react to it.
This local reaction, manifest as a sudden shift in flight
paths, creates a ripple effect in the flock as the other birds
attempt to realign themselves. In this case, the massive flock
is not engaged in the joint task of predator evasion. Rather,
a local group is engaged in predator evasion while the
majority of the remaining birds are merely continuing to
implement the processes of attraction-repulsion-orientation.3
This situation contrasts markedly from that of wolves on the
hunt, wherein each of the individual wolves perceives the
prey and is actively engaged in hunting.
There is no significant specialization of functions among
the members of the flock. Within the flock, each bird is
more or less functionally isomorphic to the other birds.
Hierarchies within flocks exist, but are fluid. “Leader” roles,
such as directing migration routes (Mouritsen, 2003), are
interchangeable and constantly shifting (Nagy, Ákos, Biro,
3 This may provide an alternate explanation for why individual
vigilance against predators in Quelea quelea decreases with flock
size (cf. Lazarus, 1979). Lazarus explains this effect in terms of an
economy of energy, but it may simply arise from a situation in
which only a local region of birds within the flock actively respond
to predators.

& Vicsek, 2010). This contrasts with, for example, the
captain of a ship or a pack breeder.
The behavior of the flock is limited to perception and
locomotion, violating D6. Birds are individually complex
and can perform a variety of functions besides moving and
perceiving, such as fighting, mating, or raising offspring.
Insofar as they constitute a flock, however, they are limited
to basic procedures of attraction-repulsion-orientation.4
These require only that 1) the bird perceives the
coordinators, and 2) the bird adjusts its flight accordingly.
The flock as a system likewise only perceives and moves. In
the example of predator evasion, the flock (but not
necessarily each member thereof) perceives the hawk and
changes its flight patterns to evade it. Flocks do not fight,
mate, or raise offspring. They are defined only as a
perceptual-locomotive social system.
Crook (1960) notes curious synchronized, wave-like
movements during feeding and drinking in Quelea quelea.
While drinking, the birds collectively alternate their
positions, moving forward birds who have not yet drank and
moving back birds who have. These “wave-like
progression[s]” (p. 5) are broadly consistent with a system
of
basic
attraction-repulsion-orientation
processes.
Nevertheless, SPP studies of avian populations have yet to
go beyond an analysis of flight patterns and this is a
particular research desideratum.
Of the six criteria of distributed cognition, flocks satisfy
only two. The concept of “distributed cognition” is too
limited to capture the manifold manifestations of social
cognitive systems. New concepts are needed to understand
complex systems such as bird flocks. We introduce “swarm
intelligence” as a concept capable of describing social
cognitive systems with characteristics like flocks.

Swarm Intelligence as a Concept of Social
Cognition
We appropriate the term ‘swarm intelligence’ from
computing. In computing, swarm intelligence describes a set
of optimization methods with emergent and self-organizing
algorithms (Yang & Karamanoglu, 2013) inspired by bees,
ants, wolves, and other collectivist organisms (Beekman,
Sword, & Simpson, 2008). In our usage, “swarm
intelligence” refers to a class of rudimentary and nonspecialized social cognitive systems. The prototypical case
we offer is the bird flock, although it may also cover cases
such as schools of fish, mosquito swarms, and human
crowds.
S is a swarm-intelligent system if:
S1. S is emergent.
S2. There is a continuous coordination of individuals as
members of S.
S3. Individual agency is minimal insofar as the individual
constitutes S.

4 The properties of the collective need not resemble the
properties of its members (Hutchins, 1995a).

2799

S4. The cognitive behavior of S is limited to perception
and locomotion.
S5. Communication or interaction between members of S
as they constitute S is minimal.
S6. The organization of S is relatively isomorphic, with
no significant specialization of functions.
Flocks are emergent (S1). Overall flock movement in
flight arises from the local processes of attraction-repulsionorientation. This global order in turn affects the local
movements of individual birds. Comprehending why one
bird happens to be caught up in a swirling arm of a
murmuration requires a dynamical systems analysis of the
entire flock. There is a continuous coordination of
individuals as members of the flock (S2). Individual birds
orientate themselves continuously in reference to several
neighboring birds (see Figure 2).
Individual agency is minimal insofar as the individual
constitutes the flock (S3). We noted this earlier as a
violation of D3. Regardless of how agentic individual birds
may be, they do not exhibit any significant agency within
the collective. The cognitive behavior of the flock is limited
to perception and locomotion (S4). Flocks are restricted to
evasion, migration, and food-locating behaviors. For
example, while ants construct elaborate nests as a form of
collective shelter, most birds are only capable of creating
roosts individually.
Communication or interaction between members of the
flock insofar as they constitute the flock is minimal and
there is no communication of intentions (S5). While birds
have complex modes of communication (e.g. birdsong),
they do not directly communicate qua members of a flock.
The only information indirectly communicated is relative
distance and position. The organization of the flock is
relatively isomorphic. There are no significant
specializations of functions among members of the flock
(S6). Some transient local leaders might guide flight away
from predators or towards food sources, but these positions
are not enduring.
Overall, swarm intelligence is far simpler than distributed
cognition. It does not necessitate any shared goals or joint
tasks and its cognitive functions are limited to perception
and locomotion. Nevertheless, it may describe systems as
varied as bird flocks, mosquito swarms, schools of fish, and
human crowds. Indeed, schools of fish and human crowds
appear to operate by the same basic processes of attraction,
alignment, and repulsion as do flocks of birds (Couzin,
2008; Moussaid et al., 2009).

Conclusion: Towards a Taxonomy of
Nonreductive Social Cognition
The field of social cognition remains dominated by
reductionist and CRUM approaches. Since the mid-1990s,
studies in distributed cognition have challenged this
orthodoxy and demonstrated that social cognition can be
understood from a nonreductive and systems perspective.
Nevertheless, distributed cognition remains circumscribed
in its applicability to different social cognitive systems. Its

paradigm cases are of human technical-scientific
institutions. We provide formal criteria for the identification
of distributed cognition consistent with Hutchins (1995a,
1995b), Giere (2006), and Kirsh (2006).
Distributed cognition remains useful for describing some
systems that are nonhuman or non-technical-scientific, such
as wolf packs. We demonstrate point-by-point how wolf
packs are cases of distributed cognition. However, this
concept is inappropriately applicable to many other social
cognitive systems. We offer bird flocks as a counterexample
to distributed cognition and propose “swarm intelligence” as
an alternative concept of nonreductive social cognition.
These two forms of social cognition are not proposed as
absolute categories, but rather as relative points of
difference between which gradations may exist.
The implications of this are significant. Beyond flocks,
swarm intelligence is potentially found among schools of
fish, mosquito and other flying insect swarms, and human
crowds (cf. Moussaid et al., 2009). Swarm intelligence does
not operate in lieu of distributed cognition. Nor is it the only
alternative type of nonreductive social cognition. New
concepts are needed to establish a more accurate taxonomy
of nonreductive social cognition as diverse as the
phenomena under investigation. Such a taxonomy allows
the many and varied phenomena of social cognition to be
recognized as such and studied through an appropriate
theoretical lens (cf. O’Donnell et al. 2015 for a
misattribution of distributed cognition in part due to such a
lack of diversity).
As we have demonstrated, wolf packs or the HST do not
operate by the same organizational principles as do bird
flocks. This is not surprising given their radically different
structures, functions, and components. What is far more
surprising is that wolf packs operate, on an abstract level,
analogously to certain technical-scientific institutions. Still
other types of social cognitive systems await discovery. Ant
colonies may not be well described by either distributed
cognition or swarm intelligence. For example, unlike birds
in a flock, ants have up to 12 modalities of communication
(Hölldobler & Wilson, 1990). Furthermore, they are able to
engage in intricate collective projects such as nest building
without a central planner. Ultimately, the project of creating
a taxonomy of different social cognitive systems will serve
to delineate and extend the outer bounds of the concept of
“cognition.”

References
Amon, M. J., & Favela, L. H. (2017). Human-dog system as
example
of
interspecies
distributed
cognition.
Unpublished manuscript.
Baglietto, G., Albano, E. V., & Candia, J. (2013). Complex
network structure of flocks in the Standard Vicsek Model.
Journal of Statistical Physics, 153, 270-288.
Beekman, M., Sword, G. A., & Simpson, S. J. (2008).
Biological foundations of swarm intelligence. In C. Blum
& D. Merkle (Eds.), Swarm intelligence: Introduction and
applications. Berlin, Germany: Springer.

2800

Bialek, W., Cavagna, A., Giardina, I., Mora, T., Silvestri,
E., Viale, M., & Walczak, A. M. (2012). Statistical
mechanics for natural flocks of birds. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 109 (13), 4786–4791.
Castellana, M., Bialek, W., Cavagna, A., & Giardina, I.
(2016). Entropic effects in a nonequilibrium system:
Flocks of birds. Physical Review, 93, 1-12.
Cavagna, A., Duarte Queirós, S. M., Giardina, I., Stefanini,
F., & Viale, M. (2013). Diffusion of individual birds in
starling flocks. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 280,
1-22.
Cavagna, A., Giardina, I., & Ginelli, F. (2013). Boundary
information inflow enhances correlation in flocking.
Physical Review Letters, 110 (16), 1-5.
Chemero, A. (2009). Radical embodied cognitive science.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clark, A., & Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind.
Analysis, 58 (1), 7-19.
Couzin, I. D. (2008). Collective cognition in animal groups.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13 (1), 36-43.
Couzin, I. D., Krause, J., James, R., Ruxton, G. D., &
Franks, N. R. (2002). Collective memory and spatial
sorting in animal groups. Journal of Theoretical Biology,
218, 1-11.
Crook, J. H. (1960). Studies on the social behavior of
Quelea q. quelea (Linn.) in French West Africa.
Behaviour, 16 (1/2), 1-55.
Favela, L. H. (2014). Radical embodied cognitive
neuroscience: Addressing “grand challenges” of the mind
sciences. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 1-10.
Gibson, J. J. (1979/2015). The ecological approach to visual
perception (Classic ed.). New York, NY: Psychology
Press.
Giere, R. (2006). The role of agency in distributed cognitive
systems. Philosophy of Science, 73, 710-719.
Gilbert, D. (1999). Social cognition. In R. A. Wilson & F.
C. Keil (Eds.), The MIT encyclopedia of the cognitive
sciences. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hölldobler, B., & Wilson, E. O. (1990). The ants.
Cambridge, MA: Springer.
Hutchins, E. (1995a). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995b). How a cockpit remembers its speeds.
Cognitive Science, 19, 265-288.
Kattas, G. D., Xu, X.-K., & Small, M. (2012). Dynamical
modeling of collective behavior from pigeon flight data:
Flock cohesion and dispersion. PLOS Computational
Biology, 8 (3), 1-15.
Kirsh, D. (2006). Distributed cognition: A methodological
note. Pragmatics & Cognition, 14 (2), 249-262.
Lazarus, J. (1979). Flock size and behaviour in captive redbilled weaverbirds (Quelea quelea): Implications for
social facilitation and the functions of flocking.
Behaviour, 71 (1/2), 127-145.
Maturana, H., & Varela, F. (1980). Autopoiesis and
cognition: The realization of the living. Dordrecht,
Netherlands: D. Reidel Publishing Company.

Mech, L. D. (2007). Possible use of foresight,
understanding, and planning by wolves hunting
muskoxen. Arctic, 60 (2), 145-149.
Mech, L. D., Smith, D. W., & MacNulty, D. R. (2015).
Wolves on the hunt: The behavior of wolves hunting wild
prey. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Mouritsen, H. (2003). Spatiotemporal orientation strategies
of long-distance migrants. In P. Berthold, E. Gwinner, &
E. Sonnenschein (Eds.), Avian migration. Berlin,
Germany: Springer.
Moussaid, M., Garnier, S., Theraulaz, G., & Helbing, D.
(2009). Collective information processing and pattern
formation in swarms, flocks, and crowds. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 1, 469-497.
Muro, C., Escobedo, R., Spector, L., & Coppinger, R. P.
(2011). Wolf-pack (Canis lupus) hunting strategies
emerge from simple rules in computational simulations.
Behavioural Processes, 88, 192-197.
Nagy, M., Ákos, Z., Biro, D., & Vicsek, T. (2010).
Hierarchical group dynamics in pigeon flocks. Nature,
464, 890-893.
O'Donnell, S., Bulova, S., DeLeon, S., Khodak, P., Miller,
S., & Sulger, E. (2015). Distributed cognition and social
brains: Reductions in mushroom body investment
accompanied the origins of sociality in wasps
(Hymenoptera: Vespidae). Proceedings of the Royal
Society B, 282, 1-4.
Rowlands, M. (2010). The new science of the mind: From
extended mind to embodied phenomenology. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Shayler, D. J., & Harland, D. M. (2016). The Hubble Space
Telescope: From concept to success. New York, NY:
Springer.
Tang, R., Fong, S., Yang, X.-S., & Deb, S. (2012). Wolf
search algorithm with ephemeral memory. In S. Fong, P.
Pichappan, S. Mohammed, P. Hung, & S. Asghar (Eds.),
Seventh International Conference on Digital Information
Management (ICDIM 2012). IEEE.
Thagard, P. (2005). Mind: Introduction to cognitive science
(2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Thompson, E. (2007). Mind in life: Biology,
phenomenology, and the sciences of the mind. Cambridge,
MA: Belknap Press.
Yang, X.-S., & Karamanoglu, M. (2013). Swarm
intelligence and bio-inspired computation: An overview.
In X.-S. Yang, Z. Cui, R. Xiao, A. H. Gandomi, & M.
Karamanoglu (Eds.), Swarm intelligence and bio-inspired
computation. London, United Kingdom: Elsevier.

2801

