Bridging Visual Working Memory Research from Infancy through Adulthood with
Dynamic Neural Field Modeling
Vanessa R. Simmering (simmering@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1202 W. Johnson Street, Madison, WI 53706 USA

Sammy Perone (sammy.perone@wsu.edu)
Department of Human Development, Johnson Tower 516, Pullman, WA 99163 USA

(Amari, 1977; Wilson & Cowan, 1972) and simulate neural
population dynamics to represent a continuous dimension,
such as space or color (Schöner, Spencer, & the DFT
Research Group, 2015). DNFs have a functional topographic
organization such that neighboring nodes within a field
representing similar features (e.g., shades of blue in color,
neighboring locations in space). In DNFs, a stimulus input
excites selectively-tuned neurons which then interact through
local excitatory and lateral inhibitory connections to create a
localized “peak” of activation (illustrated in Fig.1 below).
A peak in a DNF represents a real-time neuronal estimate
of the stimulus. With relatively weak local excitation and
lateral inhibition, peaks are only present when supported by
input, that is, when the stimulus is present in the environment
– we refer to this as an encoding state. With stronger
connectivity, peaks can persist after a stimulus disappears
(i.e., input is removed), which we refer to as a working
memory state. Peaks leave excitatory memory traces, a
simple Hebbian-type history of activation, that facilitate the
re-formation of peaks at similar values (e.g., color, location)
at future points in time. For example, when presented with a
blue stimulus, the model will produce a peak that estimates
the specific hue. The peak will leave a memory trace that
facilitates the formation of a peak for the color blue at a future
point in time. We will show that this feature of DNFs has
implications for behavior in working memory tasks.
Multiple DNFs can be coupled together to create more
complex neural architectures that simulate neurocognitive
processes of encoding, maintenance, comparison, and
recognition (described further below). To use such models to
understand behavior, these neural architectures can be
coupled to behavioral systems to generate the particular
behavioral dynamics of interest – below we describe systems
to simulate looking behavior, same/different judgments, or
pointing/recall responses. In the next section, we describe a
three-layer architecture that we have used to simulate
performance in visuospatial working memory tasks from
infancy to adulthood.

Abstract
Theories that span tasks and developmental periods require
explaining how a single cognitive system can flexibly adapt
across contexts yet show stable age-related improvement. Here
we present a computational model that embodies a unified theory of visuospatial cognitive development. We use this model
to bridge between previously disconnected domains, as diverse
as infant habituation and visual working memory capacity in
adults. We illustrate how the same real-time and developmental
processes can account for behavior across tasks and age groups.
We conclude with a discussion of the implications of a unified
theory for understanding cognition and development more
broadly, with an eye toward early intervention.
Keywords: visual cognition; working memory; development;
infancy; neural field model

A Unified Theory of Visuospatial Cognition
A central challenge in cognitive science is to create theories
that generalize across tasks and developmental periods.
Computational models provide a concrete tool to confront
this challenge. We illustrate this using a dynamic neural field
(DNF) model of visuospatial cognition. Our goal is to
explicitly connect the processes that operate across the range
of behavioral tasks used from infancy through adulthood to
measure different aspects of visuospatial cognition. By
demonstrating that such disparate tasks and phenomena arise
through common underlying processes, we can construct a
broader theory to contrast with prior theories that have been
proposed to account for only a single task and age group.
The unified theory of visuospatial working memory
development we espouse is implemented in a single model
architecture with a single developmental mechanism to
explain change from infancy to adulthood. Here we show
how this model can bridge between previously disconnected
domains and developmental periods. We begin by describing
the basic dynamics of DNFs. Next, we present the specific
architecture we have applied across tasks and age groups. We
then illustrate how this model can be used to account for
visual and spatial working memory processes across tasks
and development. Finally, we close by discussing the implications of our unified theory for understanding cognitive
development and interventions that strengthen cognition in
at-risk or developmentally delayed populations.

A Three-Layer Dynamic Neural Field Model
Figure 1 shows the three-layer model (reviewed by Johnson
& Simmering, 2015; referred to here as the “dynamic model”
for simplicity) used for the simulations we describe. This
instantiation of the model consists of a fixation and visualcognitive system. The fixation system consists of a collection
of nodes that represent looking to left, right, center, and away

Dynamic Neural Fields
DNFs belong to a larger class of bi-stable attractor networks
1

3174

locations in a virtual world. The nodes compete in a winnertake-all fashion. The winner (left node in Fig.1) opens a
perceptual gate and the stimulus at that location (green and
red) is input to the visual-cognitive system (see green arrow
from virtual world to visual-cognitive system). The visualcognitive system consists of a perceptual field (PF), which
receives input from the fixation system representing the color
of the stimulus. This input creates peaks representing the
stimulus; connectivity in this field is set to the encoding state
described above. Activation in PF supports continued
fixation through reciprocal connectivity (see green arrow
from PF to virtual world) and also feeds into a working
memory (WM) field (see green arrow from PF to WM).
These fields interact through a shared field of inhibitory
nodes (Inhib). When WM activity for an item is strong, WM
sends strong activity to Inhib (see red arrow from WM to
Inhib). This, in turn, suppresses activity for that item in PF
(see red arrow from Inhib to WM). In addition to this threelayer (PF-Inhib-WM) architecture, the dynamic model
includes memory trace (MT) layers associated with PF and

WM that accumulate activation over a longer time scale (for
simplicity, only MT WM is shown in Fig.1), serving the
Hebbian function described above.
Figure 1 illustrates how the dynamic model simulates
encoding, maintenance, and comparison of items in WM. A
critical insight gained from applying this model across tasks
and development is how the same real-time processes
underlying these cognitive functions can produce a range of
seemingly unrelated behavioral signatures (e.g., habituation,
perseveration, novelty preferences, capacity limits,
dimensional attention), as described below. At the moment
represented in Figure 1, WM is maintaining the colors light
green and orange, which has inhibited encoding in PF (see
inhibitory troughs at sites tuned to light green and orange),
which released fixation from the right location (see position
in virtual world). This inhibition of encoding by WM is the
mechanism of recognition in the model. After fixation was
released from the right location in the simulation shown in
Figure 1, the model fixated the left location and is encoding
a dark green and red stimulus there. This is the mechanism of
novelty detection in the model – fixating and encoding items
not held in WM. Notice that the model has MTs associated
with the light green and orange items. This will enable the
model to form robust WM peaks for those colors in the future,
which can support recognition of those items as familiar.
This simulation shows the dynamic model equipped with a
fixation system that looks at multiple locations, which
simulates looking behavior (Perone, Simmering, & Spencer,
2011). To simulate the behaviors required by different
visuospatial working memory tasks, the model can be used to
generate continuous recall responses (e.g., pointing to a
remembered location or color) based on peak positions (e.g.,
Spencer, Smith, & Thelen, 2001) or equipped with a
same/different response system (Johnson, Spencer, Luck, &
Schöner, 2009). Critically, however, each of these different
behavioral responses is driven by the same underlying
cognitive processes embodied in the three-layer architecture.
In the following sections, we synthesize recent applications
of the dynamic model to provide a unified explanation of
visuospatial cognitive processes across previously
disconnected domains and development: habituation and
visual recognition during infancy, and VWM capacity limits
from infancy to early childhood and adulthood.

Common Processes Underlying Visual
Working Memory from Infancy to Adulthood
In this section, we describe how this model can account for
behavior and development in three domains, highlighting that
a single developmental mechanism produces change in all
three domains. We begin by describing how the model links
infant looking at a single location to WM formation in the
habituation paradigm. Next, we show how the same model
looks to multiple location in a visual recognition context, the
visual paired comparison task. After that, we show how the
same model can once again be adapted to explain visual
working memory capacity limits in children and adults.

Figure 1. Three-layer dynamic neural field architecture,
coupled to a fixation system viewing colors in a virtual
world. Green versus red arrows indicate excitatory versus
inhibitory connections; horizontal dashed lines indicate the
zero threshold in each field. See text for further description.

2

3175

measures, including shift rate (gaze switches per second of
looking), look duration (mean duration of each look), peak
look (longest look), and preferences (proportion of looking to
one item greater than chance). Infants’ recognition memory
is assessed via pairing a previously seen, familiar item with a
novel item. A preference for the novel item is evidence of
both (1) recognition of the familiar item and (2)
discrimination between the familiar and novel items (as
illustrated in Fig.1). With age, infants exhibit faster shift
rates, shorter look durations, shorter peak looks, more finegrained discrimination, and stronger novelty preferences.
These looking behaviors develop more slowly in at-risk
populations, such as preterm infants (e.g., Rose, Feldman, &
Jankowski, 2001).
The dynamic model can adapted to VPC by equipping it
with a fixation system that looks at left and right locations
(see Fig.1), compared to the single item/fixation location
used for habituation. The dynamics of the visual-cognitive
system are otherwise identical to the model simulations of
habituation from Perone and Spencer (2013). Perone and
Spencer (2014) asked whether this same model and
developmental mechanism could account for the range of
behavioral changes infants show over development in VPC.
They probed this by testing infants’ looking behavior and
discrimination abilities between 5 and 10 months of age, then
simulating the paradigm in the dynamic model. They found
that infants exhibited faster shift rates, shorter look durations,
and shorter peak looks with age. They also found that infants
were able to make discriminations along a continuous
metrically organized dimension by 7 months of age. The
model exhibited the same behavioral pattern over
development for precisely the same reasons as it did in the
habituation paradigm: faster, more robust memory formation.
Perone and Spencer (2014) also analyzed individual differences. In particular, individual differences in looking during
the learning phase of VPC predicted their discrimination
abilities during the testing phase. This pattern was found in
the dynamic model’s performance as well. But where did
these individual differences come from? There were no
parameter changes to simulate “individuals” in the model;
rather, the individual differences in patterns of performance
were emergent. The structure of looking behavior that builds
memory representations and supports discrimination in the
dynamic model emerged autonomously. This parallels the
insight gained from the simulations of habituation: infants’
exploratory behavior in the task influenced the formation of
memory, which in turn shaped their subsequent looking
behavior. Although the processes at work in the habituation
and VPC are generally considered similar, what infants
remember in each paradigm is different (Oakes & Ribar,
2005). This is the first theory to formally account for how the
same learning process unfolds in both contexts.

Habituation
Infant looking paradigms form the foundation of our understanding of the origins of human cognition. Habituation of
looking behavior has been used for half a century to probe
perceptual, memory, and cognitive processes during infancy.
In a typical habituation task, infants are presented with a
single stimulus (e.g., blue circle). Initially, they exhibit high
levels of looking which decreases with repeated presentation.
They typically renew looking when presented with a novel
stimulus (e.g., red star). Prior theories have not considered
looking behavior a central part of the learning process
(Cohen, 1972) but rather as an output. However, there is
evidence that how infants distribute their looking through
time structures what they learn (Jankowski, Rose, &
Feldman, 2001). To explore the interplay between looking
and learning, Perone and Spencer (2013) used the dynamic
model with a simple fixation system that stochastically oscillated between looking at a single stimulus and looking away.
As described above, when the fixation node was looking to
the stimulus, it opened a perceptual gate that sent input PF.
Strong activation in PF supported continued looking and led
to the formation of memory representations in WM and MT.
When the WM representation grew robust across
presentations, encoding in PF was inhibited (as described
above), and looking was released. Thus, the dynamic model
showed habituation in looking time, just as infants do.
Perone and Spencer (2013) tested whether the dynamic
model could account for the developmental changes infants
show in habituation tasks: faster habituation rates and the
ability to make finer-grained distinctions with age. To
simulate development in the visual-cognitive system of the
dynamic model, they implemented the Spatial Precision
Hypothesis (SPH). The SPH posits that the strength of
excitatory and inhibitory connectivity within and between
layers increases over development (see Simmering &
Schutte, 2015, for review). Implementing the SPH in the
context of the habituation task led to faster, more stable WM
formation and more robust novelty detection. This led to
quick habituation and improved discrimination with age, just
as infants show. The dynamic model’s performance
highlighted the link between visual exploration and learning.
For example, spontaneous long looks helped WM form,
which led to fast habituation. Conversely, spontaneous short
looks led to slowed memory formation. This provides an
explanation for how individual differences in visual
exploration can structure learning. This highlights the
importance of simulating real-time behavior in a model to
understand how the cognitive system functions and develops.

Visual Paired Comparison
The visual paired comparison (VPC) paradigm is commonly
used to study visual recognition and categorization processes
during infancy. VPC differs from the habituation paradigm in
a critical way: it introduces competition. Infants are presented
with pairs of stimuli and can freely look back and forth
between them. This context yields a rich set of looking

Capacity Limits over Development
One of the hallmarks of WM is its limited capacity. Visual
working memory (VWM ) in particular is limited to only
three or four items in adults (Luck, 2008). The majority of
3

3176

work characterizing VWM capacity limits have focused on
children and adults, with the change detection task being a
common approach, shown in Figure 2A. In this task, a small
number of simple items (e.g., colored squares) is shown
briefly, followed by a brief blank delay, then a test array in
which either all of the items remained the same or one has
changed. Capacity estimates from this task (using a formula
proposed by Pashler, 1988) have shown a gradual increase
from early childhood through adolescence (Simmering,
2016; Simmering & Perone, 2013). Studies with infants,
however, present seemingly contradictory results, with
estimates of capacity reaching adult-like levels within the
first year of life (e.g., Oakes, Ross-Sheehy, & Luck, 2006;
Ross-Sheehy, Oakes, & Luck, 2003). One way to address this
apparent discrepancy across tasks and age groups is through
the dynamic model framework presented here.

paradigm and showed that the SPH could account for the agerelated changes in capacity estimates during infancy. One
intriguing finding from these simulations was that a robust
preference in the model did not depend on holding all of the
items in memory: that is, a preference for set size three did
not necessarily reflect that three items could be held in WM.
Perhaps this means that the items required to be remembered
to yield different estimates differs across tasks. Simmering
(2016) probed this possibility by situating the dynamic model
in both the change preference and change detection task. In
order for the dynamic model to simulate performance in the
change detection task, it must be equipped to give the “same”
or “different” responses required by the task. This type of
response system can be implemented by building from the
mechanisms of recognition and familiarity inherent in the
model’s visual-cognitive system (see Fig.1): peaks in WM
indicate familiar items whereas peaks in PF indicate novel
items. Thus, a simple system in which activation from WM
projects to a “same” decision node, and activation from PF
projects to a “different” decision node, can use these signals
to general a discrete response on each trial (see Johnson &
Simmering, 2015, for further discussion).
Model simulations revealed that the two tasks used to
estimate capacity showed different relationships between the
underlying memory representations and the behavioral
measures used to estimate it (Simmering, 2016). In particular,
while simulations of the infant task suggested that behavioral
estimates may over-estimate the number of items held in
memory (Perone et al., 2011), simulations of adults’ performance in change detection indicated it under-estimated the
number of items held in memory (Johnson, Simmering, &
Buss, 2014). Simmering (2016) bridged these results from
infancy and adulthood by testing young children in both types
of capacity tasks, then directly comparing performance
across tasks and simulating results within a unified model.
Simulations showed that developmental changes in both
tasks could be accounted for within the same model through
strengthening connectivity. Furthermore, although the tasks
yielded different estimates of capacity between 3 and 5 years
of age – at least six items in the looking task versus only two
to three items in the change detection task – the common
underlying processes were evident in correlations across
tasks. Motivated by the common processes that support the
detection of novelty across the two tasks in the model,
Simmering (2016) found that children’s preference scores in
the looking task were significantly correlated with their hit
rates (i.e., proportion correct on change trials) in change
detection. This relationship across tasks was not evident from
considering only the capacity estimates from each task, but
rather depended on a systematic understanding of how
cognition and behavior relate.

Figure 2. Sample trials from two tasks used to
estimate VWM capacity: (A) change detection used
with children and adults and (B) change-preference
used with infants.
The task used to estimate capacity during infancy, shown
in Figure 2B, is a variant of VPC called the change preference
paradigm. Infants are presented with the same number of
colored squares is presented on each of two displays. The
squares briefly appear and disappear repeatedly throughout
each trial; across these presentations, the colors in the “nochange” display remain the same; on the other “change”
display, one color changes following each blank delay.
Infants’ fixation is tabulated over the course of the trial, and
compared to chance (i.e., equal looking to both displays).
Capacity is estimated from the highest set size (i.e., number
of colors per display) at which infants show a reliable
preference for the “change” display. The rationale behind this
interpretation is that if infants can remember the colors within
a display, the “change” display will appear novel and
therefore support a looking preference. Ross-Sheehy et al.
(2003) estimated capacity to be only one item at 6 months,
but three to four items at 10 months. Oakes et al. (2006) then
showed that the capacity increase from one to three items
occurred between 6 and 7 months of age.
How can the change preference task yield a VWM capacity
of 3-4 items at 10 months but the change preference task only
yield a capacity of 1-2 items at 3 years? Perone et al. (2011)
situated the dynamic model in the change preference

Spatial Cognition and Development
The preceding sections showcased the use of the same
model and developmental mechanism to adapt across
contexts and development for visual (featural) memory
processes. In this section, we illustrate that the same model
4

3177

can be adapted to account for performance in four spatial
cognition tasks– (1) perseverative reaching in the Piagetian
A-not-B task, (2) A-not-B-type biases in a sandbox task, (3)
reference-related biases in spatial recall and (4) similar biases
in position discrimination. Moreover, we show that
developmental change across all of these domains was
explained with the SPH.

Implications and Future Directions
We presented a unified theory of working memory
development that spans an impressive number of domains
and periods of development. Importantly, this was only
possible by using a concrete tool – a computational model –
to tackle the difficult challenge of explaining cognition across
domains and development. There are a number of
implications of this work. First, our theory indicates that
cognitive processes are not domain specific. Instead, the
same general visual-cognitive system can account for
multiple neurocognitive processes by organizing itself
differently in different contexts with different behavioral
demands. These include infant habituation (looking), visual
working memory capacity (same/different judgments), and
spatial recall (position estimation). Second, our theory
indicates that the developmental mechanisms that drive
change across domains are not unique. We showed that the
SPH could account for changes in performance across
multiple domains and radically different periods of development. Last, our account raises the intriguing possibility that
we can target basic visual-cognitive processes to strengthen
early in development, which may have an impact across
many domains and over a long period of time.
One long-term goal of employing such a computational
framework is to make further connections across age groups
and domains, and to provide a mechanistic account of how
behavior emerges in specific task contexts. Such examples
can already be found in the domains of executive function
(e.g., Buss & Spencer, 2014; Perone, Molitar, Buss, Spencer,
& Samuelson, 2015) and word learning (e.g., Samuelson,
Schutte, & Horst, 2009; Samuelson, Smith, Perry, & Spencer,
2011). By connecting the same real-time processes of
encoding, maintaining, and comparing visual inputs with the
longer time-scale of learning in contexts that connect to
verbal labels, we can test how far relatively simple cognitive
mechanisms can go toward explaining complex behaviors
(cf. Smith, Jones, & Landau, 1996).

A-not-B Tasks
Beginning with the A-not-B task (cf. Thelen, Schöner,
Scheier, & Smith, 2001), weaker connectivity to simulate
early infancy (8-10 months) led to perseverative reaching
because the peak representing the second (B) location was
not strong enough to overcome the history of reaches at the
first location (A). With stronger connectivity to capture
development, this peak could be maintained accurately
through the delay to support accurate reaching as seen in
older infants (10-12 months).A similar interaction between
memory for the current target and prior reaches can be seen
in older children’s performance in a sandbox version of the
A-not-B task (e.g., Schutte, Spencer, & Schöner, 2003;
Spencer, Smith, & Thelen, 2001). Children between the ages
of 2 and 6 years show recall responses that are biased toward
previously-remembered locations, with a developmental
change in the spatial spread of this influence – younger
children’s performance is biased over larger separations than
older children’s (Schutte et al., 2003). This metric change in
the influence of reaching history in the task has been
simulated first through changes in the spread of activation
within the three-layer architecture (Schutte et al., 2003) and
later through changes in only the strength of connectivity
(Simmering et al., 2008; see Simmering & Schutte, 2015, for
further discussion). By showing that the SPH can account for
changes in infants’ performance in the canonical A-not-B
task as well as the metric changes during early childhood, this
model architecture brought together previously disconnected
age groups and tasks into a unified framework.

Spatial Recall & Discrimination

Acknowledgments

Young children’s performance in spatial recall tasks also
shows influences of the spatial structure of the space, in
addition to prior history of reaches. Specifically, young
children recall locations as closer to the midline symmetry
axis of the task space, whereas older children and adults recall
locations further from midline and the edges of the task space
(see Spencer, Simmering, Schutte, & Schöner, 2007, for review). These effects can be simulated in the same three-layer
architecture through the coordination between perceptual and
memory processes in the sandbox or “spaceship” tasks. As
connectivity strengthens over development, the representation of information in both perception and memory lead to
the transition in bias (Schutte & Spencer, 2009, 2010). These
processes operate continuously through time, and can be
detected even in the brief delay of position discrimination
tasks, linking together previously disconnected areas of
research (Simmering & Spencer, 2008).

Both authors contributed equally to this work. Thanks to
Aaron T. Buss, Christian Faubel, Jeffrey S. Johnson, John
Lipinski, Yulia Sandamirskaya, Sebastian Schneegans,
Gregor Schöner, Anne R. Schutte, and John P. Spencer for
helpful discussion and support during the development of this
line of research.

References
Amari, S. (1977). Dynamics of pattern formation in lateralinhibition type neural fields. Biological Cybernetics, 27,
77–87.
Buss, A. T., & Spencer, J. P. (2014). The emergent executive:
A dynamic field theory of the development of executive
function. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 79, 1–103.
Cohen, L. B. (1972). A two process model of infant visual
5

3178

attention. Paper presented at the Merrill Palmer Conference on Research and Teaching of Infancy Development.
Jankowski, J. J., Rose, S. A., & Feldman, J. F. (2001).
Modifying the distribution of attention in infants. Child
Development, 72, 339–351.
Johnson, J. S., & Simmering, V. R. (2015). Integrating
perception and working memory in a three-layer dynamic
field architecture. In G. Schöner, J. P. Spencer, & the DFT
Research Group (Eds.), Dynamic thinking: A primer on
dynamic field theory. New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
Johnson, J. S., Simmering, V. R., & Buss, A. T. (2014).
Beyond slots and resources: Grounding cognitive concepts
in neural dynamics. Attention, Perception, &
Psychophysics, 76, 1630–1654.
Johnson, J. S., Spencer, J. P., Luck, S. J., & Schöner, G.
(2009). A dynamic neural field model of visual working
memory and change detection. Psychological Science, 20,
568–577.
Luck, S. J. (2008). Visual short-term memory. In Visual
Memory. New York: Oxford University Press.
Oakes, L. M., & Ribar, R. J. (2005). A comparison of infants’
categorization in paired and successive presentation
familiarization tasks. Infancy, 7, 85–98.
Oakes, L. M., Ross-Sheehy, S., & Luck, S. J. (2006). Rapid
development of feature binding in visual short-term
memory. Psychological Science, 17, 781–787.
Pashler, H. (1988). Familiarity and visual change detection.
Perception and Psychophysics, 44, 369–378.
Perone, S., Molitar, S., Buss, A. T., Spencer, J. P., &
Samuelson, L. K. (2015). Enhancing the executive functions of 3-year-old children performing the dimensional
change card sort task. Child Development, 86(3), 812–827.
Perone, S., Simmering, V. R., & Spencer, J. P. (2011).
Stronger neural dynamics capture changes in infants’
visual working memory capacity over development.
Developmental Science, 14, 1379–1392.
Perone, S., & Spencer, J. P. (2013). Autonomy in action:
Linking the act of looking to memory formation in infancy
via dynamic neural fields. Cognitive Science, 37, 1–60.
Perone, S., & Spencer, J. P. (2014). The co-development of
looking dynamics and discrimination performance.
Developmental Psychology, 50, 837–852.
Rose, S. A., Feldman, J. F., & Jankowski, J. J. (2001).
Attention and recognition memory in the 1st year of life: A
longitudinal study of preterm and full-term infants.
Developmental Psychology, 37, 135–151.
Ross-Sheehy, S., Oakes, L. M., & Luck, S. J. (2003). The
development of visual short-term memory capacity in
infants. Child Development, 74, 1807–1822.
Samuelson, L. K., Schutte, A. R., & Horst, J. S. (2009). The
dynamic nature of knowledge: Insights from a dynamic
field model of children’s novel noun generalization.
Cognition, 110, 322–345.
Samuelson, L. K., Smith, L. B., Perry, L. K., & Spencer, J. P.
(2011). Grounding word learning in space. PLoS One,
6(12), e28095.

Schöner, G., Spencer, J. P., & the DFT Research Group.
(2015). Dynamic thinking: A primer on dynamic field
theory. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Schutte, A. R., & Spencer, J. P. (2009). Tests of the dynamic
field theory and the spatial precision hypothesis: capturing
a qualitative developmental transition in spatial working
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 35, 1698–1725.
Schutte, A. R., & Spencer, J. P. (2010). Filling the gap on
developmental change: Tests of a dynamic field theory of
spatial cognition. Journal of Cognition and Development,
11, 328–355.
Schutte, A. R., Spencer, J. P., & Schöner, G. (2003). Testing
the dynamic field theory: Working memory for locations
becomes more spatially precise over development. Child
Development, 74, 1393–1417.
Simmering, V. R. (2016). Working memory capacity in
context: Modeling dynamic processes of behavior,
memory, and development. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 81, 7–148.
Simmering, V. R., & Perone, S. (2013). Working memory
capacity as a dynamic process. Frontiers in Developmental
Psychology, 3, 567.
Simmering, V. R., & Schutte, A. R. (2015). Developmental
dynamics: The spatial precision hypothesis. In G. Schöner,
J. P. Spencer, & the DFT Research Group (Eds.), Dynamic
thinking: A primer on dynamic field theory. New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Simmering, V. R., Schutte, A. R., & Spencer, J. P. (2008).
Generalizing the dynamic field theory of spatial cognition
across real and developmental time scales. Brain Research,
1202, 68–86.
Simmering, V. R., & Spencer, J. P. (2008). Generality with
specificity: The dynamic field theory generalizes across
tasks and time scales. Developmental Science, 11, 541–
555.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., & Landau, B. (1996). Naming in
young children: A dumb attentional mechanism?.
Cognition, 60(2), 143-171.
Spencer, J. P., Simmering, V. R., Schutte, A. R., & Schöner,
G. (2007). What does theoretical neuroscience have to
offer the study of behavioral development? Insights from a
dynamic field theory of spatial cognition. In J. M. Plumert
& J. P. Spencer (Eds.), The emerging spatial mind. New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Spencer, J. P., Smith, L. B., & Thelen, E. (2001). Tests of a
dynamic systems account of the A-not-B error: The influence of prior experience on the spatial memory abilities of
2-year-olds. Child Development, 72, 1327–1346.
Thelen, E., Schöner, G., Scheier, C., & Smith, L. B. (2001).
The dynamics of embodiment: A field theory of infant
perseverative reaching. Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 24,
1–86.
Wilson, H. R., & Cowan, J. D. (1972). Excitatory and
inhibitory interactions in localized populations of model
neurons. Biophysical Journal, 12, 1–24.
6

3179

