Broadening the Scope of Recognition Memory
Justin M. Olds (justin.olds@unil.ch) & Julian N. Marewski (julian.marewski@unil.ch)
Department of Organizational Behavior, University of Lausanne
1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

including prior work that has examined their interconnected
nature. Within this review, we note criticisms of each line of
research. Following this, we (1) describe a research
methodology that draws upon both lines of work to address
these concerns, (2) present the results of an experiment
adopting this approach, and (3) discuss implications of these
results and considerations for future work.

Abstract
Within the literature of psychological and decision sciences,
there is a critical difference in the way recognition is defined
and studied experimentally. To address this difference, the
current experiment examines and attempts to disentangle the
influence of two recognition judgment sources (from within
an experiment and from an individual’s prior life experiences)
upon two different recognition judgments. By presenting
participants with a set of related stimuli that vary naturally in
environmental occurrence and by manipulating exposure
within an experimental context, this experiment allows for a
broader and more ecologically valid assessment of
recognition memory. Contrasting with the typical wordfrequency effect, the results reveal an overall bias to judge
high-frequency items as studied on an episodic recognition
test. Additionally, the results underscore the role of context
by showing that a single study exposure increases the
probability that individuals will judge stimuli as presented
outside the laboratory.
Keywords:
Recognition
ecological validity

memory;

Episodic Recognition in Memory Research
Recognition memory has been studied extensively with listlearning experiments. Here, stimuli, such as words or
pictures, are presented individually in the form of a study
list. After a delay ranging from a few seconds to multiple
days, participants are presented with a recognition memory
test list, and are asked to discriminate targets (stimuli from
the study list) from foils (new items). Episodic recognition
memory has been the focus of decades of extensive research
and has been noted as an increasingly prevalent research
paradigm (e.g., Hintzman, 2011).
A major strength of the episodic recognition memory line
of research is experimental control. This is, in part, achieved
by minimizing the role of individual stimuli, such as by
presenting mixed lists of unrelated and uncommon concrete
nouns. This approach follows in the footsteps of pioneering
memory researcher Ebbinghaus (1885), who used nonsense
stimuli to avoid the influence of everyday exposure.
The advantage of striving for experimental control in this
way is also a disadvantage when it comes to understanding
how memory judgments operate within everyday decisionmaking. For example, Neisser (1976) argued that memory
research should strive toward ecological validity. Drawing
upon work in perception by Brunswik (1957) and Gibson
(1979), ecological validity refers to applicability outside the
laboratory. The importance of ecological validity is
underscored by research on eyewitness testimony. For
instance, when participants study mixed lists of unrelated
words, a positive relationship between accuracy and
confidence is typically found (e.g., Dallenbach, 1913;
Dunlosky & Metcalfe, 2009). This intuitive finding
dovetails with the 1972 and 1976 U.S. Supreme Court
rulings suggesting that highly confident eyewitness
identification is likely accurate. This pattern, however, does
not hold for lists of similar material (i.e., categorized lists,
see e.g., DeSoto & Roediger, 2014), such as description
details of suspects presented to an eyewitness (e.g., Smith,
Kassin, & Ellsworth, 1989). It is disconcerting to consider
how other memory research findings might also be
misleading due to a similar lack of ecological validity.

decision-making;

Recognizing the Difference between
Recognition and Recognition
In general, recognition refers to the experience wherein
upon encountering a stimulus an individual has a sense that
she has encountered that stimulus before. A recognition
judgement, in turn, is when an individual explicitly claims
that a stimulus was previously encountered. Within the
literatures of psychological and decision sciences, there is a
critical difference in the way recognition is studied
experimentally. While one set of research focuses on an
individual’s capacity to recognize stimuli presented
previously within an experimental episode (episodic
recognition memory), the other set focuses on an
individual’s capacity to recognize stimuli as previously
encountered during the individual’s prior life experiences
before beginning an experiment (pre-experimental
recognition memory). Although these types of recognition
are typically studied independently, the sources of
experience related to both are inherently interconnected.
Indeed, the experience of recognition is influenced by an
individual’s prior life experiences as well as by the
experiences she has during an experiment. The current work
provides a framework for studying recognition memory in a
way that more readily relates to these two intertwined
factors.
In what follows, we first broadly describe the lines of
research related to both types of recognition judgements,

877

Departing from the convention of presenting participants
with mixed lists of uncommon, unrelated stimuli would
inherently introduce an additional factor, which might
interact with or overshadow other experimental
manipulations. Specifically, a by-product of presenting
participants with a more ecologically valid set of related
stimuli is that the individual items will vary based on how
often each occurs outside the laboratory. The influence of
environmental frequency upon episodic recognition
judgements has been the focus of extensive research (e.g.,
Dennis & Humphreys, 2001; Estes, 1994; Glanzer &
Adams, 1985; Lohnas & Kahana, 2013; McClelland &
Chappell, 1998; Shiffrin & Steyvers, 1997). In these
experiments, study and test lists are composed of unrelated
words that are sampled randomly from a range of low
linguistic frequency words and high linguistic frequency
words. The typical word-frequency finding on an episodic
recognition memory test is that low-frequency target words
are more accurately judged to be “old” than high-frequency
target words and low-frequency foil words are more
accurately judged to be “new” than high-frequency foils.
Although this line of research does begin to reintroduce the
influence of pre-experimental exposure into a laboratory
setting, these experiments still tend to favor experimental
control over ecological validity in numerous ways. First, the
study lists in these experiments are typically composed of
stimuli that are sampled from opposite poles along a
continuum of environmental frequency—either extremely
low-frequency or extremely high-frequency (but see Lohnas
& Kahana, 2013, for an exception), essentially transforming
the naturally continuous variable of environmental
frequency into a dichotomized factor. Second, the study and
test lists used in these experiments are often composed of
unrelated words. That is, the stimuli belong to many
disparate categories and, thus, do not related to one another
regarding any real-world inferences, such as person details
in relation to culpability.
It may be the case that, similar to experiments
investigating the word-frequency effect (e.g., Glanzer &
Adams, 1985), a mnemonic advantage for low-frequency
items emerges if participants are tested with a related set of
stimuli sampled with varying degrees of environmental
frequency. There is some evidence, however, suggesting
that this pattern of superior recognition accuracy for lowfrequency items might not persist. Specifically, in an
experiment by Jacoby, Woloshyn, and Kelley (1989), which
investigated the influence of environmental frequency by
composing study and test lists of famous and nonfamous
names, the results of an episodic recognition test revealed
that famous names (i.e., high-frequency items) were more
likely to be judged as presented on the study list than
nonfamous ones (i.e., low-frequency items), regardless of
whether or not they were actually studied. Thus, it may turn
out that the low-frequency item advantage, borne out of
memory research favoring experimental control over
ecological validity, may not hold when participants are
tested with sets of related stimuli.

Pre-Experimental Recognition in Decision-Making
Research
Numerous researchers have investigated how individuals
use pre-experimental recognition, a sense of prior exposure
to a stimulus outside the laboratory, during decision-making
(e.g., Dougherty, Gettys, & Ogden, 1999; Erdfelder,
Küpper-Tetzel, & Mattern, 2011; Goldstein & Gigerenzer,
2002; Hertwig, Herzog, Schooler, & Reimer, 2008;
Marewski & Schooler, 2011). A sense of pre-experimental
recognition has been shown to influence a wide array of
judgments, including about population size (e.g., Marewski
& Schooler, 2011), fame (Jacoby, Woloshyn, & Kelley,
1989), and company revenue (Hertwig, et al., 2008), to
name but a few. This work has shown that the frequency of
occurrence for a given stimulus in the environment (which
can be estimated by counting how often a stimulus, say a
city name, occurs on the Internet or in the print media),
allows for modeling how likely and how quickly the
stimulus is to be recognized (e.g., Hertwig et al., 2008).
Overall, this body of research underscores the intuitive
notion that a sense of recognition is paramount for making
many everyday decisions.
The influence of pre-experimental recognition upon
decision-making is typically studied within probabilistic
inference experiments, in which individuals are assumed to
use known attributes of a stimulus as cues to make
inferences about an unknown or future criterion. These
experiments typically include a recognition task and a
paired-comparison inference task. In the recognition task,
participants are shown a list of related stimuli, such as city
names, and asked to judge if they recognize each item from
their prior life experience. Additionally, some experiments
ask individuals to report if they have additional knowledge
beyond a sense of pre-experimental recognition for each
object. Reponses from this task and their respective
response times are later used, to predict judgments on the
paired-comparison inference task. In the paired-comparison
inference task, individuals are shown two items at a time
from a related set of stimuli and asked to infer which
alternative is higher or lower on some judgement criterion,
such as which of two cities has a larger population size.
In part because of its rigid simplicity, one decision
strategy in particular, the recognition heuristic (Goldstein &
Gigerenzer, 2002), has been the focus of much research and
debate. This strategy assumes that, stemming from an
existing relationship in the world between environmental
occurrence and a given criterion (e.g., population size), a
sense of pre-experimental recognition can readily guide
decisions in a straightforward way. Specifically, the
recognition heuristic assumes that on a paired-comparison
inference task, if one decision alternative is recognized and
the other is not, individuals will judge the recognized
alternative to have a higher value on the criterion.
In general, this line of research is aptly commended for
showcasing and exploring how memory is employed for
everyday decisions. One major criticism of this research,
however, is that the assumptions about recognition memory

878

fail to appropriately draw upon theory from the abundance
of related recognition memory research (e.g., Dougherty,
Franco-Watkins, & Thomas, 2008; Newell & Fernandez,
2006). It appears that much of the work on recognitionbased decision-making assumes that pre-experimental
recognition is a fixed commodity, whereas research
concerning episodic recognition memory has revealed many
ways in which a sense of recognition is influenced by
contextual conditions. For example, Jacoby et al. (1989)
found that presenting nonfamous names within an
experiment study phase increased the likelihood that these
nonfamous names would be incorrectly judged as famous
later (see also Hertwig et al., 2008). Related to this, Pohl
and colleagues (Pohl, Erdfelder, Michalkiewicz, Castela, &
Hilbig, 2016), point out two typical experimental procedure
choices that fail to consider how a sense of pre-experimental
recognition might be influenced by experimental conditions.
Both entail how participants, during an earlier part of the
experiments, are often exposed to the stimuli that they are
later asked to consider during a paired-comparison inference
task. First, to obtain a large number of paired-comparison
inference trials, items are often paired repeatedly with
different items, such that each item appears numerous times
during the task. Additionally, the order of the two tasks is
often counterbalanced across participants, such that some
participants have the recognition task first and others have
the paired-comparison inference task first. These two typical
methodology choices may influence the sense of preexperimental recognition and respective recognition speed
that individuals might use during decision-making.
Although Pohl and colleagues (2016) focused on
recognition speed specifically in relation to these
methodology concerns, context conditions such as exposure
within an experiment might also influence the probability
that participants will judge stimuli as recognized from
outside the laboratory. This is one of the concerns the
current approach addresses.

In relation to previous work, the current experiment also
addresses the following two questions. First, does the
typical low-frequency item advantage for episodic
recognition memory (e.g., Glanzer & Adams, 1985) occur
when individuals are tested with a more ecologically valid
set of stimuli (i.e., stimuli from a related set that vary based
on their natural occurrence outside the laboratory)? Second,
to what extend does a single incidental study exposure
influence judgements of pre-experimental recognition, and,
if so, does this influence depend on the environmental
frequency of stimuli?

Method
Participants A total of 63 individuals (mean age = 21.5
years, 56% female) recruited from the University of
Lausanne were paid roughly 26 Swiss francs each
(depending on performance) for participating in the
experiment. They were tested individually.
Design The study was conducted as a within-subjects design
with one independent variable, study status, one pseudoindependent variable, environmental frequency, and two
dependent variables (measured using within-subjects
blocks), episodic recognition judgements and preexperimental recognition judgements. Study status was
manipulated within-subjects by presenting half of the to-betested stimuli within a preceding study phase. Preexperimental frequency was estimated for each stimulus
using Wikipedia page occurrences as a proxy for
environmental occurrence.
Stimuli The stimuli presented during the experiment were
from a set of 200 city names from North American and
Western European countries (Canada, England, France,
Germany, Italy, Spain, and USA). Additionally, eight extra
city names were used at the beginning and end of the study
task to minimize primacy and recency study effects. The
city names used in the experiment were sampled such that
the entire set would include cities from each country that
varied in both population size (population statistics obtained
from www.citypopulation.de) and environmental occurrence
(as approximated by Wikipedia page occurrences) and
excluded capital cities. All stimuli were counterbalanced
such that each occurred roughly equally often in all study
and test conditions.
Procedure The experiment was conducted on a computer
using E-Prime experimental software (Psychology Software
Tools). Participants were informed that there would be three
separate tasks and payment would depend of their
performance in each task. First, all participants had an
incidental study task, in which half of the city names (100)
were presented. Specifically, participants were shown each
city name individually and asked to count the number of
vowels in each city name. At the beginning of each trial a
fixation cross (+) appeared on the screen for 2 s along with a
reminder of the task. Participants were informed that the
fixation cross would occur immediately before each city
name was presented to help them prepare to respond.
Afterwards, a city name replaced the fixation cross and

Experiment
The purpose of the current experiment is to investigate the
influence of two fundamental sources of experience, one
stemming a person’s prior life experiences before entering
the laboratory and another stemming from the experiences
within an experimental context, upon recognition
judgements. Specifically, the memory source related to the
experimental context here is a single study exposure and the
memory source related to prior life experiences is preexperimental exposure (estimated with web frequencies).
The influence of both sources is examined for both episodic
recognition (e.g., “Was this city name presented earlier
during the experiment?”) and pre-experimental recognition
(e.g., “Have you ever heard of this city name before
beginning the experiment?”). In line with ecological
validity, instead of informing participants that stimuli
presented during the study phase would be presented during
a later memory test, incidental study exposure was adapted
from Hertwig et al. (2008).

879

participants were prompted to press the appropriate number
key on the keyboard corresponding to the number of vowels
in the city name. Participants were given up to 4 s to make
their response and a blank screen was presented for 2 s
between trials.
The following test phase consisted of two separate tasks,
an episodic recognition task (“Was this city name presented
during the vowel counting task”) and a pre-experimental
recognition task (“Have you ever heard of this city name
before beginning the experiment?”). Participants were asked
to respond with one of two keyboard keys to respond “yes”
or “no” for each test trial. Participants were given as long as
needed to make their response in both tasks. Each task block
consisted of 100 trials, which included half studied and half
unstudied city names. Importantly, city names were not
repeated across test tasks, but were counterbalanced
between-subjects such that each city name would occur
roughly equally often in each test phase. The order of test
tasks was counterbalanced between-subjects. Similar to the
study phase, each trial began with a 2 s fixation cross and
was followed by a 2 s intertrial interval during both
recognition tasks.

participants, follow-up generalized linear mixed models
were conducted. The same pattern emerged: both factors of
study status (z = 5.22, p < .001) and environmental
frequency (z = 6.77, p < .001) contributed to the model fit,
and there was no evidence of an interaction between the two
found (χ2 = .78, df = 1, p = .38).

Results

Figure 1: Mean episodic recognition rates. The left side depicts the
mean influence of study exposure for all city names with standard
error bars. The right side depicts the influence of both study
exposure and environmental frequency for each city name with a
moving average for both studied and unstudied city names across
environmental frequency.

The data from all 63 participants was analyzed, excluding
trials for one city name due to a clerical error. Wikipedia
page occurrence values were log transformed to
approximate a linear relationship across city names (e.g.,
Marewski & Schooler, 2011). Given the two binary
dependent variables, separate logistic regressions were
planned for both episodic recognition and pre-experimental
recognition judgments.

Comparison to previous results The results from the
episodic recognition task contrast with the typical wordfrequency effect (e.g., Glanzer & Adams, 1985), which
reveal an interaction between study and environmental
frequency, such that low-frequency targets are recognized
more accurately (i.e., higher hit rate and lower false alarm
rate) than high-frequency targets and low-frequency lures
are correctly rejected more accurately than high-frequency
lures (e.g., Lohnas & Kahana, 2013). Instead, the current
results show that when participants are tested with a set of
related stimuli, high-frequency items are more likely to be
judged as studied regardless of if they were studied or
unstudied (i.e., higher hit and false alarm rates for highfrequency items). Why did this pattern of results differ from
the typical word-frequency effect? Although further work is
required to better address this question, we can provide
some speculation. The potentially stronger association with
the experiment context for low-frequency items, perhaps
due to item distinctiveness, may have been relatively diluted
in the current experiment for a number of reasons. First, one
important difference to remark upon is the overall low
episodic recognition accuracy from the current experiment
compared to previous word-frequency experiments (e.g.,
Lohnas & Kahana, 2013). We suspect this difference can be
attributed to the difficulty inherent in testing sets of related
stimuli and stemming from incidental study (e.g., Criss &
Shiffrin, 2004). This increased task difficulty may have led
participants be more influenced by the pre-existing
associations for high-frequency items, since these

Episodic Recognition Results from the episodic recognition
task are presented in Figure 1. From visual inspection of
Figure 1, two patterns are apparent. First, the probability
that participants judged city names as presented during the
study phase was higher for studied city names than for
unstudied city names. Second, the probability of judging
city names as studied increased as a function of
environmental frequency. Moreover, the difference in
recognition probabilities between studied and unstudied city
names did not seem to vary as a function of environmental
frequency. To test the influence of both factors (study status
and environmental frequency), a multilevel logistic
regression analysis was conducted to fit the episodic
recognition data. A test of the model against a constant only
model indicated that the predictors as a set provided an
improved fit (χ2 = 980, df = 2, p < .001, Nagelkerke’s R2 =
.20). The Wald criterion demonstrated both factors, study
status (z = 5.38) and environmental frequency (z = 6.82),
contributed to the model fit (p < .001 for both).
Additionally, by comparing the model to another which
included an additional interaction term of the two factors,
evidence of an interaction between study status and
environmental frequency was not found (χ2 = .27, df = 1, p =
.61). To control for the variance associated with the random
factor of repeated measurements from individual

880

associations are less contingent upon the study conditions
than the associations between the context and studied items.

relatively constant increase in the probability of preexperimental recognition across all items, regardless of
environmental frequency.

Pre-Experimental Recognition Results from the preexperimental recognition task are presented in Figure 2.
From visual inspection of Figure 2, two patterns are
apparent. First, the probability of judging city names as
recognized from outside the laboratory increased as a
function of environmental frequency. Second, the
probability that participants judged city names as
recognized from outside the laboratory was slightly higher
for studied city names than for unstudied city names.
Additionally, it appears that the influence of a study
exposure was relatively consistent across varying degrees of
environmental frequency. To test the influence of both
factors (study status and environmental frequency), a
multilevel logistic regression analysis was conducted to fit
pre-experimental recognition judgements using study status
and environmental frequency as predictors. A test of the
model against a constant only model indicated that both
predictors as a set provided an improved fit (χ2 = 1739, df =
2, p < .001, Nagelkerke’s R2 = .323). The Wald criterion
demonstrated both factors, study status (z = 4) and
environmental frequency (z = 32), contributed to the model
fit (p < .001 for both). Additionally, by comparing the
model to another which included an additional interaction
term for the two factors, evidence of an interaction between
study status and environmental frequency was not found (χ2
= .621, df = 1, p = .431). Evidence for the same pattern was
suggested by a generalized linear mixed model with the
categorical variable of participant included as a random
factor.

Figure 2: Mean pre-experimental recognition rates. The left side
bar graph depicts the mean influence of study exposure for all city
names with standard error bars. The right side depicts the influence
of both study exposure and environmental frequency for each city
name with a moving average for both studied and unstudied city
names across environmental frequency.

Discussion
The main purpose of the current work is to showcase a
broad approach to studying recognition memory—one that
considers how different types of recognition emerge as a
function of the interconnected factors of (1) an individual’s
prior life experiences and (2) an individuals’ recent and
current experiences within an experimental context. This
approach was designed to better translate results from
memory experiments into real-world situations. This was
achieved by testing recognition judgements for related
stimuli, which, in turn, we assume more readily relate to
everyday recognition judgments and memory-based
inferences. For instance, one might be asked to identify or
corroborate which colleagues were present at a company
meeting or holiday party. This would entail gauging
exposure within a context for a related set of stimuli (e.g.,
co-workers) that vary based on their environmental
frequency (i.e., some are more well-known than others).
This kind of everyday memory task contrasts sharply with
the typical kind of recognition memory task used in
psychology experiments, in which stimuli are unrelated and
environmental occurrence is either constrained or
dichotomized into highly disparate factor levels (extremely
low and high-frequency bins).
The importance of adopting a broader and more
ecologically valid approach to understanding recognition
memory is underscored by the current experiment results. In
contrast to the typical word frequency effect (increased
episodic recognition accuracy for low-frequency items)
found in many previous experiments, (e.g., Glanzer &
Adams, 1985; Lohnas & Kahana, 2013), the current

Comparison to previous results Similar to previous work
(e.g., Marewski & Schooler, 2011), the current results
support the use of web frequencies as a reasonable predictor
of pre-experimental recognition. The results from the preexperimental recognition task also converge with previous
work showing that an experimental exposure increases the
probability of inferring an item to be higher on a criterion
related to pre-experimental exposure, such as the fame of
individuals (Jacoby et al., 1989) or population size of cities
(Hertwig et al., 2008). Unlike previous work, however, the
current experiment examines the relationship of a single
incidental study exposure across items varying in
environmental frequency continuously from extremely
infrequent to extremely frequent. Importantly, the current
work examines pre-experimental recognition instead of
inference judgments, which are assumed to be influenced by
a sense of pre-experimental recognition. By focusing on this
more basic memory judgment, the current approach and
respective data reveal that the presentation of stimuli within
an experimental context influences a sense of preexperimental recognition that is core to much research on
memory-based decision research (e.g., Goldstein &
Gigerenzer, 2002). One novel finding is that, because of the
lack of an interaction between study and environmental
frequency, it appears a single study exposure results in a

881

models and the fast and frugal heuristics. Psychological
Review, 115, 199.
Dougherty, M. R., Gettys, C. F., & Ogden, E. E. (1999). MINERVADM: A memory processes model for judgments of
likelihood. Psychological Review, 106, 180.
Dunlosky, J., & Metcalfe, J. (2009). Metacognition. New York, NY:
Sage
Ebbinghaus, H. (1885). Über das gedächtnis: untersuchungen zur
experimentellen psychologie. Duncker & Humblot.
Erdfelder, E., Küpper-Tetzel, C. E., & Mattern, S. D. (2011).
Threshold models of recognition and the recognition
heuristic. Judgment and Decision Making, 6(1), 7.
Estes, W. K. (1994). Classification and Cognition. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception,
New York: Houghton Mifflin.
Glanzer, M., & Adams, J. K. (1985). The mirror effect in recognition
memory. Memory & Cognition. 12, 8-20.
Goldstein, D. G., & Gigerenzer, G. (2002). Models of ecological
rationality: the recognition heuristic. Psychological Review, 109, 75.
Hertwig, R., Herzog, S. M., Schooler, L. J., & Reimer, T. (2008).
Fluency heuristic: a model of how the mind exploits a by-product of
information retrieval. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 34, 1191.
Hintzman, D. L. (2011). Research strategy in the study of memory:
Fads, fallacies, and the search for the “coordinates of
truth”. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 6, 253-271.
Jacoby, L. L., Woloshyn, V., & Kelley, C. (1989). Becoming famous
without being recognized: Unconscious influences of memory
produced by dividing attention. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 118, 115.
Lohnas, L. J., & Kahana, M. J. (2013). Parametric effects of word
frequency in memory for mixed frequency lists. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 39,
1943.
Malmberg, K. J., & Murnane, K. (2002). List composition and the
word-frequency effect for recognition memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28,
616.
Manson v. Brathwaite, 432 U.S. 98,97 S.Ct. 2243 (1976).
Marewski, J. N., & Schooler, L. J. (2011). Cognitive niches: an
ecological model of strategy selection. Psychological Review, 118,
393.
McClelland, J. L., & Chappell, M. (1998). Familiarity breeds
differentiation: A subjective-likelihood approach to the effect of
experience in recognition memory. Psychological Review, 105, 724760.
Neil v. Biggers, 409 U.S. 188 (1972).
Neisser, U. (1976). Cognition and Reality. San Francisco: W.H.
Freeman.
Newell, B. R., & Fernandez, D. (2006). On the binary quality of
recognition and the inconsequentiality of further knowledge: Two
critical tests of the recognition heuristic. Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, 19, 333.
Pohl, R. F., Erdfelder, E., Michalkiewicz, M., Castela, M., & Hilbig,
B. E. (2016). The limited use of the fluency heuristic: Converging
evidence across different procedures. Memory & Cognition, 44,
1114-1126.
Shiffrin, R. M., & Steyvers, M. (1997). A model for recognition
memory: REM—retrieving effectively from memory. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 4, 145-166.
Smith, V. L., Kassin, S. M., & Ellsworth, P. C. (1989). Eyewitness
accuracy and confidence: within-versus between-subjects
correlations. Journal of Applied Psychology, 74, 356.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A heuristic for
judging frequency and probability. Cognitive Psychology, 5, 207232.

experiment results showed an increased tendency to judge
high-frequency items from a set of related stimuli as
studied.
The current experiment results also provide evidence
suggesting that context conditions, such as a single
incidental study exposure, influence pre-experimental
recognition judgements. This finding suggests that
researchers examining memory-based inferences should
strongly consider how often and in what manner stimuli are
presented within an experiment. Related to this concern,
although separate sets of stimuli were presented during both
recognition test phases (episodic and pre-experimental) of
the current experiment, we reanalyzed both sets of data with
the inclusion of test task order as a factor to help rule out the
influence of task demands upon the results. For both
recognition tasks, the same main effects (study exposure
and environmental frequency) and lack of interaction were
supported. Importantly, these results did not interact with
task order and a main effect of task order was not found.
There are numerous possible extensions of the current
work. One is to incorporate the influence of context factors
into
models
of
memory-based
decision-making.
Additionally, the influence of list composition (e.g.,
Malmberg & Murnane, 2002) upon both episodic and preexperimental recognition can be explored with sets of
related stimuli, such as city names. Although the current
experiment included related stimuli that varied widely on
environmental frequency and the stimulus set was somewhat
balanced, in that half of the city names were typically
recognized, it remains largely unexplored to what degree a
sense of recognition is influenced by the composition of
study and test lists of related sets of stimuli. Similar to list
composition effects, testing other stimulus materials, such
as eyewitness-related description details, may help reveal
the influence of varying environmental occurrence patterns.

Author’s Note
Correspondence: justin.olds@unil.ch. We would like to
thank Ulrich Hoffrage and the four anonymous reviewers
for their helpful comments on a previous version of this
article. This work was supported by a grant from the Swiss
National Science Foundation [159822].

References
Brunswik, E. (1957). Scope and aspects of the cognitive problem. The
essential Brunswik: Beginnings, explications, applications, 300-312.
Criss, A. H., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2004). Interactions between study task,
study time, and the low-frequency hit rate advantage in recognition
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 30, 778.
Dallenbach, K. M. (1913). The relation of memory error to time
interval. Psychological Review, 20, 323.
Dennis, S., & Humphreys, M. S. (2001). A context noise model of
episodic word recognition. Psychological Review, 108, 452.
Roediger III, H. L., & DeSoto, K. A. (2014). Confidence and memory:
Assessing positive and negative correlations. Memory, 22, 76-91.
Dougherty, M. R., Franco-Watkins, A. M., & Thomas, R. (2008).
Psychological plausibility of the theory of probabilistic mental

882

