Burstiness across multimodal human interaction reveals differences between
verbal and non-verbal communication
Drew H. Abney (dhabney@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Rick Dale (rdale@ucmerced.edu)
Chris T. Kello (ckello@ucmerced.edu)
Cognitive and Information Sciences
University of California, Merced, Merced, CA 95340 USA

Max M. Louwerse (m.m.louwerse@uvt.nl)
Center for Cognition and Communication
Tilburg University, Tilburg, Netherlands
Abstract

people speak (McNeill, 1992), and because of evidence
linking gesture with language development (Butcher &
Goldin-Meadow, 2000). In fact, non-verbal and verbal
communication are sometimes argued to be so interwoven
that gesture and speech are co-expressive manifestations of
one integrated system, forming complementary components
of one underlying process that helps organize thought
(Goldin-Meadow, 2005; McNeill, 1992).
Louwerse, Dale, Bard, and Jeuniaux (2012) investigated
the temporal relationship between matching behaviors in
dialog partners, such as manual gesture in one speaker vs.
the same manual gesture in the other speaker. By applying a
cross-recurrence analysis, Louwerse et al. showed
synchronized matching behavior in all categories (language,
facial, gestural) that were investigated at temporal lags short
enough to suggest imitation of one speaker by the other.
Louwerse et al. concluded that the similarities between the
different channels – verbal and non-verbal – demonstrated
that the temporal structure of matching behaviors provided
low-level and low-cost resources for human interaction.
So far, all studies focusing on the similarities between
verbal and non-verbal communication, including Louwerse
et al. (2012), focused on the temporal matching of verbal
and non-verbal behavior. They tend not to investigate the
temporal distribution of independent behavioral event
dynamics. Complex behaviors such as human interaction
tend not to show the strictest forms of synchrony, but
instead are more loosely, functionally coupled (e.g., Fusaroli
et al., 2014). Instead, the overall pattern of behavior,
expressed in the distribution of events, may reflect particular
local patterns of interaction – when one interlocutor
gestures, it may sustain itself for a given period of time
before waning; when another person speaks, this burst of
behavior may look quite different, sustaining itself for
longer, more regular periods of time. These event dynamics
might paint a different picture of the relationship between
verbal and non-verbal channels.

Recent studies of naturalistic face-to-face communication have
demonstrated temporal coordination patterns such as the
synchronization of verbal and non-verbal behavior, which provides
evidence for the proposal that verbal and non-verbal
communicative control derives from one system. In this study, we
argue that the observed relationship between verbal and non-verbal
behaviors depends on the level of analysis. In a re-analysis of a
corpus of naturalistic multimodal communication (Louwerse et al.,
2012), we focus on measuring the temporal patterns of specific
communicative behaviors in terms of their burstiness. We
examined burstiness estimates across different roles of the speaker
and different communicative channels. We observed more
burstiness for verbal versus non-verbal channels, and for more
versus less informative language sub-channels. These findings
demonstrate a new method for analyzing temporal patterns in
communicative behaviors, and they suggest a more complex
relationship between verbal and non-verbal channels than
suggested by prior studies.
Keywords: burstiness, multimodal communication, verbal
and non-verbal communication

Introduction
In cognitive science, a considerable number of studies have
investigated the role of non-verbal communication in
relation to verbal communication. The majority of these
studies suggest an intrinsic relationship between verbal and
non-verbal communication. For instance, a strong link has
been shown between lexical access and gesturing, such that
when people gesture, lexical access is facilitated (Rime &
Schiaratura, 1991). Also, the time gap between gesture and
a familiar word is considerably shorter than the gap between
gesture and an unfamiliar word (Morrel-Samuels & Krauss,
1992), and when speech is disrupted, gestures are halted
(Mayberry & Jaques, 2000). Gesture is thought to be
intrinsically related to language processing (Butterworth &
Morrissette, 1996) because most gestures occur when

39

we also investigated the burstiness of sub-channels that
constitute the language communicative channel. Our results
indicate that burstiness is different for verbal versus nonverbal behaviors, and also for different aspects of language
behaviors.

The Property of Burstiness
Most work studying human communication is based on
dyadic analyses that focus on temporal patterns across
partners rather than the temporal patterns of specific
behaviors produced by each partner. In the current study, the
large multimodal corpus of human communication collected
and reported in Louwerse et al. was re-analyzed to focus on
the quantification of a particular property of behavior,
burstiness.
Using the framework developed by Goh and Barabasi
(2008) and extended by others (e.g., Jo, Karsai, Kertész, &
Kaski, 2012), we estimated the burstiness of verbal and nonverbal behaviors. The burstiness parameter, B, provides an
estimate of a system’s activity patterns spanning from
periodic (B = −1), to random (B = 0), to theoretically
maximal burstiness (B = 1) (see Figure 1). Goh and
Barabasi (2008) observed that human phenomena like
human texts and email patterns have positive burstiness
estimates, B > 0, whereas human cardiac rhythms were
found to have periodic burstiness estimates, B < 0.

Methods
Multimodal Communication Corpus
The original task developed to collect these multimodal data
is described by Louwerse et al. (2008) and Louwerse et al.
(2012), who were interested in collecting multimodal
structure of human interaction in order to inform avatar
design for intelligent tutoring systems and other
technologies. In the task, N = 24 pairs of participants helped
each other navigate a map. Each pair of participants
completed 8 rounds of navigation. For each round, one
participant was chosen as the “Information Giver”, and
other the “Information Follower.” The Information Giver
had a complete map, and the Information Follower had a
noisy and partial map. This mismatch between maps was
intended to elicit communication and predict the points at
which misunderstandings were likely to occur. The
participants had to use language and gesture via webcam so
that the Information Follower could reconstruct a map route
with the help of the Information Giver. The corpus was
developed by taking these 192 recordings of interactions
and coding a wide variety of behaviors. These codings were
based on well-known or adapted coding schemes in
discourse, along with some other semi-automated
procedures (see Louwerse et al., 2008 for details). All
behaviors were coded in 250ms to encompass relatively fast
behaviors such as nodding, acknowledgements, and smiling.
The output from this coding procedure was a multicolumnar
data format of binary point series that represented the
occurrence of different behaviors at a 250ms interval. These
250ms intervals were the subject of our burstiness analyses.
We chose 39 behaviors that fit into four specific
behaviors channels (as did Louwerse et al., 2012).
Behavioral channels were categorized into two factors,
Channel and Role. For the Channel factor, channels were
identified as either “Face & Head,” “Manual Gesture,”
“Face Touch,” or “Language.” For the Role factor, channels
were identified as either Giver or Follower. For the levels of
the Role factor, all channels were included for the Giver and
the Follower. See Table 1 for the behaviors that were
included into each channel. The language sub-channels were
annotated at the utterance-level.

Figure 1: Overview of system’s activity patterns spanning
from periodic, to random, to theoretically optimally bursty.

The Current Study
The goal of the current study was to investigate the temporal
dynamics of behavioral events across verbal and non-verbal
communicative modalities during face-to-face human
interaction. We focus on the measure of burstiness, now
widely used in statistical physics to capture the temporal
patterns of point processes in complex network interactions.
In the first analysis section, we investigated whether or
not there were differences in the burstiness of behaviors that
are categorized into verbal and non-verbal channels. It is
possible that verbal and non-verbal channels have similar
degrees of burstiness, which would be consistent with
previous work suggesting a strong intrinsic relationship.
However, if the channels exhibit different degrees of
burstiness, such results would suggest a more complex
relationship between verbal and non-verbal communication.
To further explore and understand the burstiness measure,

40

We are interested in estimating the burstiness and memory of multimodal comm
with a multivariate class of spike trains. To our knowledge, the current study
burstiness and memory in multivariate spike train corpora. The protocol converts
accounting for simultaneous communicative events across channels.
First, for each channel, we created a spike train of onset events which exclude
for each communicative modality (linguistic or nonlinguistic), we summed th
linguistic or nonlinguistic communicative modalities, respectively), yielding a m
Table 1: List of Channels, Sub-channels, and Behaviors
between them, τ = tj+1 − tj. For an IEI that contains
sample when no event occurred,
a ’1’ represents a sample when one event occurr
simultaneous
communicative
behavior For
(2 orexample,
more events
in with an ”af
sample
when two or
more events occurred.
a sample
channel
sub-channels
behaviors
the
same
sample),
an
IEI,
τ,
was
computed
and
added
to
the
event would have a ”2” in the event series. Any sample with two or more ev
face &
mouth
laughing, lip tightening
distributionbehavior
in addition
towe
a zero
for below.
each additional
event. intervals (I
communicative
which
discuss
Finally, inter-event
head
For example, when an IEI with the second sample has 3
series to construct an IEI distribution for each communicative modality for each
eyes
blink, rolling eyes
events, we would add to the IEI distribution (1) the
An IEI is computed by considering two consecutive events, tj and tj+1 , and fi
eyebrows
asymmetrical, downcorresponding τ and (2) two zeros (0,0). We chose to add
t j . For an IEI
that contains simultaneous communicative behavior (2
j+1 component
frowning, out brow raiser t = tthis
to the protocol because we wanted to treat
was
computed
and
added
to the distribution
to a zero for each addi
head
nodding, shaking
simultaneous communicative
behaviorin addition
as quantitatively
the
second
sample
has
3
events,
we
would
add
to
the
IEI
distribution
(1) the c
’more bursty’. Adding zeros to an IEI distribution
will
manual
beat, deictic, iconic,
chose
to
add
this
component
to
the
protocol
because
we
wanted
to
treat
simultane
amplify a burstiness estimate. IEI distributions for each
gesture
metaphoric, symbolic
bursty’. Addingchannel
zeros toand
an IEI
distribution
willrole
inflate
a burstiness est
each
map task
were
touch
touching cheek, chinrest ’morecommunicative
communicative
modality
and
each
map
task
role
were
submitted
to estimates of
submitted to estimates of burstiness.
face
language dialogue acts acknowledgements, align,
of burstiness
and memory
Estimation
of Burstiness
check, clarify, explain, Estimation
The
burstiness
parameter,
B,
is
as, as,
instruct, query-what,
The burstiness parameter, defined
B, is defined
query-yes/no, ready,
reply-no, reply-what,
st mt
B=
,
reply-yes
st + mt
discourse
alright, no, ok, um, well,
connectives
yes
descriptions
color, compass direction,
where στ is the standard deviation of the IEI distribution and
digit, relative direction,
mτ is the mean of the IEI distribution (Goh & Barabási,
spatial preposition
2008; Jo, Karsai, Kertész, & Kaski, 2012). Alternative
measures of burstiness have been employed in previous
studies
in
computational
linguistics
(Altmann,
Construction of Multivariate Spike Trains and
Pierrehumbert, & Motter, 2009; Pierrehumbert, 2012)
utilizing parameter fitting from a stretched exponential
Inter-event Intervals
distribution (Weibull distribution). These alternative
We are interested in estimating the burstiness of multimodal
measures have provided unique insights into the dynamics
communicative behavior and are therefore working with a
of linguistic levels of description. Our decision to utilize the
multivariate class of spike trains. To our knowledge, the
burstiness parameter, B, is twofold. First, parameter
current study provides the first steps towards dealing with
estimation from a distribution requires a minimum number
burstiness in multivariate spike train corpora. The protocol
of data points or IEIs. Therefore, with the properties of our
converts multivariate spike trains into inter-event interval
corpus, parameter estimation from distribution fitting
(IEI) distributions. These interval distributions help quantify
requires the implementation of confidence intervals, which
the temporal clustering of communicative events across
can be avoided with the utilization of the burstiness
channels.
parameter, B. Second, one goal of this study is to account
First, for each behavior, we created a spike train of onset
for simultaneous communicative behavior as a higher
events which excludes successive ‘1’s for prolonged events.
degree of burstiness. The burstiness parameter, B, is
Second, for each communicative channel (Face & Head,
amplified when zeros are added to the IEI distribution and
Manual Gesture, Face Touch, Language), we summed the
therefore an ideal option for the current study. B is bounded
spike trains from each behavior, yielding a multimodal
from [-1,1], where B = 1 for a theoretical maximum bursty
event series where a ‘0’ represents a sample when no event
behavior, B = -1 for completely regular behavior (e.g.,
occurred, a ‘1’ represents a sample when one event
metronome), and B = 0 for a homogeneous Poisson process,
occurred, and any number greater than 1 represents a sample
i.e., independent events. We omitted trials that did not
when two or more events occurred. For example, a sample
include reliable burstiness estimates for any of the four
with a “Laughing” event and a “Nodding” event would have
channels across the MapTask roles in the first analysis
a “2” in the event series. Any sample with two or more
section (1.24% of trials) and for any of the three channels
events is considered a sample of simultaneous
across the MapTask roles in the second analysis section
communicative behavior which we discuss below. Finally,
(1.00% of trials).
IEI’s were computed from the multimodal event series to
construct an IEI distribution for each channel for each map
task role (Giver or Follower).
An IEI is computed by considering two consecutive
events, tj and tj+1, and finding the temporal difference

41

Table 2: Multiple Comparisons from the random mixed
effects model: *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001.
Multiple Comparisons
Beta
Z-score
Channel Man. Gest. v. Face/Head
.08
7.9***
Touch Face v. Face/Head
.11
9.6***
Language v. Face/Head
.17
16.7***
Touch Face v. Man. Gest.
.02
2.2
Language v. Man. Gest.
.08
7.5***
Language v. Touch Face
.05
4.6***
Role
Leader v. Follower
.01
.7
Int.
F:Man. Gest v. F:Lang
-.07
-4.79 ***
G:Man. Gest. v. G:Lang
.05
3.17*
F:Man. Gest v. G:Lang
.06
3.08*
G:Man. Gest v. F:Lang
.04
2.79

Burstiness

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00
Face & Head

Manual Gesture

Face Touch

Language

Channel

0.20

Burstiness

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00
G:Face & Head G:Manual Gesture G:Face Touch

G:Language

F:Face & Head F:Manual Gesture

F:Face Touch

The communicative channel x map task role interaction
was significant, F(3, 1030) = 20.97, p < .0001, therefore, we
tested for multiple comparisons using Tukey Honestly
Significant Difference tests to investigate differences within
and across MapTask roles (Figure 2b). At this level of the
analysis, we were specifically interested in the differences
between language and manual gestures, so we limit our
report to those subsets of the analysis. We observed withinrole differences between language and manual gesture
burstiness estimates for the Follower role (b = -.07, p <
.001) and for the Giver role (b = .05, p = .03). We also
observed a between-role difference for Follower: Manual
Gesture v. Giver: Language (b=.06, p=.04). The results from
this analysis suggest that, across map task role, the verbal
channel (i.e., language channel) had higher burstiness
estimates relative to the non-verbal channels, and
specifically the manual gesture channel.

F:Language

Channel

Figure 2a and 2b: Burstiness across channels with a)
Information Giver (G) and Follower (F) combined, and b)
the roles separated. Error bars reflect 95% CIs.

Investigating Differences in Burstiness across
Verbal and Non-verbal Channels
Mixed effects models (Bates et al., 2014; Team R., 2013)
were utilized to determine if burstiness differed across
different channels. The first set of analyses was conducted
to compare burstiness estimates across role structure and
communicative channels. Linear models were utilized to
predict burstiness estimates. Fixed effects for these models
included map task role (leader or follower), communicative
channels (Face & Head, Manual Gesture, Face Touch, and
Language), and event count for each communicative
channel. Event count was added into the model as a
covariate to control for the potential relationship between
burstiness estimates and the number of behavioral events
going into the analysis. Dyad and map type were included as
random effects.
If there are differences across communicative channels,
we can observe such differences in a variety of ways: are
there differences in the temporal structure across
communicative modalities (1) collapsing burstiness
estimates across MapTask roles? (2) within MapTask roles
(e.g., Follower:Manual Gesture vs. Follower:Language)?
and/or (3) across MapTask roles (e.g., Follower:Manual
Gesture vs. Giver: Manual Gesture)?
Collapsing burstiness estimates across MapTask role, we
observed a significant main effect of communicative
channel, F(3, 1030) = 162.55, p < .0001 (Figure 2a). See
Table 2 for results from multiple comparison tests. Overall,
the language channel (M=.16, SE=.003) was observed to be
more bursty relative to the manual gesture channel (M = .14,
SE = .01), b = .08, p = .009.

Investigating the Relative Magnitude of
Burstiness in the Language Channel
In the last section, we established that communicative
channels exhibit temporal patterns of behavior that (1) vary
across verbal and non-verbal channels and (2) are all bursty
relative to exhibiting random or periodic temporal patterns.
But what does it mean to be more bursty? It is important to
note that these channels are made up from specific subchannels that are further made up from individual behaviors.
In an effort to better understand the relative magnitude of
burstiness, in this section, we focused on the language
channel because this channel exhibited the highest estimates
of burstiness. Specifically, we zoomed into the language
channel and investigated the temporal patterns of the subchannels.
The language channel is made up of three specific subchannels: dialogue acts, discourse connectives, and
descriptions. We expected to observe higher burstiness
estimates for the ‘descriptions’ sub-channel relative to the
other two channels. This hypothesis is motivated by
previous research that focused on the burstiness of various
linguistic levels in texts (Altmann, Cristadoro, & Esposti,

42

Discussion

2012; Altmann, Pierrehumbert, & Motter, 2009). Altmann
et al. (2009) observed that burstiness increased across
semantic classes where ‘entities’ like proper nouns had
higher burstiness estimates relative to predicates like in,
which in turn had higher estimates than higher level
operators like the. If the results observed in texts are
consistent with human dialogue, we should expect to
observe that descriptions like providing a relative direction
will have higher burstiness estimates relative to dialogue
acts like saying no or discourse connectives like saying um.

The primary goal of the current paper was to better
understand the temporal patterns of verbal and non-verbal
behaviors during face-to-face multimodal human
communication. We submitted the multimodal corpus to an
analysis of burstiness. In the first analysis section, we
observed that communicative channels differed in the
degree of burstiness, with the verbal channel having higher
burstiness estimates relative to non-verbal channels like
manual gestures, face & head, and face touch. To add
nuance to this result, in the second analysis section, we
focused on better understanding the magnitude of
burstiness, and zoomed into the language channel. In this
analysis, we observed that a more informative sub-channel,
‘descriptions’, had higher burstiness estimates relative to
sub-channels that focused on operators and modifiers.
Much work in the cognitive sciences has argued that
verbal and non-verbal behaviors are intrinsically related via
the same communicative system (Golden-Meadow, 2005;
McNeill, 1992). Recent work (Louwerse et al., 2012) has
made this argument by focusing on evidence of
synchronization across verbal and non-verbal channels. In
the current paper, we observed that, verbal and non-verbal
channels differ in terms of estimates of their temporal
burstiness. An important question is what these differences
reflect. To begin to find an answer to this question, we
examined certain language sub-channels and found higher
degrees of burstiness for descriptive productions compared
to pragmatic productions like dialog acts or connectives.
Considering the latter results, there are a few possible
explanations for the observation that verbal and non-verbal
channels exhibit different types of temporal patterns, with
the verbal channel exhibiting higher burstiness estimates.
The first possible explanation is that increased estimates of
burstiness for the verbal channel means that more
information is contained within this communicative channel
relative to the non-verbal channels. This suggestion is
influenced by the observations of higher degrees of
burstiness in higher-level semantic classes in texts
(Altmann, et al., 2009) and higher degrees of burstiness in
descriptive sub-channel in dialogue (the current paper’s
second analysis section). If this is the case, our results point
to the proposal that verbal channels during human
communication are more informative relative to non-verbal
channels. However, this possibility seems unlikely because
our own results show that the direction of burstiness
estimate differences for the language and manual gesture
channels are not consistent: higher estimates for language
relative to manual gesture for the information giver and
higher estimates for manual gesture relative to language for
the information follower.
The second possible explanation is that an important
property of multimodal communication is having a
collection of different types of temporal patterns across
communicative channels. This proposal, what we call the

Burstiness

0.05

0.00

-0.05

-0.10

Dialogue Acts

Discourse Connectives

Descriptions

Sub-channel

0.10

Burstiness

0.05

0.00

-0.05

-0.10

G:Dialogue Acts

G:Discourse Connectives

G:Descriptions

F:Dialogue Acts

F:Discourse Connectives

F:Descriptions

Sub-channel

Figure 3a and 3b:
Burstiness across language channels with a) Information
Giver (G) and Follower (F) combined, and b) the roles
separated. Error bars reflect 95% CIs.
Linear models were utilized to predict burstiness
estimates. Fixed effects for these models included map task
role (Giver or Follower), language sub-channels (Dialogue
Acts, Discourse Connectives, Descriptions), and event count
for each communicative channel. Similar to the previous
analysis section, event count was added into the model to
act as a covariate to control for the potential relationship
between burstiness estimates and the number of events
going into the analysis. Dyad and map type were again
included as random effects. We observed that descriptions
(M = .08, SE = .005) had higher burstiness estimates relative
to discourse connectives (M = -.06, SE = .004, b = .06, p <
.001) and dialogue acts (M = -.11, SE = .004; b = .17, p <
.001) (Figure 3a). Discourse connectives and dialogue acts
were both more periodic than bursty, and dialogue acts were
more periodic (closer to -1) relative to discourse connectives
(b = .11, p < .001). These results suggest that various levels
of verbal dialogue have different temporal patterns and such
patterns have interesting parallels to previous research
studying the burstiness of text corpora. We discuss these
parallels in addition to the insights gained from the analysis
section to better understand the pattern of results in the
previous analysis section.

43

‘temporal heterogeneity’ hypothesis, suggests that
successful communication emerges from a diverse suite of
information channels that vary in temporal properties. An
important adaptive property of a complex system, such as a
dyadic communicative system (Dale, Fusaroli, Duran, &
Richardson, 2013; Fusaroli, Raczaszek-Leonardi, & Tylén,
2013), is the ability for multiple components with specific
intrinsic properties to self-organize to form higher-level
structures (Kello & Van Orden, 2009; Kugler & Turvey,
1987). This proposal is amenable to the hypothesis that
verbal and non-verbal channels are part of the same
integrated system (Golden-Meadow, 2003; McNeill, 1992)
and that gesture and speech are complementary
communicative channels important for the resolution of
referential expressions (Louwerse & Bangerter, 2010;
Seyfeddinipur & Kita, 2001). The current paper contributes
to this line of argument by showing, at a specific level of
analysis, that verbal and non-verbal channels have different
types of temporal patterns and that the heterogeneity of
these temporal patterns might be important for successful
communication. Another important contribution is the
introduction to a simple analysis of the temporal structure of
behavioral event dynamics, the burstiness analysis. Future
work is required to better understand the connection
between varying degrees of burstiness across diverse types
of human behavioral patterns.

Butterworth, G., & Morissette, P. (1996). Onset of pointing
and the acquisition of language in infancy. Journal of
Reproductive and Infant Psychology, 14(3), 219-231.
Dale, R., Fusaroli, R., Duran, N., & Richardson, D. C.
(2013). The self-organization of human interaction.
Psychology of learning and motivation, 59, 43-95.
Fusaroli, R., Rączaszek-Leonardi, J., & Tylén, K. (2014).
Dialog as interpersonal synergy. New Ideas in
Psychology, 32, 147-157.
Goh, K. I., & Barabási, A. L. (2008). Burstiness and
memory in complex systems. EPL (Europhysics Letters),
81(4), 48002.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (2005). Hearing gesture: How our
hands help us think. Harvard University Press.
Jo, H. H., Karsai, M., Kertész, J., & Kaski, K. (2012).
Circadian pattern and burstiness in mobile phone
communication. New Journal of Physics, 14(1), 013055.
Kello, C. T., & Van Orden, G. C. (2009). Soft-assembly of
sensorimotor function. Nonlinear dynamics, psychology,
and life sciences, 13(1), 57.
Kugler, P. N., & Turvey, M. T. (1987). Information, natural
law, and the self-assembly of rhythmic movement.
Routledge.
Louwerse, M. M., Dale, R., Bard, E. G., & Jeuniaux, P.
(2012). Behavior matching in multimodal communication
is synchronized. Cognitive science, 36(8), 1404-1426.
Louwerse, M. M., & Bangerter, A. (2010). Effects of
ambiguous gestures and language on the time course of
reference resolution. Cognitive Science, 34(8), 15171529.
Mayberry, R., & Jaques, J. (2000). Gesture production
during stuttered speech: insights into the nature of speechgesture integration. Language and Gesture, 199-215.
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and mind: What gestures reveal
about thought. University of Chicago press.
Morrel-Samuels, P., & Krauss, R. M. (1992). Word
familiarity predicts temporal asynchrony of hand gestures
and speech. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18(3), 615.
Pierrehumbert, J. B. (2012). Burstiness of verbs and derived
nouns. In Shall We Play the Festschrift Game? (pp. 99115). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Rime, B., & Schiaratura, L. (1991). Gesture and Speech.
Chicago.
Seyfeddinipur, M., & Kita, S. (2001, June). Gestures and
self-monitoring in speech production. In Annual Meeting
of the Berkeley Linguistics Society (Vol. 27, No. 1, pp.
457-464).

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NIH, T32 Grant # HD07475
awarded to the first author, and NSF-IIS-0416128 awarded
to the last author. The usual exculpations apply.

References
Altmann, E. G., Pierrehumbert, J. B., & Motter, A. E.
(2009). Beyond word frequency: Bursts, lulls, and scaling
in the temporal distributions of words. PLoS One, 4(11),
e7678.
Altmann, E. G., Cristadoro, G., & Degli Esposti, M. (2012).
On the origin of long-range correlations in texts.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
109(29), 11582-11587.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2014).
lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using Eigen and S4. R
package version, 1(7).
Butcher, C., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2000). Language and
gesture. Gesture and the transition from one-to two-word
speech: When hand and mouth come together, 235-257.

44

