Cascading effect of context and competition on novel word learning
Sarah C. Kucker (kuckers@uwosh.edu)
Aaron Bagley (baglea45@uwosh.edu)
The University of Wisconsin Oshkosh; Department of Psychology
800 Algoma Blvd; Oshkosh, WI 54901 USA

Most recently, there has been a further push to view word
learning as a process that unfolds over multiple timescales
instead of a one-shot learning episode (Kucker, McMurray,
& Samuelson, 2015). The initial mapping between a new
word and its referent happens in real-time. This is an in-themoment process of comprehending “Where’s the wif?” or
“Get the dax.” However, this initial association between the
word and referent is often weak and transient. Over time and
repetitions the word-referent association becomes honed and
strengthened, partially by reinforcing the correct links but
also by pruning away incorrect associations (McMurray,
Horst, & Samuelson, 2012). Regardless if it is children,
adults, or robots, word learning requires real-time responses
to interact with slower associative mechanisms. Successful
long-term learning thus depends partially on the context in
which the word-referent pair was initially encoded as well
as the context in which it is stored and retrieved.

Abstract
Learning, especially in the case of language acquisition, is not
an isolated process; there is ever-present competition between
words and objects in the world. Such competition is known to
play a critical role in learning. Namely, the amount and
variability of competing items during word learning have
been shown to change learning trajectories in young children
learning new words. However, very little work has examined
the interaction of competition amount, competition
variability, and task demands in adults. The current study
assesses adults’ ability to map new word-referent pairs in
varying amounts of competition and competitor variability. In
addition, the effect of mapping context on retention was
assessed. Results suggest that retention is weak in some cases
and importantly, there are cascading effects of competitor
variability in mapping on later retention of new words.
Results are discussed in light of associative learning
mechanisms and the implications of competition for learning.
Keywords:
competition

word

learning;

fast

mapping;

context;

Competition in Mapping

Introduction
Word learning always occurs in a context. New words are
encountered in a conversation, new objects are alongside
others on a shelf, and word-referent pairs are embedded in
fleeting moments. Often, the referent for a word is not
immediately clear. It is precisely this complexity and
ambiguity that has puzzled researchers for decades – how do
individuals, and young children in particular, correctly map
a novel word to its referent amidst dozens of possible
objects in the world around them? The last few decades of
research have subsequently resulted in multiple pathways by
which children overcome the problem of referential
ambiguity to acquire new words and add them to their
lexicon. We know that children appear to use their prior
knowledge of objects (e.g. mutual exclusivity; Markman &
Wachtel, 1988), novelty (e.g. N3C; Mervis & Bertrand,
1994), and social cues (Akhtar, Carpenter, & Tomasello,
1996) to eliminate competitors and focus on the target. We
know that the number of competitors present (Zosh,
Brinster, & Halberda, 2013) and the context in which
objects are encountered (Horst, 2013) matter. And we know
that as a child’s vocabulary grows, so too does their
performance in word learning tasks (Bion, Borovsky, &
Fernald, 2013). There has also been parallel research on
how both adults (Alt & Gutman, 2009; Greve, Cooper, &
Henson, 2014; Halberda, 2006; Warren & Duff, 2014) and
robots (Morse et al., 2015; Twomey, Morse, Cangelosi, &
Horst, 2016) acquire new words.

Across all work on word learning, there is one factor that is
consistent – competition. Competition occurs between
objects present in the world, between words in the lexicon,
and between former knowledge and new. At times there
exists a lot of competition, while at other times the
competition is limited. Sometimes, the competing items that
may be present are relevant and helpful (e.g. learning about
forks while in the kitchen), and sometimes the competitors
and context are not. In addition, the initial context in which
a word is mapped to its referent can vary widely not just
between people or words, but even across occurrences of a
single word. That is, the word fork may be heard primarily
in the kitchen, but occasionally could be used while outside.
This competition and its variability have cascading effects
on retrieval and retention of newly learned information.
One of the classic tests of word learning is Carey and
Bartlett’s (1978) study of “fast-mapping”. Here, preschool
children were presented with a novel word while in a
classroom, surrounded by multiple people and objects and
tested on their ability to accurately “Get the chromium tray,
not the blue one”. This referent selection task has been used
for decades to test not just an individual’s ability to map
words and referents in ambiguous scenes, but also retain
newly mapped word-referent pairs until a later time.
A critical part of the classic referent selection task is the
presence of competition - in order to get the chromium tray,
children had to decide against the blue tray and not pick up
a cup or spoon. In many variations of the task, there is
obviously competition between multiple items that may be
present (e.g. tray vs. cup). Other versions of the task

2482

highlight the competition between known items and novel
(e.g. blue vs. chromium). And others try to eliminate direct
competition by directly naming a single item. Regardless of
the number or type of competitors, both children and adults
are easily able to map a novel word to a novel referent inthe-moment (Horst, Scott, & Pollard, 2009; Warren & Duff,
2014; Greve, et al., 2014), becoming increasingly successful
over development (Bion, Borovsky, & Fernald, 2013).
However, real-time eye-tracking behavior does suggest
there are differences in mapping due to competition. For
instance, when children and adults are presented with both a
known and a novel object and hear a novel word, they
reliably look to the competing known items before settling
on the novel referent (Halberda, 2006). In addition, there is
evidence that explicit selection of a competitor (in error) can
still lead to later learning (Fitneva & Christiansen, 2011).
Thus, the simple presence of competitors can change even
subtle selection behaviors and cognitive processing.
Furthermore, other work suggests that the details about
how many competitors or the variability of the competitors
also shift real-time processing, which has cascading effects
on long-term learning. First, work with children suggests
that the number of competitors present during mapping has
a direct negative correlation on performance – fewer items
seem to help mapping (Axelsson, Churchley, & Horst,
2012), but more competitors benefit long-term learning
(Zosh, et al., 2013). And, computational models of referent
selection and retention propose that though more
competition during mapping requires more cognitive
processing, it also results in more opportunities for pruning
away spurious word-referent links, thus allowing more
honing in a single trial (McMurray, et al., 2012). This
subsequently boosts retention (McMurray, Zhao, Kucker, &
Samuelson, 2013). In a recent study of adult word learning,
encoding new words with competitors resulted in almost
immediate lexical competition between the new word and
known word. However, learning that occurred in an isolated,
direct-naming context did not (Coutanche & ThompsonSchill, 2014). Competitive initial learning also led to
broader semantic networks days later. Taken together, the
amount of competition influences real-time processing and
has cascading effects on long-term retention.
In addition to the amount of competition present, the type
of competition may also play a role. Specifically, the
relevance and variability of competing known foil items
interacts with new word-referent pairs. Recent work has
demonstrated that young children often learn new words
better when couched in a known context, such as when
drawn from a category of objects they are familiar with
(Borovsky, Ellis, Evans, & Elman, 2016), or when an item
is physically located in a related scene (Meints, Plunkett,
Harris, & Dimmock, 2004). It is also clear that both children
and adults pay attention to competitors even if they are not
the target. In some cases, children implicitly extract some
minor representation or memory for competitors such that
they are more likely to look at them later (Wojick, 2013). In
other cases, adults recall semantic information about the

novel target, acquired while the target was presented in
various scenarios (Alt & Gutman, 2009). In addition,
context diversity is more predictive of word knowledge in
adults (and vocabulary acquisition in children) than simple
frequency of occurrence (Adelman, Brown, & Quesada,
2006; Hills, Maouene, Riordan, & Smith, 2010). Put
together, this suggest that the composition of, and
specifically the relationship between, the competitors might
matter not just for mapping, but also for retention.

Competition in Retention
Generally, adults are considered to be good at learning
new words, performing well above chance on laboratory
tasks (Greve, et al., 2014). However, we also know that an
individual’s ability to retain newly learned words is reliant
on a number of factors, such as the length of delay (Vlach &
Sandhofer, 2012; McGregor, 2014) and phonological
neighbors (Tamminen & Gaskell, 2008). Work with
children has suggested that retention is also partially
dependent on the number of competitors present during
mapping (Zosh, et al., 2013), and the types of cues present
during encoding (Capone & McGregor, 2005).
Furthermore, most work showing good retention with adults
has thus far primarily used relatively easy task – pulling the
target out of a three-item array. Thus, though adults are
expected to be good at learning new words, it is likely that
competition can still play a role. A recent study by
Dautriche and Chemla (2014) found context effects in crosssituational learning where consistent repetition of
competitors over the course of multiple blocks led to
improvements in memory for both the broader context
group and target. Learning here was tested through forcechoice selection of the target from four-item array. In
another study, Warren and Duff (2014) tested retention after
a zero competitor/ ostensive (direct) naming condition as
well as a two-item referent selection condition. Critically,
they looked at retention with both a three-alternative forcedchoice recognition test (3AFC) and free recall (recalling
word-forms from test). Overall, typically developing adults
selected the referent on the 3AFC test well above chance,
near 65% correct, for both conditions. However, free recall
varied between the mapping contexts - accuracy was higher
for words learned directly without competitors than those
with competition during mapping. That is, though context
may influence initial encoding, the method for tapping
retention is critical in assessing the robustness of the newly
acquired word-referent pair.
Despite the lack of work on competition effects on the
retention of new words, the evidence suggests that the
associative learning processes of adults, like children, are
highly variable and occur incrementally over multiple
timescales (Kucker, et al., 2015). Such associative
processing occurs over the lifespan and critically, some
propose that the complex networks in which new words are
learned are also linked with advances in other areas of
cognition (Roembke, Wasserman, & McMurray, 2016).
Thus, the process of learning a single new word has

2483

important implications for broader theories of associative
learning and cognition.

Table 1. Mapping conditions
Condition # of
Example trial
Comp
etitors
“Which is the cheem?”

Current Study
Competition is widely accepted as highly relevant for word
learning, but there is still much debate about how much
competition is optimal and what effects initial competition
has on long-term learning. Both the number and variability
of competitors has been studied in word learning of young
children (though with mixed results); much less work has
been conducted in adults despite the fact that adults too,
continue to learn new associations. In addition, the question
of how adults learn simple associations (such as words) is at
the crux of many computational models of learning and
information processing (e.g. Regier, 2005; McMurray, et al.,
2012). Thus, there is a gap in understanding both how an
adult’s real time processing changes across contexts and the
impact the contexts have on their retention of new wordreferent associations. The current study fills this gap by
combining word learning methods from work with children
with the adult literature to test the impact of competition
(amount and variability) on in-moment mapping, and the
cascading effects mapping context has on retention.
Furthermore, learning is assessed with two different
methods to tap both weak associations that may be
recognized in an array but not recalled as well as robust
associations that can be easily recalled without cues.

Methods
Participants
A total of 149 adults participated. All individuals were
monolingual English speakers and provided informed
consent before participating. Individuals were recruited
either through a current college course (receiving course
credit), or through Amazon’s MTurk (receiving $1.75).

Stimuli
Individuals saw a randomly selected subset of known and
novel words and objects over the course of the experiment.
Known items were drawn from pools of prototypical toys
(book, ball, drum, block), kitchen utensils/tools (fork,
spoon, bowl, cup), vehicles (car, boat, airplane, bike),
clothing (shoe, hat, belt, purse), or furniture (chair, bed,
lamp, clock). All images were previously normed by a
separate set of adults to elicit their respective labels and be
obvious members of their category. Novel items were drawn
from a pool of unique items typically used in child word
learning studies. These items were judged in prior studies to
be highly unfamiliar and not easily named by most adults
(Horst & Hout, 2016). Novel words were legal words in
English but had few or no known orthographic neighbors.

OD none

0

3AFC vary

2

5AFC vary

4

3AFC same

2

5AFC same

4

and all completed the entire study on-line in a single sitting.
Conditions varied in the number of competitors present
during initial mapping and the variability of competitors
present (Table 1). The number of competitors varied from
zero to four with the to-be-learned novel object present
alongside no other items (ostensive definition trial; OD
none), paired with two distinct known competitors (3 total
items, alternative forced-choice trial; 3AFC), or paired with
four distinct known competitors (5AFC) on each trial.
Competitors also differed in their variability – competitor
items were either variable, drawn from distinct known
categories (vary), or clustered and drawn from the same
category (same).
Each condition began with a mapping phase in which
participants were initially exposed to novel word-referent
pairs, followed by a retention phase in which they were
tested on their memory for the word-referent pairs from
mapping. During the mapping phase, participants were
instructed to pay attention to a series of word-referent pairs
presented on the screen. One each trial, a novel printed word
was presented along with an image of a novel object. In the
OD none (0 competitions) condition, no other items were
present on the screen. In the 3 and 5 item conditions (3AFC,
5AFC), 2 or 4 images of known items were respectively
presented alongside the novel item. Items were presented
equally spaced in a horizontal row with location randomized
across trials. In each case, the participant had to click on the
correct referent before proceeding to the next trial. Novel
word-referent pairs were presented at least once (in the case
of OD none) and no more than three times (for most AFC
versions) over the course of all training trials (referred to as
Novel Mapping trials). The 3AFC and 5AFC conditions
also included filler/catch trials in which participants were
asked to select one of the known items (referred to as
Known Mapping trials). These were included both as catch
trials and to draw the participants attention to the
competitors in order to increase encoding of them. There
were between 12 and 16 total mapping trials and each
participant was trained on 4-5 novel words.

2484

Results
Average percent correct for each participant on Known
Mapping trials, Novel Mapping trials, Forced Choice
(recognition) Retention, and Free Recall Retention were
scored. Both Mapping trials and the Forced Choice
Retention were calculated as percent of trials an individual
correctly chose the target. Free Recall response was scored
by 2-3 independent, blind coders who calculated a binomial
score for each answer. If the written description was specific
enough to uniquely identify the target object from the array
of novels, it received a score of one. However, if the
description was either too vague to refer to a single specific
item or if it described a foil object, it received a score of
zero. This coding scheme thus gave participants credit for a
variety of responses (e.g. an overall description or a single
unique feature) as it eliminated possible referents
systematically based on the information given. For instance,
if the participant responded “the blue flat thing”, and there
was only one novel item presented that was blue (and it was
the correct answer), they would receive a one. If, however, a
participant responded with “the round one”, and multiple
novel objects were spherical, then they would receive a
score of zero. Only scores of one were counted as correct in
calculating overall performance. All coding was conducted
as a consensus of scores across two blind coders with
additional 1-2 coders settling all discrepancies. Responses
that required more than four coders to come to a consensus
were thrown out.
First, performance on mapping across all conditions was
analyzed. Each condition was compared against chance and
each trial type was analyzed with a two-way ANOVA of
performance on Number of Competitors (3AFC vs. 5AFC)
by Competitor Type (vary vs. same). Unsurprisingly, adults
are very good at the Known item filler trials on all
conditions, selecting the known target item at nearly ceiling
levels (see Figure 1). As suspected, there was no difference
between conditions on these trials (Known Mapping;
F(1,149)=.806, p=.493, ŋ2=.016). Adults were also well

OD none
3AFC vary
5AFC vary
3AFC same
5AFC same

1
0.9
0.8
0.7

% Correct

Immediately following the mapping phase, participants
were tested for their comprehension and retention of the
novel word-referent pairs. This was done via two methods –
free response recall and forces-choice (multiple choice)
recognition. The free response retention trials asked
participants to describe the referent for each of the novel
words from mapping/training (e.g. “Describe the cheem”).
Though prior work has asked participants to recall the wordform (thus testing phonological memory), here we ask for a
description of the item to tap semantic-conceptual memory
and thus allow a tighter connection to what is tested in the
forced-choice trials. In addition, one current hypothesis is
the semantic relationship (not names) between stimuli
matters. In the forced-choice trials, participants were given
one of the novel words from mapping and asked to select
the correct referent from an array of all multiple novel
objects from mapping. Words and objects for all phases
were counter-balanced across conditions and participants.

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Known Mapping Novel Mapping

Retention
Forced-Choice

Retention FreeResponse

Figure 1. Performance on mapping and retention
above chance in all conditions at selecting the novel target
(Novel Mapping). However, there was a main effect Type of
Competitors, F(1,178)=9.027, p=.003, ŋ2=.048, with adults
performing significantly better when the competing items
varied than when competitors were from the same category.
There was no effect of competitor amount. This suggests
that despite a very robust lexicon and a clear ability to find
the referent when asked, adults real-time mapping of novel
words may be influenced by subtle changes in the type of
items present, regardless of the number of items.
Performance on retention was then analyzed. Most
subjects were asked both a free recall retention question
followed by a forced-choice recognition test. Due to a
programming error, 29 subjects in the 3AFC same condition
only answered the forced-choice test and 24 subjects in the
3 varies condition were asked the forced-choice first
followed by free recall.1 In addition to testing performance
against chance, a repeated measures ANOVA of Retention
Test Type (forced-choice vs. free recall) on Number of
Competitors (3AFC vs. 5AFC) by Competitor Type (vary
vs. same) was run. First, adults were well above chance in
all conditions on the forced-choice retention, though
importantly, not at ceiling. Chance in both cases was set at
20% as presumably, adults were recalling one of the five
just-learned items. On free recall, however, performance
was much more mixed with performance in the vary
conditions at or near chance, 3AFC: t(45)=1.401, p=.168;
5AFC: t(28)=2.042, p=.051. In addition, there was a
significant ANOVA of Retention for Type of Retention,
Number of Competitors and Competitor Type,
F(1,216)=5.865, p=.016, ŋ2=.026, with a significant
Competitor Type main effect, F(1,216)=13.286, p<.001,
ŋ2=.058, and Test Type by Competitor Type interaction,
F(1,199)=5.655, p=.018, ŋ2=.028. Thus, the variability of
the context matters for mapping and has cascading effects
on retention, especially when a more rigorous test of recall
is used.
1

There was a marginal effect of order; Forced Choice (FC)
Retention before Free Recall (FR) led to higher Retention (FC:
t(46)=2.38, p=.021, and FR: t(44)=1.88, p=.067). However, main
effects and interactions in the overall ANOVA remain the same
with and without order included.

2485

Discussion
Overall, the results show a unique pattern of responding
for both in-the-moment mapping as well as retention.
Though the type of competitors appears to matter overall for
Novel Mapping, its effect on retention is confounded by the
type of test, showing differential affects for forced-choice
vs. free response retention. This could mean that the
processes that support real time processing may not be the
same mechanisms driving retention. Alternatively, it could
suggest that associative learning is a complicated interaction
of multiple factors and tasks and there are different ways of
tapping knowledge to reveal those processes in different
ways. That is, a free response retention test has no other
items present. Thus, in order to respond, an individual has to
have a robust memory to retrieve, but also may grasp onto
any cues they can, such as vague memories from when they
initially learned the word (Coutanche & Thompson-Schill,
2014). Initial context that had more helpful cues (similar,
same competitor condition) would give more relevant aids
to retrieval, thus boosting performance.
Not only does the type of test matter, but subtle shifts in
learning that are not always apparent with one test can be
revealed with another. Specifically, the different retention
tests give hints to the strength of the word-referent
associations formed. Forced choice retention tests show
only a slight effect of competitor variability, however, free
recall for those exact same items is influenced in a different
way by the variability of competitors from the previous
mapping trials - variable competitors are equivalent to the
Ostensive Naming, zero competitors condition on forcedchoice retention, (though lower than same competitor
condition) but at chance when tested with free recall (at
which point all other conditions are above chance).
These results also speak to the nature of the underlying
association. During mapping, the initial association is weak,
fragile, and likely has many spurious connections. More
competitors, especially competitors that are vastly different
and unique, take longer to process, and thus initial mapping
is less successful. In some prior cases, these “harder” initial
encoding scenarios have led to more robust learning because
they require more processing (Vlach & Sandhofer, 2014). If
we only test learning through a forced choice recognition
test, that is precisely what we see – above chance learning
across the board. However, the free response retention
reveals that the variable groups (the same groups who were
relatively poorer on Novel Mapping) are at chance for
recalling the word-referent link. This suggests that the wordreferent link that is being built during mapping has clearly
been encoded and withstands weak tests of its viability, but
has a long way to go before it is fully integrated into the
lexicon.
At its core, word learning is a form of associative
learning. As such, the results of the current study may
suggest that domain-general associative mechanisms are
influenced by the context and competition. Importantly,
associations are constantly in flux and robust links are not
guaranteed, even in supposedly “easy” cases of learning.

That means that the imperfect retention seen in the current
study is not evidence for a lack of learning, but rather as an
in-progress process which will continue to be strengthened
over time. The type of competitive mechanism employed in
these associative learning situations is not just beneficial for
a single moment as demonstrated here, but likely also
beneficial for the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and all future encounters of the
word (Benitez, Yurovsky, & Smith, 2016; Dautriche &
Chemla, 2014; Yurovsky & Yu, & Smith, 2013). That is,
learning is reliant not just on one-to-one links, but rather is
couched within a larger network which has a direct
influence on the development of a single association, which
in turn may alter learning future associations.
As a whole, the current study examines two critical
elements to associative learning – 1) how does the amount
and variability of context shape real-time processing, and 2)
how does the amount and variability of the competitors
shape the refinement of those associations over time.
Results suggest that there is not a single pathway to
mapping or retaining, but rather, like most cognitive
processes, it is a complicated interaction.

Acknowledgments
Funding to SCK by a Callier Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship from the University of Texas at Dallas. Special
thanks to the Oshkosh Development Lab for help coding.

References
Adelman, J.S., Brown, G.D.A., & Quesada, J.F. (2006).
Contextual diversity, not word frequency, determines
word-naming and lexical decision times. Psychological
Science, 17(9), 814-823.
Akhtar, N., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (1996). The
role of discourse novelty in early word learning. Child
Development, 67, 635-645.
Alt, M. & Gutmann, M.L. (2009). Fast mapping semantic
features: Performance of adults with normal language,
history of disorders of spoken and written language, and
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder on a word learning
task. Journal of Communication Disorders, 42(5), 347364.
Axelsson, E.L., Churchley, K., & Horst, J.S. (2012). The
right thing at the right time: Why ostensive naming
facilitates word learning. Frontiers in Psychology, 3(88).
Benitez, V.L., Yurovsky, D., & Smith, L.B. (2016).
Competition between multiple words for a referent in
cross-situational word learning. Journal of Memory and
Language, 90, 31-48.
Bion, R. A. H., Borovsky, A., & Fernald, A. (2013). Fast
mapping, slow learning: Disambiguation of novel word–
object mappings in relation to vocabulary learning at 18,
24, and 30 months. Cognition, 126(1), 39–53.
Carey, S., & Bartlett, E. (1978). Acquiring a single new
word. Papers and Reports on Child Language
Development, 15, 17-29.

2486

Borovsky, A., Ellis, E. M., Evans, J. L., & Elman, J. L.
(2016). Lexical leverage: Category knowledge boosts
real-time novel word recognition in 2-year-olds.
Developmental Science, 19(6), 918-932.
Capone, N.C., & McGregor, K.K. (2005). The effect of
semantic representation on toddlers’ word retrieval.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 48,
1468-1480.
Carey, S. & Bartlett, E. (1978). Acquiring a single new
word. Papers and Reports on Child Language
Development, 15, 17-29.
Coutanche, M.N., & Thompson-Schill, S.L. (2014). Fast
mapping rapidly integrates information into existing
memory networks. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 143(6), 2296-2303.
Dautriche, I., & Chemla, E. (2014). Cross situational word
learning in the right situations. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 40(3),
892-903.
Fitneva, S.A., & Christiansen, M,H. (2011) Looking in the
wrong direction correlates with more accurate word
learning. Cognitive Science, 35, 367-380.
Greve, A., Cooper, E., & Henson, R.N. (2014). No evidence
that ‘fast-mapping’ benefits novel learning in healthy
older adults. Neuropsychologia, 60, 52-59.
Halberda, J. (2006). Is this a dax which I see before me?
Use of the logical argument disjunctive syllogism
supports word-learning in children and adults. Cognitive
Psychology, 53, 310-344.
Hills, T.T., Maouene, J., Riordan, B., & Smith, L.B. (2014).
The associative structure of language: Contextual
diversity in early word learning. Journal of Memory and
Language, 63, 259-273.
Horst, J.S. (2013). Context and repetition in word learning.
Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 1-11.
Horst, J.S., & Hout, M.C. (2016). The novel object and
unusual name (NOUN) database: A collection of novel
images for use in experimental research. Behavioral
Research Methods, 48(4), 1293-1409.
Horst, J.S., Scott, E.J., & Pollard, J.A. (2009). The role of
competition in word learning via referent selection.
Developmental Science, 13, 706-713.
Kucker, S. C., McMurray, B., & Samuelson, L. K. (2015).
Slowing Down Fast Mapping: Redefining the Dynamics
of Word Learning. Child Development Perspectives, 9(2),
74–78
Markman, E. M., & Wachtel, G. F. (1988). Children’s use
of mutual exclusivity to constrain the meanings of words.
Cognitive Psychology, 20(2), 121–157.
McGregor, K.K. (2014). What a difference a day makes:
Change in memory for newly learned word forms over 24
hours. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 57(5), 1842-1850.
McMurray, B., Horst, J.S., & Samuelson, L.K. (2012).
Word learning emerges from the interaction of online
referent selection and slow associative learning.
Psychological Review, 119(4), 831-877.

McMurray, B., Zhao, L., Kucker, S. C., & Samuelson, L. K.
(2013). Pushing the envelope of associative learning:
Internal representations and dynamic competition
transform association into development. In L. Gogate &
G. Hollich (Eds.) Theoretical and computational models
of word learning: Trends in psychology and artificial
intelligence. (pp.49-80). Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
Meints, K., Plunkett, K., Harris, P.L., & Dimmock, D.
(2004). The cow on the high street: Effects of background
context on early naming. Cognitive Development, 19(3),
275-290.
Mervis, C. B., & Bertrand, J. (1994). Acquisition of the
novel name–nameless category (N3C) principle. Child
Development, 65(6), 1646–1662.
Morse, A.F., Benitez, V.L., Belpaeme, T., Cangelosi, A., &
Smith, L.B. (2015). Posture affects how robots and infants
map words to objects. PLoS One, 10(3), 1-17.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0116012
Regier, T. (2005). The emergence of words: Attentional
learning in form and meaning. Cognitive Science, 29,
819-865.
Roembke, T.C., Wasserman, E., & McMurray, B. (2016).
Learning in rich networks involves both positive and
negative associations. Journal of Experimental
Psychology General, 145(8), 1062-1074.
Tamminen, J. & Gaskell, M.G. (2008). Newly learned
spoken words show long-term lexical competition effects.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 61(3),
361-371.
Twomey, K., Morse, A., Cangelosi, A., & Horst, J. (2016).
Children’s referent selection and word learning: Insights
from a developmental robotic system. Interaction Studies,
17(1), 101-127.
Vlach, H. A., & Sandhofer, C. M. (2012). Fast mapping
across time: Memory processes support children’s
retention of learned words. Frontiers in Psychology, 3.
http://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00046
Vlach, H.A., & Sandhofer, C.M. (2014). Retrieval dynamics
and retention in cross-situational statistical word learning.
Cognitive Science, 38, 757-774.
Warren, D.E., & Duff, M.C. (2014). Not so fast:
Hippocampal amnesia slows word learning despite
successful fast mapping. Hippocampus, 24, 920-933.
Wojcik, E. H. (2013). Remembering new words: Integrating
early memory development into word learning. Frontiers
in Psychology,4. http://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00151
Yurovsky, D., Yu, C., & Smith, L.B. (2013). Competitive
processes in cross-situational word learning. Cognitive
Science, 37(5), 891-921.
Zosh, J.M., Brinster, M., & Halberda, J. (2013). Optimal
contrast: Competition between two referents improves
word learning. Applied Developmental Science, 17(1), 2028.

2487

