Causation and norms of proper functioning: Counterfactuals are (still) relevant
Jonathan Phillips (phillips01@g.harvard.edu) & Jonathan Kominksy (jkominsky@g.harvard.edu)
Department of Psychology, Harvard University, 33 Kirkland St. Cambridge, MA, 02138
Abstract

counterfactual relevance in precisely the same way that they
affect causal judgments (Phillips, Luguri, & Knobe, 2015).
On the other side, other researchers have argued for separate explanations of the two effects. The most recent approach has suggested that the term ‘cause’ is polysemous: It
can be used to talk about whether an agent is morally responsible for an outcome, or it can be used to talk about whether
some event causally contributed to an outcome (Samland &
Waldmann, 2016). On this approach, the impact of violations
of moral norms can instead be accounted for by arguing that
participants are more likely to interpret the word ‘cause’ as
being about moral responsibility in cases where moral norms
have been violated.
Advancing this debate, Samland and Waldmann (2016)
(S&W hereafter) reported two important new data points:
First, the violation of moral norms selectively influences
causal judgments about whether agents caused an outcome,
but not causal judgments of whether inanimate objects used
by the same agents caused the outcome. Second, factors that
affect the moral responsibility of the norm violator (such as
their knowledge states) also affect causal judgments (see also
Samland, Josephs, Waldmann, & Rakoczy, 2016). S&W suggest that these findings are best accounted for by assuming
that participants were interpreting the causal question to be
about moral responsibility when asked about an agent, but
about simple causal contribution when asked about an object.
In arguing that these results provide evidence against a unified counterfactual account, S&W rely on the assumption that
when a norm violation occurs, people consider counterfactual
alternatives to the event in its entirety. That is, they consider
a counterfactual alternative that involves both the agent who
violated a norm and the inanimate object used by that agent.
If this assumption is correct, then a polysemy account seems
to better capture S&W’s results, since a unified counterfactual account would predict that causal judgments of the agent
and the inanimate object would both be affected.
At the same time, though, it is possible that the counterfactual alternatives people represent are more granular. That
is, when a moral norm violation occurs, people may consider
a counterfactual alternative that involves the norm-violating
agent, but not the inanimate object used by that agent. If this
turns out to be correct, then S&W’s findings should be understood as perfectly compatible with a unified counterfactual
explanation, as this accounts would then predict that causal
judgments of the agent, but not the object, would be affected.
To distinguish these possibilities, we begin by asking
whether the effects uncovered by S&W also arise in participants’ assessments of which counterfactuals are relevant.
One possibility is that, because moral norms apply to agents
but not inanimate objects, participants will regard counter-

Causal judgments are well-known to be sensitive to violations
of both prescriptive moral and descriptive statistical norms.
There is ongoing discussion as to whether both effects are
best explained through changes in the relevance of counterfactual possibilities, or if moral norm violations should be independently explained through a potential polysemy whereby
‘cause’ may simply mean ‘is morally responsible for’. In
support of the latter view, recent work has pointed out that
moral norm violations affect judgments of agents, but not inanimate objects, and that these effects are moderated by agents’
knowledge states. We advance this debate by demonstrating
that judgments of counterfactual relevance exhibit precisely
the same patterns, and that judgments of inanimate objects are
actually highly sensitive to whether the object violated a prescriptive norm by malfunctioning. The latter finding is difficult
to account for through polysemy, but is predicted by changes in
the relevance of counterfactual alternatives. Finally, we show
that direct (non-moral) interventions on the the relevance of
counterfactual alternatives affect causal judgments in precisely
the same way as functional and moral norm violations.
Keywords: causation; norms; counterfactuals; morality; teleology

Introduction
A central question in research on causal cognition concerns
the role of norms. It is well-known that both descriptive
norms (e.g., the probability of an event occurring) and prescriptive norms (e.g., the morality of an event occurring) influence judgments of actual causation, that is, a judgment that
some event, e, was the cause of some outcome, o (Alicke,
2000; Gerstenberg & Tenenbaum, in press; Hitchcock &
Knobe, 2009; Kominsky, Phillips, Gerstenberg, Lagnado, &
Knobe, 2015). Specifically, people are more inclined to judge
that e was the cause of o if e was either very unlikely to happen or morally prohibited. Despite widespread agreement on
the existence of the phenomenon, there has been little corresponding agreement on how these effects should be explained.
Most researchers take the impact of descriptive statistical
norms to reveal part of the basic underlying processes that
support causal reasoning (e.g., Gerstenberg & Tenenbaum,
in press; Icard, Kominsky, & Knobe, in press; Samland &
Waldmann, 2016). They differ, however, in whether they treat
the impact of prescriptive moral norms similarly, or argue that
it arises from a fundamentally different set of processes.
On one side, researchers have argued that the impact of
both descriptive and prescriptive norms is best explained
by changes in the relevance of counterfactual possibilities.
These accounts propose that when a norm violation occurs, it
increases the relevance of counterfactual alternatives wherein
the norm violations are replaced by norm-conforming events
(e.g., Halpern & Hitchcock, 2015; Kominsky et al., 2015;
Bello, 2016). In support of this account, recent work demonstrated that norm violations affect explicit assessments of

931

factual alternatives to what the agent did as relevant, but not
alternatives to what the inanimate object did. If so, it would
suggest that they are represented somewhat independently of
one another. Furthermore, changes to agents’ mental states
may affect both the agent’s moral responsibility and similarly
whether it is relevant to consider counterfactual alternatives to
their actions, which may help explain why changes to agents’
mental states affect causal judgments (see, e.g., Lombrozo,
2010 on how intentions affect causal judgments in doubleprevention scenarios).

what Alex could have done differently and also whether it was
relevant or irrelevant to consider what Benni could have done
differently. Subsequently, as in S&W, participants were asked
to judge who or what caused the plants to dry up (again depending on the Question condition). In the Agent condition,
participants indicated both whether they thought Alex was a
cause and also whether they thought Benni was a cause. Because the causal question was simply a replication of S&W
(who did not include a counterfactual question), the counterfactual question was always presented first and mirrored
S&W’s causal question as closely as possible.
Following these question, participants received two check
questions that tested their understanding of which chemicals
were applied by which gardener, and which chemicals Tom
wanted each gardener to use. Following S&W, they were
also asked to estimate the proportion of the flowers that dried
when (1) only fertilizer A-X200 was applied, (2) only fertilizer B-Y33 was applied, and (3) both were applied.

Experiment 1
Methods
Participants. 610 participants (Mage = 37.28, SDage =
12.14; 338 females, 1 unreported) from Amazon Mechanical Turk participated for a $0.25 compensation. Participant recruitment was automated through TurkPrime
(www.turkprime.com) to prevent repeat participation and
limit recruitment to participants with a high approval rating.

Results

Stimuli and procedure. This experiment was nearly identical to S&W’s Experiment 4, but with an additional DV. The
overall design was 4 (norm condition) x 3 (question) and
administered fully between-subjects. Participants read one
of four vignettes (see Supplementary Materials available at
https://github.com/phillipsjs/stillRelevant). In
all conditions, Tom owns a garden and has two gardeners,
Alex and Benni, who each take care of 1/3 of the plants on
their own, and jointly tend to the remaining 1/3. Additionally, Alex and Benni always use two fertilizers “A-X200 R ”
and “B-Y33 R ”. Tom reads that fertilizers are good for plants,
but using more than one kind of fertilizer could damage his
plants, so Tom decides he wants both gardeners to use only
fertilizer A-X200. In all cases, however, Alex applies fertilizer A-X200 and Benni applies fertilizer B-Y33, and the
plants cared for by both of them are damaged.
The four conditions varied the reason that Benni used BY33. In the Standard norm-violation condition, Benni simply decides to use B-Y33; in the Unintended norm-violation
condition, Benni believed he was applying A-X200, but accidentally applied B-Y33; in the Ignorant norm-violation condition, Tom neglects to tell Benni to use only A-X200, and
he uses B-Y33 instead; and in the Deceived norm-violation
condition, Alex deliberately lies to Benni about which fertilizer he is supposed to use to get him in trouble. We additionally varied the focus of the questions. Participants were
either asked questions that focused on the two agents (“Alex”
and “Benni”), the two actions (“the application of fertilizer by
Alex” and “the application of fertilizer by Benni”), or the two
chemicals (“the application of chemical A-X200” and “the
application of chemical B-Y33”).
After reading the vignette, participants were asked whether
it was relevant to consider counterfactual alternatives to some
aspect of the event, following Phillips et al., (2015). For
example, in the Agent condition, participants indicated both
whether they thought it was relevant or irrelevant to consider

We excluded participants who did not answer both of the
check questions correctly, and analyzed the remaining 439
participants’ judgments. (Note that here and throughout the
following experiments, all of the key results remain when
these exclusion criteria are relaxed.) To examine the effects of
our manipulation on both causation and relevance judgments,
we categorized participants’ responses as assigning causal
responsibility (or counterfactual relevance) to (1) only the
norm-violating agent, (2) both agents, or (3) only the normconforming agent, and then subjected both kinds of judgments to a proportional odds logistic regression using the probit function in the MASS package in R. For causal judgments,
we observed an effect of the norm-condition (LRT = 20.49
[d f = 3], p < .001), an effect of question (LRT = 44.53
[d f = 2], p < .001), and critically, a norm-condition × question interaction effect (LRT = 19.94 [d f = 6], p = .003). This
precisely replicates the pattern of data observed in S&W (the
complete information on the replication of the key statistical
tests reported in S&W is available in the Supplementary Materials). Importantly, this direct replication of S&W provides
evidence that answering the counterfactual question first did
not unduly influence participants’ causal judgments.
We next analyzed participants’ relevance judgments, and
observed a highly similar pattern of results: an effect of
norm-condition (LRT = 13.93 [d f = 3], p = .003), an effect of question (LRT = 73.34 [d f = 2], p < .001), and a
norm-condition × question interaction effect (LRT = 14.15
[d f = 6], p = .028. Critically, because participants answered
this question first, the observed pattern cannot have been influenced by participants’ causal judgments. All the same,
at the level of each participants’ responses, judgments of
the causal responsibility were highly correlated with judgments of whether it was relevant to consider alternatives to
the agents’ actions. This was true both for judgment of
the norm-violating agent/action/object, (Pearson’s r = 0.553,
p < .001), and for the norm-conforming agent/action/object

932

(Pearson’s r = 0.406, p < .001), and moreover, held whether
participants were making judgments about agents (Pearson’s
r = 0.651, p < .001), actions (Pearson’s r = 0.262, p <
.001), or simply inanimate objects (Pearson’s r = 0.280, p <
.001).The similarity in the overall pattern of these judgments
across all of the conditions can be seen in Figure 1.

Stimuli and procedure. This experiment used a 3 (Norm
violation; norm-conforming vs. moral violation vs. malfunction) x 2 (Question: agent vs. object) design, administered
fully between-subjects.
Participants read one of three vignettes involving a vending
machine in an academic department. In every condition, the
machine has three levers (red, black, and white): two produce
pencils and one produces an eraser but frequently malfunctions and also produces a broken pencil. There were also two
agents: an administrative assistant, and Professor Smith (a recent hire who did not know about the malfunctioning lever).
Prof. Smith always pulls the red lever, and the assistant always pulls the black lever. This later results in a problem for
a student who needs a pencil to take a test but cannot get one.
In the norm-conforming condition, the red lever and black
lever both produce pencils, and the white lever produces
erasers (but also consistently malfunctions). Additionally,
both administrators and faculty were allowed to take pencils from the machine. Both agents request pencils using
the black and red levers, which both function appropriately.
The moral violation condition was identical to the normconforming condition, except that the faculty are not allowed
to get pencils from the machine (but administrative assistants are allowed), and this rule was known by Prof. Smith.
Lastly, the malfunction condition was identical to the normconforming condition except that it was the red lever that produced erasers (and malfunctioned), and Prof. Smith wanted
an eraser, so Prof. Smith pulled the red lever and got an eraser
and a broken pencil.
Participants were then asked a question about the relevance
of counterfactual alternatives and a causal question in random order on separate pages. The relevance of alternatives
question was worded and presented the same way as Experiment 1, and either focused on the agents (Prof. Smith, administrative assistant) or the objects (red lever, black lever).
The causal question similarly asked either who caused the
problem (agent condition) or what caused the problem (object condition), and participants could select one or both.
These were followed by three comprehension check questions and two additional manipulation-check questions. The
comprehension questions ensured that participants understood the key facts about the levers, agents, and outcome
of the scenario. Additionally, participants rated, on a 0100 scale, how likely the malfunction was to occur, in order to verify that participants did not think the malfunction
also violated a descriptive (statistical) norm. Finally, participants rated their agreement with the statement “It was morally
wrong for Prof. Smith to pull the red lever” on a 7-point Likert scale, with the expectation that ratings should be higher in
the moral violation condition than the other two conditions,
which should not differ from each other. The predictions
for both manipulation-check questions were overwhelmingly
confirmed (see Supplementary Materials). Thus, any effect
of the functional norm violation cannot be explained by appealing to statistical or moral norms.

Figure 1: Depiction of the relationship between participants’
causal ratings and relevance ratings. Judgments related to the
norm-conforming agent are marked with a ‘C’; Judgments
related to the norm-violating agent are marked with a ‘V’.

Discussion
In sum, we replicated S&W’s causal judgments, and found
a corresponding pattern for which counterfactual alternatives
participants regarded as relevant. These findings mirror those
in observed in Phillips et al. (2015), which used a continuous
rather than dichotomous measure of counterfactual relevance,
and more importantly are predicted by a unified counterfactual account of the impact of norms on causal judgments.

Experiment 2
We next investigated whether causal judgments of inanimate
objects are sensitive to violations of prescriptive norms of
proper functioning (e.g., a machine malfunctioning). According to a unified counterfactual account, when a machine
malfunctions, it should become more relevant to consider
the counterfactual possibility that the machine could have instead functioned as intended, and thus the machine should
be judged as more causal. Polysemy accounts do not predict such an effect, as participants should not interpret the
word ’cause’ to mean ’morally responsible’ when discussing
an inanimate object. We test these two predictions.

Methods
Participants. 403 participants (Mage = 34.96, SDage =
11.90; 205 females, 1 unreported) from Amazon Mechanical Turk participated for a $0.25 compensation. Participant
recruitment was again automated through TurkPrime.

933

Results
We excluded participants who did not answer all three of the
check questions correctly, and analyzed the remaining 258
participants’ judgments. To facilitate comparison of participants’ judgments, we computed a measure of participants’
preference for selecting the norm-violating event as a cause.
Participants who selected only the norm-violating event as a
cause were assigned a score of 1; participants who selected
both or neither events as causes were assigned score of 0; and
participants who selected only the norm-conforming event
were assigned a score of -1. We then analyzed participants’
causal preference scores with a 2 (Causal Question: Agent
vs. Object) × 3 (Norm condition: Immoral vs. Malfunction vs. Normal) proportional odds logistic regression, as in
Study 1. This analysis revealed a main effect of Norm condition, (LRT = 71.49 [d f = 2], p < .001), no main effect of
Causal question (LRT = 0.045 [d f = 1], p = .832), and critically a Norm condition × Causal question interaction effect
(LRT = 31.42 [d f = 2], p < .001).
We decomposed this interaction effect by separately analyzing participants’ causal preference scores for each of the
different conditions. When the relevant norm was moral
and thus applied to the agent but not the object, participants
tended to prefer the norm-violating agent as a cause, but
did not similarly prefer the norm-violating object as a cause
(LRT = 15.33 [d f = 1], p < .001). When the relevant norm
was functional, and thus the norm applied to the object but
not the agent, this pattern was reversed: participants tended to
prefer the norm-violating object as a cause, but did not similarly prefer the norm-violating agent as a cause (LRT = 12.36
[d f = 1], p < .001). When there was no norm that applied
to either the agent or the object, there was small and nonsignificant preference for the norm-conforming agent but not
the object (LRT = 1.13 [d f = 1], p = .288).
We next analyzed participants’ judgments of the relevance
of counterfactual alternatives in exactly the same way. Just
as with participants’ causal judgments, we observed a main
effect of Norm condition, (LRT = 40.53 [d f = 2], p < .001),
no main effect of Relevance question (LRT = 0.10 [d f = 1],
p = .747), and critically a Norm condition × Relevance question interaction effect (LRT = 33.70 [d f = 2], p < .001). We
decomposed this interaction effect by separately analyzing
participants’ counterfactual preference scores for each of the
different conditions. When a moral norm was salient, participants tended to prefer counterfactuals for the agent, but
not the object (LRT = 16.63 [d f = 1], p < .001). When the
relevant norm was functional, this pattern was reversed: participants preferred counterfactuals for the object, but not the
agent (LRT = 11.20 [d f = 1], p < .001). When there was no
norm violation that applied to either the agent or the object,
there was a small and significant preference for the normconforming agent, but not the object (LRT = 4.48 [d f = 1],
p = .034). A similar pattern is found when only participants’
first responses are analyzed, allowing for a between-subjects
analysis (see Supplementary Materials).

Figure 2: Average preference score for the norm-violating
event in causal judgments (top) and counterfactual relevance
judgments (bottom), as a function of which norms were relevant (split into panels). Grey bars depict responses to questions about agents; Red bars depict responses to questions
about inanimate objects. Error bars depict +/- 1 SEM.

Discussion
Experiment 2 found that judgments of inanimate objects are
sensitive to violations of prescriptive norms of proper functioning, even though they are not sensitive to violations of
moral norms. Specifically, we found that when an inanimate
object violated a functional norm, participants’ thought it was
relevant to consider counterfactual alternatives to that malfunction, and that this effect was mirrored by a corresponding change in participants’ causal judgments. This pattern is
uniquely predicted by a unified counterfactual accounts of the
impact of norms on causal judgments, and is not predicted by
an account on which the term ‘cause’ is polysemous.

934

Experiment 3
Previous research (Phillips et al., 2015) has demonstrated that
causal judgments are also sensitive to more direct counterfactual manipulations: participants tend to judge an event to be
more causal after they generate relevant alternative ways that
the event could have occurred. In Experiment 3, we extend
this method by asking participants to generate alternatives to
one particular aspect of the causal structure that contributes
to the outcome (i.e., to the agent or to the inanimate object).
We then measure how their causal judgments are affected by
this manipulation. This allows us to test a precise prediction
of a unified counterfactual account: participants causal judgments should be affected by the generation of counterfactual
alternatives primarily for the part of the causal structure that
the counterfactual alternative focused on.

Methods

Figure 3: Agreement with the causal statement concerning
the agent (left bars) and the object (right bars) as a function
of Counterfactual condition). Error bars depict +/- 1 SEM.

Participants. 601 participants (Mage = 35.96, SDage =
15.58; 304 females, 2 unreported) from Amazon Mechanical Turk participated for $0.35 in compensation. Participant
recruitment was again automated through TurkPrime.

which levers were actually pulled and about who actually received a pencil in the original story.

Stimuli and procedure. This experiment used a 3 (AgentCounterfactual vs Object-Counterfactual vs No Counterfactual) × 2 (Agent Question vs Object Question) design. Counterfactual condition was manipulated between-subjects and
Question was manipulated within-subjects.
All participants read the norm-conforming condition from
Experiment 2, where the red lever and black lever both produce pencils, and the white lever produces erasers (but also
consistently malfunctions). In this scenario, both the administrators and the faculty are allowed to take pencils from
the machine, both the administrative assistant and Professor
smith request pencils using the black and red levers respectively, and both levers function appropriately to produce pencils. A problem then arises from a lack of pencils.
After reading the vignette, participants underwent the
counterfactual manipulation. In the Agent-Counterfactual
condition, for example, participants were asked to think about
Professor Smith’s decision to take a pencil from the vending
machine, and then to consider and describe one relevant way
that things could have gone differently such that the professor would not have taken one of the pencils from the vending machine. In the Object-Counterfactual condition, by contrast, participants were instead asked to consider and describe
a relevant way in which the red lever could have functioned
differently such that it didn’t produce a pencil from the vending machine. In the No Counterfactual condition, participants
were simply asked to describe the story they read.
After completing this task, they rated their agreement (on
a scale from 0 (‘Completely disagree’) to 100 (‘Completely
agree’) with a statement that the Professor caused the problem, and separately with a statement that the red lever caused
the problem. The statements were presented in counterbalanced order and on separate pages. Participants then completed a series of control questions that asked them about

Results
We excluded participants who did not answer both of the
check questions correctly, and analyzed the remaining 423
participants’ judgments. First, we analyzed the agreement
with the two causal statements by comparing a series of
linear mixed-effects models using the lme4 package in R
(Bates, Maechler, Bolker, Walker, et al., 2014). This analysis revealed a main effect of Question (χ2 (1) = 53.135,
p < .001) and a main effect of Condition (χ2 (2) = 13.492,
p = .001). Critically, however, these were qualified by a
significant Question × Condition interaction (χ2 (2) = 23.04,
p < .001). We decomposed this interaction using a series
of planned comparisons. These analyses revealed that participants strongly agreed that Professor Smith was a cause
of the problem when they considered alternatives to Professor Smith’s action (M = 32.99, SD = 33.33), but in comparison, agreed significantly less both when they did not consider counterfactual alternatives (M = 18.22, SD = 27.28),
t(282.48) = 4.12, p < .001, d = 0.482, and when they only
considered alternatives to the way the lever functioned (M =
24.43, SD = 29.12), t(279) = 2.27, p = .024, d = 0.272.
We also observed a corresponding pattern in participants’
agreement with the statement that the red lever caused the
problem: participants agreed that the lever was more of a
cause when they considered alternatives to the way the lever
functioned (M = 20.11, SD = 33.34), than when they did not
generate any relevant counterfactual alternatives, (M = 8.62,
SD = 19.64), t(211.21) = 3.42, p < .001, d = 0.421, or
when they considered alternatives to what Professor Smith
did (M = 10.05, SD = 20.59), t(213.65) = 2.99, p = .003,
d = 0.367.

935

Discussion

represented as distinct variables, are almost completely unexplored topics (e.g. Halpern & Hitchcock, 2015 explicitly acknowledge this issue). However, as emerging research makes
clear, it will be difficult to make precise predictions about the
impact of norms without a more well worked-out theory of
how events are represented in causal reasoning.
This opportunity cuts in both directions. These results are,
to our knowledge, the first empirical investigation of which
events are represented as distinct variables. Yet, as much as
we need to build precise theories of how these events are represented in order to understand how norms will affect causal
judgments, we can also use the effect of norms on causal
judgments to determine which causes are distinct. We look
forward to exploring these questions in future work.

In short, we found that directly manipulating the relevance of
counterfactual alternatives affected participants’ causal judgments. Moreover, in line with the predictions of a unified
counterfactual account, we found this effect was specific to
the factor that was altered in the counterfactual alternative.

General Discussion
The results of these three experiments favor a counterfactual
relevance account of the impact of norms on causal judgments. Experiment 1 replicated S&W’s finding that moral
norm violations primarily affect causal judgments of intentional agents and not inanimate objects. Experiment 2 further found that violations of norms of proper functioning primarily affect judgments of inanimate objects but not intentional agents. In both experiments, judgments of counterfactual relevance tracked the impact of different norm violations
on causal judgments for both intentional agents and inanimate objects. Finally, Experiment 3 demonstrated that nonnormative manipulations of counterfactual relevance produce
an analogous pattern in participants’ causal judgments. These
results support work on causal cognition that provides a central role for counterfactuals (Gerstenberg & Tenenbaum, in
press; Kominsky et al., 2015; Icard et al., in press).
The extant literature on causal judgment now provides
evidence for three distinct types of norms that all show
similar effects: descriptive statistical norm violations (e.g.,
Kominsky et al., 2015), prescriptive moral norm violations
(e.g., Hitchcock & Knobe, 2009), and prescriptive functional
norm violations (demonstrated here). The demonstration of
additional norms that have similar a impact on causal judgments makes a parsimonious explanation increasingly desirable. To extend the polysemy account, for example, one
would now have to propose three independent explanations
for three qualitatively similar effects. By contrast, an account
that appeals to the relevance of counterfactual alternatives
provides a unified explanation and predicts that these various
norms should all have a qualitatively similar impact.
At the same time, many aspects of the relationship between counterfactual representation and causal cognition remain poorly understood. For example, a critical insight which
arises in both S&W and in the current studies is that norms
have a highly specific effect on causal judgments: they preferentially affect causal judgments of the entities to which the
norm applies and typically do not extend to other aspects of
the same event. Across three experiments, we find a similar
pattern in participants’ reasoning about counterfactual alternatives. Collectively, these findings suggest that, rather than
representing a counterfactual alternative to an event in its entirety, participants’ causal and counterfactual cognition represents events more granularly.
Not only does this shape our interpretation of S&W’s original result, it opens an exciting new frontier in the study of
causal cognition. How events are represented in causal and
counterfactual cognition, and which aspects of an event are

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Harvard’s Moral Psychology Research Lab, D. Lagnado, T. Gerstenberg, and J. Knobe
for helpful discussion. This work was supported by Grant
N00014-14-1-0800 from the Office of Naval Research to JP.

References
Alicke, M. D. (2000). Culpable control and the psychology
of blame. Psychological bulletin, 126, 556.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., Walker, S., et al. (2014).
lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using eigen and s4. R
package version, 1.
Bello, P. F. (2016). Machine ethics and modal psychology.
In Computing and philosophy (pp. 245–258). Springer International Publishing.
Gerstenberg, T., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (in press). Intuitive theories. In M. Waldmannn (Ed.), Oxford handbook of causal
reasoning. Oxford University Press.
Halpern, J. Y., & Hitchcock, C. (2015). Graded causation and
defaults. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science,
66, 413–457.
Hitchcock, C., & Knobe, J. (2009). Cause and norm. Journal
of Philosophy, 106, 587–612.
Icard, T. F., Kominsky, J., & Knobe, J. (in press). Causality,
normality, and sampling propensity. Elsevier.
Kominsky, J. F., Phillips, J., Gerstenberg, T., Lagnado, D., &
Knobe, J. (2015). Causal superseding. Cognition, 137,
196–209.
Lombrozo, T. (2010). Causal–explanatory pluralism: How
intentions, functions, and mechanisms influence causal ascriptions. Cognitive Psychology, 61, 303–332.
Phillips, J., Luguri, J., & Knobe, J. (2015). Unifying moralitys influence on non-moral judgments: The relevance of
alternative possibilities. Cognition, 145, 30–42.
Samland, J., Josephs, M., Waldmann, M. R., & Rakoczy, H.
(2016). The role of prescriptive norms and knowledge in
childrens and adults causal selection. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 145, 125.
Samland, J., & Waldmann, M. R. (2016). How prescriptive
norms influence causal inferences. Cognition, 156, 164–
176.

936

