Challenging the superficial similarities superiority account for analogical retrieval
Lucas Raynal (lucasraynal@gmail.com)
Paragraphe Lab, EA 349, University Cergy-Pontoise
Avenue Marcel Paul, 92230 Gennevilliers, FRANCE

Evelyne Clément (evelyne.clement@u-cergy.fr)
Paragraphe Lab, EA 349, University Cergy-Pontoise
Avenue Marcel Paul, 92230 Gennevilliers, FRANCE

Emmanuel Sander (emmanuel.sander@paris8-univ.fr)
Paragraphe Lab, EA 349, University Paris 8, Department of Psychology
2 Rue de la liberté, 93526 Saint-Denis Cedex 02, FRANCE
Abstract
The predominant view concerning determinants of
analogical retrieval is that it is preferentially guided by superficial
cues. In order to test the cognitive plausibility of a structural
similarities-based retrieval, we constructed a story-recall task in
which life-like scenarios shared structural correspondences. In
Experiment 1, we showed that such structural similarities induce
retrievals when the participant had several source candidate
situations sharing superficial similarities with the target cue.
Experiment 2 was designed to test whether the encoding was
sufficiently oriented on structural similarities to drive retrievals,
even if the participants possess only one source candidate situation
with superficial matches in memory. The results of the two present
experiments lead us to conclude that in some contexts, abstract
encoding induces a superiority of structural similarities over
superficial ones in retrieval. Further implications for analogical
retrieval approaches are discussed.

Keywords: Analogy; analogical retrieval; structural
similarity; abstract encoding; story-recall task

Introduction
Analogy has been identified as a key process to perceive
the conceptual structure of a new situation by importing it
from a familiar analog representation (Gentner, 1983; Gick
& Holyoak, 1983). Most studies are consensual that the
mapping process permitting this transfer is preferentially
based on structure rather than surface correspondence. In
other words, when comparing two analogs, subjects do not
rely on similarities in terms of objects or object attributes, but
instead tend to focus on common abstract relations. Figure 1
provides an illustration of a target cue story sharing a
structural correspondence with a superficially dissimilar
analog source candidate situation ("making a deal to avoid a
bad situation"), and a surface correspondence with a
superficially similar disanalog source candidate situation
belonging to the same semantic domain (raptors, tailfeathers,
etc).
Target cue story
Karla, an old hawk, lived at the top of a tall oak tree. One
afternoon, she saw a hunter on the ground with a bow and

some crude arrows that had no feathers. The hunter took aim
and shot at the hawk but missed. Karla knew the hunter
wanted her feathers so she glided down to the hunter and
offered to give him a few. The hunter was so grateful that he
pledged never to shoot at a hawk again. He went off and shot
deer instead.
Superficially dissimilar analog source candidate situation
Once there was a small country called Zerdia that learned
to make the world's smartest computer. One day Zerdia was
attacked by its warlike neighbor, Gagrach. But the missiles
were badly aimed and the attack failed. The Zerdian
government realized that Gagrach wanted Zerdian computers
so it offered to sell some of its computers to the country. The
government of Gagrach was very pleased. It promised never
to attack Zerdia again.
Superficially similar disanalog source candidate situation
Once there was an eagle named Zerdia who donated a few
of her tailfeathers to a sportsman so he would promise never
to attack eagles. One day Zerdia was nesting high on a rocky
cliff when she saw the sportsman coming with a crowsbow.
Zerdia flew down to meet the man, but he attacked and felled
her with a single bolt. As she fluttered to the ground Zerdia
realized that the bolt had her own tailfeathers on it.
Figure 1: Situations sharing different types of similarity in
Gentner, Ratterman & Forbus (1993)
Types of similarity implicated in the retrieval of a source
representation in memory are the main issues debated in the
literature. The predominant view is that the retrieval of a
source candidate situation critically depends on superficial
similarities, whereas the influence of structural similarities
seems more peripheral (Gentner, 1983; Gentner, Ratterman
& Forbus, 1993; Gick & Holyoak, 1983; Trench &
Minervino, 2015). In Gentner and Colhoun's (2010) words:
"Relational retrieval can be said to be the Achilles' heel of our
relational capacity. There is considerable evidence that

2957

similarity-based retrieval, unlike the mapping process, is
more influenced by surface similarity than structural
similarity." However, opposite assertions have arisen in the
literature, attributing a major influence to structural
similarities, even overcoming that of surface similarities
(Blanchette & Dunbar, 2000; Dunbar & Blanchette, 2001;
Hofstadter & Sander, 2013; Kretz & Krawczyk, 2014). The
aim of this paper is to demonstrate that structural matches
have a greater influence than superficial ones in the retrievals
of life-like situations. This will be shown by creating a
competition between source candidate situations sharing
either exclusively superficial or structural similarities with
the target cue (Figure 2 illustrates this intended feature
composition). Before considering the current experiments,
we report the major findings stemming from several
experimental paradigms.
Analog source
candidate situations
Structural similarity

Disanalog source
candidate situations

X

Superficial similarity

X

Figure 2: Correspondences between target cues and critical
source candidate situations intended in Experiment 1 and 2

Analogical Problem Solving
In the problem solving domain, a common experimental
design to study analogical retrieval via analogical transfer is
the source-target paradigm (Gick & Holyoak, 1983; Holyoak
& Koh, 1987). A source problem situation is first proposed
with its solution, then an analog target problem is given to be
solved. To measure the role of surface correspondence in
access, the surface of the source problem is manipulated to
either match or not with the target one. The retrieval is
considered to have occurred when the participant detects
similarities between the target problem and the source
problem without further hints from the experimenter, leading
to the transfer of the resolution procedure from the source to
the target. Results have shown that retrieval is high when the
source is both superficially and structurally similar to the
target. More precisely, the similarities in terms of the
problems' story theme have appeared to be a crucial
determinant in access (Ross, 1987). Inversely, superficially
dissimilar analog source problems are seldom retrieved by
the participants (Gick & Holyoak, 1983). Studies on problem
solving have also demonstrated that structural similarities
can, in certain circumstances, have a role in retrieval: when
two source analogs are presented jointly to be compared, their
critical solution principle can be retrieved when faced with
the target (Catrambone & Holyoak, 1989). Also, retrievals
are reported to be more frequent when the two superficially
dissimilar analog problems share structural similarities at a
less abstract level (Holyoak & Koh, 1987).

Story-Recall Paradigm
Another frequently used paradigm is the story-recall task
(Gentner et al., 1993; Wharton, Holyoak & Lange, 1996;
Catrambone, 2002). A set of short text stories are presented
as source candidates for the retrieval before the introduction
of target cue situations which share various similarities with
them (Figure 1). Within a problem solving paradigm, the
problems generally share the same structure since it is the
transfer of an abstract solution being investigated. This is not
systematically the case in the story-recall paradigm since the
situations are chosen to create a competition between source
candidate situations possessing exclusively the surface or
exclusively the structure in common with the target cue
(Gentner et al., 1993). This paradigm showed superficially
similar disanalogs were retrieved significantly more often
than superficially dissimilar analogs, leading to the
conclusion that superficial similarity is the main factor
implicated in access.
Wharton, Holyoak, Downing, Lange, Wickens & Melz
(1994) argued that the minor role attributed to structural
matches in story-recall tasks could be due to the fact that only
one source candidate, the superficially similar disanalog,
shares some semantic features with the target cue. One can
note that in real-life conditions, several source candidate
situations, corresponding in superficial features with the
perceived situation, are generally available in memory. The
authors observed that structural similarities may play a
certain role in access because when the analog source
candidate also shares some superficial similarities, it is better
retrieved than the concurrent source candidate possessing
only superficial similarities with the target cue. Structural
similarities also seem to play a certain role in access when
they are implemented without superficial matches: the
retrieval of a superficially dissimilar source candidate is
higher when it shares structural features with the target cue
(Wharton et al., 1996). However, the role of structural
similarities in access has only been shown when two source
candidates shared the same amount of surface
correspondence. Hence, the reviewed works did not
demonstrate the superiority of structural similarities in
access, since it would require showing that superficially
dissimilar analogs are better retrieved than superficially
similar disanalogs.

Production Paradigm
Challenging the ecological nature of traditional
experimental conditions (unfamiliar source and target
situations, short familiarization time, restrained pool of
source candidates), further research focused on the retrieval
of situations encoded prior to the experiment in real-life
conditions (Blanchette & Dunbar, 2000; Dunbar &
Blanchette, 2001; Kretz & Krawczyk, 2014). With this
configuration, a high structural overlap was generally
observed between the source and the target cue situation. For
instance, expert discourse in scientific domains (politics,
biology, economics) exhibited predominance for structural
analogies, though sometimes also sharing a superficial

2958

correspondence. Those findings were replicated in
experimental conditions with a production paradigm, where
participants who were allowed to select their own sources of
analogy retrieved significantly more semantically distant
analogs than superficially similar analogs (Blanchette &
Dunbar, 2000). In other words, those findings not only
advocate for the major role of structural similarity but also
for the weak impact of superficial similarity when accessing
an analog. However, Trench & Minervino (2015) pointed out
that the sources provided by the participants could be
invented rather than real memories, and that superficially
dissimilar analogs could be more common in memory than
superficially similar ones. They tested the potential that while
controlling the availability and number of the two types of
concurrent source candidates, findings obtained from usual
source-target and story-recall paradigms would be replicated
when the participant generates analogical retrievals from her
or his own experiences. They proposed target situations with
either superficial and structural, or solely structural
similarities with their memories. In accordance with prior
findings, participants more often proposed superficially
similar analogs than superficially dissimilar ones. In another
study using this paradigm, situations retrieved by
management consultants provided with target situations
embodying an original negotiation principle manifested only
superficial matches (Gentner, Loewenstein, Thompson &
Forbus, 2009). Contrary to previous studies using the
production paradigm, this experiment reflects a marginal
tendency to access structurally similar source situations.
These results, in sharp contrast with the ones obtained by
Dunbar and Blanchette (2000), indicate that the natural
settings of the encoding condition of one of the analog is not
in itself the critical parameter influencing the type of
retrieval. Namely, whereas it probably promotes the abstract
encoding of this analog situation, the access to its structural
matches with the other analog which is still provided by the
experimenters is not guaranteed.

Encoding through abstract concepts
When faced with a target cue situation, the fail to retrieve
an analog situation is generally interpreted as a defect of
abstract encoding of the two situations (Gick & Holyoak,
1983; Gentner et al., 2009). If the participant is unable to
grasp the structure of the situations, the abstract similarities
could not be used as a cue to retrieve. Indeed, only if the
participant is incited to compare either two source analogs or
two target analogs, he might extract a schema sufficiently
abstract, and subsequently perceive this schema in a
superficially dissimilar analog, in the context of the retrieval.
However, even if the schema extracted from the situation
is not abstract enough so that the similarities introduced
between the analogs by the experimenter will be detected, it
cannot be claimed that the encoding of a situation is purely
concrete and literal (Hofstadter & Sander, 2013). Whereas a
wealth of stimulations is permanently available in our
environment, one has to select the properties relevant to make
sense of the situations. This cannot be done by processing

every perceptively available superficial piece of information.
Instead, the situation's understanding depends on the
properties (whether perceptual or abstract) that are
compatible with the conceptual structure in construction and
on the neglect of those which are not.
We suggest that familiar concepts' evocation during the
encoding is a critical point to account for the abstract
information raised by perceived situations. This idea is
congruent with findings revealing that source analog
problems that participants usually fail to retrieve in
experiments are better accessed by expert participants
(Novick, 1988). When experts have a familiar concept to
highlight the abstract properties of these situations, the novice
does not have this conceptual door toward the structure. This
reveals that the novice participant has not elaborated the
specific concept that allows for the encoding of the structure
of complex problem situations necessary for the structurallybased retrieval of this type of situations. However, it is very
likely that he/she has acquired an expertise in daily-life
situations, where one systematically has to deepen the
encoding until elementary abstract concepts are established,
such as "making a deal", "bad faith", "lie", "authenticity",
"prosocial behavior" and so on, to produce adapted
behaviors. The activation of these concepts should highlight
the structure underlying some daily-life situations in a way
that elicit structurally-based retrieval. Whereas most studies
have focused on abstract inter-domain analogies that a novice
could rarely access, we aim at investigating analogies
between situations inspired from social scenarios that can be
experienced in different domains of daily-life.

Experiment 1
In order to demonstrate the superiority of structural
similarities over superficial similarities in retrieval, we
conducted a first experiment where those two types of
similarities were in competition in the retrieval of a source
situation candidate. In that way, a story-recall task was used
so as to control for the highlighting of the structure
underlying both the analog source candidate situation and the
target cue situation.

Method
Material
Social scenarios inspired from Wharton et al. (1996)
involving life-like contexts were used. Although the objects
of the analog situations were clearly divergent, they shared
very similar role at the required level of abstraction for
making sense of the stories. In the analog pair reported in
Figure 3 for instance, both stories relate the setting of a social
competition between two characters (rival cookers or
classmates) having the same goal (turnover or seducing
someone) and an unusual way to put an end to it by helping
the competitor to enhance her/his critical ability (improve
Lorenzo's pizza dough or looking after Diane's appearance).
If those situations are not directly taken from the participant's

2959

experience, s/he still can use her/his general knowledge about
social relations to encode such scenarios.
In order to make sure that the two types (superficial or
structural) of similarities with the target cue were never
confounded in a same source situation, superficially similar
source stories structure clearly diverge from the target ones.
In this way, contrasting with previous works (e.g. Gentner et
al., 1993), disanalogs are not modified versions of a same
structure story, but describe structurally different scenarios.
Wharton et al. (1994) noticed that when semantic
correspondence was not only present between the source
disanalog and the target cue, the artificial saliency of the
superficial matches decreased and resulted in a weaker
influence on access. In their experiment, the concurrent
superficially similar source candidates were the analog and
the disanalog. As previously indicated, we aim at isolating
the influence of structure and surface similarities by
implementing them in different source candidates. Hence, we
multiplied the number of source candidates sharing surface
features with the target cue by introducing three superficially
similar disanalogs. To respect a symmetry between the
number of semantically close and distant source candidates,
we also introduced three superficially dissimilar source
candidate situations (the analog sharing structural
correspondence, and two unrelated distractors).

looking men in Italian traditional suits. However, once they
will have left this selling space, the two men will go to
another market place after taking care of wearing German
traditional clothes to sell sausage specialties. The sign will
display « At Hans and Hendrich’s ».

Target cue story
Luigi holds a pizza truck in a very popular place. Lorenzo,
another ambulant pizzaiolo, has placed his truck just beside
Luigi’s and is detrimental to his turnover. Luigi realizes the
dough of Lorenzo’s pizzas is bland. Luigi spontaneously
gives his personal recipe to Lorenzo so as he can enhance the
quality of his product. Since then, his pizza dough is
amazingly tasty. The same evening, Lorenzo declares to
Luigi that in order to show him how much he found his
intention was nice, he will move his truck in another sector,
far from this one.

Participants
34 participants (25 women and 9 men, mean age 23.8
years) accepted to take part in the experiment in University
libraries (Paris 5 and Paris 8). They were all fluent French
speakers.

Superficially dissimilar analog source candidate situation
Julie is in love with Victor, her classmate, and she is getting
closer to him in order to seduce him. But Diane joins the class
in the middle of the year and also has a crush on Victor. Julie
remarks that Diane was not very aware of her style and
proposes her some relooking advices, showing her fashion
photos and taking her for shopping. Diane now looks very
cute and chic. Diane is so grateful that she tells Julie that she
would stop flirting with Joe.
Superficially similar disanalog source candidate situation
In a market place, the truck called « At Alessandro &
Fabio’s » has various choices of homemade pizzas. The
important clientele going there is fond of the authentic
atmosphere steaming from this stand held by the two happy

Figure 3: Examples of stories used in the Experiment1
Procedure and experimental design
The first two pages of a booklet presented the 6 source
stories, then a blank page separated them from the last page
comporting the target cue situation. Under each source story
was a 5 points scale inviting participants to assess the ease
they had to imagine the scene while reading it. As
recommended by Wharton et al. (1996), this was done to
promote a deep treatment of the situations. The dependent
variable was the source retrieved during the reading of the
target cue situation.
It was indicated that the task took around 10-15 minutes to
fulfill but no time limitations was imposed. After they agreed
to participate, participants were given the booklet. They were
invited to read the instructions available in the first page. The
target cue situation was presented on the last page, followed
by the solicitation to indicate if they were reminded of one of
the previous situations. If it was the case, they had to restitute
any element they could remember about it.

Results and discussion
Access credit was attributed to the source candidate for
which the participant recalled word content. If content word
from more than one source was reported, the source
containing the more content words in common was credited.
If the participant explicitly reported more than one source
despite the instruction, his response was excluded. 3
responses were not analyzed for this reason.
Analyses were drawn on a comparison between the
superficially and structurally similar source candidates that
were retrieved. Structurally similar source candidate
situations were much more retrieved (84.61 %) than
superficially similar disanalog source candidate situations
(15.39 %, see Figure 4). This difference reaches high
significance (X2 (1, N=29)=12.46; P<0.001)1.
In real-life condition, one generally has in memory
multiple source candidates sharing similarities in terms of
superficial objects with the target cue situation. The results
reveal that when a pool of semantically similar source
candidate situations is available in memory, but those
situations do not preserve the structure of the target cue, the

1

4 participants chose one of the two distractors or did not
report any retrieval and were not included in the analyses

2960

retrieval is preferentially guided by structural matches with
sources of a distant semantic domain. However, our results
cannot help us identifying whether the structural matches of
daily-life scenarios are sufficiently blatant to drive the
retrieval when only one concurrent source candidate belongs
to the same semantic domain as the target cue. Experiment 2
was designed in order to answer this question.
100

84,61

80

Superficially
dissimlar analog
source candidate

60
40
20

15,39

Superficially
similar source
candidates

Again, analyses were focused on the comparison between
surface and structure similarities-based retrievals. As
illustrated in Figure 5, the superficially dissimilar analog
source candidate was significantly more retrieved than the
superficially similar disanalog source candidate (respectively
81.25% and 18.75%, X2 (1, N=62)=22.41, p<0.001)2.
These results share a similar pattern with the ones obtained
from Experiment 1. This comparison induces that the
presence of multiple situations belonging to the same
semantic domain as the target cue was not a determinant
factor promoting the superiority of structural similarities in
retrieval. Instead, the fact that our stimuli depicted daily-life
situations might have been a critical parameter so that the
participants may have rely on the abstract structures of the
scenarios as retrieval cues.
100
81,25
80

0

Superficially
dissimilar analog
source candidate

60

Figure 4: % of retrievals of structurally versus
superficially similar source candidates in Experiment 1

40

Experiment 2

20

Method

18,75

Superficially
similar disanalog
source candidate

0

Material
Six source candidate situations were proposed before the
target cue situation (taken from experiment 1): 4 unrelated
stories (distractors), one superficially similar disanalog story
(taken from Experiment 1) and a superficially dissimilar
analog story (taken from Experiment 1, c.f. Figure 3). Hence,
the design was more similar to the one used in traditional
recall tasks (Gentner et al., 1993), though it differs in the
isolation of structural or superficial similarities in different
source candidate stories that are in competition.
Procedure and experimental design
The procedure and experimental design were the same as
in Experiment 1.
Participants
67 students (52 women and 15 men, mean age 20.8 years)
accepted to take part in the experiment during a class
(University Paris 8).

Results and discussion
3 responses could not be interpreted since several source
candidate situations were reported despite the instruction
asking for only one.

Figure 5: % of retrievals of structurally versus
superficially similar source candidates in Experiment 2

Conclusion
In Experiment 1, the superiority of structural similarities in
retrieval was observed while the source analog was in
competition with several source candidates sharing
exclusively surface features with the target cue. As noted by
Wharton et al. (1994, 1996), providing participants with only
one source candidate sharing objects with the target cue may
provoke its retrieval. However, in Experiment 2, providing
participants with only one surface matching source candidate
in competition with the superficially dissimilar analog did not
reduce the proportion of structural similarity-based retrievals.
Thus, structural similarity-based retrievals are predominant
when the situations experimentally provided are close to the
ones that are encountered in daily-life.
Experimental studies have widely converged on the
conclusion that retrieval is driven by superficial similarities.
However, as the analog situations that have been mainly
studied are unfamiliar for the participants, the latter
conclusion cannot be applied to the more ecological retrievals
that are processed in daily-life. Indeed, in analogical problem

2

2 participants chose one of the two distractors or did not
report any retrieval and were not included in the analyses

2961

solving, analog problems share a highly abstract resolution
principle (Gick & Holyoak, 1983; Ross, 1987). Alternatively,
the nature of retrieval can be better informed when
meaningful structural similarities are set between situations
potentially encountered by the participants in their familiar
environment. Under these conditions, the participant's
knowledge allows to encode familiar relations that constitute
cues for retrieving former episodes, while surface features
may be neglected (Novick, 1988; Hofstadter & Sander,
2013). Indeed, a filter has to operate in order to identify the
relevant properties constitutive of a concept that allows to
make sense of the situation.
Some authors have claimed that the commonly observed
surface similarity-based retrieval was not so detrimental to
our cognition since situations sharing surface generally also
share structure (the kind world hypothesis; Gentner &
Medina, 1998; Trench & Minervino, 2015). It is noticeable
indeed that objects in our environment usually interact in
regular ways and have typical relations (Bassok, Wu &
Olseth, 1995). For instance, situations involving two pizzaioli
in the same place potentially induce very closed relations,
such as a competition between them (Figure 3). Two
situations sharing both surface and structure can only be more
structurally similar than two surface dissimilar situations
sharing only structure at a certain level of abstraction. Yet, it
has been taken as granted for advocating the superficially
driven retrieval view that retrievals of structurally and
superficially similar situations were more frequent than only
structurally similar ones (Trench & Minervino, 2015). An
attempt to introduce a source candidate sharing only surface
and no structure with the target cue has been made in storyrecall paradigms (Gentner, 1993). Yet, a closer look at the
stimuli (Figure 1) makes apparent that the superficially
similar disanalog source candidate situations systematically
still shared some relational features with the target cue
(Wharton et al., 1996). Their structures are highly similar
(making a deal to avoid a bad situation) until opposite
conclusions at the end of the stories (betrayal or respect of
the deal). However, a set of objects still can induce a
heterogeneous panel of relations (e.g. two pizzaioli: rivalry,
friendship, etc), while different types of objects can induce
very similar relations (e.g. a loving couple can also induce the
relation rivalry for instance, c.f. Figure 3). In our
experiments, dissociating object similarities and similarities
in terms of familiar relations into different source candidate
situations demonstrated that it is not the objects in themselves
that drive access, but rather the familiar structural relations
that link them.

References
Blanchette, I., & Dunbar, K. (2000). How analogies are
generated: The roles of structural and
superficial
similarity. Memory & cognition, 28(1), 108-124.
Catrambone, R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1989). Overcoming
contextual limitations on problem-solving transfer.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 15(6), 1147.

Catrambone, R. (2002). The effects of surface and structural
feature matches on the access of story analogs. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 28(2), 318.
Dunbar, K., & Blanchette, I. (2001). The in vivo/in vitro
approach to cognition: The case of analogy. Trends in
cognitive sciences, 5(8), 334-339.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-Mapping: A Theoretical
Framework for Analogy. Cognitive Science, 7(2),
155‑170.
Gentner, D., & Colhoun, J. (2010). Analogical processes in
human thinking and learning. In Towards a theory of
thinking (pp. 35-48). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M. J., & Forbus, K. D. (1993). The
roles of similarity in transfer: Separating retrievability
from inferential soundness. Cognitive psychology, 25(4),
524-575.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L., & Forbus, K. D.
(2009). Reviving inert knowledge: Analogical abstraction
supports relational retrieval of past events. Cognitive
science, 33(8), 1343-1382.
Gentner, D., & Medina, J. (1998). Similarity and the
development of rules. Cognition, 65(2), 263-297.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction and
analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15(1), 1‑38.
Hofstadter, D., & Sander, E. (2013). Surfaces and essences:
Analogy as the fuel and fire of thinking. Basic Books.
Holyoak, K. J., & Koh, K. (1987). Surface and structural
similarity in analogical transfer. Memory & Cognition,
15(4), 332-340.
Kretz, D. R., & Krawczyk, D. C. (2007). Expert analogy use
in a naturalistic setting. Psychological perspectives on
expertise, 108.
Novick, L. R. (1988). Analogical transfer, problem
similarity, and expertise. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14(3),
510.
Ross, B. H. (1987). This is like that: The use of earlier
problems and the separation of similarity effects. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 13(4), 629.
Trench, M., & Minervino, R. A. (2015). The role of surface
similarity in analogical retrieval: Bridging the gap between
the naturalistic and the experimental traditions. Cognitive
science,39(6), 1292-1319.
Wharton, C. M., Holyoak, K. J., Downing, P. E., Lange, T.
E., Wickens, T. D., & Melz, E. R. (1994). Below the
surface: Analogical similarity and retrieval competition in
reminding. Cognitive Psychology, 26(1), 64-101.
Wharton, C. M., Holyoak, K. J., & Lange, T. E. (1996).
Remote analogical reminding. Memory & Cognition,
24(5), 629-643.

2962

