Characterizing spatial construction processes:
Toward computational tools to understand cognition
Cathryn S. Cortesa (ccortes4@jhu.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, 3400 N. Charles St. Baltimore, MD 21218

Jonathan D. Jones (jdjones@jhu.edu)
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 3400 N. Charles St. Baltimore, MD 21218

Gregory D. Hager (hager@cs.jhu.edu)
Department of Computer Science, 3400 N. Charles St. Baltimore, MD 21218

Sanjeev Khudanpur (khudanpur@jhu.edu)
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 3400 N. Charles St. Baltimore, MD 21218

Amy L. Shelton (ashelton@jhu.edu)
School of Education, 2800 N. Charles St. Baltimore, MD 21218

Barbara Landau (landau@jhu.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, 3400 N. Charles St. Baltimore, MD 21218
Abstract

Benbow, 2009), developmental of logico-mathematical
abilities (Casey et al., 2008; Cheng & Mix, 2012; Nath &
Szücs, 2014), and math performance in middle and high
school (Stannard, Wolfgang, Jones, & Phelps, 2001;
Wolfgang, Stannard, & Jones, 2003).
Despite the importance of spatial construction skills, little
is known about the cognitive processes underlying their
origins and development. Part of the reason for this is that
spatial construction skills are highly complex, yet the
cognitive characterization of these skills and their
measurement has been quite limited. For example, although
evaluation of block construction tasks has long been
recognized as an important assessment of spatial skills
(Bailey, 1933), most methods of assessment only evaluate
the end product (accuracy), and fail to measure the
construction process. Studies have generally reported broad
stroke outcome measures such as time to complete a
structure (Akshoomoff & Stiles, 1996; Frick, Hansen, &
Newcombe, 2013), binary measures of block placement as
correct or incorrect (Brosnan, 1998; Hoffman, Landau, &
Pagani, 2003; Stiles & Stern, 2001), or summary ratings for
the complexity, planning, or organization of free-play block
designs (Caldera et al., 1999; Casey & Bobb, 2003; StilesDavis, 1988; Stiles & Stern, 2001). Even studies that aim to
characterize development of construction processes or
strategies have used analytic categories that are limited in
their generality for understanding construction. For
example, some have suggested that children start with
simple iterative methods (i.e. stacking blocks on top of one
another), then move to sequential combinations of methods
(i.e. first creating a line of blocks next to one another, then
creating a stack), and finally come to flexibly shift between
multiple methods (Stiles-Davis, 1988; Stiles & Stern, 2001;
Stiles, Stern, Trauner, & Nass, 1996). These

Spatial
construction—creating
or
copying
spatial
arrangements—is a hallmark of human spatial cognition.
Spatial construction appears early in development, predicts
later spatial and mathematical skills, and is used throughout
life. Despite its importance, we know little about the cognitive
processes underlying skilled construction. Construction tasks
are highly complex but analyses have tended to focus on
broad-stroke measures of end-goal accuracy. In this paper we
introduce a novel behavioral coding formalism to characterize
an individual’s entire construction process, examine many
individuals’ processes in aggregate, and summarize patterns
that emerge. The results show high consistency at certain
points occurring throughout the construction, but also indicate
flexibility in the interim paths that lead to and diverge from
these points. Our approach offers a new method that can more
precisely describe the behavioral patterns observed during
construction in order to reveal the underlying cognitive
processes engaged, and capture individual differences in
building expertise.
Keywords: spatial skills; spatial cognition; block copying;
computational model

Introduction
Spatial construction—the activity of creating novel spatial
arrangements or copying existing ones—is a hallmark of
human spatial cognition. These activities naturally occur
during childhood and adolescence and are related to later
achievements in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) fields (Hsi, Linn, & Bell, 1997; Kell,
Lubinski, Benbow, & Steiger, 2013; Verdine, Golinkoff,
Hirsh-Pasek, Newcombe, et al., 2014). Moreover, spatial
play during early schooling—including spatial building
tasks—contributes to school readiness (Verdine, Golinkoff,
Hirsh-Pasek, & Newcombe, 2014; Wai, Lubinski, &

246

characterizations tell us little about the step-by-step
processes that the user takes when carrying out a complex
construction, nor how the ever-expanding set of outcomes
grows over time.
More recent studies have attempted to provide a more
precise characterization of the process occurring during
construction. Verdine and colleagues characterized
children’s placement errors, including whether a block was
placed in the correct layer, in correct orientation relative to
other blocks, and with the correct attachment studs
connected (Verdine, Golinkoff, Hirsh-Pasek, Newcombe, et
al., 2014; Verdine, Golinkoff, Hirsh-Pasek, & Newcombe,
2016). Researchers in computer science have generated
step-by-step instructions for assembling block models based
on physical constraints such as avoiding ‘floating blocks’
not supported from below (Zhang, Igarashi, Kanamori, &
Mitani, 2016). Both studies begin to characterize the
temporal and incremental nature of block construction.
Each of the approaches discussed above provides a
description of the accuracy of a block construction at points
intermediate to building or at the end; but none provides a
characterization of an individual’s complete construction
process. Yet, variability and/or consistency across
individuals’ construction processes may reveal much about
the underlying cognitive and perceptual abilities and biases
that influence the builder’s construction choices.
The incremental process of adding blocks to a structure
can unfold in many ways, with different strategies leading to
the same successful solution. Some of this variation may be
unimportant—merely small tweaks in the options one can
use to complete a construction. Other aspects of variation
are likely to reflect important cognitive processes. For
example, limitations of attention and memory make it likely
that certain strategies or processes will be preferred as they
may reflect more efficient use of available cognitive
resources (Ballard, Hayhoe, Pook, & Rao, 1997). Certain
strategies may also reflect the builder’s understanding of the
physical principles engaged during building. For example,
the effect of gravity could bias the builder to construct from
the bottom layer upwards (Zhang et al., 2016). Finally,
construction strategies may be related to perceptual or
semantic groupings of the blocks within the structure. The
sub-parts which the builder chooses to construct, and the
order in which they are created may be driven by the
builder’s perceptual parsing of the model being copied.
More generally, there may be systematic commonalities in
the construction paths that builders use, and these may vary
depending on the builder’s level of skill.
Understanding the principles underlying construction
requires methods that can characterize the builder’s full
construction process. Ideally, the best analysis would
completely describe the entire construction process,
capturing any imaginable construction outcome as well as
each step of building along the way. This kind of
characterization would be as relevant for a simple stack of
blocks as it would be for an elaborate castle or an abstract
collection of connected pieces.

To our knowledge, such methods have never been
reported. Therefore, in this paper, we report a new method
for characterizing the precise nature of processes involved
when people carry out a relatively simple construction task:
using blocks to copy a target model. To do this, we ask
adults to carry out a simple building task, using a set of
Duplos™. We describe our new method for coding block
construction behavior that uses a novel computer interface.
Our method characterizes each partial assembly created
during the building process as a step taken along a path
from the start to the end of construction. We then evaluate
common states and predominant path types traversed by
adults as they move through the construction process.
Finally, we make inferences about the underlying cognitive
mechanisms engaged during block construction.

Method
Participants
Twenty-seven healthy adults 18-53 years old (M = 21;4, SD
= 6;6) participated in the study. A university ethical review
board approved the study’s procedures, and all participants
provided informed consent.

Materials
Participants were asked to copy six different block models
of varying size, each consisting of 4, 6, or 8 blocks. Each
participant copied each of the six models in randomized
order, but always began with the two smallest models
(models 1 and 2). Figure 1 shows each of the six models.
We used Duplo™ blocks for the construction copy task.
These blocks were chosen for several reasons. First, the
attachment mechanism allowed the blocks to be connected
to each other in fixed ways. The attachment studs permitted
precise specification of the relationships between blocks
above and beside one another. In addition, the limited set of
colors (red, yellow, green, blue) of each shape (2x2 square,
4x2 rectangle) were ideal for the precise measurement
system we developed.

Figure 1: The block models used in this study. Models 1 and
2 contain four blocks, models 3 and 4 contain six blocks,
and models 5 and 6 contain 8 blocks.
We mounted a PrimeSense Carmine RGBD camera in an
overhead configuration to record participants’ behaviors as

247

they carried out the construction task, at a rate of 30 frames
per second. All videos were coded using our annotation
interface. The coder viewed the video recording frame-byframe on a desk-top computer.

table. Other actions included a complex set of simultaneous
relationships such as adding a single block in a location that
was both above and beside other blocks. Actions could be
constructive, such as adding a block or connecting multiple
parts, or deconstructive, such as removing a block or
separating a structure into two parts.
Each relationship was defined specifically by the set of
attachment studs involved. For example, if two rectangle
blocks were placed horizontally adjacent to each other along
the principal (long) axis, then four studs on each block
would be involved in the adjacency. Alternatively, if they
were attached along the secondary (short) axis, only two
studs on each block would be implicated. Block studs were
identified according to the column and row on each block,
so the coded data specified the exact relationship between
sets of two blocks.
Each action modified the environment to result in a new
block state, defined as a set of block attachments present in
the copy. Since the construction process occurred over time,
each action included a time stamp that allowed block states
to be ordered. Here, we refer to the ordered sequence of
states over time as a construction path, where actions
represent transitions connecting one state to the next. To
illustrate, Figure 3a shows six observed states (illustrated as
images of block configurations) and 11 observed actions
(directed arrows). Any set of arrows that lead from the first
null state to the final correct copy state could comprise a
construction path.

Procedures
Participants were seated at a table marked with an outline of
a rectangular area (14.75 x 24.00 in.) in which they
completed their block construction copy. During data
collection, the experimenter observed participants in real
time on a video display monitor. A vertical black barrier
was placed on the table behind the construction area to
obscure the video display monitors from the participant and
to avoid distraction. Figure 2 shows the testing equipment
setup used for the study.
In the procedure, the experimenter first placed the model
at a 45° angle in the rear left corner of the marked
construction area on the table. Each model was presented in
a standardized orientation so that the greatest number of
model surfaces were visible to the participant. Then, the
experimenter placed the corresponding loose blocks on the
table in the center of the construction area by emptying
them from a small bag. This ensured random starting
positions for each of the blocks used to construct the copy.
Participants were instructed to take their time and to copy
the model, building as efficiently and accurately as possible.

Data analysis
One researcher coded all videos. The initial state of the
model was always a null state in which no blocks were
connected. Each other state along the path to the final copy
was attained via a constructive or deconstructive action
taken at the preceding state. Since each participant could
take any number of actions, construction path length was
not balanced across individuals. We also used the coded
data to count the number of unique state transitions for all
participants in aggregate. Results of the analysis are
described below. Principles of the results are true across all
six models, but we illustrate using two models as examples.

Results

Figure 2: Overhead camera and blocks set up for the block
copying task. The model was placed at the rear left of the
table, and blocks for the copy construction were placed at
the center.

Overwhelmingly, the most common actions were correct
single-block placements over time. Participants tended to
take efficient paths that traversed an average of just over n-1
states for a model that contains n blocks. This held true for
all six of the models, including the four-block models 1 and
2 (M = 3.3, SD = 0.9 and M = 3.1, SD = 0.6, respectively),
the six-block-models 3 and 4 (M = 5.0, SD = 0.7, and M =
5.5, SD = 1.8, respectively), and the eight-block-models 5
and 6 (M = 7.4, SD = 0.9, and M = 7.9, SD = 1.7,
respectively). Strikingly, the observed correct states
represented only a small proportion of total possible correct
states. For example, for the six-block model 3 (shown in

Analytic Rationale
To account for the broad range of construction behaviors
and resulting complex patterns in the copy, we developed a
new behavioral coding system, executed in a custom
designed computer interface. The video frames for each trial
from each participant were coded as a series of actions, each
of which culminated in a state. Each action captured the
start and end time of a change made to the copy as it was
being constructed. Actions could be comprised of a single
relationship, such as placing two blocks adjacent on the

248

Figure 3b), 79 possible correct states exist1. In aggregate,
our sample executed a total of 136 actions, but only created
16 different correct states (27% of all possible correct
states). An additional three erroneous states were observed
in model 3; these will be discussed later.

path to achieve this state led from the fifth image in the third
row of Figure 3b, such that 17 of the 26 (65.4%) people who
created the same penultimate state achieved it by placing the
green square on the second layer.
The most commonly traversed states created points of
convergence. Convergence points represented a single
subassembly that results from several different preceding
actions. We observe that convergence points tend to be
highly likely states, which most or all participants created
along the way to a complete construction. As shown in
Figure 3b, most participants (66%) passed through the state
in which three blocks are joined with horizontal adjacency
to create the base of the copy (second image, second row).
The observed frequencies of convergence points are
remarkable when one considers that only a fraction of all
possible efficient paths go through these states.
We also observed points of divergence. Divergence points
represented cases where participants, when presented with
identical partial assembly states, chose to proceed with
several different actions. For example, about 70% of those
who created the base of model 3b proceeded to place the
green then the blue square in the second layer. The other
30% instead placed the same two blocks in the opposite
order, first placing the blue and then the green square in the
second layer. This is illustrated in Figure 3b, in the third and
fifth images of the third row.
Our results demonstrated some commonalities across the
six different models. The most frequently constructed partial
assembly states for all six of the models represented a
complete layer. Across all six models, 83.6% of participants
began their copy construction by creating the base layer. For
the models with six or eight blocks, 77.4% and 86.5% of
participants created the complete second layer as a partial
assembly, respectively. Across all six models, each
complete layer state is visited more frequently than would
be expected by chance, even with the most conservative
comparison against only other observed states with the same
number of blocks (all p’s < .001).
Many participants’ construction paths (75.5%) traversed
all complete layer states, although this is by no means
necessary in order to achieve a correct copy. Specifically for
the most complex model, model 6, those participants who
traversed each complete layer partial assembly state in their
individual construction path also tended to have the shorter
path lengths (t(24) = −2.57, p = .017). In other words, when
faced with a complex block copying task, building layer by
layer appears to be both highly likely and highly efficient.
These observations provide insight into the importance of
layers, which may be driven by the builder’s understanding
of physical properties such as gravity and/or perceptual
biases that suggest a natural parse in terms of layers.
Although most block placements were correct (i.e.
replicated part of the model in the copy), there were some
errors—that is, states that did not represent a correct part of
the model. These errors contributed to deviations from the
main construction paths. If erroneous states are included in
our calculation, the number of possible block states in given

Figure 3: Observed paths for models 2 (a) and 3 (b). Paths
begin at the top, where the null state represents no blocks
connected. Images represent block states; arrows connecting
images represent actions. Numbers adjacent to arrows
represent the number of times that action was executed.
Of the 16 observed states for model 3 (Fig 3b), some were
created by a majority of participants, while others were rare.
We found the same pattern in the observed paths, that is, the
actions moving from state to state. Though all observed
paths led to a correct copy construction, some were highly
likely, while others were highly unlikely. For example, the
first image in the fourth row in Figure 3b was created by a
great majority of participants (96.3%). The most common
1
For a given model with n blocks, we define the set of possible
correct states as the set of unique states traversed along any path
which begins at the null state, ends at the goal state, and contains n
states. These states can be enumerated computationally.

249

a starting set of 4, 6, or 8 blocks is vast, but finite. For
example, a mathematician recently estimated that there are
nearly a billion possible ways to connect six uniform
rectangular Lego™ blocks contiguously (Abrahamsen &
Eilers, 2011). The model and our instructions to participants
constrained their behavior such that even though errors
occurred, only an extremely small proportion of all possible
states were observed.
The errors observed in this sample also provided insight
into the cognitive limitations of our adult participants. Two
categories of errors were observed. First, spatial errors
occurred when a participant utilized the correct block, but
placed it in incorrect orientation relative to the rest of the
copy. For example, in model 2, one participant placed the
yellow square block with incorrect relationship relative to
the red and green rectangles underneath, shown in the first
image of the first row in Figure 3a. Second, block identity
errors occurred when a participant created the correct form
in their copy, but used the wrong color block relative to the
model. For example, for model 3, one participant used the
yellow rectangle to create the base of their copy instead of
the green rectangle (first image, first row of Figure 3b).
Overall, our results provided rich detail about the step-bystep process undertaken by our adult participants in the
block copying task. We observed only a small portion of all
possible correct states, and a yet smaller portion of all
possible states including erroneous ones. The distribution of
the sample across different construction paths was not
uniform, but rather demonstrated commonalities across the
six models. Specifically, convergence points were observed
corresponding to completed copy layers, and divergence
was observed in the order of block placement within a
single layer. Most common construction paths involved the
sequential construction of horizontal layers, beginning with
the base and building upward.

chunks in systematic ways. The location of convergence
points, for example, at the completion of a horizontal layer,
may indicate that participants grouped or chunked the
models principally into horizontal layers or “floors”.
It is likely that the underlying structure of sub-goals will
vary substantially, depending on a variety of factors. For
example, a model that is organized to highlight salient
perceptual units, such as multiple vertically adjacent blocks
of the same color, could induce a construction path that
would take most builders through a convergence point
organized as a vertical chunk, and not the horizontal layers
observed in the present study. In this case, we anticipate that
adults would attend to the imposed perceptual units and
change their construction strategy to build using sub-goals
defined by these color-units. Similarly, incorporating
conceptual structure into the models could radically alter
people’s construction paths—heads and eyes on structures
that look like animals, or wheels on structures that look like
vehicles could serve as the chunks or sub-goals to be built.
The role of conceptual knowledge in the reproduction of
complex figures has a long history in the domain of chess,
where experts are known to reproduce board configurations
using sub-structures that reflect high-level concepts such as
attack and defend (Chase & Simon, 1973).
In our simple construction task, errors were relatively
rare. Errors were characterized as either spatial relationship
or block identity errors. We hypothesize that spatial errors
indicate problems with spatial working memory, in
translating information observed in the model into the
working copy. Block identity errors, on the other hand, may
involve object working memory, or a prioritization of
spatial configuration over color information. These error
types are likely linked to the relative simplicity of the
models we used; analysis of error patterns for more complex
models may well reveal more variation.
We see our method as a powerful way to examine the
nature of sub-goals and errors, applicable to a variety of
visual-spatial construction tasks involving conceptual or
perceptual chunks. The extent to which observed
construction paths and construction errors change over
variations in the target model would provide insight into
how building principles change across target types. In
addition, our method permits evaluation of variation in
construction paths across different participant populations
including construction experts compared to novices, and
developmental populations of children at different ages.
We believe that our analytic method has great potential
for revealing the fine-grained nature of many tasks that
require step-by-step actions, which in turn require rich
cognitive capabilities, including representation of the goal
as well as strategies for moving from a start state to an end
state. Such general task requirements are ubiquitous
throughout life—from the toddler who learns to operate an
iPad to the adult who learns to cook a gourmet meal. Our
insight is that understanding complex skills requires a finegrained and precise approach, exemplified by the method
we have introduced. Block construction serves as a first

Discussion
Our study presented a precise, quantitative method for
understanding how people carry out a simple block
construction task. Using a novel behavioral coding method
together with computational modelling, we precisely
described the block construction process as a temporal
sequence of states. This approach shed light on the cognitive
processes that support spatial construction tasks.
A description of state transitions illustrated commonalities
among the construction paths that participants used for each
of the six models. Convergence points tended to correspond
to the completion of a horizontal layer in the model, while
divergence points tended to correspond to various orders of
placing blocks within a layer. We hypothesize that
convergence points can be interpreted as boundaries
between perceptual or semantic chunks—that is, they
represent sub-goals that builders had in mind as they
approached and carried out the task. Although we did not
provide any pre-determined conceptual units or clear
perceptually-based chunks (such as sub-parts built from
same-colored blocks), participants nonetheless created these

250

demonstration of the utility of our approach, but it is by no
means the end.

(2013). Creativity and technical innovation: Spatial
ability’s unique role. Psychological Science, 24(9), 1831–
1836. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797613478615
Nath, S., & Szücs, D. (2014). Construction play and
cognitive skills associated with the development of
mathematical abilities in 7-year-old children. Learning
and
Instruction,
32,
73–80.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2014.01.006
Stannard, L., Wolfgang, C. H., Jones, I., & Phelps, P.
(2001). A longitudinal study of the predictive relations
among construction play and mathematical achievement.
Early Child Development and Care, 167(1), 115–125.
https://doi.org/10.1080/0300443011670110
Stiles-Davis, J. (1988). Developmental change in young
children’s spatial grouping activity. Developmental
Psychology,
24(4),
522–531.
https://doi.org/10.1037//0012-1649.24.4.522
Stiles, J., & Stern, C. (2001). Developmental change in
spatial cognitive processing: Complexity effects and
block construction performance in preschool children.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 2(2), 157–187.
Stiles, J., Stern, C., Trauner, D., & Nass, R. (1996).
Developmental change in spatial grouping activity among
children with early focal brain injury: Evidence from a
modeling task. Brain and Cognition, 31(1), 46–62.
https://doi.org/10.1006/brcg.1996.0024
Verdine, B. N., Golinkoff, R. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., &
Newcombe, N. S. (2014). Finding the missing piece:
Blocks, puzzles, and shapes fuel school readiness. Trends
in Neuroscience and Education, 3(1), 7–13.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tine.2014.02.005
Verdine, B. N., Golinkoff, R. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., &
Newcombe, N. S. (2016). Links between spatial and
mathematical skills across the preschool years.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development.
Verdine, B. N., Golinkoff, R. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K.,
Newcombe, N. S., Filipowicz, A. T., & Chang, A. (2014).
Deconstructing building blocks: Preschoolers’ spatial
assembly performance relates to early mathematics skills.
Child
Development,
85(3),
1062–1076.
https://doi.org/10.1111/cdev.12165.
Wai, J., Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. P. (2009). Spatial
ability for STEM domains: Aligning over 50 years of
cumulative psychological knowledge solidifies its
importance. Journal of Educational Psychology, 101(4),
817–835. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0016127
Wolfgang, C. H., Stannard, L., & Jones, I. (2003).
Advanced constructional play with LEGOs among
preschoolers as a predictor of later school achievement in
mathematics. Early Child Development and Care, 173(3),
467–475. https://doi.org/10.1080/02568540109594958
Zhang, M., Igarashi, Y., Kanamori, Y., & Mitani, J. (2016).
Component-based building instructions for block
assembly. In Computer-Aided Design and Applications
(pp. 55–59). Vancouver, Canada: Taylor & Francis.
https://doi.org/10.1080/16864360.2016.1240450

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NSF grant #1561278.

References
Abrahamsen, M., & Eilers, S. (2011). On the asymptotic
enumeration
of
Lego
structures.
Experimental
Mathematics,
20,
145-152.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10586458.2011.564539
Akshoomoff, N. A., & Stiles, J. (1996). The influence of
pattern type on children’s block design performance.
Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society,
2, 392–402.
Bailey, M. W. (1933). A scale of block constructions for
young children. Child Development, 4(2), 121–139.
https://doi.org/10.2307/1125591
Ballard, D. H., Hayhoe, M. M., Pook, P. K., & Rao, R. P. N.
(1997). Deictic codes for the embodiment of cognition.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 20, 723–767.
Brosnan, M. J. (1998). Spatial ability in children’s play with
Lego blocks. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 87, 19–28.
Caldera, M., Culp, A., O Brien, M., Tuglio, R., Alvarez, M.,
& Huston, A. (1999). Children’s play preferences,
construction play with blocks, and visual-spatial skills:
Are they related? International Journal of Behavioral
Development,
23(4),
855–872.
https://doi.org/10.1080/016502599383577
Casey, B. M., Andrews, N., Schindler, H., Kersh, J. E.,
Samper, A., & Copley, J. (2008). The development of
spatial skills through interventions involving block
building activities. Cognition and Instruction, 26(3), 269–
309. https://doi.org/10.1080/07370000802177177
Casey, B. M., & Bobb, B. (2003). The power of block
building. Teaching Children Mathematics, 10(2), 98–102.
Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1973). Perception in chess.
Cognitive Psychology, 4, 55–81.
Cheng, Y. L., & Mix, K. S. (2012). Spatial training
improves children’s mathematics ability. Journal of
Cognition
and
Development,
15(1),
2–11.
https://doi.org/10.1080/15248372.2012.725186
Frick, A., Hansen, M. A., & Newcombe, N. S. (2013).
Development of mental rotation in 3- to 5-year-old
children. Cognitive Development, 28(4), 386–399.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogdev.2013.06.002
Hoffman, J. E., Landau, B., & Pagani, B. (2003). Spatial
breakdown in spatial construction: Evidence from eye
fixations in children with Williams syndrome. Cognitive
Psychology, 46, 260–301. https://doi.org/10.1016/S00100285(02)00518-2
Hsi, S., Linn, M. C., & Bell, J. E. (1997). The role of spatial
reasoning in engineering and the design of spatial
instruction. Journal of Engineering Education, 86(2),
151–158.
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.21689830.1997.tb00278.x
Kell, H. J., Lubinski, D., Benbow, C. P., & Steiger, J. H.

251

