Children’s social referencing reflects sensitivity to graded uncertainty
Emily Hembacher

Benjamin deMayo

Michael C. Frank

ehembach@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

bdemayo@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

mcfrank@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Abstract

accomplish this type of self-monitoring. For example, 3year-olds report being equally confident about correct and
incorrect responses in memory tasks (Hembacher & Ghetti,
2014). Preschoolers report being less confident when they
are wrong in other tasks, but they are typically overconfident overall (Coughlin, Hembacher, Lyons, & Ghetti, 2015;
Lipowski, Merriman, & Dunlosky, 2013). However, these
studies may underestimate young children’s uncertainty monitoring, as they typically rely on explicit metacognitive reports. Children may learn to respond appropriately to uncertainty in everyday learning situations before they can bring it
fully into consciousness and report on it.
Several studies have provided evidence that children’s
spontaneous information-seeking behaviors might track uncertainty. Call and Carpenter (2001) had 2-year-olds choose
between several tubes to find a hidden sticker. They found
that the toddlers were more likely to peek inside a tube before choosing when they had not seen the baiting of the tubes
compared to when they had, suggesting they were aware of
their ignorance and managed to delay their response until
they were sufficiently confident. In another study, Goupil,
Romand-Monnier, and Kouider (2016) found that 20-montholds were more likely to seek help by looking at their parents when they were unable to respond accurately in a memory task. These spontaneous information-gathering behaviors
may provide a window into early uncertainty monitoring, and
allow us to ask questions about its development.
Here, we focus on the role of uncertainty in guiding social referencing – one form of information gathering – during word learning. Referencing a social partner can provide
several types of disambiguating information. For example,
children can follow a speaker’s gaze direction to infer the referent of a new word, as people tend to look at objects they
are referring to. By the second year of life infants follow a
speaker’s gaze and map labels to objects on the basis of gaze
direction (Baldwin, 1991). There is also evidence that infants’ propensity for gaze-following predicts later language
development (Carpenter, Nagel, Tomasello, Butterworth, &
Moore, 1998), highlighting the importance of this behavior
for learning. In addition to monitoring gaze direction, children may reference a social partner’s emotional reaction to
a stimulus or event, which can help disambiguate the appropriateness of a response (Walden & Ogan, 1988). Finally,
looking at a social partner can be taken as a bid for help
(Vredenburgh & Kushnir, 2015), and may result in explicit
instruction.
Social referencing can be an efficient source of disambiguating information, but is it driven by uncertainty during

The ability to monitor epistemic uncertainty is critical for selfdirected learning. However, we still know little about young
children’s ability to detect uncertainty in their mental representations. Here we asked whether a spontaneous information
gathering behavior – social referencing – is driven by uncertainty during early childhood. Children ages 2-5 completed a
word-learning task in which they were presented with one or
two objects, heard a label, and were asked to put the labeled
object in a bucket. Referential ambiguity was manipulated
through the number of objects present and their familiarity. In
Experiment 1, when there were two novel objects and a novel
label, the referent was ambiguous; when there were two familiar objects, or only one novel or familiar object, the referent
was known or could be inferred. In Experiment 2, there were
either two novel objects, two familiar objects, or one familiar
and one novel object; in the latter case the referent could be inferred by excluding the familiar object. To further manipulate
the availability of referential cues, the experimenter gazed at
either the target or the center of the table while labeling the object. In both experiments, children looked at the experimenter
more often while making their response when the referent was
ambiguous. In Experiment 2, children also looked at the experimenter more when there was one familiar and one novel
object, but only when the experimenter’s gaze during labeling was uninformative. These results suggest that children’s
social referencing is a sensitive index of graded epistemic uncertainty.
Keywords: social referencing; help seeking; word learning;
uncertainty.

Preschoolers quickly learn new concepts, rules, and language. They also actively explore and ask questions in ways
that seem targeted to maximize learning (Chouinard, Harris,
& Maratsos, 2007; Schulz & Bonawitz, 2007). However, we
still have an incomplete understanding of young children’s
ability to monitor their own mental states, in particular, their
epistemic uncertainty (Sodian, Thoermer, Kristen, & Perst,
2012). Do preschool-aged children monitor uncertainty and
actively guide their learning behaviors on the basis of this
monitoring, or is early learning better characterized as a process of integrating information that is largely generated externally, for example, by social partners who act as teachers
(Csibra & Gergely, 2006)?
A hallmark of successful uncertainty monitoring is being less confident when the probability of accuracy is lower
(Robinson, Johnson, & Herndon, 1997). This ability includes
awareness of complete ignorance, but also of graded evidence
in mental representations, which is considered important for
predicting outcomes and regulating behavior (Lyons & Zelazo, 2011). During adulthood, accurately representing one’s
own learning progress allows for efficient self-directed study
and predicts learning outcomes (Dunlosky & Rawson, 2012).
There is mixed evidence about whether young children can

495

early childhood? It could be that social referencing is not
costly enough to require selectivity, or that uncertainty signals
are too weak to drive information-seeking behaviors in young
children. Similarly, other learning mechanisms such as the
privileging of social information (Ho, MacGlashan, Littman,
& Cushman, 2017) or tracking of regularities in the environment (Yurovsky & Frank, 2015) may be sufficiently powerful
to obviate the need for uncertainty monitoring in preschoolaged children.
The present work asks whether preschoolers reference a
speaker more frequently when the referent of the speech is
ambiguous. This work adapts a paradigm used by Vaish,
Demir and Baldwin (2011) in which 13- to 18-month-olds
sat across from an experimenter who produced a label (e.g.,
“a modi!”) in the presence of one or two novel objects. Infants looked towards the experimenter more often when there
were two objects present, suggesting that infants’ social referencing is driven by referential ambiguity. Here we adapt this
procedure for use with preschoolers, who have a richer behavioral repertoire compared to infants, and may not reference
social information based on uncertainty for the reasons discussed previously. We ask whether preschoolers look more
at a social partner when they are uncertain about the identity
of a referent (Experiment 1) and whether they are sensitive
to graded uncertainty based on the amount of disambiguating
evidence available (Experiment 2).

two unfamiliar objects, when the object-label mapping was
not known and could not be inferred.
We were interested in the amount of social referencing
children exhibited across the trial. We considered four different phases of each trial based on the notion that children
might expect different social information at different stages
of the task. Specifically, we predicted that children might expect the speaker’s gaze direction to be informative during the
labeling itself, as speakers tend to look at objects they refer
to. We predicted that later in the trial, as children reached for
an object and placed it in the bucket, they might expect evaluative feedback about their choice (e.g., facial expressions of
encouragement or discouragement).

Methods
Participants We recruited a planned sample of 80 children
ages 2-5 years from the Children’s Discovery Museum in San
Jose, California.1 The sample included 20 2-year-olds (mean
age 31.97 months), 20 3-year-olds (mean age 42.65 months),
20 4-year-olds (mean age 55.85 months), and 20 5-year-olds
(mean age 65.21 months). An additional 20 children participated but were removed from analyses because they heard
English less than 75% of the time at home (n = 10), because
they were unable to complete at least half of the trials in the
task (n = 4), because of parental interference (n = 1), or due
to experimenter or technical errors (n = 5).
Stimuli and Design Children were presented with one or
two objects, heard a label, and were asked to put the labeled
object in a bucket. Half of the objects were selected to be
familiar to children (e.g., a cow) and half were selected to
be novel (e.g., a nozzle). There were four trial types: onefamiliar, one-novel, two-familiar, and two-novel. There were
three trials of each type, for a total of twelve trials. Trial
types were presented sequentially in an order that was counterbalanced across participants. The assignment of individual
objects to trial types was counterbalanced. On familiar trials,
the familiar label for the target object was used (e.g., “cow”).
On novel trials, a novel label was used (e.g., “dawnoo”).
The critical manipulation was of referential ambiguity; on
one-familiar and two-familiar trials, there was no referential
ambiguity, as children were expected to be certain about the
objects and their labels. Similarly, on one-novel trials, children were expected to be certain about the label referent as
there was only one option. However, on two-novel trials, the
referent was ambiguous, as the novel label could apply to either novel object.
Throughout the task, the experimenter never gazed at the
object they were labeling, or responded to children’s verbal
or non-verbal bids for help by indicating the correct object.
Thus, children were expected to remain uncertain about the
referent throughout the trial when two novel objects were
present.

Figure 1: Study design for Experiments 1 and 2.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we examined whether children would visually reference a speaker more often when the speaker produced a referentially ambiguous label compared to an unambiguous label. Children sat across from an experimenter who
labeled an object on the table between them (Figure 1). The
experimenter then asked the child to place the named object
in a bucket. Across trials, there were either one or two objects
on the table, which were either familiar or novel to the child.
This design allowed us to test whether merely having more
than one object present is sufficient to increase social referencing (which could not be ruled out by Vaish et al.), or if
referential ambiguity (and thus epistemic uncertainty) is the
underlying factor. If the latter is true, we expected children to
increase their looking to the experimenter only on trials with

1 Planned sample size, exclusion criteria, and analysis plan preregistered at https://osf.io/y7mvt

496

objects and familiarity during the planning (β = 0.21, p <
.001) and response phases (β = 0.6, p < .001), such that 2novel trials were associated with more looking. There was
no interaction with age in either phase.2 In summary, children looked to the experimenter more often when planning
and executing a response under uncertainty. These results
suggest that children were aware that they did not have sufficient knowledge to answer independently, and referenced the
speaker to resolve this uncertainty.
We did not find the expected effect of referential ambiguity in the label phase. It is possible that children failed to
predict that they would need more information until later in
the trial, when they were actually faced with making a decision. Another possibility is that children’s looking was at
ceiling during the labeling phase, perhaps because children
look at someone who is speaking regardless of the need for
referential disambiguation. A third possibility is that this is an
artifact of our design, in which the experimenter gazed at the
center of the table rather than the referent of the label. Children may have realized that the experimenter’s gaze direction
during labeling was not informative. Similarly, children may
have found it strange to interact with an experimenter who
did not gaze at the object they were labeling, which may have
produced unnatural patterns of social referencing. Experiment 2 tests these possibilities and examines whether children’s social referencing is sensitive to graded uncertainty.

Procedure Throughout the study, the child sat at one end
of a large circular table, and the experimenter stood at the
opposite end. Each trial of the task proceeded as follows:
the experimenter placed one or two objects on the sides of
the table, out of reach of the child so that the child could
not interact with the toys during the labeling event. For oneobject trials, the location of the object (left or right) alternated
between trials.
After placing the objects, the experimenter said “Hey look,
there’s a (target) here.” The experimenter gazed at the center
of the table rather than the object they labeled (see rationale
in Stimuli and Design). The experimenter waited approximately two seconds (based on a visual metronome placed
within view) before saying, “Can you put the (target) in the
bucket?” They then pushed the object(s) forward within reach
of the child, and placed a plastic bucket in the center of the
table, also within reach of the child. Prior to the twelve experimental trials, there were two training trials: a one-familiar
trial and a two-familiar trial, to acquaint the child with the
procedure. A camera placed to the side of the experimenter
captured the participant’s face, so that looking behavior could
be coded from video.
Coding procedure Videos were coded using DataVyu software (http://datavyu.org). For each participant, we
coded the number of times they referenced the experimenter
across the trial. Because we were interested in the circumstances that elicit social referencing in children, we coded the
number of looks that occurred during four phases of the trial:
a label phase, which began at the utterance of the label and
ended when the experimenter began to slide the objects, a
slide phase, in which the experimenter slid the object(s) into
the child’s reach, a planning phase, which began at the end
of the slide and ended when the child touched an object, and
a response phase, which began when the child touched an
object and ended when the child released the object into the
bucket. A second coder independently scored the number of
looks for one third of the trials for each participant to establish reliability.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was designed to replicate Experiment 1 and investigate whether children’s social referencing is sensitive to
uncertainty based on graded evidence about a label’s referent.
Since we did not observe any difference between one-familiar
and one-novel trials, we eliminated single-object trials, leaving the 2-familiar and 2-novel trials. In addition, we added
1-novel-1-familiar trials. For these trials, we expected that
children would be able to infer the referent by excluding the
familiar object as a possibility. For example, when a toy lion
and a novel item were present, they could exclude that the
speaker was referring to the lion as a “blicket” (Markman &
Wachtel, 1988). We predicted that children might be less certain about their choice on these trials compared to when the
label and referent were familiar to them (2-familiar trials),
but more confident than when there are no cues to reference
(2-novel trials).
In addition, we manipulated between participants whether
or not the experimenter’s gaze during labeling was informative (they gazed at either the referent of their label or the center of the table), allowing us to determine whether children
selectively reference gaze during labeling when gaze is expected to be informative. The manipulation of informativity of gaze during labeling also meant that participants in the
referential gaze condition had an additional referential cue,
which might decrease uncertainty for the remainder of the
trial. In Experiment 1, we did not observe an effect of age, so

Results and Discussion
Results of Experiment 1 are presented in Figure 2. Inter-rater
reliability for the number of looks in each phase was high,
intraclass correlation r = .97, p<.001. To test our prediction
that referential ambiguity (i.e., having two novel objects)
would produce more social referencing, we fit mixed-effects
linear regression models separately for each phase with
the following structure: number of looks ˜ number of
objects * familiarity * age in months + (number
of objects + familiarity | Subject ID). A single
model with phase as a factor did not converge.
We did not find any main or interaction effects of number
of objects, familiarity, or age on number of looks during the
label or slide phases. Thus, mere novelty or the presence of
multiple objects was not enough to increase social referencing. However, we found an interaction effect of number of

2 https://github.com/emilyfae/socref_uncert

497

One object

Two objects

2
2 years

1

3 years

1

familiarity
0
2

familiar
novel
4 years

Number of Looks

0
2

1

0
2
5 years

1

0
label

slide

planning

response

label

slide

planning

response

Phase

Figure 2: Results of Experiment 1. Number of looks to the experimenter across phases and conditions. Error bars are 95 percent
confidence intervals.
Procedure The procedure was identical to Experiment 1,
except that there were three practice trials (two familiar trials
and one novel trial). We included two familiar trials during
the practice so that children would remain motivated to complete the task.

we restricted the current sample to 3- and 4-year-olds.

Methods
Participants We recruited a planned sample of 80 children
ages 3-4 years from the Children’s Discovery Museum in
San Jose, California.3 . The sample included 40 3-year-olds
(mean age 42.89 months) and 40 4-year-olds (mean age 53.47
months). An additional 20 children participated but were removed from analyses because they heard English less than
75% of the time at home (n = 9), because they were unable to
complete at least half of the trials in the task (n = 7), or due
to experimenter or technical errors (n = 4).

Results and Discussion
Results of Experiment 2 are presented in Figure 3. Inter-rater
reliability for the number of looks in each phase was again
high, intraclass correlation r = .97, p<.001. To quantify the
main and interactive effects of familiarity, gaze informativity,
phase, and age on social referencing, we fit a mixed-effects
linear regression model with the following structure: number
of looks ˜ familiarity * age in months * gaze *
phase + (familiarity | Subject ID). In contrast to
Experiment 1, a model with phase as a predictor converged.
First, do children reference a speaker more often when the
objects and label are novel? Phase interacted with familiarity such that the response phase of novel trials was associated
with significantly more looks (β = 0.51, p < .001). This result is consistent with our finding from the analysis of the
response phase in Experiment 1. However, in contrast to Experiment 1, we did not observe that looking was significantly
greater for novel trials in the planning phase.
We were also interested in whether mutual exclusivity tri-

Stimuli and Design The stimuli and design were similar to
Experiment 1, except that we eliminated 1-object trials. Instead, we included three trial types: 2-familiar, 2-novel, and
1-novel-1-familiar. There were four of each trial type, totaling twelve trials. In addition, we manipulated the experimenter’s gaze behavior between participants. For half of the
participants, the experimenter looked at the center of the table while labeling objects; for the remaining half, they looked
directly at the objects they labeled.
3 Planned sample size, exclusion criteria, and analysis plan preregistered at https://osf.io/y7mvt/.

498

Referential gaze

No referential gaze

2

3 years

Number of Looks

1

familiarity
0

2−familiar

2

1−novel−1−familiar
2−novel

4 years

1

0
label

slide

planning response

label

slide

planning response

Phase

Figure 3: Results of Experiment 2. Number of looks to the experimenter across phases and trial types. Error bars are 95 percent
confidence intervals.
rules out the possibility that children were less selective during labeling because they learned that gaze direction was not
informative.

als would elicit an intermediate amount of uncertainty. We
observed a three-way interaction of familiarity, gaze, and
phase, such that the response phase of mutual exclusivity trials in the no-referential-gaze condition was associated with
significantly more looks (β = 0.39, p < .01). Thus, mutual exclusivity trials were associated with greater looking
only when the experimenter did not provide informative gaze.
This finding is intriguing given that children should be able to
solve mutual exclusivity trials without gaze information. Instead, they appear to remain relatively uncertain while making a decision if excluding the familiar object is their only cue
to reference, but this uncertainty is resolved if the speaker’s
gaze is informative. On the other hand, informative gaze during labeling did not lessen social referencing for novel trials,
suggesting that gaze information alone was not sufficient to
reduce uncertainty. Instead, both gaze information and mutual exclusivity provided evidence about a label-object pairing, and children required both types of evidence to feel certain about their response.
Finally, we observed a four-way interaction such that the
response phase of novel trials in the gaze condition was associated with more looking with increasing age (β = 0.06, p
< .01), suggesting that children may become more selective
in their social referencing as they get older. It may be that
children improve in their ability to monitor the need for disambiguating information, or they may become more likely to
recognize that social information can be a source of disambiguation.
We did not observe social referencing during the label
phase, even when referential gaze was available. This result

General Discussion
During the preschool years, children are increasingly able to
actively gather information through help-seeking and exploration (Chouinard et al., 2007; Schulz & Bonawitz, 2007).
Do children monitor their own uncertainty to guide these behaviors, or are they indiscriminate with regard to underlying knowledge states? Here, we examined whether young
children’s social referencing during a word-learning task was
driven by uncertainty about a label’s referent.
We found that referential ambiguity strongly predicted
children’s social referencing. Specifically, we observed this
selectivity when children were forced to decide which object
the speaker was referring to. We speculate that children referenced the speaker during the decision process because they
expected evaluative feedback about their choice, either implicitly through the adult’s facial expressions, or through an
explicit response. This idea is consistent with other recent research that has found that preschoolers seek help selectively
when a problem is difficult or they are less skilled (Vredenburgh & Kushnir, 2015).
Most intriguingly, we found that children’s looking was
driven by graded referential evidence. In the case of mutual
exclusivity trials, children could solve the problem of reference by excluding the familiar item (Markman & Wachtel,
1988). Thus, unlike novel trials, they likely had some signal about the correct object-label mapping. If children sim-

499

ply monitored the presence or absence of such signals, they
would have consistently treated mutual exclusivity trials as
familiar trials. Instead, their social referencing depended on a
combination of cues from mutual exclusivity and gaze informativity, suggesting that they are sensitive to graded evidence
and seek disambiguating information only when uncertainty
is relatively high. Children’s greater social referencing on
trials with only one cue to reference (i.e., mutual exclusivity trials with no referential gaze and novel trials with referential gaze) additionally suggests that children may remain
uncertain about a new label-object mapping if they have not
received confirmation of its accuracy, for example, through
explicit feedback or gaze direction.
On the other hand, we found no evidence for selective social referencing as the object was being labeled. One possibility is that young children do not recognize the need for disambiguating information until they need to make a decision.
Another possibility is that preschool-aged children spontaneously look at a speaker regardless of ambiguity, and additional looking was not needed or possible. Notably, Vaish
et al. observed selective referencing during labeling among
infants. Since infants in that study were holding one of
the objects during labeling, referencing the speaker would
have required them to disengage from that object, and may
therefore have been more costly, promoting selectivity. Future research with preschoolers that includes a greater reward
trade off between attentional options would help to distinguish among these possibilities. Overall, these results provide evidence that preschool-aged children monitor graded
uncertainty in their mental representations and act on that uncertainty through spontaneous information-seeking.

ence, 18(6), 957–971.
Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (2006). Social learning and social
cognition: The case for pedagogy. In Y. Munakata & M. H.
Johnson (Eds.), Processes of change in brain and cognitive
development (pp. 249–274). Oxford: Oxford University
Press: Oxford University Press.
Dunlosky, J., & Rawson, K. A. (2012). Overconfidence produces underachievement: Inaccurate self evaluations undermine students learning and retention. Learning and Instruction, 22(4), 271–280.
Goupil, L., Romand-Monnier, M., & Kouider, S. (2016). Infants ask for help when they know they don’t know. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(13),
3492–3496.
Hembacher, E., & Ghetti, S. (2014). Don’t look at my answer: Subjective uncertainty underlies preschoolers’ exclusion of their least accurate memories. Psychological Science, 25(9), 1–9.
Ho, M. K., MacGlashan, J., Littman, M. L., & Cushman,
F. (2017). Social is special: A normative framework for
teaching with and learning from evaluative feedback. Cognition, 1–16.
Lipowski, S. L., Merriman, W. E., & Dunlosky, J. (2013).
Preschoolers can make highly accurate judgments of learning. Developmental Psychology, 49(8), 1505–1516.
Lyons, K. E., & Zelazo, P. D. (2011). Monitoring, metacognition, and executive function: Elucidating the role of selfreflection in the development of self-regulation. Advances
in Child Development and Behavior, 40, 379–412.
Markman, E. M., & Wachtel, G. F. (1988). Children’s use
of mutual exclusivity to constrain the meanings of words.
Cognitive Psychology, 20, 121–157.
Robinson, M. D., Johnson, J. T., & Herndon, F. (1997). Reaction time and assessments of cognitive effort as predictors
of eyewitness memory accuracy and confidence. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 82, 416–425.
Schulz, L. E., & Bonawitz, E. B. (2007). Serious fun:
Preschoolers engage in more exploratory play when evidence is confounded. Developmental Psychology, 43(4),
1045–1050.
Sodian, B., Thoermer, C., Kristen, S., & Perst, H. (2012).
Metacognition in infants and young children. In M. J. Beran, J. Brandl, J. Perner, & J. Proust (Eds.), Foundations of
metacognition (pp. 119–133).
Vaish, A., Demir, . E., & Baldwin, D. A. (2011). Thirteenand 18-month-old infants recognize when they need referential information. Social Development, 20(3), 431–449.
Vredenburgh, C., & Kushnir, T. (2015). Young children’s
help-seeking as active information gathering. Cognitive
Science, 40(3), 697–722.
Walden, T. A., & Ogan, T. A. (1988). The development of
social referencing. Child Development, 59(5), 1230–1240.
Yurovsky, D., & Frank, M. C. (2015). An integrative account of constraints on cross-situational learning. Cognition, 145(C), 53–62.

Acknowledgements
We thank Veronica Cristiano for assisting with data collection. This work supported by a generous gift from Kinedu,
Inc.

References
Baldwin, D. A. (1991). Infants’ contribution to the achievement of joint reference. Child Development, 62(5), 875–
890.
Call, J., & Carpenter, M. (2001). Do apes and children know
what they have seen? Animal Cognition, 3(4), 207–220.
Carpenter, M., Nagel, K., Tomasello, M., Butterworth, G.,
& Moore, C. (1998). Social cognition, joint attention, and
communicative competence from 9 to 15 months of age.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 63(4), i–iii–v–vi–1–174.
Chouinard, M. M., Harris, P. L., & Maratsos, M. P. (2007).
Children’s questions: A mechanism for cognitive development. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 72, 1–129.
Coughlin, C., Hembacher, E., Lyons, K. E., & Ghetti, S.
(2015). Introspection on uncertainty and judicious helpseeking during the preschool years. Developmental Sci-

500

