Children’s EEG Indices of Directed Attention during Somatosensory Anticipation:
Relations with Executive Function
Staci Meredith Weiss (SWeiss@Temple.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1701 N. 13th Street
Philadelphia, PA USA

Peter J. Marshall (PJMarsh@Temple.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1701 N. 13th Street
Philadelphia, PA USA
modulated not only in response to stimuli, but also during
anticipation (Corbetta and Shulman, 20012). This effect is
present even when the preparatory cue is presented in a
different sensory modality from that of the expected target,
allowing temporal and spatial differentiation of anticipatory
activity in the target sensory cortex from cue encoding
(Zanto and Gazzley, 2009). During anticipatory attention,
preparatory cues uniquely engage the intra-parietal sulcus
(IPS) to apply a filter on attention, which is not active in
subsequent target perception (Corbetta and Shulman, 2002).

Abstract
Children’s ability to direct attention to salient stimuli is a key
aspect of cognitive functioning. Here we examined the
magnitude and lateralization of EEG indices during
somatosensory anticipation elicited by a left or right directional
cue indicating the bodily location of an upcoming tactile
stimulus. In 50 children aged 6-8 years, somatosensory
anticipation was accompanied by anticipatory negativity and
alpha mu rhythm desynchronization at contralateral central
electrode sites (C3 and C4) overlying the hand area of the
somatosensory cortex. Individual differences in these
contralateral brain responses during somatosensory
anticipation were associated with scores on a flanker task of
executive function. The results suggest that processes involved
in directing attention in the tactile modality may overlap with
those involved in broader executive function abilities.

Introduction
The ability to direct attention in a focused and efficient
manner is crucial to cognitive performance and decisionmaking (Posner and Fan, 2008). Directed attention is the
heightened monitoring of spatial location prior to
presentation of a target stimulus, and is known to facilitate
heightened perception, shorter reaction time and improved
inhibition in adults (Rothbart, Posner and Kieras, 2006).
Introduction of preparatory cues relevant for upcoming
target stimuli allows study of neural activity or behavior
during anticipation, prior to subsequent attention and
perception of stimuli (Anderson and Ding, 2012).
Anticipation is the goal-directed monitoring of sensation in
expectation of a stimulus. Within a sensorimotor
contingency framework, anticipatory brain responses can be
viewed as ‘pragmatic’ in that they prepare for expected
action (Engel et al., 2013), reflecting the reciprocal nature of
prior experience, cognition and action (O’Reagen, 2011). In
directed attention tasks with children, individual differences
in post-stimulus neural activity to target stimuli (Stevens
and Bavelier, 2012) are associated with cognitive skills and
school achievement, but pre-stimulus anticipatory neural
activity is rarely examined as an index of cognitive ability.
Directed
attention
paradigms
investigate
how
manipulation of endogenous (top-down) attention facilitates
subsequent exogenous (bottom-up) stimuli-driven attention,
perception, and neural responses to target stimuli. Neural
activity in the region that encodes target stimuli features are

Emerging research accounts for neural activity unique to
anticipation as filtering the focus of attention in expectation
of an upcoming target (Zhang and Ding, 2010). To examine
this account, we study how the magnitude of anticipatory
neural activity during a somatosensory directed attention
task relates to performance on the flanker task, which
demands conflict monitoring, or a focus on single target
stimuli among distractors competing for attention (Rothbart,
Posner and Kieras, 2006). The flanker task requires
participants to respond to the direction of a central target
arrow amidst congruent or incongruent flanking distractor
arrows: incongruent conditions are associated with slower
reaction times, explained as resolving the conflict between
the target and distractors. The flanker task taps into
endogenous attentional abilities measured by executive
function (EF). Our understanding of EF is informed by
relational-systems theory, with EF defined as the goaldirected regulation of behavior, aligning action with topdown attention (Dick and Overton, 2011). We are concerned
with the relations between flanker task performance and
individual differences in the neural indices during
somatosensory anticipation, elicited in a directed attention
paradigm in which a visual cue directs children’s attention
to the expected spatial location of an upcoming tactile
stimulus. Associating neural indices of somatosensory
anticipation with EF facilitates study of inter-sensory
attention, with potential for linking sensory-specific
attentional processes to cognitive skills.
EEG Indices of Somatosensory Anticipatory Attention
Changes in brain responses recorded through the
electroencephalogram (EEG) are reliable indicators of
attention orienting, sometimes proving more predictive of
relevant behavior than reaction time responses to stimuli
(Foxe and Snyder, 2011). Brain responses to directed

2711

attention are lateralized, such that there is a modulation of
neural activity contralateral to the direction of the spatial
cue (Gazzaley and Nobre, 2012). Attention can be indexed
by the modulation of EEG signals in the alpha band (8-14
Hz in adults). Alpha band fluctuations are interpreted as a
correlate of underlying attentional states, with the
magnitude of change in amplitude sensitive to stimuli
salience, strength and individual differences. When
monitoring stimuli presented to one visual field, to one hand
or to one ear, there is typically a disruption of rhythmic
alpha activity known as event-related desynchronization
(ERD) in the contralateral sensory cortex (Stevens and
Bavelier, 2012). Desynchronization of the alpha rhythm
appears to reflect an increase in local field potentials of
neurons in the region of interest. Heightened alpha band
desynchronization is thought to increase the perceptual
salience of upcoming stimuli in the target modality (Foxe
and Snyder, 2011). In the tactile modality, anticipatory
desynchronization of the alpha-range mu rhythm at central
electrodes is an index of somatosensory cortex excitability.
Attention-related changes in the EEG during anticipation
can also be indexed via event-related potential (ERP)
methods. Relevant here is the contingent negative variation
(CNV), a negative-going potential occurring during the
anticipatory period between a preparatory cue and a target
stimulus (Corbetta and Shulman, 2002). The CNV elicited
by a preparatory cue can be considered to reflect
endogenous anticipatory directed attention, while later
potentials (P1, N2, P3) can be considered to reflect
exogenous, stimulus-evoked attention.
There is an emerging literature studying pre-stimulus EEG
activity during the anticipation of touch. Detection of weak
tactile stimuli was predicted by contralateral power of
anticipatory alpha desynchronization (Zhang and Ding,
2010) after a cue indicated upcoming stimulation of the
right hand. Anticipatory somatosensory selective attention
paradigms often include a cue containing relevant spatial
information about upcoming tactile stimulation, to examine
the lateralization of brain responses or hemispheric
asymmetry. Haegens, Luthur and Jensen (2012)
demonstrated anticipatory desynchronization of alpha
rhythm in central electrodes contralateral to the direction of
the spatial cue, and synchronization of the alpha rhythm in
the ipsilateral central electrodes. To our knowledge, there is
no existing research on the cognitive mechanisms
facilitating the association of pre-stimulus alpha mu
desynchronization and post-stimulus enhanced perception of
tactile stimuli. There are also no studies on the
developmental trajectory of neural indices during
somatosensory anticipation.

Lewis (2001) found age-related differences in children’s
target discrimination on visual selective attention paradigms
when target and non-target stimuli were presented
simultaneously. By age 8 years, performance was
comparable to adults in anticipatory visual selective
attention tasks. The authors suggested discrepant trajectories
in the development of distractibility and anticipation.
There is interest in studying the neural indices elicited by
selective attention, when distractors presented simultaneous
to the target compete for directed attention. Coch, Sanders
and Neville (2005) employed a dichotic listening task to
examine neural indices in response to target tones in
attended and unattended simultaneous auditory streams in
children aged 6-8. They found a slow positive ERP peaking
around 150 ms in children as opposed to the typical ERPs
found in adults: early sensory potentials, followed by an N2
and P3. The amplitude of the ERP was greater in the
attended auditory stream than the unattended auditory
stream. Isbell, Wray and Neville (2015) found the positivity
of auditory-evoked selective attention potentials related to
non-verbal IQ scores, such that only higher-IQs
preschoolers exhibited significant differences in amplitude
distinguishing target tones in the attended stream from tones
in the unattended stream. The nature of the dichotic
listening task requires the same skills as the tasks involved
in non-verbal IQ assessment. A study of anticipatory
attention to visual stimuli in 10-year-old children found that
CNV magnitude (evoked by preparatory spatial cues)
related to visual short-term memory capacity (Shimi et al.,
2014). The measure of EF was response to the targets of
‘anticipatory attention’, so it is difficult to tease apart the
relations among task performance, working memory and
neural indices of attention.
Prior studies suggest adult executive function relates to
brain responses during attention to visual or auditory
stimuli. During a dichotic listening task, the amplitude of
the contralateral brain responses during auditory selective
attention relates to non-verbal working memory (Giuliano et
al., 2014). In contrast, a study of visual selective attention
found only ipsilateral brain responses to be related to
cognitive skills (Zanto & Gazzaley, 2009). The authors
found that the ipsilateral increase in amplitude accounted for
greater variation in working memory, when compared to the
magnitude typically associated with selective attention,
which is reduced alpha power in the contralateral occipital
cortex. The current investigation extends the study of
anticipatory attention and cognitive skills to the
somatosensory domain by examining how EF relates with
EEG indices of directed attention to upcoming tactile
stimuli.

Current Study

Development of Directed Attention and EF
Precursors to attention regulation are apparent in infancy,
with gaze fixation sensitive to stimulus features, novelty
preferences, and prior learning in newborns (Hood, Willen,
Driver, 1998; Sheese et al., 2008). Goldberg, Maurer and

Studying pre-stimulus attention in the tactile modality
contributes to the basic science of bodily awareness and
somatosensation. The fundamental, early-developing nature
of somatosensory processing (Marshall & Meltzoff, 2015)
make it a compelling domain of study for examining the

2712

development
of
top-down
attentional
processes.
Furthermore, perception of tactile pulses appears uniquely
associated with neural indices of attention, unlike reaction
time in response to tactile pulses (Zhang and Ding, 2010):
Electrophysiological data can therefore provide insight into
the perception of touch, beyond simultaneous behavioral
measures. Our study examines how the somatosensory
domain adds to the developmental literature on executive
function indices of domain-general attention.
The current study examined the magnitude and
lateralization of CNV potentials and sensorimotor alpha mu
rhythm modulation, as elicited by a directional cue
indicating the bodily location of upcoming tactile stimuli.
We hypothesized that individual differences in brain
responses during somatosensory anticipation would be
associated with scores on a flanker task. This potential
association between the cognitive state elicited during
anticipation and EF was the key focus of the study.

Methods
Participants
Sixty children between the ages six to eight years of age
participated in the study (M = 7.2 years, SD = .6; 27 male).
Families were recruited from a diverse urban environment
using commercially available mailing lists and online
advertisements. Families were not invited to participate if
their child had any medical or psychological diagnoses, was
left-handed, or on any long-term medication. A number of
children were excluded from analyses because they did not
have a sufficient number of artifact-free trials (n = 6) or
because the child did not tolerate cap preparation (n=4).
These 10 excluded children did not statistically differ in
scores on the flanker from the remaining sample (N=50.)

Procedure
Children were read an assent form outlining the protocol in
the presence of their caregiver, who also read the consent
forms. Children were then fitted with an EEG cap while
seated at a table facing a computer screen, with instructions
to stay as still as possible with their hands on their lap, out
of sight. Research assistants explained the paradigm as a
game that required children to pay close attention to the
right or left hand, as indicated by the arrow, and respond to
the tactile stimuli by pressing a foot pedal once if they felt
one tap or twice if they felt two taps. Each of the 120 trials
began with a fixation cross baseline for 1500 ms, followed
by an arrow displayed for 500 ms, followed by a response
screen which read ‘Copy with Your Foot!’ (Figure 1).

Tactile stimulation was delivered using a pneumatic
simulator controlled by STIM stimulus presentation
software (both device and software from James Long
Company), with the compressed air delivered during the
arrow display and before the response screen. An inflatable
membrane mounted in a plastic casing was placed on the
middle fingers of children’s left and right hands, held in
place by a finger clip. The membrane is inflated by a short
burst of compressed air delivered via flexible polyurethane
tubing (3 m length, 3.2 mm outer diameter). The tactile
stimulus feels like a light tap on the finger, lasts around 60
ms, and has a peak force of around 2 N.
The NIH Cognition Toolbox flanker task was then
administered. Children completed the flanker task on an
iPad by selecting the direction of a central target arrow
among 4 flanking distractor arrows, which were either
congruent or incongruent in direction to the target arrow.
Scores were calculated as number of trials with correct
response for incongruent trials weighted by reaction time,
such that a higher score indicated better EF abilites.

EEG Collection and Processing
EEG was recorded using a 32-electrode stretch cap (ANT
Neuro, Inc.) from the following sites: Fp1, Fpz, Fp2, F3, F4,
Fz, F7, F8, C3, C4, CP1, CP2, T7, T8, P3, P4, Pz, P7, P8,
O1, Oz, O2, and the left and right mastoids. Conducting gel
was used and scalp electrode impedances were kept under
25 kΩ. The signal from each site was amplified using
optically isolated, high input impedance (> 1 GΩ) custom
bioamplifiers (SA Instrumentation) and was digitized using
a 16-bit A/D converter (+/− 5 V input range). Bioamplifier
gain was 4000 and the hardware filter (12 dB/octave rolloff)
settings were .1 Hz (high-pass) and 100 Hz (low-pass). EEG
analysis was performed using the EEGLAB 13.5.4b toolbox
(Delorme and Makeig, 2004) implemented in MATLAB.
The signal was collected referenced to the vertex (Cz), and
EEG signals were re-referenced offline to an average
mastoids reference for further analysis. Independent
component analysis (ICA) cleared EEG data of ocular and
muscle artifact. The ICA procedure was an automation of
the method described by Hoffmann & Falkenstein (2008).
Visual inspection of the EEG signal was then used to reject
epochs containing movement artifact. The mean number of
artifact-free trials per cue direction was 41 (SD = 5.71).

Results
Analyses focused on electrode sites overlying the hand area
(the left and right central electrodes; C3 and C4) of
sensorimotor cortex. For all ANOVAs, within-subject
effects were adjusted using Greenhouse-Geisser correction
factors; pairwise t-test comparisons and multiple linear
regressions were reported with p-values adjusted for
multiple comparisons.

Anticipatory Negativity
Figure 1. Protocol consisted of 120 trials: a 1500 ms baseline, then
an arrow displayed for 500 ms, then tactile stimuli and response.

We extracted mean amplitude during the 300 ms
immediately preceding tactile stimulation, within the 500
ms window relevant to anticipatory attention. This window

2713

was selected to study the CNV waveform, accounting for a
200 ms delay after the preparatory cue (Shen et al., 2017).
To study lateralization of anticipatory negativity, an
ANOVA compared mean CNV amplitude by electrode (C3
or C4) and cue direction (left or right arrow). There was a
significant main effect of cue direction, such that cues
directing attention to the right hand elicited an enhanced
anticipatory negativity (F (1, 48) = 37.06, p < .019). There
was a significant main effect of electrode, such that C3
exhibited enhanced anticipatory negativity (F (1, 48) =
37.06, p < .001). As expected, there was significant
interaction between electrode (C3 or C4) and cue direction,
F (1, 48) = 15.95, p < .001, driven by negativity in the
electrode contralateral to the stimuli: pairwise comparisons
(adjusted with FDR) reveal amplitude in C3 was lower for
right cue than left cue, p<.001, while the opposite trend was
found for the amplitude of C4, p<.061 (see figure 2).
\

Time Frequency Analysis
Event-related spectral perturbation (ERSP) analyses were
conducted on the alpha frequency band at 7–12 Hz
(Berchicci et al., 2011; Marshall, Bar-Haim, & Fox, 2002),
as is appropriate for children, and baseline corrected for the
500 ms prior to cue onset. Event-related desynchronization
(ERD) is as an alpha power decrease relative to the baseline.
An ANOVA compared pre-stimulus alpha power by
electrode (C3 or C4) and cue direction (left or right arrow).
There was a main effect of cue direction, such that cues
directing attention to the right hand elicited greater
desynchronization, F (1, 48) = 37.06, p < .001. There was
no main effect of electrode position. A significant
interaction was observed between electrode and cue
direction, F (1, 48) = 15.95, p < .001 (see figure 3). The
interaction was due to greater ERD in the contralateral
hemisphere (see figure 4): the mu rhythm showed greater
desynchronization over C3 elicited by the right cue, and
over C4 elicited by the left cue.

Figure 2. For each trial, an epoch of 1500ms was
extracted: analyses focused on the 300ms preceding tactile
stimulation during the pre-stimulus period, accounting for
the average amplitude during a pre-cue 200 ms baseline.
The epochs were then filtered at 30 Hz.
Anticipatory ERPs and Flanker. To examine the relations
between flanker and anticipatory negativity, regressions
were conducted predicting flanker scores from lateralization
of CNV amplitude and its interactions with electrode and
cue direction. We computed lateralization of CNV
amplitude by subtracting the mean amplitude at C3 from
mean amplitude at C4, for each participant and each hand.
There was a trend of lateralized amplitude predicting flanker
score, t (1, 48) = 1.72, p = .090. Performance on the flanker
task was predicted by a significant interaction between
lateralized amplitude and cue direction, t (1, 48) = -2.40, p
=.019. To further probe this interaction, we performed posthoc regressions predicting flanker score by average
amplitude for C3 and C4 during right and left cues. The
interaction was driven by marginal relations between flanker
and amplitude in the contralateral hemisphere: flanker score
related with CNV amplitude over C3 elicited by a right
directional cue, t (1, 49) = -1.72, p = .094, and over C4
elicited by a left directional cue, t (1, 49) = -1.70, p = .097.
Amplitude in the ipsilateral hemisphere did not relate with
flanker score.

2714

Figure 3. For each trial, an epoch of 1500ms was
extracted: spectral power was estimated using Gaussiantapered Morlet wavelets, and changes in power were
computed as ERSP focused on the 500ms pre-stimulus
period, relative to a 500 ms baseline (-1000 to -500 ms).

Figure 4. Mean ERSP for mu rhythm (7–12 Hz) in
C3/C4 for left/ right cues from −500 ms to 0 ms.
Negative values reflect a reduction in mu power (ERD)
relative to a 500 ms pre-cue baseline (-1000 to -500 ms).

Anticipatory ERSP and Flanker. To examine the relation
of flanker task scores with ERD during somatosensory
anticipation, regressions were conducted predicting scores
on flanker task by ERD and its interactions with electrode
position and cue direction, controlling for within-participant
variability. There were no significant main effects or twoway interactions. However, performance on the flanker task
was significantly predicted by a three-way interaction
between alpha power, electrode position and cue direction, t
(46) = 2.33, p = .012. Post-hoc regressions (with p-values
adjusted for the false discovery rate) further probed the
relations, revealing ERD in the hemisphere contralateral to
the direction of the cue was inversely related to the scores
on the Flanker task: for right cue over C3, t (1, 49) = -2.65,
p = .014, and for left cue over C4, t (1, 49) = -2.50, p= .021.
ERD in the ipsilateral hemisphere was not related with
flanker score (see Table 1). Refer to Figure 5 for inverse
correlations between flanker score and contralateral ERD.
Table 1. Flanker predicted by ERD, Cue,& Electrode
Overall Regression
B
Std Error
ERD
-3.51 2.53
Electrode
-.627 2.49
Cue
2.44 2.45
Power*Cue*Electrode 2.33
.021
Post-Hoc Regression B
Std Error
Right Cue C3
-3.68
1.39
Right Cue C4
1.70 1.45
Left Cue C3
1.52 1.20
Left Cue C4
-6.42 2.56

t value
p
-1.39 .16
-.252 .80
.977 .32
2.33 .01*
t value p
-2.65
.01*
1.17
.24
1.40
.18
-2.50
.02*

*Significant at less than p=.05; p-values of post-hoc corrected for FDR

Figure 5. Correlations of Flanker scores with ERD:
significant correlations were found for pre-stimulus ERSP
contralateral to cue direction. For right cue over C3, r= .395; for left cue over C4, r =-.377. There was no relation
between flanker scores and ipsilateral ERSP; right cue over
C4, r=.106; left over C4, r = -.021.

Discussion
The current study investigated somatosensory anticipation
in children, and if anticipatory EEG responses in amplitude
and alpha mu rhythm were related with individual
differences in flanker scores. Just as seen in adults, we
found a preparatory spatial cue directing attention to the
bodily location of upcoming tactile stimulation modulated
the activity of the alpha mu rhythm. Children’s contralateral
alpha band activity (in C3 – Right Cue and C4 – Left Cue)
during anticipation was inversely associated with
performance on a flanker task, while ipsilateral responses
had no relation to flanker scores. Anticipatory negativity
(i.e., the CNV response) was lateralized, with more negative
amplitudes in the hemisphere contralateral to cue direction.
The degree of lateralization, computed as mean amplitude at
C4 – C3, was related to participants’ flanker scores, which
subsequent analyses demonstrated were driven by
contralateral negativity. Children’s ability to modulate
attention in preparation for tactile stimulation appears to be
related to individual differences in EF, as codified by their
scores on the flanker task.
Our findings of an association between flanker and neural
indices of tactile attention should be interpreted with
caution, as our sample is small for a study of individual
differences. Studies linking neural indices of somatosensory
anticipation and attention with other EF tasks should be
conducted, to parallel research in other sensory modalities
(Isbell, Wray and Neville, 2015). Other studies of
anticipation in adults suggest that ipsilateral EEG activity
suppresses responses to distractors (Hagens, Luthur, and
Jensen, 2012; Zanto & Gazzaley, 2009), but our paradigm
did not include distractor stimuli; our study observed only a
trending alpha power increase in the ipsilateral hemisphere,
elicited by stimuli to the left hand. Further investigations
can examine whether introducing simultaneous, competing
stimuli in the somatosensory domain elicits an ipsilateral
increase in alpha mu rhythm, as observed during
anticipatory somatosensory selective attention in adults. A
paradigm with simultaneous tactile stimulation to both
hands would be more parallel to developmental research on
the relations of cognitive skills and children’s
somatosensory selective attention rather than our study of
somatosensory directed attention. First, we believed it
crucial to replicate modulation in EEG indices during the
anticipation of tactile stimuli in children, and further
investigation is needed to assess how preparatory cues
influence anticipation, attention and perception when
distractors are introduced. Our results support that shared
processes are involved in sensory-specific directed attention
and domain-general EF, but continued study of attention in
different modalities will address theories of inter-sensory
attentional mechanisms (Gazzaley and Nobre, 2012). Study
of brain responses to tactile stimuli uniquely informs models
of action-oriented representation, wherein internal
(cognitive and physiological) states reflect the environment
and prescribe action (Clark, 1998; Engel et al., 2013).

2715

Research on bodily awareness and representation would
benefit by studying how the associated neural indices of
somatosensation are influenced by attention and related
cognitive processes. Children’s neural indices during
directed attention to bodily sensation appear similar to those
in adults, when compared to ERP responses evoked during
visual and auditory attention (Stevens and Bavelier, 2012).
This could be interpreted as signaling the importance of
somatosensory attention in development, although further
work is needed to establish whether tactile attention is more
predictive than attention in other modalities (e.g. vision).
Future studies of the neural indices of somatosensory
attention could lay the foundation for interventions that train
attention or executive function in children.

Acknowledgements
The education of the primary author is supported by a PreDoctoral NSF Graduate Fellowship. We thank the members
of the Developmental Science Lab for their feedback and
assistance in data collection; Guannan, Ashley, Jeb and Val.

References
Anderson, K. L., & Ding, M. (2011). Attentional
modulation of the somatosensory mu rhythm.
Neuroscience, 180, 165-180.
Berchicci, M., Zhang, T., Romero, L., Peters, A., Annett, R.,
Teuscher, U., & Comani, S. (2011). Development of mu
rhythm in infants and preschool children. Developmental
neuroscience, 33(2), 130-143.
Clark, A. (1998). Being there: Putting brain, body, and
world together again. MIT press.
Corbetta, M., & Shulman, G. L. (2002). Control of goaldirected and stimulus-driven attention in the brain. Nature
reviews neuroscience, 3(3), 201-215.
Coch, D., Sanders, L. D., & Neville, H. J. (2005). An eventrelated potential study of selective auditory attention in
children and adults. Journal of cognitive neuroscience,
17(4), 605-622.
Delorme, A., & Makeig, S. (2004). EEGLAB: an open
source toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics
including independent component analysis. Journal of
neuroscience methods, 134(1), 9-21.
Dick, S., & Overton, W.F. (2010) Executive Function:
Description and Explanation. In Sokol, B. W. (Ed.) Self
and social regulation: Social interaction and the
development of social understanding and executive
functions, 7-34. Oxford University Press.
Engel, A. K., Maye, A., Kurthen, M., & König, P. (2013).
Where's the action? The pragmatic turn in cognitive
science. Trends in cognitive sciences, 17(5), 202-209.
Foxe, J. J., & Snyder, A. C. (2011). The role of alpha-band
brain oscillations as a sensory suppression mechanism
during selective attention. Frontiers in psychology.
Gazzaley, A., & Nobre, A. C. (2012). Top-down
modulation: bridging selective attention and working
memory. Trends in cognitive sciences, 16(2), 129-135.
Haegens, S., Luther, L., & Jensen, O. (2012).
Somatosensory anticipatory alpha activity increases to

suppress distracting input. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience. 24(3), 677-685.
Hoffmann, S., & Falkenstein, M. (2008). The correction of
eye blink artefacts in the EEG: a comparison of two
prominent methods. PLoS One, 3(8), e3004.
Hood, B. M., Willen, J. D., & Driver, J. (1998). Adult's eyes
trigger shifts of visual attention in human infants.
Psychological Science, 9(2), 131-134.
Isbell, E., Wray, A. H., & Neville, H. J. (2015). Individual
differences in neural mechanisms of selective auditory
attention in preschoolers from lower socioeconomic status
backgrounds. Developmental science.
Marshall, P.J., Bar-Haim, Y., & Fox, N., (2002).
Development of the EEG from 5 months to 4 years of age.
Clinical Neurophysiology, 113(8), 1199-1208.
Marshall, P. J., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2015). Body maps in the
infant brain. Trends in cognitive sciences, 19(9), 499-505.
O’Regan, J.K. (2011). Why Red Doesn’t Sound Like a Bell:
Understanding the Feel of Consciousness. Oxford
University Press.
Posner, M. I., & Fan, J. (2008). Attention as an organ
system. Topics in integrative neuroscience, 31-61.
Rothbart, M. K., Posner, M. I., & Kieras, J. (2006).
Temperament, Attention, and the Development of SelfRegulation. Chicago.
Sheese, B. E., Rothbart, M. K., Posner, M. I., White, L. K.,
& Fraundorf, S. H. (2008). Executive attention and selfregulation in infancy. Infant Behavior and Development,
31(3), 501-510.
Shimi, A., Nobre, A. C., Astle, D., & Scerif, G. (2014).
Orienting attention within visual short‐term memory:
Development and mechanisms. Child development,
85(2), 578-592.
Stevens, C., & Bavelier, D. (2012). The role of selective
attention on academic foundations. Developmental
cognitive neuroscience, 2, S30-S48.
Shen, G., Saby, J. N., Drew, A. R., & Marshall, P. J. (2017).
Exploring Potential Social Influences on Brain Potentials
during Tactile Stimulation. Brain Research.
Zanto, T. P., & Gazzaley, A. (2009). Neural suppression of
irrelevant information underlies optimal working
memory performance. Journal of Neuroscience, 29(10),
3059-3066.
Zhang, Y., & Ding, M. (2010). Detection of a weak
somatosensory stimulus: Role of the pre-stimulus mu
rhythm and its top–down modulation. Journal of cognitive
neuroscience, 22(2), 307-322.

2716

