Children’s use of lexical flexibility to structure new noun categories
Mahesh Srinivasan (srinivasan@berkeley.edu) & Catherine Berner (catherineberner@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94704 USA

Hugh Rabagliati (hugh.rabagliati@ed.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, The University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, EH8 9JZ UK
Abstract
Because most common words have multiple meanings,
children are often learning new senses of existing words,
rather than entirely new words. Here, we explore whether
children can use their knowledge of an existing word sense to
constrain their interpretation of a new word meaning. Across
two studies, we teach 3- and 4-year-olds and adults novel
words for materials, and manipulate whether those words are
also used flexibly, to label objects made from those materials.
We find that participants of all ages assign markedly different
interpretations to the object labels when they have a prior,
material meaning: Rather than extending them to other
objects of similar shapes, they extend them on the basis of
shared material, thus overriding the well-documented shape
bias. These findings suggest that language learners can use a
word’s prior meaning to learn about the structure of its new
meaning.
Keywords: polysemy; lexical flexibility; word extension;
word learning; shape bias

Introduction
A great deal of evidence in language development suggests
that children constrain their guesses about the referents and
extensions of new words through a variety of heuristics and
biases (Clark, 1990; Markman, 1990). For instance, if
children are told that a novel object is called a dax, they
typically infer that dax will also refer to objects that are
similarly shaped (Landau, Smith & Jones, 1988). This socalled shape bias arises early in acquisition, and is thought
to play an important role in lexical development.
Of course, the shape bias is not sufficient for acquiring
adult-like meanings for words, since the extension of many
words meanings goes beyond shape. A single word can
often apply to multiple items that vary in shape, but that
share an underlying essence (e.g., natural kind terms like
bird; e.g., Gelman & Markman, 1986), intended function
(artifact terms like chair; e.g., Bloom, 1996), or substance
(e.g., for mass nouns like bread). Consistent with this, in
order to develop adult-like meanings for words, children are
thought to draw on a variety of different cues – such as
animacy, background knowledge, or functional affordances
– to override the shape bias, and structure their new word
meanings (Booth & Waxman, 2002; Jones & Smith, 1988;
Kemler Nelson, 1995).
While previous studies have investigated how children
learn the meanings of entirely new words, they have yet to
address the fact that many of the new word meanings that

children have to acquire are not associated with novel word
forms, but instead with word forms they are already familiar
with. This is because most words are not unambiguous, but
are instead flexible: Most common words are polysemous
and denote a variety of different senses of meaning (Nerlich,
Todd, Herman & Clarke, 2003). The word glass, for
instance, refers to both a transparent material and a drinking
vessel made from that material. This phenomenon, which
we refer to as lexical flexibility, is common both within
languages and across languages. Further, lexical flexibility
follows systematic patterns in English and in other
languages: Multiple English words, for example, can label
materials and objects made from those materials (glass, tin,
etc.), animals and their meat (chicken, lamb, etc.), tools and
functional uses of those tools (hammer, saw, etc.), and more
(see Srinivasan & Rabagliati, 2015).
In the present studies, we investigate how children’s
biases about word meanings interact with lexical flexibility:
How does a word’s first-acquired meaning influence
children’s guesses about the extension of new, additional
senses of the word? In particular, are additional word senses
learned in isolation, or does a word’s first meaning bias the
application of constraints like the shape bias?
Consistent with the idea that the extension of new word
senses is constrained by knowledge of other word senses,
many historically-derived senses of words appear to be
partially influenced by their historically-primary sense. This
can be observed with the word glass, whose extended
drinking vessel sense is defined by a combination of shape,
function and material (and whose meaning thus differs from
words like cup, which are defined by shape and function
alone). Lending support to the idea that children’s
interpretation of new word senses could be constrained by
their understanding of existing, already-learned senses, a
recent body of work in language development indicates that
even preschool-aged children understand the semantic
relations that license lexical flexibility in their language. For
example, children expect words to label animals and their
meat, but not other thematically-related items (Srinivasan &
Snedeker, 2014), and generalize patterns of lexical
flexibility to new words (e.g., such that they expect new
words to label tools and their functional uses; Srinivasan,
Al-Mughairy, Foushee & Barner, 2017).
Given these facts, it seems plausible that if children know
one sense of a word, then they might use that knowledge to
constrain their guesses about how that word should be

3241

extended. This could cause them to override the shape bias
in some cases, and extend new word senses according to
other criteria. Some preliminary evidence for this idea
comes from a study by Yoshida and Smith (2003), who
showed that the shape bias was increased if a novel object
was labeled with a familiar name that was strongly
associated with a characteristic shape (e.g., ball), compared
to a familiar name that was associated with a substance.
However, subjects in this previous study were learning
novel exemplars for existing words – as opposed to novel
senses of existing words – thus leaving open the role of
lexical flexibility in structuring new semantic categories.
In the present studies, children and adults were first taught
a novel name for a material. They were then presented a
novel object made from the same material, and either
learned that the object name was the same as the material
name (both were called gup) or was labeled using a new,
distinct word (the material was called zev and the object
called gup). Our studies tested whether this manipulation of
lexical flexibility affected participants’ guesses about the
extension of the object name – e.g., by making them more
likely to privilege shared material as basis for extension in
the flexibility conditions – using a forced-choice task (Study
1) and a more open-ended sorting task (Study 2).

and one contrasting animal (e.g. two bears and a horse). In
each warm-up trial, the experimenter placed one of the
duplicate animals on the table, and named it (e.g. “Here is a
bear!”), and then placed the remaining two animals and
asked the participant to point to the other matching animal
(e.g. “I want another bear. Can you point to a bear?”).
Test Trials Participants completed four test trials. The trials
varied depending on which of the three conditions the
participant was in.
The stimuli consisted of four sets of novel objects. Each
set included (1) a jar of small pieces of a novel material and
a wooden spoon, (2) a standard object made out of the
novel material, (3) a material-match test object that was
made out the novel material, but was of a different shape
than the standard, and (4) a shape-match test object that was
the same shape as the standard, but was made out of a
different material.

Experiment 1
Adults and 3- and 4-year-olds participated one of three
conditions: In the flexibility condition, the novel material
and novel object were given the same label, and in the
unambiguous condition they were given different labels. A
final material vs. object condition tested whether
participants learn distinct material and object senses of a
flexible word, or instead a single vague meaning
encompassing both objects and materials.

Methods
Participants
This study included 100 3- and 4-year-olds from the
Berkeley area (Range: 3;0-4;11; Mean age = 4;0), split
roughly evenly among the three conditions. 48 adults were
also recruited from the UC Berkeley campus community,
with 16 participating in each condition. English was the
primary language spoken by all participants. Children were
tested in lab, and at local preschools and museums; Adults
were tested in lab or at designated locations on the UC
campus. Children were given a small gift for participating,
and adults were given either course credit or a small gift. 16
additional children participated but were excluded for
failing catch trials administered at the end of the task
(described below; n=12), parental interference (n=3), or
experimenter error (n=1). Three adults were also excluded
due to experimenter error. All participants were tested
individually by a female experimenter.
Warm-up trials Participants completed three warm-up
trials to ensure that they understood the task. The stimuli
consisted of three sets of toy animals: two identical animals

Figure 1: Example test trial from the polysemy and unambiguous
conditions of Experiment 1. The novel material and standard object
were given the same word in the polysemy condition and different
novel words in the unambiguous condition.

In each test trial (Fig. 1), the experimenter brought out a
jar of novel material and a wooden spoon. The experimenter
labeled the material with a novel word, using mass syntax
(e.g. “This stuff is called gup. This stuff is called gup. I have
half a jar of gup here.”) and then stirred the material with
the spoon and scooped some of it out of the jar to emphasize
that it was a material. The name given to the material varied
depending on the condition: The material was labeled with
the same novel word (e.g. gup) that was later used to label
the standard object in the flexibility condition, and was
given a different name (e.g. zev) in the uanmbiguous
condition (Fig. 1).
Next, the experimenter brought out the standard object
and named it (e.g. “Now look at this thing! This thing is
called a gup.”), and illustrated that it was an object by using
count syntax and attributing a vague function to it (“I have
two gups and I use them in my garage.”). Then, the
experimenter brought out the two test objects – the material-

3242

match object and the shape-match object (in the flexibility
and unambiguous conditions) – and asked the participant to
extend the label for the standard object to one of the two test
objects, using count noun syntax (“I want another gup. Can
you point to a gup?”; Fig. 1). We expected that if
participants use a prior sense of the word to constrain their
interpretation of a new word sense, they should be more
likely to override a shape bias–which typically arises when a
count noun labels a rigid object (Landau et al., 1988)–and
choose the material-match object in the flexibility condition.
The material vs. object condition was conducted to test
whether participants who learned that the material and
object were given the same word (e.g., when both were
labeled gup) in fact learned two distinct senses of the word
(as opposed to a single word that can label both materials
and objects). To test this, at test participants were asked to
choose between the material-match object and a pile of the
material. We reasoned that if subjects had learned a novel
object sense of the critical word, they would choose the
material-match more often than the pile of material, since
the request at test employed count syntax (Can you point to
a gup?), and thus a request for an individual.

children understood that the experimenter was requesting an
object using the object sense of the novel word at test, as
opposed to simply re-using the material word they had first
been trained on.

Figure 2: Percentage of trials in Experiment 1 in which children
chose the material-match object across conditions. Error bars show
+/- 1 SE. Dashed line shows 50% mark.

Catch trials Finally, participants completed three catch
trials at the end of the task to ensure that they had sustained
their attention throughout the study. In these trials, the
experimenter labeled a novel object with a novel word, and
then asked participants to point to which of two subsequent
objects could be labeled by the word. One of the choice
objects was identical, and the other differed in shape and
material. Participants who failed to correctly respond on at
least two out of the three catch trials were excluded.

Results
Our results are consistent with the idea that the meaning of
one word sense guides children’s guesses about subsequent
senses. As indicated in Figure 2, children in the flexibility
condition extended the name of the standard object to the
material-match object (70% of trials; SE = 4%), and were
more likely to do so than children in the unambiguous
condition (27% of trials; SE = 4%), as revealed by a linear
model (β = −1.86, SE = 0.27, z = −6.79, p < .001). Thus,
while children in the unambiguous condition exhibited the
robust shape bias documented in prior work (Landau, Smith,
& Jones, 1988), children in the flexibility condition
overcame this bias and extended the new word sense
according to material, rather than shape.1 This tendency to
select the material-match object could not be explained by a
failure to learn distinct senses of the flexible word (i.e., to
learn both a material and object sense of the word), as
children in the material vs. object control condition reliably
selected the material-match object over the pile of material
on 83% of trials (SE = 3%) of the time. This suggests that
1

This model did not detect a significant effect of age, which was
treated as a continuous variable (β = 0.03, SE = 0.02, z = 1.43, p

= .15)

Figure 3: Percentage of trials that adults chose the material-match
object across the conditions of Experiment 1. Error bars show +/- 1
SE. Dashed line shows 50% mark.

Adults (Fig. 3) showed a similar pattern of word
extension choices to children in the flexibility condition,
and extended the name of the standard object to the
material-match object on 89% of trials (SE = 4%),
significantly more than they did in the unambiguous
condition (2% of trials, SE = 2%; β = −6.24, SE = 1.08, z =
−5.76, p < .001). Unexpectedly, however, adults did not
show the same pattern of choices as children in the material
vs. object condition, and only chose the material-match
object on 56% of trials (SE = 6%). This surprising result
leaves open whether adults differentiated between the two
senses of the word as clearly as children.

Discussion
Experiment 1 showed that lexical flexibility allows children
to override semantic heuristics like the shape bias: When a
label for an object had previously also been used to label a
material, then children’s guesses about the further extension

3243

of that object label were less reliant on shape, compared to a
condition in which different labels were given to the object
and material. Importantly, the additional material versus
object control condition provided evidence that children did
not simply conflate the “object” and “material” senses of
this novel word into a single vague meaning: When asked to
choose “a gup” from an object and a pile of material,
children consistently chose the object. Thus suggests that
children understood that while one sense of the word gup
referred to a kind of material, another sense of the word
(identified with count syntax) referred to an object.
Surprisingly, adults behaved a chance in this condition, and
we return to this result in the General Discussion.
What, then, is the status of the shape bias when children
learn an additional sense under these conditions? In
particular, did the participants believe that shape was
entirely irrelevant to the meaning of the second sense, or did
they simply privilege material when they were forced to
choose between an item that matched in material (but not
shape) and an item that matched in shape (but not material)?
One possibility left open by the results of Experiment 1 is
whether children in the flexibility condition might have
chosen to extend the novel label for the object only to other
items that matched in both material and shape, had they not
been forced to choose between a material match and shape
match (a limitation of the 2-alternative-forced-choice task
used in Experiment 1).

initial warm-up trials (n=2), or due to parental interference
(n=1). All participants were tested individually by a female
experimenter either at a children's museum or at designated
locations on the UC Berkeley campus.

Materials and procedure
Warm-up trials Participants completed three warm-up
trials. Participants who failed on two or more of these trials
were excluded. The stimuli consisted of three sets of toy
animals. Each set included three animals from a single
category and two animals from contrasting categories (e.g.
three horses, a cat, and a fish). In each trial, the
experimenter brought out a toy animal and told the
participant what is was (e.g. “Here is a horse!”). The
experimenter then put the animal into a plastic box and told
the participant that the box was for the target animals (e.g.
horses). The experimenter then placed the animal on the
table with the other four animals and asked the participant to
sort all of the animals (e.g. horses) into the box and all the
animals that were not in that category, into a plastic bowl.

Experiment 2
Here, we employed a more open-ended task, giving
participants more choice in how they determined the
extension of the newly-learned words. 4-year-olds and
adults were taught a label for a novel material and a label
for a novel standard object, just as in the flexibility and
unambiguous conditions of Experiment 1. Then, participants
were shown an array of new objects that varied in shape,
material, and size from the standard object, and were asked
to classify which of these additional objects could be labeled
by the same word as the word for the standard object (Fig.
4). As in Experiment 1, we varied whether the newlylearned object and newly-learned material shared a label.
Using this method, we were interested in whether
participants in the flexibility condition would restrict word
extension to only items of the same shape and material as
the standard.

Methods
Participants
Participants were recruited from the Berkeley area as
described in Experiment 1. Experiment 2 included 32 4year-olds (Range: 4;0-4;11; Mean age = 4;6), divided
evenly between the flexibility and unambiguous conditions.
33 adults also participated (17 in the flexibility condition;
16 in the unambiguous condition). English was the primary
language spoken by all participants. Three additional
children participated, but were excluded for failing the

Figure 4: An example test trial from Experiment 2. Participants
sorted five objects as belonging to the target category or not. The
novel material and standard object either received the same label
(flexibility condition) or different labels (unambiguous condition).

Test Trials In each of the four test trials (Fig. 4),
participants were first introduced to a novel material (but
instead of pieces of a solid material, novel non-solid
materials were used). As before, participants were then
shown a standard object that was made out of the same
novel material. Then, participants were asked to sort a set of
five objects (four test objects plus the standard object itself)
as either belonging to the target category or not. The four
test objects varied in whether they matched the standard
object in material and shape. In total, participants were
asked to sort: (1) a +Material/-Shape Object that was made

3244

out the same material, but was a different shape than the
standard, (2) a –Material/+Shape Object that was the same
shape as the standard, but was made out of a different
material, (3) a +Material/+Shape object that shared the same
material and shape as the standard, but was smaller, (4) a –
Material/-Shape object that contrasted with the standard in
both shape and material, and finally (5) the Standard Object
itself.
In each test trial, the experimenter took out a jar of novel
material. The experimenter told the participant the
material’s name (e.g. “This stuff is called kiv.”) and then
stirred the material with the spoon and then scooped and/or
stretched the material, and took some material out of the jar
(This was to underscore fact that the novel material was
indeed a material). The name of the material varied
depending on the condition, as before: In the flexibility
condition, the material was labeled with the same novel
word that was later used to label the standard object, and in
the unambiguous condition was given a different name.
Next, the experimenter brought out the standard object
and named it, using count syntax (e.g. “This thing is called a
kiv.”). The experimenter then brought out the four test
objects and said “Some of these are kivs and some are not
kivs.” and then asked the participant “Can you put all of the
kivs into this box and all of the other things into this bowl?”

Results
The results from the more open-ended task of Experiment 2
paralleled those of Experiment 1. In particular, participants
were more likely to privilege material in their extensions in
the flexibility than in the unambiguous condition. Consistent
with this, children in the flexibility condition were more
likely to sort the +Material/-Shape object (61%, SE = 6%)
as a member of the target category than children in the
unambiguous condition (14%, SE = 4%; β = −2.25, SE =
0.44, z = −5.11, p < .001). In contrast, children in the
unambiguous condition were more likely to show a shape
bias, and sort the –Material/+Shape object (88%, SE = 4%)
as a member of the target category than children in the
flexibility condition (38%, SE = 6%; β = 2.46, SE = 0.46, z
= 5.37, p < .001). Meanwhile, children in both the flexibility
and unambiguous conditions almost always sorted the
Standard Object (Flexibility: 98%, SE = 2%; Unambiguous:
100%) and +Material/+Shape Object (Flexibility: 98%, SE =
2%; Unambiguous: 100%) as members of the target
category, and almost never sorted the –Material/-Shape
Object as a category member (Flexibility: 2%, SE = 2%;
Unambiguous: 0%).
To examine whether individual children were internally
consistent in their sorting, we coded the data in terms of
their categorization strategies. Strategies were defined
using a 75% cut-off: Participants who used the same
strategy for 3 or 4 of the test trials were classified as having
that categorization strategy, but were otherwise coded as
other. As indicated in Figure 5, children in the flexibility
condition more often sorted objects using a material-based
strategy (i.e., sorting all three of the objects that matched in

material as being part of the target category), than children
in the unambiguous condition. In contrast, a shape-based
strategy (i.e., sorting all three of the objects that matched in
shape as part of the target category) was more prevalent in
the unambiguous condition.

Figure 5: Categorization strategies of children in the flexibility
condition (left) and unambiguous condition (right).

Adults showed a similar pattern of choices to children.
Participants in the flexibility condition were more likely to
sort the +Material/-Shape object (74%, SE = 5%), as a
member of the target category than adults in the
unambiguous condition (5%, SE = 3%; β = −4.03, SE =
0.65, z = −6.19, p < .001). In contrast, adults in the
unambiguous condition were more likely to show a shape
bias, and sort the –Material/+Shape object (81%, SE = 5%)
as a member of the target category than adults in the
flexibility condition (19%, SE = 5%; β = 2.91, SE = 0.44, z
= 6.54, p < .001). No adults in either condition sorted the –
Material/-Shape as a member of the target category, and all
but one participant sorted the Standard object and
+Material/+Shape object as a member of the target category.

Figure 6: Categorization strategies of adults in the flexibility
condition (left) and unambiguous condition (right).

Finally, similar to the children, most adult participants in
the flexibility condition sorted objects using a materialbased strategy, while most in the unambiguous condition
used a shape-based strategy. Only three adults (1 in the
flexibility condition, 2 in the unambiguous condition)
employed a material- and shape-based strategy,
constraining the target category to only the standard object
and the +Material/+Shape object. Note that this third, more
conservative strategy was never used by children.

3245

Discussion

While Experiment 1 showed how lexical flexibility can
reduce reliance on the shape bias, Experiment 2 explored
the nature of that reduction. We found that, in the presence
of lexical flexibility, both children and adults tended to
extend new meanings based on a single feature – material –
rather than through a combination of multiple features, such
as shape and material (only 1 out of 16 adults in the
flexibility condition used the shape & material strategy),
even though the task of Experiment 2 was open-ended
enough to allow this strategy to emerge.
This reliance on material when extending the object labels
in some ways conflicts with how flexible material words are
used in languages. For instance, although the object senses
of words like glass and tin are defined partially by material
(a wooden box is not a “tin”), they label specific kinds of
objects that are defined by shape and function (not all
artifacts made of tin can be called “tins”). One reason that
children and adults in the flexibility condition may not have
used shape in their strategies is because we did not provide
specific information about the functions of the standard
objects; Such information could constrain hypotheses about
the likely shapes – and functional affordances – of kind
members (Kemler Nelson, 1995).

General Discussion
How do children make inferences about the structure of new
lexical categories? Guided by the fact that most common
words are polysemous, our studies explored whether
children’s understanding of one meaning of a word would
affect how they interpreted a subsequent meaning for that
word. Two experiments demonstrated that, after children
and adults learned that a substance name could also be used
to label an object, they were less likely to extend that name
according to shape, and instead privileged material.
These findings are consistent with a recent proposal
(Srinivasan & Rabagliati, 2015) that lexical flexibility plays
an important functional role in language development, in
facilitating the acquisition of the lexicon. By this account, it
may be more difficult for children to learn an unambiguous
lexicon in which each meaning has its own word, compared
to one in which words label multiple meanings in
predictable ways. Consistent with this idea, the present
studies show that children’s knowledge of an initial word
sense can facilitate their learning of a second word sense.
Our findings also raise a host of interesting questions for
future research. Some questions concern the precise
meanings that children learned in our task. For instance,
when children learned that gup could label both a material
and an object, did they actually learn separate and
conventionalized senses? Or did they simply realize that it
was possible to “coerce” the meaning of gup from a material
sense to a portioned object sense (cf. ordering two coffees,
Frisson & Frazier, 2005). Experiment 2 provides some
evidence for the latter account, as children (and adults) were
willing to extend the newly learned object name to any other
object made of the material, regardless of its shape. This
might also help make sense of why adults were at chance in

choosing between the material-match object and pile of
material in Experiment 1: Adults may have thought that the
flexible “object” label could apply to any individual made of
the material, and may have been more flexible than children
in construing a pile of material as an individual.
Although we have only explored our hypothesis in the
context of materials and objects, our results hold
implications for how lexical flexibility might shape
conceptual development more broadly. While prior research
has focused on how children use labels as ‘invitations’ to
group items into common categories, our findings show that
children understand that labels can pick out items from
distinct, but related categories. In particular, by attending to
lexical flexibility, children could use naming practices to
draw inductive inferences about the structure of the world.
For instance, just as hammers are used for hammering and
shovels for shoveling children could reason that something
called a dax that supports daxing is probably designed for
that function, and that all daxes should support this function.

Acknowledgments
Thank you to Nicole Hsu, Megan Merrick, and Sophie
Waldman for their help with data collection. This research is
supported by NSF SBE-16302040 to MS.

References
Bloom, P. (1996). Intention, history, and artifact concepts.
Cognition, 60(1), 1-29.
Clark, E. V. (1990). On the pragmatics of contrast. Journal
of child language, 17(02), 417-431.
Frisson, S., & Frazier, L. (2005). Carving up word meaning:
Portioning and grinding. Journal of Memory and
Language, 53(2), 277-291.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. M. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23(3), 183-209.
Jones, S. S., & Smith, L. B. (1998). How children name
objects with shoes. Cog Dev, 13(3), 323-334.
Landau, B., Smith, L. B., & Jones, S. S. (1988). The
importance of shape in early lexical learning. Cognitive
development, 3(3), 299-321.
Nerlich, B., Todd, Z., Herman, V., & Clarke, D. D. (Eds.).
(2003). Polysemy: Flexible patterns of meaning in mind
and language (Vol. 142). Walter de Gruyter.
Srinivasan, M., Al-Mughairy, S., Foushee, R., & Barner, D.
(2017). Learning language from within: Children use
semantic generalizations to infer word meanings.
Cognition, 159, 11-24.
Srinivasan, M., & Rabagliati, H. (2015). How concepts and
conventions structure the lexicon: Cross-linguistic
evidence from polysemy. Lingua, 157, 124-152.
Srinivasan, M. & Snedeker, J. (2014). Polysemy and the
taxonomic constraint: Children’s representations of words
with taxonomically-different meanings. Language
Learning and Development, 10(2), 97-128.
Yoshida, H., & Smith, L. B. (2003). Known and novel noun
extensions: Attention at two levels of abstraction. Child
Development, 74(2), 564-577.

3246

