Cognitive and Attentional Process in Insight Problem Solving
of the puzzle game “Tangram”
Yoshiki Nakano (nakano@ed.akita-u.ac.jp)
Faculty of Education and Human Studies, Akita University. Tegata Gakuen-machi 1-1.
Akita City, 010-8502 JAPAN

Abstract
The purpose of this study is to demonstrate a constraint
relaxation which is followed by the transition to an
appropriate representation in insight problem solving. The
puzzle game “Tangram” was used as a new insight problem,
in which problem-solvers were presented a silhouette and
asked to make the same configuration by arranging 7 pieces.
At the beginning, problem-solvers had a constraint allocating
the pieces into a geometric shape, but then relaxed this to
reach the correct configuration at a later stage of problem
solving. Participants’ subjective assessments of their
confidence to reach the solution predicted neither the
constraint relaxation nor the successful problem solving.
However, eye-tracking data suggested that the successful
problem-solvers tended to search the problem space more
widely than the unsuccessful-problem solvers.
Keywords: Tangram; insight problem solving; constraint
relaxation; eye tracking.

Introduction
The Insight problem solving, in general, exhibits a
characteristic pattern as a following process (Kaplan &
Simon, 1990; Metcalfe, 1986). At first, an insight problem
seems easy to solve, but problem-solvers are caught in an
impasse soon after. They get stuck, think that all options
have been explored and lose their way. When a sudden and
useful idea comes to mind, it often leads problem-solvers
rapidly to the solution.
There is an agreement that inappropriate constraints for a
solution are the main source of the difficulty to solve an
insight problem (Jones, 2003; Orrmerod, MacGregor, &
Chronicle, 2002). These studies suggested that insight
requires the relaxation of such inappropriate constraints, and
that an impasse can be broken by changing a representation
of the problem. A constraint is a tendency of thinking and
behavior that is taken in attempting to solve a certain
problem. It usually facilitates the process to reach the
solution. When a self-imposed constraint, however, is
inappropriate to solve a problem, it prompts a critical
difficulty to achieve insight, as it activates irrelevant
knowledge and causes attempts that cannot contribute to
correct solution. This leads problem-solvers into an impasse.
In spite of the consensus about the source of difficulty of
insight problems, a dynamic process to reach a solution has
not been identified clearly. The purpose of this study is to
specify an inappropriate constraint which inhibited the
insight into the solution in a geometric problem solving, and
to provide direct evidence about a critical factor for the

Figure 1: The 7 pieces of Tangram. Top: a
configuration when the pieces are divided from a
square. Bottom: Separated seven pieces. A problemsolver of Tangram move, rotate or combine them to
complete a task silhouette.

successful problem solving. In addition, an eye-tracking
technique is adopted to examine whether a proper searching
of the problem space can lead successful problem solving or
not (Thomas & Lleras, 2009).
This study also aims to test whether the difficulty of the
constraint relaxation can be reflected in an apparent task
performance of a problem-solver while independent from
subjective awareness. For these purposes, the puzzle game
of “Tangram” was used as a new insight problem. Tangram
consists of 7 triangular, square or parallelogram pieces
(Figure 1). Problem-solvers are presented a task silhouette
and required to make the same configuration by arranging
these pieces. In Tangram, numerous task silhouettes can be
composed by the 7 pieces; for example geometrical shapes,
animals or objects. Because each silhouette has an
individual configuration of the pieces, problem-solvers often
cannot find a correct configuration immediately after the
silhouette has been presented. They usually repeat trials
with arranging the pieces until the solution is completed.

2778

Tangram has the advantages of allowing researchers to
monitor task performance of a problem solving requiring
insight. Nakano (2009) recorded protocols of participants
and movements of the pieces. His protocol data revealed
that the participants who could complete the task silhouette
had expressed an “Aha” experience before reaching the
correct configuration. Nakano (2009) found that the
participants tended to combine the pieces into a geometric
shape such as a square or a triangle. This tendency was
usually involved combinations of the 2 largest triangles
among the 7 pieces. Such the constraints will facilitate the
process to reach the solution, in the case that a correct
configuration includes geometric combination of the pieces
as a square or a triangle. For example, the task silhouette of
an arrow has two patterns of the correct configuration, and
the both include geometric combination of the 2 largest
triangles (bottom in Figure 2). However, when these 2
pieces must be combined into an irregular configuration to
complete a task silhouette, the tendency to construct a
geometric shape will inhibits the insight into the correct
configuration. For example, to complete the silhouette of a
lion (top-left in Figure 2) the 2 triangle pieces must be
attached by sliding their longer sides in an opposite
direction to each other (top-right in Figure 2). Most
problem-solvers who tried to complete this silhouette
reported that it was difficult to discover this irregular
configuration (Nakano, 2009). This finding indicated that
the problem-solvers imposed apparent constraints on
allocations and combinations of the pieces in the problem
solving of Tangram.
The primary purpose of the present experiment is to
investigate the correspondence between the constraint
relaxation and explicit movements of the pieces. For this
purpose, movements of the 7 pieces were recorded and
combinations of the 2 largest triangle pieces were identified.
These combinations will change as the initial constraint is
relaxed and more appropriate representations are
constructed. Participants who try to complete the task
silhouette of an arrow will not have to relax the constraint to
allocate the 2 largest triangle pieces in a geometric pattern.
So they will reach the solution easier and faster comparing
to the task silhouette of a lion. When they try to complete
this task silhouette, they find it impossible to complete the
solution only by arranging the pieces into familiar geometric
combinations. Then, the participants arrange the pieces into
other combinations. To investigate this hypothesis,
arrangements of the 2 largest triangle pieces are categorized
into three categories, geometric, transitional or irregular
combinations. The geometric means the combination of the
2 pieces was a square or a triangle. The irregular
combination is that the 2 pieces have a contact each other
but no corners of the pieces meet or the edges of the pieces
were placed adjacently without combining their corners.
The rests of combinations, as that the pieces were arrange in
the same direction or in a symmetric configuration, are
categorized in the transitional combination.
The second purpose is to examine independence between

Figure 2: Top-left; the task silhouette of a lion. Topright; the correct configuration of the 7 pieces
constructing the silhouette of a lion. The two largest
triangle pieces (greyed part) are allocated in irregular
combination. Bttom-left; the task silhouette of an arrow.
Bottom-center and -right; the correct configuration
constructing the silhouette of an arrow. There are two
patterns of correct configuration. In both, the 2 pieces
are allocated in a geometric combination.

the constraint relaxation and subjective awareness in the
problem solving of Tangram. In Nakano (2009), participants
were required to evaluate how confident they could
complete the correct configuration before and during
problem solving of Tangram. The subjective confidence
decreased over time even in the successful problem-solvers.
Thus, the subjective evaluation did not predict performance
on the insight problem, as had been suggested by Metcalfe
and Wiebe (1987). This finding supports the idea that the
transition from one rule to a more appropriate representation
for a solution proceeds without subjective awareness.

Methods
Participants
Twenty undergraduates (mean age = 20.8, age range = 2026) participated in the experiment. All were naive to
Tangram.

Apparatus
The Tangram was comprised of 7 pieces. A set of the
pieces was made by dividing a square plate which was
11.8cm in width and in height (Figure 1). The task
silhouette was a lion or an arrow (Figure 2 left). The size of
the both silhouettes were the same as one-fifth of the correct
configuration which constructed by the 7 pieces. During the
task, participants assessed how confident they were to
complete the task at the Graphics Rating Scale (GRS). The
GRS involved 6 verbal descriptors and 13 scale marks along
a horizontal line. A description “Not at all” was written at
the left end of the horizontal line, and “Nearly completed”
was at the right end. An index arrow was attached on the
GRS board so that the participants could indicate their

2779

positions on the horizontal line taking the descriptions into
account. At the beginning of the experiment, the index
arrow was located on the center of the 13 scale marks. A
digital video camera (Panasonic NV-GS100) recorded
movements of the pieces and a location of the index arrow
from 65 cm above.

Procedure.
A participant sat down in front of a work desk on which
the 7 pieces of Tangram and the GRS board were situated.
The pieces were allocated on the desk as depicted in Figure
1 (below). After the instructions about what the experiment
involved, the participant was presented the task silhouette
which was printed in black and was required to complete the
configuration of it by using all the pieces. The participant
indicated how he or she would be able to complete the
correct configuration of the silhouette by the index arrow on
the GRS board. During the assessment, the participant was
allowed to see the pieces and the silhouette but was not
permitted to touch or move the pieces. After the assessment,
the participant was allowed to move the pieces. Each
session lasted for 240 sec, and was followed by the
assessment on GRS. Then 1 minute of rest period was given
to the participant until the next session was started.
When a participant completed the correct configuration,
the problem solving was successfully ended. A sum of the
manipulation time until the completion was accounted as a
solution time of the “completer”. A participant who could
not complete the correct configuration until the end of
session 5 was counted as a “non-completer”. In this case,
the total manipulation time was 20 min.
All the participants participated in the two-day
experiment. Either the silhouette of the lion (lion task) or the
arrow (arrow task) was given to the participant as a task in
each day. The order of the task silhouettes was
counterbalanced among the participants.

Recording of eye movements
During process of the problem solving of Tangram, eye
movements were captured using Talk Eye Lite (Takei
Scientific Instruments Co. Ltd, Japan). Eye tracking was
operated in monocular mode on the right eye and at a
sampling rate of 33 Hz. The participants were seated on a
chair and their head was fixed by using a chin and forehead
rest to keep a distance from a surface of a work desk to eye
in approximately 40 cm. The surface of the work desk was
tilted to about 10 degree angle. The 7 pieces of Tangram
were located on the desk surface and were moved within the
range of 25 cm in length and 35 cm in width so as not to go
outside the participant’s eye-field.

Results
Among the 20 participants, 9 completed the correct
configuration of the task silhouette of a lion. The mean
solution time was 594.7 sec (SD = 376.0 sec, Min = 106 sec,
Max = 1080 sec). Three of the 9 completers had finished in
session 1, and 2 of the remaining 6 had finished in session 3.
Three had finished in session 4 and 1 had finished in the last
session. In the arrow task, 12 participants completed the

correct configuration within 5 sessions. The mean solution
time was 483.6 sec (SD = 331.1 sec, Min = 58 sec, Max =
1030 sec). Among the 12 participants 4 had finished in
session 1. Two of the remaining 8 completers had finished
in session 2. Three of the remaining 6 completers had
finished in session 3. Two had finished in session 4 and 1
had finished in the last session. Eight of the 20 participants
completed both the lion and the arrow task. The averaged
solution time of these “high-achievers” was faster in the
arrow task (532.8 sec) than in the lion task (644.8 sec), but
statistical analysis revealed that the difference did not reach
significant level (p > .1). Therefore, contradicting to the
expectation, both the ratios of the completer and their
solution time did not indicate that there is a difference in
difficulty between the two task silhouettes.
Ratings of subjective confidence to the completion were
identified from a location of the index arrow on GRS from
the video image. The value of 0 was assigned to the mark on
left extreme side, and 12 was assigned to the right extreme
mark. Six assigned to the central mark which located
between the descriptions “possibly, I can complete” and
“possibly, I cannot complete”. A value of each rating was
identified on the basis of relative distance of the index arrow
from the marks. Mean ratings were calculated among the
completers and the non-completers in each sessions. Figure
3 show the plots of the mean ratings as a function of the
sessions for each task silhouette. Because the participants
who had completed the task silhouette were not engaged in
the assessment anymore, sample numbers included in the
plots of the completer decreased as the session proceeded.
All mean ratings of non-completers included 11 participants
in Figure 3a and 8 in Figure 3b.
To investigate the relationship between participants'
confidence and results of the problem solving, they were
categorized into a high-achiever who completed the both
task silhouettes or into a non-achiever who could not
complete the both silhouettes. Thus, 5 participants who only
completed the either task were eliminated from this analysis.
Table 1 shows mean ratings of confidence in session 1 and
in the last session for the high-achievers (n = 8), excepting
one participant who completed the both tasks in session 1,
and for the non-achievers (n = 7), respectively. For the
completers, the last session is when they completed the task,
and for the non-completers it was always the fifth session. A
2 × 2 analysis of variance (ANOVA) with the variables
achievement (high-achiever vs. non-achiever) and time
(session vs. last session) showed that the effect of time was
significant, F(1, 12) = 52.2, p < .01. In detail, the mean
rating in session 1 was higher than that in the last session in
the both groups. Supported with this result, the linear
regression lines in Figure 3 indicated that participants’
subjective assessments of their confidence decreased over
time. The main effect of achievement and the interaction
between the two variables did not reach statistical
significance.
To investigate whether constraint relaxation was reflected
on actual manipulation of the pieces, arrangements of the 2

2780

a. Lion task
12

Completer (n=9)
Non-completer (n=11)

10

Mean Rating

8
9

6

6

6

4

4

2
1

0
1st

2nd

3rd

Session

4th

5th

b. Arrow task
12

Completer (n=12)
Non-completer (n=8)

Mean Rating

10
8
12

6

8
6

4

1

2

3

0

1st

2nd

3rd

4th

5th

Session
Figure 3: Plots of mean ratings of subjective confidence
and linear regression lines in the lion task (a) and the
arrow task (b). The plots of Grey circle with a solid line
indicate results of the completers and the plots of blank
triangle with a dashed line indicate results of the noncompleters. The numbers beside the plots of the
completer indicate a number of samples included in each
mean value. Error bars indicate SDs.

Table 1: Mean ratings and SDs of a participants’ confidence
High-achiever
1st session
Last session

5.79 (1.8)
3.36 (2.6)

Non-achiever
4.82 (1.6)
1.79 (0.8)

largest triangle pieces were categorized and their duration
times were compared. When these 2 triangle pieces were in
contact with each other at least on a corner or a side of them,
this arrangement was counted as a combination of the pieces.
All combinations of the 2 largest triangle pieces were
identified on the video image and categorized into a
geometric, a transitional or an irregular combination. In the
case that the 2 pieces were combined into a triangle or a
square, such the allocation was categorized into the
geometric combination. In the arrow task, this category
includes the correct combination of the 2 pieces. The
participants often allocated the 2 pieces such that the short
edge of one triangle is placed adjacent to the long edge of
the second triangle so that no corners of the sides met,
additionally the corner of the long edge of the second
triangle did not make contact with the first triangle. As with
these examples, an allocation of the 2 pieces in which the
edges were placed adjacently without combining their
corners was categorized into the irregular combination. In
the lion task, this category includes the correct combination
of the 2 pieces. All other combinations that were
categorized neither into the geometric nor into the irregular
combination were categorized into the transitional
combination. A measure of the duration of the time in which
each combination was made was taken from the video
image. The measurement started from the moment at which
the 2 pieces were allocated into a certain combination and
ended when they were separated or changed into the other
arrangement. To investigate a transition of a predominant
combination of the pieces, overall manipulation time of each
participant was divided into a first and a second half period.
A cumulative duration time of each combination was
calculated for each participant. Table 2 shows mean
percentage of the cumulative duration time of each
combination over the total manipulation time.
Three-way ANOVA with the variables completion
(completer vs. non-completer), time (1st vs. 2nd half) and
combination (geometric, transitional or irregular) was
computed on percentage of the cumulative duration time. In
the lion task, the results showed that there was a significant
main effect of time variable, F(1, 18) = 5.1, p < .05, and
two-way interaction between completion and time, F(1, 18)
= 7.9, p < .05. Post hoc analysis revealed that, in the
completers, an averaged percentage of the cumulative
duration time over the three combinations was significantly
higher in the second half (14.9%) than in the first half
(6.0%), F(1, 18) = 12.7, p < .01, but the difference was not
significant in the non-completer (11.3% in the 1st half;
10.3% in the 2nd half). Additionally, two-way interaction
between time and combination was also significant, F(2, 36)
= 7.5, p < .01. Post hoc analysis revealed that the percentage
significantly increased than the first half (5.7% in the 1st half
vs. 17.9% in the 2nd half), F(1, 54) = 12.8, p < .01, while for
the transitional combination the increase was marginally
significant (8.2% vs. 14.8%), F(1, 54) = 3.7, p < .06. In
contrast, for the geometric combination, the percentage in
the first half was significantly higher than the second half

2781

Table 2: Percentage of the cumulative duration time of each
combination over the total manipulation time

Lion task
Geometric
1st half
2nd half
Transitional
1st half
2nd half
Irregular
1st half
2nd half

Arrow task
Geometric
1st half
2nd half
Transitional
1st half
2nd half
Irregular
1st half
2nd half

Completer

Non-completer

9.1%
2.3%

15.2%
8.1%

6.0%
13.1%

10.4%
16.5%

3.1%
29.3%

8.3%
6.3%

Completer

Non-completer

29.0%
26.8%

19.2%
27.1%

1.4%
6.1%

1.7%
1.5%

5.3%
5.3%

4.9%
3.7%

at the range of a single piece or at the silhouette for more
than 33 while manipulating the pieces, this duration time
was accumulated as a time spent looking at the AOI. The
proportion of the time spent looking at the AOI per second
during the total manipulation time was calculated for the
each piece, and it summed over the 7 pieces for each
participant. Table 3 shows the mean proportions of the time
spent looking at the pieces and that looking at the silhouette,
for the high-achievers who completed both the tasks and for
the non-achievers who could not complete the both tasks.
Statistical analysis revealed that the proportion of the time
spent of the non-achievers looking at the pieces (283.1
msc/sec) was significantly longer than that of the highachievers (137.4 msc/sec), F(1, 13) = 10.9, p < .01. There
was no difference between these two groups in the
proportion of the time spent looking at the silhouette. The
result that the time spent looking at the range of the pieces
was relatively short might be reflected a wider or more
active scanning over the problem space. In order to verify
this inference more directly, eye movement distance during
the participants manipulated the piece was calculated. The
values in the bottom row of Table 3 indicate a mean eye
movement distance per second in a visual angle for the
high-achiever and for the non-achiever. Statistical test
revealed that the eye movement distance of the highachiever was higher than that of the non-achiever but it was
marginally significant, F(1, 13) = 3.15, p < .10.

(12.1% vs. 5.2%), F(1, 54) = 4.1, p < .05. The three-way
interaction reached statistically significant, F(2, 36) = 4.9, p
< .05. Post hoc analysis revealed that in the second half the
percentage of the irregular combination was higher in the
completer than that in the non-completer (29.3% vs. 6.3%),
F(1, 54) =13.8, p < .01, but in the first half the difference
was not significant (3.1% vs. 8.3%). Regarding the
completers, the percentage of the irregular combination
(29.3%) was significantly higher than that of the geometric
(2.3%) and the transitional combination (13.1%) in the
second half, all ps < .01. This percentage of the completer in
the second half was significantly increased than the first half
(3.1%), F(1, 54) =29.8, p < .01. In the arrow task, three-way
ANOVA showed that the main effect of combination
variable was significant, F(2, 36) = 11.1, p < .01. Multiple
comparisons revealed that the percentage of the geometric
combination averaged over time and completion variables
(25.2%) was significantly higher than that of the transitional
(2.8%) and the irregular combination (5.1%), all ps < .01.
The other main effect and the interactions did not reach
statistical significance.
To investigate whether there is a characteristic attentional
shift when problem-solvers reach the solution of Tangram,
eye tracking data was recorded during the participants
manipulated the 7 pieces. Areas of interests (AOIs) were
surface of the each piece and the silhouette which was
presented to the participants. When the participants looked

Table 3: Mean proportion of the time spent (msc/sec) and
the eye movement distance (deg/sec)

Proportion of time
7 pieces
Silhouette
Movement distance

High-achiever

Non-achiever

137.4 (40.0)
25.7 (31.4)

283.1 (108.3)
13.2 (11.9)

72.4 (47.3)

36.8 (25.3)

Discussion
This research aimed to demonstrate a constraint relaxation
which is followed by the transition to an appropriate
representation in insight problem solving. For this purposes,
Tangram was used as a new tool. To investigate the
correspondence between the constraint relaxation and actual
manipulation of the pieces of Tangram, combinations of the
2 largest triangle pieces which were the key to completing
the two task silhouettes, a lion and an arrow, were analyzed.
Nakano (2009) found that problem-solvers of Tangram
tended to combine these 2 pieces into a geometric shape.
This initial constraint would facilitate reaching an insight
for the solution of the arrow task, because the correct
configuration of this silhouette could be achieved by
arranging the 2 pieces into either a square or a triangle. As
expected, in this task both the completers and the non-

2782

completers arranged the 2 pieces predominantly in a
geometric combination through the problem solving. While
in the lion task, this initial constraint to arrange the pieces
into a geometric combination would inhibit the insight to
occur, because the 2 pieces should be arranged in an
irregular combination to complete the correct configuration
of the lion task (top-right in Figure 2). Thus, the participants
were expected to achieve better results in the arrow task
than in the lion task. Contrary to this prediction, however,
neither the percentage of the completers nor the time to
completion of the high-achievers who were completed the
both tasks were significantly different between the two tasks.
This finding supported the view that the relaxation of the
initial constraint was not the sole determinant of the insight
for reaching the solution (Ormerod et al., 2002). As an
evidence of this interpretation, in the lion task, the
percentage of the cumulative duration time that the 2 pieces
were arranged in the geometric combinations was decreased
in the second half comparing with the first half. Importantly,
such the decrease was found not only in the completers but
also in the non-completers.
The critical difference between the completers and the
non-completers was found in the lion task, in that, the
completers arranged the 2 pieces in the irregular
combination for a longer time in the second half than in the
first half. This result for the completer should be a
manifestation that the relaxation of the inappropriate initial
constraint was followed by the construction of more
appropriate representation. In contrast to this steady
approach of the completers to reach the solution, the noncompleters could not distinguish which of the three types of
combinations would lead them to the solution, even in the
second half. Therefore, the critical determinant for reaching
an insight to the solution was a clear cut differentiation
between the appropriate representation and other
alternatives.
The participants' eye movements were measured while
they manipulated the pieces, in order to investigate specific
feature of attention shift that facilitated the successful
problem solving in Tangram. The analysis of the time spent
looking at the surface of the pieces indicated the noteworthy
difference between the high-achiever and the non-achiever
that the latter had a longer time staying attention on the
pieces. In contrast to this attentional feature of the nonachiever, the high-achiever had a slightly longer distance of
eye movements during the manipulation of the pieces than
the non-achiever. These findings suggested that the
successful problem-solvers of Tangram tended to search the
problem space of the pieces more widely or actively.
The second purpose of this research was to demonstrate
the independence between the transition from the initial but
inappropriate constraint to the more appropriate
representation for the solution and the changing of the
confidence to reach the solution. There was a remarkable
difference between the results of the present experiment and
the series of the researches by Metcalfe (Metcalfe, 1986;
Metcalfe and Wiebe, 1987). In these previous researches,

most of the participants rated their confidence lowest level
at the starting of the problem solving, and their selfevaluations stayed constant or slightly increased by the floor
effect. While in the present experiment, the evaluation to the
confidence was relatively high before starting the problem
solving of Tangram, and it declined over time. Considering
that the findings of Metcalfe was obtained by using insight
problems including a spatial task and a linguistic task,
Tangram is more likely to give the impression that it is easy
to solve than those other insight problems, especially at the
beginning of the problem solving. Another notable finding
was that the participants who solved the insight problem had
evaluated less confidence to reaching the solution (Metcalfe,
1986; Metcalfe and Wiebe, 1987). In other words, the actual
achievement of each participant had opposite direction to
their subjective confidence. Furthermore, the present
experiment indicated that the completer manipulated the
pieces so as to approach to the solution steadily but their
confidence about it consistently declined. Therefore, this
finding demonstrated that the process of deriving an insight
and the subjective awareness to the problem solving did not
progress independently but in the opposite direction over
time.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grantin-Aid for Challenging Exploratory Research (Grant
Numbers 26540060).

References
Jones, G. (2003). Testing two cognitive theories of insight.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 29, 1017–1027.
Kaplan, C. A., & Simon, H. A. (1990). In search of insight.
Cognitive Psychology, 22, 374–419.
MacGregor, J. N., Ormerod, T. C., & Chronicle, E. P.
(2001). Information processing and insight: A process
model of performance on the nine-dot and related
problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 27, 176–201.
Metcalfe, J. (1986). Premonitions of Insight Predict
Impending Error. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 12, 623-634.
Metcalfe, J., & Wieb, D. (1987). Intuition in insight and
noninsight problem solving. Memory & Cognition, 15,
238-246.
Nakano, Y. (2009). The insight problem solving in the
puzzle game of “Tangram”. Memoirs of Faculty of
Education and Human Studies Akita University:
Educational Sciences, 64, 65–72.
Ormerod, T. C., MacGregor, J. N., & Chronicle, E. P.
(2002). Dynamics and constraints in insight problem
solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 28, 791–799.
Thomas, L. E., & Lleras, A. (2009). Covert shifts of
attention function as an implicit aid to insight. Cognition,
111, 168–174.

2783

