Computational and behavioral investigations of the SOB-CS removal mechanism
in working memory
Violette Hoareau1 (violette.hoareau@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr), Sophie Portrat1,2 (sophie.portrat@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr),
Klaus Oberauer3 (k.oberauer@psychologie.uzh.ch), Benoı̂t Lemaire1,2 (benoit.lemaire@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr),
Gaën Plancher4 (Gaen.Plancher@univ-lyon2.fr) and Stephan Lewandowsky5 (Stephan.Lewandowsky@bristol.ac.uk)
1

5

LPNC, University Grenoble Alpes, F-38040 Grenoble, France
2 CNRS, LPNC UMR 5105, F-38040 Grenoble, France
3 University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
4 Université Lumière Lyon 2, Lyon, France
University of Bristol and University of Western Australia, Bristol, UK

Abstract

layer connectionist network that associates a distributed item
representations with distributed position markers, for instance
associating the first item of the sequence with position 1,
through Hebbian learning (Anderson, 1995). Each association is registered in a two-dimensional weight matrix coding for the position and the item representations. During
each processing step, SOB-CS assumes that distractors are
encoded in the same way as items and associated to the position of the preceding item. In other words, SOB-CS suggests that items and distractors are superimposed in the same
weight matrix, leading to a distortion of items by distractors
which in turn causes forgetting. In this way, the model is able
to reproduce interference between items and distractors according to their similarity: the more a distractor is similar to
an item, the more feature values they share, leading to less
distortion of the memory item. Therefore, this model predicts that high similarity between an item and the following
distractor is beneficial to WM performance.

SOB-CS is an interference-based computational model of
working memory that explains findings from simple and complex span experiments. According to the model’s mechanism
of interference by superposition, high similarity between memory items and subsequently processed distractors is beneficial
because the more a distractor is similar to an item, the more
they share similar units, leading to less distortion of the memory item. When time allows, SOB-CS removes interfering distractors from memory by unbinding them from their context.
The combination of these two mechanisms leads to the prediction that when free time is long enough to remove the distractors entirely, similarity between items and distractors should
no longer be beneficial to memory performance. The aim of
the present study was to test this prediction. Adult participants
performed a complex-span task in which the free time following each distractor and the similarity between items and distractors were varied. As predicted by the model, we observed
a positive effect of the similarity between items and distractors, and a negative effect of pace on the mean working memory performance. However, we did not observe the predicted
interaction. An analysis of the errors produced during recall
showed that longer free time reduced the tendency of distractors to intrude in recall much less than the model predicted.
The SOB-CS model accounted well for the data after a substantial reduction of the removal-rate parameter.
Keywords: Working Memory, SOB-CS model; interference
by superposition; removal mechanism

Oberauer, Farrell, Jarrold, Pasiecznik, and Greaves (2012)
reviewed studies that have investigated item-distractor (I-D)
similarity effects. They showed that phonological similarity between items and distractors is beneficial if the material
was pronounceable non-words (non-words were used in order to ensure that participants do not encode stimuli by their
meanings). Oberauer et al. did four experiments in which
participants had to remember a list of four non-words items.
The two distractors intervening after each item were also nonwords and had to be read aloud. The phonological similarity
between the items and the distractors was manipulated. In the
first three experiments, distractors were similar to the preceding item whereas in the fourth experiment distractors were
similar to the following item. The findings of experiments
1, 2 and 3 showed a positive effect of phonological similarity between items and distractors which meshes well with the
mechanism of interference by superposition implemented in
SOB-CS. Moreover, experiment 4 confirmed the hypothesis
of SOB-CS suggesting that distractors are associated to the
preceding item and not to the following item: no beneficial
effect of I-D similarity was observed when similar distractors
preceded, rather than followed, the items to which they were
similar.

Introduction
Working memory (WM) is the system responsible for holding information available for ongoing cognition (Baddeley &
Hitch, 1974; Miyake & Shah, 1999). It is often tested with
complex-span tasks (Barrouillet, Bernardin, & Camos, 2004),
which combine an immediate memory test with a concurrent processing demand: some items (e.g., letters or words)
are provided one at a time for subsequent recall in order and
several distractors are also presented in-between items. The
concurrent processing of distractors impairs memory, compared to a simple-span task that consists only of the immediate memory test. There has been ongoing debate about the
reasons why distractors affect WM performance. The present
study contributes to this question by testing a prediction of the
interference-based connectionist model SOB-CS (Oberauer,
Lewandowsky, Farrell, Jarrold, & Greaves, 2012).
According to SOB-CS, forgetting is due to interference between items and distractors. The model is based on a two-

532

The SOB-CS model also proposes an explanation for the
cognitive load effect (Barrouillet, Portrat, & Camos, 2011).
This effect has been observed in several studies showing that
WM performance depends on the proportion of time during
which distractors capture attention (Barrouillet, Bernardin,
Portrat, Vergauwe, & Camos, 2007; Barrouillet et al., 2004,
2011). According to decay-based theories (Baddeley, 1986;
Towse & Hitch, 1995; Barrouillet et al., 2011), the cognitiveload effect can be explained as follows: forgetting is mostly
due to the time-based decay of the memory traces when distractors are processed. In order to avoid forgetting, memory
traces can be reactivated when free time is available between
distractors. A sole interference mechanism cannot account
for such a positive impact of free time on WM performance.
Hence, in SOB-CS, the cognitive load effect is explained as
follows: forgetting is counteracted by a removal mechanism
in such a way that each distractor that has just been encoded
is ”removed” during free time. The removal process consists
of an unbinding, by Hebbian anti-learning, of the association
between each distractor and the study context, thereby rendering the context signal more effective as a retrieval cue for the
memoranda. SOB-CS suggests that the strength of removal
exponentially depends on the time devoted to it. This mechanism leads to the prediction that the more free time elapses
after each distractor, the more time is available for removing
the interfering distractor that just has been encoded and hence
the better the WM performance.
To sum up, two mechanisms are important in SOB-CS to
specifiy the effect of distractors on WM performance. First,
according to the mechanism of interference by superposition,
distractors which are similar to the preceding item should distort that item less than dissimilar distractors, leading to better
performance at recall. Second, the mechanism of ”removal”
leads to the prediction that distractors are unbound from WM
during free time in order to clear memory from irrelevant information. The combination of these two mechanisms gives
rise to an interesting hypothesis which is at the heart of the
present paper: if free time is long enough to entirely unbind
an irrelevant distractor from WM, there is no reason to observe an effect of I-D similarity as distractors would not be
present in WM anymore.

tion among a candidate set containing the four list items, four
of the distractors and four not presented lures (NPLs). The
NPLs were non-words which had never been seen by participants in the current experiment.
In their experiment, Oberauer, Farrell, et al. (2012) only
manipulated the similarity between items and distractors. We
extended that experiment by adding the manipulation of the
pace of the distractor presentation to vary the free time available to remove distractors. We tested participants and the
SOB-CS model with three paces (fast, medium, slow). To
allow comparisons of our findings with Oberauer, Farrell, et
al. (2012), the faster pace of our experiment was the pace
used by Oberauer, Farrell, et al. (2012). This extension allowed to test the special prediction that the positive effect of
I-D similarity decreases as the free time increases.

Simulation 1 with SOB-CS
To test the prediction that the positive effect of I-D similarity
decreases as the free time increases, we reused and adapted
the simulation presented in Oberauer, Farrell, et al. (2012).

Method
The creation of the stimuli was done similarly as in Oberauer,
Farrell, et al. (2012): stimuli were generated and organized in
8 dissimilar sets for each trial, each set containing 10 similar
stimuli. From these sets, items, distractors and non-presented
lures (NPLs) were selected according to the condition of similarity (i.e. high vs low). The recall candidate sets were composed of the four items of the trial, four distractors and four
NPLs. The NPLs were added in order to balance the global
attractiveness of the candidate sets between similarity conditions. In the high similarity condition, a distractor is attractive for two reasons: it has been processed and it was similar
to the items. In the low similarity condition, distractors are
therefore less attractive. In contrast to the distractors, NPLs
were dissimilar to the items in the high similarity condition,
whereas they were similar to the items in the low similarity
condition.
In all the simulations presented in Oberauer, Farrell, et al.
(2012), which reproduced well the behavioral data, the encoding duration of the distractor was set to 1000 ms. As the
pace of the processing task of all their experiments is 1000
ms, no free time was available to remove the distractor. This
means that they did not use the removal mechanism in their
simulations. In order to replicate the results in this baseline
condition (which is the condition with the faster pace in our
experiment), we also set the encoding duration of the distractor to 1000 ms.1 For the moderate (1800 ms) or slow (2600
ms) paces, the removal mechanism was used because there
were 800 ms or 1600 ms available free time.

Overview of the experiment
The aim of our experiment was to test this prediction of
SOB-CS concerning both the removal and the interference
by superposition mechanisms. To do that, our experiment
replicates and extends the second experiment presented in
Oberauer, Farrell, et al. (2012). It consisted of a verbal complex span task in which items and distractors were pronounceable non-words (i.e. words without semantic meanings). The
length of the memory list was constant and set to four items.
In the high similarity condition, the similar distractor always
immediately followed the items to which they were similar
and all the items were dissimilar to each other. Then, as memoranda were non-words, serial recall was done by reconstruc-

1 The encoding duration of the distractor is an arbitrary value, as
we did not know the exact duration of the attentional capture of the
reading task of non-words, but we were interested on the relative
effect of an additional free time and not on the absolute effect of the
free time in this study.

533

We ran 1000 simulated subjects, each one completing five
trials in each condition as in the experiment. Oberauer, Farrell, et al. (2012) used the SOB-CS default parameter values
except for the distinctiveness parameter c, which they lowered from 1.3 to 0.45 to approximately move the overall accuracy into the range of data. This new value of parameter
c was justified because non-words are less distinctive than
well-known words. In our simulation, we did as Oberauer,
Farrell, et al. (2012) except that we lowered the c parameter
even more from 0.45 to 0.3. The reason is that, in our experiment, we ensured that each non-word, as an item, a distractor
or a NPL, was seen only once by a participant. In contrast,
in Oberauer, Farrell, et al. (2012), 100 trials were performed
using a set of 36 non-words only. One trial required 16 items,
which is almost half the set of non-words. This means that
each participant saw each item more than 40 times during the
test, which would make them familiar with the non-words as
they go along the test. This difference could make their task
easier. This is why, in the simulation, it was justified to set
the distinctiveness parameter c to 0.3 instead of 0.45.

the more we should observe confusion errors at recall. We
observed that NPLs intrusion decreased when the free time
increased as WM is less distorted. We also observed an effect of similarity: there are more NPLs intrusion in the lowsimilarity condition as the NPLs are similar to the items in
this condition. This effect is much stronger at fast pace (when
distractors are not removed) than at moderate and slow pace.
In fact, we observed that the differences of intrusion rates between low-similarity and high-similarity are 0.09, 0.02 and
0.02 for the fast, moderate and slow pace respectively.
Transposition errors Finally, Figure 4 shows the proportion of transposition errors (order errors) for which a small
pace effect was observed. At the fast pace, the proportion
of transposition errors was increased by 8% as compared to
the slow and moderate pace. No effect of similarity and no
interaction were observed.
Summary of the simulation results In summary, the SOBCS model with its standard parameters (except the c parameter) predicts a beneficial effect of I-D similarity, which is
present only when there is no removal of the distractors (i.e.
in the fast pace condition). As soon as there is free time (800
ms or 1600 ms), the similarity effect disappears. The analysis of the different kind of errors show that as soon as there
is free time, distractor intrusions is negligible. This finding
can explain why we do not observe the similarity effect at a
moderate and slow pace: distractors are totally removed according to the SOB-CS model. These predictions will now be
compared with human data.

Results: Simulated data
Correct responses Recall responses were scored as correct
when a correct item was chosen in its exact serial position.
Figure 1 (panel B2 ) presented the percentage of responses
correctly recalled by the model as a function of pace and similarity. As expected, the simulation shows an effect of pace
(0.38, 0.75, and 0.77 at fast, moderate and slow pace respectively) and an interaction effect according to which the beneficial effect of similarity disappears as the pace slows down
(i.e. as free time increases). In fact, we can see that at a
fast pace the percentage of correct recall is higher when distractors are similar (compared to dissimilar), to the preceding
item (0.43 vs. 0.33) whereas at moderate and slow paces, the
difference between similarity conditions is null (0.75 vs. 0.75
and 0.76 vs. 0.78 for moderate and slow paces respectively).
We also analyzed three different kinds of errors. An error
could be an intrusion of distractor, an intrusion of NPL or a
transposition error (an item from the list in a wrong position).

Experiment
Method
Participants Participants were 34 students from the University of Bristol. They participated voluntarily in 1-hr session in exchange for course credit. Each participant performed the 6 conditions: three different paces (slow, moderate, fast) × two similarity conditions (low and high).
Material Participants were presented with four non-words
(e.g ”zaff”) for memorization, each followed by a pair of nonword distractors. The memoranda were presented in red and
the distractors in black. Participants were asked to read aloud
all the non-words as soon as they appeared but to only memorize the red ones in serial order.
Items and distractors were sampled from a set of nonwords selected from the ARC Nonword Database (Rastle,
Harrington, & Coltheart, 2002). A database of 720 non-words
was used to ensure that participants never saw a non-word
more than once. Each non-word was pronounceable, composed of one syllable and four letters. The 720 non-words
were organized in 240 rhyming groups, each containing three
non-words (e.g., ”baff, daff, haff” was a rhyming group).
The candidate set for recall was constructed such that its
similarity structure was the same for both conditions (low and
high similarity). Whatever the similarity condition, partici-

Distractor intrusions Figure 2 (panel B) presents the proportion of distractor intrusions. First, the simulation showed
a strong effect of pace: around 20% of the responses at fast
pace contained distractor intrusions whereas distractor intrusions are negligible (less than 2%) at moderate and slow pace.
It appears that distractors are sufficiently removed after 800
ms, for not being recalled. No effect of similarity and no interaction were observed.
NPL intrusions Figure 3 (panel B) presents the proportion
of NPLs intrusions. Even if NPLs are not encoded into WM,
the NPLs can be recalled as they can be confused with the
memoranda. The more the WM is distorted by distractors,
2 All the results discussed below are represented by the solid lines

in all panels B, which correspond to the simulation of the model with
the default value (r=1.5) of the removal strength parameter. The
dashed lines will be discussed latter.

534

Panel B : simulation

Mean proportion

r.value

Similarity

0.7

● High

●

Panel A : data
●

r = 0.1
r = 1.5

Low
0.6
0.5
0.4

●

●

●

●

●
●

Panel B : simulation

0.3

Mean proportion

Panel A : data
0.8

0.2

●
●

0.1
●

●

●

0.3

●
●

●

●

●

0.0

1000

1800

2600

1000

1800

1000

2600

2600

1000

1800

2600

Pace (ms)

Figure 3: Proportion of NPLs intrusions. Error bars are 95%
confident intervals for within-subject comparisons.

Figure 1: Proportion of correct responses. Error bars are 95%
confident intervals for within-subject comparisons.
Panel A : data

1800

Pace (ms)

Pace (ms)

Pace (ms)

Panel A : data

Panel B : simulation

Panel B : simulation

0.3
●
●
●

0.2

●
●
●
●

0.1
●

0.0
1000

1800

Pace (ms)

2600

1000

1800

Mean proportion

Mean proportion

0.4

●

0.3

●
●
●

●

●
●

●

0.2

0.1
1000

2600

1800

Pace (ms)

Pace (ms)

2600

1000

●

●

1800

2600

Pace (ms)

Figure 2: Proportion of distractor intrusions. Error bars are
95% confident intervals for within-subject comparisons.

Figure 4: Proportion of order errors. Error bars are 95% confident intervals for within-subject comparisons.

pants saw four items, four stimuli similar to each item and
four stimuli dissimilar to the items. In the high-similarity
condition, the four stimuli similar to each item were the
distractors whereas in the low conditions they were notpresented lures (NPLs).
In the high similarity condition, one stimulus from four different rhyming groups was chosen at random to be an item,
and the other two stimuli of each rhyming group were used
as the pair of distractors that immediately followed that item,
such that each pair of distractor was similar to their preceding
item. The NPLs, for the recall set candidates, were chosen at
random from 4 other rhyming groups, such that NPLs did not
rhyme with any item or distractors.
In the low similarity condition, four groups were used to
create the list of items and NPLs, such that each NPL was
similar to an item. Two stimuli from each of four other
rhyming groups were chosen at random to serve as distractors. In this way, no pair of distractors rhymed with any item
on the low-similarity condition.
For all conditions, we ensured that the four to-bemaintained items were dissimilar to each other.

400 ms blank. Distractors appeared at the rate of one stimulus
per 1,000 ms (800 ms on, 200 ms off) in the fast condition,
1,800 ms (800 ms on, 1000 ms off) in the moderate condition
and 2,600 ms (800 ms on, 1,800 ms off) in the slow condition.
After the last distractor, 12 recall candidates simultaneously
appeared on the screen in blue, each in a blue frame. They
were displayed at random in a 3 × 4 matrix. Participants selected recall choices by clicking inside the items’ boxes in the
order in which they were presented. A sound indicated that a
response has been recorded. They were asked to guess if they
could not remember an item. Each participant completed 30
trials, 5 in each condition, in a random order. They were also
prompted to take self-paced breaks every six trials. In addition, there were four practice trials at the start with four
different conditions: similar/fast, dissimilar/moderate, similar/slow and dissimilar/fast.

Results: human data and comparisons with
simulated data
We ran a two-way ANOVA on the mean proportion of correct
responses and different types of errors over trials with similarity (high and low I-D similarity) and pace (slow, moderate
and fast) as within-subjects factors.

Procedure A MATLAB program using Psychophysics
Toolbox (Brainard, 1997; Pelli, 1997) coded by Oberauer and
collaborators (2011) was reused with some modifications to
display stimuli and record responses. Each trial started with
a black centered fixation cross presented during 1,500 ms,
followed by a computer-paced presentation of items and distractors. Items always appeared during 800 ms followed by a

Correct responses Figure 1 (panel A) shows that, as
predicted by the model, there was an effect of similarity [F(1, 33) = 31.2, p < .001, η2p = .48] and an effect of
pace [F(2, 33) = 12.6, p < .001, η2p = .27]. However, contrary to SOB-CS predictions, no interaction was observed

535

[F(2, 33) < 1]. In fact, even at slow pace, we observed a positive effect of high similarity versus low similarity condition
on recall performance.

In the following section, we present the results of a grid
search on the removal parameter r in order to identify a better
r value to reproduce the human data.

Distractor intrusions Figure 2, panel A, shows a small effect of pace on distractor intrusions [F(2, 33) = 3.18, p =
.047, η2p = .08] with 27%, 26% and 24% of distractor intrusions among responses at fast, moderate and slow pace respectively. In contrast, the model predicted a strong effect of
the pace with almost no intrusion of distractors at medium
and slow pace compare to 20% at fast pace. This discrepancy
suggests that participants did not remove distractors as much
as the model did. No similarity effect [F(1, 33) = 2.69, p =
.11, η2p = .07] and no interaction [F(2, 33) < 1] was observed
on the distractor intrusion, as predicted by the model.

Estimation of the removal parameter
Several experiments (Oberauer, 2001, 2002) estimated that
removing part of the contents of working memory takes between 1 and 2 s. In addition to the time devoted to the removal, the strength of removal depends also on a rate of removal controlled by the free parameter r. The greater the
value of r, the faster associations between the distractor and
its position are removed. Therefore, in SOB-CS, the removal
parameter r was set to 1.5, which implies that the rate of antilearning for removal has reached 95% of its asymptote after 2
s. According to the previous experimental analysis, it seems
that distractors are not removed as quickly as in the model.
To search for a value for the r parameter that would better fit
the data, we conducted a grid search on a range between 0
and 1.5 with a step size of 0.1. The Root-Mean-Square Error (RMSE) was calculated for each parameter value. This
measure represents the discrepancy between the model prediction and human data. The lowest RMSE corresponds to
the best model. We found that the best model is the one with
r equals to 0.1 instead of the standard value 1.5. If r is set
to zero, meaning no removal at all, an important loss of fit is
observed as the model does not predict the pace effect anymore. The dashed lines of the panel B of all Figures shows
the simulation results with r set to 0.1. First, the pace and
the similarity variables do not interact anymore. Second, the
main effect of pace on accuracy and error rates is about as
large as in the data. Globally, we observed that the proportion of the different error types fits well the human data. Our
result is in contradiction with the conclusion from previous
studies (Oberauer, 2001, 2002) that removal takes only 1 to 2
s, as with this new r parameter, removing completely irrelevant information would take about 30 s instead of 2 s.

NPL intrusions We observed a strong effect of similarity
on NPL intrusions [F(1, 33) = 77.3, p < .001, η2p = .70] and a
small pace effect [F(2, 33) = 4.5, p = .014, η2p = .11] (Fig. 3,
panel A). Here again, the model predicted a much stronger
pace effect as compared to the experimental data. No significant interaction was found [F(2, 33) = 2.24, p = .11, η2p =
.06] suggesting that the effect of similarity on NPLs is constant over the pace whereas the model predicts a stronger effect of similarity at fast pace.
Transposition errors No similarity and no pace effect on
the transposition errors were found [respectively; F(1, 33) <
1 and F(2, 33) = 1.27, p = .28, η2p = .04] (Fig. 4, panel A).
No significant interaction was found [F(2, 66) = 1.27, p =
.28, η2p = .03]. In line with these data, the model predicted no
effect of the similarity on the transposition errors. However,
the model predicted a small effect of pace between the fast
and the two other paces.

Discussion
The present results replicated the observations found in Experiment 2 of Oberauer, Farrell, et al. (2012) suggesting that
forgetting in WM is partly due to interference by superposition. First, whatever the experimental condition, the mean
proportion of distractor intrusions was higher than the proportion of NPLs (0.25 vs. 0.1 on average). This result demonstrates that distractors, unlike NPLs, are encoded into WM
which is a necessary prerequisite for studying distractor interference. Moreover, evidence in favor of the interference
by superposition mechanism was provided by replicating the
strong benefit of high over low I-D similarity.
However, we observed a discrepancy between some of the
model predictions and the data. SOB-CS only fits well the
data in the fast condition that is similar to Oberauer, Farrell,
et al. (2012)’s experiment, where no removal was used in the
simulation. As soon as there is free time and hence removal,
the SOB-CS simulation erroneously predicted an interaction
between pace and I-D similarity. The error analyses revealed
that this difference between model and human seems to be
due to an overestimation of the removal strength by the model
compared to the experimental findings.

General Discussion
In this paper, we aimed to contribute to the debate regarding
the reasons why distractors affect working memory performance by testing predictions of SOB-CS. More specifically,
we investigated the I-D similarity effect after various amounts
of free time. Human results confirm several predictions of
SOB-CS. First of all, our results show that distractors are actually encoded in working memory since they were more often recalled than not-presented lures. Then, experimental data
reproduced the positive effect of a high similarity between
items and distractors originally found by Oberauer, Farrell, et
al. (2012). This finding is predicted by the mechanism of interference by superposition of SOB-CS. Finally, we also observed that memory performance increases at a slower pace
than predicted by the removal mechanism.
However, results disconfirm one prediction from the model
with its standard parameter values: the data show that the ID similarity effect does not diminish with longer free time.

536

When simulating this experiment with the SOB-CS computational model, the similarity effect disappears when there is 0.8
s or more of free time available, because the model strongly
removes distractors. In fact, we observed that at moderate
and slow paces, distractors are totally removed according to
SOB-CS. The total removing of the distractors cancels the
recall difference between similar and dissimilar conditions.
Contrary to this expectation, human data still showed distractor intrusions at moderate and slow pace.
Searching for a removal rate able to reproduce the experimental data resulted in a much lower estimate (r=0.1 instead
of r=1.5), which could reproduce the observed similarity effect at all three levels of pace. The removal mechanism was
supported, because r=0.1 fit better than r=0. What are the implications of our removal rate estimate, which is much lower
than that in the orignal model? Either, we can consider that
r=0.1 is the parameter value that holds generally, implying
that removal is much slower than thought so far. A way to verify this option would be to simulate other complex span task
experiments to test whether their results can be reproduced
by SOB-CS with r=0.1. Or, there is something particular to
delete the material of our experiment that would require a low
removal strength. In future research, a comparison of the size
of the pace effect across experiments could shed some light
on that. In fact, the comparaison of the pace effect of our experiment with all the other experiments can help to determine
if our experiment had an exceptional low pace effect or if the
removal strength needs to be lowered.
According to decay-based models of working memory,
such as TBRS (Barrouillet et al., 2007) or TBRS* (Oberauer
& Lewandowsky, 2011), removal does not exist and free time
is used to retrieve and maintain the to-be-remembered items.
The maintenance of memory items can be viewed as the
strengthening of the item-position bindings of the memory
items and also as the strengthening of the representations of
individual non-words themselves (i.e., item memory). Decaybased models predict the pace effect which has been observed
many times. In fact, the more free time the more opportunity
to maintain memory items. In such a model, the positive effect of high similarity between items and distractors, that is
not accounted for by decay-based models, can be explained
by the assumption that retrieving an item in order to refresh
it is easier if it is less distorted by distractors. This process
of retrieving would be required whatever the duration of the
free time. The effect of similarity on retrieval therefore would
lead to a beneficial effect of similar distractors whatever the
pace. However, for the moment, decay-based computational
models, such as TBRS* do not implement interference by superposition. In the future, it would be interesting to replace
the removal mechanism by a mechanism of maintenance in
SOB-CS.

Council ”Région Rhône-Alpes” which provided a PhD grant
to V.H. We acknowledge the Université Grenoble Alpes who
gave a grant allowing V.H. to go to the University of Bristol
during three months in order to collaborate with S.L.

References
Anderson, J. A. (1995). An introduction to neural networks.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Baddeley, A. D. (1986). Working memory. New York, NY,
US: Clarendon Press/Oxford University Press..
Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. (1974). Working memory.
The psychology of learning and motivation Advances in research and theory, 8, 47–89.
Barrouillet, P., Bernardin, S., & Camos, V. (2004). Time Constraints and Resource Sharing in Adults’ Working Memory
Spans. J Exp Psychol Gen, 133(1), 83–100.
Barrouillet, P., Bernardin, S., Portrat, S., Vergauwe, E., &
Camos, V. (2007). Time and cognitive load in working
memory. J Exp Psychol Learn, 33(3), 570–585.
Barrouillet, P., Portrat, S., & Camos, V. (2011). On the Law
Relating Processing to Storage in Working Memory. Psychol Rev, 118, 175–192.
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The psychophysics toolbox. Spatial
vision, 10, 433–436.
Miyake, A., & Shah, P. (Eds.). (1999). Models of working
memory: Mechanisms of active maintenance and executive
control. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Oberauer, K. (2001). Removing irrelevant information from
working memory: a cognitive aging study with the modified Sternberg task. J Exp Psychol Learn, 27(4), 948–957.
Oberauer, K. (2002). Access to information in working memory: exploring the focus of attention. J Exp Psychol Learn,
28(3), 411–421.
Oberauer, K., Farrell, S., Jarrold, C., Pasiecznik, K., &
Greaves, M. (2012). Interference between maintenance
and processing in working memory: The effect of itemdistractor similarity in complex span. J Exp Psychol Learn,
38(3), 665–685.
Oberauer, K., & Lewandowsky, S. (2011). Modeling working memory: a computational implementation of the TimeBased Resource-Sharing theory. Psychon B Rev, 18(1), 10–
45.
Oberauer, K., Lewandowsky, S., Farrell, S., Jarrold, C., &
Greaves, M. (2012). Modeling working memory: An interference model of complex span. Psychon B Rev, 19, 779819.
Pelli, D. G. (1997). The VideoToolbox software for visual
psychophysics: Transforming numbers into movies. Spatial Vision, 10, 437–442.
Rastle, K., Harrington, J., & Coltheart, M. (2002). 358,534
nonwords: The ARC Nonword Database. Q J Exp Psychol,
55(A), 1339–1362.
Towse, J. N., & Hitch, G. J. (1995). Is there a relationship
between task demand and storage space in tests of working
memory capacity? Q J Exp Psychol, 48(A), 108–124.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Louise Kenney who participated in
the data gathering. We also acknowledge the French Regional

537

