Computational Exploration of Lexical Development in Down Syndrome
Angel Eugenio Tovar (eugeniot@comunidad.unam.mx)
Department of Psychology, UNAM
Avenida Universidad 3004, Ciudad Universitaria, Mexico

Gert Westermann (g.westermann@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University
Lancaster LA1 4YF, United Kingdom

sufficient to account for the differences in performance
between lexical comprehension and production in this
population.
This hypothesis is in accordance with a domain-general
view of cognitive development, where the process of
associative learning is affected overall, but depending on the
demands of the task (i.e., comprehension or production) the
observed outcomes are qualitatively different. We test this
hypothesis in our computational model of lexical
development. Therefore, a second aim of this paper is to
provide a computational model of atypical lexical
acquisition, biologically informed.

Abstract
Research on lexical development in Down syndrome (DS) has
emphasized a dissociation between language comprehension
and production abilities, with production of words being
relatively more impaired than comprehension. Current
theories stress the role of associative learning on lexical
development. However, there have been no attempts to
explain the atypical lexical development in DS based on
atypical associative learning. The long-term potentiation
(LTP) and long-term depression (LTD) of synapses,
underlying associative learning, are altered in DS. Here we
present a neural network model that instantiates notions from
neurophysiological studies to account for the disparities
between lexical comprehension and production in DS. Our
simulations show that an atypical LTP/LTD balance affects
comprehension and production differently in an associative
model of lexical development.

Lexical development in Down Syndrome (The
Process)

Keywords: Down syndrome; lexical development;
associative learning; comprehension/production asymmetries;
neurocomputational model.

Down syndrome (DS) is the most common genetic cause
of intellectual disability. There has been extensive research
in behavioral and neurophysiological sciences to understand
how DS affects cognitive development.
One of the behavioral domains that has attracted
particular attention in DS is language development, and
specifically, lexical development. This is interesting because
lexical development has been argued to be based on
associative learning mechanisms (McMurray, Horst, &
Samuelson, 2012), while studies on the neurophysiology of
DS have consistently described an altered mechanism for
synaptic adaptation (Begenisic et al., 2014; Scott-McKean
& Costa, 2011) which lies at the core of associative
learning. Nevertheless, the role of atypical associative
learning in lexical development in DS has not been
explored.
In this paper, we address this gap by describing a
neurobiologically informed computational model that
implements an altered associative learning mechanism
described in DS to account for the atypical lexical
development in DS. Our focus is on explaining an apparent
dissociation between lexical comprehension and production
in DS. We want to address to what extent this observed
dissociation is based on general atypical associative learning
mechanisms. Our hypothesis is that interactions between
experience and the neurophysiological constraints of DS are

Language development in DS, as in other developmental
disorders, has attracted considerable attention for both
theoretical and practical reasons. On the one hand,
descriptions emphasizing a relatively greater impairment in
language abilities in DS (Chapman & Hesketh, 2000; Rice,
Warren, & Betz, 2005; Vicari et al., 2004) have motivated
theoretical debate on the nature of language as a process
resulting from a cognitive system with domain specific vs.
domain general components (Marcus & Rabagliati, 2006;
Stojanovik, 2014; Thomas & Karmiloff-Smith, 2005). On
the other hand, there is interest in understanding atypical
language trajectories in DS to develop better interventions
and minimize dysfunction in these patients. Among the
different domains of language development, in this review
we focus on lexical development.
Lexical acquisition is traditionally studied through the
number of words produced and number of words
comprehended in a certain age range. These numbers are
lower in DS when compared to typically developing
children (TD) of the same chronological age, but the
discrepancy between DS and TD diminishes when DS
individuals are compared with TD children of the same
mental age (i.e., level of non-verbal cognitive ability)
(Galeote, Soto, Sebastián, Rey, & Checa, 2012).
In DS it is commonly reported that language
comprehension abilities exceed language production
abilities (Galeote et al., 2012; Kay-Raining Bird, Chapman,
& Schwartz, 2004; Vicari et al., 2004). This pattern
replicates a canonical finding in research of lexical
development in TD: the number of words comprehended
initially exceeds the number of words produced (McMurray

1199

et al., 2012). However, critically, a number of studies have
found that the discrepancy between the comprehension and
production of words in DS is greater than expected on the
basis of mental age, with comprehension at or near mentalage-typical levels, but production selectively impaired
(Kay-Raining Bird et al., 2004; Vicari et al., 2004).
Some studies also suggest that production and
comprehension of words in DS follow qualitatively different
developmental trajectories (Chapman, Hesketh, & Kistler,
2002; Galeote et al., 2012), with one study reporting that
comprehension of words in DS even exceeded the level of
non-verbal mental age (Glenn & Cunningham, 2005).
However, in contrast to these results, other evidence has
suggested that in DS both expressive and receptive language
are significantly more impaired than what is expected on the
basis of mental age (Bello, Onofrio, & Caselli, 2014).
Due to conflicting results it has been difficult to
characterize a unique profile of cognitive and linguistic
abilities in DS. High inter-individual variability in the DS
population (Karmiloff-Smith et al., 2016), along with
methodological constraints including small sample size and
the use of different measures and procedures, may explain
some disparities between studies. In an effort to analyze a
larger sample of DS individuals in verbal skills, Næss and
colleagues (2011) meta-analyzed data reported by different
research groups between 1988 and 2009, and found that
performance of children with DS is in line with TD
children, matched by mental age, in receptive vocabulary
but is significantly impaired in measures of expressive
vocabulary.
A number of questions arise from this apparently uneven
profile between lexical comprehension and production, and
its failed predictability from the overall level of cognitive
development: is lexical development in DS only delayed or
deviated from the TD pattern? Is there a dissociation
between lexical comprehension and production in DS? Is it
possible to account for these results with a domain general
approach?

Lexical Acquisition and Associative Learning (The
Theory)
There is a vast literature on lexical acquisition and the study
of word learning is at the core of this field. Word learning is
viewed as the process by which we learn to link a
phonological representation with a category of objects.
Word learning involves a sequence of complex processes;
the learner faces the challenge of selecting discrete
phonological representations, picking a specific object in a
cluttered visual scene, and creating meaningful
representations linking the sounds and the visual objects.
Attempts to explain how the cognitive system deals with
such a complexity have been based on three theoretical
accounts. First, under the lexical constraints account, word
learning is guided by a set of default assumptions (i.e.,
constraints) on hypotheses (Woodward & Markman, 1998).
For example, the mutual exclusivity constraint describes the
process of inferring which word corresponds with which

object on the basis of knowing already the names of the
other objects present in the visual scene.
Second, the social-pragmatic account argues that children
use cues such as the speaker’s (e.g., caregiver) gaze or
intention to learn the correspondences between sounds and
objects (see Ambridge & Lieven, 2011). Third, the
associative learning account explains word learning as a
process governed by the domain-general rules of learning.
The focus is on the linkages created between sounds and
objects without appealing to any other prerequisites such as
lexical constraints or social cues, even when these can exert
a modulatory role on word learning. In recent years, this
account has been formalized and tested through
computational models (Mayor & Plunkett, 2010; McMurray
et al., 2012, Westermann & Mareschal, 2014).
Computational simulations have provided precise
descriptions on how the qualitative properties of lexical
development, empirically observed, as is the initial
asymmetry between comprehension and production, the
vocabulary spurt, and mutual exclusivity, emerge in a
system that operates by establishing associations with
language-like inputs (e.g., McMurray et al., 2012).
In this paper, we focus on analyzing the disruptive effects
that atypical mechanisms of associative learning have on
word learning for the DS population. For this reason, our
approach is based on the model proposed by McMurray,
Horst and Samuelson (2012), we call this the MHS model
from here on. We selected this model for the following
reasons: first, the theoretical account underlying this model
distils the process to its basic computational components
and develops an approach focused on the role of associative
learning, and this is convenient for our purpose of analyzing
atypical forms of associative learning on lexical
development. Second, the architecture of this model is well
suited to incorporating our computational formalization of
biological descriptions of atypical learning in DS. Third, by
building on previous work, we extend this previous and well
accepted model to account for atypical behavior and in this
extension (in terms of behavior, and populations) additional
evidence is provided for the associative account of word
learning.

Associative Learning in Down Syndrome (The
Underlying Mechanism)
From a neurobiological perspective, associative learning
results from the adaptation of synaptic connections between
neurons. Such adaptations are activity dependent; following
Hebbian descriptions high co-activation between pre- and
post-synaptic neurons lead to a strengthening of the synaptic
connection. Complementary to the Hebbian account,
empirical research has shown that decays in the efficacy of
synaptic connections are also triggered by the co-activation
between the pre- and post-synaptic units. A co-activation
threshold is assumed to exist (Bienenstock, Cooper, &
Munro, 1982) so that below-threshold co-activation values
produce decays in the synaptic efficacy (i.e. long-term
depression or LTD) and above-threshold co-activation

1200

values lead to increase the synaptic efficacy (i.e., long-term
potentiation or LTP).
A vast literature on the biological bases of associative
learning in DS has described an atypical balance between
LTP and LTD in different mouse models of this syndrome.
When compared with euploid control mice, LTP is limited
and LTD is increased in DS (Begenisic et al., 2014; ScottMcKean & Costa, 2011; Siarey, Villar, Epstein, &
Galdzicki, 2005). This pattern of synaptic adaptation
functionally corresponds with an increased co-activation
threshold, where the same level of stimulation produces
limited gains and increased decays in the connection
strengths in DS relative to TD. An increased co-activation
threshold has been proposed for other populations that show
cognitive impairment (Meredith & Mansvelder, 2010).
While considerable progress has been made in the study
of LTP/LTD in DS, with an emphasis on the design of
pharmacological interventions (e.g., Begenisic et al., 2014),
building the bridge from the basic level of altered
neurophysiology to the high level of cognitive function has
seen less progress. For example, it is not clear what is the
role of the altered LTP/LTD balance on language
development in DS. Descriptions of the exact way by which
biological differences contribute to language impairments in
different populations (e.g., TD, Williams syndrome, fragile
X syndrome) will inform us on what is common across
populations, the nature of language impairments, and how
the language capacity is vulnerable (Rice et al., 2005).
Given the evidence from two fields of research, one
informed by behavioral studies suggesting a preserved and
marked asymmetry between comprehension and production
of words, and another informed by neurophysiological
studies describing an altered mechanism for associative
learning, and in the context of an associative learning
account to word learning, in this paper our focus is on
exploring, the role of atypical associative learning
mechanisms in word learning in DS.

Computational Model
Overview and Architecture The present model is based on
the MHS model. It is designed to analyze the role of
associative learning in the establishment of correspondences
between auditory word forms and visual objects. In the
following, we describe our model and we indicate the
differences between the present model and the MHS model.
The present model is composed of a neural network with
three layers of units. Two of these layers represent
processing in the auditory and visual systems. These layers
are used to present input patterns to the network and to
collect responses. These layers are not directly connected
with each other; instead they are indirectly connected
through a third layer of “lexical units” (see Figure 1).
One assumption of this approach is that the auditory and
visual systems can already categorize objects and select
discrete elements from the environment. The units in the
visual and auditory layers are localist; each unit represent
only one stimulus.

Figure 1: Architecture of the neural network with the
visual, auditory and lexical layers. Only a few connections
are shown to represent connectivity from auditory and
visual units to lexical units.
The auditory and visual layers have 40 units each. Thus,
40 is the total number of words that the network is able to
learn. The lexical layer contains 100 units. There are more
lexical units than would be needed to learn 40 words –this
allows for better learning (McMurray et al., 2012). Since the
model could initially randomly associate two different
inputs with the same lexical unit, increasing the number of
lexical units prevents mismappings and increases
discrimination of words (McMurray et al., 2012).
The architecture of the model is similar to the one
presented by McMurray and colleagues (2012), but a key
difference is in the number of units. The MHS model has 35
input units in the auditory and visual layers, and 500 lexical
units. Our model incorporates more input units and fewer
lexical units; thus our model requires less computational
power to simulate the learning of a higher number of words.
Each unit in the input layers is connected to all the units
in the lexical layer. These connections are bidirectional and
their weights are initially randomized. In the MHS model,
connections are not functionally bidirectional, since they use
a different temperature parameter for feed-forward and
feed-back connections.
Activation values of units range between 0 and 1. The
activation values of the lexical units are initially normalized,
such that the sum of all activation values equals 1. When an
auditory or visual stimulus is presented to the input layers,
the unit that represents this stimulus is activated with a
value of 1, and all remaining inputs are set to 0. The
activation flows through the connections and reaches the
lexical layer, which then computes the net input as the sum
of activations coming from the auditory and visual inputs
weighted by the corresponding connection values. The
activation values in the lexical layer then go through a
process of normalization (Equation 1), during 7 cycles. In
our model 7 cycles are optimal to stabilize 100 lexical units.
It is not clear how many cycles the MHS model requires.

1201

(1)
The activation of the lexical units then feeds back to the
auditory and visual layers; these units then sum the net input
coming from the lexical layer with the activation from direct
stimulation. This process allows integration of bottom-up
with top-down information. Then, the connection weights
are updated according to the rule described below.
Learning The MHS model incorporates a Hebbian learning
algorithm that strengthens connections between co-acvtive
units. The decay terms in the MHS model weaken the
connections when either the lexical-, or the input units are
inactive. In our model, the learning algorithm is designed to
capture the functional differences in synaptic adaptation
between TD and DS, as informed by studies with mouse
models. Thus, both strengthening and weakening of
connections result from the co-activation of units. Our
algorithm incorporates a co-activation threshold (θ). Those
co-activation values that surpass θ lead to gains in the
connection weights, and co-activation values below θ lead
to decays in connection weights. The simulations of DS use
a relatively higher value for θ than simulations of TD (i.e., θ
= 0.9 for DS and 0.7 for TD). Higher values of θ restrict
connection strengthening and increase connection decay; in
this way we simulate the atypical pattern of increased LTD
and limited LTP that has been described in DS.
To stabilize changes in connection weights we also
include a self-adjusting parameter called lambda (λ). It
keeps weights between 0 and 1, by reducing changes as
weights approach 1. As shown in Equation 2, for above-θ
values, λ depends on the difference between the coactivation and the current connection weight. It is computed
by subtracting the value of the current weight from the
current co-activation. For below-θ values, lambda acquires a
negative value proportional to the current weight.
If (ai*aj)> θ, Then λ = (ai*aj) – Wij
Else
λ = –Wij

(2)

Lambda is a multiplicative parameter in the final learning
algorithm (Equation 3).
Wij(t+1) = Wij(t) + λ ß (ai*aj)

(3)

Changes in weights (Wij) then depend on the co-activation
value (ai*aj) modulated by the interaction between the
current state of the connection and the co-activation
computed by λ, and a learning rate (ß). We ran two sets of
simulations for DS. In the first set (DS-1) we used a
relatively lower ß in DS compared to TD simulations to
capture additional neurophysiological abnormalities in DS
with impact on computing power, namely, a reduction of
synapse density and inhibitory predominance (Dierssen,

2012). In the second set of simulations of DS (DS-2) we
kept the same value ß as the one used in TD. We did this to
be able to compare and explore the effects of an increased θ
alone vs. increased θ and lower ß. (ß = 0.001 for TD and
DS-2; and ß = 0.0005 for DS-1).

Simulations
Training One auditory object was presented during each
training trial along with many visual objects (usually five).
These presentations simulate natural scenes where, in a
discrete moment, one auditory word form is presented
(spoken) to the child in the presence of a cluttered visual
scene. For example, the first time a child hears the word
/cat/, she can observe a visual scene that contains a cat, but
also contains a dog, a container with milk, a ball of yarn,
etc. Thus, the word /cat/ could initially refer to any of these
visual objects. This problem of referential ambiguity needs
to be solved by the child across many trials. Let’s consider a
second trial when the word /cat/ is presented again, but now
the visual scene contains the cat, the container with milk, a
pillow, and a table. If the child is sensitive to the
environmental regularities, across many trials she will learn
the correct correspondences between auditory words and
visual objects (Smith & Yu, 2008). But this is a slow
process that requires numerous trials. To capture this
process, in our simulations, each time that an auditory word
was presented, the correct visual object was presented with
another 4 different visual objects. The additional visual
objects changed for every trial. We simulated the learning of
40 words, by presenting each auditory-visual pairing a total
of 20000 times.
Testing We presented trials to evaluate comprehension and
production of words. Tests for comprehension were
designed, as in the MHS model, to simulate a traditional test
of lexical comprehension, The N-alternative forced choice,
where a number of different visual objects are presented to
the child and she is asked to point or select one in particular
(e.g., where is the pencil? which one is the pencil?). In our
simulations one auditory stimulus (e.g., pencil) was active,
as well as 4 visual objects (e.g., pencil, cat, table, glass) in
the visual layer. Activation flowed from inputs to the lexical
layer and back. Then the unit in the visual layer with the
highest activation (e.g., pencil) was taken as the response of
the model. In this way, comprehension was conceptualized
as the correct activation of the visual object in the presence
of one particular auditory word form.
Following again simulations in the MHS model, tests for
production of words were designed to simulate the “child
says” measures of the MacArthur-Bates Communicative
Development Inventory. In these trials one single visual
object was active and all possible auditory word forms were
active. Activation flowed from inputs to the lexical units
and back, then the auditory unit with the highest activation
value was taken as the response of the model. Production
then corresponded to evaluating the activation of auditory
word forms in the presence of a particular visual object.

1202

The comprehension and production test trials were run
after every 50 training epochs (each epoch was composed of
the presentation of the 40 training trials). A total of 400
measures of comprehension and production were obtained
for each simulation. We ran 20 simulations of TD, 20 of
DS-1 and 20 of DS-2.

Results and Discussion
Figure 2 shows the mean values of words comprehended
and produced for TD, DS-1, and DS-2. The standard
deviation values are shown in the error bars (gray areas).
Our simulation of TD (Fig. 2A) shows that
comprehension surpassed production in the early stages of
learning; then, from the test trial 51 until the end of the
simulation, comprehension and production were matched,
and show complete learning of vocabulary.
The simulations of DS-1 and DS-2 (Fig. 2 B and C) show
a qualitatively different trajectory of lexical acquisition.
Some aspects shown by these simulations are of particular
interest in the context of our theoretical and empirical
review. First, performance in the comprehension task is
always above the performance in the production task.
Moreover, production of words never reaches the maximum
possible value of 40 words. Second, DS-1 is more affected
than DS-2. DS-1 used a higher co-activation threshold with
a lower learning rate, while DS-2 used the higher coactivation threshold with a high learning rate. Data from
DS-2 suggests that the atypical synaptic learning process in
DS has a direct consequence on lexical development on its
own, and the difference between DS-1 and DS-2 suggests
that the learning rate has an additional effect. Third, the
standard deviations show that the performance in the DS

groups was more variable than the performance in TD. DS-1
showed the highest variability. These patterns replicate the
high inter-individual variability usually observed in DS
compared with TD (see Karmiloff-Smith et al., 2016).
Comprehension and production tests were different tasks
in our simulations. Comprehension required the selection of
a visual stimulus from a sample of a few objects, while
production, a more demanding task, required the selection
of an auditory stimulus from the total number of auditory
word forms. These tasks were designed to reproduce the
top-down and bottom-up interactions that a child processes
when she produces names vs. when she comprehends
auditory words. Then, in our model, the asymmetries
between comprehension and production are (partially)
explained by the properties of the tasks. Remarkably, the
disparity between comprehension and production in TD was
overcome as training continued, but this disparity persisted
for the DS simulations, thus pointing to the atypical
associative learning mechanism as an explanation for the
persistence and more marked disparity between
comprehension and production of words in DS.
Other factors may as well contribute to the lexical
comprehension/production asymmetry in DS, such as an
atypical physical development that affects correct
articulation of words and therefore restricts experience with
lexical production. Our model, however, shows that the
atypical pattern of synaptic strengthening directly affects
lexical development.
Our approach supports a domain-general view of
cognitive development, and we argue that it also strengthens
the associative learning account to lexical development,
since it explains a pattern of uneven development of lexical
abilities in Down syndrome as a result of an altered domain-

Figure 2: Mean values of comprehension and production across the 400 test trials for TD (Panel A), DS-1 (Panel B)
and DS-2 (Panel C). The values from the three populations appear for comparison purposes in Panel D. Gray areas in
Panels A, B and C show the standard deviation.

1203

general mechanism in combination with the properties of
the behavioral task.

Acknowledgments
AET was funded by Secretaría de Ciencia Tecnología e
Innovación-Ciudad de México. GW is funded by the ESRC
International Centre for Language and Communicative
Development
(LuCiD)
at Lancaster
University
(ES/L008955/1) and by a British Academy/Leverhulme
Trust Senior Researcher Fellowship.

References
Ambridge, B., & Lieven, E. V. (2011). Child language
acquisition: Contrasting theoretical approaches. UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Begenisic, T., Baroncelli, L., Sansevero, G., Milanese, M.,
Bonifacino, T., Bonanno, G.,… Sale, A. (2014).
Fluoxetine in adulthood normalizes GABA release and
rescues hippocampal synaptic plasticity and spatial
memory in a mouse model of Down Syndrome.
Neurobiology of Disease, 63, 12–19.
Bello, A., Onofrio, D., & Caselli, M. C. (2014). Nouns and
predicates comprehension and production in children with
Down syndrome. Research in Developmental Disabilities,
35(4), 761–775.
Bienenstock, E. L., Cooper, L. N., & Munro, P. W. (1982).
Theory for the development of neuron selectivity:
orientation specificity and binocular interaction in visual
cortex. The Journal of Neuroscience: The Official Journal
of the Society for Neuroscience, 2(1), 32–48.
Chapman, R. S., & Hesketh, L. J. (2000). Behavioral
phenotype of individuals with Down syndrome. Mental
Retardation and Developmental Disabilities Research
Reviews, 6(2), 84–95.
Chapman, R. S., Hesketh, L. J., & Kistler, D. J. (2002).
Predicting longitudinal change in language production and
comprehension in individuals with Down syndrome:
hierarchical linear modeling. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 45(5), 902–915.
Dierssen, M. (2012). Down syndrome: the brain in trisomic
mode. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience, 13(12), 844–858.
Galeote, M., Soto, P., Sebastián, E., Rey, R., & Checa, E.
(2012). Vocabulary acquisition in children with Down
syndrome: Normative data and developmental trends.
Infancia y Aprendizaje, 35(1), 111–122.
Glenn, S., & Cunningham, C. (2005). Performance of young
people with Down syndrome on the Leiter-R and British
picture vocabulary scales. Journal of Intellectual
Disability Research, 49(4), 239–244.
Karmiloff-Smith, A., Al-Janabi, T., D’Souza, H., Groet, J.,
Massand, E., Mok, K., … Strydom, A. (2016). The
importance of understanding individual differences in
Down syndrome. F1000Research, 5.
Kay-Raining Bird, E., Chapman, R. S., & Schwartz, S. E.
(2004). Fast mapping of words and story recall by
individuals with Down syndrome. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 47(6), 1286–1300.

Marcus, G., & Rabagliati, H. (2006). What developmental
disorders can tell us about the nature and origins of
language. Nature Neuroscience, 9(10), 1226–1229.
Mayor, J., & Plunkett, K. (2010). A neurocomputational
account of taxonomic responding and fast mapping in
early word learning. Psychological Review, 117(1), 1–31.
McMurray, B., Horst, J. S., & Samuelson, L. K. (2012).
Word learning emerges from the interaction of online
referent selection and slow associative learning.
Psychological Review, 119(4), 831–877.
Meredith, R. M., & Mansvelder, H. D. (2010). STDP and
mental retardation: dysregulation of dendritic excitability
in Fragile X syndrome. Frontiers in Synaptic
Neuroscience, 2.
Næss, K.-A. B., Lyster, S.-A. H., Hulme, C., & MelbyLervåg, M. (2011). Language and verbal short-term
memory skills in children with Down syndrome: A metaanalytic review. Research in Developmental Disabilities,
32(6), 2225–2234.
Rice, M. L., Warren, S. F., & Betz, S. K. (2005). Language
symptoms of developmental language disorders: An
overview of autism, Down syndrome, fragile X, specific
language impairment, and Williams syndrome. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 26(1), 7–27.
Scott-McKean, J. J., & Costa, A. C. S. (2011). Exaggerated
NMDA mediated LTD in a mouse model of Down
syndrome and pharmacological rescuing by memantine.
Learning & Memory, 18(12), 774–778.
Siarey, R. J., Villar, A. J., Epstein, C. J., & Galdzicki, Z.
(2005). Abnormal synaptic plasticity in the Ts1Cje
segmental trisomy 16 mouse model of Down syndrome.
Neuropharmacology, 49(1), 122–128.
Smith, L., & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent
mappings
via
cross-situational
statistics. Cognition, 106(3), 1558–1568.
Stojanovik, V. (2014). Language in genetic syndromes and
cognitive modularity. En L. Cummings (Ed.), The
Cambridge handbook of communication disorders (pp.
541–558). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Thomas, M., & Karmiloff-Smith, A. (2005). Can
Developmental Disorders Reveal the Component Parts of
the Human Language Faculty? Language Learning and
Development, 1(1), 65–92.
Vicari, S., Bates, E., Caselli, M. C., Pasqualetti, P.,
Gagliardi, C., Tonucci, F., & Volterra, V. (2004).
Neuropsychological profile of Italians with Williams
syndrome: an example of a dissociation between language
and
cognition?
Journal
of
the
International
Neuropsychological Society, 10(6), 862–876.
Westermann, G. and Mareschal, D. (2014) From perceptual
to language-mediated categorization. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B, 369, 20120391
Woodward, A. L., & Markman, E. M. (1998). Early word
learning. In Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 2:
Cognition, perception, and language (pp. 371–420).
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons Inc.

1204

