Context reduces coercion costs – Evidence from eyetracking during reading
Oliver Bott (oliver.bott@uni-tuebingen.de)
Project Composition in Context (CiC), DFG Priority Program XPrag.de
SFB 833, Nauklerstraße 35, 72074 Tübingen, Germany
Abstract

(2)

This paper presents an eyetracking during reading experiment
that investigated the role of supportive context on processing
aspectual coercion. Coercion sentences in need of aspectual
enrichment were embedded in discourse contexts providing
the necessary information for successful interpretation. The
findings of the reported experiment show that context information can be used immediately without disrupting reading of
coercion sentences. The lack of coercion costs in supportive
discourse contexts provides experimental evidence for the proposed Composition in Context Hypothesis and against theories
that view semantic composition as largely encapsulated from
context. Furthermore, the present experiment investigated the
role of inter-individual differences in verbal working memory
capacity on the immediate use of contextual information in
computing coerced interpretations.

The inserted coercion operator ADD CULMINATION is a
function that takes as input an activity and outputs an accomplishment (see, e.g., Dölling, 2014, for semantic representations of various coercion operators). The coercion operation
solves the compositional problem. After the inclusion of the
appropriate type shifting operator the resulting representation
can be interpreted fully compositionally. Interestingly, the
semantic problem in (1) seems to completely disappear once
the sentence is embedded in an appropriate discourse context.
Consider (1) in the context of (3).
(3)

Keywords: Aspectual coercion; Discourse context; Semantic
processing; Eyetracking during reading; Working memory capacity

Introduction
A central assumption in semantics is that interpretation is
governed by the principle of compositionality (see, e.g., Pelletier, 1994). The prinholds that the meaning of a complex expression is entirely determined by the meaning of its parts and
their syntactic combination. However, linguistic expressions
are at the same time highly context dependent, and the language interpretation system is therefore not only dependent
on the parts of complex expressions in a bottom-up fashion,
but also has to be open to top-down influences of the context of utterance. The present study investigates the interplay
between sentential and contextual information during the online composition of the event interpretation. In particular, I
tested whether contextual information is immediately used to
resolve compositional conflicts during online interpretation.
Cases of coercion have prominently figured in studies
on the time course of compositional interpretation, see e.g.
Piñango and Deo (2016) for an overview of studies on complement coercion, and Bott (2010) and Paczynski, Jackendoff, and Kuperberg (2014) for aspectual coercion. (1) displays
a compositional conflict calling for aspectual coercion.
(1)

[in thirty minutes[Peter jog-]]
coerce [in thirty
minutes[ADD CULMINATION[Peter jog-]]]

# Yesterday, Peter jogged in only thirty minutes.

When uttered out of the blue, sentence (1) is hardly interpretable. This is because an in-adverbial requires a telic event
predicate of the accomplishment type (Vendler, 1957), but Peter jog- expresses an atelic activity. Under a coercion analysis
Peter jog- has therefore to be shifted into an accomplishment,
i.e. the event representation of the activity has to be enriched
by adding a culminating event. The required operation can be
summarized as follows:

Half a year ago, Peter started to jog four kilometersculmination every day. When he began, he was quite
slow but now he is really fast.

Based on the pragmatic literature (Recanati, 2010) two theoretical alternatives can be contrasted on how compositional
interpretation might make use of contextual information. The
Composition in Context (CiC) hypothesis predicts immediate
availability of contextual information (e.g., Nieuwland & van
Berkum, 2006). Accordingly, the bounded path four kilometers from the preceding context should be immediately available when composing the adverbial with the rest of the target sentence in (1). Alternatively, however, compositional
interpretation may operate in strictly locally in a bottom-up
fashion (Cappelen & Lepore, 2005). According to this view,
which may be characterized as Encapsulated Composition
(EC) hypothesis, contextual information is only considered
when the sentence information is not sufficient: Either to resolve compositional conflicts or to interpret context dependent expressions that are context dependent. In fact, in coercion theories it is standardly assumed that coercion operations are locally triggered by temporary semantic mismatch,
i.e. many coercion analyses employ the EC hypothesis (cf.
de Swart, 1998, p. 8).
According to the EC hypothesis the initial interpretation of
(1) in the context of (3) should result in an aspectual mismatch that is only resolved in a second processing step. This
should lead to measurable disruption during online interpretation. The CiC hypothesis, by contrast, predicts no processing
costs of coercion sentences relative to non-coercing controls
because the contextually given culmination can go right into
the composed meaning.
Context effects on coercion have only been investigated in
a small number of online studies so far. Traxler, McElree,
Williams, and Pickering (2005) report a series of self-paced
reading and eyetracking during reading experiments in which

1654

they presented target sentences involving complement coercion (the student began the book: [begin[the book]] coerce
[begin[to do something involving[the book]]]) and manipulated the preceding discourse context. Here is a sample item
from Traxler et al. (2005, Exp. 3/4); c1/2 correspond to coercion vs. control contexts, t1/2 are coercion vs. control targets,
critical regions underlined.
(4)

c1)
c2)
t1)
t2)

The student started a book in his dorm room.
The student read a book in his dorm room.
Before he started it, he checked his e-mail.
Before he read it, he checked his e-mail.

Contextual facilitation was found in cases in which the context sentence either itself required complement coercion (c1),
or explicitly introduced the relevant event (c2). In their Exp. 3
and 4, Traxler et al. (2005) observed coercion costs for c1 relative to c2. Crucially, however, the anaphor it in the coercion
target t1 was read as fast as in the control condition t2 showing that the anaphor could be immediately linked to the relevant event in the discourse representation. This is prima facie
evidence in favour of the CiC hypothesis. However, there is
another explanation consistent with the EC hypothesis too. It
is also possible that it was not interpreted as anaphoric to the
book but rather as an event anaphor, which would make coercion unnecessary in the first place. The following example
adopted from Asher (1993, p. 233) illustrates the difference
between individual and event anaphora.
(5)

If Timmyi hits j Johnk , it∗i/ j/∗k will cause a fight.

As for aspectual coercion, Bott (2010, Exp. 3) reports a selfpaced reading experiment investigating whether German contexts such as (3) facilitate aspectual enrichment in German
versions of (1). The findings provide preliminary evidence
that supportive context can eliminate coercion costs observed
for this type of sentences when presented out of context. After telic contexts such as (3) the reading times of coercion
sentences did not differ from control targets allowing for plain
compositional interpretation. However, this interpretation of
the results is complicated by the fact that the comparison crucially involved a direct comparison between different adverbials (German in x time vs. for x time).
Processing along the lines of the EC or the CiC hypothesis
does not have to be an either or choice but could be subject
to inter-individual differences. In particular, verbal working
memory capacity may be an important constraining factor for
being able to employ a highly context dependent processing
strategy as put forward in the CiC hypothesis. Note that the
CiC haypothesis presupposes full accessibility of all the relevant contextual information. Processing along the lines of
the CiC hypothesis can therefore be expected to require more
working memory capacity than the strictly local interpretation
of the EC hypothesis. Existing research on sentential context effects has provided evidence that low-span readers make
even less use of the immediate sentential context than highspan readers (van Petten, Weckerly, McIsaac, & Kutas, 1997).

Thus, smooth aspectual enrichment in line with the CiC hypothesis may be especially expected for high-span readers,
whereas low-span readers should be more likely to exhibit coercion costs. Inter-individual differences in working memory
capacity have not been taken into account in coercion studies
so far.
The present experiment studied contextual facilitation effects in aspectual coercion with four major modifications relative to prior research. First of all, the present study employed
eyetracking during reading – an online method that provides
us with a richer picture about the time course of interpretation
than self-paced reading. Secondly, a larger set of experimental items was tested, and these materials were set up in such
a way that the critical region was kept identical across conditions. Thirdly, the materials were more carefully pretested
concerning their offline interpretation than the ones used in
Bott (2010, Exp. 3). Finally, contextual facilitation effects
were related to participants’ verbal working memory capacity
as measured by the reading-span task (Daneman & Carpenter,
1980).
The experimental design of the present study included a
coercion and a control condition as well as a mismatch condition. Two kinds of contexts were constructed. Both, telic
contexts such as (3), and atelic contexts such as (6) introduced
a repetitive event (contexts translated from German). The
only difference is that the telic context (3) establishes a series of telic, bounded events (e.g., jog four kilometers) while
the atelic context (6) introduces a series of atelic, unbounded
activities instead. Both types of contexts put emphasis on the
actual duration of the respective events at reference time now.
(6)

Half a year ago, Peter started to jog every day. When
he began, he had to stop after a short time but now he
can run for quite a long time.

Target sentences were of two types manipulating the adverbial: telic sentences (7-a) including German in-adverbials,
and atelic sentences (7-b) with German for-adverbials.
(7)

a.

b.

c.

Als es ihm vorhin gelang, in nur dreißig
When he just managed in only thirty
Minuten zu joggen,. . .
minutes to jog. . .
‘When he managed to jog in only 30 min. . . . ’
Als es ihm vorhin gelang, ganze dreißig
When he just managed for thirty
Minuten zu joggen,. . .
minutes to jog. . .
‘When he managed to jog for 30 min. . . . ’
. . . war er sehr stolz auf sich.
. . . he was very proud of himself.

Discourse conditions were as follows. The coercion condition
was constructed by combining telic contexts (3) with telic targets (7-a). The control condition combined atelic contexts (6)
with atelic targets (7-b). For the aspectual mismatch condition atelic contexts (6) were paired with telic targets (7-a).

1655

(t1 (19) = −5.4, p < .01; t2 (23) = −9.52, p < .01). The latter
were judged even slightly better than the well-formed fillers
(atelic targets: 5.90; well-formed fillers: 5.70) suggesting that
the target sentences in the control condition are in fact fully
acceptable. The telic target sentences received mean ratings
of 4.24 and were thus well above the nonsensical fillers with
a mean rating of 2.34. Even though the telic target sentences
were perceived as not fully acceptable when presented out of
the blue, participants seemed to be aware of the fact that these
sentences are in fact well-formed if embedded in an appropriate discourse context.

Pretest 2
Figure 1: Mean judgments in Pretest 1 (left-hand side) and
Pretest 2 (right-hand side). Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals (by-participants analysis).

Method 30 new participants (mean age: 26.2 years; 16 female), all native speakers of German, took part in the pretest
for a payment of e5. Participants rated the acceptability of
the discourses in the coercion, the control, and the mismatch
condition on a scale from 1–7. In addition to the 24 experimental items 66 filler discourses were included (33 acceptable and 33 incoherent discourses). 20 of the incoherent filler
discourses were globally incoherent, e.g. Lisa is very bad in
maths. [. . . ] . So, she wasn’t surprised when she got an A.,
and 13 were locally incoherent, e.g. . . . the jockey sat in his
horse . . . . The items plus the fillers were distributed to three
lists in a Latin square design. Ten participants were randomly
assigned to each list. The procedure was the same as in the
previous pretest

Pretests
Two pretests were conducted. The first pretest was a sentence
acceptability judgment experiment testing the telic (7-a) and
the atelic (7-b) target sentences out of context. The second
pretest was a discourse acceptability rating experiment that
queried the felicity of the discourses in the coercion, the control, and the mismatch condition, respectively. The predictions are straightforward. Due to their need of coercion, telic
target sentences should be less acceptable than atelic target
sentences when encountered out of context. Supportive context should increase the acceptability of the coercion condition, though. After a telic context, a telic target should become as acceptable as the control condition. The mismatch
condition should be judged as infelicitous.

Pretest 1
Method 20 native German speakers (mean age: 26.9 years;
17 female) participated in the pretest for a payment of e5.
Participants rated the acceptability of the telic and atelic target sentences on a scale from 1–7 from completely unacceptable to fully acceptable.
Target sentences were taken from the set of 24 items created for the eyetracking study. All were constructed following
the scheme exemplified in (7). Pronouns were replaced by the
proper names from the contexts (3)/(6). Two lists were constructed using a Latin square design and 100 filler sentences
were added to each list. 60 of the fillers were infelicitous
(‘bad fillers’) while the others were fully acceptable (‘good
fillers’). Ten participants were randomly assigned to each list.
Paricipants were tested individually in a quiet computer
pool. Sentence materials were presented in randomized order in a single block which was preceded by a short practice
of five trials. An experimental session took less than 30 minutes.
Results and discussion The mean judgments are shown in
Figure 1. As predicted, acceptability of telic target sentences
was judged significantly worse than atelic target sentences

Results and discussion The mean judgments are also
shown in Figure 1. As predicted, telic targets preceded by
a telic context made the coercion condition fully acceptable.
Paired t-tests revealed that the coercion condition did not differ reliably from the control condition (t2 (29) = −1.65, p =
.11; t1 (23) = −.76, p = .46). Both, coercion (mean rating:
5.10) and control (mean rating: 5.27) received ratings in the
range of the good fillers (mean rating: 5.82). As expected,
the mismatch condition was judged similar to the incoherent
fillers. Repeated measures ANOVAs revealed that mismatch
was judged significantly worse than coercion and control
(F1 (2, 58) = 81.77, p < .01; F2 (2, 46) = 122, 56, p < .01).1
Taken together, the results of the pretests show that the materials tested in the eyetracking study fully meet the assumptions stated in the introduction. The coercion targets are not
fully interpretable on their own but require contextual support. Embedded in a telic context, however, the telic targets
become fully acceptable. After atelic contexts, however, telic
target sentences result in aspectually incoherent discourses.

Eyetracking Experiment
The EC and the CiC hypotheses make fundamentally different predictions regarding the online processing of the three
discourse conditions.
1 In all analyses in the present paper including the three-level fac-

tor DISCOURSE CONDITION the degrees of freedom were corrected
by applying the Greenhouse-Geisser correction. In the text the uncorrected degrees of freedom are reported.

1656

According to the EC hypothesis, the coercion operation
is triggered by a temporary semantic mismatch during the
intial interpretation of atelic activity verbs modified by inadverbials. Therefore, during first-pass reading the coercion
condition should pattern with the mismatch condition and
lead to processing difficulty relative to the control condition.
By contrast, the CiC hypothesis predicts smooth interpretation of the coercion condition. Coercion should therefore
pattern with the control condition, and it should only be the
mismatch condition that causes processing difficulty.
In order to assess effects of inter-individual differences in
working memory capacity, between group analyses were conducted for high- versus medium- vs. low-span readers.

screen. Judgments had to be provided by pressing the left or
the right button of a gamepad.
The experiment started with five discourses for practice,
followed by the individually randomized presentation of the
experimental trials in three blocks. A typical experimental
session lasted less than 45 minutes. Immediately after the
eyetracking experiment each participant was subjected to an
experimenter-administered version of the reading span task
(Friedman & Miyake, 2004). Reading span was scored as
follows. The highest stage for which at least two out of a total
of three sequences could be correctly recalled determined a
participant’s basic reading span. If she was able to correctly
recall one sequence from an even higher stage, a value of 0.5
was added to this basic value.

Methods
Participants 48 new participants (mean age: 24.1 y., range
20 – 32 y.; 40 female) all native speakers of German with
normal or corrected-to-normal vision took part in the experiment for a payment of e8. Based on their performance in
Daneman and Carpenter’s (1980) reading span task they were
divided into three groups. The first group consisted of 10 participants with a reading span of 3.0, the median value in the
sample. This group was included as MEDIUM SPAN readers
in ANOVA analyses including the between factor READING
SPAN . The group of LOW SPAN readers consisted of 19 participants with a mean reading span of 2.4 (range 2.0 – 2.5).
The group of HIGH SPAN readers consisted of 19 participants
with a mean reading span of 3.7 (range 3.5 – 4.5).
Materials The sentence materials were identical to those
used in the pretest and the items were always presented on
three lines. The first line contained the first context sentence,
the second line the second context sentence, and the third line
the target sentence. The target sentences were split up in ten
regions of interest (ROIs):
(8)

Als es ihm| heute| gelang,|adv1 in nur|adv2 dreißig|adv3
Minuten|verb zu joggen,|coda1 war er|coda2 sehr
stolz|coda3 auf sich.|

The critical region was the verb ROI. Note that any aspectual
mismatch only becomes evident at this ROI. For instance, als
es ihm heute gelang, in nur dreißig Minuten vier Kilometer
weit zu joggen, . . . (when he managed today to jog four kilometers in only thirty minutes . . . ) would be fully acceptable
even after an atelic context.
Apparatus and procedure Eye movements of the dominant eye were recorded with an SR Research Ltd. Eyelink
1000 eyetracker. The trial began with the presentation of a
screen which served as calibration check and for drift correction with a yellow dot in the position where the centre of the
first word would appear. If no fixation on the dot was registered within five seconds, recalibration was enforced. Otherwise, texts were presented. After reading, participants had to
move their eyes to a yellow dot in the right bottom corner of
the screen which triggered the presentation of the judgment

Eyetracking analysis Prior to all analyses the eyetracking
data were preprocessed. Two trials with major track loss were
exluded, and all fixations immediately preceding or following
a blink were eliminated. All fixations shorter than 80 ms and
further than 0.5 degrees from the last or next fixation as well
as fixations longer than 800 ms were eliminated. Preprocessing affected 2.7% of all fixations.
The analyzed measures of first-pass reading included first
fixation durations, first-pass times, and first-pass regression
ratios, i.e. the proportions of regressions made during firstpass reading.Measures related to rereading included secondpass time and the proportions of regressions in.

Results
The coercion condition was accepted 83.3% of all trials, control was accepted 86.9%, but mismatch was rejected 66.5%.
Thus, discourses in the coercion and in the control condition
were generally accepted while the aspectual mismatch condition was generally rejected. The analysis of judment RTs,
corrected for outliers by eliminating all RTs more than 2.5
standard deviations above a participant’s mean RT, revealed
no significant differences between the three discourse conditions (F1/2 < 1).
Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics for the eyetracking measures related to first-pass parsing. The findings for
the measures related to rereading are shown in Table 2.
First-pass reading Immediately when readers encountered
the verb region, first fixation durations were longer in the
mismatch condition than in the control condition (t1 (47) =
2.29, p < .05; t2 (23) = 2.12, p < .05). By contrast, verbs in
the coercion condition were read equally fast as verbs in the
control condition (|t1/2 | < 1). Before or after the critical verb
ROI there were no significant differences in first fixation durations for any of the ROIs in the target sentences.
The analyses of first-pass times further corroborated this
finding. At the verb ROI a clear mismatch effect was found
(t1 (47) = 3.85, p < .01; t2 (23) = 3.72, p < .05), but coercion
did not differ from control (|t1/2 | < 1). The mismatch effect
was again limited to the verb ROI, and discourse conditions
did not differ reliably from each other at any target ROI.

1657

Table 1: Mean first fixation durations (FFD), mean first-pass
times (FPT), and mean first-pass regression ratios (FPRR) of
the target sentences in the eyetracking experiment. Note: ROI
a3 corresponds to the final adverbial region, verb to the critical verb region, and c1–c3 to the three sentence final ROIs.
FFD
(in ms)
FPT
(in ms)
FPRR
(in %)

contr.
coerc.
mism.
contr.
coerc.
mism.
contr.
coerc.
mism.

a3
205
210
213
217
219
219
14.6
15.7
16.2

verb
251
247
266
311
317
345
18.5
16.9
27.1

c1
238
247
240
290
317
304
6.4
9.3
12.2

c2
252
247
243
333
312
307
25.4
26.3
21.9

Table 2: Mean second-pass times (SPT), and mean proportions of regressions in (RI) of the relevant ROIs of the target
sentences.

SPT
(in ms)

c3
256
264
257
403
424
417
45.8
48.3
51.2

RI
(in %)

Mismatch not only slowed down reading speed during firstpass reading, it also gave rise to more regressions from the
verb ROI. The analysis of first-pass regression ratios showed
that readers launched more regressions from mismatching
verbs than from verbs in the control condition (t1 (47) =
2.23, p < .05; t2 (23) = 3.08, p < .01). Again, coercion did
not differ from control (|t1/2 | < 1).
Taken together, the findings from the three measures reflecting the first-pass reading of the critical verb ROI show
that the initial interpretation of the coercion targets was as
smooth as that of the control targets. Without a preceding
telic context in the mismatch condition, however, first-pass
reading was severely disrupted.
Rereading The analyses of the proportions of regressions
in revealed that readers regressed back to the three adverbial
ROI s in the mismatch condition. For all three ROI s reliable
mismatch effects were observed (first ROI: t1 (47) = 2.52, p <
.05; t2 (23) = 2.82, p < .05; second ROI: t1 (47) = 2.70, p <
.05; t2 (23) = 2.84, p < .01; third ROI: t1 (47) = 2.02, p < .05;
t2 (23) = 2.16, p < .05). Also, on the verb ROI a mismatch
effect was found that was marginally significant by subjects
and significant by items (t1 (47) = 1.87, p = .07; t2 (23) =
2.18, p < .05). The coercion analyses showed that the adverbial ROIs did not receive more regressions in the coercion
condition than in the control condition (all |t1/2 | < 1). However, it turned out that readers regressed more often back into
the verb ROI than they did in the control condition. This was
reflected by a (by-items marginally) significant coercion effect (t1 (47) = 2.46, p < .05; t2 (23) = 1.97, p = .06).
A similar pattern of effects was observed in the secondpass times too. The mismatch condition led to longer secondpass times than the control condition persisting from the adverbial ROIs (first ROI: t1 (47) = 2.83, p < .01; t2 (23) =
2.23, p < .05; second ROI: t1 (47) = 2.40, p < .05; t2 (23) =
2.64, p < .05; third ROI: t1 (47) = 1.70, p = .10; t2 (23) =
1.80, p = .08) to the verb ROI (t1 (47) = 4.71, p < .01;

contr.
coerc.
mism.
contr.
coerc.
mism.

a1
81
85
129
35.7
37.9
47.5

a2
106
104
160
22.8
26.3
33.5

a3
56
59
89
19.7
22.0
30.7

verb
81
143
167
4.6
9.2
8.1

c1
88
115
87
–
–
–

c2
115
132
108
–
–
–

t2 (23) = 3.90, p < .01). Also, a coercion effect was present,
and, consistent with what was observed for the regressions in,
this effect was limited to the verb ROI (t1 (47) = 3.25, p < .01;
t2 (23) = 2.46, p < .05).
Taken together, the analyses of late eyetracking measures –
besides substantial mismatch effects – show that participants
were more likely to reread the verbs in the coercion condition
than in the control condition.
Analyses contingent on reading span In order to investigate whether early and late effects were modulated by interindividual differences in working memory capacity ANOVAs
with the within-factor DISCOURSE CONDITION and the between factor READING SPAN (three levels: HIGH SPAN vs.
MEDIUM SPAN vs. LOW SPAN ) were computed analyzing the
first and second-pass times of the verb ROI. Table 3 presents
the mean reading times of the verb ROI split up by groups.
The analysis of first-pass times only revealed a significant main effect of DISCOURSE CONDITION (F1 (2, 90) =
4.61, p < .05), i.e. the above reported mismatch effect.
Neither the main effect of READING SPAN nor its interaction with DISCOURSE CONDITION reached significance (both
F1 < .05). Thus, the three reading span groups did not differ
with respect to their first-pass reading times of the verb.
The analysis of second-pass times also revealed no differences between the three groups. The main effect of DIS COURSE CONDITION was reliable (F1 (2, 90) = 11.88, p <
.01), but neither the main effect of READING SPAN nor the
interaction reached significance (both F1 < 1.3).
To summarize, the three reading span groups had strikingly
similar patterns of results. The three groups showed equally
sized early effects of aspectual mismatch and late coercion
effects that only started during rereading the sentence.

Discussion
The present study investigated whether coercion sentences
embedded in supportive discourse context lead to measurable
processing costs during their initial interpretation. According to the EC hypothesis, the compositional system operates
strictly bottom-up, and the coercion targets should therefore
lead to temporary aspectual mismatch during the initial inter-

1658

Table 3: Mean first- (FPT) and second-pass times (SPT) of
the verb ROI split up by reading span groups.
low span

medium span

high span

contr.
coerc.
mism.
contr.
coerc.
mism.
contr.
coerc.
mism.

FPT (ms)
325
324
353
313
316
344
296
309
338

SPT (ms)
73
106
126
72
158
230
95
171
174

guistic evaluation, would be consistent with the CiC hypothesis. The above reported analyses taking into account participants’ working memory capacity suggest that the second
explanation is more likely than the first.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the DFG in the project Composition in Context of the Priority Program SPP 1727 XPrag.de.
The author would like to thank Salome Mauthe and Maximilian Müller for conducting the experiments. The author would
also like to thank four anonymous CogSci 2017 reviewers for
their valuable comments on a first draft of this paper. The
usual disclaimer applies.

References
pretation and subsequent context-driven repair. During firstpass reading target sentences in the coercion and the mismatch condition should exhibit qualitatively similar processing effects. The CiC hypothesis, by contrast, predicts smooth
interpretation of the coercion targets if embedded in a supportive context because the culminating event from the context should be immediately available.
The findings of the present eyetracking experiment unambiguously provide evidence against the EC hypothesis. While
aspectual mismatch led to substantial processing difficulty
during first-pass reading, none of the three analyzed early
eyetracking measures indicated any difficulty in the coercion
condition. The processing of aspectual coercion involved a
qualitatively different time course than aspectual mismatch.
Do the findings support the CiC hypothesis, then? Above,
it was stated that supportive context should completely eliminate all coercion costs. The coercion effects observed during rereading of the coercion targets may therefore be taken
as prima facie evidence against the CiC hypothesis. However, the exposition of this hypothesis in the introduction was
grossly oversimplistic. On closer consideration, the hypothesis is fully consistent with overall higher processing demands
in the coercion than in the control condition as long as difficulty only emerges after a smooth first composition step. Two
potential sources of difficulty come to mind. Under the CiC
hypothesis comprehenders still have to be able to exactly recall the culmination introduced two sentences before. Note
that in order to make proper sense of the coercion target it is
important to know the exact length of the path. Obviously, to
jog a distance of three miles in half an hour is plausible but
thirty miles is not. Therefore, successful coercion crucially
depends on a precise representation of the context in all its
particulars. Another potential source of difficulty may be attributed to the metalinguistic evaluation demanded from the
participants: since the target sentences were exactly the same
in the coercion and the mismatch condition, the metalinguistic evaluation may have been more difficult in the coercion
than in the control condition.
Both explanations, the (un-)availability of the culminating
event in working memory as well as difficulty during metalin-

Asher, N. (1993). Reference to abstract objects in discourse.
Dordrecht: Springer.
Bott, O. (2010). The processing of events. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Cappelen, H., & Lepore, E. (2005). Insensitive semantics.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Daneman, M., & Carpenter, P. (1980). Individual differences
in working memory and reading. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 19, 450–466.
de Swart, H. (1998). Aspect shift and coercion. Natural
Language & Linguistic Theory, 16(2), 347–385.
Dölling, J. (2014). Aspectual coercion and eventuality structure. In K. Robering (Ed.), Events, arguments and aspects –
topics in the semantics of verbs (p. 189-226). Amsterdam:
John Benjamin.
Friedman, N. P., & Miyake, A. (2004). The reading span test
and its predictive power for reading comprehension ability.
Journal of Memory and Language, 51, 1–25.
Nieuwland, M. S., & van Berkum, J. J. (2006). When peanuts
fall in love: N400 evidence for the power of discourse.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18(7), 1098–1111.
Paczynski, M., Jackendoff, R., & Kuperberg, G. (2014).
When events change their nature. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 26(9), 1905–1917.
Pelletier, F. J. (1994). The principle of semantic compositionality. Topoi, 13(1), 11–24.
Piñango, M. M., & Deo, A. (2016). Reanalyzing the complement coercion effect through a generalized lexical semantics for aspectual verbs. Journal of Semantics, 33(2),
359–408.
Recanati, F. (2010). Truth-conditional pragmatics. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Traxler, M., McElree, B., Williams, R., & Pickering, M.
(2005). Context effects in coercion. Journal of Memory
and Language, 53, 1–25.
van Petten, C., Weckerly, J., McIsaac, H., & Kutas, M.
(1997). Working memory capacity dissociates lexical and
sentential context effects. Psychological Science, 8(3),
238–242.
Vendler, Z. (1957). Verbs and times. The Philosophical
Review, 66(2), 143–160.

1659

