Could both be right? Children’s and adults’ sensitivity to subjectivity in language
Ruthe Foushee (foushee@berkeley.edu)

Mahesh Srinivasan (srinivasan@berkeley.edu)

Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94704
Abstract

prior experiences, such that they may not always agree about
whether a specific apartment or day is “big” or is “cold.”
As we review below, the fact that speakers may have different things in mind when using words like “big” and “pretty”
may pose a challenge for successful communication. This is
especially true in light of evidence that children (and even
adults) have an overarching tendency toward naive realism;
i.e., to behave as though their own perception reflects reality
and their judgments are objective (Ross & Ward, 1996).

While some word meanings, like “spotted,” depend on intersubjectively accessible properties of the world, others like
“pretty” invoke speakers’ subjective beliefs. We explored children and adults’ sensitivity to the subjectivity of a range of
adjectives, including words like “spotted” and “pretty,” but
also words like “tall,” which are evaluated relative to a standard. Participants saw two speakers who had independently
experienced sets of exemplars of a novel object kind disagree
about whether a critical exemplar was, e.g., “tall,” “pretty,” and
“spotted.” In Experiments 1 and 3, speakers had seen distinct
sets of exemplars, while in Experiments 2 and 4, the sets were
identical. Adults always judged disagreements over words like
“pretty” as faultless—indicating that both speakers “could be
right”—and permitted less faultless disagreement for ones like
“tall” when the speakers had experienced identical sets of exemplars. Strikingly, children did not respond in an adult-like
manner until age 8 or 9, but their explanations for speakers’
conflicting assertions suggested some sensitivity to the kinds
of knowledge relevant for evaluating different adjectives.

Background
Previous work demonstrates that children have sophisticated
knowledge of relative adjectives, but leaves open whether
they incorporate information about their interlocutors into
their interpretations. Four-year-olds understand that the
meanings of words like “big” and “tall” depend on distributions of referents within a given class. For example, they appropriately identify “tall pimwits” as ones at the higher end of
the distribution of only pimwit heights, even if that means ignoring other, taller objects (Barner & Snedeker, 2008). Fiveyear-olds also understand that the frame of reference for what
counts as “high” or “low” varies with the class of object in
question (e.g., “high” for a bird is much higher than “high”
for a bunny: Smith, Cooney, & McCord, 1986).
One reason to think that children may have difficulty interpreting the meanings of words that depend on speakers’
beliefs is that they appear to begin life heavily influenced by
naive realism, and behave as if their own construal of a stimulus will be shared by others. In one study, for example, children were shown an image that was then covered so only an
unidentifiable quadrant of it was left visible. Four-year-olds
predicted that others would still be able to identify the largely
occluded image, seemingly discounting their previous subjective access to it in full (Taylor, Cartwright, & Bowden, 1991).
In general, the literature suggests that young children might
be able to understand why people say the things they say,
but still have difficulty thinking that others can have different meanings for words than they do, perhaps due to their
fundamental assumptions about language itself. For example,
although toddlers recognize that others might want a different
snack from one that they themselves find delicious (Repacholi
& Gopnik, 1997), they judge statements of unconventional
snack opinions like “ice cream is yucky” as unacceptable well
into the preschool years (Holubar, 2015). Thus, preschoolaged children understand that others may have different preferences, but struggle with understanding that an unqualified
statement about a preference that they think is wrong can still
be “right.” Children’s eventual success on false belief tasks
(e.g., Wellman & Liu, 2004) demonstrates their understanding that an individual’s experience leads to their beliefs. But

Keywords: metalinguistic development; theory of mind

Introduction
What goes into our understanding of what other people
say? While comprehension of some words, like “spotted”
or “striped,” does not appear to rely on our knowledge of others’ beliefs and experiences, comprehension of other words,
like “pretty” or “tasty,” does. Thus, when someone says that
they saw a “spotted bird,” we can understand what they mean
by leveraging our understanding of what “spotted” and “bird”
refer to. We understand that the bird must have some spots on
it to be called “spotted,” and that were we also to see the bird,
we would agree with the speaker’s description. The meaning
of “spotted” is in this sense intersubjective, based on properties in the external world all speakers can access. In contrast,
when someone says that they saw a “pretty bird,” it is not immediately apparent what property of the bird she is describing, nor that we would agree that the same bird is “pretty.”
This is because the meanings of words like “pretty” are not
intersubjective, but instead depend on the speaker’s belief.
The present studies are motivated by the idea that many
words—far beyond clearly subjective predicates of personal
taste like “pretty,” “tasty,” and “funny”—are interpreted relative to their speakers. In particular, we consider the cases
of relative adjectives like “big” and “cold,” which have to be
interpreted relative to the nouns they modify: a “big bird” is
smaller than a “big lion.” We test whether these predicates
are also interpreted relative to the prior experiences and beliefs of speakers. Do we adjust the imagined size of a “big
apartment” or temperature of a “cold day” depending on the
sample of apartments and weather we believe our interlocutor
has experienced? Speakers may have different thresholds for
calling an apartment “big” or a day “cold” depending on their

379

it may be more challenging for children to understand that experience might result in speakers of the same language having
different meanings for the same word (e.g., such that speakers have different temperatures in mind when they talk about a
“cold day”). Consistent with this, studies on children’s beliefs
about conventionality in language have argued that children
expect object labels to be shared by other speakers of their
language, even given evidence to the contrary (e.g., when
other speakers were absent when a novel object’s label was
taught: Diesendruck, 2005).
While adults “succeed” on some of these tasks that stump
children, they are also not immune to the influence of naive
realism, suggesting some form of continuity over development. For example, adults often overestimate the prevalence
of their own attitudes in the general population, and are reluctant to attribute those attitudes to their own subjective experience, rather than to objective features of the world (see Ross
& Ward, 1996 for a review). When it comes to language,
adults have the metalinguistic knowledge to be able to explicitly judge words and phrases like “pretty shirt” as subjective when they are presented in the absence of a referent that
they could evaluate (Scontras, Degen, & Goodman, 2016).
However, to our knowledge there have been no empirical investigations of whether adults permit different word meanings for speakers when the adults themselves are confident of
whether the word applies: e.g., when they are confident that
a particular shirt is “pretty” or “big.” Additionally, no studies have explored whether adults’ tolerance of disagreement
about different word uses is influenced by their knowledge of
a speaker’s relevant prior experience.

2009), and refer to adjectives like “pretty” as subjective GAs.
To assess individuals’ appreciation of the subjectivity of
these different kinds of adjectives, we obtain judgments of
faultless disagreement: disagreements where neither person is wrong (Barker, 2013). Such judgments are closely
correlated with direct measures of statements’ subjectivity
(Scontras et al., 2016), and offer a less metalinguistically demanding measure to use with children. In addition, we elicit
qualitative explanations from participants to understand the
sources of knowledge that they are drawing on when evaluating speakers’ utterances. Critically, given that participants
maintain visual access to the complete distribution of exemplars observed by both speakers, they are able to form their
own evaluation of whether the adjective-noun phrase applies
to the target exemplar that is the subject of the speakers’ disagreement. Since they share this evaluation with only one of
the two disagreeing speakers (e.g., one will call the pimwit
“pretty” and one “not pretty”), we can interpret judgments of
faultless disagreement as overcoming naive realism.

Experiment 1
Participants Twenty-five UC Berkeley undergraduates
participated in Experiment 1 (18 women, 19.65–27.37, M =
21.24 years, SD = 1.68 years). All were native speakers of
English and received course credit for their participation.

Stimuli and Methods

The Present Studies
Here, we explore adults’ and children’s sensitivity to linguistic subjectivity across four experiments. In particular, we ask
whether, in addition to considering the real-world distribution
of a specific noun’s referents along a given dimension, listeners also interpret adjectives like “tall” relative to what they
know of the distribution that the speaker has experienced. To
test these ideas, we manipulate whether two speakers experience different distributions of exemplars of a novel object
kind (Exps. 1 and 3), or identical distributions of exemplars
(Exps. 2 and 4), and assess whether this affects adults’ (Exps.
1 and 2) and children’s (Exps. 3 and 4) judgments of whether
the two speakers can disagree about how to describe a novel
target exemplar that they can both see.
Across our studies, the disagreeing assertions that participants judge involve adjective-noun phrases that describe the
same target object: e.g., “That’s [not] a tall pimwit.” We
introduce novel nouns, but use familiar gradable adjectives
(GAs) that vary in how intersubjective versus subjective they
are. We categorize these adjectives into three classes. Following Syrett, Kennedy, and Lidz (2009), we call words like
“spotted” absolute GAs. These adjectives require their arguments to possess some minimal degree of a property, and their
meaning is largely context-independent. We refer to contextdependent adjectives like “tall” as relative GAs (Syrett et al.,

Figure 1: Schematic of experimental setup for Exps. 1–4.
Experimental Setup The stimuli were sets of eleven objects belonging to distinct novel kinds. Critical kinds were
pimwits, thin purple cylinders ranging from 0.75 to 6.25
inches in height, and from densely to sparsely spotted, and
daxes, blue and yellow spheres ranging from 0.5 to 3 inches
in diameter, and from heavily to lightly striped. Each set was
divided into two arrays composed of the five smallest and five
largest exemplars, with the exemplar in the middle of the size
distribution used as the critical target exemplar (Figure 1).
Participants sat across a table from two wooden house-like
structures separated by a narrow stage. The experimenter
sat behind the display and animated pairs of puppets representing familiar characters from Sesame Street, who she

380

explained could not see or hear anything that happened
beyond their “classrooms” while they were inside them.

of exemplars the speakers had experienced (S PEAKER E X PERIENCE—e.g., “He saw tall pimwits and she saw short
ones”), or the speaker’s subjective evaluation of the object
(S PEAKER O PINION—e.g., “He likes purple and she doesn’t
like spots.”). Explanations could receive multiple codes.

The experiment consisted of two blocks of two training trials each, followed by two blocks of three critical trials each
and a post-test. In each block, two speakers were independently introduced to distinct arrays of a novel kind in their
classrooms by the experimenter, before emerging to view and
disagree about a new exemplar (the target) placed by the experimenter in the middle of the stage.

Post-Test We directly assessed participants’ own evaluation of the target exemplars in a post-test. Participants saw
the entire distribution of exemplars, and answered whether
the target exemplars were “spotted,” “tall,” “pretty,” etc.

Results

Training Trials The initial training trials familiarized participants with the paradigm, and provided practice with judging disagreements as faultless and not. In them, characters
saw distinct sets of exemplars labeled with the same noun,
and then ‘disagreed’ over a target exemplar that shared properties with both sets. In a faultless training trial, Dawn might
see five feps that were matte white circles, while Big Bird saw
five feps that were sparkly white squares. Dawn would exclaim that the target fep, a sparkly white circle, was “sparkly,”
while Big Bird would assert that it was “round” (a faultless
disagreement). The non-faultless complement would consist of one speaker asserting the target exemplar was “white,”
while the other said it was “black.” Participants received feedback for their answers on only the first block of training trials,
and we recorded their judgments prior to feedback.

Faultless Disagreement Disagreements over relative and
subjective GAs were almost always judged as faultless (spotted: 24%, striped: 20%, tall: 100%, big: 100%, pretty: 100%,
boring: 92%; see Figure 2). There were no significant differences between the proportions of faultless disagreement for
the two adjectives in each class, so we collapse them here.

Critical Trials In critical trials, the characters were introduced to distinct sets of exemplars belonging to the same
novel kind (pimwits or daxes). For example, Zoe might
see five relatively short and densely spotted pimwits, while
Cookie Monster saw five relatively tall and lightly spotted
ones. Upon encountering the intermediate target pimwit, Zoe
would assert that it was tall, which Cookie Monster would
deny. Following the disagreement, participants answered
whether each speaker was “wrong” or “could be right,” and
explained why. Responses where participants answered
“could be right” for both speakers were coded as indicating
faultless disagreement. For each novel kind, speakers
disagreed over an absolute, relative, and subjective GA.

Figure 2: Adult rates of faultless disagreement judgment during
critical trials in Exps. 1–2 by gradable adjective type (A BSOLUTE:
“spotted,” “striped;” R ELATIVE: “tall,” “big;” S UBJECTIVE:
“pretty,” “boring”). Participants in Exp. 1 judged speakers exposed
to distinct distributions of exemplars, while participants in Exp. 2
judged speakers who had seen identical ones. Error bars for this and
all plots indicate 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals (k = 1000).

Relation to Post-test The relation between participants’
post-test evaluations and faultless disagreement judgments
qualitatively distinguished the three classes of adjectives. For
absolute GAs, participants uniformly answered “yes” when
asked whether the target pimwit or dax was “spotted” or
“striped,” and typically answered that only the speaker who
asserted the same could be right. For relative GAs, in contrast, while participants again all said that the target exemplar
was “tall” or “big,” they also all responded that both speakers
could be right. Despite variability in participants’ own evaluations of the critical items’ beauty (91% said it was “pretty”)
or tedium (17% said it was “boring”), they almost always
judged disagreements over subjective GAs as faultless.

The order of the blocks, which speaker asserted the positive
statement, and the block-internal order of the relative versus
subjective disagreements were counterbalanced across participants. Disagreements over absolute GAs were always presented last to avoid invalidating one of the speakers. To prevent speakers from being degraded across blocks for wrong
assertions, new speakers were introduced each block of trials.
Qualitative Explanations In each critical trial, we collected qualitative explanations of participants’ evaluations of
speakers’ assertions. From explanations collected during piloting, we developed three primary codes to describe participants’ responses. Trained coders identified whether each explanation made reference to apparently intersubjective properties of the target exemplar (O BJECT P ROPERTY—e.g., “It
is beautiful;” “There are dots on it”), the distinct arrays

Qualitative Explanations Participants for the most part
cited distinct sources of knowledge to explain their judgments
of utterances from different adjective classes (Figure 3). They
referred to speakers’ opinions (S PEAKER O PINION) exclusively when explaining their evaluations of utterances using

381

subjective GAs (and did so on 80% of all subjective trials).
We fit separate logit models to the data for the two remaining codes (O BJECT P ROPERTY and S PEAKER E XPERIENCE)
that were used in explanations regarding more than one adjective class, using GA type as our sole predictor. Participants were more likely to refer to object properties to explain absolute GA utterances (β = 1.266, p < 0.001), and less
likely to cite them when explaining subjective GA judgments
(β = −3.462, p < 0.001). Participants cited speakers’ unique
experiences most in explaining judgments of relative GA utterances, and were unlikely to do so to explain judgments of
absolute GAs (β = −1.153, p < 0.001).

ticipants were highly likely to permit faultless disagreement
for subjective (β = 7.377, p < 0.001) and relative (β = 3.061,
p < 0.001) GAs. They were unlikely to permit faultless disagreement over absolute ones (β = −2.501, p < 0.001).
Relation to Post-test As in Experiment 1, we see differences among the adjective classes in the relation between participants’ own assertion of each GA and their permission of
faultless disagreement over it. In the post-test, all participants judged the target pimwit with spots “spotted,” “tall,”
and “pretty.” 94% answered “yes” when asked if the plain target pimwit was “pretty.” For the dax with stripes, 97% judged
it “striped.” 64% said it was “big,” and only 9% said it was
“boring,” while 55% said that the plain dax was. Despite substantial variation in their own evaluations of the critical items,
participants almost always permitted faultless disagreement
for the subjective GAs. For the absolute GAs, which the vast
majority of participants accepted as true of the critical items,
participants permitted very little faultless disagreement, but
judged disagreements over the relative GAs as faultless between half and three-quarters of the time (Figure 2).
Even when listeners do not have an explanation for speakers’ differing standards for relative GAs, they may permit
faultless disagreement due to the standard’s uncertainty. Participants permitted more faultless disagreement over “big”
(72% of participants), which a lower proportion (64%) agreed
was true of the critical dax, and less over “tall” (56%) which
all participants agreed was true of the pimwit.
Qualitative Explanations Fitting logit models to the data
for each explanation code and GA type, participants again
were likely to refer to object properties in explaining judgments over absolute GAs (β = 1.541, p < 0.001), but not relative (β = −4.616, p < 0.001) or subjective (β = −4.616,
p < 0.001) ones. Participants were most likely to refer to
speakers’ experiences—even though they were identical—in
their explanations for relative (β = 3.960, p < 0.001) and subjective (β = 2.060, p < 0.01) GAs, and least likely for absolute ones (β = −3.466, p < 0.001). Finally, participants
were unlikely to refer to speakers’ opinions in explaining disagreements over absolute GAs (β = −2.501, p < 0.001), but
were likely to do so in explaining disagreements over relative
GAs (β = 1.096, p < 0.05), and highly likely for subjective
(β = 3.521, p < 0.001) ones as well (Figure 3).

Figure 3: Adult reference to properties of the target exemplar
(O BJECT P ROPERTY), speakers’ distinct experiences of the object
kind (S PEAKER E XPERIENCE), and speakers’ subjective opinions
(S PEAKER O PINION), in explaining their evaluations of assertions.
Panels reflect proportions of each code for explanations regarding a
given GA type (in columns) in a given experiment (in rows).

Experiment 2
Having demonstrated that adults readily judge disagreements
over relative and subjective GAs as faultless when speakers
have experienced distinct distributions of exemplars, we explored the limits of listeners’ acceptance of subjective meanings by equating the disagreeing speakers’ experiences.
Participants 33 undergraduate adults (26 women, 18.10–
39.83 years, M = 20.91, SD = 3.52) participated.

Stimuli and Methods

Compared to Experiment 1, adults permitted less faultless disagreement for relative and absolute GAs when speakers had experienced identical distributions of exemplars (Figure 2). This was not the case for subjective GAs, which participants continued to permit faultless disagreement over.

The experimental paradigm was identical to that of Experiment 1 with two changes: 1) speakers saw identical distributions of exemplars in their respective classrooms, and 2) we
introduced an additional, plain (i.e., not spotted or striped)
target exemplar for each novel kind about which the speakers
only disagreed using our subjective GAs.1

Experiment 3

Results
Faultless Disagreement We fit a logit model to the faultless
disagreement judgment data with GA type as a predictor. Par-

Experiment 3 followed up on the previous experiments with
adults by exploring the developmental trajectory of linguistic
subjectivity. We tested a large age range to span a broad swath
of theory-of-mind and metalinguistic development.

1 We included plain exemplars of the critical object kinds after
most children during piloting for Exp. 3 cited the pimwit’s spots to
explain why the speaker who had denied it was pretty was wrong.

382

Participants Seventy-one children across three age groups
participated (24 4–5.5 years: 15 girls, M = 4.83, SD = 0.34;
23 5.5–7 years: 8 girls, M = 6.05, SD = 0.470; 24 8–9.5
years: 14 girls, M = 8.90, SD = 0.34). Four children were
excluded due to experimenter error or broken stimuli (n = 2).

the same qualitative relation between post-test response and
faultless disagreement judgments as with adults: greater posttest consensus meant less faultless disagreement.
Qualitative Explanations There appear to be some children across our age range who understood the source of
knowledge most relevant for each GA, though children referred to object properties most frequently for all types until our oldest age group (Figure 5). We fit logit models
to the data for each explanation code separately, with GA
type, age, and their interaction as predictors. Children were
highly likely to refer to properties of the objects in explaining absolute (β = 2.543, p < 0.05) and relative (β = 3.758,
p < 0.05) GA utterances, and less likely to do so for relative (β = −0.800, p < 0.01) and subjective ones with age
(β = −0.642, p < 0.01). They were least likely to refer
to speakers’ experiences in explaining absolute utterances
(β = −6.608, p < 0.01), though more likely to refer to them
at all with age (β = 0.586, p < 0.05). Finally, they became
more likely to refer to speakers’ opinions to explain subjective utterances as they got older (β = 0.872, p < 0.05).

Stimuli and Methods
Experiment 3 used the same method as Experiment 2, except
that speakers experienced distinct exemplar distributions as
they did in Experiment 1. We also only included one object
kind, pimwits, to keep it a more manageable length for children.

Results

Figure 4: Child rates of faultless disagreement judgment in Exp.

(a) Child explanations for “spotted” utterances.

3. T RAIN :A BS and T RAIN :FD trials were training intended to
elicit non-faultless and faultless judgments, respectively. Participants made two judgments over the subjective GA “pretty,” regarding a spotted as well as a plain pimwit, but there was no significant
difference between rates of faultless disagreement between the two.

Faultless Disagreement We fit a logit model to the critical
trial faultless disagreement data with GA and age. Children
were significantly less likely to permit faultless disagreement
for absolute GA “spotted” (β = −7.646, p < 0.001), and significantly more likely for relative and subjective GAs “tall”
and “pretty” (“tall”: β = 2.047, p < 0.001; “pretty” for spotted pimwit: β = 1.170, p < 0.05; “pretty” for plain pimwit:
β = 1.831, p < 0.001). In general, they permitted faultless
disagreement more with age (β = 0.764, p < 0.001).
We can think of children’s initial judgment rates on the
faultless disagreement training trials as baselines (Figure 4).
Even in our oldest age group, rates of faultless disagreement on the critical trials are significantly below those of
the faultless training trials (for relative trials: t = −2.164,
d f = 31.373, p < 0.05; for subjective trials: t = −3.820,
d f = 70.616, p < 0.001). While capable of judging disagreements as faultless, children were reluctant to do so when they
themselves agreed with only one of the speakers.

(b) Child explanations for “tall” utterances.

(c) Child explanations for “pretty” utterances.

Figure 5: Proportion of children’s explanations in Exp. 3 receiving
each qualitative code, by GA type and age group (in panels).

Experiment 4
Experiment 4 used the same method as above, with children
at the older end of the age range. As in Experiment 2, the
distributions that the two speakers saw were identical.

Relation to Post-test 96% of children judged the target
pimwit “spotted.” More children judged it “pretty” (85%)
than “tall” (49%). 55% answered that the plain pimwit was
“pretty.” For the absolute and relative GAs, we see roughly

Participants Participants were 24 children 8–9.5 years of
age (12 girls; M = 9.09, SD = 0.44).

383

Results

gests that children better grasp subjectivity when they are able
to reason about an individual’s goals (Holubar, 2015), a dimension that was absent from our experiments. To this end,
our ongoing studies explore the effect of goal-oriented contexts (e.g., choosing who you would want to be friends with
or learn from), which might be more sensitive to children’s
nascent understanding of the different implications of being
“wrong” about whether something is “spotted” as opposed
to “pretty.” Second, there may be more continuity between
adults and children than it appears. Adults’ permission of
faultless disagreement and explanation of different GA utterances may reflect social pressures and metalinguistic knowledge, rather than a core belief that their own evaluation is
subjective. When it comes to predicates of personal taste, although adults may readily say that the meaning of “good” is
subjective, such that both speakers can be right, we have all
had the experience of disagreeing about whether a movie or
song is “good.” Future studies will test for possible continuity between children and adults by examining the contexts in
which children may behave more like adults in their metalinguistic judgments of subjectivity, and the contexts in which
adults may react similarly to children in their implicit commitment to intersubjectivity.

Faultless Disagreement Children permitted faultless disagreement on 98% of faultless training trials, and on none
of non-faultless training trials. They did so most on subjective trials (67% of the time, 95% CI : 53 − 80), followed by
relative (38%, CI : 21 − 54) and absolute (1%, CI : 0 − 4).
Children were least likely to permit faultless disagreement over absolute GA “spotted” (β = −3.135, p < 0.01),
and highly likely for all other adjectives (“tall”: β = 2.625,
p < 0.05, “pretty” for spotted pimwit: β = 4.052, p < 0.001,
“pretty” for plain pimwit: β = 3.829, p < 0.001).
Relation to Post-Test While all children judged the target
pimwit “spotted” and “tall,” they resembled adults by still
permitting faultless disagreement over “tall” about half the
time (and almost never over “spotted”). 79% and 92% participants judged the spotted and plain pimwits “pretty,” respectively. Despite general consensus over their beauty, children
responded more like adults in nonetheless permitting faultless
disagreement over them at relatively high, equivalent rates.
Qualitative Explanations Children’s explanations for absolute GA “spotted” were highly likely to receive the O B JECT P ROPERTY code (β = 2.398, p < 0.01), while explanations of relative (β = −2.734, p < 0.01), and subjective
(β = −3.267, p < 0.001) utterances were unlikely to. Explanations of absolute GA utterances were also unlikely to be
coded as referring to S PEAKER E XPERIENCE (β = −3.135,
p < 0.01), which was highly likely for relative GA utterances
(β = 2.625, p < 0.05). Lastly, explanations of subjective
GAs were likely to be coded as citing S PEAKER O PINION
(β = 4.005, p < 0.001), in contrast to explanations about absolute GA utterances (β = −3.135, p < 0.01).

References
Barker, C. (2013). Negotiating taste. Inquiry: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Philosophy, 56(2–3), 240–257.
Barner, D., & Snedeker, J. (2008). Compositionality and
statistics in adjective acquisition: 4-year-olds interpret tall
and short based on the size distributions of novel noun referents. Child Development, 79, 594–608.
Diesendruck, G. (2005). The principles of conventionality
and contrast in word learning: An empirical examination.
Developmental Psychology, 41(3), 451–463.
Holubar, T. F. (2015). Children’s reasoning about unconventional opinions as evidence for naive realism. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Stanford University.
Repacholi, B. M., & Gopnik, A. (1997). Early reasoning
about desires: Evidence from 14- and 18-month-olds. Developmental Psychology, 33(1), 12–21.
Ross, L., & Ward, A. (1996). Naive realism in everyday
life: Implications for social conflict and misunderstanding.
In T. Brown, E. S. Reed, & E. Turiel (Eds.), Values and
knowledge (pp. 103–135). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Scontras, G., Degen, J., & Goodman, N. D. (2016). Subjectivity predicts adjective ordering preferences. Open Mind.
Smith, L. B., Cooney, N. J., & McCord, C. (1986). What
is “high”? The development of reference points for “high”
and “low”. Child Development, 57, 583–602.
Syrett, K., Kennedy, C., & Lidz, J. (2009). Meaning and
context in children’s understanding of gradable adjectives.
Journal of Semantics, 27(1), 1–35.
Taylor, M., Cartwright, B., & Bowden, T. (1991). Perspective
taking and theory of mind: Do children predict interpretive
diversity as a function of differences in observers’ knowledge? Child Development, 62(6), 1334–1351.

General Discussion
We tested theoretical claims about faultless disagreement
arising when there is uncertainty about how and whether to
assess something as, e.g., “pretty” or “tall” (Barker, 2013).
We asked in particular whether individuals consider the reference distribution of their interlocutors in interpreting relative
gradable adjectives. Adults reliably permitted faultless disagreement over relative and subjective GAs when two speakers had had distinct personal experiences. Rates of faultless
disagreement decreased for relative GAs when speakers had
experienced identical distributions, but did not disappear altogether, suggesting that adults were instead permitting faultless disagreement out of an understanding of the standard’s
uncertainty. Together, these findings provide evidence for the
consideration of speaker at the level of semantics, as well as
adults’ sensitivity to the potential for differing standards of
more than just explicitly context-dependent adjectives.
The development of sensitivity to linguistic subjectivity appears to be exceptionally prolonged: for the most part, children ‘sided’ with the speaker who voiced their own evaluations. Two factors might explain the apparent gap between
adults and children in our studies. First, previous work sug-

384

