Counterfactual Conditionals and Normative Rules
Meredith R Wilkinson (mwilkinson@dmu.ac.uk)
School of Allied Health Sciences, De Montfort University, The Gateway, Leicester, UK, LE1 9BH

Shira Elqayam (selqayam@dmu.ac.uk)
Division of Psychology, De Montfort University, The Gateway, Leicester, UK, LE1 9BH

Valerie Thompson (valerie.thompson@usask.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of Saskatchewan, 9 Campus Drive, Saskatoon, Canada, S7N 5A5

David E Over (david.over@durham.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Durham University Science Site, South Road, Durham, UK, DH1 3LE

demonstrates how reasoning can be applied to our everyday
judgement and decision making. If this is the case, then it is
persuasive that reasoning, judgement and decision making
may adopt similar psychological processes.
This paper expands upon our previous work within this
area (Elqayam et al., 2015), where we examined how we
make such deontic judgements from non-deontic content, a
process termed deontic introduction. The next section
presents an overview of our previous research on this area
with the use of conflicting norms. Our aim for this paper is
to see if we can extend Elqayam et al.'s (2015) findings with
counterfactual conditionals and this is why the section after
examines previous work on counterfactual thinking to set
the scene for our own research. Within this section we refer
to literature on the functional basis of counterfactual
thinking (e.g., Epstude & Roese, 2008) which provides a
rationale for us extending our work on deontic introduction
into this domain. The final section before the method
section provides an overview of the hypotheses for our
current experiment.

Abstract
Counterfactual thinking is the consideration of how things
could have turned out differently, usually taking the form of
counterfactual conditionals. This experiment examined the
psychological mechanisms that transform counterfactuals into
deontic guidance rules for the future. We examined how
counterfactual thinking translates into deontic guidance rules
by asking participants to infer these deontic conclusions from
the counterfactual premises. Participants were presented with
a vignette and a counterfactual conditional, and assigned to
either a control condition or a suppression condition in which
they were additionally presented with conflicting normative
rules. The presence of conflicting norms reduced the
likelihood of positive deontic conclusions being endorsed and
increased the likelihood of negative deontic conclusions being
endorsed. Future intentionality and regret intensity ratings
were reduced in the suppression condition. The same
conditions that affect normative inference also affect regret
and future planning, suggesting similar cognitive mechanisms
underlie these processes.
Keywords: conflicting norms; counterfactual thinking;
deontic introduction; new paradigm; regret

Previous Work on Deontic Introduction

Introduction
All of us have to make many deontic judgments about what
we ‘should’ and ‘ought’ to do. As Elqayam, Thompson,
Wilkinson, Evans and Over (2015) note, when we learn
about poverty in Somalia, we naturally infer that we ought
to donate to famine relief. Such inferences are made on a
daily basis, often about such everyday matters as the type of
coffee we ‘must’ or ‘should’ buy, or the types of food we
'must not' or 'should not' eat. People readily infer these
deontic statements from premises that contain no deontic
content. However, very little is known about the
psychological processes underlying the inferences.
Recently reasoning research has undergone a shift
towards the ‘new paradigm’ of reasoning (Elqayam & Over,
2013 and see other contributions in this special issue; Evans,
2012). The ‘new paradigm’ of reasoning rejects binary
logic, regards reasoning as strongly related to judgement
and decision making, focuses on probabilities and
emphasizes pragmatic factors.
Such an approach

Elqayam et al. (2015) examined the process of deontic
introduction which entails making deontic inferences from
content that contains no deontic material and which is
pragmatic or informal type of inference (e.g., Hahn &
Oaksford, 2007). Deontic introduction is an inference
which is socially contextualised, based on previous beliefs
and desires and is probabilistic and defeasible (e.g.,
Oaksford & Chater, 2007). By defeasible we mean an
inference can be withdrawn or suppressed in light of
additional information (Elio & Pelletier, 1997).
Elqayam et al. (2015) propose that deontic introduction
depends on a chain of inferences which are largely implicit.
We begin with a conditional that bears utility (utility
conditional) (e.g., If you pull the dog’s tail, then it will bite
you). When presented with this statement we make a goal
valence inference in that a valenced outcome (positive
negative or neutral) is implicitly inferred from the
description of the outcome (e.g., being bitten is bad). We

3528

then make a causal inference which infers a causal link
between the action and outcome (e.g., pulling the dog’s tail
makes the dog bite). Given we now have the information
that being bitten is bad and that pulling to dog’s tail makes
the dog bite psychological value passes via the causal link
from the inferred goal to the action (e.g., pulling the dog’s
tail is costly) this is known as valence transference. This
then feeds into deontic bridging: the valence can bridge into
a novel norm expressed by a deontic operator (e.g., you
should not pull the dog’s tail).
Elqayam et al. (2015) conducted a series of experiments
to test various features of the model. They adopted the
same core design throughout their studies: they presented a
vignette describing a protagonist and a situation with a
utility conditional presented underneath. Then participants
had to rate the degree to which it follows that the
protagonist must, should and may (positive deontic
operator) and must not, should not and need not (negative
deontic operator) and going to and not going to (inductive
conclusion) take the action to bring around the outcome.
This experiment examines Elqayam et al.’s defeasibility
hypothesis, and so the inference suppression paradigm was
adopted (e.g., Stevenson & Over, 1995) in which an
additional premise is presented to weaken the strength of the
initial argument. Our particular focus is on conflicting
norms. Say we are informed that going to a particular
holiday region will lead us to having a good holiday. Since
this is something we wish to do it is likely that we would
choose to go to that location. If we are later informed that
the particular holiday region has hunts for endangered
species, and we are against such hunting, this causes a
conflict between the norm generated by deontic introduction
and the pre-existing norm presented separately. This blocks
deontic bridging by priming a normative conclusion that is
opposite to the one generated by deontic bridging. The
result is that participants are less likely to infer positive
deontic operators when a conflicting norm is presented
compared to when it is not, and more likely to endorse
negative deontic operators when a conflicting norm is
present compared to when it is not, as found by Elqayam et
al. (2015). We wish to examine whether this effect occurs
for counterfactual conditionals.

Previous Work on Counterfactual Thinking
Counterfactual thinking can be defined in more than one
way, but in the context of this paper, we take it to be
considering how things could have turned out differently,
for better or worse (see Byrne, 2016 for a review). A
student who does not study hard for an exam and then
subsequently fails that exam may imagine a world in which
they did study and they received a good mark. This process
may in turn then lead them to the decision that in future they
will study for exams.
Whilst such a process of
counterfactual thinking elicits emotions such as regret (e.g.,
Wilkinson, Ball, & Alford, 2015; Zeelenberg, 1999) it is
said to have functional properties in that it can help people

prepare for similar situations in the future (e.g., Epstude &
Roese, 2008).
Research on counterfactual thinking has often employed
vignette-based paradigms, where participants are presented
with a scenario about a protagonist and are required to make
a judgement. This research has yielded some consistent
results. One is the temporal order effect, in which actions
are regretted more in the short term, and inactions more in
the long term (e.g., Gilovich & Medvec, 1994). Much
related research has been done on counterfactual
conditionals. These conditionals, of the form if p had been q
would have been, presuppose that p and q are false. In the
example of us going on holiday to a particular region, it
could be asserted, "If I had gone on holiday to that particular
region, then I would have enjoyed my holiday better".
When we are faced with a conflicting norm and the
outcome turns out negatively we could argue that the
outcome was out of our control since taking the action
would mean that we behave in a manner which conflicts
with our norms in life. In this instance participants may
report that the protagonist may feel less regret when a
conflicting norm is present relative to when it is not.
Previous work has demonstrated that people are more likely
to mutate controllable rather than uncontrollable features in
the wake of a negative event (e.g., Girotto, Legrenzi &
Rizzo, 1991).
If people are more likely to mutate
controllable aspects of events, then it may follow that when
an outcome is in a protagonist’s control participants predict
they will feel greater regret in the wake of a negative
outcome relative to when it is not as much in their control.
Counterfactual thinking arises from comparing what
actually happened to what might have happened. Such
comparison, made ‘upwards’ (it could have been better), or
‘downwards’ (it could have been worse), help us plan for
the future (e.g., Roese, 1994; Epstude & Roese, 2008). We
propose that these future plans are mediated by normative
rule generation. For example, faced with a disappointing
exam result, a student might think she could have done
better had she not been hung over. This in turn leads to the
creation of a normative rule, ‘I should not drink on an
exam’s eve’. In the psychology of reasoning, this process is
called ‘deontic introduction’ (Elqayam et al., 2015). Our
goal is to study the psychological mechanisms governing
this transition from counterfactual thinking to deontic rule,
and its effect on future planning

Hypotheses
This experiment aimed to extend that of Elqayam et al.
(2015) by adopting counterfactual conditionals, rather than
indicative conditionals, to examine the effect of conflicting
norms. Indicative conditionals are of the form ‘If p than q’,
linking an antecedent p to a consequent q. Please see
below an example of a set of stimuli for one of the scenarios
that participants had to reason about. The predictions were
presented with reference to the stimuli.

3529

Martin has a new girlfriend, Gabrielle. He is keen to
impress her by cooking a meal and is at the supermarket
looking at different oils since he is making an Italian dish.
Martin can buy a special olive oil produced in Fontignani.
He opts for the cheaper oil and goes home. After he has
cooked the meal and serves up he finds that the pasta is a
bit greasy. He says to his girlfriend:

and 37 males with 1 participant not disclosing gender.
Participants age range was 21-75 years. Twenty participants
stated Canada was their country of residence, 27 UK, 29
USA and 1 Australia. One participant did not disclose a
country of residence. If participants reported a diagnosis of
dyslexia, if English was not their first language or they
failed to answer the attention checking question correctly
their data were excluded from analysis. This left us with 62
participants.

If I had opted for the Fontignani olive oil, then our pasta
dish would have tasted better. (control condition)

Experimental Design, Materials and Procedure
However, the Fontignani olive oil is produced using
intensive farming practices. If Martin uses the Fontignani
oil, then he will be contributing to environmental
degradation of the area (additional information for
suppression condition)
There are a number of predictions we have: (1) that
conflicting norms will suppress deontic introduction for
counterfactual conditionals in the same manner that they do
for indicative conditionals.
With a conflicting norm
present, conclusions with positive deontic operators will be
less likely to be rated and conclusions with negative deontic
operators more likely to be rated relative to no conflicting
norm being present. In the example above, (2) Martin will
be viewed as less inclined to use Fontignani oil if there is a
conflicting norm present, e.g. a wish to avoid environmental
degradation. When participants are asked how likely the
protagonist is to take the action in the future, they will rate it
as less likely than when a conflicting norm is absent, and (3)
the participants will predict the protagonist will feel less
regret intensity in the conflicting norm condition relative to
the control condition. The reason for this is that they would
have needed to take an action that conflicted with a norm
(e.g., contribute to environmental degradation) to bring
around the desirable outcome.
Both the first and second hypotheses derive out of the
work of Elqayam et al. who found that conflicting norms
defeated deontic introduction and the third hypothesis
relating to regret emerges from the previous literature on
counterfactual thinking which indicates that participants are
more likely to mutate controllable relative to uncontrollable
aspects that led to an unfortunate outcome (e.g., Girotto et
al., 1991). It therefore follows that if participants are more
likely to mutate controllable aspects then these controllable
aspects may in turn lead to the inference that the protagonist
will feel greater regret when the situation was in their
control and no conflicting norm was present then when the
conflicting norm may have taken the outcome somewhat out
of their control.

Method
Participants
Seventy-eight participants completed the experiment and
were recruited via Crowdflower a crowd sourcing platform
enabling members of the public to participate in research for
a small financial reimbursement. There were 40 females

A mixed design was adopted. Participants were either
randomly assigned to the control condition, in which they
were just presented with the vignette and conditional
statement or the suppression condition, in which participants
were additionally presented with a conflicting norm.
Participants had to then complete three tasks which are
explained below: (1) a deontic rating task, (2) an
intentionality question and (3) a regret intensity question.
The independent variables were whether participants were
in the condition to which participants were assigned (control
or suppression) and the deontic operators (must, should,
may and must not, should not and need not). The dependent
variables were conclusion rating of the deontic operators
from 1 = definitely does not follow to 7 = definitely follows,
future intentionality rating from 1 = not at all likely to 7 =
highly likely and regret intensity rating from 1 = low regret
to 7 = high regret. Each task was presented on a separate
page. There was a practice item at the top of each page to
get participants used to each task. Participants reasoned
about five vignettes.
Materials were modified from
Elqayam et al. (2015) Experiment 3.
The deontic rating task asked participants to rate the
degree to which it followed that the protagonist must, must
not, should, may and need not take the action in the
vignette. Participants were required to state for each deontic
operator whether they thought it definitely does not follow,
follows very weakly, follows weakly, follows to some
degree, follows strongly or follows very strongly.
Participants completed a regret rating task. They had to rate
the degree of regret they thought the protagonist would feel
on a 7-point scale from 1 = low regret to 7 = a high regret.
The future intentionality task asked participants to state the
degree to which they thought that the protagonist would be
likely to take the action in the future. Again, participants
rated this on a 7-point scale from 1 = not at all likely to 7 =
highly likely.

Results
Deontic Introduction
As can be seen in Table 1, all positive deontic operators
receive higher ratings in the control condition relative to the
suppression condition and all negative operators receive
higher ratings in the suppression condition relative to the
control condition. A 2 (condition: suppression or control) x
6 (operator: must, must-not, should, should-not, may and
need-not) ANOVA was conducted and found an operator x

3530

condition interaction F(5, 255) = 12.63, MSE = 2.65, p <
.01, ηp2= .20. A significant main effect of operator was
observed using a Greenhouse-Geisser correction F(2.73,
139.25) = 45.50, MSE = 2.65, p < .05, ηp2 = .47 but no main
effect of condition F(1, 51) = 1.04, MSE = 2.56 p = .31,
ηp2= .02.
Table 1: Mean (and standard deviation) ratings for each
deontic operator as a function of condition
Operator
Must
Should
May
Must not
Should not
Need not

Control
4.31 (1.62)
5.55 (0.92)
5.37 (1.21)
1.96 (1.28)
2.06 (1.35)
2.93 (1.24)

Suppression
2.96 (1.15)
3.80 (0.93)
4.93 (1.19)
2.76 (1.38)
3.09 (1.24)
3.54 (1.62)

In order to unpack the operator x condition interaction, we
conducted six independent samples t-tests for each operator
separately. This was found to be significant for the
operators must, should and should not with a p < .008 with
the adoption of a Bonferroni correction but not for the must
not p = .03, may p = .19 and need-not p = .13. These fit
with our first hypothesis that conflicting norms will lead to
lower ratings for positive deontic operators compared to the
control condition with the reverse the case for negative
deontic operators.

Future Intentionality and Regret Ratings
We then examined the future intentionality ratings
comparing the control condition to the suppression
condition. We compared mean likelihood ratings across the
scenarios for the control and suppression conditions and
found future intention ratings were higher in the control
condition (M = 5.95, SD = 0.49) compared to the
suppression condition (M = 4.48, SD = 0.96) a finding
which reached significance when conducting an
independent samples t-test t(51) = 6.80 p < .01. This
supports our hypothesis that future intentionality will be
weakened in the suppression condition.
Our final analysis considered the reported regret intensity
that participants thought the protagonist would feel. It was
found that participants thought the protagonists in the
control condition would experience greater regret intensity
(M = 5.61, SD = 0.66) comparative to the suppression
condition (M = 4.44, SD = 1.09) a finding which was
significant when undertaking an independent samples t-test
t(51) = 4.58, p < .01. This supports our hypothesis that the
level of regret intensity the participant thinks the protagonist
will feel is less in the suppression condition compared to the
control condition.

General Discussion
The aim of this experiment was to examine the process of
deontic introduction for counterfactual conditionals rather
than indicative conditionals. We examined the defeasibility

hypothesis adopting conflicting norms to block the deontic
bridging stage of deontic introduction. We proposed three
hypotheses at the start of our paper (1) that conflicting
norms will suppress deontic introduction in the context of
counterfactual conditionals, as they do with indicative
conditionals, (2) when a conflicting norm is present
participants will rate the protagonist’s intention to take the
action in the future as lower than when no conflicting norm
is present and (3) when a conflicting norm is present regret
intensity for the outcome will be rated as lower compared to
when no conflicting norm is present.
Support was found for the first hypothesis with positive
deontic operators rated as lower in the conflicting norms
condition relative to the control condition with the reverse
pattern occurring for negative deontic operators. This
finding supports the defeasibility hypothesis of Elqayam et
al. (2015) and extends to findings of Elqayam et al. to
counterfactual conditionals.
We propose the same
explanation for these findings that Elqayam et al. offer in
their paper. Deontic bridging is not able to occur due to a
conflict between the pre-existing norm and the invited
normative conclusion (generated by deontic introduction).
When it came to our item analysis for each of the
operators we observed significant effects for must, should
and should not. Taking into consideration the marginal
significant effect of must not we note that the significant
differences lie in those operators that express obligations
and forbidding but not permissions. This finding suggests
that perhaps the role of counterfactual thinking is to direct
future action, making it functional (e.g., Epstude & Roese,
2008). In this respect, obligations and forbidding are more
powerful than permissions, and this could provide an
explanation for the pattern of results we observed.
Our second hypothesis was that, for future intentionality
ratings, participants would predict the protagonist would be
less likely to take the action when a conflicting norm was
present compared to when it was not. This is what we
found. We propose that this result occurs because a
conflicting norm prevents deontic bridging. Such a finding
supports our prediction that deontic introduction can be used
to direct future actions as a result of the presence of
counterfactuals. This is in line with the notion of
counterfactual thinking is functional (e.g., Epstude & Roese,
2008).
Our third hypothesis was participants would report the
protagonist feeling less regret when a conflicting norm was
present compared to when it was not. This hypothesis was
supported. We propose that this finding may occur for one
of two reasons. The first is that the conflicting norm serves
to distance the protagonist from the regretted incident by
providing a justification or rationale for them not taking the
action. In the case of Martin and the Fontignani olive oil,
that justification would be the conflict between having the
better meal and the fact that he does not want to contribute
to environmental degradation. If this process is occurring,
the decision could be seen as self-enhancing allowing one to
distance oneself from the regretted outcome (e.g., Feeney,

3531

Gardiner, Johnston, Jones & McEvoy, 2005). A second
reason this effect may occur could be linked to the
controllability of the outcome. If we take away the
conflicting norm in the case of Martin and the Fontignani
olive oil the outcome is entirely within Martin's hands: he
did not select the correct olive oil for the dish resulting in
the dish not being as nice. However, when we add a
conflicting norm, that outcome becomes less controllable,
since he does not want to behave in a manner that conflicts
with his normative framework. We propose that perhaps
less regret is predicted in the suppression condition because
participants view the outcome as less in control of the
protagonist. Girotto et al. (1991) found that participants
prefer to mutate controllable relative to uncontrollable
events that lead to a negative outcome. We propose that,
when a conflicting norm is presented, this makes taking the
action to bring about the desired outcome less "controllable"
in a normative sense: it becomes less permissible or even
forbidden. Since people are more likely to mutate
controllable than uncontrollable events that led to a negative
outcome, it seems intuitive that greater regret intensity will
be predicted for the control condition, where the outcome is
within the protagonist's control, than in the suppression
condition, in which the conflicting norm serves to block the
action, making it uncontrollable in the normative sense.
Both hypotheses are possible but the controllability one may
be stronger since when it comes to distancing oneself from
the outcome controllability may act as a moderator. A
future avenue of research could use a controllability
manipulation (controllable versus uncontrollable outcome)
to examine what effect this direct manipulation has on
deontic introduction.
A final suggestion for the result lies in the fact that
participants have to make a comparison when presented
with a conflicting norm. For Martin it is the choice between
using the other oil and the meal not being as tasty to using
the Fontignani oil and contributing to environmental
degradation. It is possible that in these cases preference
construction occurs on the spot.
The fact that conflicting norms demonstrate such
consistent results when also accounting for Elqayam et al.’s
(2015) findings strongly indicates that people are unwilling
to go against their normative framework. Although we did
not test it directly in our study one proposal is that whilst
people will generally not go against their normative
framework for small instances (e.g., having a nice meal)
they may do so when the outcome generates sufficient
benefit. For example, we may be told as children that it is
wrong to lie, and we must tell the truth, and we may hold
that norm. However, if we are placed in a situation in which
lying could garner a benefit and especially a moral benefit
(e.g., saving a life) then it may be the case that we act
against our normative framework in this instance.
These findings have extended those of Elqayam et al.
(2015) through demonstrating that their proposed model for
deontic introduction can be applied to counterfactual
conditionals. This is an important theoretical development

since it indicates that similar cognitive processes are at work
when reasoning about counterfactual to indicative
conditionals. We propose that an avenue for future research
could be to test different components of the model of
Elqayam et al. to see whether they are applicable for
counterfactual counterfactuals in the same manner as they
are for indicative conditionals. Elqayam et al.’s work has
demonstrated that factors such as utility and probability,
which are deeply rooted in the new paradigm, have an
impact on deontic introduction for indicative conditionals.
We propose that such effects may also occur when
counterfactual conditionals are used.
Research on deontic introduction has begun by adopting a
vignette-based paradigm like many areas of reasoning
research. One challenge of that paradigm though is seeing
the degree to which the model can apply to everyday life.
We propose an interesting extension would entail asking
participants to recall an instance of real life regret, to
consider a counterfactual conditional, and then to complete
the deontic rating task. Through adopting this approach, we
hope to learn how deontic introduction can be applied to
real life regrets, and whether the same experimental
manipulations, such as conflicting norms, demonstrate the
same suppression effects as they do in a vignette-based
paradigm, where the participant is reasoning about an
unknown protagonist.
From a methodological perspective we believe it would
be interesting to examine the cognitive processes
participants adopt directly via the adoption of think-aloud
protocols. This is a process-tracing technique that requires
participants to think aloud whilst working through a
problem in order for the researcher to gain insight into
participants’ thought processes (see Ericsson & Simon,
1993). Wilkinson, Ball and Cooper (2010) have utilised
think aloud protocols using counterfactual vignettes about
mental states to good effect. Stenning and van Lambalgen
(2008) show that experimental data can be enriched by the
use of think aloud protocols, revealing how participants
understand the task, and the trajectory of their reasoning
processes. By adopting think aloud protocols whilst asking
participants to complete the deontic rating task, future
intentionality and regret questions could provide insights
into their cognitive processes and potentially add further
weight to the model of Elqayam et al. (2015). It would
enable participants to state how they deal with the presence
of a conflicting norm within their reasoning. This would
enable the test of some of the predictions for the findings
made within this section.
This experiment has extended one of the findings of
Elqayam et al. (2015), demonstrating that deontic
introduction in the context of conflicting norms is not only
affected by indicative conditionals but also by
counterfactual conditionals. This is an important finding for
the new paradigm of reasoning (e.g., Evans, 2012;
Manktelow, Over, & Elqayam, 2011; Over, 2009) with
subjective degrees of belief at its heart and social pragmatics
and subjective psychological value having a significant role

3532

to play (Elqayam & Over, 2013). We believe that our
research adds to this field by showing how counterfactual
conditionals can give rise to new deontic norms. It supports
the conclusion that, whilst our counterfactual thinking may
cause us pain, it is truly functional (e.g., Epstude & Roese,
2008). As Elqayam et al. (2015) noted, humans are quite
ready to infer an ‘ought’ from an ‘is’ (see also Hume,
2000/1739-1740). Our findings indicate that humans are
also often keen to infer an ‘ought’ from a ‘would have
been’.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge the Leverhulme trust for funding to the
second, third and fourth authors for a grant (RPG-2012573).

References
Byrne, R. M. J. (2016). Counterfactual thought. Annual
Review of Psychology, 67, 135-157.
Elio, R., & Pelletier, F. J. (1997). Belief change as
propositional update. Cognitive Science, 21(4), 419-460.
Elqayam, S., Thompson, V. A., Wilkinson, M. R., Evans, J.
St. B. T. & Over, D. E., (2015). Deontic introduction: A
theory of inference from is to ought. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 41(5), 1516-1532.
Elqayam, S., & Over, D. E. (2013). New paradigm
psychology of reasoning: An introduction to the special
issue edited by Elqayam, Bonnefon and Over. Thinking &
Reasoning, 19(3-4), 249-265.
Epstude, K., & Roese, N. J. (2008). The functional theory of
counterfactual
thinking. Personality
and
Social
Psychology Review, 12(2), 168-192.
Ericsson, K. A. & Simon, H. A. (1993). Protocol analysis:
Verbal reports as data. Revised Edition. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2012). Questions and challenges for the
new psychology of reasoning. Thinking & Reasoning,
18(1), 5-31.
Feeney, A., Gardiner, D. R., Johnston, K., Jones, E., &
McEvoy, R. J. (2005). Is regret for inaction relatively
self-enhancing? Applied Cognitive Psychology, 19(6),
761-777.
Gilovich, T. & Medvec, V. H. (1994). The temporal pattern
to the experience of regret. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 67(3), 357-365.
Girotto, V., Legrenzi, P., & Rizzo, A. (1991). Event
controllability in counterfactual thinking. Acta
Psychologica, 78(1-3), 111-133.
Hahn, U. & Oaksford, M. (2007). The rationality of
informal argumentation: A bayesian approach to
reasoning fallacies. Psychological Review, 114(3) 704732.
Hume, D. (2000). A treatise on human nature (Original
publication date 1739-1740). Oxford, UK: Clarendon
Press.

Manktelow, K. I., Over, D. E., & Elqayam, S. (2011).
Paradigm shift: Jonathan Evans and the science of reason.
In K. I. Manktelow, D. E. Over and S. Elqayam (Eds.) ,
The science of reason: A festschrift in honour of
Jonathan St. B. T. Evans (pp. 1-16). Hove, UK:
Psychology Press.
Oaksford, M. & Chater, N. (2007). Bayesian rationality:
The probabilistic approach to human reasoning. Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.
Over, D. E. (2009). New paradigm psychology of reasoning.
Thinking & Reasoning, 15(4), 431-438.
Roese, N. J. (1994). The functional basis of counterfactual
thinking. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
66(5), 805-818.
Stenning, K. & van Lambalgen, M. (2008). Interpretation,
representation, and deductive reasoning. In J. E. Adler
and L. J. Rips (Eds.) Reasoning Studies of Human
Inference and Its Foundations (pp. 223-248). New York,
US: Cambridge University Press.
Stevenson, R. J. & Over, D. E. (1995). Deduction from
uncertain premises. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental
Psychology
Section
A:
Human
Experimental Psychology, 48(3), 613-643.
Wilkinson, M. R., Ball, L. J., & Alford, D. (2015).
Counterfactual reasoning for regretted situations
involving controllable versus uncontrollable events: The
modulating role of contingent self-esteem. Advances in
Cognitive Psychology, 11(1), 22-30.
Wilkinson, M. R., Ball, L. J., & Cooper, R. (2011).
Arbitrating between theory-theory and simulation theory:
Evidence from a think-aloud study of counterfactual
reasoning. In S. Ohlsson and R. Catrambone Proceedings
of the 32nd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society. (pp. 1008-1013). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Zeelenberg, M. (1999). Anticipated regret, expected
feedback and behavioral decision making. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 12(2), 93-106.

3533

