Counterfactuals, indicative conditionals, and negation under uncertainty:
Are there cross-cultural differences?
Niki Pfeifer (niki.pfeifer@lmu.de)
Munich Center for Mathematical Philosophy, LMU Munich, Germany

Hiroshi Yama (yama@lit.osaka-cu.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Literature and Human Behavioral Sciences, Osaka City University, Japan
Abstract
In this paper we study selected argument forms involving
counterfactuals and indicative conditionals under uncertainty.
We selected argument forms to explore whether people with
an Eastern cultural background reason differently about conditionals compared to Westerners, because of the differences
in the location of negations. In a 2 × 2 between-participants
design, 63 Japanese university students were allocated to four
groups, crossing indicative conditionals and counterfactuals,
and each presented in two random task orders. The data
show close agreement between the responses of Easterners and
Westerners. The modal responses provide strong support for
the hypothesis that conditional probability is the best predictor for counterfactuals and indicative conditionals. Finally,
the grand majority of the responses are probabilistically coherent, which endorses the psychological plausibility of choosing
coherence-based probability logic as a rationality framework
for psychological reasoning research.
Keywords: argument forms; cross-cultural comparison; counterfactuals; indicative conditionals; negation; probability
logic; reasoning under uncertainty

Introduction
In this paper we study selected argument forms involving
counterfactuals and indicative conditionals under uncertainty.
The aim is to explore potential cross-cultural differences in
human reasoning about conditionals and negation under uncertainty between Easterners and Westerners. There are two
possible hypotheses: A universal hypothesis and a cultural
differences hypothesis. Like universal grammar (Chomsky,
1957), the human mind is conceived as universal across cultures according to mainstream 20th century psychology. Researchers who agree with this hypothesis usually assume that
cultural differences are very small since human reasoning
has evolved universally (e.g., Mercier & Sperber, 2011). So
far, cross-cultural differences in reasoning involving negations have been described in the classical-logic based (old)
paradigm psychology of reasoning literature (see, e.g., Nisbett, Peng, Choi, & Norenzayan, 2001; Norenzayan, Smith,
Kim, & Nisbett, 2002; Peng & Nisbett, 1999; Yama, in press).
These previous studies demonstrate that Westerners are inclined to engage in rule-based reasoning whereas Easterners are apt to engage in intuitive or dialectical reasoning.
In other words, Easterners are more likely to consider contradictory premises dialectically than Westerners. However,
Zhang, Galbraith, Yama, Wang, and Manktelow (2015) report that Easterners are not actually more dialectical when
they meet contradictory opinions, but they believe due to cultural reasons that dialectical thinking is wiser than Westerners. Because contradictory premises are not used in this ex-

periment, we do not make predictions concerning whether
Easterners reason more dialectical or not (see, e.g., Peng &
Nisbett, 1999). Rather, we explore whether the location of
negation in the context of conditionals impacts on reasoning
and whether our Japanese sample differs from corresponding
data of Western samples. If Japanese people see a stronger
cultural value in dialectical thinking, it is plausible to assume that they may hesitate to show stronger confidence in
the correctness of their judgments. Moreover, the Japanese
language differs from European languages in the location of
verb and negation. Usually, the verb is placed at the end of a
sentence in Japanese. Furthermore, the term “not” is placed
after the negated verb. Thus, the word order of a negated
sentence is: complement—verb—not. In spite of these differences, cross-cultural studies on logical reasoning which focus on these differences systematically are rare. Our study
presents one of the first attempts (see also Yama, in press)
to identify cross-cultural differences within the framework of
the new probability-based paradigm psychology of reasoning.
Among the various ways of expressing and using counterfactuals (see, e.g. Declerck & Reed, 2001), we restrict our
investigation of counterfactuals to conditionals in subjunctive
mood, where the grammatical structure implies that the counterfactual’s antecedent (A) is factually false. For instance,
consider the utterance of the following counterfactual in the
context of a randomly drawn poker card:
If the drawn card were to show an ace (A),
then it would show spades (C) .

(1)

The grammatical structure of (1) pragmatically entails that
the drawn card is not an ace (¬A), i.e., the antecedent A of (1)
is false. By “indicative conditional” we mean an “if–then”
statement of the form If A, then C, e.g.,
If the drawn card shows an ace, then it shows spades . (2)
Contrary to the counterfactual (1), the indicative conditional (2) does not imply whether the card actually shows an
ace or not. While the core meaning of indicative conditionals
was equated with the semantics of the material conditional
in the classical logic-based paradigm (or “old”) psychology
of reasoning (see, e.g., Braine & O’Brien, 1998; JohnsonLaird, 1983; Rips, 1994; Wason & Johnson-Laird, 1972), our
work is located in the new paradigm psychology of reasoning,
where conditionals are interpreted as conditional probability assertions (see, e.g., Elqayam, Bonnefon, & Over, 2016;

2882

Oaksford & Chater, 2007; Over, 2009; Pfeifer, 2013). Instead
of using (fragments of) classical logic, the new paradigm psychology of reasoning uses probability theory as a rationality
framework. Probability as a rationality framework is psychologically and philosophically appealing for many reasons
(see, e.g., Pfeifer & Douven, 2014). Let us mention three of
them.
First, probability theory allows for managing degrees of belief instead of restricting belief to the two values true and
false as in the case of bivalent classical logic. Thus, probability theory provides a much richer framework to study conditionals. It allows for analysing different psychological predictions concerning conditionals: not only in terms of the material conditional (A ⊃ C) and the conjunction (A∧C) as defined
in classical logic, but also in terms of the conditional event
(C|A), as defined in coherence-based probability logic (see,
e.g., Coletti & Scozzafava, 2002; Gilio, Pfeifer, & Sanfilippo,
2016; Pfeifer & Kleiter, 2009). Table 1 presents the truth
conditions of these three interpretations. Note that the conditional event cannot be expressed in classical bivalent logic.
We hypothesise that the degree of belief in a conditional If A,
then C is interpreted by a suitable conditional probability assertion (p(C|A)) and neither as the probability of the material
conditional (p(A ⊃ C)) nor as the probability of the conjunction (p(A ∧C)). We will test these three interpretations in the
following experiment.
Table 1: Truth tables for the material conditional A ⊃ C interpretation, the conjunction ∧ interpretation and the conditional
event interpretation C|A of a (counterfactual) conditional If A
(were the case), then C (would be the case).
A
true
true
false
false

C
true
false
true
false

A⊃C
true
false
true
true

∧
true
false
false
false

C|A
true
false
undetermined
undetermined

Second, probability logic blocks so-called paradoxes of the
material conditional (see, e.g., Pfeifer, 2014). For example,
¬A (“not-A”) logically entails A ⊃ C. The paradox arises,
when the material conditional is used to formalize a natural
language conditional. Then, for example, the conditional “if
it rains today, then I’ll be a billionaire tomorrow”, follows
from the premise “it does not rain today”: this inference violates common sense but it is logically valid. In probability
logic, the inference from p(¬A) = x to p(C|A) is probabilistically non-informative, i.e., if p(¬A) = x, then 0 ≤ p(C|A) ≤ 1
is coherent; hence, the paradox is blocked (Pfeifer, 2014).
Whether an inference is probabilistically informative or not
is a binary question: if the best possible coherent probability
bounds on the conclusion coincide with the unit interval [0, 1],
then the argument form is probabilistically non-informative;
otherwise, it is probabilistically formative (i.e., the premise
set constrains the probability of the conclusion). The the-

oretical prediction that the paradox is probabilistically noninformative also matches experimental data based on samples involving Westerners (Pfeifer & Kleiter, 2011; Pfeifer &
Tulkki, 2017b). Note that the paradox is not blocked if the
conditional probability (conclusion) is replaced by p(A ⊃ C)
or by p(A ∧ C). A subgoal of this paper is to explore how
Japanese participants reason about this paradox.
Third, probability allows for retracting conclusions in the
light of new evidence while classical logic is monotonic (i.e.,
adding a premise to a logically valid argument can only increase the set of conclusions). The suppression effect (see,
e.g., Byrne, 1989; Stenning & van Lambalgen, 2005) illustrates peoples’ capacity to retract conclusions if new premises
are learned. Moreover, experimental data suggests that most
people satisfy basic nonmonotonic reasoning postulates of
System P (see, e.g. Benferhat, Bonnefon, & Da Silva Neves,
2005; Pfeifer & Kleiter, 2005, 2010). The rules of System P
describe formally basic principles any system of nonmonotonic reasoning should satisfy (Kraus, Lehmann, & Magidor, 1990) and different semantics were developed, including probabilistic ones. Probabilistic semantics postulate that
conditionals should be represented by conditional probability
assertions (see, e.g., Adams, 1975; Gilio, 2002). Interestingly, inference rules which are (in)valid in System P are also
(in)valid in standard systems of counterfactual conditionals
(like Lewis, 1973). This convergence shows a close relation
between conditional probabilities and counterfactuals. Compared to the big number of psychological investigations on indicative conditionals (for overviews see, e.g., Evans & Over,
2004; Nickerson, 2015), studies on adult reasoning about
counterfactuals are surprisingly rare (Over, Hadjichristidis,
Evans, Handley, & Sloman, 2007; Pfeifer & Stöckle-Schobel,
2015; Pfeifer & Tulkki, 2017b). Our study sheds new light by
adding a cross-cultural perspective on indicative conditionals
and counterfactuals.
Table 2: Task names, their abbreviations and formal structures used in the experiment, where ¬ denotes negation, →
is a placeholder for denoting the indicative conditional or the
counterfactual, ⊃ denotes the material conditional, ∴ denotes
“Therefore”.
Task name (abbreviation)
Aristotle’s thesis #1 (AT1)
Aristotle’s thesis #2 (AT2)
Negated Reflexivity (NR)
From “Every” to “If” (EIn)
From “Every” to “If” (EI)
Modus Ponens (MP)
Negated MP (NMP)
Paradox (Prdx)

Argument form
it’s not the case that:(¬A → A)
it’s not the case that:(A → ¬A)
it’s not the case that:(A → A)
Every S is P ∴ S → ¬P
Every S is P ∴ S → P
A, A → C ∴ C
A, A → C ∴ ¬C
¬A ∴ A → C

Table 2 lists the task names, their abbreviations, and their
underlying logical form used in our experiment. All argu-

2883

ment forms were investigated previously in the literature on
Western samples. Each argument form is suitable for indicative and subjunctive formulations. They are carefully selected
to distinguish between the material conditional, conjunction
and conditional event interpretation of conditionals. Tasks
AT1, AT2, and NR (adapted from Pfeifer, 2012) are about
negating conditionals. AT1 and AT2 are contingent (i.e., they
are neither tautologies nor contradictions) under the material conditional interpretation of conditionals: specifically,
¬(¬A ⊃ A) ≡ ¬(¬¬A ∨ A) ≡ ¬A and ¬(A ⊃ ¬A) ≡ ¬(¬A ∨
¬A) ≡ ¬¬A ≡ A. Since we don’t know anything about (¬)A,
probability logic predicts for AT1: 0 ≤ p(¬(¬A ⊃ A)) ≤ 1;
likewise, for AT2: 0 ≤ p(¬(A ⊃ ¬A)) ≤ 1. For the conditional event interpretation, however, both AT1 and AT2 obtain probability one, since in general coherence requires that
p(A|¬A) = p(¬|A) = 0 for any contingent A and since by the
narrow scope reading of conditionals, AT1 is represented by
p(¬A|¬A) and AT2 is represented by p(A|A) and 1 is the only
coherent assessment for the respective conditional probabilities. Note that there are two ways to negate material conditionals, namely the wide scope negation of material conditionals (i.e., A ⊃ C can be negated by ¬(A ⊃ C)) and the
narrow scope negation of material conditionals (i.e., A ⊃ C is
negated by negating its consequent C: A ⊃ ¬C). Note that if
people interpret → by ⊃ but negate the conditional by the narrow scope interpretation of negation of conditionals, the predictions for AT1 and AT2 coincide with the predictions of the
conditional probability interpretation of conditionals (since
AT1: p(¬A ⊃ ¬A) = p(¬¬A ∨ ¬A) = p(A ∨ ¬A) = 1 and
since AT2: p(A ⊃ ¬¬A) = p(¬A ∨ ¬¬A) = p(¬A ∨ A) = 1).
To disentangle the conditional probability interpretation and
the narrow scope negation of the material conditional interpretation, we added the NR task. The NR task, the narrow
scope negation of the material conditional interpretation predicts that the whole unit interval is coherent, since the instruction does not reveal any probabilistic information about
¬A and since (A ⊃ ¬A) ≡ (¬A ∨ ¬A) ≡ ¬A, hence 0 ≥ p(A ⊃
¬A) ≤ 1, while coherence requires that p(¬A|A) = 0.
Table 3 lists the normative predictions of the different argument forms. Averaging the percentages of responses in
three studies reveals that 73% of the participants in task AT1,
75% in task AT2, and 80% of the participants in task NR
responded probabilistically coherently according to the conditional probability interpretation (Pfeifer, 2012; Pfeifer &
Stöckle-Schobel, 2015; Pfeifer & Tulkki, 2017b).
Task EI (resp., task EIn) connects the basic syllogistic sentence type “Every S is P” with associated conditionals (resp.,
conditionals involving negations) in the indicative and in the
counterfactual form. The motivation for these tasks is to shed
light on the hypothesised close relations between quantified
statements and conditional probability assertions in the literature (see, e.g. Cohen, 2012; Pfeifer & Sanfilippo, 2017, submitted). Recent data of Westerners suggest, that in task ASP
73% of the participants respond that the conclusion holds,
whereas 88% of the participants respond that the conclusion

in task ASnP does not hold (Pfeifer & Tulkki, 2017b), which
corresponds to the normative predictions.
We also investigate the well-known MP and its not logically valid but probabilistically informative counterpart NMP.
In a sample of Western participants (Pfeifer & Tulkki, 2017b),
68% responded correctly, that the conclusion in task MP
holds, and 63% responded correctly that the conclusion in
task NMP does not hold (see also Pfeifer & Kleiter, 2007).
Although tasks EIn, EI, MP, and NMP do not differentiate among the three considered interpretations of the conditionals, these tasks were selected (i) to test whether the responses of the Japanese sample differs from responses of corresponding Western samples and (ii) to investigate whether
there are differences in the responses between the two experimental conditions (i.e., indicative versus counterfactual conditionals).
Finally, as mentioned above, we investigate one of the
paradoxes of the material conditional. Western data on
Task Prdx indicates that most people (87% on the average) understand that this argument form is probabilistically
non-informative (Pfeifer & Kleiter, 2011; Pfeifer & Tulkki,
2017b).

Method
Materials and Design
We used a 2 × 2 between-participants design where we
crossed task formulations in terms of indicative conditionals
versus formulations in terms of counterfactuals. To control
for position effects, we used two random orders (generated
by random.org). This resulted in four different task booklets.
Each booklet consisted of a brief introduction, of eight
tasks, and of questions about the booklets (task difficulty,
whether participants took logic or probability classes and
whether they like maths). Furthermore, we included usual demographic questions at the end. The logical forms of the eight
tasks are explained in Table 2. We instantiated these logical
forms into a cover story which was already used in studies on
Western samples (see, e.g., Pfeifer & Kleiter, 2011; Pfeifer
& Tulkki, 2017b). We adapted and translated this cover story
for the Japanese sample.
For each task, the participants were asked to imagine the
following situation:
Hanako works in a factory that produces toy blocks. She is
responsible for controlling the production. Every toy block has
a shape (cylinder, cube or pyramid) and a colour (red, blue or
green). For example:
• Red cylinder, red cube, red pyramid
• Blue cylinder, blue cube, . . .
• Green cylinder, . . .

Then, for example in task AT1 (indicative conditional), the
participants were asked to consider the following sentence:

2884

It is not the case, that: If the toy block is not a cube, then
the toy block is a cube.

Participants and procedure

(もしおもちゃのブロックが立方体ではないならば、そのおも
ちゃのブロックは立方体である、というわけではない。)

The instructions continued by the following questions,
which prompt answers in a forced choice format:
Can Hanako infer at all how sure she can be that the sentence
in the box holds? (please tick the appropriate box)
 NO, Hanako can not infer how sure she can be that the
sentence in the box holds.
 YES, Hanako can infer how sure she can be that the sentence in the box holds.

The previous question serves to give the opportunity to respond in a non-informative way and thereby avoid conversational implicatures which could bias the participant to respond in an informative manner. Specifically, we aim to investigate to what extent the participants are able to distinguish
probabilistically informative and non-informative argument
forms. The next question prompts a qualitative evaluation of
the conclusion of argument forms which are perceived to be
probabilistically informative:
If you chose “YES”, please tick one of the following answers:

Results and discussion

 Hanako can be sure that the sentence in the box holds.
 Hanako can be sure that the sentence in the box does not
hold.

After each target task, the participants were instructed to rate
on a scale their subjective confidence in their response. The
corresponding AT1 task involving counterfactuals was formulated in exactly the same way with the difference, that the
indicative conditional was replaced by a corresponding counterfactual, as follows:
It is not the case, that: If the toy block were not a cube,
then the toy block would be a cube.
(もしおもちゃのブロックが立方体ではなかったとすれば、そのお
もちゃのブロックは立方体であるだろう、というわけではない。)

Note that AT1 can be conceived as an inference from
an empty premise set. For those tasks involving explicit
premises (i.e., in tasks EIn, EI, MP, NMP, and Prdx), we formulated uncertainties in terms of verbal descriptions (“極め
て確実である”; “quite sure”). For instance, consider task
MP:
(A) . . . quite sure that the toy block is a cube.
(B) . . . quite sure that if the toy block is a cube, then it is red.

Our reason for qualitative premise and conclusion probabilities in terms of verbal descriptions of probabilities (instead
of quantitative probabilities) was to reduce the psychological
complexity of the probabilistic inference. In this study, we
were interested in the interpretation of negations and conditionals but not in the numerical propagation of the probabilities from the premises to the conclusion.

63 Osaka City University undergraduate students participated
in this study (mean age 20.02 (SD = 1.05) years, 34 females,
21 males, 8 did not disclose their gender). Their major subjects included various humanistic fields (3 commerce, 5 culture, 1 geography, 5 history, 4 Japanese, 8 law, 5 linguistics, 1
pedagogy, 2 philosophy, 17 psychology, 2 sociology, and 10
other). Nobody had ever taken logic classes but two participants had previously taken some probability classes. At the
end of the experiment, participants evaluated the set of tasks
as rather difficult (mean 2.76 (SD = 2.11) on a scale ranging from 0 (“very difficult”) to 10 (“very easy”)). 82.54%
reported that they do not like maths.
All participants were tested at the same time during a lesson in a course on cultural psychology. For reducing the
probability for copy-pasting responses, the booklets were distributed such that the two task orders and the two formulations of the conditionals (indicative vs. counterfactual) alternated systematically. Moreover, the experimenter announced
that the task booklets differ before the participants started
with filling in their responses. The booklets were formulated
in Japanese, the participants’ mother tongue.

We performed Fisher’s exact tests to compare the response
frequencies among the four booklets (task order 1 × task order 2 × indicative conditionals × counterfactuals) and did not
observe any significant differences after performing HolmBonferroni corrections for multiple significance tests. Likewise, analyses of variance on the participant’s confidence
ratings in the correctness of their responses did not show
statistically significant differences among the four booklets.
This replicates previous findings in studies which used Western samples. Specifically, studies on probabilistic truth table
tasks (Over et al., 2007; Pfeifer & Stöckle-Schobel, 2015)
and on uncertain argument forms (Pfeifer & Tulkki, 2017b)
did not detect significant difference between indicative conditionals and counterfactuals. Thus, our data speak against
cross-cultural differences between Easterners and Westerners. This calls for further experiments to clarify whether this
interesting negative result is due to a too high dissimilarity of
our tasks compared to those in other studies on cross-cultural
differences. Or, alternatively, whether cross-cultural differences are not that strong as they are claimed to be (see, e.g.,
Zhang et al., 2015).
Since there were no significant differences in the responses
among the four booklets, we pooled the data for the following data analysis (N = 63). Concerning the interpretation of
conditionals, we observed high endorsement rates of the conditional probability hypothesis (see Table 3). This is strong
support for the hypothesis that both indicative conditionals
and counterfactuals are best modeled by conditional probability.
Table 4 presents the mean confidence ratings, which shows
how sure the participants are that their responses are correct.

2885

Table 3:
Percentages (n = 63) of “holds” (hld), “does
not hold” (¬hld), and probabilistic non-informativeness responses (n-inf; see also Table 2). Predictions based on
the conditional probability hypothesis of conditionals are in
bold. Alternative hypotheses are indicated in parentheses:
¬⊃ (resp., ⊃¬ ) denotes wide (resp., narrow) scope negation
of the material conditional ⊃; ∧ denotes conjunction. If not
specified otherwise, predictions coincide.
AT1

AT2
⊃¬ 
∧

⊃¬ 
∧

NR

EIn

hld:
¬hld:
n-i:

65.08
15.87
19.05(¬⊃ )

76.19
11.11
12.70(¬⊃ )

6.35
63.49(¬⊃ )
¬
30.16 ⊃
∧

6.45
69.35
24.20

hld:
¬hld:
n-inf:

EI
88.89
6.35
4.76

MP
53.97
3.17
42.86

NMP
9.52
52.38
38.10

Prdx
0.00(⊃ )
17.46(∧ )
82.54

The confidences are relatively high, with an average value of
7.2 on a rating scale from 0 to 10.
Table 4: Mean (M) and standard deviations (SD) of the participants’ confidence ratings (n = 63) on a scale from 0 (“very
sure that my response is not correct”) to 10 (“very sure that
my response is correct”; see also Table 2).
AT1
M 6.77
SD 1.99

AT2
6.86
2.06

NR
7.20
2.37

EIn
7.71
1.99

EI
8.02
1.97

MP
7.18
2.10

NMP
7.02
2.08

Prdx
6.82
1.93

samples and also in our Japanese sample—respond by corresponding conditional probabilities when asked to give a degree of belief in a counterfactual.
Our data suggest a negative answer to the question whether
there are cross-cultural differences between Easterners and
Westerners w. r. t. reasoning about indicative conditionals,
counterfactuals, and their negations. Further experimental
work, e.g., involving causal task material (see, e.g. Over et
al., 2007; Pfeifer & Tulkki, 2017a), is needed to substantiate the hypothesis that conditional probability is the universal
key ingredient for psychological theories of indicative conditionals and counterfactuals.
The material conditional interpretation of conditionals was
the gold standard to evaluate human reasoning about conditionals in the old paradigm psychology of reasoning. Our data
do not support the material conditional interpretation. Rather,
our results strongly support the conditional probability interpretation of conditionals, which became prominent in the new
paradigm psychology of reasoning and which received strong
experimental support in recent years (see, e.g., Elqayam et
al., 2016; Fugard, Pfeifer, Mayerhofer, & Kleiter, 2011; Over,
2009). Even though most of the data was collected on Western samples, but given the theoretical plausibility of the the
conditional probability interpretation, we think that this is further suggests that universality in human reasoning.
Finally, we note that adaptation of reasoning styles can be
one of the universal adaptive strategies across cultures. The
question of which aspects of human reasoning are universal,
and in how far they are universal, is important and calls for
collaborations of psychologists of reasoning and cultural psychologists.
Acknowledgments Niki Pfeifer is supported by the DFG
project PF 740/2-2 (part of SPP1516).

Concluding remarks

References

Our data suggest that people form their degree of belief in
the counterfactual If A were the case, C would be the case by
equating it with the corresponding conditional probability of
C|A. This is consistent with the observation in previous experimental work (with Western participants) that people treat the
factual statement as irrelevant when they form their degree of
belief in a counterfactual (Pfeifer & Stöckle-Schobel, 2015;
Pfeifer & Tulkki, 2017b, 2017a). This can be justified and
explained by the coherence-based theory of nested conditionals (Gilio & Sanfilippo, 2013, 2014; Gilio, Over, Pfeifer, &
Sanfilippo, 2017, submitted). Given three events A, B,C with
incompatible A and B (i.e., A ∧ B is a logical contradiction)
the prevision of the conditional random quantity ((C|B)|A)
is equal to p(C|B) (Gilio & Sanfilippo, 2013, Example 1, p.
225). Thus, the counterfactual If A were the case, C would be
the case can be modeled by the degree of belief in the conditional random quantity (C|A)|¬A which equals to p(C|A)
(i.e., Prevision((C|A)|¬A) = p(C|A)). This is an explanation
for why people—as experimentally demonstrated in Western

Adams, E. W. (1975). The logic of conditionals. Dordrecht:
Reidel.
Benferhat, S., Bonnefon, J.-F., & Da Silva Neves, R. (2005).
An overview of possibilistic handling of default reasoning,
with experimental studies. Synthese, 1-2, 53-70.
Braine, M. D. S., & O’Brien, D. P. (Eds.). (1998). Mental
logic. Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Byrne, R. M. J. (1989). Suppressing valid inferences with
conditionals. Cognition, 31, 61-83.
Chomsky, N. (1957). Syntactic structures. Hague: Mouton.
Cohen, A. (2012). Generics as modals. Recherches linguistiques de Vincennes, 41, 63–82.
Coletti, G., & Scozzafava, R. (2002). Probabilistic logic in a
coherent setting. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Declerck, R., & Reed, S. (2001). Conditionals: A comprehensive empirical analysis. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Elqayam, S., Bonnefon, J.-F., & Over, D. E. (Eds.). (2016).
New paradigm psychology of reasoning. London: Routledge.

2886

Evans, J. St. B. T., & Over, D. E. (2004). If. Oxford: OUP.
Fugard, A. J. B., Pfeifer, N., Mayerhofer, B., & Kleiter, G. D.
(2011). How people interpret conditionals: Shifts towards
the conditional event. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 37(3), 635–648.
Gilio, A. (2002). Probabilistic reasoning under coherence
in System P. Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence, 34, 5-34.
Gilio, A., Over, D. E., Pfeifer, N., & Sanfilippo, G. (2017).
Centering and compound conditionals under coherence. In
M. B. Ferraro et al. (Eds.), Soft methods for data science
(pp. 253–260). Berlin: Springer.
Gilio, A., Over, D. E., Pfeifer, N., & Sanfilippo, G. (submitted). Centering with conjoined and iterated conditionals
under coherence. https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.07785.
Gilio, A., Pfeifer, N., & Sanfilippo, G. (2016). Transitivity
in coherence-based probability logic. Journal of Applied
Logic, 14, 46–64.
Gilio, A., & Sanfilippo, G. (2013). Conditional random quantities and iterated conditioning in the setting of coherence.
In L. C. van der Gaag (Ed.), Ecsqaru 2013 (Vol. 7958, pp.
218–229). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Gilio, A., & Sanfilippo, G. (2014). Conditional random
quantities and compounds of conditionals. Studia Logica,
102(4), 709–729.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models. Cambr.: CUP.
Kraus, S., Lehmann, D., & Magidor, M. (1990). Nonmonotonic reasoning, preferential models and cumulative logics.
Artificial Intelligence, 44, 167-207.
Lewis, D. (1973). Counterfactuals. Oxford: Blackwell.
Mercier, H., & Sperber, D. (2011). Why do humans reason?
Arguments for an argumentative theory. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 34, 57–111.
Nickerson, R. S. (2015). Conditional reasoning. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Nisbett, R. E., Peng, K., Choi, I., & Norenzayan, A. (2001).
Culture and system of thought: Holistic versus analytic
cognition. Psychological Review, 108, 291–310.
Norenzayan, A., Smith, E. E., Kim, B. J., & Nisbett, R. E.
(2002). Cultural preferences for formal versus intuitive reasoning. Cognitive Science, 26, 653–684.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2007). Bayesian rationality.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Over, D. E. (2009). New paradigm psychology of reasoning.
Thinking and Reasoning, 15, 431–438.
Over, D. E., Hadjichristidis, C., Evans, J. St. B. T., Handley, S. J., & Sloman, S. (2007). The probability of causal
conditionals. Cognitive Psychology, 54, 62-97.
Peng, K., & Nisbett, R. E. (1999). Culture, dialectics, and
reasoning about contradiction. Am. Psychol., 54, 741–754.
Pfeifer, N. (2012). Experiments on Aristotle’s Thesis: Towards an experimental philosophy of conditionals. The
Monist, 95(2), 223–240.
Pfeifer, N. (2013). The new psychology of reasoning: A mental probability logical perspective. Thinking & Reasoning,

19(3–4), 329–345.
Pfeifer, N. (2014). Reasoning about uncertain conditionals.
Studia Logica, 102(4), 849-866.
Pfeifer, N., & Douven, I. (2014). Formal epistemology and
the new paradigm psychology of reasoning. The Review of
Philosophy and Psychology, 5(2), 199–221.
Pfeifer, N., & Kleiter, G. D. (2005). Coherence and nonmonotonicity in human reasoning. Synthese, 146, 93–109.
Pfeifer, N., & Kleiter, G. D. (2007). Human reasoning with
imprecise probabilities: Modus ponens and Denying the
antecedent. In G. De Cooman, J. Vejnarová, & M. Zaffalon
(Eds.), Proc. of ISIPTA (pp. 347–356). Prague: SIPTA.
Pfeifer, N., & Kleiter, G. D. (2009). Framing human inference by coherence based probability logic. Journal of
Applied Logic, 7(2), 206–217.
Pfeifer, N., & Kleiter, G. D. (2010). The conditional in mental probability logic. In M. Oaksford & N. Chater (Eds.),
Cognition and conditionals (pp. 153–173). Oxford: OUP.
Pfeifer, N., & Kleiter, G. D. (2011). Uncertain deductive reasoning. In K. Manktelow, D. E. Over, & S. Elqayam (Eds.),
The science of reason (p. 145-166). Hove: Psychol. Press.
Pfeifer, N., & Sanfilippo, G. (2017). Square of opposition
under coherence. In M. B. Ferraro et al. (Eds.), SMPS (pp.
407–414). Berlin: Springer.
Pfeifer, N., & Sanfilippo, G. (submitted). Probabilistic squares and hexagons of opposition under coherence.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.07306.
Pfeifer, N., & Stöckle-Schobel, R. (2015). Uncertain conditionals and counterfactuals in (non-)causal settings. In
G. Arienti, B. G. Bara, & S. G. (Eds.), Proceedings of
the EuroAsianPacific joint conference on cognitive science
(Vol. 1419, pp. 651–656). Aachen: CEUR. Retrieved from
http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1419/paper0108.pdf
Pfeifer, N., & Tulkki, L. (2017a). Abductive, causal, and
counterfactual conditionals under incomplete probabilistic
knowledge. In G. Gunzelmann, A. Howes, T. Tenbrink, &
E. Davelaar (Eds.), Proceedings of CogSci17. Austin: The
Cognitive Science Society.
Pfeifer, N., & Tulkki, L. (2017b). Conditionals, counterfactuals, and rational reasoning. An experimental study on basic
principles. Minds and Machines, 27(1), 119–165.
Rips, L. J. (1994). The psychology of proof: Deductive reasoning in human thinking. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Stenning, K., & van Lambalgen, M. (2005). Semantic interpretation as computation in nonmonotonic logic. Cognitive
Science, 29, 919-960.
Wason, P. C., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1972). The psychology
of reasoning. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Yama, H. (in press). Thinking and reasoning across cultures.
In L. J. Ball & V. A. Thompson (Eds.), International handbook of thinking and reasoning. Hove: Psychology Press.
Zhang, B., Galbraith, N., Yama, H., Wang, L., & Manktelow,
K. I. (2015). Dialectical thinking: A cross-cultural study
of Japanese, Chinese, and British students. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 27, 771–779.

2887

