Creating words from iterated vocal imitation
Pierce Edmiston (pedmiston@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1202 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA

Marcus Perlman (marcus.perlman@mpi.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics
Nijmegen, 6500 AH The Netherlands

Gary Lupyan (lupyan@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1202 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA
Abstract
We report the results of a large-scale (N=1571) experiment to
investigate whether spoken words can emerge from the process
of repeated imitation. Participants played a version of the children’s game “Telephone”. The first generation was asked to
imitate recognizable environmental sounds (e.g., glass breaking, water splashing); subsequent generations imitated the imitators for a total of 8 generations. We then examined whether
the vocal imitations became more stable and word-like, retained a resemblance to the original sound, and became more
suitable as learned category labels. The results showed (1) the
imitations became progressively more word-like, (2) even after 8 generations, they could be matched above chance to the
environmental sound that motivated them, and (3) imitations
from later generations were more effective as learned category labels. These results show how repeated imitation can
create progressively more word-like forms while retaining a
semblance of iconicity.
Keywords: categorization; transmission chain; language evolution

People have long pondered the origins of languages, especially the words that compose them. For example, both
Plato in his Cratylus dialogue (Plato and Reeve, 1999) and
John Locke in his Essay Concerning Human Understanding
(Locke, 1948) examined the “naturalness” of words–whether
they are somehow imitative of their meaning. Some theories of language evolution have hypothesized that vocal imitation played an important role in generating the first words
of spoken languages (e.g., Brown et al., 1955; Donald, 2016;
Imai and Kita, 2014; Perlman et al., 2015); early humans may
originally have referred to a predatory cat by imitating its
roar, or to the discovery of a stream by imitating the sound
of rushing water. Such vocal imitation might have served to
clarify the referent of a vocalization and eventually establish
a mutually understood word. In this study, we investigate
the formation of onomatopoeic words–imitative words that
resemble the sounds to which they refer. We ask whether
onomatopoeic words can be formed gradually and without
instruction through repeated imitation.
Onomatopoeic words appear to be a universal lexical category found across the world’s languages (Dingemanse, 2012).
Languages all have conventional words for animal vocalizations and various environmental sounds. Rhodes (1994), for
example, documented a repertoire of over 100 onomatopoeic

Figure 1: The design of the transmission chain experiment.
16 seed sounds were selected, four in each category of environmental sounds. Participants imitated each seed sound,
and then the next generation of participants imitated the imitations and so on for 8 generations.

words in English, which he notes exist along a continuum
from “wild” to “tame”. People often use more wild vocal imitations and other sound effects during demonstrative
discourse, especially when producing quotations (Blackwell
et al., 2015; Clark and Gerrig, 1990). Wild words have a more
imitative phonology whereas tame words take on more standard phonology of other English words. In some cases, words
that begin as wild imitations of sounds become fully lexicalized and integrated into the broader linguistic system, when
they behave like more “ordinary” words that can undergo typical morphological processes. Examples are English words
like “crack” or the recently adapted “ping”.
However, not all researchers agree that vocal imitation has
any significant role in language. For instance, Pinker and
Jackendoff (2005) suggested that, “Humans are not notably
talented at vocal imitation in general, only at imitating speech

331

Table 1: Experiment sample sizes. Participants in Experiments 1-4 were recruited via Amazon Mechanical Turk and
paid to participate in an online study. Participants in Experiment 5 were University of Wisconsin-Madison undergraduates who received course credit in exchange for participation.

sounds (and perhaps melodies). For example, most humans
lack the ability (found in some birds) to convincingly reproduce environmental sounds . . . Thus ‘capacity for vocal imitation’ in humans might be better described as a capacity to
learn to produce speech.” Nevertheless, experiments show
that people can be quite effective at using vocal imitation.
For example, Lemaitre and Rocchesso (2014) collected imitations and verbal descriptions of mechanical and synthesized
sounds. When participants listened to these and were asked
to identify the source, they were more accurate with imitations than descriptions. A subsequent study found that vocal
imitations tend to focus on a few salient features of the sound
rather than a high fidelity representation, which aids identification of the source (Lemaitre et al., 2016).
Thus humans can be effective at communicating with vocal
imitation, it can play an important role in narration and discourse, and it appears to be the basis for substantial inventories of sound-imitative vocabulary across languages. But the
process by which onomatopoeic words like “meow”, “ping”
and “buzz” emerge from vocal imitations has yet to be observed. Here we examine whether simple repeated imitations of environmental sounds become more word-like even
in the absence of explicit communication intent or the intent
to create a word-like token. Alternatively, repeating imitations might never stabilize on a particular wordform, or the
limited fidelity of human vocal imitation may simply restrict
the formation of stable words through iterated imitations.
To test this, we recruited participants to engage in a large
scale online version of the children’s game of “Telephone” in
which an acoustic message is passed from one person to the
next. After obtaining these imitations, we investigated how
the imitations changed over generations to determine whether
they became more word-like. We investigated the acoustic
properties of the imitations as well as the orthographic properties once transcribed into English words. We find that by
both measures the imitations become more stable through
repetition. In addition to stability, we also find that the imitations can still be matched back to the original sounds at
above chance levels for many generations. Finally, we measured how quickly the invented words are learned as category
labels in a category learning experiment, and find that later
generation imitations are easier to learn as category labels.

#

Experiment

1
2
3
4
5

Collecting imitations
Matching imitations to seeds
Collecting transcriptions
Matching transcriptions to seeds
Category learning

N
94
752
218
444
63

Exp 1: Collecting imitations
In Experiment 1 we collected the iterated vocal imitations that
served as the basis for the remaining experiments. Our hypothesis was that these vocal imitations would become more
stable as they were repeated over generations of speakers.

Methods
We selected inanimate categories of sounds because they
were less likely to have lexicalized onomatopoeic forms already in English, and they were less familiar and more difficult to imitate. Nonetheless, it is possible that lexical knowledge still influenced imitation fidelity–a possibility to be explored in future work. The sounds used here were selected using an odd-one-out norming procedure (N=105 participants)
to reduce an initial set of 36 sounds in 6 categories to a final
set of 16 “seed” sounds: 4 sounds in each of 4 categories. The
four final categories included: water, glass, tear, zipper.
Participants were paid to participate in an online version
of the children’s game of “Telephone”. The instructions informed participants that they would hear some sound and
their task is to reproduce it as accurately as possible using
their computer microphone. Participants listened to and imitated 4 sounds. Participants received one sound from each
of the four categories of sounds drawn at random such that
participants were unlikely to hear the same person more than
once. Imitations were monitored by an experimenter to catch
any gross errors in recording before they were passed on to
the next generation of imitators, including blocking sounds
that violated the rules of the experiment, e.g., by saying something in English.
Given large differences in recording quality resulting from
conducting the experiment online, we were unable to use previously published techniques for calculating acoustic distance
(cf. Lemaitre et al., 2016). Instead, we obtained subjective
measures of acoustic similarity using a controlled, randomized norming procedure completed by research assistants.
Five RAs listened to pairs of imitations while blind to generation and rated their similarity on a 7-point scale where a 1
meant the sounds could never be confused with one another
and a 7 meant the sounds were nearly identical.

General Methods
In Experiment 1 we collected iterated vocal imitations using
the transmission chain design depicted in Fig. 1. We then
assessed changes in these imitations over generations in the
remaining experiments, which are listed in Table 1. In Experiment 2 we assessed the extent to which each imitation
could be matched back to its originating sound. Experiment
3 involved collecting transcriptions of imitations, and these
transcriptions were matched back to the original sounds in
Experiment 4. In Experiment 5 we selected transcriptions
taken from first and last generation imitations as novel labels
in a simple category learning experiment.

332

Category

glass

tear

water

zipper

5−6

6−7

Acoustic similarity (z−score)

0.8

0.4

0.0

−0.4

1−2

2−3

3−4

4−5

7−8

Figure 3: Types of matching questions depicted in relation
to the 16 seed sounds. For each question, participants listened to an imitation (dashed circles) and had to guess which
of 4 sound choices (solid circles) they thought the person
was trying to imitate. (Top) True seed questions contained
the actual seed that generated the imitation in the choices,
and the distractor seeds were sampled from different categories. (Middle) Category match questions also used distractor sounds from different categories but the correct seed was
not the actual seed, but a different sound within the same category. (Bottom) Specific match questions pitted the actual
seed against the other seeds within the same category.

Generation

Figure 2: Increase in acoustic similarity over generations.
Points depict mean acoustic similarity ratings for imitations
in each category of environmental sounds. The predictions of
the linear mixed effects model with random effects for rater
and category are shown, with error bands denoting +/- 1 standard error of the model predictions.

Results
We collected a total of 480 imitations, of which 115 were
removed, leaving 365 imitations along 105 contiguous transmission chains for analysis. Imitations from later generations
were rated as being more similar to one another than imitations from earlier generations, b = 0.09 (0.02), t(4.5) = 4.42, p
= 0.009 (Fig. 2), suggesting that the imitations are stabilizing
through repetition.

Results
Matching accuracy for all question types started above chance
for the first generation of imitations, b = 1.65 (0.14) log-odds,
odds = 0.50, z = 11.58, p < 0.001, and decreased steadily
over generations, b = -0.16 (0.04) log-odds, z = -3.72, p <
0.001. We tested whether this increase in question difficulty
was constant across the three types of questions or if some
question types became more difficult at later generations.

Exp 2: Matching imitations to seeds
Experiment 2 was conducted to determine if the imitations retained some resemblance to the original environmental sound
that motivated it (i.e. the seed sound). Participants listened
to imitations and guessed which seeds they came from. By
varying the relationship between the imitation and the options
presented to each participant, we were able to assess the extent to which the imitations retained categorical as opposed
to specific, identifying information. On the view that repetition makes the imitations more word-like, we expected later
imitations to be better indicators of categories of sounds as
opposed to specific sounds within each category.

The results are shown in Fig. 4. Performance decreased
over generations more rapidly for specific match questions
than for category match questions, b = -0.05 (0.02) log-odds,
z = -2.53, p = 0.012, suggesting that category information
was more resistant to loss through transmission. One explanation for this result is that the specific match questions
are simply harder than the category match questions. However, performance also decreased more rapidly for the easiest
type of question where the correct answer was the actual seed
generating the imitation. The advantage for having the true
seed among the options decreased over generations, b = -0.07
(0.02) log-odds, z = -2.83, p = 0.005. These results indicate
that later generation imitations were more likely to be recognized as identifiers of a particular category than they were of
particular exemplars within each category.

Methods
All 365 imitations collected in Experiment 1 were tested in
each condition depicted in Fig. 3. On each trial participants
listened to an imitation and selected among four possible options as to which option sounded the most like the imitation.
They did not receive any feedback on their performance. We
tested three types of matching questions that differed according to the relationship between the imitation and the four seed
sounds serving as the options in the 4AFC task (Fig. 3).

333

0.8

70%

True seed
Category match

Distance between transcriptions

Specific match

Accuracy

60%

50%

40%

30%

chance

0.6

0.4

0.2

20%
0.0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

First

8

Last

Generation

Generation

Figure 5: Average orthographic distance among transcriptions of imitations taken from first and last generations. Each
point represents the average distance among all transcriptions
for a single imitation. Error bars are +/- 1 standard error of
the linear mixed effects model predictions.

Figure 4: Accuracy in matching imitations back to seed
sounds. Performance is separated by question type based on
the relationship between the imitation and the options in the
question (see Fig. 3). Lines depict predictions from the generalized linear mixed effects model along with +/- 1 standard
error of the model predictions.

Methods

Exp 3: Collecting transcriptions of imitations

The top 4 most frequent transcriptions for each imitation transcribed in Experiment 3 were tested in Experiment 4. Participants completed a modified version of the 4AFC described in
Experiment 2. Instead of listening to imitations, participants
now read a transcription of an imitation, which they were told
was an invented word. They were instructed that the word
was invented to describe one of four presented sounds, and
they had to guess which one. Specific match questions (see
Fig. 3) were not collected for transcriptions.

In addition to assessing stability in the acoustic properties of
the imitations, we also measured orthographic agreement. If
imitations are becoming more wordlike we would expect orthographic agreement to increase over generations.

Methods
We selected the first and final three imitations in each transmission chain to be transcribed into English orthography. Participants were instructed to write down what they heard as a
word so that the written word would sound like the message.

Results
Participants were able to guess the correct meaning of the
transcribed word above chance even after 8 generations of
repetition, b = 0.83 (0.13) log-odds, odds = -0.18, z = 6.46, p
< 0.001 (Fig. 6). This was true both for true seed questions, b
= 0.75 (0.15) log-odds, odds = -0.28, z = 4.87, p < 0.001, and
for category match questions, b = 1.02 (0.16) log-odds, odds
= 0.02, z = 6.39, p < 0.001. The effect of generation did not
vary across these question types, b = 0.05 (0.10) log-odds, z
= 0.47, p = 0.637.

Results
We collected a total of 2182 or roughly 21 transcriptions per
imitation. All transcriptions containing actual English words
were excluded from analysis. Orthographic agreement was
measured as the longest contiguous substring match between
the most frequent transcription of an imitation and all other
transcriptions. Analyzing changes in orthographic agreement
over generations paralleled what was observed in the analysis of acoustic similarity: Transcriptions from later generation
imitations were more similar to one another in terms of orthographic distance than transcriptions from earlier generations,
b = -0.12 (0.03), t(3.0) = -3.62, p = 0.035 (Fig. 5). This result
supports our hypothesis that the imitations were becoming
more stable in both acoustic and orthographic forms.

Exp 5: Transcriptions as category labels
In Experiment 5 we examined whether there was a learning
advantage to the more word-like imitations emerging through
iterated repetition as compared to direct imitations of the
source of the sound. We hypothesized that transcriptions of
the more word-like forms emerging through repeated imitation should be easier to generalize to new category members
than transcriptions from direct imitations.

Exp 4: Matching transcriptions to seeds
Experiment 4 tested whether the transcriptions could be
matched back to the original seed sounds.

334

First generation

Last generation

1200

50%

Reaction time (msec)

Accuracy

Transcription of
40%

30%
chance

First generation
Last generation

1000

800

20%

True seed

Category match

True seed

Category match

Question type
600

Figure 6: Matching accuracy for transcriptions of imitations
taken from first and last generations. True seed questions contained transcriptions of the actual seed generating the transcribed word. Category match questions contained transcriptions of imitations of other seeds from the same category.

1

2

3

4

Block number (24 trials per block)
1000

Reaction time (msec)

900

Methods
To determine which transcriptions to test as category labels,
we selected transcriptions which were matched above chance
in Exp. 2. Of these, transcriptions with fewer than two
unique characters or more than 10 characters in length were
excluded. The final set comprised first and last generation
imitations sampled to control for overall matching accuracy.
Participants learned, through trial-and-error, the names for
four different categories of sounds. On each trial participants
listened to one of the 16 environmental sounds used as seeds
and then saw a novel word–a transcription of one of the imitations. Participants responded by pressing a green button if the
label was the correct label and a red button otherwise. They
received accuracy feedback after each trial.
The experiment was divided into blocks so that participants
had repeated exposure to each sound and the novel labels
multiple times within a block. At the start of a new block,
participants received four new sounds from the same four categories (e.g., a new zipping sound, a new water-splash sound,
etc.) that they had not heard before, and had to associate these
sounds with the same novel labels from the previous blocks.
The extent to which their performance declined at the start
of each block serves as a measure of how well the label they
associated with the sound worked as a label for the category.

800

700

600
Before

After

Block transition

Figure 7: (Top) RTs on correct trials by block, showing faster
responses when learning category labels transcribed from last
generation imitations. (Bottom) RTs on trials leading up to
and immediately following the block transition where new
category members are introduced.
0.025 (Fig. 7B). This suggests that in addition to becoming
more stable both in terms of acoustic and orthographic properties, imitations that have been more repeated may also be
faster to learn as category labels.

Discussion
We show that repeated imitation of an originally imitative vocalization gradually becomes more word-like as it is transmitted along the chain of a “Telephone” game. The first evidence provided showed that imitations became more stable
over generations of repetition, both in terms of acoustic similarity as well as in orthographic agreement. But more than
just becoming more stable over generations, the imitations
also become more word-like in that they served as more effective category labels. Category information was more resilient
to transmission decay than specific information identifying a
particular exemplar within a category. This category information remained even when the imitations were transcribed
into lexical forms, as participants were able to guess the categorical meaning of the word at above chance levels even after
8 generations of repetition. One such consequence of having words is that they make categorization easier. In support
of this conclusion, we found that participants were faster and

Results
When participants had to generalize the meaning of the novel
label to new category members (new sounds), they were faster
when the label came from transcriptions of later generation
imitations than from transcriptions of first generation imitations, b = -114.13 (52.06), t(39.9) = -2.19, p = 0.034 (Fig.
7A). Accuracy improved over generations but did not significantly differ between groups, p > 0.05. The effect can be
further localized within each block. Comparing RTs on the
trials leading up to a block transition and the trials immediately after the block transition (6 trials) revealed a reliable
interaction between block transition and the generation of the
transcribed label, b = -146.75 (65.47), t(1869.7) = -2.24, p =

335

not less accurate in learning category labels that had emerged
through repeated imitation than those who learned from transcriptions of direct imitations of the environmental sounds,
completing the transition from nonverbal imitation to a fully
lexicalized word form and demonstrating the impact of this
transition on communication.

ple process. The results show how repeated imitation can create progressively more word-like forms while retaining a resemblance to the original sound that motivated it. This raises
the possibility that onomatopoeic words can be created simply through repeated imitation.

References

One result that did not fit squarely with imitations becoming more word-like is that with transcriptions, there was no
difference over generations between question types. If the results of matching transcriptions back to seed sounds would
have mirrored the results of matching imitations we would
have expected the difference between True seed questions and
Category match questions to decrease over generations, but
it did not. Although participants were able to match transcriptions to categories of sounds after 8 generations of repetition, it was easier for them to match a transcription to the
actual seed that generated the transcription, meaning that individuating information was retained over and above category information. One possible explanation for this is that by
converting the imitations into orthographic representations of
phonemes, idiosyncratic features of the sound could become
rendered as categorical phonological features. This process
could exaggerate the features and facilitate identification of
the source. To test this we need to collect match accuracy for
transcriptions on Specific match questions to see if transcriptions are able to be matched within-category even when the
imitations that generated those transcriptions are not.

Blackwell, N. L., Perlman, M., and Tree, J. E. F. (2015). Quotation as a multimodal construction. Journal of Pragmatics, 81:1–7.
Brown, R. W., Black, A. H., and Horowitz, A. E. (1955). Phonetic symbolism in natural languages. Journal of abnormal
psychology, 50(3):388–393.
Clark, H. H. and Gerrig, R. J. (1990). Quotations as demonstrations. Language, 66:764–805.
Dingemanse, M. (2012). Advances in the Cross-Linguistic
Study of Ideophones. Language and Linguistics Compass,
6(10):654–672.
Dingemanse, M., Schuerman, W., and Reinisch, E. (2016).
What sound symbolism can and cannot do: Testing the
iconicity of ideophones from five languages. Language,
92.
Donald, M. (2016). Key cognitive preconditions for the evolution of language. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, pages
1–5.
Imai, M. and Kita, S. (2014). The sound symbolism bootstrapping hypothesis for language acquisition and language
evolution. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
B: Biological Sciences, 369(1651).
Lemaitre, G., Houix, O., Voisin, F., Misdariis, N., and Susini,
P. (2016). Vocal Imitations of Non-Vocal Sounds. PloS
one, 11(12):e0168167–28.
Lemaitre, G. and Rocchesso, D. (2014). On the effectiveness
of vocal imitations and verbal descriptions of sounds. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 135(2):862–
873.
Locke, J. (1948). An essay concerning human understanding.
In Dennis, W., editor, Readings in the history of psychology. Norwalk, CT.
Perlman, M., Dale, R., and Lupyan, G. (2015). Iconicity can
ground the creation of vocal symbols. Royal Society Open
Science, 2(8):150152–16.
Pinker, S. and Jackendoff, R. (2005). The faculty of language:
what’s special about it? Cognition, 95(2):201–236.
Plato and Reeve, C. D. C. (1999). Cratylus. Hackett, Indianapolis.
Rhodes, R. (1994). Aural images. Sound symbolism, pages
276–292.
Voeltz, F. E. and Kilian-Hatz, C. (2001). Ideophones, volume 44. John Benjamins Publishing.

Our study focused on the formation of onomatopoeia–
sound-imitative words–but in addition to onomatopoeia,
many languages have semantically rich systems of ideophones. These words comprise a grammatically and phonologically distinct class of words that are used to express a
variety of sensory-rich meanings (Dingemanse, 2012; Voeltz
and Kilian-Hatz, 2001). Notably, these words are often recognized by native speakers to be somehow imitative of their
meaning. For example, in Japanese, the word ‘koron’ – with
a voiceless [k] refers to a light object rolling once, the reduplicated ‘korokoro’ to a light object rolling repeatedly, and
‘gorogoro’ – with a voiced [g] – to a heavy object rolling
repeatedly (Imai and Kita, 2014). The iconicity of ideophones was verified by an experiment that tested the ability of
nave listeners to guess the meanings of words sampled from
five different languages (Dingemanse et al., 2016). Although
words for sounds were guessed more accurately than the rest,
listeners were better than chance at guessing the synonyms
of ideophones that expressed meanings from all five semantic categories tested – color/visual, motion, shape, sound, and
texture. In addition, laboratory experiments show that people
are able to generate imitative vocalizations for a variety of
non-sound concepts, and that these are also understandable
to nave listeners (Perlman et al., 2015). Thus vocal imitation
has the potential to play a role in word formation that extends
beyond just the imitation of sounds.
Our findings from an online game of Telephone suggest
that the formation of words from vocal imitation can be a sim-

336

