Cute Little Puppies and Nice Cold Beers:
An Information Theoretic Analysis of Prenominal Adjectives
Melody Dye (meldye@indiana.edu)1, Petar Milin (p.milin@sheffield.ac.uk)2,
Richard Futrell (futrell@mit.edu)3, & Michael Ramscar (michael.ramscar@uni-tuebingen.de )4
1 Cognitive

Science Program, Indiana University, Bloomington 2 Department of Journalism, University of Sheffield
of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT 4 Department of Linguistics, University of Tübingen

3 Department

Abstract

transmitting information. A language’s structural features
should thus be subject to the selection pressures that govern
the design of efficient digital codes (Dahl, 2004). On this
read, variation among languages is the result of selective
adaptations to variable circumstances, with communicative
efficiency the key measure of fitness.
This is not to imply that the solutions that different
languages converge on are ‘equally’ optimal to some prespecified degree. Evolutionary processes achieve local—
rather than global—optima, and are chained to their
particular historical lineage (Simon, 1989). Rather, the idea
is to provide an overarching framework in which the host of
interacting variables may be arrayed, so as to better
understand how the system maintains and restores a
functional equilibrium. In particular, it allows us to ask:
How are the perturbations in one part of the system
balanced by compensating forces in another?
For example, whereas more ‘synthetic’ languages, like
German, rely heavily on morphological devices to convey
information, others, like English, leave more to the
surrounding context (Lupyan & Dale, 2010). This mode of
typological inquiry can help uncover how languages use
different means to nevertheless achieve similar functional
ends, and the potential trade-offs—in terms of complexity
and efficiency—that these different strategies may incur
(Pellegrino, Coupé, & Marsico, 2011).

A central goal of typological research is to characterize
linguistic features in terms of both their functional role and
their fit to social and cognitive systems. One longstanding
puzzle concerns why certain languages employ grammatical
gender. In an information theoretic analysis of German noun
classification, Dye et al. (2017) enumerated a number of
important processing advantages gender confers. Yet this
raises a further puzzle: If gender systems are so beneficial to
processing, what does this mean for languages that make do
without them? Here, we compare the communicative function
of gender marking in German (a deterministic system) to that
of prenominal adjectives in English (a probabilistic one),
finding that despite their differences, both systems act to
efficiently smooth information over discourse, making nouns
more equally predictable in context. We examine why
evolutionary pressures may favor one system over another,
and discuss the implications for compositional accounts of
meaning and Gricean principles of communication.
Keywords: prenominal adjectives; grammatical gender;
language comprehension; language production; language
evolution; information theory; typology; formal semantics;
Gricean conversational maxims

Introduction
Linguistic typologists work to define similarity and
difference across languages, in an effort to establish what
invariant ‘universal’ properties might underpin the
fundamental human capacity for language, amidst
remarkable diversity (Evans & Levinson, 2009). This
enterprise is complicated by the fact that language is a
hybrid system, which is product both of a common
biological endowment (shared across languages and
peoples) and of a particular ecological niche (specific to a
given language).
As languages evolve, they adopt communicative
strategies in response to both social and cognitive pressures,
strategies which are then refined over generations of cultural
transmission (Becker et al., 2009; Tomasello, 2003; Boyd &
Richerson, 2005; Atkinson & Gray, 2005). In seeking to
understand the limits on variation, a typologist has the
unenviable task of disentangling biological imperative
(Christiansen & Chater, 2008) from cultural and historical
contingencies (Lupyan & Dale, 2010), such as migrations or
language contact.
Information theoretic approaches to language can help
clarify this problem, by setting a goalpost that is explicitly
functional, rather than biological or cultural (Ramscar &
Baayen, 2013). On this view, language is a communication
system like any other, with the same fundamental purpose of

Two Germanic Tongues
One longstanding puzzle for typologists concerns why
certain languages employ grammatical gender, which
assigns nouns to distinct classes and marks neighboring
words for agreement. From a taxonomic standpoint, gender
specification can often appear arbitrary, with little obvious
correspondence between the semantic properties of a given
referent and its noun class (Vigliocco et al., 2005).
Historically, gender has thus been viewed as a useless
ornament with little apparent rhyme or reason (Maratsos,
1979). In previous work, Dye et al. (2017) offered a possible
solution to this puzzle, using an information theoretic lens to
clarify the communicative function of noun classification in
German.
On their account, grammatical gender marking serves to
modulate nominal entropy, making nouns more equally
predictable in context. This functionality benefits language
processing in multiple ways: 1) by helping speakers avoid
the peaks in uncertainty that would otherwise occur over
nouns, smoothing entropy over the larger sequence; 2) by
reducing competition between nouns that are highly
confusable in context; and 3) by facilitating the use of a
richer array of lexical items.
!1

319

These findings raise a further puzzle: If gender systems
are so beneficial to processing, languages should tend to
maintain or expand them as they evolve. Yet a number of
closely related Germanic tongues have followed precisely
the opposite trajectory: Swedish, Danish, and Dutch have all
consolidated their noun classification systems, while
English has dispensed with gender altogether.
Like Modern German, Old English (~750-1150 AD)
classified nouns according to three genders (masculine,
feminine, and neuter) and all inanimate nouns belonged to
one of the three classes (Curzan, 2003). However, in
Modern English, aside from a few archaic exceptions, only
nouns referring to males and females take gendered
pronouns; inanimate nouns are neuter. The gender system in
Modern English is thus far simpler than the noun class
systems found in Old English and Modern German.
This raises the worrying possibility that English lacks the
resources to accomplish the same specificity of expression
available in German. However, another possibility, explored
here, is that rather than employing a rigid grammatical
device, English relies on a more graded, semantically
transparent method of entropy reduction: namely,
prenominal adjectives.
Like gender markers, adjectives may act to systematically
delimit the space of following nouns. For example, massive
and moist are likely to have markedly different following
distributions. Yet even subtle differences, such as that
between great big and very big, could be highly informative
in English. To test this proposal, we use tools from
information theory to compare gender marking in German
(a deterministic system) to prenominal adjective use in
English (a probabilistic one).

disposal for making a particular lexical choice more or less
predictable in context. One possibility is to rely on the
preceding discourse as a form of scaffolding. Noun class is
an efficient system for implementing this principle.
Consider the German equivalent of (1):
Ich hätte gern ein ! Bier

Grammatical gender markers can significantly ease the
lexical access problem by systematically narrowing the set
of candidate nouns that follow (Dahan et al., 2000), thereby
offloading some of the uncertainty about the upcoming noun
onto the determiner.
To evaluate this hypothesis, Dye et al. (2017) examined
the entropy of nouns in German, a language with a threeclass gender system. An analysis of the Stuttgart deWaC
mega-corpus (Faaß & Eckart, 2013) revealed that gender
markers systematically reduced nominal entropy across all
cases. Further, this appeared to benefit lexical diversity:
German plurals, which are not gender-marked, showed a
reduction in their type/token ratio, suggesting that the
presence of a gender marker was catalyzing the use of a
wider array of lexical items.
Yet English is not without its own entropy-smoothing
resources. Compared to the sparse semantic context
provided by (1), the noun beer should be more predictable
following the comparatively constraining context provided
by (3):
I would like a nice cold ! beer

(3)

This raises an important question: Might prenominal
adjectives in English serve a similar function to grammatical
gender markers in German?
Suggestive evidence comes from the visual world
paradigm, an experimental framework for studying online
language processing in which subjects’ eye movements over
a visual display are monitored as they listen to a concurrent
speech stream (Tanenhaus et al., 1995). A common finding
is that listeners fixate semantically-related pictures as they
become relevant, with patterns of eye movements timelocked to incoming speech. In studies of this kind,
prenominal adjectives and gender markers have been shown
to play similar functional roles: When French and Spanish
speakers encounter a gendered determiner, they rapidly shift
their gaze to gender-consistent referents in the display in
anticipation of the upcoming noun (Dahan et al., 2000; LewWilliams & Fernald, 2007). Similarly, when viewing an
array of semantically plausible competitors, English
speakers interpret prenominal adjectives contrastively,
quickly homing in on likely candidates (Sedivy et al., 1999;
Fernald, Thorpe, & Marchman, 2010). Such findings
suggest that both prenominal elements serve a predictive,
discriminative function.

Nominal Uncertainty Management
Languages appear to be organized to maintain relatively
stable levels of uncertainty across discourse (Genzel &
Charniak, 2002), employing various strategies to make each
lexical choice more equally predictable in context, and
thereby reducing processing difficulties (Tily et al., 2009;
Jaeger, 2010). In information theory, uncertainty is
quantified in terms of entropy. Formally, the entropy H over
a distribution of lexical items is a measure of the expected
value of information (‘surprisal’) over the full range of
items (Shannon, 1948):

In many languages, like English and German, nouns are the
most diverse part of speech. When prior context is ignored,
uncertainty should thus be highest at points where a noun
occurs. For example, in the following sequence, uncertainty
over possible noun continuations (!) will be higher than for
possible verb continuations (#):
I would # like a ! beer

(2)

Corpus Analysis

(1)

To more closely examine this apparent functional
similarity between languages, we conducted a comparison
of prenominal adjective and determiner usage in written
English and German.

Unsurprisingly, nouns are among the most common sites for
disfluencies, incorrect retrieval, and mishearings (Clark &
Wasow, 1998; Vigliocco, 1997).
Nevertheless, speakers have various resources at their
!2

320

about definite articles—and hence, about noun class—led to
a significant increase in entropy (from 10.55 to 11.71 bits).
In the simplified model corpus depicted in Figure 1,
whereas the baseline entropy difference between marked
English and German nouns suggests a usage rate of around
30% more nouns, the difference between marked and
unmarked German nouns is the equivalent of more than
125% more nouns.

Corpora
Analyses were initially run on manually annotated
newswire corpora, and subsequently replicated on larger
web-crawled mega-corpora. These corpus types trade off on
scale and precision. Due to space constraints, we report one
or the other, but not both; in each case, the qualitative nature
of the results are the same.
The newswire corpora included the Negra II corpus of
German newspapers, (Skut et al. 1997) and the New York
Times Gigaword corpus (Graff et al., 2007). The webcrawled WaCky mega-corpus supplied the SdeWaC, a
subset of the German section (Baroni, Bernardini, Ferraresi,
& Zanchetta, 2009), comprising more than 850M word
tokens and 1.1 M word types (Faaß & Eckart, 2013), and the
ukWaC, the British English subset, comprising nearly 2
billion word tokens and 3.8 M word types (Ferraresi et al.,
2008). It is worth noting that these are collections of written
language, which may not reflect the complexities of spoken
production (Baayen, Milin, & Ramscar, 2015).
Additional annotation for fine-grained part-of-speech
categories and extraction was carried out with the RFTagger
(Schmid & Laws, 2008) and the Stanford Parser (Klein &
Manning, 2003).

Lexical Diversity This finding suggests that compared to
English, German noun usage must be more heterogeneous
following determiners (Figure 1). To compare nominal
usage across languages, we calculated the type/token ratio
of noun lemmas in these contexts in the Negra II and NYT
Gigaword corpus, following Dye et al. (2017), and
normalizing for corpus size to make the results comparable.
Conveniently, type/token ratio is the inverse of average
frequency, which means that the greater the diversity of
nominal usage, the lower the average frequency. We found
that whereas the average frequency of the German noun
lemmas in Negra II was 2.12, the average frequency of
similar noun lemmas in the English ukWaC sample was
4.93 (p < 0.001).
These results suggest that noun class allows German
speakers to use more ‘informative’—and therefore, less
frequent and less predictable—nouns after definite articles
more often than English speakers do. Or, to put it another
way, German speakers appear to use the entropy reduction
provided by noun class to choose nouns that are more
specific, resulting in greater nominal diversity.

Determiners
Entropy Reduction In German, grammatical gender serves
to subdivide the space of nouns that can legally follow each
marker. By markedly reducing nominal entropy, gender
facilitates the use of a more diverse—and more informative
—set of nouns following gender-marked determiners.
Consistent with this thesis, when Dye et al. (2017)
compared singular nouns in German (which are marked for
gender), with plural nouns (which are not), they found that
singular nouns following determiners were significantly
more lexically diverse than their plural counterparts.
By comparison, English determiners, which are neither
gender nor case-specific, have less potential to be
informative about their following nouns. Consider that
while the determiner the in English is informative about the
type of word that will follow (a noun, most likely), in
German, the determiners der, die, das, den, dem, and des
convey not only part of speech information, but also
delineate the specific set of lexical items that can follow.
This suggests that English determiners may not support the
same level of lexical diversity available in German.
To examine this possibility, we first compared the
conditional entropy of German nouns following articles
(which are gender-marked) to that of English nouns
following articles (which are not), in the Negra II and NYT
Gigaword corpus, respectively. While the average
uncertainty following the determiners was similar across
languages, German determiners supported much greater
entropy reduction than their English equivalent, a result that
held across corpus types.
As Figure 1 illustrates, following a definite article, the
conditional entropy of English nouns was similar to that of
German nouns (10.17 vs. 10.55). However,
whereas
German provided a substantial entropy offset, English
provided none at all. In German, removing information
!

Figure 1: To illustrate the relationship between entropy,
probability, and frequency in a corpus of nouns, the x-axis above
represents the entropy for a given noun as the size of a set of nouns
of equal frequency (1, y-axis) increases. As the size of the set of
items increases linearly, entropy rises as an exponential function.

Adjectives
While our results confirm that nominal usage following
determiners is more diverse in German than in English, it
does not therefore follow that English is lexically
impoverished compared to German, or unable to achieve the
same degree of specificity. In particular, definite articles are
not the only type of word that typically precede nouns—
!3

321

adjectives are also common prenominally, and may serve a
similar function.
To further explore this idea, we compared the adjectivenoun sequences in the ukWaC and the SdeWaC corpora.
Both the overall proportion of adjectives (tp = 1992.336; p <
.0001) and the probability of a noun being preceded by an
adjective (tp = 85.088; p < .0001) were significantly higher
in English than in German. While German nouns are
significantly more lexically diverse than their English
counterparts, precisely the opposite obtains for adjectives.
These results present us with two different theoretical
explanations. One possibility is that English speakers use
more adjectives overall to compensate for the use of less
varied nouns in communication—i.e., that they make their
messages more specific through adjectival syntagmatic
choices. Alternatively, it might be that while German
speakers use more varied nouns after articles, English
speakers use an equally diverse set of nouns, but rely on
adjectives—rather than determiners—to facilitate the use of
more informative nouns. Fortunately, these accounts make
competing predictions, allowing us to distinguish between
them empirically.
The first account accords well with the taxonomic
assumption that adjectives add semantic detail to nouns, or
somehow “modify” their semantic content (Kamp & Partee,
1995). On this assumption, adjectives should preferentially
modify high frequency nouns, which are in greater need of
semantic augmentation, over low frequency nouns, which
tend to be more specific (Rosch, 1978). For example, dog is
less informative than retriever, which is less informative
than dachshund; accordingly, dog should be the most
frequently modified, and dachshund the least.
However, if prenominal adjectives in English serve a
similar role to gendered determiners in German, precisely
the opposite prediction should be made regarding frequency.
In German, the entropy reduction properties afforded by
noun class facilitate the use of more informative (lower
frequency) nouns. If, in English, at least some of this
functionality is subsumed by prenominal adjectives, then it
is low frequency nouns that should be preferentially
“modified”, not high frequency ones. The relationship
between adjectives and noun frequency thus provides an
important test case.
In line with the entropy smoothing account, our analysis
reveals a negative correlation between a noun’s log
frequency and its likelihood of being modified (r = -0.17, p
< 0.001). Moreover, our investigation1 indicates that in
English, adjectives redistribute the relative entropy of
nouns, thus serving to balance the degree to which nouns
can be predicted in context: More frequent nouns tend to be
preceded by adjectives that are (on average) higher
frequency and higher entropy (edf = 22.06: F = 32069: p <
0.0001). Indeed, a nonlinear interaction between adjective
entropy and adjective frequency accounts for fully 94% of
the variance in noun frequency (Figures 3, 4).

Figure 3: Adjective maximum entropy, which provides an upper
bound on uncertainty about the preceding adjective, accounted for
almost 90% of the variance in noun frequency (Adjusted R2 =
0.891), revealing that more frequent nouns are preceded by larger
number of different adjectives.

Figure 4: To achieve greater precision, a second interactive model
was run, which regressed noun frequency with the tensor product
of adjective entropy by adjective average frequency. This
interactive model accounted for fully 94% of the variance in noun
frequency (Adjusted R2 = 0.941), and achieved better goodness-offit than the max entropy model, as indicated by both the difference
in AIC (28603.60), and the Chi-square test of fREML scores (χ2 =
14274.832, edf difference = 3.000, p < 0.0001).

Discussion
In comparing English and German, two closely related
Germanic tongues, we found that whereas German nouns
are significantly more lexically diverse than their English
counterparts, precisely the opposite obtains for adjectives.
These results suggest that the difference between German
and English does not lie in the ‘specificity’ of expression,
per se, but rather in how specificity is achieved.
German uses gender marking to distinguish between
likely lexical competitors, and adjectives to make rarer
lexical items more predictable in context. By contrast, in
English, which largely lacks gender, adjectives assume both
roles. While these findings are compatible with
discriminative accounts of language processing (Ramscar et
al, 2010), they raise questions about the explanatory
adequacy of traditional taxonomic theories.

To better understand adjective-noun relations in English, we retrieved the top 50k most frequency nouns from the ukWaC, along with information about the
adjectives preceding them, including: their number, average frequency, and entropy (i.e., the uncertainty over the noun’s prior distribution). These results
were log-transformed to approximate normality. For convenience, a base-two logarithmic transform was used for adjective-number, yielding adjective
maximum entropy in bits.
1

!4

322

conventions that support young learners, prove nearly
impossible for adult learners to master (Johnson & Newport,
1989), particularly when extrapolating from noisy input
(Hudson Kam & Newport, 2009).
In languages spoken by large populations of adult
learners, there is thus both impetus and imperative to
simplify the obligatory aspects of the grammar. Moreover,
adult speakers are instrumental to how languages evolve—it
is skilled language users (not novices) who make and spread
innovations (Labov, 1972; Trudgill, 2010), and adult
learners readily adapt newly acquired grammars to better
meet their communicative needs (Fedzechkina, Jaeger, &
Newport, 2011; Kirby, Cornish, & Smith, 2010).
From this perspective, the distribution of Modern English
can be seen as having developed in response to the selective
pressures produced by the conflicting gender systems of Old
English and Norse, combined with a large percentage of
adults in the population of language learners. These
conditions resulted in a shift away from the abstract,
grammaticalized entropy management system of Old
English gender marking, to the more probabilistic,
semantically transparent system based on adjectives found
in Modern English. In comparison to German and Old
English, Modern English has thus traded efficiency—in
communicative terms—for error tolerance, making it more
amenable to later learning.

General Discussion
To Gender or Not
On an evolutionary scale, languages tend to become more
codified over time, as frequently used sequences of words
gradually crystallize into more rigid conventions, a process
known as grammaticalization (Hopper & Traugott, 1993).
However, at a number of points in its history, English has
taken the opposite developmental path.
One such turning point was the invasion and colonization
of the British Isles in the 8th and 9th centuries by the Norse,
followed by the Norman conquest of England in the 11th
century. As a result of the extended interaction between Old
English and Norse, much of the information that had been
encoded in fixed aspects of the grammar became “optional”
– expressed by words rather than fixed grammatical
markers. Old English, the language of England at the
beginning of this period, looks like Modern German, with
relatively complex patterns of inflection for number, gender,
and case. However, by the end of this period, Old English
had been eclipsed by Middle English, which much more
closely resembles the modern tongue: nouns are marked
only for number, adjectives are no longer inflected, and
demonstratives are reduced in kind (Dawson, 2003). What
might explain this trajectory?
Evolutionary Pressures While it is well known that some
languages are easier for adult learners to master than others,
it is also the case that first languages are acquired at
different rates—Russian children, for example, take several
years longer than their Turkish neighbors to sort out
nominal case marking (Slobin, 2006). However, what is
difficult for a child to learn, may not be difficult for an
adult, and vice versa; early language acquisition and adult
second-language learning are qualitatively different, both in
the nature of the task demands, and in the capacities of the
learners themselves (Ramscar & Gitcho, 2007; ThompsonSchill et al., 2009). Likewise, there may be tradeoffs
between what is easy to acquire, and what is efficient to
process (see Ramscar et al. 2010 on adjective ordering).
In line with this proposal, there is accruing evidence that
the structural form of a language is coupled to its population
(and history) of adult learners (Johnson & Newport, 1989;
Trudgill, 2002). Support for this comes from a series of indepth analyses of the World Atlas of Language Structures
conducted by Lupyan and Dale (2010), who found that
languages with “larger speaker populations, greater
geographical coverage, and greater degree of contact with
other languages” (p. 6) tend to be morphologically simpler,
more transparent in their mappings between form and
meaning, and more likely to express semantic distinctions
through lexical or pragmatic means, rather than encoding
them explicitly in the grammar.
On this account, languages strike a balance between early
learnability and adult processing that is moderated by their
social niche. Thus, while morphologically complex
languages provide a rich set of additional cues to scaffold
infant learning, this early advantage has significant
drawbacks for adult speakers. The same marking

Adjectives and Overspecification
From a certain perspective, languages with complex
inflectional patterns can appear inefficient, in that they
obligate the marking of certain distinctions—such as the
temporal remoteness of an action or event—that may or may
not actually be relevant to the topic at hand (Lupyan &
Dale, 2010). Yet languages with more transparent semantics
employ much of the same apparent redundancy: Native
English speakers, who are not grammatically obliged to be
superfluous, still regularly produce overspecified utterances
like “that’s a cute little puppy” and “how about a nice cold
beer?” (Deutsch & Pechmann, 1982; Engelhardt et al.,
2006) The logic of such productions has proved notoriously
difficult to account for: For one, they appear to violate the
Gricean Maxim of Quantity, which assumes that speakers
provide just enough information to identify a referent, and
no more; for another, their combinatorial meaning has
defied systematic description (Lahav, 1989), relegated by
formal semanticists to the realms of ‘context dependence’
and ‘vagueness’ (Kamp & Partee, 1995).
However, productions like these only appear mysterious if
their meanings are assumed to be compositional—i.e.,
constructed as a function of their syntax and the meanings
of their constituent parts (Fodor & Lepore, 2002; but see
Baroni & Zamparelli, 2010 for a novel approach). Under the
alternative model suggested by information theory,
utterances are produced so as to iteratively reduce
uncertainty, and different languages employ more (or less)
conventionalized means of streamlining that process
(Baayen & Ramscar, 2015). While the patterns of adjective
use in English are difficult to account for in terms of formal
semantics, their communicative function is strikingly clear
from an information theoretic perspective.
!5

323

Future Directions

Acknowledgments

One straightforward extension of this work is to the
ordering of prenominal adjectives in English. Violations of
conventional adjective ordering can make interpretation
difficult, as when we compare ‘old French red wine crates’
with ‘red French old wine crates.’ Yet adjective ordering
cannot be explained by a simple syntactic rule, and while
various elaborate semantic hierarchies have been suggested
(Table 1), they are not consistent enough to be implemented
computationally (Malouf, 2000).

Many thanks are due to Christian Adam for his heroic feats
of data collection in mining the WaCky corpora.

References
Arnon, I. & Ramscar, M. (2012). Granularity and the acquisition of grammatical gender: How order of acquisition affects
what gets learned. Cognition, 122(3), 292-305.
Atkinson, Q. D., & Gray, R. D. (2005). Curious parallels and curious connections--phylogenetic thinking in biology and
historical linguistics. Systematic Biology, 54(4), 513–526.
Baayen, R. H., & Ramscar, M. (2015). Abstraction, storage and naive discriminative learning. In Dabrowska, E., and
Divjak, D. (Eds.) Handbook of Cognitive Linguistics., 99-120. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton.
Baayen, R. H., Milin, P., & Ramscar, M. (2015). Frequency in lexical processing. Aphasiology, 30(11), 1174–1220.
Baroni, M., Bernardini, S., Ferraresi, A., & Zanchetta. E. (2009). The WaCky wide web: a collection of very large
linguistically processed web-crawled corpora. Language Resources and Evaluation, 43(3), 209- 226.
Baroni, M., & Zamparelli, R. (2010). Nouns are vectors, adjectives are matrices: representing adjective-noun
constructions in semantic space. Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, 1183–1193.
Beckner, C. et al. (2009). Language is a complex adaptive system: Position paper. Language Learning, 59(1), 1-26.
Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. J. (2005). The origin and evolution of cultures. New York: Oxford University Press.
Christiansen, M. H., & Chater, N. (2008). Language as shaped by the brain. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 31(05), 489–
509.
Clark, H. H., & Wasow, T. (1998). Repeating words in spontaneous speech. Cognitive Psychology, 37, 201-242.
Curzan, A. (2003). Gender shifts in the history of English. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dahan, D., Swingley, D., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Magnuson, J. S. (2000). Linguistic Gender and Spoken-Word Recognition
in French. Journal of Memory and Language, 42(4), 465–480.
Dahl, Ö. (2004). Studies in Language Companion Series : Growth and Maintenance of Linguistic Complexity. John
Benjamins Publishing Company.
Danks, J. H., & Glucksberg, S. (1971). Psychological scaling of adjective orders. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 10(1), 63–67.
Dawson, H. C. (2003): Defining the Outcome of Language Contact: Old English and Old Norse. OSUWPL, 57, 40-57.
Dye, M., Milin, P., Futrell, R., & Ramscar, M. (2017). A functional theory of gender paradigms. In F. Kiefer, J.P. Blevins,
& H. Bartos (Eds.) Perspectives on Morphological Organization: Data and Analyses. Brill: Leiden.
Engelhardt, P., Bailey, K., & Ferreira, F. (2006). Do speakers and listeners observe the Gricean Maxim of Quantity?
Journal of Memory and Language, 54(4), 554–573.
Evans, N., & Levinson, S. C. (2009). The myth of language universals: Language diversity and its importance for
cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 32(05), 429–448.
Faaß, G., & Eckart, K. (2013). SdeWaC - A Corpus of Parsable Sentences from the Web. Gurevych, Iryna, Chris
Biemann & Torsten Zesch (eds.): GSCL 2013, LNCS 8105. (Heidelberg: Springer).
Fedzechkina, M., Jaeger, T.F., & Newport, E.L. (2011). Functional biases in language learning: Evidence from word
order and case-marking interaction. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Austin, TX.
Fernald, A., Thorpe, K., & Marchman, V.A. (2010). Blue Car, Red Car: Developing Efficiency in Online Interpretation of
Adjective-Noun Phrases. Cognitive Psychology, 60(3), 190-217.
Ferraresi, A., Zanchetta, E., Baroni, M. & Bernardini, S. (2008). Introducing and evaluating ukWaC, a very large webderived corpus of English. In Proceedings of the 4th Web as Corpus Workshop (WAC-4). 47–54.
Fodor, J.A. & Lepore, E. (2002). The Compositionality Papers. Oxford University Press.
Genzel, D., & Charniak, E. (2002). Entropy rate constancy in text (pp. 199–206). In Proceedings of the 40th Annual
Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics: Morristown, NJ.
Graff, D. et al. (2007). English Gigaword Third Edition LDC2007T07. Web Download. Philadelphia: Linguistic Data
Consortium.
Hopper, P., & Traugott, E. (1993). Grammaticalization. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hudson Kam, C. L., & Newport, E. L. (2009). Getting it right by getting it wrong: When learners change languages.
Cognitive Psychology, 59(1), 30–66.
Jaeger, T. F. (2010). Redundancy and reduction: Speakers manage syntactic information density. Cognitive Psychology,
61(1), 23–62.
Kamp, H. & Partee, B. (1995). Prototype theory and compositionality. Cognition, 57, 129-191.
Kirby, S., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2008). Cumulative cultural evolution in the laboratory. PNAS, 105(31), 10681–
10686.
Kemmerer, D., Weber-Fox, C., Price, K., Zdanczyk, C., & Way, H. (2007). Big brown dog or brown big dog? An
electrophysiological study of semantic constraints on prenominal adjective order. Brain and Language, 100(3), 238–
256.
Labov, S. (1972). Sociolinguistic Patterns. University of Pennsylvania Press.
Lahav, R. (1989). Against compositionality: The case of adjectives. Philosophical Studies, 57(3), 261–279.
Lambert, W. E., & Paivio, A. (1956). The influence of noun-adjective order on learning. Canadian Journal of
Psychology, 10(1), 9–12.
Lupyan, G., & Dale, R. (2010). Language Structure Is Partly Determined by Social Structure. PLoS ONE, 5(1), e8559.
Malouf, R. (2000). The order of prenominal adjectives in natural language generation. Proceedings of the 38th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 85-92.
Maratsos, M. P. (1979). How to get from words to sentences. In D. Aaronson & R. Rieber (eds.), Perspectives in
psycholinguistics. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum
Monaghan, P., Christiansen, M. H., & Fitneva, S. A. (2011). The arbitrariness of the sign: Learning advantages from the
structure of the vocabulary. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 140(3), 325–347.
Pechmann, T. (1989). Incremental speech production and referential overspecification. Linguistics, 27(1).
Pellegrino, F., Coupé, C., & Marsico, E. (2011). A cross-language perspective on speech information rate. Language,
87(3), 539–558.
Percy, E. J., Sherman, S. J., Garcia-Marques, L., Mata, A., & Garcia-Marques, T. (2009). Cognition and native-language
grammar: The organizational role of adjective-noun word order in information representation. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 16(6), 1037–1042.
Ramscar, M. & Baayen, H. (2013). Production, comprehension and synthesis: A communicative perspective on language.
Frontiers in Language Sciences, 4, 233.
Ramscar, M. & Gitcho, N. (2007) Developmental change and the nature of learning in childhood. Trends In Cognitive
Science, 11(7), 274-279.
Ramscar, M., Yarlett, D., Dye, M., Denny, K., & Thorpe, K. (2010). The effects of feature-label-order and their
implications for symbolic learning. Cognitive Science, 34, 909-957.
Ramscar, M., Smith, A.H., Dye, M., Futrell, R., Hendrix, P., Baayen, H. & Starr, R. (2013). The ‘universal’ structure of
name grammars and the impact of social engineering on the evolution of natural information systems. Proceedings
of the 35th Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, Berlin, Germany.
Rosch, E. (1978). Principles of categorization. In E. Rosch, & B. B. Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition and categorization (pp. 27–
48). Hillside, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Publishers.
Schmid, H. & Laws, F. (2008). Estimation of Conditional Probabilities with Decision Trees and an Application to FineGrained POS Tagging. COLING 2008: Manchester, Great Britain.
Shannon, C.E. (1948). A Mathematical Theory of Communication. Bell System Technical Journal, 27, 379–423, 623–
656.
Simon, H. A. (1989). Cognitive Architectures and Rational Analysis: Comment. Technical Report AIP, 58, 1–25.
Skut, W., B. Krenn, T. Brants., & H. Uszkoreit. (1997). An annotation scheme for free word order languages. In
Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing (ANLP).
Slobin, D. (2006). Cross-linguistic comparative approaches to language acquisition. Encyclopedia of Language &
Linguistics, 299–301.
Tanenhaus M. K., Spivey-Knowlton M. J., Eberhard K. M., Sedivy J. C. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic
information in spoken language comprehension. Science 268 1632–1634.
Thompson-Schill, S., Ramscar, M., & Chrysikou, E. (2009) Cognition without control: When a little frontal lobe goes a
long way. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 8(5), 259-263.
Tily, H., Gahl, S., Arnon, I., Snider, N., Kothari, A., & Bresnan, J. (2009). Syntactic probabilities affect pronunciation
variation in spontaneous speech. Language and Cognition, 1(2), 147–165.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a language: A usage-based theory of language acquisition. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Trudgill, P. (2002). Sociolinguistic Variation and Change. Edinburgh University Press.
Trudgill, P. (2010). Investigations in sociohistorical linguistics: Stories of colonisation and contact. Cambridge
University Press.
Vigliocco, G., Antonini, T., & Garrett, M. F. (1997). Grammatical Gender Is on the Tip of Italian Tongues. Psychological
Science, 8(4), 314–317.
Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D.P., Paganelli, F., & Dworzynski, K. (2005). Grammatical Gender Effects on Cognition:
Implications for Language Learning and Language Use. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 134,
501-520.
Ziff, P. (1960). Semantic Analysis. Cornell University Press: Ithaca, NY.

!

Table 1: A semantic account of adjective order, in which
specifying adjectives “single out or quantify the referent”,
descriptive adjectives “characterize the referent along a variety of
semantic parameters”, and classifying adjectives “categorize the
referent” (Kemmerer et al., 2007: 240).

Ziff (1960) proposed that adjective order was determined
according to two closely related heuristics: the adjective’s
“privilege of occurrence” (i.e., the range of nouns it might
modify) and its “definiteness of denotation” (i.e., the extent
to which its interpretation depended on the noun being
modified). On this account, adjectives that are more
privileged and more definite should be slotted closer to the
noun. In a related vein, Danks and Glucksberg (1971)
argued that adjectives are ordered according to their
“discriminative potential”, with the most broadly
discriminating being placed first. Both of these claims are
amenable to further scrutiny in terms of information and
prediction.
One possibility is that adjective chains follow the familiar
branching structure seen in personal names (Ramscar et al.,
2014), with set-size increasing as a function of proximity to
the head noun. This would be consistent with the finding
that more frequent adjectives tend to precede less frequent
ones. However, given that adjectives’ appear to smooth
entropy, rather than simply reduce it, the precise chaining
structure may be closely tied up with the frequency of the
noun being ‘modified’. This could explain apparent
exceptions to this trend (like “witty young lawyer”).
In addition to adjective order, similar analyses might help
explain the cross-linguistic differences that have been
observed in languages with postnominal adjective biases
(Percy et al. 2009; see also Lambert & Paivio, 1956). More
ambitious extensions could be made to other parts of
speech, such as verbs and adverbs, and for other languages,
beyond those studied here.

!6

324

