Developing cognitive flexibility in solving arithmetic word problems
Calliste Scheibling-Sève (calliste.scheibling.seve@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, University of Paris 8,
2 Rue de la Liberté, 93526 Saint-Denis Cedex 02, Paris, France

Emmanuel Sander (Emmanuel.sander@univ-paris8.fr)
Department of Psychology, University of Paris 8,
2 Rue de la Liberté, 93526 Saint-Denis Cedex 02, Paris, France

Elena Pasquinelli (elena.pasquinelli@fondation-lamap.com)
Fondation La main à la pâte
43 rue de Rennes, 75006 Paris, France
Abstract
In problem solving situation, cognitive flexibility appears to
be a major skill. Fostering cognitive flexibility is therefore a
specific stake in mathematics education. This research
introduces a learning method to develop mathematical
concepts when solving word arithmetic problems. The study
was conducted with 8 classes (4th-5th Grades) from highpriority education schools in the Paris area following this
protocol: pre-tests, 5 learning sessions for experimental and
control groups, post-tests. During learning sessions, students
studied arithmetic word problems that can be solved in two
different ways: an expansion strategy and a factorization one.
The experimental teaching method, based on a
recategorization principle, allowed experimental students to
improve more than the control students in ability to use the
factorization strategy even in contexts where it is the less
intuitive and to consider the two successful strategies.
Educational entailments of our finding are discussed.
Keywords: cognitive flexibility, evidence-based education,
categorization, learning method, word arithmetical problem

Introduction
In mathematics, proposing flexible and adaptive
representations and strategies reflects higher problem
solving skills (Heinze, Star & Verschaffel 2009). We
proposed to study not only strategies in algebra problems
but also the related representations derived from word
problem. Indeed when solving word problems, novices
intuitively induce a superficial structure, triggering a
misleading categorization of the situation (Chi, 2008). The
present study aimed to improve pupil’s cognitive flexibility
in problems solving in order to develop an expert
categorization on problems that reflects a better mastering
of the underlying mathematical notions. Students are
encouraged to reelaborate the notion’s representation, which
leads to recategorize it. Based on recategorization principle,
this method is applied on problems involving the
distributive property. The distributive property problems
admit two solving strategies whose preferential use depends
on the representation built by the solver.

An induced representation
Phrasing of mathematical word problems can influence
the induced representation of the problem by students
(Vergnaud, 1982; Hudson, 1983; De Corte, Verschaffel &
De Win, 1985). But in addition to linguistic features,
semantic effects also rely on semantic relations or scenario
depicted in the problem: when solving a word problem,
students build a mathematical representation based on
semantic relations inferred from real-word objects (Bassok
& Olseth, 1995, Bassok, Chase & Martin, 1998). For
instance, a problem involving apples and baskets is likely to
evoke the asymmetric “contain” relation. So students align
this semantic relation with structurally analogous
mathematical relations: apples and baskets support the
semantic relation contain (content, container) and thus the
mathematical relations of division (dividend, divisor). This
spontaneous encoding of problem situations results from the
properties and relations of the entities or objects depicted in
a problem. Semantic alignment, namely alignment between
the semantic and mathematical relations, influences the
difficulty of mathematical problems.
A way to study this effect of semantic content on the
spontaneous encoding is to use problems solvable by two
strategies. Indeed the semantic context can influence the
encoding of the problem and thus lead to a preference for
one of the two strategies. Several studies showed that the
variable involved in the problem impacts the problem’s
representation built by the solver (Bassok et al., 1995;
Vicente, Orrantia &Verschaffel, 2007; Gamo & Sander,
2010). In Gamo et al.’s study, 4th and 5th grade students
had to solve isomorphic problems involving one of the three
following variables - the number-of- elements, price, and
age –. This type of problem (“Antoine took painting courses
at the art school for 8 years and stopped when he was 17
years old. Jean began at the same age as Antoine and took
the course for 2 years less. At what age did Jean stop?”)
can be solved by two strategies: a ‘‘complementation’’
strategy (in three steps: 17 – 8 = 9; 8 – 2 = 6; 9 + 6 = 15)
and a ‘‘matching’’ strategy (in one step: 17 – 2 = 15). But
the variable involved in the problem fosters one of the two
representations of the problem: (a) a part-whole schema that

3076

underlies unordered units which triggers the computation of
the difference between the part and the whole given in the
first half of the problem; and (b) a comparison schema that
underlies ordered units. Number-of-elements problems are
spontaneously encoded according to the part-whole schema
and lead to the complementation strategies whereas the age
problems foster the matching strategy but not exclusively.
Cognitive flexibility in problem solving
Even after instruction, non-relevant representations
remain: experts do not systematically use the most efficient
strategy when solving arithmetic problems (Star & Newton,
2009) even though they master it. Therefore, arithmetic
problem solving raises the question of the influence of
problem representations on the possibility to choose flexibly
the most efficient strategy. Cognitive flexibility seems to be
critical while solving problems (Clement, 2006). Indeed, it
refers to the ability to select adaptively among multiple
representations of an object, perspectives or strategies in
order to adjust to the demands of a situation (Cragg &
Chevalier, 2012; Diamond, 2013). Through the problem of
‘water-jug measuring problems’ (Luchins, 1942), Clement
(2006) proposed the concept of representational flexibility
in problem solving: following an impasse situation,
individuals recode the situational properties and adopt a new
representation that leads to transfer the right strategy.
Hence, cognitive flexibility is related both to abstraction and
transfer. Cognitive flexibility can therefore be measured
through the mastering of multiple strategies and of their
appropriate use (Rittle-Johnson & Star, 2007; Star & Seifert,
2006). Students with high flexibility in problem solving are
more likely to adapt existing strategies when faced with
unfamiliar transfer problems and to better understand
domain concepts (Hiebert & Wearne, 1996; Rittle-Johnson
& Star, 2007).
Recategorization in problem solving
Studies on cognitive flexibility in mathematics focused
either on interpretation of the situation or on strategies
(Heinze et al., 2009). Being able to adopt a multiplicity of
categorization makes it possible to change point of view
according to the needs of the situation. For example, a
physicist who sees a glass falling down does not need to
categorize a glass as a body under the law of gravitation and
on which forces are exerted. Categorizing a glass only as
"an object made of a fragile material" is sufficient to act in
the appropriate way, namely to catch up the glass. Thus, the
more an individual diversifies his repertoire of
categorization, the more he is able to adopt different
perspectives. By articulating different points of view on the
same situation, the individual can embrace its complexity
(Hofstadter & Sander, 2013).
In the present study, we proposed to focus on
recategorization as a mechanism to recode a representation
and transfer the adapted strategy to a new context.
Evidences from social psychology showed that if an
individual seems to be inconsistent with his/her category

membership, perceivers would integrate other information
and recategorize the individual in the newly applied
category (Gawronski & Creighton, 2013). When it comes to
solving problems, a same situation or entity can be
categorized at different levels of abstraction in multiple
ways. The categorization adopted has been identified as an
indicator of expertise. For example, in physics, novices
categorize problems according to the objects used (problems
of pulley or inclined planes), while experts categorize
problems according to the physical principle (e.g. Newton's
third law) (Chi, Feltovich, and Glaser, 1981, Chi et al.,
1989). Unlike the experts, the novices therefore construct
their categories mainly on the basis of superficial
information, such as specific objects (Schoenfeld &
Herrmann, 1982). Experts rely on a greater number of
categories and levels of categorization than novices to
represent a situation. Since novices use some superficial
cues, they can make negative transfers, using an irrelevant
strategy by analogy with a problem that share the same
superficial traits (vocabulary, object, theme) (Chen, 2002).
Teaching to recategorize in a relevant manner seems to be a
lever to develop students' ability to transfer strategies.
Thus, training cognitive flexibility is a challenge for
developing learning method. Teaching experiments in
mathematics mainly studied number calculations: multidigit addition and subtraction (Carpenter et al., 1997),
decomposition (Klein, Beishuizen, & Treffers, 1998) and
linear equations (Rittle-Johnson & Star, 2007). Evidences
have therefore been obtained for the algorithmic aspects but
are sparser when it comes to word problems. One method
consists in comparing two strategies for the same problem
(Brissiaud, 1994). Gamo et al. (2010) proposed a training
method in order to develop mathematical concepts through
the semantic recoding of the word problem. The principle is
to recode the semantically induced structure into a more apt
mathematical structure. By recoding the problem, the
students adopts a new point of view, which leads them to
develop a representation of the problem that corresponds to
the mathematical structure and succeed to use more expert
solving strategies. In Gamo et al.’s study, students in Grade
4 and 5 had to solve problems sharing the same deep
structure but being spontaneously categorized as problems
solvable by complementation strategy and not by the most
efficient one (the matching strategy). During the training
session, students compared the problems to stress the
common structure. At post-test, students improved their use
of matching strategy. Whereas interpretation initially
realized at a level of abstraction based on the semantic
structure, students acquired an additional degree of
abstraction based on the mathematical structure, after
semantic recoding. Comparison fosters a more abstract
representation of the problems.
The present study: a training method based on
recategorization
Because of the lack of understanding of abstract ideas,
when they are not operationalized (Willingham, 2009), and

3077

the difficulties of transferring solving strategies (Ross,
1984), the learning method to develop students' cognitive
flexibility is applied in a specific school context: word
arithmetic problems on the distributive property. This type
of problems -listed in the French curricula in 4th and 5th
grade- has the methodological interest to be solvable by two
strategies. Moreover, the nature of the variable involved in
the problems favor one of the strategies (expansion or
factorization) (Sander, 2008; Moreau & Coquin-Viennot,
2003).
The main goal of this method is to allow students to
overcome the spontaneous encoding of problem situations.
In order to develop learning methods favoring abstraction,
while taking into account the difficulties of transfer, the
training of recategorization was conducted through a
semantic analysis and was supported by an explicit method
built with students. This method consisted in allowing
students to switch between two conceivable points of view
on the same situation. Then they were prompted to choose
their own one. This choice of point of view by students is
related to a reflexive level and is consistent with previous
work (Siegler, 1999; Blöte, 2001) that stressed the flexible
use of strategies and encouraged students to think about the
value of different procedures for solving a given problem.
The different steps of the experimental training are detailed
in Method, Training sessions.

Hypothesis
We therefore hypothesized that the experimental training
method should favor students' cognitive flexibility on a
mathematical concept- the distributive property- involved in
arithmetic word problems.
Students should be able to adopt the two points of view
on the problem and use the two strategies (expansion and
factorization) without depending on the semantic context.	  
For the training problems, no significant difference in
factorization and dual strategies use between the two groups
should be observed, since they are both trained to solve this
kind of problems (Hypothesis 1). Yet, the experimental
method based on recategorization should favor far-transfer
compared to the traditional method. Thus the experimental
group should propose significantly more factorization and
dual strategies than the control group at the post-test and
higher progression should be observed for the experimental
group for the non-trained problems (Hypothesis 2). 	  

Method
Participants
The experiment was conducted with eight classes from
four elementary schools located in high-priority education
network in Paris region during regular classwork school
hours. 142 students took part in the study: 74 were fifth
graders and 68 were fourth graders (mean age=10 years and
3 months, SD=6 months, 78 boys, 64 girls).
The experimental group included 66 students (37 5th
graders from 2 classes and 29 4th graders from 2 classes.
The control group included 76 students (37 5th graders from

2 classes and 39 were 4th graders from 2 classes).

Design
The experiment included three phases: pretest, training
sessions, post-tests. The pre- and posttest were strictly
identical. Both the experimental group (EG) and the control
group (CG) followed training sessions taught by the
experimenter. Within each group, training sessions were
identical in their duration, organization and problems
statements.

Material
Pre and post-tests
The material was composed by 8 isomorphic
distributive word problems (Table 1) and 5 filler problems.
Indeed, filler problems were proposed between distributive
problems, in order to make the structural similarities
between the distributive problems less salient for the
students.
Each distributive problem describes a situation
involving one factor and three summands. The final
question whose structure is “How much/many … in all?”
was placed at the end of the text. Two main solving
strategies make it possible to reach the solution: Expansion
strategy (sum of each part multiplied by the factor: 4x6 +
4x7 + 4x8) and Factorization strategy (sum of the parts, then
multiplied by the factor: (6+7+8) x4). We selected four
different variables (Numbers, Duration, Price, Weight). For
each variable, a statement whose summands are said
specific categories and a problem whose summands are
called general categories were proposed (Table 1). The
summands of the specific category problem are grouped at a
base level, while those of the general category problem at a
more abstract level than the base level (in the context of a
treat cone, 3 balloons, 8 cookies, 4 figurines or 7 lollipops, 8
8 candies, 3 chocolates). So summing them as a whole is
easier for specific than general category, and could
influence the strategy.
The distributive problems were constructed by controlling
the familiarity of the vocabulary and the numerical values at
stake. The numerical values had different features in
common in order to limit numbers’ effects. Factor value was
between 4 and 8 (5 was excluded since the associated
multiplication table is easier). The three summands were
between 2 and 8 (5 is excluded). Their sum lied between 11
and 21. And the result was inferior to 100 (between 72 and
98) in order to control the level of calculation difficulty.
A pedagogical advisor of the French National Education
was involved in the conception of all sessions, in order to
assure ecological material and ecological pedagogical acts.
Therefore, 8 booklets were constructed by controlling the
numerical values, the order of presentation of the problems
variable and problems versions. On each page of the
booklet, the problem was presented in written form with two
sections in order to propose two strategies. The instruction
for solving the problem with two strategies was both orally
given by the experimenter and written on each page:

3078

Variables))

Dura,on)

Numbers)

Weight)

Price)

)
Context)

X)has)made)a)list)of)purchase)for)y)
years.)Each)year,)X’s)purchases)
are:))

X)wants)to)prepare)a)treat)cone)per)
child.)There)are)y)children.)Making)
a)treat)cone)requires)the)following)
items:)

Speciﬁc)Categories)

Printers))
Computers)
Scanners)

Lollipops))
Candies))
Chocolates)

Pens))
Gums)
Markers)

Buns)
Cakes)
Pies)

General)
Categories)

Microscopes)
Desks)
Hamsters)

Balloons)
Cookies)
Figurines)

Shells,))
KeyRrings)
Candies)

Ice)
Plants))
Plates)

In)all,)how)many)purchases)has)X)
bought?)

In)all,)how)many)objects)does)X)
need?))

In)all,)how)much)does)these)items)
weight?)

In)all,)how)much)did)X)spend?))

X)wants)to)ﬁll)his/Her)pencil)case)
with)items)that)weight)y)grams)
each.))
In)the)pencil)case,)there)are:)

X)is)at)the)checkout)of)a)
supermarket.)He)bought)some)
items.)For)each)item,)he)took)y)in)
his)basket:))

Table)1:)The)8)problems)at)pre)and)postRtests)

Write all your calculations and the result in the following
section:
Do you see any other method to come up with the same
result? If yes, write it down while writing all calculations
you performed to find the result.
Tests lasted 45 minutes. Students were given 3 minutes to
solve each problem. Students were instructed that they could
ask the experimenter or the teacher to read aloud the
problem in order to bypass reading difficulties, and that they
had to write down all calculations. When the time was over,
students had to turn the page and begin the new problem
when the experimenter gave the instruction. They could not
modify their answer once they turned the page.
Training sessions
Training sessions took place in 5 sessions over 5 weeks
(45 minute session each week) for each class (Table 2).
Usual French textbooks inspired the pedagogical method
used by the control group for Grades 4 and 5 (Vive Les
Maths and Companion Math). The experimental method
was built for this study. The two approaches did only differ
in their treatment of the problem. In the control group,
students learnt to select relevant information in statements
and choose operations. And the experimental group looked
for the semantic relations (the sum of the parts forms a
whole) and chose the point of view it wished to adopt. For
instance, one of the training problem was the following: « A
team of 5 athletes participated in a relay: each athlete ran
on a loop of 8 km, then on a straight line of 2 km and finally
on a loop of 6km. How many kilometers has the team
traveled? »
To find the number of kilometers, two strategies are
possible. Experimental group learnt to choose between:
- adopting the point of view of each part of the relay
(loop and line): each loop/line is a separate part and we
realize an expansion strategy: 5x8 + 5x2 + 5x6 = 80km
- adopting the more abstract point of view of the relay:
the different parts (loops and line) form the relay, we carry
out a factorization strategy: (8 + 2 + 6) x 5 = 80 km
Thus whereas categorizing each addend as a part leads to
an expansion strategy, categorizing them as a whole leads to
a factorization strategy.
Regarding all other aspects, session organization was
similar between the two groups: students began by
exercising on the slate, in order to engage them in the task.

Then the students had to answer on an exercise sheet, whose
support was also projected on the blackboard. Finally,
students ended the session by answering the question "What
did I learn today? " and then a general conclusion was
proposed by the experimenter and was written by the
students. The distributive problems studied in the sessions 3,
4 and 5 were identical between the two groups and involved
only two types of variables: Number-of-Elements and
Distance.
Coding and scoring
For pre and post-test, problems were analyzed under two
criteria:
- the use of factorization strategy (correct reasoning and
calculation) to solve the problem as a first or second
strategy
- the use of double strategy (reasoning and correct
calculation)
Then a global improvement score was calculated. At pre and
post-test, each problem was coded as 1 when it was solved
by an expansion, by 2 when it was solved by a factorization,
by 4 when it was solved by dual-strategies and 0 if
otherwise. Then the difference between post and pre-test
was computed. Each student got therefore an improvement
score, reflecting his/her progress between the pre and posttest.

Results
Hypothesis 1 stated that the frequency of factorization and
dual-strategies by students was not expected to be different
between the two groups for the training problem (Numberof-elements) due to the effect of training in both groups. The
improvement score was 0.34 for the control group and 0.37
for the experimental group (p>0.5) for factorization strategy
and 0.30 for dual-strategy for each group (p=1).

3079

Experimental Group

Control Group

Session 1

A problem:
way of seing a situation,
parts and whole

A problem:
a question, useful data, operations

Session 2

Multiplication and commutativity
by semantic recoding

Multiplication and commutativity
by repeated addition

Session 3

Distributivity:
semantic relations
and choice in point of view

Distributivity:
useful data
and choice in operations

Session 4

Dual strategies
by change in point of view

Dual strategies
by equivalency of procedures

Session 5

Distributivity problems:
choice in points of view

Distributivity problems:
useful data, operations

Table 2: The training
sessions

CG
EG

PreTest
Factorization
Dual Strategy
0.14 (0.24)
0.05 (0.14)
0.18 (0.27)
0.07 (0.18)

PostTest
Factorization
Dual Strategy
0.47 (0.40)
0.36 (0.40)
0.63 (0.38)
0.47 (0.43)

Table 3: Means (and SD) of factorization and dual strategy frequency
by students at pre and post-test in use of in the experimental group and control group

Discussion
This absence of difference between the two groups for the
trained problems reflects the similarity in terms of learning
method between the two groups: they both learned to use
dual-strategies (expansion and factorization) for the
distributive problems. The control group focused on
relevant information in statements, digits and operations
whereas the experimental group focused on semantic
relations, words and point of view. At the pretest, repeated
measure ANOVAs with group as the between factor and
problem variable as the within-subjects factor showed that
there was no difference regarding the use of factorization
(F<1, ns) or dual strategies, (F < 1, ns). Both groups showed
the same pattern of choice of strategies for each type of
problem.
Hypothesis 2 stated that a better transfer should appear
in the experimental group for non-training problems. At the
posttest, reapeated measure ANOVAs with group as the
between subjects factor and problem variable as the withinsubjects factor were performed: the experimental group was
significantly superior to the group control for the use of
factorization (M=0.63 vs M=0.47 F(1,140) = 6.15, p=0.01)
and we observed a marginal trend for the use of dual
strategies (M=0.47 vs M=0.36, F(1,140) = 2.72, p=0.1)
(Figure 1 and Table 3).
Then we analyzed the improvement score. The global
improvement score raised 1.46 for the experimental group
and the control group’s one raised 1.10. A repeated measure
ANOVA was performed. The difference in improvement
between the groups got a statistically significant trend
(F(1,140)=3.5, p=0.06). For problems from general
category, we observed an improvement score by 1.59 for the
experimental group compared to 1.10 for the control group.
A repeated measure ANOVA was performed (Table 4).
Therefore, the improvement score for the more abstract
problems (general category) was significantly higher for the
experimental group (F(1,140)= 6.12, p=0.014) .
Figure 1: Mean in factorization by students at Post-Test

The learning method based on both the resolution
strategy comparison and the explicit analysis of semantic
relations during classroom activities showed its success in
promoting transfer. The experimental group was more
successful in transferring the factorization strategy and dual
strategies to non-trained problems in the post-test. The
Price, Duration and Weight variables in post-test problems
had not been trained during the learning sessions. The
progression in terms of factorizing strategy and dual
strategy suggests that the experimental group became less
dependent on the choice of the variable than the control
group. That means that the experimental group shows a
greater ease in independence to context. They were
successful switching from the spontaneous representation
influenced by the variables of the problem to flexible
representation based on the mathematical structure. Since
progress for trained problems are similar between groups,
the added value of the recategorization method lies in the
success of far transfer.
The use of isomorphic problems made it possible to
identify more precisely the robustness of the transfer effects
from the learning method. Indeed as we studied the nontrained problems, the greater progression for the
experimental group shows that the training was not
superficial. This transfer reflects a semantic change by
students that could adopt a double point of view on the
problem.
In addition, our findings support the work of Vicente et
al. (2007) who pointed out that the difficulty for students
lies in developing the conceptual relations between the
entities of the problem. Thus, in their study, the success rate
of problems whose rewording shed light on "part-whole"
relationships was higher than problems with additional
information about the problem’s situation. The properties
and relations of the entities or objects depicted in a problem
are therefore key in the choice of strategies. In our study, we
did not use a conceptual rewording that underlines the
underlying semantic relations but the experimental method
consisted in orienting students to establish these relations
because their categorizations of the elements of the
problems were based on them.

Conclusion
The students from the training group became less dependent
from semantic context. Their choice of strategy was less
constrained by the nature of the variable. The substantial
transfer of the non-preferred strategy (factorization)
illustrates the ability to adopt a new point of view on the
situation. Thus students were able to change their encoding
based on spontaneous representations to an encoding based
on conceptual relations. To adopt this flexible and multiple

3080

points of view on a problem, the training method based on
recategorization seems to be promising. In addition to
improve semantic analysis, students were encouraged to
adopt a reflexive attitude thanks to the notion of point of
view. Thus students developed their cognitive flexibility:
developing flexible strategies with the ability to transfer
them to new problems. Yet studying the extent of this
transfer could be the goal of further research. The teaching
method appears to be a useful framework to identify if
cognitive flexibility is domain-general or domain-specific.
Indeed, fostering cognitive flexibility takes part of a broader
goal, namely promoting conceptual development.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by a National Research
Agency Grant ANR-06-APPR-015. We thank the pedagogical
advisor Arbya Eichi.

References
Bassok, M., & Olseth, K. L. (1995). Object-based
representations: Transfer between cases of continuous and
discrete models of change. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21(6)
Bassok, M., Chase, V. M., & Martin S. A. (1998). Adding
apples and oranges: Alignment of semantic and formal
knowledge. Cognitive psychology, vol. 35, no2, 99-134.
Blöte, A., Van der Burg, E., & Klein, A. S. (2001). Students'
flexibility in solving two-digit addition and subtraction
problems. Journal of Educational Psychology, 93(3), 627.
Brissiaud, R. (1994). Teaching and development: solving
‘missing addend’ problems using substraction. European
Journal of Psychology of Education, 9, 343-365
Chen, Z. (2002). Analogical Problem Solving: A
Hierarchical Analysis of Procedural Similarity. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 28, 81-98
Chi, M. T., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., &
Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students study
and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive
Science, 13, 145–182.
Chi, M. T., Feltovich, P. J., & Glaser, R. (1981).
Categorization and representation of physics problems by
experts and novices. Cognitive science, 5(2), 121-152.
Chi, M. T. (2008). Three types of conceptual change:
International handbook of research on conceptual
change, 61-82.
Clément, E (2006). Approche de la flexibilité cognitive en
résolution de problème. L'Année Psychologique, 106
Cragg, L., & Chevalier, N. (2012). The processes
underlying flexibility in childhood. The Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 65(2), 209-232.
DeCorte, E. Verschaffel, L., & De Win, L. (1985) Influence
of rewording verbal problems on children’s problem
representations and solutions. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 77. 460-470
Diamond, A. (2013). Executive functions. Annual review of
psychology, 64, 135-168.
Gamo, S., Sander, E., & Richard, J-F. (2010). Transfer of
strategies by semantic recoding in arithmetic problem

solving. Learning and Instruction, 20, 400-410.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical problem
solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 306-355.
Heinze, A., Star, J. R., & Verschaffel, L. (2009). Flexible
and adaptive use of strategies and representations in
mathematics education.
Hiebert, J., & Wearne, D. (1996). Instruction,
understanding, and skill in multidigit addition and
subtraction. Cognition and instruction, 14(3), 251-283.
Hofstadter, D., & Sander, E.(2013). Surfaces and
EssencesNew York, Basic Books.
Hudson, T. (1983). Correspondences and numerical
differences between disjoint sets. Child Development,
54(1), 84–90.
Klein, A. S., Beishuizen, M., & Treffers, A. (1998). The
empty number line in Dutch second grades: Realistic
versus gradual program design. Journal for Research in
Mathematics Education, 443-464.
Lautrey, J., Rémi-Giraud, S., Sander, E., & Tiberghien, A.
(2008). Les connaissances naïves. Armand Colin.
Lusk, Cynthia M., and Charles M. Judd. "Political expertise
and the structural mediators of candidate evaluations."
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 24.2 (1988)
Richland, L. E., & Simms, N. (2015). Analogy, higher order
thinking, and education. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Cognitive Science, 6(2), 177-192.
Rittle-Johnson, B., & Star, J. R. (2007). Does comparing
solution methods facilitate conceptual and procedural
knowledge? An experimental study on learning to solve
equations. Journal of Educational Psychology, 99(3), 561.
Schoenfeld, A. H., & Herrmann, D. J. (1982). Problem
perception and knowledge structure in expert and novice
mathematical problem solvers. Journal of Experimental
Psychology. Learning, Memory and Cognition, 8, 484.
Siegler, R. S. (1999). Strategic development. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 3(11), 430-435.
Star, J. R., & Newton, K. J. (2009). The nature and
development of experts’ strategy flexibility for solving
equations. ZDM, 41(5), 557-567.
Star, J. R., & Seifert, C. (2006). The development of
flexibility in equation solving. Contemporary Educational
Psychology, 31(3), 280-300.
Star, J. R., & Rittle-Johnson, B. (2008). Flexibility in
problem solving: The case of equation solving. Learning
and Instruction, 18(6), 565-579.
Vergnaud, G. (1982). A classification of cognitive tasks and
operations of 1195 thought involved in addition and
subtraction problems. In T. P. Carpenter, 1196 J. M.
Moser, & T. A. Romberg (Eds.), Addition and subtraction:
A 1197 cognitive perspective (pp. 39e59). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Vicente, S., Orrantia, J., and Verschaffel. L., Influence of
situational and conceptual rewording on word problem
solving. British journal of educational psychology 77.4
(2007): 829-848.
Willingham, D. T. (2007). Critical thinking: Why is it so
hard to teach? American Educator, 8–19.

3081

