Do Speaker’s Emotions influence their Language Production? Studying the
Influence of Disgust and Amusement on Alignment in Interactive Reference
Charlotte Out (c.out@uvt.nl)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication, Tilburg University, PO Box 90153, 5000 LE, The Netherlands

Martijn Goudbeek (m.b.goudbeek@uvt.nl)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication, Tilburg University, PO Box 90153, 5000 LE, The Netherlands

Emiel Krahmer (e.j.krahmer@uvt.nl)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication, Tilburg University, PO Box 90153, 5000 LE, The Netherlands
Abstract
The influence of emotion on (the early stages of) speech
production processes, notably content selection has received
little scholarly attention. Goudbeek & Krahmer (2012) found
evidence for alignment at the conceptual level: speakers may
start using a dispreferred attribute over a preferred attribute in
their referring expressions when they are primed by a prerecorded female voice in a preceding interaction. The current
study aimed to assess the role of emotion (using amusement
and disgust) in alignment, while simultaneously replicating
this finding in a more naturalistic setting involving two
human participants in naturalistic dialogue. Our results
replicate the findings by Goudbeek & Krahmer (2012),
generalizing their findings to a much more naturalistic setting.
In addition, we found that amused, but not disgusted speakers
tend to use the preferred attribute more to describe objects to
their conversational partner.
Keywords: alignment; egocentricity bias, attentional bias,
emotion; amusement; disgust; speech production; referential
expressions, psycholinguistics.

Introduction
Several effects of emotion on various processes in speech
have been studied extensively, including effects on
articulation and pronoun use. For instance, speakers often
signal their emotional state in their prosody, by sobbing,
crying or shouting (Bachorowski, 1999; Goudbeek &
Scherer, 2010) and depressed writers have been shown to
use more first person singular pronouns (Pajak &
Trzebiński, 2014; Stirman & Pennebaker, 2001). However,
the impact of emotion on other aspects of the speech
production processes has received little attention. In this
study, we aim to investigate the role of emotion in the
earlier processes in speech production, in particular on
content selection stage (“deciding what to say”) of language
production, focusing on referential expressions.

Emotion and speech production
As far as we know, only a few studies have looked at the
relationship between emotional state and content selection.
For example, Kempe, Rookes and Swarbrigg (2012) looked
at the effect of speaker emotion (positive or negative
emotion) on ambiguity avoidance in the production of
referring expressions. In their experiment, emotion was

induced by a positive or negative video, accompanied by
emotion congruent classical music. After the emotion
manipulation, participants were asked to uniquely describe
four pictures on the sheet. In the critical trials, two of the
four pictures could be described in a linguistically
ambiguous way, e.g. as a “bat” which could either be a
flying bat or a baseball bat. They found that speakers in a
positive state were less likely to disambiguate the second
linguistically ambiguous picture, that is, they were more
likely to use the word ‘bat’ for both the flying bat and the
baseball bat. These findings suggest that positive emotions
might increase ambiguity in referring expressions, which
could be the result of an attentional shift in the speaker
(Beukeboom and Semin, 2006).
Attentional bias It has been generally accepted that positive
emotions (e.g., amusement) broaden attention, whereas
negative emotions (e.g., sadness) narrows attention (see
Frederickson, 2001). However, Harmon-Jones, Gable, and
Price (2013) state that not valence, but the motivational
intensity of emotions influence attention: emotions of low
motivational intensity (e.g., sadness) broaden cognitive
scope and emotions of high motivational intensity (e.g.,
disgust) narrow cognitive scope. They found that
individuals exposed to disgusting pictures (compared to
neutral pictures) who did a global-local letter task (Navon,
1977) responded slower to global than to local targets
(Gable and Harmon-Jones, 2010), supporting the hypothesis
that emotions of high motivational intensity narrow
attention and make people focus more on details.
Egocentricity bias Egocentricity of speakers has been
known to influence content selection. The egocentricity bias
is the tendency of individuals to use their own perspective
as reference point to the world (Ross & Sicoly, 1979). Many
authors claim that although individuals are often able to
adjust to the perspective of the listener, they initially act
egoistically (Epley, Morewedge, and Keysar, 2004; Horton
and Keysar, 1996), although some beg to differ (see for
example Bezuidenhout, 2013). According to Converse, Lin,
Keysar and Epley (2008) and Clore and Hutsinger (2007),
individuals in a positive state are less likely to adopt to the
perspective of another person than individuals in a negative
state, the shift of perspective to the listener might be
impaired because positive emotions promote automatic
responses.

2846

Although these studies suggest an interesting link
between emotion and (the early stages of) speech
production, many questions remain. For example, what is
the effect of emotion on the language production of speakers
and listeners in an interaction?

Krahmer (2012) using a more naturalistic elicitation
paradigm.

The present study

Alignment in interaction
In the current study, we focus on the effect of emotion on
the amount of alignment between conversational partners in
referential expressions. As argued by Garrod and Pickering
(2004), one of the ways conversational partners can align to
each other is by using the same attributes to refer to an
object as their conversational partner. For example, if the
other person just referred to an object in terms of its size
(the large table), the speaker would be more likely to use
size as well in a subsequent reference, because the previous
use of size would prime this attribute. However, this is at
odds with another tendency that has been reported in the
literature, namely that speakers prefer to use certain
attributes that are more “absolute” in their meaning over
attributes that are less so (e.g. color over size, Martin, 1969;
Pechmann, 1989). Inspired by observations such as these,
Dale and Reiter (1995) developed the Incremental
Algorithm which assumes a fixed preference order of
attributes to determine in what order certain attributes are
used in the generation of referential expressions. This
Incremental Algorithm states that when individuals describe
an object, they will first use the most preferred attribute and
matching value, e.g., color and then “red”, leading to the red
chair. When this is not sufficient to single out the target
object (e.g., there are multiple red chairs), the speaker will
proceed by adding a less preferred attribute, e.g., size,
leading to the large red chair. The speaker will continue
adding attributes until the listener is able to identify which
chair she is talking about. Dale and Reiter’s (1995)
Incremental Algorithm thus predicts that speakers will never
use a dispreferred attribute when a preferred attribute is
sufficient for identification. However, Goudbeek and
Krahmer (2012) primed speakers with dispreferred
attributes (attributes that were used earlier in an interaction)
– and investigated whether they would stick to their
preferences or align by incorporating the dispreferred
attribute that was used by their conversational partner. In
their study, participants listened to a pre-recorded female
voice referring to one of three furniture objects, using either
a preferred (color; “the red chair”) or dispreferred
(orientation, “the chair seen from the side”) attribute. They
subsequently indicated which image (the target) matched
this description. When they were asked to describe a new
target object, they tended to use the same type of attribute
that they were primed with before, even when they could
also use the preferred attribute to distinguish the target.
These results show that speakers may thus use dispreferred
attributes over preferred ones when they are primed to do
so. In this paper, we study whether the emotions amusement
and disgust might inhibit or promote this tendency. In
addition, we aim to replicate the findings by Goudbeek and

Based on the results from Goudbeek and Krahmer (2012)
we predict that speakers will indeed align with their
dialogue partners and start using the dispreferred attribute in
their referring expressions when primed to do so. With
respect to the effect of emotion, previous research (e.g.,
Kempe et al., 2013, Beukeboom & Semin, 2006) indicates
that the emotional state of a speaker influences the content
selection process of language production, and thus
potentially the degree to which speakers align with respect
to the attributes they use in interaction.
However, mainly the influence of emotions differing in
valence (positive vs. negative) on speech production has
been studied (see Kempe et al., 2012; Converse et al., 2008)
which severely limits our understanding into the role of
emotion in speech production. After all, emotions can be
differentiated in other ways, which might influence speech
production as well.
We induced amusement and disgust, two emotions that
differ on multiple appraisals, among which is valence, but
also approach/avoidance, potency/control and, possibly,
intensity (see Scherer, 2013). Amusement is a positive
emotion that occurs when a person experiences something
entertaining (e.g., a joke) and feels pleasant (Tong, 2015).
Disgust is an emotion that is elicited when a person is
confronted with something they deem repulsive, for instance
bodily fluids (vomit, pus, urine). We will study the effect of
disgust and amusement on alignment in an interactive
referential task. Will amused speakers or disgusted speakers
align more with their conversational partners, even when
they use a dispreferred way to refer to a target?

Methods
Participants
A total of 140 Dutch-speaking university students (36
male), participated in the experiment in pairs (n = 70).

Materials
Stimuli Following Goudbeek and Krahmer (2012), we used
pictures taken from the TUNA corpus (van Deemter, Gatt,
van der Sluis, & Power, 2012), depicting front-facing
furniture items (a fan, a chair, a couch, and a desk) in four
different colors (blue, green, red, and grey) and two
different sizes (large or small). Participants were asked to
uniquely identify the target picture (accompanied by two
distractors) to their conversational partner. Previous studies
(Gatt et al., 2007; Goudbeek & Krahmer, 2012) indicate the
well-known preference of participants for color in their
description of the target picture.
There were three types of trails: color trials, size trials and
filler trials. Each participant pair was presented with 60
trials, divided into two blocks, consisting of 20 color trials

2847

and 20 size trials. Additionally, each block included 10 filler
trials, all containing large pictures of furniture in greyscale.
Four versions were created, containing different orders of
trials.
Mood questions To control for participants’ mood before
the experiment, we asked the participants to rate their mood
before they watched the video. They indicated on a 1 to 7
scale how much they experienced each of the following
moods: happy/sad, pleasant/unpleasant, satisfied/unsatisfied,
content/discontent, cheerful/sullen, in high spirits/lowspirited (Krahmer, van Dorst, & Ummelen, 2014, based on
Mackie and Worth, 1991 and Bohner et al. 1992; English
translations of Dutch originals).
Manipulation check To check whether emotion induction
was successful, we asked participants after viewing the
video to report how much amusement and disgust (and
pride, anger, sadness, disgust, surprise and fear) they
experienced on a 1 (“not at all”) to 7 (“extremely”) point
Likert scale.
Other-participant questions After the director-matcher
task, participants rated on a 7-point Likert scale (ranging
from 1: “not at all” till 7: “very”) how much they liked the
other participant, how empathic they felt towards them, and
how much they thought they got along. Finally, they
indicated if they knew the participant, choosing either “no”,
“yes, a little”, or “yes, very well”.
Videos To counter the possibility of film specific effects,
two different disgust-inducing and two different amusement
videos were shown. Based on existing literature, we used
four videos that were moderate to highly successful in
inducing the corresponding emotions amusement and
disgust, respectively. The amusement videos were “When
Harry met Sally” (1989) and “There’s Something About
Mary” (1998). The disgust videos were “Trainspotting”
(1996) and “Pink Flamingos” (1972). We selected these
videos because they have been used effectively in recent
work (e.g., Hewig, Hagemann, Seifert, Gollwitzer,
Naumann, and Bartussek, 2005; Fajula, Bonin-Guilaume,
Jouve, and Blin, 2013; Harlé and Sanfey, 2010; Schaeffer,
Nils, Sanchez, and Philippot, 2010; and Rottenberg, Ray,
and Gross, 2007).

went into a new room together with the other participant. To
enhance the emotion manipulation, participants discussed
the video they viewed with each other for approximately 2
minutes. They were instructed to focus on describing what
they saw in the video, and telling the other participant what
they thought and felt while viewing the video. They then
filled in the mood questionnaire again and go on to perform
the director-matcher task together.
Each trial consisted of four turns. First, participant A, the
director, described the target picture (framed by a red border
on the screen) to participant B, the matcher. Depending on
the trial, participant A used (was forced to use) either a
preferred or dispreferred attribute to describe the target
picture to participant B. In the color trials, participant A
could only use the preferred attribute color to distinguish the
target picture from the distractors. For example, the target
picture was a large blue fan, and the distractors were a large
red couch and a large red fan. Therefore, participant A had
to use color to describe the target picture. In the size trials,
participant A could only use the dispreferred attribute size to
distinguish the target picture from the distractors. For
example, the target picture was a large green desk, and the
distractors were a small green desk and a small green fan.
Therefore, participant A had to use size to describe the
target picture (see Figure 1, square 1).
Second, participant B, the matcher, saw the same pictures
on their screen in a different order than participant A. After
listening to the description of participant A, they indicated
the matching picture by pressing the key of the
corresponding number on their keyboard, e.g., “2” (see
Figure 1, square 2). When participant A knew that
participant B had selected an answer, she pressed “Enter”
and the participants viewed a new screen.

Procedure
After the participants had read and signed the consent form,
they were sent to separate cubicles and filled in the
demographics and answer the mood questions. The
participants were informed that they were going to view an
(emotional) video and were instructed to pay attention to the
video and keep their eyes on the screen, because they would
need this information in the video later in the experiment.
After viewing the video (the emotion induction), they
answered the questions of the manipulation check with
respect to their current emotional state. Subsequently, they

Figure 1. Example of a size trial in the director-matcher
task. Square 1 and 2 depict green pictures. Square 3 and 4
depict a red couch (the target), a blue desk and a grey chair.

2848

Third, the participants switched roles: now participant B
was the director and participant A the matcher. In contrast to
the previous turn, the combination of pictures on this screen
gave participant B the choice to use either the preferred or
dispreferred attribute to distinguish the target picture from
the distractors. For example, the target picture was a large
red couch and the distractors were a small grey chair and a
small blue desk. Participant B could either use the preferred
attribute (“the red couch”) or use the dispreferred attribute
(“the large couch”) to distinguish the target picture from the
distractors (see Figure 1, square 3). In case participant B
aligned with participant A, they used color when participant
A (i.e., in color trials) used the preferred attribute, and size
when participant A used the dispreferred attribute (i.e., in
size trials).
Fourth, participant A, now the matcher, selected the
picture that matched participant B’s description by pressing
the key of the corresponding number on the keyboard, e.g.,
“2” (see Figure 1, square 4). When participant B knew that
participant A had selected an answer, participant B pressed
“Enter”, marking the end of the trial. After participant B had
pressed “Enter”, a new trial appeared and the procedure was
repeated. Following the director-matcher task, both
participants filled in the questions about the other
participant. They got debriefed and received compensation
(credits or money).

Figure 2a. Proportion of preferred and dispreferred
attributes per Prime (Color or Size) for Amusement

Results
Manipulation check
First, we tested whether the emotion manipulation was
effective. We performed a one-way analysis of variance
with Emotion Video (Amusement vs. Disgust) as
independent variable and Emotion Scale (amusement vs.
disgust) as dependent variable. As expected, we found a
significant effect of Emotion on amusement, F(1, 138) =
88.89, p < .0001, and disgust, F(1, 138) = 255.47, p < .0001.
The mean scores of the combined videos per emotion
indicate that participants who viewed an amusing video
reported higher levels of amusement (M = 4.89, SD = 1.38)
than disgust (M = 2.60, SD = 1.49). Participants who viewed
a disgusting video reported a higher level of disgust (M =
6.26, SD = 1.38) than amusement (M = 2.51, SD = 1.39).
This indicates that the emotion manipulation had the desired
effect.

Analyses
To statistically evaluate the effects of emotion, prime, and
attribute, we conducted an analysis of variance with the
proportion of attribute use as dependent variable and
Emotion (Amusement vs. Disgust) as between subject
factor, and Prime (Color vs. Size) and Attribute (preferred
vs. dispreferred) as within-subject factors. The results of this
analysis can be found in Table 1.
A significant main effect was found for Prime, F(1, 68) =
47.36, p < .0001, η² = .41, indicating that the prime indeed
influences the selection of attribute. Mean scores (with
standard deviations) of the proportion of attribute use as
influenced by prime can be found in Table 2.
A significant main effect was found for Attribute, F(1,
68) = 33.67, p < .001, η² = .33, confirming that the preferred
property color (M = .80, SE = .03) is indeed preferred over
size (M = .52, SE = .03).
The effect of emotion The interaction between Emotion
and Attribute is significant, F(1,68) = 5.01, p = .028, η² =
.07. A one-way analysis of variance with Emotion and
Attribute shows a significant effect of Emotion for the use
of preferred attribute, F(1,68) = 5.54, p = .022, regardless of
prime. Amused individuals showed a preference for the
preferred attribute color (M = .86, SD = .19) over the
dispreferred attribute size (M = .48, SD = .22). Disgusted
participants did not show a preference for color (M = .73,
SD = .28) or size (M = .56, SD = .25), F(1,68) = 1.91,
p = .172. The three-way interaction between Emotion,
Prime and Attribute was not significant (F(1,68) = 3.34, p =
.072), but there was a significant interaction between
Emotion and Attribute (F(1,68) = 5.01, p = .022). The
proportions of preferred and dispreferred attributes as a
function of Prime and Emotion are shown in Figure 2a (for
Amusement) and Figure 2b (for Disgust).

Figure 2b. Proportion of use of preferred and dispreferred
attributes per Prime (color or size) for Disgust

2849

Table 1. Summary of statistical analysis

Emotion
Prime
Attribute
Emotion x Prime
Emotion x Attribute
Prime x Attribute
Emotion x Prime x Attribute

F
0.05
47.36
33.67
3.34
5.01
119.89
0.31

p≤
.376
.001
.001
.072
.028
.001
.580

η²
.01
.41
.33
.05
.07
.64
.01

Table 2. Proportions of preferred and dispreferred attributes
per Prime (color vs. size)
Prime
Color
Size

Attribute
Preferred
Dispreferred
Preferred
Dispreferred

M
0.85
0.31
0.75
0.72

SD
0.21
0.28
0.31
0.29

Discussion
The aim of this study was twofold. One, investigating the
effect of emotion on alignment in interactive reference
production. Two, providing a more naturalistic replication
of the results by Goudbeek and Krahmer (2012) by
investigating alignment on dispreferred properties in a truly
naturalistic version of the interactive alignment paradigm.
Regarding the effect of emotion on attribute use, we
found that amused speakers have a stronger preference for
the preferred attribute (color) over the dispreferred attribute
(size) than disgusted speakers. This finding can be explained
by the theory that individuals in a positive state tend to
process information more shallow and global than
individuals in a negative state (e.g., Beukeboom & Semin,
2006) therefore using the preferred attribute because it is the
default.
Regarding the effect of emotion on alignment, we did not
find a statistically significant interaction between emotion,
prime and attribute. However, upon inspecting our data, we
did observe some interesting trends. We found that amused
speakers aligned with their conversational partner regardless
of prime. In other words, amused speakers aligned when
they were primed with color and when they were primed
with size (Figure 2a). This is in line with Harmon-Jones et
al. (2013): amusement, an emotion of low emotional
intensity, broadens the cognitive scope and therefore,
speakers align with their conversational partners, regardless
of prime. However, our amused speakers still used the
preferred attribute color more (Figure 2a), supporting Clore
and Hutsinger (2007), who state that speakers in a positive
state find it harder to shift to the perspective of their
conversational partner.
Disgusted speakers aligned when they were primed with
color and when they were primed with size as well (Figure
2b). However, disgusted speakers primed with size

(opposed to the amused speakers primed with size) use the
dispreferred attribute more than the preferred attribute,
indicating that disgusted speakers have an even stronger
tendency to align than amused individuals. This might be
explained by the theory that individuals in a negative state
have a narrower scope of attention (Beukeboom & Semin,
2006). A narrow scope of attention might cause disgusted
speakers to focus more on the words of their conversational
partner than amused speakers who have a broad focus. The
increased attention for the conversational partner in turn
results in more alignment, regardless of prime (color or
size). However, the result that disgusted speakers align more
when they are primed with size than their amused peers can
also be explained by the egocentricity bias (see Kempe et
al., 2012). If amused speakers are more egocentric than
disgusted speakers, they will rely more on their own
perspective, using the preferred attribute color more,
regardless of prime. This might not be the case for disgusted
speakers, who are less self-focused and therefore align with
their conversational partner, even when the prime was a
dispreferred attribute.
The results of this study are perfectly in line with those of
Goudbeek and Krahmer (2012). First, we found that
participants generally used the preferred attribute color over
the dispreferred attribute size. Second, participants primed
with size used the dispreferred attribute size more than when
they were primed with color. This is an interesting result,
because the paradigm used in the study by Goudbeek &
Krahmer (2012) was much more artificial than the one in
our current study. In their experiment, speakers interacted
with a computer and were primed by a pre-recorded
computerized female voice. In our study, two human
participants interacted in pairs in a relatively natural setting:
they were asked to interact normally, without restrictions.
The participants who primed did this naturally and
unconsciously, by being only able to use the preferred or
dispreferred attribute to describe the target picture.
The preliminary evidence for the differential effects of
amusement and disgust on attribute choice in referential
expressions should lead to further explorations of the effect
of (various) emotions on language production in human
interactions. Future studies could, for example, focus on
finding the (inter- and intrapersonal) mechanisms that might
underlie the preference of emotional speakers to use either
preferred over dispreferred attributes. In our study, amused
speakers preferred color much more than disgusted speakers
did, which implies that the emotional state of a speaker
influences her attribute preferences. These and similar
studies should result in a more detailed picture of the
underlying mechanisms of the language production of
emotional speakers.

Acknowledgments
The research reported in this article is part of the project
“Producing Affective Language: Content Selection,
Message Formulation and Computational Modelling”
funded by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific

2850

Research (NWO via Grant PR-14-87). We thank Nadine
Braun for her support and insights.

References
Bachorowski, J.A. (1999). Vocal expression and perception
of emotion. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
8, 53-57.
Beukeboom, C. J., & Semin, G. R. (2006). How mood turns
on language. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
42, 553-566.
Bezuidenhout, A. (2013). Perspective taking in
conversation: A defense of speaker non-egocentricity.
Journal of Pragmatics, 48, 4-16.
Clore, G. L., & Huntsinger, J. R. (2007). How emotions
inform judgment and regulate thought. Trends in cognitive
sciences, 11(9), 393-399.
Converse, B. A., Lin, S., Keysar, B., & Epley, N. (2008). In
the mood to get over yourself: Mood affects Theory-ofMind use. Emotion, 8, 725-730.
Dale, R., & Reiter, E. (1995). Computational Interpretations
of the Gricean Maxims in the Generation of Referring
Expressions. Cognitive Science, 19, 233–263.
van Deemter, K., Gatt, A., van der Sluis, I., & Power, R.
(2012). Generation of referring expressions: Assessing the
Incremental Algorithm. Cognitive Science, 36, 799-836.
Epley, N., Morewedge, C. K., & Keysar, B. (2004).
Perspective taking in children and adults: Equivalent
egocentrism but differential correction. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 40, 760–768.
Fajula, C., Bonin-Guillaume, S., Jouve, E., & Blin, O.
(2013). Emotional reactivity assessment of healthy elderly
with an emotion-induced procedure, Experimental Aging
Research, 39, 109-124.
Fredrickson, B. L. (2001). The Role of Positive Emotions in
Positive Psychology: The Broaden-and-Build Theory of
Positive Emotions. The American Psychologist, 56, 218–
226.
Gable, P. A., & Harmon-Jones, E. (2010). The blues
broaden, but the nasty narrows: Attentional consequences
of negative affects low and high in motivational intensity.
Psychological
Science,
21,
211–215.
doi:10.1177/0956797609359622
Garrod, S., & Pickering, M. J. (2004). Why is conversation
so easy? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 8–11.
Gatt, A., van der Sluis, I., & van Deemter, K. (2007).
Evaluating algorithms for the generation of referring
expressions using a balanced corpus. In Proceedings of
the 11th European Workshop on Natural Language
Generation, July 17-20, Sloss Dagstuhl, Germany.
Goudbeek, M., & Scherer, K., (2010). Beyond arousal:
Valence and potency/control cues in the vocal expression
of emotion. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
128, 1322-1336.
Goudbeek, M., & E. Krahmer (2012). Alignment in
interactive reference production: Content planning,
modifier
ordering
and
referential

overspecification. Topics in Cognitive Science, 4, 269289.
Harlé, K.M., & Sanfey, A.G. (2010). Effects of approach
and withdrawal motivation on interactive economic
decisions. Cognition and Emotion, 24, 1456-1465.
Harmon-Jones, E., Gable, P.A., Price, T.F. (2013). Does
negative affect always narrow and positive affect always
broaden the mind? Considering the influence of
motivational intensity on cognitive scope. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 22, 301-307.
Hewig, J., Hagemann, D., Seifert, J., Gollwitzer, M.,
Naumann, E., Bartussek, D. (2005). A revised film set for
the induction of basic emotions. Cognition & Emotion,
19, 1095-1109.
Horton, W. S., & Keysar, B. (1996). When do speakers take
into account common ground?. Cognition, 59, 91-117.
Kempe, V., Rookes, M., & Swarbrigg, L. (2012). Speaker
emotion can affect ambiguity production. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 1-12.
Krahmer, E. J., van Dorst, J., & Ummelen, N. (2004).
Mood, persuasion and information presentation: the
influence of mood on the effectiveness of persuasive
digital documents. Information Design Journal, 12, 4052.
Martin, J.E. (1969). Semantic determinants of preferred
adjective order. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 8, 697-704.
Navon, D. (1977). Forest before trees: The precedence of
global features in visual perception. Cognitive Psychology,
9, 353–383.
Pajak, K., & Trzebinski, J. (2014). Escaping the world:
linguistic indicators of suicide attemps in poets. Journal
of Loss & Trauma, 19, 389-402.
Pechmann, T. (1989). Incremental speech production and
referential overspecification. Linguistics, 27, 89–110.
Scherer, Klaus R. (2013). The Nature and Dynamics of
Relevance and Valence Appraisals: Theoretical Advances
and Recent Evidence. Emotion Review, 5, 150-162.
Schaeffer, A., Nils, F., Sanchez, X., & Philippot, P. (2010).
Assessing the effectiveness of a large database of
emotion-eliciting films: A new tool for emotion
researchers. Cognition & Emotion, 24, 1153 – 1172.
Stirman, S. W., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2001). Word use in
the poetry of suicidal and nonsuicidal poets.
Psychosomatic Medicine, 63, 517-522.
Tong, E.M.W. (2015). Differentiation of 13 positive
emotions by appraisals. Cognition and Emotion, 29, 484503.
Rottenberg, J., & Ray, R.D., & Gross, J.J. (2007). Emotion
elicitation using films. In J.A. Coan & J. J. B. Allen
(Eds.), The handbook of emotion elicitation and
assessment. London: Oxford University Press.
Ross, Michael; Sicoly, Fiore (1979). Egocentric biases in
availability and attribution. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology. 37, 322–336.

2851

