Does Associative Memory Play a Role in Solving Physics Problems?
K. Wood, R.P. McLaren & I.P.L. McLaren (i.p.l.mclaren@exeter.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Exeter, UK

Abstract
Previous research has found that people frequently provide
incorrect predictions about the path of moving objects when given
an idealised physics problem to solve. The aim of this research was
to explore whether these incorrect predictions are due to the
application of an incorrect naïve physics theory, whether incorrect
perceptions generated from past experiences lead to
misconceptions of how moving objects behave, or whether it is a
combination of both. Thirty-one participants volunteered to take
part in the experiment which followed a two (experience
congruent/incongruent with naïve physics theory) by two (carried
versus free-moving object) within-subject design. The dependent
variable was participant response (straight down or curved
forwards). Results of the study revealed that participants provided
answers both consistent and inconsistent with the naïve physics
theory. This suggests that responses were primarily elicited
through the retrieval of associatively-mediated memories of similar
scenarios - some of which contain perceptual illusions. Possible
methodological limitations and alternative theoretical explanations
are discussed, along with practical and theoretical implications for
education and learning.

Introduction
Objects are constantly moving all around us. Therefore, it
seems realistic that an individual should be able to correctly
predict the path of a moving object (Zago & Lacquaniti,
2005). However, research has found that people are
frequently incorrect in their predictions when given an
idealised problem to solve (McCloskey, Caramazza &
Green, 1980; McCloskey, Washburn & Felch, 1983;
McLaren, Wood & McLaren, 2013). The aim of this study is
to investigate whether conscious reasoning leads people to
apply an incorrect theory to basic physics problems (a
propositional account, cf. Mitchell, De Houwer and
Lovibond, 2009) or whether automatic associative memories
(McLaren, 2011) generate misperceptions of how moving
objects behave (the associative account), or even if a
combination of both is needed to explain these predictions
(a dual-process account (McLaren et al., 2014)). We first
introduce the on-going debate as to whether human mental
life is best explained in propositional terms, associative
terms or both, before going on to consider other related
examples of problem solving in humans (and other animals)
which may cast light on this research question.
Both the propositional (see also Shanks, 2007) and dualprocess (McLaren et al., 2014) approaches agree that human
learning incorporates a conscious, calculating component,
and that past experiences play a crucial role. However,
disagreement exists on whether human learning can be
explained by one unitary set of processes or requires
multiple processes for its full characterisation. The dualprocess approach refers to two modes of processing which
are fundamentally distinct: associative processes which
create links between representations without conscious
knowledge and regardless of the individual’s intentions, and
cognitive processes which consciously employ rules and
reasoning (McLaren, Green & Mackintosh, 1994). It is

argued that whilst both human and non-human species are
capable of associative learning, humans alone possess rulebased processes which allow logical reasoning (Povinelli,
2004). However, Mitchell, De Houwer and Lovibond (2009)
argue that evidence for these two distinct learning processes
is ambiguous. They state that rule-based learning and
associative learning are part of a combined system where
associative learning relies on conscious, effortful and
calculated processes, rather than implicit, automatic
processes.
The present study explores all three of the theoretical
approaches discussed above, in relation to how people solve
physics problems. However, the working hypothesis is that
associative processes, in the form of associative memory,
primarily drive responses to physics problems in most
people. Mental rotation tasks share similarities to the basic
physics problems used in this current study, in requiring a
simulation of the physical world (Neiworth & Rilling,
1987). Therefore, they provide a solid starting point for
exploring whether associative memory plays a primary role
in responding to these types of problems. During a
discrimination task involving shape rotations, Shepard and
Metzler (1971) found an increased reaction time for larger
rotations. This linear relationship led Shepard and Metzler
to conclude that people have a general purpose rotation
ability. They suggested that participants created mental
representations of the first image and then, when shown the
second image, mentally rotated it to match the first.
However, something resembling mental rotation has also
been demonstrated in pigeons (Neiworth & Rilling, 1987). If
humans alone possess rule-based processes which allow
logical reasoning (Povinelli, 2004), then mental rotation in
pigeons might suggest a role for associative processes in
these tasks. Pigeons were trained to respond to images of
clocks with rotating hands and were then tested in a
discrimination task. Neiworth and Rilling found the pigeons
not only performed above chance when discriminating
rotations they had been trained on, but also in trials
involving rotations they had not been trained on. The
pigeons appeared to know where the clock hand should
reappear given the time that had gone by, and were able to
indicate whether it was right or wrong when the clock hand
reappeared. These findings provide support for the primary
role of associative memory because the pigeons had
considerable experience of successive events during
training, and, as a result, were later able to extrapolate novel
rotations similar to the rotations they had previously
experienced. It can, therefore, be argued that it is also
extrapolation based on experience that enables humans to
solve similar problems. Rather than utilising a generalpurpose rotation ability, people’s ability to apparently
mentally rotate objects might instead come from their vast
experience of objects in different orientations in the
environment (Edelman & Bülthoff, 1992). A corollary of
this position is that if people’s responses are driven by
associative memory and experience, then changing

3546

contextual variables (i.e. the surface features of the task)
should potentially change people’s answers. We make use
of this logic in the study reported here.
Previous research on naïve physics problems has helped
inform the current research. According to McCloskey,
Caramazza and Green (1980), when presented with
problems involving a ball bearing entering a horizontally
positioned curved tube, people tend to utilise the belief that
the ball will exit the tube with a “curvy impetus”. The
majority of participants verbally indicated in a later
interview that they believed the ball would acquire a force
or momentum in the tube that would cause it to continue to
travel in a curved motion upon its exit, gradually losing
momentum until the trajectory became straight. This led
McCloskey et al. (1980) to conclude that participants were
using a naïve theory of motion. McCloskey, Washburn and
Felch (1983) later provided evidence for a naïve physics
theory in problems involving falling objects. Participants
appeared to apply the incorrect non-Newtonian theory that,
whilst free-moving objects will fall in a curved motion,
carried objects will fall straight down. McCloskey et al.
(1983) suggest that a perceptual illusion occurs when people
observe a carried object falling. For instance, when an
individual drops something whilst cycling, the object ends
up behind them due to the cyclist maintaining a constant
speed before noticing the object has fallen. Whilst the
cyclist continues at a constant speed, the object gradually
loses speed as soon as it starts to fall. Although the object
falls forward in a curved motion, the observer is likely to
believe that the object fell straight down (or backwards)
because it is behind the cyclist in their frame of reference.
Whilst it appears that participants are consistently getting
basic physics problems wrong due to explicitly applying an
incorrect non-Newtonian theory, there is the alternative
possibility that these responses are primarily elicited
through the retrieval of associatively-mediated memories of
similar scenarios - some of which contain perceptual
illusions (Zago & Lacquaniti, 2005). Participants may later
offer an explanation congruent with a naïve physics theory
to justify their reasoning, in an attempt to rationalise their
responses in a scientific way. In order to provide evidence
for the use of associatively-mediated memories in these
problems, it needs to be demonstrated that individuals can
produce systematically different answers to essentially the
same problem (Sloman, 1996) when the contextual cues
accompanying it are varied. If participants cannot explain
their answers using a consistent rule, then this indicates
automatic associative processing followed by conscious
reasoning to justify their initial automatic responses.
A study by McLaren, Wood and McLaren (2013) explored
whether experience is primary in explaining why people
incorrectly predict the directions of moving objects.
Participants were required to complete a questionnaire
containing eight physics problems, each concerning falling
objects, and were asked to indicate which path they thought
each falling object would take. They found that participants
gave responses that were both consistent and inconsistent
with the naïve physics theory, depending on the context of
the problem. In a series of structurally identical but
contextually varied scenarios, around half of the carried
objects were predicted (on the basis of extrapolation from
experience) to fall in a curved forwards motion whilst the

others were predicted to fall straight down. Equally, around
half of the free-moving objects were predicted to fall
straight down whilst the others were predicted to fall in a
curved forwards motion. A naïve physics view would
predict that all the carried objects fall straight down, and all
the free-moving objects follow a curved forwards path.
McLaren et al. (2013) argued that if participants’ responses
were produced by applying a naïve physics theory, the
theory would have to be consistently applied across all
scenarios. In fact, the variation in contextual cues led to
responses that were consistent with their predictions rather
than the naïve physics view. Therefore, a more feasible
explanation for the responses is that participants were
primarily responding to these problems using their own
experiences of events similar in structure or context to
predict the paths of the falling objects.
The present research was predicated on the existence of
both propositional and associative processes in humans.
Whilst it might appear that people apply an incorrect naïve
physics theory when solving basic physics problems
(McCloskey et al., 1980; McCloskey et al., 1983) the
presence of the inconsistent responses seen in McLaren et
al.’s (2013) study suggests that associative memory plays a
significant role in generating these incorrect predictions.
Thus, it is possible that participants’ responses are based on
associative memory rather than propositional inference or
reasoning and that naïve physics accounts are later presented
as a reason for these responses (i.e. an epiphenomenon).
This study aims to extend McLaren et al.’s (2013) work in
order to determine whether results in support of the
associative account can be replicated under more controlled
conditions. In order to do this, a number of possible
weaknesses and limitations that were identified in McLaren
et al.’s (2013) study were eliminated. Firstly, the number of
possible paths of falling objects that participants could pick
from was reduced from five to two in order to simplify the
analysis of participants’ responses. Secondly, the number of
problems was increased from eight to twelve to improve
reliability. Thirdly, each image was carefully refined to
avoid any confounding characteristics such as motion lines
and object position – these are now equated across
problems. Fourthly, each participant was tested on a
computer individually and then interviewed afterwards
rather than given a questionnaire to complete in class. This
was to strengthen validity of the experiment by avoiding
confounding variables such as responses of classmates at the
same table and noisy distractions. The interview was done to
ensure enough information was provided to generate reliable
qualitative data. If these findings show responses that are
both consistent and inconsistent with the naïve physics
theory, depending on the context in which they are
presented, this will support the theory that people are
making use of associative memories when responding to
these problems.

Experiment
Method
Participants
Thirty-one participants volunteered to take part in the
experiment. Participants consisted of 17 females and 14
males (M=26.45 years, SD=8.37) living in Exeter and the
surrounding areas (15 undergraduate students, 5 college

3547

students, 10 professionals and 1 postgraduate student). All
participants had a GCSE in Physics and one had an A Level
in Physics. Final year psychology students with prior
knowledge of the theories explored in this study were
excluded from participation.

Materials and Design

please ignore the effects of air/wind resistance and friction.
All objects are travelling at the same speed (Speed V). When
you have made your choice, let the experimenter know. You
will then be asked a couple of brief questions before moving
on to the next scenario. Please give as full an answer as
possible. If you are happy to continue, press the space bar
to begin the experiment.”

The experiment followed a 2 (experience congruent/
incongruent with naïve physics theory) by 2 (carried/freemoving object) within-subject design. The dependent
variable was participant response (straight down/curved
forwards). Each participant was presented with the same 12
basic physics problems, constructed using Microsoft Word
and Microsoft PowerPoint and programmed using SuperLab
software on a Macintosh computer. The experiment
contained what was essentially the same physics problem
presented in 12 different ways, using different contextual
features. All of the problems were framed around falling
objects travelling at the same speed. Six problems involved
carried objects and the other six problems involved freemoving objects. These two types of problems were divided
into subcategories, based on whether the predicted answer
was congruent or incongruent with the naïve physics theory.
Therefore, the four categories of problems were: Carried –
Congruent (e.g. Figure 1), Carried – Incongruent (e.g.
Figure 2), Free-moving – Congruent (e.g. Figure 3) and
Free-Moving – Incongruent (e.g. Figure 4).
There were three problems in each of the four categories.
Carried – Congruent: a seagull in flight dropping an icecream, a plane dropping a crate and a running student
dropping a book; Carried – Incongruent: a swinging monkey
dropping a banana, a plane dropping a bouncing bomb and a
running cricketer dropping a ball; Free-Moving –
Congruent: a cannonball fired off a cliff, a skier approaching
a crevasse and a toy car falling off a table; Free-Moving
Incongruent: a river flowing off a cliff, a skater dropping
into a half-pipe and a toy train falling off a broken track.
The congruent problems were based on problems used in
previous research that resulted in responses congruent with
the naïve physics theory (i.e. straight down for carried
objects and curved forwards for free-moving objects). The
incongruent problems, which were designed to elicit
responses incongruent with the naive physics theory (i.e.
curved forwards for carried objects and straight down for
free-moving objects), were selected based on the research
team’s own visualisations of how the objects would appear
to behave from associated experiences (e.g. a skater can be
associated with dropping straight down into a half-pipe).

Procedure
Firstly, participants were given a consent form to sign,
which briefed them on the procedure of the experiment and
their right to withdraw at any time. They then read the
onscreen instructions as follows: “You are about to view a
series of scenarios in which objects are seen falling to the
ground. Firstly, look at the scenario and decide which path
you think the object will take on its journey, and then, from
the two choices offered, select which path you think most
resembles the one you thought of. Indicate your choice by
pressing the corresponding number on the keyboard. For
example, if you think Path 1 is most similar to the path you
thought of, press the key ‘1’. When making your choice,

The experiment began with one of the 12 scenarios
appearing on the screen. Participants were provided with

3548

information about the scenario (see Figures 1-4) and were
then asked to press the space bar to see the possible paths of
the falling object (see Figure 5). These were shown side by
side, with the object falling straight down or curved
forwards. Participants were asked to select the path they
thought was most likely. They were then asked to let the
experimenter know that they had made their decision. The
experimenter responded by asking a set list of questions
about the scenario: “What was happening in the scenario?”,
“Which answer did you select?” and “Why did you select
that answer?” The 12 scenarios were presented in random
order to prevent bias.

Figure 5. Example of choices provided.
At the end of the experiment, participants were asked if
they followed any specific rules to help them complete the
experiment and if they had any general comments about the
experiment. Participants 13 to 31 were also asked if they felt
their approach changed at all during the experiment. This
was because it became apparent during the experiment that
some participants felt they were trying to apply a rule at first
and then they later noticed their responses were inconsistent
with the rule they had said they were applying. The
experimenter then verbally debriefed participants about the
nature of the study. The duration of the experiment was
approximately 15 minutes for each participant.

most popular response for free-moving problems. This
finding is consistent with a naïve physics effect.

However, a naïve physics theory predicts a preference for
straight down responses for carried objects and curved
forwards responses for free-moving objects, regardless of
congruency classification. These results were further broken
down to investigate whether carried versus free-moving had
an effect on response when looking at congruent and
incongruent problems independently. The 𝜒 # (1) = 48.31, p
< .001 for congruent problems and the 𝜒 # (1) = 16.89, p <
.001 for incongruent problems suggest that carried versus
free-moving had a highly significant but quite opposing
effect on responses for both congruent and incongruent
problems (see Figure 6). It can clearly be seen from Figure 6
that, whilst it is possible to get a pattern of results consistent
with a naïve physics theory (congruent problem data shown
in blue), it is also possible to construct similar problems that
elicit the reverse pattern of results. In the congruent
problems, carried objects tended to produce a straight down
response and free-moving objects tended to produce a
curved forwards response. Conversely, the incongruent
problems, revealed the opposite pattern of responses,
directly contradicting the naïve physics theory.

Results
As a first step, the data was analysed using a 4 (condition)
x 2 (response) contingency chi-square test to see if the
condition (carried-congruent, carried-incongruent, freecongruent or free-incongruent) had a significant effect on
the responses given (straight down or curved forwards). A
contingency chi-square test was chosen because it
investigates whether there is a significant relationship
between two variables. A significance level of p = .05 was
used for all statistical tests. The results of the
analysis, 𝜒 # (3) = 66.94, p < .001 suggest that there was a
highly significant effect. In other words, the responses given
were not independent of the condition. As the condition did
appear to have an effect on the responses given (see Table
1), a number of 2 x 2 contingency chi-square analyses were
carried out to determine the nature of this effect. Collapsing
over carried/free-moving, 𝜒 # (1) = 2.43, p = .119 (ns)
indicates that congruency had no main effect. A similar
analysis for carried/free-moving after collapsing over
congruency gave a 𝜒 # (1) = 3.89, p = .049, which suggests
there was a marginally significant relationship between this
factor and response. Straight down was the most common
response for carried problems and curved forwards was the

Figure 6. This graph represents the response difference score
(No. curved forwards – No. straight down) for each of the four
conditions, where a positive score denotes a bias for the curved
forwards response over the straight down response.

Discussion
The aim of this study was to determine whether
experiences are primary in predicting the answer of basic
physics problems. In order to do this, an extension of
McLaren et al.’s (2013) study was developed. Specifically,
the interest was whether participants responded both
consistently and inconsistently with the naïve physics theory

3549

depending on the context in which the problems were
presented. The hypothesis was that associative processes in
the form of associative memory primarily drive responses to
physics problems in relatively naïve participants. Therefore,
it was predicted that participants would provide answers
both consistent and inconsistent with the naïve physics
theory based on congruency categorisation. The results of
the study revealed that they did.

Evidence for Associative and Cognitive Processes?
Whilst we have strong evidence that contextual variables
can influence the responses to essentially the same physics
problem, a result which strengthens the case for associative
memory influencing these responses, we also have a main
effect of carried/free-moving that is consistent with a naïve
physics view. Admittedly this effect could be due to the fact
that memories of carried objects have a general tendency to
elicit a straight down response (and more than a curved
forwards response) because of an incorrect perception
generated from past experience (McLaren et al., 2013). If
the carrier of the object is still moving at a constant speed
when the object falls then it will appear that the object has
fallen straight down. Nevertheless, this is a post-hoc
explanation of this finding, which would have undoubtedly
been predicted by a naïve physics account. Thus, we must
acknowledge the possibility of a more cognitive component
to the responses made to our problems.
When exploring the qualitative data, it becomes clear that
many participants do offer something reminiscent of a naïve
physics theory when asked to explain their responses.
However, the theory provided is inconsistently applied, as
congruent questions are predominately explained using a
naïve physics theory, whereas incongruent problems are
predominately explained by an appeal to experience. If
participants were consciously applying different rules in
different situations, then they should be able to explain these
diverse rules afterwards. However, this was not the case.
For instance, in the seagull problem, the majority of
participants’ explanations were of the form: “I thought it
was most likely to fall straight down or backwards because
the bird is in motion but the ice cream is not”. This sounds
like a naïve physics theory, but on the other hand, in the
skateboarder problem, the majority of participants’
explanations did not refer to theory but to experience: “If
you see skaters on a ramp they usually go straight down”.
Other incongruent problems are explained using an
alternative theory. For instance, some participants failed to
apply the straight down belief to carried objects but instead
attempted to apply the rules of Newtonian physics by simply
mentioning gravity: “gravity will pull it straight down”.
These inconsistent explanations for responses suggest that
participants are automatically responding to problems and
later coming up with rules when asked to explain why they
selected their responses. At the end of the experiment,
many participants indicated they had later become aware
that the rule they provided as an explanation directly
contradicted some of their responses. 74.4% of participants
said that they felt their approach to the task changed as the
experiment progressed. When asked if they had any further
comments about the experiment, 71.0% said “no”. However,
the remaining 29.0% asked if all the problems had the same
answer. This shows that whilst some of the participants
suspected that the answers may all be the same due to the

similar structure, perceptions based on their own
experiences were so powerful that they overrode these
suspicions. The fact that the problems used in this
experiment were essentially the same basic problem with
different surface features shows how vulnerable
associatively-mediated retrieval is to a change in the surface
features of a problem.

Implications
The findings in this study suggest that when participants
are presented with problems, such as the ones in this study,
memories are elicited first and rules are inferred later. These
findings may have significant implications for education. If
experiences are primary to predicting the answer of basic
physics problems, this needs to be factored into the teaching
methods applied to physics. For instance, children who are
studying GCSE Physics are likely to have already formed
many memories about the behaviour of moving objects, and
because they are likely to believe things that they see with
their own eyes rather more than what they are told (Wallach,
1987) this will need to be taken into account. Just telling
them the correct theory may not be enough; some explicit
acknowledgement of their own experience and why it might
be misleading in terms of the physics of the situation may be
required.

Strengths and Limitations
This study has successfully replicated McLaren et al.’s
(2013) findings using an improved methodology, whereby
participants underwent the study in a controlled
environment and were able to provide both quantitative data
and qualitative data. The results of this study provide strong
evidence for the case that associative memory plays an
important role in problem solving and learning. However,
one limitation of this study is the method of obtaining
incongruent problems. The problems which were designed
to elicit responses incongruent with the naive physics theory
(i.e. curved forwards responses for carried objects and
straight down responses for free-moving objects) were
selected based solely on the research team’s own experience
of how the objects appear to behave. It would be useful for
future research to find a more independent method of
selecting incongruent problems. Another limitation of the
study could be that it lacks ecological validity due to the use
of images of two-dimensional objects on a computer
monitor rather than real-life objects.
It is possible that some propositional theorists may argue
that this study does not provide evidence for the primary
role of associative memory in problem solving. Mitchell et
al. (2009) allow that associative memory may have a role in
learning. However, they believe it is propositional reasoning
that elicits memories based on previous experience and
extracts a rule from them. Therefore, it could be argued that,
although the responses appear to be based on the
participants’ past experiences, it is conscious, propositional
reasoning that enables the participants to apply these past
experiences to the problems presented in the study.
Although this alternative explanation covers most of the
facts, it cannot easily explain the pattern of qualitative
results found in this study. Participants’ inconsistent
explanations for their responses suggest that they responded
to each problem automatically and later came up with a
post-hoc justification to fit the response they had given,

3550

even if their justification directly contradicted an
explanation they had given for a previous problem. At the
end of the experiment, many participants indicated that they
had later become aware that their explanations directly
contradicted some of their responses. This shows that
perceptions based on their own experiences were so
powerful that they overrode any logic.

Directions for Future Research
As pointed out earlier, the experiment involves people
predicting the path of objects drawn in two-dimensional
images on a computer monitor. Although the results of this
experiment are highly significant, it is important to find out
whether the findings can be generalised to other more
practical contexts. A possible extension of this study
involves participants predicting the path of falling objects in
real-life situations. For instance, a student running with a
book along a corridor marked with a tape measure. The
student could initially run without dropping the book to give
participants a real-life illustration. The experimenter would
then explain to the participant that the student will drop the
book at a specified point the next time he runs along the
corridor and ask them to indicate where they expect the
book will fall. This may result in more accurate responses
due to greater ecological validity. Alternatively, the
scenarios could be presented using a video recording.
This study could be extended by running the experiment
with a number of samples of participants from different age
groups, academic disciplines, professions, or demographics,
in order to determine whether the results can be generalised
to different groups of participants. It would also be
interesting to run the experiment with children in different
developmental stages. Although younger children will have
less experience with falling objects, they are likely to rely
more on automatic associative memory because, according
to Piaget (1972), they will not yet have developed the ability
to apply a theory when solving problems. However,
interestingly, some research has found evidence for children
as young as 5 years old applying what appears to be a naïve
physics theory to basic physics problems (Blown & Bryce,
2013; Kaiser, Proffitt & McCloskey, 1985; Vosniadou,
2002). It would be interesting to explore this further.
Another possible direction for future research is to study
the transition from associatively-based to rule-based
performance when solving basic physics problems. This
could be achieved by firstly running the initial experiment
with a group of participants to get a set of responses based
on associative memory, and then training the same group of
participants on Newtonian mechanics before running the
experiment (using different problem variants) with them
again. In the second trial, the participants would presumably
respond correctly to the problems because they would be
able to apply a rule they had recently learnt. This may sound
straightforward, but note that most of the participants in this
study had some knowledge of physics, and still made
systematic errors.

Conclusion
In conclusion, this study has provided strong evidence for
the primary role of associative memory in human learning
and problem solving. The highly reliable results show that
people are frequently incorrect in their predictions of the

paths of moving objects, highlighting the importance of
studying associative processes in humans and their
interaction with more cognitive (propositional) processing.
We suspect that our results will have practical implications
for education, especially instruction in physics and applied
mathematics.

References
Blown, E. J., & Bryce, T. G. K. (2013). Thought-experiments
about gravity in the history of science and in research into
children’s thinking. Science & Education, 22(3), 419-481.
Edelman, S., & Bülthoff, H. H. (1992). Orientation dependence in
the recognition of familiar and novel views of three-dimensional
objects. Vision Research, 32(12), 2385-2400.
Kaiser, M. K., Proffitt, D. R., & McCloskey, M. (1985). The
development of beliefs about falling objects. Perception &
Psychophysics, 38(6), 533-539.
McCloskey, M., Caramazza, A., & Green, B. (1980). Curvilinear
motion in the absence of external forces: Naïve beliefs about the
motion of objects. Science, 210, 1139-41.
McCloskey, M., Washburn, A., & Felch, L. (1983). Intuitive
physics: The straight down belief and its origin. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 9,
636-649.
McLaren, I. P. L. (2011). APECS: An adaptively parameterised
model of associative learning and memory, in Alonso, E., &
Mondragón, E. (Eds.). Computational Neuroscience for
Advancing Artificial Intelligence: Models, Methods and
Applications. Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
McLaren, I. P. L., Forrest, C. L. D., McLaren, R. P., Jones, F. W.,
Aitken, M. R. F., & Mackintosh, N. J. (2014). Associations and
propositions: The case for a dual-process account of learning in
humans. Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, 108, 185-195.
McLaren, I. P. L., Green, R. E. A. & Mackintosh, N. J. (1994)
Animal learning and the implicit/explicit distinction. In: Ellis, N.
(Eds.). Implicit and Explicit Learning of Languages, London,
Academic Press.
McLaren, I. P. L., Wood, K., & McLaren, R. P. (2013) Naïve
Physics: the wrong theory? In Knauff, M., Pauen, M., Sebanz,
N., & Wachsmuth, I. (Eds.). Proceedings of the 35th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 1008-1013. Austin,
TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Mitchell, C. J., De Houwer, J., & Lovibond, P. F. (2009). The
propositional nature of human associative learning. Behavioural
and Brain Sciences, 32(2), 183-198.
Neiworth, J. J., & Rilling, M. E. (1987). A method for studying
imagery in animals. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Animal Behaviour Processes, 13(3), 203.
Piaget, J. (1972). Intellectual evolution from adolescence to
adulthood. Human Development, 15, 1-12.
Povinelli, D. J. (2004). Behind the ape's appearance: Escaping
anthropocentrism in the study of other minds. Daedalus, 133, 2941.
Shanks, D. R. (2007). Associationism and cognition: Human
contingency learning at 25. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 60(3), 291-309.
Shepard, R. N. & Metzler, J. (1971). Mental rotation of threedimensional objects. Science, 191, 701-703.
Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of
reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 3-22.
Vosniadou, S. (2002). On the nature of naïve physics. In
Reconsidering Conceptual Change: Issues in Theory and
Practice (pp. 61-76). Springer Netherlands.
Wallach, H. (1987). Perceiving a stable environment when one
moves. Annual Review of Psychology, 38, 1-29.
Zago, M., & Lacquaniti, F. (2005). Cognitive, perceptual and
action-oriented
representations
of
falling
objects.
Neuropsychologia, 43(2), 178-188.

3551

