Does Mandarin Spatial Metaphor for Time Influence Chinese Deaf Signers’
Spatio-Temporal Reasoning?
Yan Gu1 (yan.gu@tilburguniversity.edu)
Yeqiu Zheng2 (yeqiu.zheng@tilburguniversity.edu)
Marc Swerts1 (m.g.j.swerts@tilburguniversity.edu)
1

Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Tilburg University, the Netherlands
2
Department of Econometrics and Operations Research, Tilburg University, the Netherlands
Abstract

In Mandarin Chinese, the space-time word “前/qian” is
used to express both the spatial concept of front/forward
and the temporal concept of early/before (e.g., “前天/qiantian”, literally front day, meaning the day before yesterday).
This is consistent with the fact that Mandarin speakers can
gesture to the front of the body to refer to a past event, and
more generally can have past-in-front space-time mappings.
In Chinese Sign Languages, however, the spatial
front/forward and the temporal early/before are signed
differently as the sign for spatial front is only used for the
spatial concept of forward, and the sign for before/past is
directed to the back. In this study we investigate whether
the Mandarin sagittal spatial metaphors for time influence
Chinese deaf signers’ spatio-temporal reasoning. In two
experiments, we found that Chinese deaf signers with
higher Mandarin proficiency were more likely to interpret
the Mandarin word “前/qian” as the temporal conception of
past (Study 1), and to perform past-in-front space-time
mappings (Study 2) as opposed to signers with lower
Mandarin proficiency. The findings of the study not only
provide within-culture evidence for the influence of
language on thought, but also demonstrate that even crossmodal space-time metaphors can have an impact on deafsigners’ spatio-temporal reasoning.
Keywords: space and time; Chinese deaf signers; language
and thought; conceptual metaphor

Introduction
Across cultures people use spatial representations to think
about time (Bottini, Crepaldi, Casasanto, Crollen, &
Collignon, 2015; Boroditsky, 2000; Casasanto &
Boroditsky, 2008; see reviews Bender & Beller, 2014;
Núñez, & Cooperrider, 2013). Most Europeans feel that
the future is in front of them and the past is at their back
(e.g., Miles, Nind, & Macrae, 2010; Ulrich et al., 2012).
Such an intuition matches the human’s experience of
walking in a certain direction, which is usually forwarding
to the front, so that the passed-by path is the past and the
place ahead represents the future. Interestingly, the futurein-front and past-at-back mappings are also expressed as
such in many languages. For instance, in English, one can
say “We look forward to the New Year ahead, and look
back to the hard times behind (e.g., Clark, 1973; Lakoff &
Johnson, 1980).
However, the way of conceptualizing the past at the
back and the future in the front does not generalise to all
languages. For example, speakers of Aymara exhibit the
opposite sagittal space-time mappings, with past things in
front of them, and the future as yet unseen events behind

them. This conceptual mapping is consistent with the way
they produce co-speech gestures, and with the spatial
metaphors in their language, as front year in Aymara has
the meaning of last year (Núñez & Sweetser, 2006).
Interestingly, Moroccans also have a strong tendency to
place past events in front, even though in Arabic the
front/back time metaphors are similar to most future-infront languages such as English. It has been argued that
the reason for Moroccans’ past-in-front space-time
mapping is that, in their culture, tradition and old
generations are more valued. Thus space-time mappings
in people’s minds are conditioned by their cultural
attitudes towards time (e.g., with a strong focus on past
times and old generations). It is claimed that the mental
space-time mappings are dependent on attentional focus
and can be independent from the space-time mappings
expressed in language (de la Fuente, Santiago, Román,
Dumitrache, & Casasanto, 2014). Moreover, a recent
study on Mandarin speakers shows that there are both
long-term effects of cultural attitudes on the spatialization
of time, and immediate effects of lexical cues to spacetime metaphors which can probe people’s mental
representations (Gu, Zheng, & Swerts, 2016).
Despite the fact that a growing number of studies have
shown that linguistic, cultural and bodily experiences
have separate influences on people’s spatial representation
of time (e.g., Boroditsky, 2001; Casasanto, & Bottini,
2014; Fuhrman & Boroditsky, 2010; Núñez & Sweetser,
2006; Núñez, Cooperrider, Doan, & Wassmann, 2012; Saj,
Fuhrman, Vuilleumier, & Boroditsky, 2014; Torralbo,
Santiago, & Lupáñez, 2006), our knowledge on why some
communities adopt a future-in-front mapping whereas
others a past-in-front mapping for time is still incomplete.
For instance, very few studies have researched deaf
signers’ spatio-temporal reasoning.
Sign language speakers also tend to use spatio-temporal
metaphors to express time. For instance, signers’ bodies
are often referred to as a deictic reference of now, and the
future is signed to the front (e.g, the American Sign
Language, Emmorey, 2001) relative to the signer’s body,
and the past to the back (e.g., the French Sign Language,
Maeder & Loncke, 1996; the Spanish Sign Language,
Pereiro & Soneira, 2004). At first sight, it would seem
reasonable to assume that the metaphorical timelines in
those sign languages would agree with the way these are
used in the corresponding spoken languages.
Interestingly, there are dramatic differences in the
deictic sagittal timelines between the Chinese Signed
Language (CSL) and Mandarin Chinese. In Mandarin

445

Chinese, the sagittal space-time word “前/qian” indicates
both the spatial concept of forward/front and the temporal
concept of early/before (Yu, 2012) (e.g., “前天/qian tian”,
literally: front day, meaning: the day before yesterday). A
case study on gestural behaviour has shown that Mandarin
speakers can point to the back or front of their body to
refer to the conception of before, depending on whether
the language suggests an ego-moving perspective (e.g.,
We are running to the future ahead.) or a time-moving
perspective (e.g., The future is coming.) (Chui, 2011).
Recent quantitative research, on the other hand, finds that
Mandarin speakers are more likely to gesture the past to
the front when referring to temporal expressions with the
sagittal space-time word (前/qian) (Gu, Mol, Hoetjes, &
Swerts, in prep). Partially due to this lexical effect, some
Mandarin speakers even explicitly report to believe the
past to be positioned behind and the future in front of
them (Gu, Zheng, & Swerts, 2016).
In CSLs, however, the spatial forward and the temporal
early/before are signed differently, i.e., the sign of front is
only used for the spatial concept of forward, whereas the
concept of before/past is signed towards the back (e.g.,
Zheng, 2009; Wu & Li, 2012). In other words, in their
lexicon, deaf signers only have the past-at-back spacetime mappings, which is different from Mandarin
speakers who additionally have past-in-front mappings
(Table1). As deaf signers learn the spatial concepts earlier
than the abstract concepts of time, it is plausible that if a
signer has not acquired the Mandarin space-time word (前
/qian) as a temporal past conception, s/he is likely to
interpret the word as a spatial concept of forward, which
is consistent with that in CSL (front in the space). By
contrast, if a signer has acquired the space-time word as a
temporal past conception, s/he is likely to map the past to
the back as suggested by the CLS past-at-back mappings,
or s/he may also establish new space-time mappings with
the past in the front, similar to Mandarin speakers.
Table 1: Differences between Mandarin Chinese and
Standard CSL in sagittal spatio-temporal metaphors.
The day before
Front (space)
yesterday (time)
Mandarin 前面 (front surface)
前天 (front day)

Chinese culture, whether the acquisition of Mandarin
sagittal spatial metaphors leads Chinese deaf signers to a
change in space-time mappings. To this end, we have
conducted two studies: study 1 used a clock question to
test how Chinese deaf signers interpret the sagittal spacetime word 前/qian (spatial front or temporal before); study
2 used a temporal diagram task to explicitly examine
Chinese deaf signers’ space-time mapping.

Study 1: The Clock Question
Method
Participants
15 deaf signers (F = 8) from Rizhao Special Education
School participated in the experiment. They were fluent
users of Standard CSL. They studied in different grades at
school, ranging from the 4th grade to 9th grade (M = 7.5).
Their mean age was 17.6 years (SD = 2.9). The average
hearing loss was moderate-severe, as reported by the
signers themselves and their teacher (M = 3.8, 1-Slight, 2Mild, 3-Moderate, 4-Moderately Severe, 5-Severe, 6Profound). Permission was granted to the investigators to
have access to the participants’ Mandarin Chinese exam
scores from the record of their last end-term exam.
Materials and Procedure
Singers were given a questionnaire to fill in personal
information and family background. The instructions were
not in sign language but in written Mandarin. In the
middle of the questionnaire, there was a clock question
(Table 2). The sagittal space-time word 前/qian (literally
front/forward or temporally before) in this question is
somewhat ambiguous in meaning though mainly used as a
temporal expression. Most Mandarin speakers will
interpret the question as moving the clock one hour
before/earlier, thus answering the question as 12 AM (Lai
& Boroditsky, 2013). However, if deaf signers think of
the space-time word (前/qian) as a spatial front, then they
are likely to move the clock one hour forward, thus giving
2 PM as an answer. It is also assumed that deaf signers of
higher Mandarin proficiency levels are more likely to
interpret the space-time word as a temporal past, as
opposed to signers of lower Mandarin proficiency levels.
Table 2: The clock question in Mandarin and English.
假设
现在
下午
1点，
Jia-she
xian-zai
xia-wu
yi-dian
suppose now
afternoon one o’ clock
suppose now it is 1 PM

CSL
One hand with the
index finger extended,
point to the very front.

The index and middle
fingers point to the
back once.

时钟
往前拨
一小时
是
几点？
Shi-zhong wang-qian bo yixiaoshi shi
ji-dian
clock
forward front
one hour
is which hour
what time is it if I would ask you to move the clock one
hour forward/before (early)

Note: The spatial concept of front in Mandarin is consistent with
that in CSL. Figures of signs are reproduced from the CSL, 2003.

Given the cross-linguistic differences in space-time
metaphors between Mandarin Chinese and CSL, and
given that learning a new category of spatial metaphors
for time may influence one’s mental representation of
time (Boroditsky, 2001), this paper aims to study (1)
whether the differences in space-time metaphors between
Mandarin Chinese and CSL influence Chinese deaf
signers’ understanding of time; (2) in the context of

Data Analysis
Data of two participants were excluded from the analysis,
as they did not fully complete the questionnaire. As a
dependent variable, we counted participants’ responses to
the clock question (answer: 12 AM or 2 PM).

446

We would discuss below how those responses were
moderated by possible factors. The first and most
important factor was participants’ Mandarin proficiency
level. It was mainly measured by the school grade level in
which a deaf signer was studying (grade), as a deaf signer
studying in a higher grade was expected to have a higher
Mandarin proficiency level than a signer studying in a
lower grade. Second, signers’ Mandarin exam score (exam
score) was used to supplement the proficiency
measurement, albeit that the exam papers and intrinsic
difficulty of tests were different across grades.
Additionally, given that age can influence individual’s
sagittal spatial-temporal reasoning (de la Fuente et al.,
2014), we controlled for age as a possible factor.
Participants’ hearing loss and their parents’ deafness
(deaf parents) were also considered to be factors that may
influence participants’ space-time mappings.

Results and Discussion
About 70% of participants (9 out of the 13 deaf signers)
responded according to the spatial understanding of the
word “前/qian” (forward), giving 2 PM as an answer. In
comparison to the 13% (3 out of 24) of Mandarin
monolinguals in Lai & Boroditsky (2013)’s study,
Chinese deaf signers were significantly more likely to
give an answer of 2 PM than Mandarin monolinguals
(Fisher exact test, p = .001, Odds Ratio = 15.75, 95% CI =
[2.91, 85.22]). Given that these deaf signers have already
learned Mandarin temporal conceptions in low grades,
this indicated that participants may still be influenced by
the spatial sign of front from their CSL.
Furthermore, we tested whether Mandarin proficiency
influenced signers’ understanding of the space-time word
(前/qian). The results showed that the factor grade was
significant (β = .387, t = 3.01, p = .020, 95% CI =
[.083, .691]), while controlling for the other factors exam
score, age, deaf parents and hearing loss (Table 3). This
indicated that those higher graders were more inclined to
interpret the space-time word (前/qian) as temporal before
(12 AM). Assuming that higher graders are likely to have
higher Mandarin proficiency levels than lower graders,
the effect of grade suggests that signers’ Mandarin
proficiency levels play a role in shaping their
understanding of the conceptions of the space-time word
(前/qian). A seemingly contradictory finding is that exam
score was not significant (β = -.0002, t = - .020, p = .985,
95% CI = [-.019, .019]), keeping all other variables
constant. This might be due to the fact that there was only
limited variation in Mandarin proficiency within a grade.

The fact that signers with lower Mandarin proficiency
levels were more likely to give an answer of 2 PM may be
caused by their use of spatial reference of front (primarily
be triggered by lexical cues), though this does not
necessarily imply that they also explicitly conceptualise
the future as in front of them. Study 2 investigated the
Chinese deaf signers’ sagittal space-time mappings using
a more explicit temporal diagram task.

Study 2: A Temporal Diagram Task
Method
Participants
All participants in study 1 took part in study 2. 1
Materials and Procedure
Participants performed a temporal diagram task (de la
Fuente et al., 2014, Experiment 1), which has been
adapted and used in Gu, Zheng, and Swerts (2016)’s study.
They sat at a table and saw a toy doll (named Xiaoming)
with one box behind and one box in front of it.
Participants and the character faced the same sagittal
direction (Fig. 1). Participants were provided with a
written instruction in which they could read that the day
before yesterday (前天/qian-tian, tr. front day) Xiaoming
went to visit a friend who liked eating apples, and the day
after tomorrow (后天/hou-tian, tr. back day) he would be
going to visit a friend who likes eating pears. Participants
were given an apple and a pear and were instructed to put
the apple in the box that corresponded to the past (以前
/yi-qian, tr. to front) and the pear to the box that
corresponded to the future (今后/jin-hou, tr. now back).
The mentioning order of the apple and pear and the way
they were paired with the day before yesterday or the day
after tomorrow were counterbalanced. Note that there was
no ambiguity in the interpretation of the space-time words
in this instruction (cf. study 1), e.g., the concept of the
space-time expression “前天/qian-tian”, tr. front day can
only be interpreted as the day before yesterday.

Table 3: Results of the clock question.
clock
Coef. t
grade
.387
3.01
exam_score
-.0002 -.02
age
-.029
-0.69
deaf_parents -.176
-0.75
hearing_loss -.231
-1.84
_cons
-1.20
-1.76
Note: * p < .1, ** p < .05

P>t
.02 **
.985
.515
.479
.108
.122

Figure 1: Schematic setting up of the Experiment
reproduced from Gu, Zheng, & Swerts (2016).
[ 95% CI ]
.083
.691
-.019
.019
-.129
.071
-.731
.380
-.528
.066
-2.83
.413

Following Gu, Zheng, & Swerts (2016)’s procedure, we
asked participants to perform the task with real entities
rather than doing it on paper (cf. de la Fuente et al., 2014).
1

Participants did Study 2 first, followed by the clock question
(Study 1) that was inserted in the middle of a questionnaire. As
participants were not given any feedback, no significant
influence was expected from the first task on the second one.

447

This can minimise the potential projection of vertical
timelines into the sagittal axis (as Chinese can
conceptualise time vertically, mapping the up and down to
the time conceptions of early and late, e.g., Boroditsky
2001; Gu, Mol, Hoetjes, & Swerts, 2017). Participants
were tested individually in Rizhao, China, and all
instructions were not in sign language but in written
Mandarin Chinese. After all tasks, they were given a
small token of appreciation and signed a consent form.
Data Analysis
In total, data of fourteen participants were used in the
analysis (Data from a 4th grader was excluded as she was
helped during the task). The dependent variable was
participants’ responses towards space-time mappings
(past-in-front or past-at-back).
As was the case with the previous experiment, we again
controlled for possible factors such as participants’ exam
score, grade, age, hearing loss and deaf parents.

Results and Discussion
42.9% of participants responded according to the past-infront mapping, placing the past event in the box in front of
the character and the future event in the box behind it.
Although this rate was not significantly different from
50%, p = .79, Odds Ratio = .75, 95% CI = [.18, .71] (N =
14), we expect it to be significant with a larger sample
size. It is unlikely that deaf signers randomly performed
the space-time mappings by chance, as shown below.
As we further examined the relationship between
signers’ Mandarin proficiency and their responses towards
space-time mappings, controlling for deaf parents, age
and hearing loss, the results showed that grade and exam
score were significantly positive (Table 4). Specifically,
first, higher graders had a stronger tendency to perform
past-in-front mappings (β = .34, t = 2.61, p = .031, 95%
CI = [.039, .641]), keeping all other variables constant.
Second, those who had higher Mandarin exam scores
were more inclined to respond towards past-in-front
mappings (β = .008, t = 2.04, p = .075 (two-tailed), 95%
CI = [-.001, .017]), ceteris paribus. The results indicated
that Mandarin proficiency has an effect on signers’ spacetime mappings, both between different grades and within
a grade. In other words, despite the fact that there are only
past-at-back spatio-temporal signs in CSL, deaf signers
can gradually establish the Mandarin past-in-front spacetime mappings during their learning process of Mandarin.
Table 4: Results of the temporal diagram task.
pastfront

Coef.

t

grade
.340
2.61
exam_score
.008
2.04
age
-.047
-1.53
deaf_parents -.477
-2.04
hearing_loss -.051
-.37
_cons
-1.52
-4.38
Note: * p < .1, ** p < .05

P>t
.031**
.075 *
.163
.075*
.724
.002

[ 95% CI ]
.0391
-.001
-.119
-1.015
-.372
-2.32

.641
.017
.024
.062
.270
-.722

Additionally, those signers whose parents were deaf

were less likely to perform past-in-front mappings (β = .48, t = -2.04, p = .075 (two-tailed), 95% CI = [1.015, .062]), ceteris paribus. The results suggested that
deaf parents may influence deaf children’s space-time
mappings. This is plausible, as deaf children may often be
exposed to the past-at-back temporal signs performed by
their deaf parents. Consequently, they may be more likely
to have past-at-back space-time mappings than their
counterparts with non-deaf parents.

General Discussion
In study 1, we used a clock experiment to examine how
Chinese deaf signers interpreted Mandarin spatial
metaphor of time. We observed effects of both CSL and
learning Mandarin Chinese on their understanding of time.
There is a co-activation of signs even in the non-signing
linguistic contexts, whereas within the signers’ group,
those with higher Mandarin proficiency levels were more
likely to interpret the space-time word 前/qian as temporal
before (like Mandarin speakers). Our results suggest that
language transfer occurs across modalities (i.e., a spoken
language and a sign language, cf. bimodal bilinguals,
Emmorey, Borinstein, Thompson, & Gollan, 2008).
Alternatively, the results can also be explained in terms
of differences in time perspective-taking (e.g., Gentner,
Imai, & Boroditsky, 2002; Moore, 2011; Núñez, Motz, &
Teuscher, 2006; Walker, Bergen, & Núñez, 2017), which
would be consistent with claims of a previous study on
Mandarin-English sequential bilinguals (Lai & Boroditsky,
2013). Similar as in CSL, in English the spatial front
usually does not have a meaning of temporal before. That
study found that Mandarin-English speakers were
influenced by English when answering the clock question
in Mandarin, such that Mandarin-English speakers were
less likely to answer the clock question as 12 AM, in
comparison with what Mandarin monolinguals did.
According to Lai and Boroditsky (2013), Mandarin
speakers mostly take the time-moving perspective (12
AM), whereas English speakers mostly take the egomoving perspective (2 PM). If monolingual signers of
CSL mainly take the ego-moving time perspective in
deictic time, it is possible that they gradually gain the
time-moving perspective after learning Mandarin Chinese.
In study 2, we used a temporal diagram task to
explicitly test deaf signers’ sagittal space-time mappings.
We found that some singers performed past-in-front
space-time mappings. Given that Mandarin speakers also
have past-in-front mappings (Gu, Zheng, & Swerts, 2016),
the pattern of signers’ space-time mappings may be due to
a characteristic of the Chinese culture, in which people
give more importance to tradition and focus more on the
past (Guo, Ji., Spina, & Zhang, 2012), analogous to what
appears to be true for Moroccans. However, within the
Chinese culture, we found that the extent to which signers
performed past-in-front mappings was positively related
to their Mandarin proficiency. Similar to the results of the
clock question, we found effects of Mandarin proficiency
on Chinese signers’ spatio-temporal reasoning, which
suggests that learning a novel linguistic spatial metaphor
for time may foster a new way of thinking about time
(Boroditsky, 2001; Hendricks & Boroditsky, 2015).

448

Future studies can further examine this using a nonlinguistic task (e.g., Fuhrman & Boroditsky, 2010).
Alternatively, according to the temporal-focus
hypothesis (de la Fuente et al., 2014), cultural attitudes
towards time exert an important influence on people’s
space-time mappings. One may argue that the typical
Chinese culture is more past-focused than that of the
Chinese deaf culture, although this needs a further survey.
Given such an assumption, signers may gradually adjust
themselves into the mainstream Chinese culture and hence
become more similar to the Mandarin speakers. Future
study can additionally control for signers’ temporal-focus
of attention to corroborate the present findings.
Note that in Standard CSL, there are no sign metaphors
that reflect past-in-front space-time mappings but only
signs for past-at-back mappings. It would therefore be
ideal if we could supplement the current set of results with
those obtained from a control group of monolingual deaf
signers of CSL to provide stronger evidence that deaf
signers indeed think of the past as being situated at the
back, though, practically, we can hardly find a group of
deaf signers who do not know Mandarin Chinese. Future
research may also study illiterate hearing Mandarin
speakers to at least examine the effects of written
Mandarin proficiency on people’s spatial-temporal
conceptualisations. By contrast, in our study, we found
that a certain proportion of Chinese deaf signers put the
entity corresponding to the past in the front. Additionally,
the effects of exam score and study grade clearly suggest
that Chinese deaf signers can gradually “learn” to have
past-in-front mappings as a function of an improved
Mandarin proficiency. This is an intriguing finding as it
shows that within the Chinese culture, learning a spatial
metaphor in a different modality can still influence
people’s mental representations of time.
Furthermore, the past-in-front mappings performed by
the deaf signers in the temporal diagram task can be
argued to be a consequence of a direct translation of the
spatial conception of front in the Standard CSL, thus
characterising the results as merely an effect of language
interferences without reference to the differences in
spatio-temporal reasoning. For example, participants may
simply interpret the sagittal space-time word (前/qian) as
front in space rather than understanding the concept of
space-time expression (前天/qian-tian, front day) as the
past conception of the day before yesterday, though the
conception of front day is not ambiguous at all. This is,
however, quite unlikely. First, the instructions were
checked beforehand by their teacher to ensure that those
participants have previously learned all the vocabulary
and would be able to understand the sentences and the
concept of front day. Second, if deaf signers would have
done a direct translation, those signers of lower Mandarin
proficiency levels should be more likely to translate the
space-time word (前/qian) as front, thus would produce a
larger proportion of past-in-front mappings. However,
quite on the contrary, we found that deaf signers of lower
Mandarin proficiency levels or studying in lower grades
were actually more inclined to perform past-at-back
mappings, which was consistent with the CSL where the
past is signed towards the back. This indicates that

participants even with a low Mandarin proficiency can
already understand that front day is a temporal concept.
Therefore, needless to say for the higher proficient group,
the tendency of having past-in-front space-time mappings
likely reflects their spatio-temporal reasoning.
Moreover, it is possible that deaf signers have to rely
on their vision heavily as a result of the hearing loss.
Consequently, this may trigger a stronger effect to
consider things that they have seen in front of them as the
past whereas the events that have not seen as the future
behind them (cf. Aymara speakers, Núñez & Sweetser,
2006). Apparently, this explanation does not hold for deaf
people universally, as deaf users of many other sign
languages (e.g., ASL, FSL) do not exhibit a tendency
towards past-in-front space-time mappings.
Additionally, we conducted both studies in Mandarin
Chinese rather than in CSL. It would be interesting to ask
the deaf signers to fulfil the temporal diagram task with a
sign language instruction, the results of which probably
can also reveal the effect of Mandarin Chinese on deaf
signers’ spatio-temporal reasoning, even when signers
think in CSL. Possibly, participants may be visually
primed by the spatial movements of the signs in the
instruction, for example, for the clock question the CSL
will give a strong hint where the clock hand is moving in
the signs (either a clockwise or an anti-clockwise
movement). This will not allow us to examine signers’
authentic interpretation of the sagittal space-time word.
Furthermore, the sign for front day (the day before
yesterday) is signed as two fingers pointing to the back of
the body, hinting a past-at-back space-time mapping.

Conclusions
In the current study we investigate whether the Mandarin
sagittal space-time metaphors influence Chinese deaf
signers’ spatio-temporal reasoning. In two experiments,
we found that signers with higher Mandarin proficiency
were more likely to interpret the Mandarin space-time
word ( 前 /qian) as temporal before (Study 1), and to
perform past-in-front space-time mappings (Study 2), in
comparisons to signers with lower Mandarin proficiency.
These findings not only provide within-culture evidence
for the influence of language on thought (cf. Boroditsky,
2001; Hendricks & Boroditsky, 2015), but also
demonstrate that even cross-modal space-time metaphors
can have an impact on signers’ spatio-temporal reasoning.

Acknowledgements
The first author received financial support from the NWO
Promoties in de geesteswetenschappen (322-89-007),
which is gratefully acknowledged.

References
Bender, A., & Beller, S. (2014). Mapping spatial frames
of reference onto time: A review of theoretical accounts
and empirical findings. Cognition, 132, 342-382.
Bottini, R., Crepaldi, D., Casasanto, D., Crollen, V., &
Collignon, O. (2015). Space and time in the sighted and
blind. Cognition, 141, 67-72.

449

Boroditsky, L. (2000). Metaphoric structuring:
Understanding time through spatial metaphors.
Cognition, 75, 1-28.
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought?:
Mandarin and English speakers’ conceptions of time.
Cognitive Psychology, 43, 1-22.
Cabeza-Pereiro, C., & Fernández-Soneira, A. (2004). The
expression of time in Spanish Sign Language (LSE).
Sign Language & Linguistics, 7, 63-82.
Casasanto, D., & Bottini, R. (2014). Mirror reading can
reverse the flow of time. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 143, 473-479.
Casasanto, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2008). Time in the
mind: Using space to think about time. Cognition, 106,
579-593.
China Association of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
(2003). Chinese Sing Language (中国手语). Beijing:
Huaxia Publishing House.
Chui, K. (2011). Conceptual metaphors in gesture.
Cognitive Linguistics, 22, 437-458.
Clark, H. (1973). Space, time semantics, and the child. In
T. E. Moore (Ed.), Cognitive Development and the
Acquisition of Language (pp.27-63). New York:
Academic Press.
De la Fuente, J., Santiago, J., Román, A., Dumitrache, C.,
& Casasanto, D. (2014). When you think about it, your
past is in front of you: How culture shapes spatial
conceptions of time. Psychological Science, 25, 16821690.
Emmorey, K. (2001). Space on hand: The exploitation of
signing space to illustrate abstract thought. In Merideth
Gattis (ed.), Spatial Schemas and Abstract Thought (pp.
147-174), Cambridge, MA, US: MIT Press.
Emmorey, K., Borinstein, H. B., Thompson, R., & Gollan,
T. H. (2008). Bimodal bilingualism. Bilingualism:
Language and cognition, 11, 43-61.
Fuhrman O., Boroditsky L. (2010). Cross-cultural
differences in mental representations of time: evidence
from an implicit nonlinguistic task. Cognitive Science,
34, 1430-1451.
Gentner, D., Imai, M., & Boroditsky, L. (2002). As time
goes by: Evidence for two systems in processing space
time metaphors. Language and Cognitive Processes, 17,
537-565.
Gu, Y., Mol, L., Hoetjes, M., & Swerts, M. (2017).
Conceptual and lexical effects on gestures: the case of
vertical spatial metaphors for time in Chinese.
Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 1-16.
Gu, Y., Zheng, Y., & Swerts, M. (2016). Which is in front
of Chinese people: Past or future? A study on Chinese
people’s space-time mapping. In Papafragou, A.,
Grodner, D., Mirman, D., & Trueswell, J.C. (Eds.).
Proceedings of the 38th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2603-2608). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Guo, T., Ji., L., Spina, R., & Zhang, Z. (2012). Culture,
temporal focus, and values of the past and future.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 38, 10301040.
Hendricks, R.K. & Boroditsky, L. (2015). New spacetime metaphors foster new mental representations of
time. In Noelle, D. C., Dale, R., Warlaumont, A. S.,

Yoshimi, J., Matlock, T., Jennings, C. D., & Maglio, P.
P. (Eds.) Proceedings of the 37th Annual Cognitive
Science Society, (pp. 902-907). Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Lai, V. T., & Boroditsky, L. (2013). The immediate and
chronic influence of spatio-temporal metaphors on the
mental representations of time in English, Mandarin,
and Mandarin-English speakers. Frontiers in
Psychology, 4, 1-10.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Maeder, C., & Loncke, F. (1996). Spatial, temporal and
temporo-logical notions in French Sign Language:
Comparative study of deaf and hearing subjects. Sign
Language Studies, 90, 38-51.
Miles, L. K., Nind, L. K., & Macrae, C. N. (2010).
Moving through time. Psychological Science, 21, 222223.
Moore, K. E. (2011). Ego-perspective and field-based
frames of reference: Temporal meanings of FRONT in
Japanese, Wolof, and Aymara. Journal of Pragmatics,
43(3), 759-776.
Núñez, R., Cooperrider, K., Doan, D, Wassmann, J.
(2012). Contours of Time: Topographic construals of
past, present, and future in the Yupno valley of Papua
New Guinea. Cognition, 124, 25-35.
Núñez, R., & Cooperrider, K., (2013). The tangle of space
and time in human cognition. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 17(5), 220-229.
Núñez, R., Motz, B., & Teuscher, U. (2006). Time after
time: The psychological reality of the ego- and timereference-point distinction in metaphorical construals of
time. Metaphor and Symbol, 21, 133-146.
Núñez, R., & Sweetser, E. (2006). With the future behind
them: Convergent evidence from Aymara language and
gesture in the cross-linguistic comparison of spatial
construals of time. Cognitive Science, 30, 401-450.
Saj, A., Fuhrman, O., Vuilleumier, P., & Boroditsky, L.
(2014). Patients with left spatial neglect also neglect the
“Left Side” of time. Psychological Science, 25, 207-214.
Torralbo, A., Santiago, J. & Lupáñez, J. (2006). Flexible
conceptual projection of time onto spatial frames of
reference. Cognitive Science, 30, 745-757.
Ulrich, R., Eikmeier, V., de la Vega, I., Fernandez, S.R.,
Alex-Ruf, S., & Maienborn, C. (2012). With the past
behind and the future ahead: Back-to-front
representation of past and future sentences. Memory
and Cognition, 40, 483–495.
Walker, E. J., Bergen, B. K., & Núñez, R. (2017). The
spatial alignment of time: Differences in alignment of
deictic and sequence time along the sagittal and lateral
axes. Acta Psychologica, 175, 13-20.
Wu, L., & Li, H. (2012). Time-space metaphors in
Chinese Sign Language (中国手语中的时间空间隐喻).
Chinese Journal of Special Education, 150, 25-29.
Yu, N. (2012). The metaphorical orientation of time in
Chinese. Journal of Pragmatics, 44, 1335-1354.
Zheng, X. (2009). A study of signs for non-visual concepts
in Shanghai Variety of Chinese Sign Language (上海手
语 非 视 觉 概 念 表 达 研 究 ). PhD Dissertation. Fudan
University, China. Yu, N. (2012).

450

