Dynamics of Affordance Actualization
Patric C. Nordbeck (nordbepc@mail.uc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 47 Corry Boulevard, Edwards Center 1
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA

Laura K. Soter (soterl@carleton.edu)
Department of Philosophy, Carleton College
Northfield, MN 55057 USA

Rachel W. Kallen (kallenrl@ucmail.uc.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA

Anthony P. Chemero (chemeray@ucmail.uc.edu)
Departments of Philosophy and Psychology, University of Cincinnati
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA

Michael J. Richardson (richamo@ucmail.uc.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA

of an environmental surface or object and an intentional
agent’s perception-action capabilities (i.e. effectivities). For
instance, a stair riser is perceived to afford (comfortable)
climbing if the ratio of the perceivers leg-length with respect
to the height of the riser is less than approximately π = .85.
Similar body-scaled ratios are known to define a wide
range of action possibilities, from the stand-ability and sitability of surfaces (e.g., Fitzpatrick, Carello, Schmidt &
Corey, 1994; Mark, 1987), to the pass-through-ability of
apertures (Warren & Whang, 1987), and the reach-ability
and grasp-ability of objects (e.g., Carello, Grosofsky,
Reichel & Solomon, 1989; Cesari & Newell, 1999;
Richardson, Marsh & Baron, 2007). In each case, this
research has demonstrated how individuals correctly detect
affordance boundaries (i.e., the boundary between when an
action is or is not possible) by means of intrinsic bodyscaled information (e.g., eye-height information) and
organize or reorganize their behavioral activity accordingly
(Carello et al., 1989). For instance, individuals are able to
correctly perceive when an object is reach-able or not by
extending their arm when seated, or by bending their torso
and extending their arm, or by standing up and walking over
to the object and organize their behavior accordingly.
It is important to appreciate, however, that in most task
contexts the different ways in which an affordance can be
actualized are not organizationally discrete, but overlap. For
instance, an object that is reachable by extending the arm, is
also often reachable by bending the torso and extending the
arm. Similarly, an object that is graspable with one hand, is
also likely graspable with two hands. Furthermore, a small,
light ball could be gripped with the fingers or grasped with
the whole hand, and then carried or thrown to its final
destination. In this sense, afforded task goals often entail a
nested structure of multiply realizable action possibilities.

Abstract
The actualization of affordances can often be accomplished in
numerous, equifinal ways. For instance, an individual could
discard an item in a rubbish bin by walking over and dropping
it, or by throwing it from a distance. The aim of the current
study was to investigate the behavioral dynamics associated
with such metastability using a ball-to-bin transportation task.
Using time-interval between sequential ball-presentation as a
control parameter, participants transported balls from a
pickup location to a drop-off bin 9m away. A high degree of
variability in task-actualization was expected and found, and
the Cusp Catatrophe model was used to understand how this
behavioral variability emerged as a function of hard (time
interval) and soft (e.g. motivation) task dynamic constraints.
Simulations demonstrated that this two parameter state
manifold could capture the wide range of participant
behaviors, and explain how these behaviors naturally emerge
in an under-constrained task context.
Keywords: affordances; dynamic systems; cusp catastrophe;
dynamic modeling; simulations; constraints;

Introduction
Reorganizing one’s activity in relation to changing task
demands is a ubiquitous aspect of everyday life and is often
required to ensure task success. In order to solve everyday
perception-action tasks, human (and animal) behavior is
functionally (re)organized in relation to the affordances that
define a given task context. Here, the term affordance
simply refers to the action possibilities that characterize a
given agent-environment system (Gibson, 1979).
Starting with Warren’s (1984) seminal work on the
perception of climb-ability, affordance perception research
has demonstrated that affordances are defined by
dimensionless ratios (termed pi-numbers) that capture the
intrinsic, or body-scaled “fit” between the relevant aspects

871

In dynamical systems terms, a nested affordance structure
corresponds to a multi-stable system, whereby two or more
states or modes of behavioral order are simultaneously
stable (and could be actualized). Regarding the perception
and actualization of nested affordances, a sign of multistability is hysteresis (Kelso, 1995; Turvey, 1990). This
occurs when an individual transitions between two different
behavioral modes or states at different body-scaled ratios
depending on its history of previous performance. For
example, an individual will typically transition from onehand to two-hand grasping at a larger arm-span/object-size
ratio (i.e., π = .8) as object size is increased, compared to
when transitioning from two-hand to one-hand grasping
(i.e., π = .65) as object size is decreased (e.g., Frank,
Richardson, Lopresti-Goodman & Turvey, 2009; van der
Kamp, Savelsbergh & Davis, 1998). Although hysteresis
has been observed in numerous affordance studies, other
dynamic patterns of behavior have also been observed. For
instance, in many task contexts individuals exhibit a fixed or
critical point transition between different affordances or
modes of affordance actualization. That is, individuals
exhibit a nonlinear phase transition between different
affordances or behavioral modes at the same body-scaled
ratio irrespective of whether it is scaled up or down
(Richardson et al., 2007; van der Kamp, et al., 1998).
Enhanced contrast or negative hysteresis has also been
observed and is defined by individuals transitioning
between different behavioral modes in a prospective or
anticipatory manner (Richardson et al., 2007; LoprestiGoodman et al. 2013). While these transitions show distinct
changes in the actualization of an affordance over time, they
are still stable solutions in terms of the task goal, or
metastable. For example, in order to successfully grasp
planks as plank size is increased, a transition (that varies
inter-individually) between one-handed and two-handed
grasping is necessary to maintain the task goal. Of course,
fixed state behavior has also been observed, whereby an
individual will enact the same affordance even if other
behavioral modes are more effective or stable. For example,
in an object grasping task a pair of individuals may choose
to pick up objects together, even when it is more efficient
and stable to pick up smaller objects separately (Richardson
et al., 2007).
Of particular relevance here, is that the varied manner in
which individuals are known to actualize a given affordance
or transition between different affordances implies that
affordance actualization is not determined by body-scaled
ratios alone, but rather is determined by a more complex set
of behavioral and contextual constraints. For example, the
amount of time an individual has to perform a given task, an
individual’s motivation, and an individual’s perceived
ability for achieving task success are known to play a
determining role in how a particular affordance is actualized
(e.g., Lopresti-Goodman, Richardson, Marsh, Carello, &
Baron, 2007; Wilson, Weightman, Bingham, & Zhu, 2016).
In an attempt to better understand how differing task
constraints influence affordance actualization, Fajen (2007)

has proposed a distinction between hard versus soft
constraints. Briefly stated, hard constraints are constraints
that define a clear line between task success and failure. For
example, when driving there is a minimum distance in
which a driver would need to start braking in order to avoid
colliding into a car stopped in front of them. The boundary
between stopping and colliding thus corresponds to a hard
task constraint, and if crossed will result in rather dramatic
and potentially deadly task failure. However, even in this
situation, successfully stopping could entail breaking close
to this hard constraint or well before it. Of course, what
determines which successful type of breaking behavior a
driver chooses to actualize will depend on many different
factors, such as the time of day, mood, or the degree to
which a given driver prefers a large or small margin of
safety. It is these kinds of latter constraints that correspond
to soft constraints (Fajen, 2007; also see Harrison, Turvey &
Frank, 2016).

Current study
The aim of the current study was to examine and model
the effects of hard and soft constraints on affordance
actualization, for a ball-to-bin transportation task. Of
particular interest was the role that temporal constraints play
on shaping the behavioral dynamics of an under- or softlyconstrained affordance actualization task. To achieve this,
individuals were instructed to transport balls from a starting
location to a target bin located 9 meters away. The interval
between sequentially presented balls was manipulated by
increasing or decreasing number of seconds between 2 and
14 (or vice versa) in 1 second steps every fourth ball.
Importantly, individuals could complete the ball-to-bin
transportation task in any way they wished; by
walking/running and dropping the balls into the target bin or
by throwing the balls into the bin from whatever distance
they liked. Of interest was the distance that individuals
chose to move prior to releasing the ball and the degree to
which time-interval, as a control parameter, operated as a
constraint on the observed behavioral dynamics.
Given the under-constrained nature of the task and the
fact that it was impossible for individuals to achieve
complete task success, the expectation was to observe a
variety of behavioral dynamics. More specifically, using
distance moved prior to attempting to throw the ball into the
bin as the dependent variable, the expectation was that
participants would exhibit one of four general classes of
behavior as time-interval was increased or decreased across
a continuous sequence of 52 balls: (I) fixed large distance
moved (essentially always walking or running nearly the
complete distance to the target bin); (II) fixed small
distance moved (essentially always throwing from the ball
pickup location); (II) gradual transition from large to small
distance moved (or vice versa); and (IV) a non-linear
transition between large and small distance moved.
It was also expected that the variation in the behavioral
dynamics observed could be modeled using a two
parameter, bifurcation or catastrophe model (namely, the

872

cusp catastrophe), in which the first parameter was
represented by time interval and the second represented the
collective approximation of the unknown soft constraints
that influenced a given individual’s behavioral dynamics.
Before explicating this modeling endeavor however, the
method and data analysis employed for the experimental
study is detailed.

Participants completed two trial series, with each series
including the sequential presentation of fifty-two balls.
Thirty-five participants started their first series at an
increasing rate: beginning with a 14 second interval of ball
presentation, this interval was decreased by 1 second after
four balls down to 2 seconds (i.e., four balls were presented
sequentially at each time interval). A small break was
provided and then the second series began with the control
parameter scaled in the reverse direction (i.e., from 2 to 14
seconds). The other thirty-four participants completed these
same two trial sequences in the reverse order (i.e., 2 to 14
second sequence, followed by the 14 to 2 second sequence).

Method
Participants
Sixty-nine undergraduates from the University of Cincinnati
participated in the experiment for partial course credit.

Data Analysis and Behavioral Classification

Materials

The distance that participants moved prior to releasing
(throwing or dropping) the ball was determined from the
video recordings, along with task success (i.e., whether
participants successfully got the ball into the bin or not).
Although not reported here, the number of balls left within
the pickup area at the time that the participant was
attempting to get their current ball in was also recorded.
The movement distances were analyzed using Matlab
2016a (MathWorks, MA), with the behavior exhibited by
participants in each temporal series (i.e., 2 to 14 second and
14 to 2 second series) graphically classified into one of four
different types of dynamics (see below for more details).
Prior to classification, the movement distances were
averaged over each change in time interval, i.e. the average
distance moved prior to releasing the ball was calculated
over the four balls that had a fourteen second interval, then
the average distance moved prior to releasing the ball was
calculated over the four balls within thirteen second
intervals, etc. This resulted in thirteen averaged movement
distances for each 52-ball sequence. From these behavioral
time-series, two descriptive statistics, namely mean distance
moved (Dm) and largest change in distance moved across a
change in time interval (ΔD; i.e. the maximum of the
differentiated 13-point behavioral time-series) were used to
classify each behavioral time series as follows:

At the starting area, seven-inch plastic playpen balls were
put through an angled PVC pipe (marked ‘4’ in Figure 1)
that protruded into the pick-up area located on a wooden
table (marked ‘3’, dimensions: 40cm wide, and 26.5cm
deep). The mouth of the PVC pipe extended back through
an opaque curtain (marked ‘2’) and a large wooden bin
(marked ‘1’, dimensions: 110cm wide, 55cm deep, and
120cm high) was positioned at nine meters from the back
edge of the ball pickup area. A computer program was used
to visually signal an experimenter (‘E’) positioned behind
the pickup location curtain (2) when to release the balls (one
by one). A video-camera was used to record participants’
(‘P’) movements and actions throughout the experiment.

Figure 1: General experimental setup.

Task and Procedure

• Stable (fixed) small distance (stDsmall) moved, whereby
participants essentially always throw the ball from the
pickup location or near the pickup location. More
specifically, Dm < 4.8 meters and ΔD < 1.58 meters.
• Stable (fixed) large distance (stDlarge) moved, whereby
participants essentially always moved across nearly the
complete distance to the target bin prior to releasing the
ball. More specifically, Dm > 4.8 meters and ΔD < 1.58
meters.
• Gradual change (phase transition) in distance (ptDgradual)
moved, whereby participants gradually increased or
decreased the distance as time interval decreased or
increased, respectively (i.e., an inverse relationship
between distance moved and time interval). More
specifically, 1.58 < ΔD < 3.8 meters.
• Nonlinear change (phase transition) in distance
(ptDnonlinear) moved whereby participants exhibited a large

Participants were told that the task involved transporting
plastic playpen balls from a pickup area to a wooden bin
located on the other side of the laboratory room. They were
instructed they could only use one ball at a time and that the
task was to get the balls into the bin, while at the same time
not letting multiple balls stack up at the pickup location.
They were told that the time between ball presentations
would change from fast to slow or slow to fast (depending
on sequence condition). They were also told that if they
drop a ball accidentally then it could be picked up, however,
if there was an attempt to get the ball into the bin but they
missed, then they should ignore it and move on to the next
one. Finally, they were instructed to solve the task in any
way they liked as long as they followed the rules. (There
were no consequences if rules were broken, and no
incentive was given for performance).

873

or nonlinear change in distance moved across a small
change in interval. More specifically, ΔD > 3.8 meters.

setting, where x is rescaled (normalized) as a function of b
(e.g., from -2 = 0 meters moved to +2 = 9 meters walked
when b = 2.8 and from -1 = 0 meters moved to +1 = 9
meters walked when b = -1.8).
As can be seen in Figure 3, this manifold includes both
mono-stable and bi-stable (multi-stable) regions and
predicts the same four patterns of behavioral dynamics
defined above depending on the values of a and b. More
specifically, as a is scaled up or down, larger values of b can
result in behavioral trajectories qualitatively consistent with
stDlarge and stDsmall, depending on the initial condition of x.
For -.5 < b < 3, however, the manifold predicts varying
degrees of ptDnonlinear type behavior as a (time interval) is
scaled up or down. Finally, when b < -.5 the manifold
predicts ptDgradual as a (time interval) is scaled up or down.
It is worth noting at this point that Eq. (1) or the Cusp
Catastrophe model has been employed to abstractly capture
a wide range of natural bifurcation phenomena, including
human anxiety and performance, organizational order,
decision-making and dating behavior (e.g., Guastello, 1995;
Hardy, 1996; Hardy & Fazey, 1987; Richardson, Dale &
Marsh, 2014; Tesser, 1980). Typically, the b parameter is
fixed and the different behaviors that Eq. (1) can produce
are explored by scaling a. In fact, this is how the exemplar
trajectories plotted on the manifold in Figure 3 were
generated (i.e., by fixing the value of b and then scaling a
for a given initial condition x0). In the current task context,
this would be equivalent to assuming that although the soft
constraints that influence a participant’s behavior might
change across trial sequences, they remain fixed over a ball
sequence. However, there is no reason to assume that this is
the case for the current task, rather it seems more likely that
the various soft constraints that influence participant
behavior change both during and across sequences. For
instance, an individual’s motivation or goal intention may
have been continuously modulated during the task. Thus, at
each interval change (or individual ball), the resulting
distance moved may reflect a continuous (or discrete)
change in both a and b.
With the latter point in mind, a range of behavioral
trajectories were simulated along the cusp catastrophe
manifold by scaling a in interval steps consistent with the
time interval steps employed in the experimental study (i.e.,
from 2.5 to -2.5 in 13 steps), as well as scaling b recursively
by adding a number from a unimodal random distribution,
with a mean of -.6 (when increasing interval, +.6 when
decreasing) and a standard deviation of 1.65. The mean of
±.6 was employed as the experimental data revealed that
participants had a preference for higher movement (see
results section for details). Two sets of 70 trajectories were
simulated, with the initial condition x0 set at +2 for
simulation set one and a normal distribution with 50%
chance of being above 0 for simulation set two (again
inspired by participant behavior). The simulated data that
resulted was rescaled to the distances of the real (human)
experimental data (~.75 meters to ~8.75 meters).

Example time-series of each behavioral type are provided in
Figure 2 for both increasing and decreasing interval
sequences.

Figure 2: Two examples each of participant (full line, square
markers) and simulated (dotted line, triangle markers)
trajectories: stDsmall trajectories (top), stDlarge (second),
ptDgradual (third) and ptDnonlinear (bottom).

Modeling and Simulation
The possible emergence of the above four types of
behavioral dynamics was modeled using a two-parameter
task manifold defined by the Cusp Catastrophe (Thom,
1975) equation
ẋ = a + bx - x3
(1)
where x represented that state or dependent variable, i.e., the
distance (rescaled) moved prior to releasing or throwing the
ball, the parameter a represented (normalized) time interval
from (-2.5 = 2 seconds to +2.5 = 14 seconds), and the
parameter b represented the collective state of (unknown)
soft constraints that might be influencing a participant’s
behavior at any point during the task (i.e., motivation,
intention, perceived ability, learned helplessness, etc.). The
manifold in Figure 3 represents the fixed points of x, for
different parameter settings of a and b. That is, each point
on the manifold can be understood as representing the
distance moved prior to releasing the ball for each (a,b)

874

Figure 3: Cusp Catastrophe Model manifold. Blue points
represent an exemplar ptDgradual behavioral trajectory. Red
points represent two exemplar ptDnonlinear behavioral
trajectories. The black and green points represent exemplar
stDlarge and stDsmall behavioral trajectories, respectively.

Results
As can be seen from an inspection of Figures 2 and 4, and
Table 1, participants produced all four of the behavioral
dynamics expected. The variability within and across
participants and ball sequences is most easily discerned
from an inspection of Figure 4, in which the behavioral
dynamics classification is plotted as a function of mean
distance moved (Dm) and maximum change in distance
moved across a change in time-interval (ΔD).
Figure 4: Participant (top) and simulated data (bottom)
behavioral classification as a function of mean distance
moved (Dm) and maximum change in distance (ΔD).

Table 1: Distribution of trajectories per type of data.
Trajectory
stDsmall
stDlarge
ptDgradual
ptDnonlinear

Simulated
8.57%
33.57%
22.14%
35.71%

Actual
9.42%
35.51%
23.91%
31.16%

Discussion
The current study was designed to explore the effects of
hard and soft constraints on the manner in which a task goal
was actualized. As expected, a variable range of behavioral
dynamics was observed, reflecting the under-constrained
nature of the task goal. Furthermore, simulations using a
two-parameter Cusp Catastrophe manifold illustrated how
the wide range of participant behaviors observed naturally
emerged due to an under- or softly-constrained task context.
That is, by the continuous modulation of soft constraints
during ongoing task performance.
The significance of the current findings with regard to
understanding human, affordance-based behavior is twofold.
First, the current results highlight how both steady state
linear and nonlinear behavioral patterns, as well as
metastable and transient behavioral patterns, can all result
from the same task dynamic, further emphasizing how
complex and context sensitive determinism underlies the
emergent (re)organization of ongoing human behavior.
Second, the current results illustrate the need for
appropriately identifying what and how soft constraints
modulate the actualization of nested affordances or multistable behavioral modes. While there was no attempt to
specifically identify what soft constraints guided task
performance in the current study, the experimental and
modeling methodology developed here could be employed

The simulated trajectories also produced a comparable set of
behavioral trajectories and classifications. Again, this can be
seen from an inspection of Figures 2 and 4 and Table 1. The
classification system was verified using a K-means Nearest
Neighbor (KNN) classifier (in Matlab, with ten number of
neighbors, Euclidian distance and squared inverse distance
weights) finding 99.28% correspondence between initial
classification and KNN classification of real data.
A curve estimation analysis was conducted on the total
frequencies of each distance across all data-points, revealing
a linear increase in frequency as distance increased (β = .85,
t(34) = 9.43, p < .01, where x = distance moved). A twotailed, bivariate correlation analysis was run to investigate
the relationship between distance moved and success (hit)
versus failure (miss), revealing a positive association (r =
.64, p < .01) in that, as distance moved increased so did the
probability of success.

875

to identify these constraints in future research. Different
hard constraints could be imposed or manipulated, or the
saliency of soft constraints within the task context could be
explicitly defined. For example, one could introduce the
hard (goal) constraint that a participant would fail
completely (and need to redo the task) if there is ever more
than one ball in the pickup area. This would likely see the
elimination of stDlarge behavior. Furthermore, if the salience
of a soft constraint were also increased, say by adding
motivation in terms of a points or monetary reward system
that empathized getting balls in the bin, then one would also
predict the (near) elimination of stDsmall, with participants
predominately producing ptDgradual or ptDnonlinear behavior.
It is also possible that task success or failure on each ball
throw could have modulated the collective motivational
state of participants. The general relationship between
longer distance and higher success rate speaks to this point,
although it does not apply as motivation to all participants
equally. (If this were applicable on an individual basis, there
would likely be no stDsmall trajectories.) However, a
confounding variable here is the general preference across
the entire dataset for longer distances. The interaction of this
preference with the individually different effect of timeinterval on distance moved, needs to be examined further in
future research.

Annual Conference of the North American Society for the
Psychology of Sport and Physical Activity. Vancouver.
June.
Kelso, J. A. S. (1995). Dynamic patterns. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Lopresti-Goodman, S., Richardson, M. J., Marsh, K. L.,
Carello, C., & Baron, R. M. (2009). Task constraints on
affordance boundaries. Motor Control. 13, 69–83
Lopresti-Goodman, S. M., Turvey, M. T., & Frank, T. D.
(2013). Negative hysteresis in the behavioral dynamics of
the affordance “graspable.” Attention, Perception, &
Psychophysics, 75, 1075–1091.
Mark, L. S. (1987). Eyeheight-scaled information about
affordances: A study of sitting and stair climbing. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 13, 361–370.
Newell, K. M., Scully, D. M., McDonald, P. V., &
Baillargeon, R. (1989). Task constraints and infant grip
configurations. Developmental Psychobiology, 22, 817–
831.
Richardson, M. J., Dale, R., & Marsh, K. L. (2014).
Complex dynamical systems in social and personality
psychology. Handbook of research methods in social and
personality psychology, 253.
Richardson, M. J., Marsh, K. L., & Baron, R. M. (2007).
Judging and actualizing intrapersonal and interpersonal
affordances. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 33, 845-859.
Tesser, A. (1980). When individual dispositions and social
pressure conflict: A catastrophe. Human Relations, 33,
393–407.
Thom, R. (1975), Structural Stability and Morphogenesis.
Reading, MA: W. A. Benjamin.
Turvey, M. T. (1990). Coordination. American
Psychologist, 45, 938–953.
van der Kamp, J., Savelsbergh, G. J. P., & Davis, W. E.
(1998). Body-scaled ratio as a control parameter for
prehension in 5- to 9-year-old children. Developmental
Psychobiology, 33, 351-361.
Warren, W. H. (1984). Perceiving affordances: Visual
guidance of stair climbing. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 10,
683-703.
Warren, W. H., & Whang, S. (1987). Visual guidance of
walking through apertures: Body-scaled information for
affordances. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 13, 371–383.
Wilson, A. D., Weightman, A., Bingham, G. P., & Zhu, Q.
(2016). Using task dynamics to quantify the affordances of
throwing for long distance and accuracy. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 42(7), 965-981.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported, in part, by the National
Institutes of Health (R01GM105045).

References
Carello, C., Grosofsky, A., Reichel, F. D., & Solomon, H.
Y. (1989). Visually perceiving what is reachable.
Ecological Psychology, 1, 27–54.
Cesari, P., & Newell, K. M. (1999). The scaling of human
grip configurations. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 25, 927–935.
Fajen, B. R. (2007). Affordance-based control of visually
guided action. Ecological Psychology, 19, 383–410.
Fitzpatrick, P., Carello, C., Schmidt, R. C., & Corey, D.
(1994). Haptic and visual perception of an affordance for
upright posture. Ecological Psychology, 6, 265–287.
Frank, T. D., Richardson, M. J., Lopresti-Goodman, S. M.,
& Turvey, M. T. (2009). Order parameter dynamics of
body-scaled hysteresis and mode transitions in grasping
behavior. Journal of Biological Physics, 35(2), 127-147.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual
perception. Boston, MA: Houghton-Mifflin.
Guastello, S. J. (1995). Chaos, catastrophe, and human
affairs: Applications of nonlinear dynamics to work,
organizations, and social evolution. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Hardy, L. (1996). Testing the predictions of the cusp
catastrophe model of anxiety and performance. The Sport
Psychologist, 10, 140-156.
Hardy, L. & Fazey, J. (1987). The inverted-u hypothesis: A
catastrophe for sport psychology? Paper Presented at the

876

