Effects of Grammatical Gender on Object Description
Arturs Semenuks1 (asemenuk@ucsd.edu)
Webb Philips1 (webb.philips@gmail.com)
Ioana Dalca2 (ioanadalca@gmail.com)
Cora Kim3 (cora.kim@fu-berlin.de)
Lera Boroditsky1 (lera@ucsd.edu)
1

Department of Cognitive Science, University of California, San Diego
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, Queen Mary University of London
3
Brain Language Laboratory, Department of Philosophy and Humanities, Freie Universität Berlin
2

Abstract
Can grammatical gender influence how people conceptualize
the referents of nouns? Using an implicit measure, we
investigated whether such an effect could be found in a task
where neither grammatical nor biological gender is
highlighted. In the current study, conducted in English,
speakers of French, German and Romanian with knowledge
of English were asked to generate adjectives they associate
with referents of nouns. Afterwards, the gender valence of the
adjectives was measured. The results showed that participants
generated more feminine adjectives for nouns with majority
feminine translations compared to nouns with majority
masculine translations. We found a stronger effect of
grammatical gender for some semantic categories than for
others. Significant effects of grammatical gender were present
starting with the 2nd adjective generated by participants
(effects were stronger for adjectives generated 2nd and 3rd by
participants, as opposed to the 1st adjective).
Keywords:
grammatical
gender;
conceptualization;
categorization; semantic features; representation

Introduction
Can the structure of the language you speak affect how you
perceive and conceptualize the world around you? Although
the question has a long history (see Koerner (1992) for an
overview), the last two decades have seen an especially
large increase in the amount of empirical work examining
and testing the predictions that the different answers to it
imply. This has lead to an accumulation of results showing
that there are cases where differences in seemingly nonlinguistic aspects of cognition between speakers of different
languages arise due to specific differences between the
structures of those languages (see Wolff & Holmes (2011)
for a survey). Nonetheless, the jury is still out on a number
of questions aiming to flesh out the details of how, when
and why linguistic differences can lead to differences in the
operation of cognitive processes.
One question that is not conclusively resolved is what
types of effects language could have on cognition. Research
supports, for example, the existence of effects of language
that play a large role in the operation of some specific
cognitive domains. Frank et al. (2012) shows that number
words are a cognitive tool that, when suppressed, impairs
Western college educated people’s ability to encode exact
numerical values. Thus number vocabulary plays an

important role in numerical cognition. Other work indicates
that language also has some early effects on cognition. A
body of research has shown that color vocabulary has an
effect on categorical color perception (see Regier et al.
(2010) for a review). There are also other types of effects
and research indicates that cognitive differences between
speakers of different languages arise due to the metaphors
they use for talking about time, their frequency of use of a
particular spatial frame of reference and knowledge of
constructions for talking about mental states, among other
differences (Wolff & Holmes, 2011).
One unresolved issue is whether language could have
broad or pervasive effects. Are effects of language only
restricted to specific domains (e.g. specific color
distinctions, numbers, orientation in space)? Or can
differences in the structure of languages lead to broadly
distributed effects across a wide range of contexts? For this
question, it is worth examining grammatical features that
apply to say all nouns (e.g., gender) or all verbs (e.g., tense).
In this paper we consider the role of grammatical gender in
shaping the way people think about things that are named by
nouns – a very broad potential scope of influence.

Grammatical Gender
Grammatical gender is a system of categorizing nouns into
distinct classes, i.e. genders, which manifests itself via
morphologically marking what gender the noun belongs to
on some of the words that that noun is morphosyntactically
related to (Corbett, 1991).
The forms that gender systems take vary. The ones that
have garnered the interest in the research on the effects of
language on cognition, however, usually share several
properties. First, these systems have masculine and feminine
genders, i.e. for nouns with human referents the assignment
is fully semantic and dependent on biological sex, bar a
small number of isolated exceptions in some languages.
Second, the majority of nouns with non-human referents fall
into the semantic residue, i.e. the category for which the
assignment is based on the word’s phonological or
morphological, but not semantic properties. Third, a number
of words in the semantic residue is assigned to either
masculine or feminine gender. Languages with such systems
provide the opportunity to ask: can the conceptualization of

1060

a noun’s referent accrue gendered properties because of the
noun’s grammatical gender assignment? If so, grammatical
gender could exhibit a broad and pervasive effect on
concept formation, since, by having a gender system, a
language requires all nouns to be assigned to one of the
gender categories. This could result in a broad range of
concepts acquiring gendered properties that would be absent
otherwise.
Why might we expect entities without biological sex to
acquire stereotypically masculine or feminine properties as a
result of being assigned to a grammatical gender category?
As we mentioned, grammatical gender can be considered to
be a system of noun categorization. Biological sex, in that
case, is a highly diagnostic feature for determining the
category assignment of nouns for humans. As the research
on categorization indicates, diagnostic features better suited
for differentiating between members and non-members of a
category draw more attention to themselves (Tversky,
1977). In addition, category features could develop or
become accentuated in response to the requirements that
tasks involving categorization impose (Schyns & Rodet,
1997; Medin et al., 1993). This could mean that nouns
belonging to a grammatical gender strongly associated with
humans of a particular sex might acquire gendered
properties just by virtue of being in those genders. Intuitions
of native speakers of languages with grammatical gender for
why nouns get assigned to their respective genders in their
language supports this view (Basetti, 2011).

Prior Research and the Goals of the Current Study
A body of prior work supports the idea that grammatical
gender influences conceptualization of objects and animals
(Basetti & Nicoladis, 2016). For example, Konishi (1993)
asked native speakers of German and Spanish to rate nouns
on a variety of semantic differential scales in their native
language. The words were either feminine in German and
masculine in Spanish or vice versa. Subjects tended to give
higher ratings on scales associated with potency for words
that were masculine in their native language. In another set
of experiments by Sera et al. (1994), Spanish and English
speaking adults and children were asked to either give
human names or assign male or female voices to pictures of
objects. The results showed that older Spanish speakers
tended to assign names and voices in these tasks in a
grammatical gender-congruent fashion, which was not the
case for English speakers or Spanish preschoolers. Phillips
and Boroditsky (2003) investigated the effects of
grammatical gender by teaching native speakers of English1
an artificial language with grammatical gender and analyzed
whether it influenced their performance on a similarityrating task. The results indicated that participants rated
pictures of humans and objects as more similar when they
were in the same grammatical gender.
However, other studies suggest that there are limitations
1

English does have pronominal gender, but not a full-fledged
grammatical gender system.

on when and how grammatical gender could have an effect
on conceptualization. For example, Vigliocco et al. (2005)
found an effect of animal name grammatical gender on
similarity in a triad similarity judgment task when the
stimuli were names of animals, but not when the stimuli
were pictures of animals. Furthermore, the effect was not
found for either names or pictures of artifacts. In another
experiment, Kousta et al. (2008) asked participants to name
pictures that appeared at a random location on the screen,
and afterwards analyzed cases where participants’ produced
an incorrect word. The subjects were either Italian or
English monolinguals, or Italian-English bilinguals. The
monolinguals responded in their native language, whereas
the bilinguals participated in the experiment in both Italian
and English. The results showed that the grammatical
gender of the Italian noun describing the picture tended to
affect the responses of Italian monolinguals - they preserved
the grammatical gender of the target word almost twice as
often as English monolinguals. The responses of ItalianEnglish bilinguals followed a pattern similar to Italian
monolingual pattern when they were tested in Italian. When
they were tested in English, however, their pattern of errors
was similar to the one exhibited by English monolinguals.
Ramos and Roberson (2010) examined how speakers of
Portuguese conceptualize inanimate objects in a series of
experiments using different methodologies and compared
their responses to the responses of an English-speaking
group. The authors found that the grammatical gender of an
object’s name strongly influenced whether the Portuguese
speakers assigned a male or a female voice to it, but had a
smaller influence on the participant’s responses in word
similarity rating task, or in a triad similarity judgment task,
especially when the stimuli were pictures, and not words.
These findings raise several issues. One alternative
interpretation of the previously obtained effects is that they
are by-products of task demands or of the particular stimuli
that were used in the study. For example, when people are
asked to give a name to an object, they might consciously or
unconsciously understand that gendered information is
important for this task. This seems especially likely when
participants come from cultures where sets of male and
female names have very little overlap, or when they are
asked to give the name to something that can be very easily
anthropomorphized, e.g. an animal. This then could lead to a
pattern of responses that suggests an effect of grammatical
gender on ingrained features of concepts, but that actually
arose due to the demands of a particular context. Similar
arguments could be made for other methodologies.
Another possibility is that some of the results arise
because of the influence of information contained in the
experimental stimuli. Given a set of words, the ones that are
more similar phonologically or morphologically are more
likely to prime each other (Kinoshita & Lupker, 2004), and
words in the semantic residue are assigned to a grammatical
gender specifically based on their phonology or
morphology. When a speaker of Spanish is participating in a
semantic differential scale task and reads a masculine noun

1061

ending in “o”, this weakly activates other words of similar
morphology and phonology. That, supported by the
experimental context, could lead to higher activation of
frequently used words for human males and their properties.
It, in turn, could lead to participants giving higher ratings to
masculine words on scales associated with masculinity.
The experiment described below aims to address these
issues. Three groups of non-native English speakers whose
native languages have grammatical gender systems were
asked to generate adjectives for English nouns. The
adjectives were then scored on how feminine or masculine
they were, and adjectives generated for nouns differing in
grammatical gender between the languages were examined.
This design addresses the issues discussed above in the
following ways. The manipulation is implicit - there is no
way for participants to guess that gender is of interest in the
study – they are simply given a list of nouns and asked to
generate adjectives that describe the referent. The adjectives
are generated for English words, which eliminates the
possibility of phonetic or morphological similarity between
words driving the effect.

Methods
Participants
A total of 273 participants completed the study. Out of
them, 99 were Romanian-English bilinguals (69 female;
mean age = 24.03, SD = 6.83; mean English proficiency =
4.38/5, SD = 0.62), 90 were German-English bilinguals (53
female; mean age = 24.37, SD = 5.91; mean English
proficiency = 4.08/5, SD = 0.80) and 84 were FrenchEnglish bilinguals (51 female; mean age = 28.96, SD =
11.52; mean English proficiency = 4.38/5, SD = 0.64).

Materials
A total of 225 nouns served as stimuli. Out of them, 200
were the most frequently used nouns in the English
language based on the data from the Corpus of
Contemporary American English (Davies, 2008). These
words were used for several reasons. First, it decreases the
possibility of an effect arising due to an unconscious
experimenter bias in the choice of items. Second, these
words are often encountered in written and spoken
language, so their meaning is unlikely to be misunderstood
by the participants. Lastly, the procedure allows for an
easier selection of items in future experiments using a
similar methodology, but examining speakers of languages
other than the ones used in this experiment.
We were also interested in examining whether the
semantic category of the noun modulates what adjectives
are generated for it, as previous work in the field has shown
that the semantic category of the noun affects participants’
responses (e.g. Vigliocco et al., 2005). Because the list
described above lacked nouns with animal referents, 25 such
words were added to the stimuli.

Procedure
All of the instructions in the experiment were given in
English. At the very beginning participants were asked to
verify their native language proficiency by translating an
English sentence.
After this, the participants were informed that in the next
part of the study they would see a list of nouns one by one,
and that they would need to list the properties that they
associate with their referents. For each noun the participants
had to list three adjectives. Half of the participants were
instructed to personify the nouns, i.e. imagine them as
humans, and generate adjectives that would best suit those
personifications, whereas the other half was not given
personification instructions (and were instructed simply to
produce adjectives). This was done in order to establish
whether explicit invitations to personify (as when assigning
names or voices) are necessary to induce effects of
grammatical gender.
Next, the participants continued onto the adjective
generation portion of the experiment. This part of the study
consisted of 225 trials. During each trial the participants saw
an English noun from the stimulus set and were asked to
generate three adjectives for it. The participants were
presented with all of the items shown in a random order.
After this, the participants were asked to translate all of
the nouns they had encountered previously into their native
language. At the end of the experiment, the participants
filled in a questionnaire about their language background,
education and residency.

Post-Processing
Grammatical Gender of Translations Some of the nouns
were translated by the participants in multiple ways. For
example, German participants translated English
“difference” both as “(der) Unterschied” (masculine) and
“(die) Differenz” (feminine).
Due to this, we first established the grammatical gender
for each of the translations generated by the participants.
Afterwards, the number of translations belonging to each of
the grammatical genders was calculated for each noun in
each language. We call the most common grammatical
gender among the noun’s translations in a particular
language its most common gender (MCG) in that language.
Noun Semantic Categories In order to analyze the effect of
noun’s semantic category, each noun was categorized as
being either an abstract noun, a noun denoting an animal, a
body part or a concrete object by two coders.
Noun Selection After the most common grammatical
genders of the nouns were established, only the nouns that
had most common masculine gender in one of the
experimental languages, and feminine in one of the others
were left for analysis, leaving a total of 68 nouns. In cases
where the noun’s MCG in the third language was neuter,
only adjectives generated by participants speaking the other

1062

Results
The data were analyzed with linear mixed-effects models
using the lme4 and multcomp packages for R (Bates et al.,
2015; Hothorn et al., 2016). The most common gender
(MCG) of the noun in the participant’s native language, the
noun’s semantic category, personification condition, i.e.
whether the participant was asked to personify the nouns,
and the order of the adjective were modeled as fixed effects,
whereas subject IDs and items were modeled as random
effects.
As a manipulation check, we examined whether the
biological gender of the referent for nouns denoting humans
predicted what adjectives would be generated for it. As can
be seen on figure 1, nouns for males on average received
more masculine adjectives (M = 0.001) compared to nouns
for females (M = -0.005). We compared mixed-effect
models with gender valence of the adjective as the
dependent variable, random intercept for subject and bysubject random slope for MCG of the noun, and a random
intercept for noun. The model with MCG of the noun fit the
data significantly better (χ2 = 21.871, p < 0.001).
Following that, we analyzed the data from nouns for nonhumans. Only comparisons between adjectives generated for
nouns that had either masculine or feminine MCG are
reported. Besides the specified fixed effects, all of the
models below contain random intercept for subject and bysubject random slope for MCG, as well as random intercept
for noun and by-noun random slope for personification.
Adjectives generated by the participants for nouns with
majority masculine translations had higher gender valence
ratings (M = 0.0007) than adjectives generated for nouns
with majority feminine translations (M = 0.0002), as figure
2 shows. To investigate whether the difference is
significant, we compared mixed-effect models with

0.008

Feminine « Masculine

Adjective Gender Valence Our next task was to
operationalize how masculine or feminine the generated
adjectives were. The participants generated a total of 45972
adjective tokens for the nouns remaining in the sample. Out
of them, 36426 were also generated for nouns for humans (i)
whose referent was clearly biologically male or female (e.g.
“man”, “woman”) or (ii) that differed in translation
depending on the sex of the referent (e.g. English “friend” =
French “ami” (masc) or “amie” (fem)). For each of those
adjectives, we calculated its token frequency among
adjectives generated for males (a total of 12564) and
adjectives generated for females (a total of 3681 tokens).
After that, we subtracted the frequency of each adjective
among adjectives generated for biological females from its
frequency among those generated for biological males. We
consider this to reflect adjectives’ relative gender valence:
relatively more positive values indicate more masculine
connotations, relatively more negative values indicate more
feminine connotations.

personification, noun’s semantic category, order of the
adjective, as well as all of their interactions as fixed effects.
Comparison of the models with and without MCG as a fixed
effect revealed that it significantly improves the fit of the
model (χ2 = 14.988, p < 0.01).
The effect, however, could potentially arise due only to
the adjectives generated by participants who were asked to
personify the noun’s referent. To examine that possibility,
we compared mixed-effect models with and without an
interaction between personification and MCG. The models
contained all other possible main effects and interactions
between them. Model comparison revealed no significant
differences between them (χ2 = 2.3089, p = 0.13).

0.004

***

0.000

−0.004

−0.008

Female humans

Male humans

Figure 1: Gender valence of adjectives for humans.
0.00100

***

Feminine « Masculine

two languages were analyzed. 39 denoted abstract concepts,
13 - animals, 4 - body parts and 12 - other concrete objects.

0.00075

0.00050

0.00025

0.00000
Feminine

Masculine

Figure 2: Gender valence of adjectives for non-humans.
Comparison of models with and without an interaction
between noun category and MCG revealed a significant
difference between them (χ2 = 9.1268, p < 0.05). Further
multiple comparisons analysis showed a significant
difference of the gender valences of adjectives for animal
nouns (z-value = 3.713, p < 0.01) and a marginally
significant difference for abstract nouns (z-value = 2.929, p
= 0.078) in the expected gender-congruent directions, but no
significant differences in gender valence for nouns for body
parts or concrete objects (see fig. 3). We note however that
the categories of body parts and concrete objects contained
very low numbers of items (4 and 12 respectively). Further,

1063

our design does not license us to generalize the results found
for these specific items to their respective semantic
categories as a whole.
Feminine « Masculine

0.002

.

0.001

**

n.s.

n.s.

0.000

Feminine
Masculine

−0.001
−0.002
Abstract

Animal

Body part Concrete

Figure 3: Gender valence of adjectives belonging to
different semantic categories.

n.s.
Feminine « Masculine

0.0010

**

***

0.0005

Feminine
Masculine

0.0000

1st

2nd

3rd

Figure 4: Gender valence of first, second and third
adjectives generated by participants for non-human nouns.
Last, we examined when the effects of grammatical
gender emerge by looking separately at adjectives generated
first, second, and third for each noun. Comparison of
models with fixed effects of MCG, personification and noun
category, as well as all of their interactions, but differing in
having or not having a fixed effect of adjective order,
revealed a highly significant difference in their fit (χ2 =
23.465, p < 0.001). Additionally, a comparison of models
with and without an interaction between MCG and adjective
order was conducted. The models included all other possible
main effects and interactions between them. The
comparison revealed that the model with the interaction fit
the data significantly better (χ2 = 10.413, p < 0.01).
Multiple comparisons analysis showed that adjectives
generated first did not differ significantly depending on the
MCG of the noun they were generated for (z-value = -0.163,
p = 1.00). However, the difference in average gender
valence was significant for second (z-value = 3.643, p <
0.01) and third (z-value = 4.054, p < 0.001) adjectives
generated for nouns with different MCG.

Discussion
What do the results tell us? We see that the grammatical

gender of a noun in a particular language influences what
adjectives are generated for it: feminine nouns tend to elicit
relatively more feminine adjectives compared to masculine
nouns.
The effect appeared even though the task was conducted
in English and did not invite participants to think about
biological or grammatical gender. This removes two
possibilities for why it arose. The first possibility that can be
ruled out is that phonological or morphological properties of
the nouns used in the experiment made the grammatical
gender more salient to the participants, since English nouns
do not contain in themselves any information related to
grammatical gender. Thus operations situated solely at the
lexical level of processing could not explain the effect.
Second, gender was not highlighted in the experimental
context for the participants who received no instructions to
personify. Additionally, the selection procedure for the
items minimized the possibility that the stimuli set would
implicitly push the participants towards thinking about
gender when participating in the experiment. This suggests
that the results could be taken as evidence for the existence
of effects of grammatical gender on how referents of nouns
are conceptualized. The exact mechanism through which
this effect takes place is a question for future work, but the
current study provides some suggestions. Similarly to some
prior work (e.g. Vigliocco et al., 2005) grammatical gender
had the most effect on adjectives for nouns denoting
animals. The interaction between the noun’s semantic
category and the gender of the noun found in the current
study provides some support for the hypothesis that
anthropomorphization of the noun referent is the mechanism
through which the effect comes into being.
Cross-linguistically nouns often constitute the most
frequently occurring word class in a language (Liang & Liu,
2013), and they are also used in everyday language for
reference to humans, animals, objects, relations, categories
and other types of entities. Because of this, the effect we
found could have a broad and pervasive influence, affecting
a wide range of processes relying on how referents of nouns
are conceptualized.
The data also indicate that the effect did not emerge solely
due to an invitation to personify the nouns that half of the
participants received. Both participants who received
instructions to personify and those who did not, showed
effects of grammatical gender. It appears that an explicit
invitation to personify (as when assigning names or voices
in prior studies) is not necessary to induce effects of
grammatical gender.
Of course, it is possible that participants personified the
nouns even without being given the instruction to do so. For
those who did not receive this instruction, the experiment
did not make any suggestions for the participants to
anthropomorphize the nouns’ referents. If participants did
engage in such unprompted personification, it seems likely
that the effect would be observed outside of the context of
this experimental task as well.
Last, we found that significant grammatical-gender

1064

effects emerged starting with the second adjective
participants generated for a given noun. This suggests that
gender information is quite central in people’s mental
representations. There was however, no significant effect
observed at the very first adjective.
This has the possibility of explaining why some studies
using tasks where participants need to respond rapidly fail to
observe effects of grammatical gender (e.g. Vigliocco et al.,
2005; Kousta et al., 2008). The effect of grammatical gender
is small in comparison to some other effects, for example
the effect of cultural associations (Beller et al., 2015). It has
also been suggested that more abstract pictures induce more
schematic ways of conceptualizing what they depict and that
verbal description of the less abstract pictures induces a
similar effect (Holmes & Wolff, 2010). This allows one to
hypothesize that the strength of the gender effect in
combination with its temporal development could leave it
unnoticeable in conditions where the participants need to
respond rapidly and where other perceptual or conceptual
features of the stimulus are highly activated due to task
demands or stimuli properties.

Conclusion
The results obtained in this study support the view that
grammatical gender affects object conceptualization. The
effect was obtained in absence of any phonological or
morphological aspects of the word carrying information
about grammatical gender. Additionally, the effect was
obtained without participants being invited to think about
gender by any experimental instructions or demands (and
participants could not have guessed that gender was of
interest in the study). Finally, effects of grammatical gender
emerged starting with the second adjective participants
generated for a given noun. This suggests that gender
information is quite central in people’s mental
representations (but did not emerge on the very first
adjective). Furthermore, it is possible that the effect is quite
pervasive, as it has the potential to affect anything that could
be named by a noun.

References
Bassetti, B. (2011) The grammatical and conceptual gender
of animals in second language users. In Cook, V.J. and
Bassetti, B. (Eds.) Language and Bilingual Cognition (pp.
357-384). Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Bassetti, B., & Nicoladis, E. (2016). Research on
grammatical gender and thought in early and emergent
bilinguals. Int. journal of bilingualism: interdisciplinary
studies of multilingual behaviour, 20(1), 3-16.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2015).
Fitting Linear Mixed-Effects Models Using lme4. Journal
of Statistical Software, 67(1), 1-48.
Beller, S., Brattebø, K. F., Lavik, K. O., Reigstad, R. D., &
Bender, A. (2015). Culture or language: what drives
effects of grammatical gender?. Cognitive Linguistics,
26(2), 331-359.
Corbett, G. (1991). Gender. Cambridge textbooks in

linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge.
Davies, M. (2008). The Corpus of Contemporary American
English: 425 million words, 1990 – present. Available
online at http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/.
Frank, M. C., Fedorenko, E., Lai, P., Saxe, R., & Gibson, E.
(2012). Verbal interference suppresses exact numerical
representation. Cognitive psychology, 64(1), 74-92.
Hothorn, T., Bretz, F., Westfall, P., Heiberger, R. M.,
Schuetzenmeister, A., Scheibe, S., & Hothorn, M. T.
(2016). Package ‘multcomp’. Simultaneous inference in
general parametric models. Project for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria.
Holmes, K. J., & Wolff, P. (2010). Simulation from
schematics: Dorsal stream processing and the perception
of implied motion. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2704-2709).
Kinoshita, S., & Lupker, S. J. (2004). Masked priming: The
state of the art. Psychology Press.
Koerner, E. F. (1992). The Sapir-Whorf Hypothesis: A
Preliminary History and a Bibliographical Essay. Journal
of Linguistic Anthropology, 2(2), 173-198.
Konishi, T. (1993). The semantics of grammatical gender: A
cross-cultural study. Journal of psycholinguistic research,
22(5), 519-534.
Kousta, S. T., Vinson, D. P., & Vigliocco, G. (2008).
Investigating linguistic relativity through bilingualism:
The case of grammatical gender. JEP: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 34(4), 843.
Liang, J., & Liu, H. (2013). Noun Distribution in Natural
Language. Poznań Studies in Contemporary Linguistics
49(4), 509-529
Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., & Gentner, D. (1993).
Respects for Similarity. Psych. Review, 100(2), 254-278.
Phillips, W., & Boroditsky, L. (2003) Can quirks of
grammar affect the way you think? Grammatical gender
and object concepts. Proceedings of the 25th annual
meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 928-933).
Regier, T., Kay, P., Gilbert, A. L., & Ivry, R. B. (2010).
Which Side Are You on, Anyway? In B. Malt & P. Wolff
(Eds.), Words and the mind: How words capture human
experience. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schyns, P. G., & Rodet, L. (1997). Categorization creates
functional features. Journal of Experimental Psychology
Learning Memory and Cognition, 23, 681-696.
Sera, M. D., Berge, C. A., & del Castillo Pintado, J. (1994).
Grammatical and conceptual forces in the attribution of
gender by English and Spanish speakers. Cognitive
Development, 9(3), 261-292.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological
review, 84(4), 327.
Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D. P., Paganelli, F., & Dworzynski,
K. (2005). Grammatical gender effects on cognition:
implications for language learning and language use. JEP:
General, 134(4), 501.
Wolff, P., & Holmes, K. J. (2011). Linguistic relativity.
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science, 2(3),
253-265.

1065

