Enactive Mechanistic Explanation of Social Cognition
Ekaterina Abramova (e.abramova@ftr.ru.nl)
Radboud University Nijmegen; Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour

Marc Slors (m.slors@ftr.ru.nl)
Radboud University Nijmegen

Iris van Rooij (i.vanrooij@donders.ru.nl)
Radboud University Nijmegen; Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour
Abstract

non-reductionist. However, in this paper we highlight its
methodological weakness that might be preventing it from
gaining popularity, namely a lack of explicit commitment to
how cognitive phenomena are to be explained. We exemplify this issue using a case of enactive accounts of social
cognition. We further point out that contemporary cognitive
science has two major explanatory frameworks on offer: a
deductive-nomological framework, typically associated with
REC, and a mechanistic framework, typically adopted by traditional cognitive scientists. We suggest that given the similarity between enactivists and other REC-ers, it is likely that
enactivists implicitly subscribe to the deductive-nomological
framework. In contrast to this, we argue that the mechanistic
framework is not only compatible with enactivism but also
preferable. We consider two main objections raised by RECers against mechanistic explanation and show that they rely
on a misunderstanding of what such an explanation entails.
We end the paper with a preliminary picture of enactive mechanistic explanation of social cognition.

In this paper we examine an enactive approach to social cognition, a species of radical embodied cognition typically proposed as an alternative to traditional cognitive science. According to enactivists, social cognition is best explained by
reference to the social unit rather than the individuals that participate in it. We identify a methodological problem in this
approach, namely a lack of clarity with respect to the model
of explanation it adopts. We review two complaints about
a mechanistic explanatory framework, popular in traditional
cognitive science, that prevent enactivists from embracing it.
We argue that these complaints are unfounded and propose a
conceptual model of enactive mechanistic explanation of social cognition.
Keywords: enactivism; social cognition; mechanistic explanation

Introduction
Embodied Cognition (EC) is most generally a plea to acknowledge that the states of the body and the environment
can influence cognition and that lower sensorimotor knowledge plays a role in higher cognition like language and reasoning (e.g. Eerland, Guadalupe, & Zwaan, 2011). Radical
Embodied Cognition (REC) is the claim that the body and
the environment are actually part of cognition and as a result, for example, there is no need to have internal representations of the environment (Wilson & Golonka, 2013; van
Dijk, Kerkhofs, van Rooij, & Haselager, 2008). Enactivism
is a strand of REC that stems from the early work in philosophy of biology of Maturana and Varela (1980) and was
popularized as an alternative to traditional cognitive science
by Varela, Thompson, and Rosch (1991). It shares theoretical commitments with complex systems theory, phenomenology and Buddhist tradition in, on the one hand, grounding
cognition on the organizational principles of living systems
while at the same time giving a prominent role to the investigation of human experience. Three main principles adopted
by enactivism are (1) challenging the dichotomy between internal components of the system and its external conditions,
instead stressing the interaction between the two, (2) emphasizing emergent properties on higher levels of organization
and (3) viewing the organism as an active autonomous entity
that is able to adaptively maintain itself in the environment1 .
We think enactivism has a lot to offer to the study of cognition because it is an approach that is both naturalistic and

Enactive Social Cognition
In broadest terms, a non-EC view on social cognition assumes
that humans can interact with others successfully only if they
are able to see other people as beings with mental states, can
infer these states using a so-called ‘theory of mind’ or simulation and plug in the results of such inferences in planning their own actions. A regular EC view denies the need
for such complex representations and inferences emphasizing
real-time interaction with other people and perceptual information available in such settings. Certain varieties of simulation accounts of mindreading fit into this framework.
What distinguishes a REC approach is an insistence that
the particular dynamics of social interaction themselves play
a crucial role in explaining social cognition. This is because
“becoming a temporary unit of social action with another person also involves creation of a new perception-action system with new capabilities ” (Marsh, Johnston, Richardson,
& Schmidt, 2009, p. 1219). Theoretically this has lead to a
claim that there is no need to represent other people or their
perspective on the world in order to coordinate with them successfully. Methodologically, it has been suggested that the
correct level of analysis in the study of social cognition is the
social unit, rather than an exclusive focus on the individuals
that comprise it. Instead of searching for internal properties

1 For an accessible introduction to enactivism see (McGee, 2005).

45

Since social interaction is proposed as an explanation, it
cannot be what enactivists are trying to explain. It would
mean that the explanandum is perhaps social cognition or experience but these are traditionally understood as individuallevel phenomena2 . If an explanandum is to be re-construed
on a supra-personal level, we need an account of social cognition on that level (without equating it with social interaction).
Enactivists could, for example, take more precisely defined
types of interaction as their phenomena of interest (cooperation, competition, exchange) and then seek non-individual
explanations for their emergence. Our proposal discussed in
the last section is to shift to a multi-level explanandum.
Moving on to the model of explanation, an explicit commitment on what constitutes an (good) explanation is important so that any given instance can be judged as to whether it
succeeds. In contemporary cognitive science two explanatory
frameworks have been discussed most widely: a deductivenomological (DN) and a mechanistic one (Cummins, 2000)3 .

Figure 1: Perceptual crossing experiment.
A pair of blind-folded participants (call them A and B) are asked
to interact in a one-dimensional horizontal field in which they can
move using a computer mouse. The field is perceived solely via
tactile feedback: encountering a stimulus produces a vibration. Participant A can sense 3 kinds of stimuli: a static object, B’s avatar and
B’s “shadow” that follows B’s avatar movement but does not provide
B with sensation (the situation is analogous for B). Participants are
asked to click when they think to be in contact with the other’s avatar.
A typical strategy is to move back and forth, especially when a stimulus is encountered. This allows for discriminating between a static
and mobile object (if the stimulation changes despite the participant
staying in place, the object is not static). The results also show that
participants click more often when encountering the other’s avatar
compared to the other avatar’s shadow. However, this increased correct clicking is not due to better recognition (the relative probability
of clicking on the avatar is not higher) but rather because the avatars
spend more time in front of each other. This effect emerges because
the situation of ‘sensing the other’ while ‘being sensed’ is more stable than sensing an insensitive shadow. The task is solved globally
even if participants are not conscious of this effect and if the solution
does not appear in an individual behavioral measure.

According to a DN framework, explaining a particular phenomenon proceeds by citing relevant general laws, the details
of particular circumstances, and how the phenomenon is to be
expected given these two pieces of knowledge. Such an explanation has a form of a deductive argument that derives the
explanandum from a certain law taken as a premise (Hempel,
1965). Many REC-ers have explicitly argued for adopting the
DN framework for explaining cognition (Walmsley, 2008).
By contrast, in a mechanistic framework, one wants to
know not just that a certain regularity holds and what it is
but also why it holds and how it is implemented. An answer
to this question is sought in identifying a mechanism, where:

of individual independent cognizers, we are to investigate the
social interconnectivity that emerges as a result of the interaction and constrains individual-level behavior from the level
of a new overarching structure.
One of the most distinctive empirical paradigms that exemplifies this idea is a perceptual crossing (PC) study (Auvray
& Rohde, 2012) presented in Figure 1, in which the task is to
distinguish another agent from inanimate objects. A frequent
assumption in traditional explanations of social cognition is
that such a recognition is accomplished by some special cognitive module (e.g. a module of agency or animacy detection)
that is a precondition for interacting successfully. The results
of the PC experiment (see Figure 1 caption and the original
article for details) have been interpreted to show the reverse:
that the social interaction itself and its particular dynamics
constitute a solution to such a task. Therefore, in the oftrepeated claim by enactivists, social interaction constitutes
social cognition.
Despite a theoretical and empirical research program on
social cognition, we believe so far enactivists have not
been sufficiently explicit about the explanatory methodology they subscribe to, by which we mean clarity on what is
their explanatory target and what constitutes an explanation
(Cummins, 2000; Wright & Bechtel, 2007).

A mechanism is a structure performing a function in
virtue of its component parts, component operations,
and their organization. The orchestrated functioning of
the mechanism is responsible for one or more phenomena (Bechtel & Abrahamsen, 2005, p. 423).
Enactivists have not explicitly accepted or rejected either
of the frameworks. However, given the similarity between
them and other proponents of REC, it seems safe to assume
that their implicit notion of explanation is likely closer to the
DN framework. We now proceed to considering the reasons
behind this preference and show that in fact there can be enactive mechanistic explanations.
2 This interpretation is suggested by a version of the task by
(Froese, Iizuka, & Ikegami, 2014) in which participants’ experience
of the other’s presence is one of the dependent variables.
3 The reader should be aware that this is a necessary oversimplification of the variety of positions held within philosophy
of science overall and that even within cognitive science there
are heated debates on the precise understanding of deductivenomological, probabilistic, rational, mechanistic and other explanations. We merely focus on the distinction that has been most widely
used in discussions between traditional cognitive science and REC.

46

Enactivist Worries about Mechanistic
Explanation

havior that they cannot exhibit on their own. It is because the
parts are on a lower level than the whole they comprise that
they cannot have the same properties (cf. the properties of
hydrogen and oxygen vs water).
Second, there is no reason to suppose that only linear and
sequential modes of organization are allowed in mechanisms.
Especially when dealing with biological mechanisms, nonlinear and cyclic modes are ever-present. Such a focus on biology has led mechanists to stress the necessity for dynamic
mechanistic explanation because in a system organized nonlinearly “the operations performed by parts of the mechanism vary dynamically, depending on activity elsewhere in
the mechanism” (Bechtel, 2011, p. 551). Therefore, an explanation has to include not just a static diagram of components and their organization but also a description of how the
functioning of these parts is orchestrated in time, including
potential shifts of the overall functional organization. Adding
dynamics to a mechanistic explanation does not turn it into a
law-based explanation (Bechtel & Abrahamsen, 2010, 2011).
The general thrust of these extensions of the mechanistic
framework is to stress that cognitive systems are likely to lie
on a continuum between the extremes of non-decomposable
and fully-decomposable. They are, instead, integrated systems, in which it is still possible to identify components but
their functions are not necessarily predetermined and fixed.
Nor is there a trivial additive relationship between component sub-functions and the overall phenomenon. Rather, their
contribution to the operation of the whole might dynamically
depend on other parts of the system, the larger context and be
variable in time. It does not mean that when studying a mechanism for a particular phenomenon it is impossible to identify
these contributions (see also Menary, 2007).
In reply to such arguments, Lamb and Chemero (2014)
state that

Since space is limited we will focus on just two worries that
prevent enactivists from adopting a mechanistic approach.
We acknowledge that there are other issues that could be
raised (e.g. the role of representations in mechanistic explanation) but our reply to them would be similar in spirit to
what we offer here: that the notion of mechanism is richer and
more flexible than typical complaints about it presuppose.

The Decomposability Worry
The main worry enactivists and other REC-ers seem to have
with the mechanistic approach is that it allegedly views cognitive systems as decomposable or near-decomposable while
in reality they are non-decomposable. For example, Lamb
and Chemero (2014) argue that according to the mechanists,
producing an explanation requires (1) “decomposition [that]
involves developing a model of a system’s behavior by identifying discrete component parts and their linear, or weakly
non-linear, interactions” and (2) “localization [that] involves
mapping those discrete components and interactions onto features of a physical system” (pp. 809-810). What is often
added to this charge is that such an explanatory strategy views
cognitive systems as component-dominant, i.e. the behavior
of the whole is a simple additive result of the behavior of
its components, whose properties and functions are rigid and
pre-determined (Favela, 2015). Therefore, a single component can be analyzed in isolation as responsible for some particular capacity of the system.
In an opposition to this view on the brain and cognition,
REC-ers argue that in fact living cognitive systems are nondecomposable into components and interaction-dominant.
That is, the behavior of the whole is more than a simple sum
of the parts because interactions between parts are mostly
non-linear, the behavior of each part dynamically depends on
all other parts of the system and it is not possible to assign any
specific task to any component. Therefore, interactions between components are more important than the components
themselves (Richardson & Chemero, 2014)4 .
If neural and cognitive systems are indeed nondecomposable and mechanistic framework can only be applied to decomposable systems, then obviously enactivists
cannot make use of it. However, these arguments betray a
misunderstanding of the mechanistic framework and explicit
dismissal of the new developments in this field.
First of all, mechanists explicitly argue against mere aggregation of components and place heavy emphasis on their
organization (Wimsatt, 1997). It is because the way parts are
organized in space and time that they together can exhibit be-

If a neo-mechanist wishes to discard the condition of decomposability, then she does so at the cost of discarding
the feature of neo-mechanistic explanations that makes
them distinct from more general accounts of naturalistic
explanation (p. 813).
We wish to oppose this complaint. First, it is unreasonable to expect that a certain concept or theory once proposed cannot be developed further. Second, what is distinctive about mechanistic explanations is not decomposability but a concern for causal structure underlying the phenomenon5 , and for explaining how things work rather than
merely stating what are the laws. Finally, specific for the
topic of this paper, a REC-er has yet to justify to what extent non-decomposability applies to social cognition, even if
it holds for the brain.

4 This view composed of several statements can of course be
translated into a continuum of positions. Arguing against the explanatory primacy of components might mean rejecting explanations
that (a) ignore interactions, (b) assume only linear interactions, (c)
assume only static interactions ignoring dynamics, (d) ignore the
effect of parameters external to the system. We thank anonymous
reviewer for pointing this out.

5 We should note here that it might be that the mechanistic approach and enactivism rely on different notions of causality that
make them incompatible. Addressing this possibility would require
not merely examining the respective commitments but also the plausibility of particular models of causality assumed, e.g. whether circular causality typically adopted by enactivists is a helpful notion.

47

The Extended Cognition Worry

that needs to maintain itself as a unity in constantly changing
external conditions.
If adopting a mechanistic framework were to indeed preclude speaking of social interaction playing a constitutive
role, enactivists would not be able to accept it. However, we
believe there are reasons to oppose Herschbach’s conclusion.
The first most obvious reply to Herschbach is that he is replacing the enactive explanandum with his own by switching
from the phenomenon of interest being social interaction as
a whole to the behavior of the individual. Even though enactivists have not been very clear on their exact explanandum,
they would definitely resist this move from the higher to the
lower level.
Furthermore, regarding autonomy as a guide to the boundaries of cognition, both Herschbach and Bechtel misunderstand the notion of autonomy adopted by enactivists. Living systems are autonomous in being self-determined rather
than being steered from outside (Bechtel’s “locus of control”). However, they are also autonomous in being operationally closed, that is, organized in a circular manner, in
which the processes and components that constitute the system are themselves constituted by that system. This, however, applies not just to the bio-chemical processes of selfmaintenance, but also to the closure of the sensorimotor loop
of the organism. This loop is closed not to the environment
but through the environment, which is merely an additional
step in the loop, not an input or output external to the system
(see Villalobos & Ward, 2015, for a more detailed argument).
The point here is that enactivist autonomy does allow for the
constitutive role of the environment in the cognitive process.
Finally, to respond to Herschbach from within a mechanistic framework itself is to point at the recent literature that
treats the coupling-constitution fallacy as an instance of a
general problem of demarcating the boundaries of a mechanism (Kaplan, 2012). In short, what is required to allow for
deciding what constitutes part of the mechanism is an account
of constitutive explanatory relevance, i.e. a way to determine
which components and processes are relevant to a particular
mechanistic explanation (Craver, 2007). This does not need
to be a priori based on deciding what cognition really is and
whether it really extends beyond the brain. In fact, it is even
possible to develop a deflationary (yet still mechanistic) account which shows how certain kinds of dynamic non-linear
coupling just are constitutive (Kirchhoff, 2016).
In sum, contra Herschbach (2012), adopting the mechanistic framework does not in fact necessitate abandoning the
constitutive role of social interaction in social cognition.

The second major worry enactivists have about mechanistic
explanation has to do with the claim that social interaction
itself constitutes social cognition. This is in line with a general REC view that cognition is not done by the brain alone
but by an extended brain-body-environment system. In the
case of social cognition, it is rather an extended brain-bodyenvironment-body-brain system (Froese, Iizuka, & Ikegami,
2013). The fear is that perhaps mechanistic framework somehow precludes such an extended conception of cognition.
The worry is seemingly justified by the following critique
by Herschbach (2012). In his article on social cognition
sub-titled “A mechanistic alternative to enactivism” (emphasis added), he very acutely points out that enactivists have
not been very clear on what they mean by constitution in
their claim that “social interaction constitutes social cognition”. Constitution is standardly taken to imply a part-whole
relationship and if the claim is that supra-personal interaction constitutes individual cognition, then it is somehow a
category mistake and a confusion of levels of organization.
On the other hand, if constitution is aimed at emphasizing the causal links between agents engaged in the interaction, then enactivists are committing a well-known couplingconstitution fallacy (Adams & Aizawa, 2010). In this fallacy,
frequently ascribed to proponents of extended cognition in
general, one points out extensive causal coupling between a
cognitive agent and some external factors and then concludes
that therefore these factors are part of cognition. Such a conclusion is thought to be unwarranted because coupling and
constitutive relations are in general not equivalent.
Herschbach proposes that adopting a mechanistic framework can capture everything that enactivists want to say about
social interaction without committing the fallacy. He states
that perceptual crossing example would be described by a
mechanist as a network composed of interacting agents to be
explained by focusing on the agents, their behavior and organization. A mechanist would then move one level down to the
internal mechanisms of the agents and how they produce the
particular behavior observed in the experiment in response to
particular sensory input. The main point of difference between enactivists and mechanists, according to Herschbach,
is that while the former would like to say that the environmental input constitutes social cognition, the latter would say
that only the agent-internal mechanism constitutes the phenomenon of interest (the behavior exhibited in the experiment) while the environmental input is merely an external
influence on that mechanism. That is, the mechanism succeeds only when situated in the appropriate social context of
having contact with another agent.
Herschbach grounds this conclusion on the fact that only
parts that participate in a self-organized autonomous individual can be truly said to constitute cognition. He follows
Bechtel (2009) who has argued that it is the autonomous living system that is the proper “locus of control”, differentiated from the environment, because it is the living system

The Enactive Mechanisms Proposal
We believe enactive mechanistic explanation is possible as
there is sufficient basis on both sides of the debate for such
a reconciliation. Constructing such an account requires two
things. First, it requires disambiguation of the notion of
‘composition’ involved in mechanistic explanations to recognize its compatibility with enactivist claims about non-

48

Figure 2: Traditional social cognition.

Figure 3: Enactive social cognition.

decomposability of cognitive systems. Identifying components in a cognitive system does not necessarily entail that
these components are self-contained, so that the mechanism
is a mere linear addition and causal interrelation of them. We
can just as well identify components that are defined by their
role in the overall whole. This latter, holistic, notion of ‘component’ is in line with enactivism. Crucially, though, it does
leave room for a mechanistic explanation. Secondly, a tailoring of the mechanistic framework is required to fit wider
enactivist commitments, such as, for example, making room
for cognitive mechanisms that are non-representational and
extended. This reorientation towards mechanisms can be advantageous to enactivists for several reasons.
First, it equips enactivism with an explicit and coherent explanatory framework, which comes with specific tools and
strategies for constructing explanations of cognitive phenomena. For example, mechanistic literature on mutual manipulability as a guide to constitutive relevance (Craver, 2007) can
help make clear what elements of individual cognition and
social interaction are essential to particular tasks. Similarly,
discussions on how to think of inter-level causation (Craver
& Bechtel, 2007) can help understand the autonomy of the
supra-personal level that enactivists consider important.
Second, the claim that social interaction itself should constitute the primary level of explanation in enactive work on
sociality to some extent encourages ignoring the individual
mechanisms. By contrast, mechanistic emphasis on working
parts and their operations highlights the need to provide a distinctively enactive account of what goes on in the individual
brains and bodies, i.e. offer a truly multi-level explanation for
a multi-level explanandum. Otherwise, a traditional cognitive
scientist might well acknowledge the role of interaction but
combine that with a non-enactive account of internal mechanisms, thereby defying the whole purpose of constructing an
explanatorily complete enactive cognitive science.
Third, enactive mechanistic explanation promotes integration with the rest of cognitive science while at the same time
making clear how enactive explanations are different from
traditional ones. That is, competing explanations could now
be formulated in the same language and compared, instead
of two communities adopting completely different explanatory frameworks and talking past each other. This is not to
say that dynamical, more law-oriented approaches are to be

eliminated and we definitely see value in a pluralistic attitude
(Dale, Dietrich, & Chemero, 2009). However, we think at
least some intersection is essential for continued progress.
The ‘commensurability’ of mechanistic enactivism and traditional cognitive science can be illustrated schematically.
Figure 2 represents a traditional cognitive science approach
to social cognition. All the components of the cognitive
mechanisms (differently colored cogs) are located inside the
agents’ brains. Succeeding in a social task requires one agent
to “replicate” the cogs of the other agent inside their own
brain, i.e. internally represent the mental states of the other
by means of “theory of mind” or simulation. The replicated
cogs will not be the same as the original ones (hence the blurriness) but need to be sufficiently close if the agents are to
interact successfully. The unfolding of the interaction is then
explained in terms of the operations of this internal machinery, giving a strong impression that once all the cogs are in
place, the whole process might as well proceed offline.
The contrasting enactive mechanistic view is depicted in
Figure 3. Here the explanandum is particular kinds of social interactions in which the individuals participate. The explanation is to be achieved by specifying all the components
of the picture that contribute to the realization of such interactions. The components of the cognitive mechanisms (the
cogs) are distributed across the brain and the body of both
agents and dynamically coupled (the toothed belt), respecting the enactivist rejection of the internal-external dichotomy.
The contribution of the individual brains to the overall social
interaction is diminished with respect to the previous figure,
suggesting a need for an alternative account of such internal
mechanisms. The fact that the coupling is a constraint on individual mechanisms rather than an additional cog, expresses
the idea that interaction consists of interacting individuals yet
allowing for emergent effects. Furthermore, the picture includes the possibility that the coupling might be affected by
contextual factors (the tension pulley), such as the layout of
the environment in which interaction unfolds, or some sociocultural circumstances.
To restate the point of our paper in terms of the second
figure above, we believe the current state of the matters in enactivist theorizing about social cognition is an exclusive focus
on the toothed belt. We think the time is ripe to start examining the rest of the picture.

49

Acknowledgments

Hempel, C. (1965). Aspects of scientific explanation and
other essays in the philosophy of science. New York: Free
Press.
Herschbach, M. (2012). On the role of social interaction in
social cognition: A mechanistic alternative to enactivism.
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 11(4), 467–
486.
Kaplan, D. M. (2012). How to demarcate the boundaries of
cognition. Biology & Philosophy, 27(4), 545–570.
Kirchhoff, M. D. (2016). From mutual manipulation to cognitive extension: Challenges and implications. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 1–16.
Lamb, M., & Chemero, A. (2014). Structure and application
of dynamical models in cognitive science. In Proceedings
of the 36th annual meeting of the cognitive science society
(pp. 809–814).
Marsh, K. L., Johnston, L., Richardson, M. J., & Schmidt,
R. C. (2009). Toward a radically embodied, embedded
social psychology. European Journal of Social Psychology,
39(7), 1217–1225.
Maturana, H., & Varela, F. (1980). Autopoiesis and cognition: The realization of the living. Boston: D Reidel Publishing.
McGee, K. (2005). Enactive cognitive science, part 1: Background and research themes. Constructivist Foundations,
1(1), 19–34.
Menary, R. (2007). Cognitive integration: Mind and cognition unbounded. Palgrave Macmillan.
Richardson, M. J., & Chemero, A. (2014). Complex dynamical systems and embodiment. In L. Shapiro (Ed.), The routledge handbook of embodied cognition (pp. 39–50). New
York: Routledge.
van Dijk, J., Kerkhofs, R., van Rooij, I., & Haselager, P.
(2008). Can there be such a thing as embodied embedded cognitive neuroscience? Theory & Psychology, 18(3),
297–316.
Varela, F., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The embodied mind: Cognitive science and human experience. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Villalobos, M., & Ward, D. (2015). Living systems: Autonomy, autopoiesis and enaction. Philosophy & Technology,
28(2), 225–239.
Walmsley, J. (2008). Explanation in dynamical cognitive
science. Minds and Machines, 18(3), 331–348.
Wilson, A. D., & Golonka, S. (2013). Embodied cognition is
not what you think it is. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 58.
Wimsatt, W. C. (1997). Aggregativity: Reductive heuristics
for finding emergence. Philosophy of Science, 64, 372–
384.
Wright, C. D., & Bechtel, W. (2007). Mechanisms and
psychological explanation. Philosophy of Psychology and
Cognitive Science, 4, 31–79.

The first author is funded by the Netherlands Organization for
Scientific Research (NWO), research project PGW-12-32.

References
Adams, F., & Aizawa, K. (2010). Defending the bounds of
cognition. The Extended Mind, 67–80.
Auvray, M., & Rohde, M. (2012). Perceptual crossing:
The simplest online paradigm. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 6, 181.
Bechtel, W. (2009). Explanation: Mechanism, modularity,
and situated cognition. In P. Robbins & M. Aydede (Eds.),
The cambridge handbook of situated cognition (pp. 155–
170). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bechtel, W. (2011). Mechanism and biological explanation.
Philosophy of science, 78(4), 533–557.
Bechtel, W., & Abrahamsen, A. (2005). Explanation: A
mechanist alternative. Studies in History and Philosophy
of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 36(2), 421–441.
Bechtel, W., & Abrahamsen, A. (2010). Dynamic mechanistic explanation: Computational modeling of circadian
rhythms as an exemplar for cognitive science. Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science Part A, 41(3), 321–333.
Bechtel, W., & Abrahamsen, A. (2011). Complex biological mechanisms: Cyclic, oscillatory, and autonomous. In
C. A. Hooker (Ed.), Philosophy of complex systems (pp.
257–285). New York: Elsevier.
Craver, C. F. (2007). Constitutive explanatory relevance.
Journal of Philosophical Research, 32, 3–20.
Craver, C. F., & Bechtel, W. (2007, 1 September). Top-down
causation without top-down causes. Biology & philosophy,
22(4), 547–563.
Cummins, R. (2000). “How does it work?” versus “what are
the laws?”: Two conceptions of psychological explanation.
In F. Keil & R. Wilson (Eds.), Explanation and cognition
(pp. 117–145). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dale, R., Dietrich, E., & Chemero, A. (2009). Explanatory
pluralism in cognitive science. Cognitive Science, 33(5),
739–742.
Eerland, A., Guadalupe, T. M., & Zwaan, R. A. (2011). Leaning to the left makes the eiffel tower seem smaller: Posturemodulated estimation. Psychological Science, 22(12),
1511–1514.
Favela, L. H., Jr. (2015). Understanding cognition via complexity science. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Cincinnati.
Froese, T., Iizuka, H., & Ikegami, T. (2013). From synthetic modeling of social interaction to dynamic theories
of brain–body–environment–body–brain systems. The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(04), 420–421.
Froese, T., Iizuka, H., & Ikegami, T. (2014). Embodied social
interaction constitutes social cognition in pairs of humans:
A minimalist virtual reality experiment. Scientific Reports,
4(3672).

50

