Equiprobability principle or “no change” principle? Examining reasoning in the
Monty Hall Dilemma using unequal probabilities
Bruce D. Burns (bruce.burns@sydney.edu.au)
University of Sydney, School of Psychology, Brennan MacCallum Building (A18)
Camperdown, NSW 2006, Australia

Abstract
The Monty Hall Dilemma (MHD) is a well-known cognitive
illusion. It is often claimed that one reason for the incorrect
answers is that people apply the equiprobability principle: they
assume that the probability of the two remaining options must
be equal. An alternative explanation for assigning the same
probabilities to options is that they had the same prior
probabilities and people perceive no significant change.
Standard MHD versions do not distinguish these possibilities,
but a version with unequal prior probabilities could.
Participants were given an unequal probabilities version of
MHD and told that either the high or low probability option had
been eliminated. This affected participants’ choices and their
posterior probabilities. Only 14% of participants’ responses
were consistent with applying the equiprobability principle, but
51% were consistent with a “no change” principle. Participants
were sensitive to the implications of the prior probabilities but
did not appear to use Bayesian updating.
Keywords: Monty Hall Dilemma, probabilistic reasoning,
cognitive illusions, cognitive reflection

Introduction
In the Monty Hall Dilemma (MHD) participants are
presented with a scenario in which there are three doors, one
of which conceals a prize. The participant initially chooses
one and then some mechanism (a game show host in the
original version) opens one of the other two doors to show
that it does not conceal the prize. This mechanism never
opens a door with the prize behind it, knows where the prize
is, and it always operates. The participant is then offered the
choice of staying with the original choice or switching to the
other unopened door. Almost all participants say they would
stay with their first choice and that the probability of winning
is 50% (Granberg & Brown, 1995), however the correct
choice is to switch and the probability of winning is 2/3.
When Marilyn vos Savant published the MHD in her
magazine column and gave its correct answer she reports
having received thousands of letters with 92% of the general
public disagreed with her, but so did 65% of letters with
university addresses (vos Savant, 1997). As such the MHD
has proved to be one of the best examples of a cognitive
illusion (Piattelli-Palmarini, 1994) and it has been the subject
of a number of research studies (see Krauss & Wang, 2003;
Tubau, Aguilar-Lleyda & Johnson, 2015, for reviews).

Factors driving the illusion
Tubau et al. (2015) point out that it has been observed in
many empirical studies that when participants are given the
MHD they display a strong tendency to see the two remaining

doors as equally likely to conceal the prize. Stibel, Dror, and
Ben-Zeev (2009) found that even in the 100-door version of
the MHD in which 98 doors were opened, participants still
tended to say that the last two remaining doors had a 50%
chance each of concealing the prize. Although Tubau et al.
point out that a number of factors have been argued to
contribute to the illusion in MHD, one factor that it has been
argued is a strong factor is misapplication of the
equiprobability principle (Falk, 1992; Johnson-Laird,
Legrenzi, Girotto, Legrenzi, & Caverni, 1999; Falk & Lann,
2008). Once participants see the options as equally probable
they then choose to “stay” due to either illusion of control
(Granberg & Dorr, 1998) or anticipation of regret (Gilovich,
Medvec, & Chen, 1995).
The equiprobability principle suggests that in the absence of
any apparent reason to differentiate options, all options will
be assigned the same probability (Johnson-Laird, et al, 1999).
So if there are just two apparently identical options they must
each have an equal 50% chances of being correct. The
equiprobability principle has often been observed when
people are faced with uncertain options. For example,
Fischhoff, Parker, Bruine de Bruin, Palmgren, Dawes and
Manski (2000) found that a large number (over 20%) of US
16 year olds estimated a 50% chance of dying in the next
year. Tversky and Kahneman (1974) report that when
participants were presented with a party made up of people
with one of two professions, but given a description of an
individual that the representativeness heuristic could not
allocate to one of the groups, they said the probability of him
being in either group was 50% regardless of base-rate. Even
when Burns and Wieth (2004) presented a variation of the
MHD that induced 51% participants to see that it was better
to switch, most still said the probability of wining was 50%.
Johnson-Laird et al. present ample evidence of the
equiprobability principle being applied to a number of
situations, but it appears to be particularly strong in the MHD.
However the frequency of the 50% answer may not be as
strong as evidence of application of equiprobability as has
been assumed because there is more than one path to this
answer.
Burns and Wieth (2004) suggested that a major barrier to
correct reasoning about the MHD is that participants fail to
understand the causal structure underlying it. Therefore they
see the host’s action in opening a door as having not having
changed the underlying probabilities. Thus given that the two
unopened doors had equal probabilities before any door was
opened they may still have equal probabilities. Occasionally
participants have report that each of the two doors now has a
33% chance of concealing the prize, making this reasoning

1697

transparent, although mathematically incoherent. However
participants may be applying this reasoning to conclude that
the ratio of the two probabilities of the remaining doors has
not changed, and thus the probability of winning after
switching is 50%. Thus participants could come to the same
answer (i.e., that each door has the same 50% chance of
concealing the prize) in two different ways: 1) by
misapplying the equiprobability principle; 2) by assuming no
change. With the standard version of the MHD it is difficult
to distinguish which form of reasoning led to the 50% answer,
but a modification used by Granberg (1999) could.

MHD with unequal probabilities
Granberg (1999) tried to probe how people use conditional
probabilities in the MHD by giving them an alternative
version of the MHD with four doors and unequal
probabilities. The Bayesian analysis shows that whether
staying or switching has the highest probability of winning
depends on which door is initially selected and which door is
opened. The optimal strategy for this version is to first select
the least likely alternative then switch away from it after a
door is opened. Granberg gave participants 60 trials of either
equal or unequal probability 4-door versions of the MHD. On
the first trial only 11% switched in the equal-probability
condition but even fewer (7%) switched in the unequalprobability condition, despite there being a 75% chance of
winning (on average) if switching in the later condition. Over
60 trials the switch rates improved in both conditions but at
similar rates. Participants in unequal-probability condition
increasingly utilized the optimal strategy, but still only used
it on an average of about 30% of trials in their last block of
10. Granberg saw this as evidence that participants were
satisficing (Simon, 1955).
Granberg (1999) did not ask participants about what they
thought were the probabilities that they would win by
switching, but by not doing so an opportunity was lost. Few
participants would be expected to get these probabilities
correct, given how poor participants are at getting the
percentage correct in standard version of the MHD (Burns &
Wieth, 2004, found only 2% did so). However their incorrect
answers could be windows into their reasoning. In the 3-door
equal-probabilities version of the MHD the same percentage
answer could result from either form of the erroneous
reasoning identified above. If a participant was applying the
equiprobability principle then they would say there is a 50%,
but they would answer the same if they thought that Monty
had changed nothing (except for cutting down the options).
However in an unequal-probabilities version applying the
equiprobability principle would still yield a 50% chance of
winning, but if they applied the “no change” principle then
the probability of winning would be a function of the unequal
probabilities. Thus an unequal probability version of the
MHD can be used to probe to what extent are participants’
errors due to either of these principles.

The current experiment
In the experiment presented here participants were given a
three-door version of the MHD but told that the probability
that Door A concealed the prize was 30%, the probability that
Door B did was 60% and the probability that Door C did was
10%. (These probabilities were chosen because they yielded
different correct answers to staying or switching depending
on which door was opened, and because they allowed easy
calculation of the percentages corresponding to reasoning I
expected from participants.) They were then told that they
had initially selected Door A (fixing the first choice
eliminated the strategic considerations that were not the focus
of this experiment), then that one of the other doors had been
opened. Figure 1a shows diagrammatically the scenario for
the condition in which Door B was the one unopened, and in
Figure 1b for when Door C was unopened.

Figure 1a: Diagrammatic depiction of the scenario presented
to participants in the Door-B unopened condition.

Figure 1b: Diagrammatic depiction of the scenario presented
to participants in the Door-C unopened condition.
Participants were then asked whether they would stay with
their first choice or switch to the unopened door, and to
express their probability of winning if they switched. They
were also asked if they had ever seen a question like this
before. There were two conditions: Door-B in which
participants were told that Door B was unopened; and DoorC in which participants were told that Door C was unopened.
Bayes’ Theorem yields the correct answer to the problems
in the two conditions. In the Door-B condition the optimal
choice is to switch because there is a 80% chance of winning
if they switch, but in the Door-C condition participants

1698

should stay because they would have only a 40% chance of
winning if they switched (these answers were confirmed by
simulations assuming that if the prize was behind Door A
then there was an equal chance of opening either Door B or
C). If participants apply the equiprobability principle then
they should indicate a 50% chance of winning by switching
in both conditions. If they are applying the “no change”
principle then in the Door-C conditions they may say 25%
(.1/(.1+.3)) and in the Door-B conditions 67% (.6/(.6+.3)).
However they may apply a cruder version of the “no change”
principle and just repeat the prior probabilities of 10% for the
Door-C condition or 60% for the Door-B condition.
Tubau et al. (2015) suggest that use of the equiprobability
principle may be due to lack of cognitive reflection, so it may
be possible to analyses reasoning about the MHD in terms of
dual-system models (see Stanovich, 2011). Applying “no
change” and repeating prior probabilities may be the least
reflective response. However “no change” but updating the
probabilities to maintain the same ratio may be the most
reflective. Thus responses to the unequal probability MHD
may also be used to probe how reflective was the thinking
employed.
The goal of the experiment was to analyze the type of
reasoning participants used in an unequal-probabilities
version of the MHD and thus to investigate what factors are
behind the cognitive illusion. An improved understanding of
the MHD can improve understanding of how people reason
about probabilities.

Method
Participants
A total of 373 participants completed the experiment as part
of a class at the University of Sydney. Of these, 105 indicated
that they had seen a similar question before, so they were
excluded from this analysis. The remaining sample of 268
consisted of 160 women and 108 men.

time.” Participants were then instructed to pretend they had
first chosen Door A and that Monty Hall then opens Door B
(if in the Door-C condition, otherwise Door C) and reveals a
goat. Now he asks you whether you want to stick with your
first choice (Door A) or switch to the Door C (or Door B if in
the Door-B condition). Participants were also shown Figure
1a or Figure 1b, which ever was relevant to their condition.
They were then asked “Would you choose to switch doors
or stay with your original door (Door A)?” and “What do you
think is the chance of winning the prize if you switch doors
(to Door B) [Door C in Door-C condition]?
Participants also completed the Cognitive Reflection Task
(CRT) of Frederick (2005) which consists of three problems
that require participants to reflect on the answers rather than
give the obvious ones. It is used to assess the extent to which
participants are reasoning reflective and thus using System 2
rather than relying on System 1 (in terms of Stanovich, 2011).

Results
Choice
After eliminating participants who reported having seen
the question before and two with missing responses, there
were 115 in the Door-B condition and 151 in the Door-C
condition. Table 1 shows the number of participants choosing
to stay or to switch depending on which door was left
unopened. There was a large effect of condition, 2(1) =
74.35, p < .001.
This result shows that participants were sensitive to the
implication of the prior probabilities of the unopened door,
with 86% correctly switching when the unopened door had a
high prior probability and 66% correctly staying when the
unopened door had a low prior probability. This result
already argues that the equiprobability principle is not being
commonly applied.
Table 1: Number of participants in each condition (Door-B
in which the high probability door is left unopened and
Door-C in which the low probability door is left unopened)
deciding to stay or switch.

Materials and procedure
During a class, participants were presented with the task as
part of a set of tasks completed on a computer. They were
told to read the following questions carefully and answer all
the questions. If there were any they did not know the answer
to, then they were instructed to guess.
“Pretend you are on a game show, where you are allowed
to choose one of three closed doors. Behind one door is a
prize (a car), and behind each of the other doors is a goat.
After you have chosen a door, the door remains closed for the
time being. The game show host, Monty Hall, who knows
what is behind the doors, now has to open one of the two
unchosen doors and reveal a goat. After he shows you a goat,
he asks you to decide whether you want to stay with your first
choice or switch to the remaining unopened door.”
“By watching the show many times you have calculated
that there is a pattern to where the prize is initially placed.
Door A has the prize 30% of the time, Door B has the prize
60% of the time and Door C has the prize only 10% of the

Door-B
unopened

(60%)

Choice
Stay
Switch
16
99

Door-C
unopened

(10%)

101

50

A slightly surprising aspect of Table 1 was how high the
switch rate was for the Door-C condition, given that so few
participants switch in standard versions of the MHD despite
it being the correct response. This may be due to the initial
choice of Door A being allocated to participants rather than

1699

being a true choice, which could reduce both the illusion of
control (Granberg & Dorr, 1998) and the anticipation of
regret (Gilovich et al, 1995) factors that have been seen as
driving the excessive number of “stay” decision in the
standard MHD. Consistent with this is that previous studies
have found that eliminating participants’ first choice
increased switch rates substantially (Tubau & Alonso, 2003).
The large effect of the prior probabilities is also surprising
in light of the lack of an effect of unequal prior probabilities
observed by Granberg (1999) on his first trial. Possibly this
was because the differences in probabilities for Granberg’s
four doors were quite small: .1, .2, .3 and .4. It is also possible
that because Granberg’s first trial was the first of 60
participants were using it to explore rather than thinking
deeply about the right choice to make.

Percent
Participants in the Door-B condition gave higher mean
percentage (M =. 61, SD = .16) chances of winning by
switching than did those in the Door-C condition (M = .41,
SD = .21), t(264) = 8.85, p < .001. Consistent with the choice
data, participants thought they had a better chance of winning
by switching if the higher probability door was left unopened.
Table 2 shows the number of participants giving each
percentage response depending of their condition and their
choice. Very few participants gave the correct percentages,
only 4/266. That these four actually calculated the Bayesian
posterior probabilities is thrown into doubt by the observation
that two participants generated these responses even when
they were incorrect for their condition. Critically, Table 2
reveals that relatively few participant gave the
equiprobability response of 50% when asked how likely they
were to win if they switched. In total only 37/266 (14%) of
participants did so. Equiprobable responses were no more
likely in the Door-C than the Door-B condition, 2(1) =
0.475, p = .47. As expected based on results from the standard
MHD, equiprobability was associated with more “stay”
decisions, 2(1) = 5.76, p = .016.
There was strong evidence that participants followed the
principle that nothing had changed. A total of 93/266 (35%)
of participants gave responses consistent with them
calculating the ratio of the prior probabilities of the opened
and unopened door (66% when Door B was unopened; 25%
when Door C was unopened). As expected, the 66% response
was much more common from participants in the Door-B
than the Door-C condition, 2(1) = 18.9, p < .001, and the
reverse was true for 25% responses, 2(1) = 19.2, p < .001.
There is also evidence of participants using a cruder version
of the “no change” principle and simply giving the prior
probabilities as the posterior probabilities (10% in Door C;
60% for Door B). A total of 50/266 (19%) did this. Again as
expected, the 60% response was much more common from
participants in the Door-B than the Door-C condition, 2(1)
= 31.4, p < .001, and the reverse was true for 10% responses,
2(1) = 20.1, p < .001.
Although only generated by 9 participants, the most
common percent response that is not apparently associated

with applying equiprobability or a “no change” principles
was 70%. This answer could be due to participants adding
together the prior probabilities of the opened and unopened
doors. Such addition is sometimes proposed as a way to
explain the correct answer to the standard version of the
MHD. The unequal probability version of the MHD
illustrates why this is a poor way to explain the MHD, but it
is interesting that a small number of participants appeared to
reasoning using it. If we see the 6 participants responding
30% as some sort of inversion of the 70% reasoning, this
leaves only 10 out of 266 other responses which cannot in
some way be linked to the “sum”, equiprobability, or “no
change” approaches.
Table 2: Frequencies of different values of reported percent
chances of winning if participant switched, split by whether
the participants decided to stay or switch and their condition
(Door-B or Door-C not opened). Two categories cover
ranges of responses rather than precise responses.
Stay

Switch

Percent
chance
of win if
switch
0-9%

Door C
(.10) not
opened
0

Door B
(.60) not
opened
0

Door C
(.10) not
opened
0

Door B
(.60) not
opened
2

10%

19

0

5

0

11-24%

1

0

0

1

25%

22

0

1

0

30%

2

0

2

1

33%

25

2

5

2

40%

3

0

0

1

50%

16

7

7

7

60%

1

3

1

23

65-67%

8

4

26

52

70%

3

0

1

5

75%

0

0

0

1

80%

0

0

1

1

100%
Totals

0
101

0
16

1
50

2
99

A surprising aspect of the data in Table 2 was that a high
number of participants in the Door C condition who switched
gave 66% as the percentage chance of winning. This is
consist with their choice but given that the prior probability

1700

of this door concealing the prize was 10% and its posterior
probability was 40%, it is hard to infer the reasoning behind
this answer. It may just be due to participants who were
confused about the problem. Alternatively it could be that
participants who had an intuition to switch, but were unable
to calculate a probability fell back to using a plausible
sounding percentage for a problem proposing three entities.
Consistent with this is the similar number of participants
giving 33% as the answer, particularly when deciding to stay.
Another possibility arises from the fact that two-thirds is the
correct answer to the standard MHD, so it is possible that
some participants who said that they have not seen a similar
problem actually had seen the standard MHD and then
repeated its solution.

Cognitive Reflection Task (CRT)
Participants’ responses to the CRT were scored by
counting how many of the three problems they gave the
correct answer to. Overall the participants did quite poorly
given that the maximum score is 3.0 but their mean score was
0.55 (SD = 0.86).
There appeared to be an association between CRT scores
and how participants responded. Those who generated the
equiprobability percent of 50% did not differ from other
participants on CRT scores (M=0.43, SD=0.83, n=37 verse
M=0.57, SD=0.86, n=229), t(264) = 0.92, p = .36. However
participants repeating the prior probability, either 10% or
60% depending on their condition, had lower CRT scores
than other participants, (M=0.30, SD=0.61, n=50 verse
M=0.61, SD=0.89, n=216), t(264) = 2.34, p = .020.
Furthermore participants maintaining the ratio of prior
probabilities, either 25% or 66% depending on their
condition, had higher CRT scores than other participants
(M=0.72, SD=0.96, n=116 verse M=0.42, SD=0.74, n=150),
t(264) = 2.92, p = .004. So it appears that participants’
responses to the unequal probabilities MHD reflect not only
what principles they applied, but also how reflective was their
thinking.

Discussion
The equiprobability principle has often been presented as a
strong driver of the illusion behind the MHD, yet there has
been no attempt to test this hypothesis beyond the observation
that most participants when given standard versions of the
MHD report that that they would have a 50% chance of
winning if they switched. To the extent that participants use
similar reasoning when faced with the equal and unequal
probability versions of the MHD, the finding here that only
14% of participants gave equal probability answers throws
into doubt that the equiprobability principle is a strong driver
of this cognitive illusion. In a way, it is also a powerful
demonstration of just how strong the equiprobability
principle can be for some individuals, given that it appeared
to be followed by some participants even when it not only led
to the wrong answer but it had to be invoked out of thin-air
(i.e., there are no mentions of 50% and percentages presented

are unequal). So this principle may explain the illusion of the
MHD for some people, but they appear to be a small minority.
The experiment’s findings represent strong evidence that
what leads participants to think that each remaining door is
equally probable after Monty has revealed one is that there
has be no change to these doors, so they maintain their equal
status. Overall 54% of participants gave percentages in which
they repeated the prior probability or they maintained the
ratio of the prior probabilities. This is consistent with Burns
and Wieth’s (2004) argument that the main obstacle to
correctly seeing the need for conditional reasoning about the
MHD is failure to recognize that Monty’s actions change
things beyond just removing an option. Burns and Wieth
argued that the MHD is difficult because it has a causal
structure that people have difficulty recognizing and thus
they fail to see that Monty’s actions have causal
consequences. We demonstrated this effect by showing
higher switch rates when the MHD was presented as a
competition. The finding here using the unequal probability
MHD show directly that a belief that there has been “no
change” could be driving many people’s failures to reason
correctly about the MHD.
The current results show almost no evidence of Bayesian
updating by participants. They are sensitive to prior
probabilities but they do not appear to recognize the problem
as one involving conditional probabilities. The more
reflective thinkers (as measured by CRT scores) recognize
that the posterior probabilities are different from the prior
probabilities, so have updated their probabilities after a door
was opened. However they have only accounted for the
missing door, not taken into account the new conditional
probabilities.
The unequal probabilities versions of the MHD have the
potential to be useful tools for examining the reasoning
people use in the MHD because they have the potential to
reveal this reasoning through differential answers. Almost all
participants gave percent responses which could be
interpreted as revealing their underlying reasoning.
Questions concerning both the MHD and probabilistic
reasoning more generally might be fruitful explored using
appropriate versions of the unequal probabilities MHD.

Does this experiment really address the MHD?
Reviewers of this paper raised some interesting issues
regarding whether any experiment using an unequalprobabilities MHD can tell us anything about how people
reason in the common equal probabilities version of the
MHD.
One claim was that the current experiment had nothing to
do with the MHD because participants were told their initial
choice and told what door was opened, whereas the common
description of the MHD allows people to make their own first
choice. However assigning to participants their first choice
has been the case in most empirical studies of the MHD going
back to the first published study by Granberg and Brown
(1995). Doing so has not eliminated the strong bias to decide
to stay, so it does not seem to be a critical factor.

1701

The question was also raised as to whether assigning
unequal prior probabilities to the doors in itself invalidates
the experiment as an examination of reasoning in the MHD.
However, that the probabilities have to be equal has not been
presented as a critical aspect of the MHD. If it is, then why it
is critical needs to be explained. The MHD is a conditional
probability problem and Bayes’ Law can be as effectively
applied to the MHD with unequal probabilities as to a MHD
with equal probabilities. From the point of view of
conditional probability, it is the equal probabilities
presentation that is a special case of a more general problem.
The reasoning described as being behind the MHD does not
seem to rely on the prior probabilities being equal, although
it may simplify the calculations.
An interesting claim made was that the unequal
probabilities MHD cannot possibly address the
equiprobability principle because it does not have equal prior
probabilities. As pointed out earlier the equiprobability
principle applies when there is no apparent reason to
differentiate the options, thus the presentation of unequal
prior probabilities may prevent it from being applied. The
probabilities of the unopened doors are also not equal in the
equal probabilities version, but people often don’t perceive
that to be the case. However this interpretation of the
principle makes it somewhat circular, that is, it becomes a
statement that people judge probabilities to be equal when
they don’t perceive them as unequal. Such an interpretation
limits the explanatory value of the equiprobability principle.
(Johnson-Laird et al [1999] also use the equiprobability
principle to generating mental models, so perhaps the
principle is better seen as a step in reasoning than as a result.)
The finding in the current experiment that some participants
thought the doors to be equally likely despite the prior
probabilities being unequal suggests that a stronger version
of the equiporbability principle is used by some people.

References
Burns, B.D., & Wieth, M. (2004). The collider principle in
causal reasoning: Why the Monty Hall Dilemma is so
hard. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General. 133,
434–449.
Falk, R. (1992). A closer look at the probabilities of the
notorious three prisoners. Cognition, 43, 197–223.
Falk, R., & Lann, A. (2008).The allure of equality:
Uniformity in probabilistic and statistical judgment.
Cognitive Psychology, 57, 293–334.
Fischhoff, B., Parker, A. M., Bruine de Bruin, W., Downs,
J., Palmgren, C., Dawes, R., & Manski, C. F. (2000).
Teen expectations for significant life events. The public
opinion quarterly, 64, 89-205.
Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive reflection and decision
making. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19, 25–42.
Granberg, D. (1999). A new version of the Monty Hall
Dilemma with unequal probabilities. Behavioural
Processes, 48, 25–34

Granberg, D., & Brown, T. A. (1995). The Monty Hall
dilemma. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21,
711–723.
Granberg, D., & Dorr, N. (1998). Further exploration of
two-stage decision making in the Monty Hall dilemma.
American Journal of Psychology, 111, 561-579.
Gilovich, T., Medvec, V. H., & Chen, S. (1995).
Commission, omission, and dissonance reduction: Coping
with regret in the "Monty Hall" problem. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 21, 185-190.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Legrenzi, P., Girotto, V., Legrenzi, M.
S., & Caverni, J.-P. (1999). Naive probability: A mental
model theory of extensional reasoning. Psychological
Review, 106, 62-88.
Krauss, S., & Wang, X. T. (2003). The psychology of the
Monty Hall problem: Discovering psychological
mechanisms for solving a tenacious brain teaser. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 132, 3-22.
Piattelli-Palmarini, M. (1994). Inevitable illusions: How
mistakes of reason rule our minds (M. Piattelli-Palmarini
& K. Botsford, Trans.). New York: John Wiley & Sons.
vos Savant, M. (1997). The power of logical thinking. New
York: St Martin's Press.
Simon, H. A. (1955). A behavioral model of rational choice.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 69, 99-118.
Stanovich, K. E. (2011). Rationality and the reflective mind.
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Stibel, J. M., Dror, I. E., & Ben-Zeev, T. (2009). The
collapsing choice theory: Dissociating choice and
judgment in decision making. Theory and Decision, 66,
149–179.
Tubau E., Aguilar-Lleyda, D., & Johnson. E. D. (2015).
Reasoning and choice in the Monty Hall Dilemma
(MHD): Implications for improving Bayesian reasoning.
Frontiers in Psychology, 6 (Article 353), 1-11.
Tubau, E., & Alonso, D. (2003). Overcoming illusory
inferences in a probabilistic counterintuitive problem: The
role of explicit representations. Memory & Cognition, 31,
596-607.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgement under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 11241130.

1702

