Error-Based Learning: A Mechanism for Linking Verbs to Syntax
Yi Lin (yilin5@illinois.edu)
Department of Psychology, 603 E. Daniel Street
Champaign, IL 61820 USA

Cynthia Fisher (clfishe@illinois.edu)
Department of Psychology, 603 E. Daniel Street
Champaign, IL 61820 USA
Abstract

new linguistic experience (Coyle & Kaschak, 2008; Lin &
Fisher, 2016; Qi, Yuan & Fisher, 2011; Ryskin, Qi, Duff &
Brown-Schmidt, 2016). For instance, Lin and Fisher (2016)
asked children and adults to describe videos by repeating and
completing sentence stems provided by an experimenter.
Training stems (10 per verb) induced participants to produce
one verb only in DO structures (Dora gave Boots___), and
another verb only in PO structures (Minnie showed the
clock___). Test stems ended at the verb, allowing participants
to choose either dative structure (Piglet gave___; The teacher
showed___). This brief training changed the biases of a wide
range of familiar verbs in adults’ and 4-year-olds’ sentence
production. In unconstrained test trials, participants produced
more DO descriptions with verbs trained in DO than in PO
structures. Similar verb-bias training effects have been found
in children’s and adults’ comprehension of sentences with a
prepositional
phrase
attachment
ambiguity
(e.g.,
Tickle/choose the frog with the feather; Qi et al., 2011;
Ryskin et al., 2016). These findings tell us that learners keep
track of the statistics of verb-structure combinations in the
linguistic environment, and adapt their language-processing
systems accordingly.
In the present study, we explored error-based learning as a
potential mechanism for verb bias learning. To do so, we explored parallels between verb bias learning and abstract syntactic priming. Syntactic priming is the tendency to reuse a
previously encountered syntactic structure. For example, a
talker who has recently read a sentence in the DO structure
(The governess made the princess a pot of tea) is more likely
to choose the same structure to describe an unrelated picture
(The boy is handing the singer a guitar; Bock, 1986). Syntactic priming is abstract—it spans different verbs, as in the example just given. Syntactic priming can be measured in children and adults, and in comprehension and production (Rowland et al., 2012; Thothathiri & Snedeker, 2008). The priming
effects are long-lasting (Bock & Griffin, 2000), suggesting
that they reflect long-term learning about abstract syntax.
Taken together, the literature on syntactic priming, and recent
reports of verb-bias learning, suggest that learners adapt to
the statistics both of abstract syntactic structures, and of verbstructure combinations (e.g., Wonnacott, Newport, & Tanenhaus, 2008).
Of particular interest here, syntactic priming shows ‘inverse preference’ or ‘surprisal’ effects (e.g., Bernolet &
Hartsuiker, 2010; Jaeger & Snider, 2013; Peter et al., 2015).

Children and adults are guided by verb-specific syntactic likelihoods, or verb bias, in language comprehension and production. Recent reports showed that verb bias can be altered by
new linguistic experience. We investigated the mechanisms
underlying this verb bias learning or adaptation. Specifically,
we asked whether verb bias learning, like abstract syntactic
priming, is driven by error-based implicit learning. We report
three experiments in which we altered the biases of familiar
dative verbs in children’s and adults’ sentence production, via
training trials that induced participants to produce each verb
consistently in either double-object or prepositional-object dative structures. Participants’ syntactic choices in later test trials
reflected the expected adaptation of verb bias to the training
experience. In addition, the magnitude of the training effect
varied with the likelihood of each sentence structure and with
pre-existing verb bias: Unexpected verb-structure combinations resulted in larger training effects, suggesting the operation of error-based implicit learning.
Keywords: language acquisition; verb bias; implicit learning;
error-based learning; surprisal

Introduction
Verbs are choosy about the sentence structures they occur
in. Transitive but not intransitive verbs can appear in transitive sentences, with two noun-phrase arguments (She saw
Sue; *She slept Sue); only certain verbs permit dative structures, with three arguments (She showed the book to Sue;
*She saw the book to Sue). In addition to these all-or-none
licensing restrictions, the linking of verbs with syntax is constrained by syntactic likelihoods. Most verbs license multiple
structures, but may occur much more often in one structure
than another. To illustrate, many dative verbs license both the
prepositional-object (PO: He showed/passed the book to her)
and the double-object dative structure (DO: He
showed/passed her the book), but the verb show occurs much
more often in the DO structure than does pass. These verbspecific likelihoods are known as verb bias. Verb bias
knowledge guides language processing in children and in
adults, affecting how we link verbs and syntax in production,
and online expectations about likely sentence structures in
comprehension (e.g., Peter et al., 2015; Snedeker & Trueswell, 2004).
Verb bias effects emerge early in acquisition (Peter et al.,
2015; Tomasello, 1992), but continually adapt to ongoing linguistic experience in children and adults. Recent reports show
that the biases of even well-known verbs can be altered by

754

That is, priming effects are larger if the structure of the prime
sentence is unexpected. To illustrate, Bernolet and Hartsuiker
(2010), in a study of adult sentence production, reported that
(a) DO prime sentences exerted a larger priming effect (relative to baseline) than did prime sentences in the more frequent PO structure, and (b) the magnitude of syntactic priming depended on verb bias: The effect of a DO prime was
larger if a PO-biased verb (one that rarely appears in this
structure) appeared in the prime sentence. Children show
similar effects of verb bias on the magnitude of syntactic
priming (Peter et al., 2015). This pattern points to error-based
implicit learning as a mechanism for syntactic priming: We
expect likely structures, and thus learn more from the unexpected, continuously adapting the language-processing system to a changing linguistic environment (Chang, Dell, &
Bock, 2006; Jaeger & Snider, 2013).
Could verb bias learning result from the same error-based
learning mechanisms that support syntactic priming? If so,
then verb bias training effects should vary with training-sentence surprisal. We tested this prediction by adapting the materials of Lin and Fisher (2016) to vary both training structure
(DO- vs. PO-training) and pre-existing verb bias (DO-biased
vs. PO-biased verbs).
In three experiments, participants watched videos depicting simple transfer events, and were prompted to describe
each one by repeating and completing a sentence stem provided by an experimenter (Fig-1). As before, each participant
received training trials that induced them to produce DO
structures with one verb (DO-training), and PO structures
with a second verb (PO-training). Crucially, one of the restricted verbs was chosen to be already DO-biased (e.g.,
show), while the other was PO-biased (e.g., pass). The assignment of verbs to training conditions varied between subjects, resulting in two list conditions: In the with-bias list,
both verbs were trained in the structure that matched their
pre-existing biases (e.g., PO-training for PO-biased pass,
DO-training for DO-biased show). In the contra-bias list, both
verbs were trained in the structure that mismatched their preexisting biases (PO-training for DO-biased show, DO-training for PO-biased pass). Following this training, participants
received test trials in which the sentence stems to be completed ended at the verb. Participants’ structural choices in
these unconstrained test trials provided our measure of verb

bias learning.
We work through our predictions for test-trial performance
in Fig-2. Each panel shows the expected rate of DO-structure
responses (as a proportion of DO and PO responses) under
different experimental outcomes, plotted by within-subjects
training condition (PO-training vs. DO-training) and between-subjects list condition (with-bias vs. contra-bias).
Based on previous results we expected pre-existing verb
bias to affect the rate of DO responses at test. Fig-2a shows
the data pattern that would result from baseline verb bias
alone: DO responses should be much more common for the
DO-biased than for the PO-biased verb. Assuming no training effect, the difference between the two verbs (indicated by
the equal-sized arrows in Fig-2a) would not vary with training condition.
We also expected to find a training effect. Fig-2b shows the
data pattern that would result if a uniform verb-bias training
effect, one that does not vary with training-sentence surprisal,
were added to the effect of pre-existing verb bias. As Fig-2b
shows, PO-training would decrease the rate of DO responding (relative to baseline), and DO-training would increase the
rate of DO responses. Given a uniform training effect, the
difference between the two verbs, reflecting pre-existing verb
bias, would again remain unchanged.
Fig-2c shows the predicted data pattern if verb bias training effects vary with training-sentence surprisal. Trainingsentence surprisal should reflect both the likelihood of the
training structure itself, and its fit with the pre-existing bias
of the verb. We expected DO-training to exert a larger effect

755

than PO-training, because the DO structure is a non-canonical structure. For example, the DO structure imposes discourse constraints on its use: It is typically used to place discourse-given recipients in post-verbal position (Show her the
picture; Stephens, 2015). The PO structure, in contrast, has
no strong discourse constraints (Brown, Savova, & Gibson,
2008). In our task, without a discourse set-up establishing the
recipient as given, the DO structure should be an unexpected
choice. We also expected the training effect to vary with preexisting verb bias: the effect of DO-training should be strongest for PO-biased verbs, those that rarely occur in the DO.
Accordingly, as shown in Fig-2c, DO-training should considerably increase the rate of DO responses for the PO-biased
verb (e.g., pass), but should have relatively little effect on the
rate of DO responses for an already DO-biased verb (e.g.,
show). In the PO-training condition, we should see relatively
little change due to training for either verb, preserving the
large difference between verbs that reflects their baseline biases. Notice the key difference between Fig-2b and Fig-2c: A
training effect that varies with training-sentence surprisal
should reduce the difference between the two verbs in the
DO-training condition relative to the PO-training condition.
We tested this prediction with 4- and 5-year-olds in Experiments 1a and 1b, and with adults in Experiment 2.

condition, both verbs were trained in the structure that mismatched their pre-existing bias.
A third dative verb, give, was unrestricted, appearing
equally often in the DO and PO structures during training.
Unrestricted give (a DO-biased verb) was included to increase children’s baseline rate of DO responses in the task;
note that children tend to prefer the PO structure in tasks like
ours (Peter et al., 2015; Stephens, 2015).
Children received 10 training trials per verb (30 training
trials total) in the training block. In the test block children
received 4 unconstrained test trials per restricted verb (show,
pass), and 8 test trials for the unrestricted verb give. The three
verbs were interleaved in training and test, and each child
heard equal numbers of DO and PO training stems across
verbs, ensuring that any effect of training reflected verb-bias
learning rather than abstract syntactic priming.
The main task was preceded by a naming game in which
children named the familiar characters and objects involved
in the events. The video-description task then began with two
filler trials to demonstrate the task.
Children’s responses were transcribed and coded as DO,
PO, or Other, following Rowland et al.’s (2012) criteria. Children who produced fewer than 80% training-compliant responses in each training condition (e.g., 80% DO responses
for their DO-trained verb) were replaced. The 48 included
children showed a compliance rate of 94% in training.
Our main analyses concerned the responses in the 8 test
trials with experimentally restricted verbs. Of the 384 test responses, 8 were Other responses, leaving 376. The dependent
measure was the proportion of DO responses (out of DO and
PO responses only), compared across the training and list
conditions.

Experiment 1a
Methods
Participants Forty-eight four- and five-year-old children
(Mean = 4;8; Range = 4;0-5;11) participated; all were native
speakers of English. Data from 4 additional children were excluded due to low training compliance (see below).

Results and Discussion
Fig-3a shows children’s proportion of DO responses in the
test trials with restricted verbs, by within-subjects training
condition (PO- vs. DO-Training) and between-subjects list
condition (with- vs. contra-bias). As predicted, children
showed a training effect, producing more DO responses in the
DO-training condition (38%) than in the PO-training condition (27%). They also showed a clear effect of pre-existing
verb bias, producing more DO responses with the DO-biased
verb show (43%) than with the PO-biased verb pass (22%),
averaged across training conditions.
Crucially, the effect of training varied with the likelihood
of the training structure and its fit with pre-existing verb bias.
Fig-3a shows that DO-training dramatically increased the
rate of DO responses for the PO-biased verb pass, but had
little effect on the rate of DO responses for the already DObiased verb show. This asymmetrical training effect reduced
the difference between the two verbs in the DO-training condition relative to the PO-training condition. In the PO-training condition, Fig-3a shows a large difference in the rate of
DO responses for the PO-biased verb pass, versus the DObiased verb show; this difference straightforwardly reflects

Materials and Procedures The materials were 46 5-s animated video clips depicting transfer events designed to be described by dative verbs, and 49 filler videos that did not depict transfer events. Children watched and described all 95
(critical and filler) videos by repeating and completing a sentence stem (Fig-1). The task was adapted from Lin and Fisher
(2016), described in the Introduction. The task took about 30
to 40 minutes, and was made engaging for children by embedding it in a scavenger hunt for which game-tokens were
discovered at intervals.
The task included a training and a testing block, with no
boundary between them from the child’s perspective. The key
manipulation involved artificially restricting particular verbs
to particular dative structures (only DO or PO) in training. As
shown in Fig-1, training stems ended with a post-verbal noun,
biasing children to produce either a DO or a PO sentence.
Test stems ended at the verb. Show and pass were the two
verbs that were restricted in training. These verbs differ in
their pre-existing biases, as revealed in a separate norming
study. Show is used more often in the DO, and pass in the PO
dative structure. Children were randomly assigned to the
with-bias or the contra-bias condition. Recall that in the withbias condition, both verbs were trained in the structure that
matched their pre-existing bias, whereas in the contra-bias

756

the verbs’ baseline verb biases. The effect of training was
larger for DO- than for PO-training, reflecting the likelihood
of each structure; the effect of DO-training was larger for a
PO-biased verb, reflecting the likelihood of verb-structure
combinations. This pattern of responses closely resembles the
predictions shown in Fig-1c, suggesting both an effect of
training and an influence of training-sentence surprisal on the
magnitude of the training effect.
This pattern was supported by a two-way mixed-model
ANOVA on the proportion of DO responses (arcsine transformed) that revealed a main effect of training (F(1,46) =
5.24, p <. 05), and an interaction of training and list (F(1,46)
= 12.22, p < .01). Separate t-tests revealed that the difference
between the two verbs was significant in the PO-training condition (t(47) = 3.32, p < .01) but not in the DO-training condition (t(47) < 1), consistent with our surprisal predictions.
In Experiment 1a we reproduced the verb-bias training effect in young children’s language production documented in
prior work (Lin & Fisher, 2016). Experience producing a verb
repeatedly in one syntactic structure modified the structural
biases of that verb, rendering children more likely to use the
verb in the same structure in later sentences. We also found
the first evidence that the magnitude of this training effect
depends on the likelihood of the training sentences. In Experiment 1b we sought to extend this effect to different verb sets,
exploring the robustness of the surprisal effect.

the verb-bias difference between our restricted verbs in Experiment 1b: Given children’s overall preference for the PO
structure, our norming study with children identified few
strongly DO-biased verbs. As in Experiment 1a, each participant was randomly assigned to the with- or contra-bias list.
Children who produced fewer than 80% training-compliant
responses in each training condition were replaced. We also
excluded one child who did not produce at least one dative
response in the test block for each restricted verb. The included children produced training-compliant responses in
95% of training trials. Of the 384 possible responses in the
test trials with restricted verbs, 7 were coded as Other trials,
leaving 377 DO and PO responses.

Results and Discussion
Fig-3b shows children’s proportion of DO responses in the
restricted-verb test trials, by within-subjects training condition (PO- vs. DO-Training) and between-subjects list condition (with- vs. contra-bias). The pattern of responses closely
resembles that found in Experiment 1a. Children showed a
training effect, producing more DO responses in the DOtraining condition (35%) than in the PO-training condition
(20%), and an effect of pre-existing verb bias, producing
more DO responses for the DO-biased verb show (34%) than
for the PO-biased verbs (21%).
As before, the effect of training varied with the likelihood
of the training structure and its fit with the pre-existing bias.
In Fig-3b, DO-training greatly boosted the rate of DO responses for the PO-biased verbs, but had little effect on rate
of DO responses for the DO-biased verb show. As a result,
the difference between the two verbs in the DO-training condition was much smaller than in the PO-training condition. In
the PO-training condition, Fig-3b shows a large difference in
the rate of DO responses for the PO-biased verbs versus the
DO-biased verb, reflecting these verbs’ pre-existing verb biases. Therefore, as before, the data bear out our surprisal predictions: the effect of training was larger for DO- than for
PO-training, reflecting the likelihood of each structure, and
the effect of DO-training was larger for a PO-biased than for
a DO-biased verb. The same pattern emerged for both verb
sets (not shown in the figure).
These observations were borne out by an ANOVA on the
proportion of DO responses (arcsine-transformed) that again

Experiment 1b
Methods
Participants A new group of forty-eight four- and five-yearold children (Mean = 4;7; Range = 4;0-5;8) participated, all
native English speakers. Data from 4 additional children were
excluded due to low training compliance (3), or too few dative responses in the test trials (1).
Materials and Procedures Materials and procedures were
identical to those of Experiment 1a, except that send was the
PO-biased verb for half of the children and throw for the other
half. We chose send and throw, two other PO-biased verbs,
to seek evidence of surprisal effects with different verb sets.
We retained show as the DO-biased verb to avoid reducing

757

revealed a main effect of training (F(1,46) = 8.16; p < .01)
and an interaction of training and list (F(1,46) = 5.83; p <
.05). Separate t-tests revealed that children produced significantly more DO responses for the DO-biased verb show than
for the PO-biased verbs send or throw in PO-training (t(47) =
2.7, p < .01) but not in DO-training (t(47) < 1).
Experiment 1b thus reproduced the key findings of Experiment 1a, varying the verb sets. Again, the pattern of results
suggested that the magnitude of verb-bias training depended
on training-sentence surprisal. In Experiment 2 we sought evidence of the same surprisal effect in adults, again varying the
verb sets.

As in Experiment 1b, the same pattern emerged for both verb
sets (not shown in the figure).
This pattern was supported by an ANOVA on the proportion of DO responses (arcsine transformed) that revealed a
main effect of training (F(1,46) = 16.73, p < .001) and an interaction of training and list (F(1,46) = 12.92, p < .01). Separate t-tests revealed that the difference between the two
verbs was significant in the PO-training condition (t(47) =
2.35, p < .05) but not in the DO-training condition (t(47) <
1), consistent with the surprisal predictions.

General Discussion
In three experiments, we found that children and adults
produced more double-object (DO) sentences for verbs
trained in the DO structure than for verbs trained in the PO
structure. This difference between training conditions replicates previous reports that the biases of familiar verbs can be
altered by new verb-structure patterns in the input (Coyle &
Kaschak, 2008; Lin & Fisher, 2016).
We also found the first evidence that the magnitude of the
verb-bias training effect depended on the prior likelihood of
the training sentences. The key result was that, as predicted,
DO-training reduced the difference in DO responses between
pre-experimentally DO- and PO-biased verbs. After DOtraining, a familiar PO-biased verb such as pass became almost as likely to be used in the DO structure as a familiar
DO-biased verb such as show. In contrast, after PO-training,
DO-biased verbs were still used much more often in the DO
structure than were PO-biased verbs. This pattern supports
the hypothesis that training-sentence surprisal affects verbbias learning. PO-training, which linked verbs with what is
arguably the default dative structure, produced little change
in the rate of DO responses relative to the verbs’ pre-existing
biases; DO-training, which linked verbs with a less canonical
structure, led to sizable increases in the rate of DO responses,
but did so mostly for PO-biased verbs, reducing the difference between the PO- and DO-biased verbs. This pattern was
observed with 4-year-olds (Experiments 1a and 1b) and with
adults (Experiment 2).
These findings highlight a strong parallel between verb
bias learning and syntactic priming. Prior evidence shows
that the magnitude of syntactic priming depends on prime
sentence surprisal: The largest priming effects are found
when the prime structure is uncommon, or is unexpected
given the verb in the prime sentence (Bernoulet & Hartsuiker,
2010; Jaeger & Snider, 2013; Peter et al., 2015). Here we saw
strikingly similar effects for verb-bias learning. In both syntactic priming and verb-bias learning, children and adults
learn more from unexpected sentences. This similarity suggests that syntactic priming, which involves learning about
abstract syntactic structure, and verb bias learning, which involves linking verbs to syntax, depend on similar learning
mechanisms and representations.
This conjecture fits well with the predictions of Chang,
Dell and Bock’s (2006) Dual-Path model of syntax learning.
The model learns to link syntax and semantics without predefined syntactic representations, in a system that yokes a

Experiment 2
Methods
Participants Forty-eight college-aged adults participated, all
native English speakers. Data from 2 additional adults were
excluded due to low training compliance (1), or too few dative responses in the test block (1).
Materials and Procedures Materials and procedures were
identical to those of Experiment 1a, except that send and hand
were the restricted verbs for half of the participants and pass
and show were the restricted verbs for the other half. Send
and pass were both PO-biased verbs in our norming data;
hand and show were both DO-biased. As in Experiment 1a,
each participant was randomly assigned to either the withbias or the contra-bias list condition.
Adults who produced fewer than 80% training-compliant
responses in each training condition were replaced. We also
excluded one adult who did not produce at least one dative
response in the test block for each restricted verb. The included participants produced training-compliant responses in
99% of training trials. Of the 384 possible responses in the
test trials with restricted verbs, 8 were coded as Other responses, leaving 376 DO and PO responses.

Results and Discussion
Fig-3c shows adults’ proportion of DO responses in the restricted-verb test trials, by within-subjects training condition
(PO- vs. DO-Training) and between-subjects list (with- vs.
contra-bias). Adults, like children, showed an effect of training, producing more DO responses in the DO-training condition (54%) than in the PO-training condition (34%). They
also showed effects of pre-existing verb bias, producing more
DO responses with the DO-biased verbs (53%) than with the
PO-biased verbs (35%), averaged across training conditions.
The pattern of data shown in Fig-3c again suggests that the
effect of training varied with the likelihood of the training
structure and its fit with the pre-existing verb bias. The difference between the (pre-experimentally) PO- vs. DO-biased
verbs was reduced in the DO-training condition relative to the
PO-training condition. This is just what we would predict
based on training-sentence surprisal: DO-training strongly increased the rate of DO responding for the PO-biased verbs.

758

syntactic sequencing system to a separate message system
representing the meaning of input sentences. A key feature of
the model is that the syntactic sequencing system is linked to
abstract event-role slots in the message system, but not to the
word-meanings bound to those event roles. This “Dual-Path”
architecture keeps lexical semantics out of the syntax, ensuring that the model creates abstract syntactic representations.
Accordingly, the model creates syntactic representations that
support abstract syntactic priming, but the model can also
learn about the syntactic biases of particular verbs under
some circumstances (Chang, Janciauskas, & Fitz, 2012). Because the model learns via error-based learning, it learns the
most from input sentences that are unexpected given the
model’s prior experience. This model therefore provides one
possible account of our findings—sentence surprisal affects
verb bias learning as well as syntactic priming because the
same error-based implicit learning mechanism underlies
learning about abstract syntax and verb bias.
Our results leave open many questions for future research
about the nature of the representations that were modified by
verb-bias training. For example, participants could have
strengthened the link between each verb and an abstract representation of sentence structure or between a verb and a thematic role ordering (Twomey, Chang, & Ambridge, 2016).
Training could have also highlighted the semantic difference
between caused possession and caused motion, changing the
prominence of recipient vs. theme. Note, though, that adapting the syntax and meanings of verbs are not mutually exclusive (Gleitman et al., 2005).
The verb bias learning studies reported here shed new light
on a fundamental question in language acquisition: How do
we coordinate abstract syntactic knowledge with our intricate
knowledge of words? Our results suggest error-based implicit
learning mechanisms help us track the likelihood of both abstract syntactic structures and the linking of those structures
with particular verbs. The same learning mechanisms may
underlie learning at both levels, creating both abstract and
verb-specific syntactic knowledge throughout development.

209.
Chang, F., Dell, G., & Bock, K. (2006). Becoming syntactic.
Psychological Review, 113(2), 234-272.
Chang, F., Janciauskas, M., & Fitz, H. (2012). Language adaptation and learning: Getting explicit about implicit learning. Language and Linguistic Compass, 6(5), 259-278.
Coyle, J. M., & Kaschak, M. (2008). Patterns of experience
with verbs affect long-term cumulative structural priming.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15(5), 967-970.
Gleitman, L. R., Cassidy, K., Nappa, R., Papafragou, A., &
Trueswell, J. C. (2005). Hard words. Language Learning
and Development, 1(1), 23-64.
Jaeger, F., & Snider, N. (2013). Alignment as a consequence
of expectation adaptation: Syntactic priming is affected by
the prime’s prediction error given both prior and recent experience. Cognition, 127, 57-83.
Lin, Y., & Fisher, C. (2016). Connecting verbs to syntax:
Modifying verb bias. Poster presented at The 29th CUNY
Conference on Human Sentence Processing.
Peter, M. Chang, F., Pine, J. M., Blything, R., & Rowland, C.
F. (2015). When and how do children develop knowledge
of verb argument structure? Evidence from verb bias effects in a structural priming task. Journal of Memory and
Language, 81, 1-15.
Qi, Z., Yuan, S., & Fisher, C. (2011). Where does verb bias
come from? Experience with particular verbs affects online
sentence processing. Proceedings of the 35th BUCLD.
Rowland, C. F., Chang, F., Ambridge, B., Pine, J. M., &
Lieven, E. V. M. (2012). The development of abstract syntax: Evidence from structural priming and the lexical boost.
Cognition, 125, 49-63.
Ryskin, R. A., Qi, Z., Duff, M. C., & Brown-Schmidt, S.
(2016). Verb biases are shaped through lifelong learning.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 43(5), 781-794.
Snedeker, J., & Trueswell, J. C. (2004). The developing constraints on parsing decisions: The role of lexical-biases and
referential scenes in child and adult sentence processing.
Cognitive Psychology, 49, 238-299.
Stephens, N. (2015). Dative constructions and givenness in
the speech of four-year-olds. Linguistics, 53(3), 405-442.
Thothathiri, M., & Snedeker, J. (2008). Syntactic priming
during language comprehension in three- and four-year-old
children. Journal of Memory and Language, 58, 188-213.
Tomasello, M. (1992) First Verbs: A Case Study of Early
Grammatical Development. Cambridge University Press.
Twomey, K. E., Chang, F., & Ambridge, B. (2016). Lexical
distributional cues, but not situational cues, are readily
used to learn abstract locative verb-structure associations.
Cognition, 153, 124-139.
Wonnacott, E., Newport, E. L., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2008).
Acquiring and processing verb argument structure: Distributional learning in a miniature language. Cognitive Psychology, 56, 165-209.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by grants from the NSF
(BCS - 1348522) and the NICHD (R01 HD054448). The
stimulus videos were adapted from materials generously
shared with us by Caroline Rowland.

References
Bernolet, S., & Hartsuiker, R. J. (2010). Does verb bias modulate syntactic priming? Cognition, 114, 455-461.
Bock, K. (1986). Syntactic persistence in language production. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 355-387.
Bock, K., & Griffin, Z. M. (2000). The persistence of structural priming: Transient activation or implicit learning?
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 129(2),
177-192.
Brown, M., Savova, V., & Gibson, E. (2012). Syntax encodes
information structure: Evidence from on-line reading comprehension. Journal of Memory and Language, 66, 194-

759

