Even when people are manipulating algebraic equations,
they still associate numerical magnitude with space
Tyler Marghetis

Robert L. Goldstone

David Landy

tmarghet@indiana.edu

rgoldsto@indiana.edu

dlandy@indiana.edu

Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405

Abstract
The development of symbolic algebra transformed
civilization. Since algebra is a recent cultural invention,
however, algebraic reasoning must build on a foundation of
more basic capacities. Past work suggests that spatial
representations of number may be part of that foundation,
but recent studies have failed to find relations between
spatial-numerical associations and higher mathematical
skills. One possible explanation of this failure is that spatial
representations of number are not activated during complex
mathematics. We tested this possibility by collecting dense
behavioral recordings while participants manipulated
equations. When interacting with an equation’s greatest
[/least] number, participants’ movements were deflected
upward [/downward] and rightward [/leftward]. This
occurred even when the task was purely algebraic and could
thus be solved without attending to magnitude (although the
deflection was reduced). This is the first evidence that
spatial representations of number are activated during
algebra. Algebraic reasoning may require coordinating a
variety of spatial processes.
Keywords: algebra; number and space; notations; mousetracking.

Introduction
The invention of symbolic algebra transformed human
civilization. Algebraic notation allows for accomplishments
as mundane as buying paint for a new fence and as fantastic
as discovering antimatter. But symbolic algebra is a recent
cultural invention. Thus, it cannot rely on devoted neural
machinery that evolved specifically for that purpose — an
innate ‘algebra module.’ Instead, our capacity for symbolic
algebra must be cobbled together from other cognitive
capacities. But which?
One proposal is that higher mathematics, including
symbolic algebra, builds on a foundation of space (e.g.,
Lakoff & Núñez, 2000; Sella et al, 2016). On this proposal,
our evolutionarily ancient spatial abilities have been coopted by culture to reason about abstract mathematical
entities and relations. Indeed, early spatial abilities are
known to predict life-long mathematical performance, from
grades in elementary school to the choice of a mathematicsheavy college major.

2675

One crucial aspect of this spatial foundation may be the
ability to use space to make sense of number (Hubbard et al,
2005). Spatial representations of number could ground the
highly abstract notion of numerical magnitude in the more
basic, experiential notion of location. More complex forms
of mathematics could then build on this foundation, from
algebra to calculus and beyond (Núñez & Marghetis, 2015).
The current study tests this account by examining whether
spatial representations are activated during one canonical
case of complex mathematical activity: solving equations.

Mixed evidence for spatial-numerical associations
in higher mathematics
There is considerable evidence that spatial representations
of number are ubiquitous and automatic, at least during
simple numerical tasks (Hubbard et al, 2005; Winter,
Marghetis, & Matlock, 2015). These spatial representations
involve both the horizontal and vertical axes. Among literate
adults in Western cultures, for instance, processing lesser
numbers facilitates subsequent responses on the left, while
processing greater numbers facilitates responses on the right
(Dehaene et al, 1993). Similarly, when German adults
generate random numbers while undergoing upward and
downward motion, they produce numbers that are
significantly greater when moving upward and lesser when
moving downward (Hartmann et al, 2011). In adults, these
spatial representations have been shaped considerably by
culture. The association between numerical magnitudes and
horizontal locations, for instance, is reversed among
Palestinians who read both words and numbers from rightto-left (Shaki et al, 2009). When we encounter a number,
therefore, we automatically activate spatial representations
of its magnitude.
But do these implicit spatial representations play any role
in mathematics beyond the domain of simple numbers? The
evidence is rather mixed. One point in favor of such a role is
that the correlation between early spatial abilities and later
school success in mathematics is mediated by the ability to
map numbers to a linear path (Gunderson et al, 2012).
Causal evidence comes from the finding that training
students to map numbers to linear path improves calculation
(Siegler & Ramani, 2009). There is also evidence that
spatial representations of number play a role in
mathematical communication. Mathematical experts
produce gestures that express numbers as locations, even

Spatializing numbers during algebra 2

when their speech does not contain any mention of space
(Marghetis & Núñez, 2013).
On the other hand, there have been a number of failures to
find any relation between spatial-numerical associations and
higher mathematical ability (e.g., Cipora & Nuerk, 2013;
Cipora, Patro, & Nuerk, 2015). Indeed, there is little
evidence that spatial representations of number are activated
at all during mathematical activities that are more complex
than simple numerical judgments — judging a number’s
relative magnitude, or determining whether it is even or odd.
In contrast to these simple tasks, real mathematical activity
seldom involves single numerals in isolation. Algebra, in
particular, is often the first time that students begin to think
about numbers, not just in terms of their magnitudes, but
also in terms of their structural interrelations. As these more
complex notions come to the fore, spatial representations of
numerical magnitude may fade into the background.
Moreover, many of these more complex notions may also
have a spatial underpinning. During mental calculation, for
instance, subtraction and addition are associated with
leftward and rightward motion, respectively (Knops et al,
2009; Marghetis, Núñez, and Bergen, 2014); and during
algebraic reasoning, space is used to represent the
hierarchical syntax of algebraic expressions (Landy &
Goldstone, 2007). If space is playing these other roles, then
the association between space and number might reasonably
be expected to fade. The neural circuitry responsible for
representing spatial location cannot be all things at once. On
this account, as space is co-opted for new roles —
arithmetic, algebraic syntax — its association with
numerical magnitude might diminish. Number-space
associations may be limited to simple numerical judgments,
disappearing as mathematical complexity increases.

The present study
The current literature, therefore, appears to support
conflicting accounts. On one hand, associations between
number and space are activated automatically during a
variety of simple tasks, and spatial processing more
generally has been implicated in higher-level mathematical
thinking. On the other hand, individual differences in spatial
representations of number do not appear to correlate with
mathematical expertise. This presents a puzzle. What is
happening to these spatial representations of number as
people transition from simple judgments of isolated
numerals to more complex mathematical activities?
To resolve this puzzle, we analyzed the spatial dynamics
of individuals’ manipulations of algebraic equations, using a
methodology that we have dubbed Dense Recording of
Algebraic Manipulations (DREAM). In this approach,
participants manipulate equations using click-and-drag
dynamic algebra software; we record the moment-tomoment details of these manipulations, including the precise
mouse trajectories used to rearranging equations.

2676

In the current study, algebraic equations were displayed
on a computer screen (e.g., x + 3 = 7), and participants
could rearrange these equations by clicking and dragging
symbols as if they were physical objects. We also
manipulated whether participants performed a task that was
focused on magnitude (“Click and drag the greatest/least
number”) or algebraic structure (“Solve for x”). Throughout,
we recorded the fine-grained details of these interactions,
including the precise spatial locations at which individual
numbers were clicked1. By varying the numbers in the
equations, we could see whether numerical magnitude had a
systematic effect on the location of symbolic manipulations.
We foresaw several possible outcomes. If spatial
representations of number play no role in higher
mathematics — or play a role only in development — then
spatial representations might not be activated at all while
equations are manipulated, particularly if the goal is to solve
the equation. If, on the other hand, spatial representations of
number continue to play a functional role in algebra —
perhaps by grounding the meaning of otherwise arcane
symbolic manipulations — then we might find traces of
spatial-numerical associations in the fine details of how
equations are manipulated. In particular, greater numbers
might be clicked higher or more rightward, while lesser
numbers might be clicked lower or more leftward.

Methods
Design
Participants manipulated equations with a computer mouse,
moving terms as if they were virtual objects. This was
implemented with the Graspable Math software
(www.graspablemath.com). Think of files and folders on a
computer desktop, which can be reorganized and rearranged
by clicking and dragging. Graspable Math offers the same
functionality but for equations. In response to these
manipulations, the software automatically adjusts the
equation to maintain its validity. For instance, given the
equation ‘x + 2 = 4,’ as the 2 is dragged to the far side of the
4, the + symbol changes automatically into the – symbol as
it crosses the equal sign, so that the final state of the
equation would be ‘x = 4 – 2’ (Fig. 1a). This allows users to
focus on how and why they want to rearrange equations. In
addition, clicking on the equals sign flips an equation (e.g.,
x = 2 ! 2 = x), and clicking on an operation performs that
operation (e.g., x = 4 – 2 ! x = 2; Fig. 1b).
The full system is quite powerful and can be explored
online (www.graspablemath.com). The current study used a
simplified version that included only the dragging and
clicking interactions described above. We recorded where
1

Technically, participants clicked numerals that denoted numbers,
and it was the numerals’ denotations that had magnitude. For
simplicity of presentation, however, we shall conflate numerals
with their denotations and refer to them as numbers.

Spatializing numbers during algebra 3

and when interactions occurred, including x,y coordinates of
the mouse cursor. Here we focus on where, exactly,
participants clicked on numbers, to investigate whether this
spatial behavior was affected by the numbers’ magnitude.

excluding 5. The value of b was always different from c, so
one number was always greater than the other, producing 56
combinations of values for b and c. Each combination was
used to create two equations: one with addition (e.g., x + 2 =
3) and one with subtraction (e.g., x – 2 = 3).

Procedure

Figure 1. Manipulating equations using Graspable Math.
(a) As an equation is rearranged, it’s updated automatically
to remain valid. Here, ‘+2’ is dragged from left to right; the
sign is switched as it crosses the equals sign. (b) Operations
are triggered by clicking the operator.
On each trial, an algebraic equation appeared on the
screen (e.g., ‘x + 3 = 5’). Participants performed one of two
tasks, assigned between-subjects.
In the Algebra task, participants had to solve for the
variable by clicking and dragging to simplify the equation
(Fig. 1). For instance, given x + 3 = 5, one might start by
dragging the 3 to the other side of the equation. Note that
this does not require attention to numerical magnitude, only
to the algebraic relations between the terms.
In the Magnitude task, participants were presented with
the exact same equations, but their task was to find the least
number — or the greatest number, depending on the block
— and indicate their selection by dragging it to other side of
the equation. This click-and-drag response was chosen so
that the two tasks involved comparable interactions with
identical stimuli.

Participants
Volunteers participated in exchange for partial course credit
(N = 69, Mage = 19 years, 51 women, 18 men). A target
sample size of 68 was determined in advance on the basis of
similar studies of number and space (e.g., n = 44 in Fischer
et al, 2010).

Materials
For both tasks, items consisted of equations in the form x
± b = c (N = 112). Values of b and c ranged from 1 to 9,

2677

Participants gave informed consent, completed a brief
tutorial on how to manipulate equations with the mouse, and
read task instructions. This was followed by practice trials
chosen randomly from the full list of items (n = 4). They
then completed the experimental trials (n = 224). Each item
appeared twice, ordered randomly across four blocks. For
the Magnitude task, initial target magnitude (greater, lesser)
was assigned randomly and switched halfway through.
Each trial began with the appearance of a fixation symbol
at the top-center of the screen. Clicking on this fixation
symbol triggered the appearance of an equation toward the
bottom of the monitor. The equation appeared either on the
left or right of the screen and with the variable either on the
left or right of the equal sign (i.e., ‘x + 2 = 3’ or ‘3 = x + 2’),
assigned randomly. Participants were then free to
manipulate the equation using the computer mouse. Trials in
the Magnitude task ended automatically when a number was
dragged across the equal sign and released. In the Algebra
task, trials ended automatically when participants had
solved for x. Participants finished by answering a series of
standard demographic questions along with four questions
about mathematical experience: Did they study calculus in
high school? In college? What was their grade? And what
was their SAT score? No other measures were collected.

Analysis
We focused on where numbers were clicked, specifically the
first number manipulated during each trial. Our primary
measure was the deflection of these locations, relative to
where the participant would click typically (i.e.,
standardized by participant). A value of zero thus indicated
no deflection; negative values, deflections downward or
leftward; and positive values, deflections upward or
rightward. Analyses used linear mixed-effects models, with
centered predictors and the maximal converging effects
structure justified by the design (Barr et al, 2013).

Results
One participant was removed for poor accuracy (72%).
Accuracy was high among remaining participants (M =
96%, 95% CI [86%, 100%]). One additional participant was
removed for corrupted data. Before analysis, we removed
trials where the participant did not arrive at the correct
response (4% of trials), followed by those that were three
standard deviations faster or slower than each participant’s
mean (1.4% of trials).

Spatializing numbers during algebra 4

Overall spatial deflection due to numerical
magnitude
We first investigated whether numerical magnitude caused
systematic spatial deflections in click locations. For each
trial, we calculated a measure of overall spatial deflection
by summing the deflection along the vertical and horizontal
axis (i.e., a signed Manhattan distance). On this measure,
positive values indicate deflections that are, overall,
congruent with our predictions for greater numerical
magnitudes (i.e., rightward and upward), and negative
values indicate deflections congruent with predictions for
lesser magnitudes (i.e., leftward and downward). This
spatial deflection was analyzed with a model that included
fixed effects of Relative Magnitude (i..e, whether the
selected number was greater or less than the equation’s
other number), Task (Algebra vs. Magnitude), and their
interaction; and random intercepts and slopes for both
participants and items.
There was no effect of Task (p > .9). As predicted,
interactions with numerals were deflected spatially by their
magnitude, b = .25 ± .03 SEM, t = 8.8, p < .0001. These
deflections were congruent with canonical spatial
representations of numerical magnitude. When participants
manipulated the lesser number in an equation, they clicked a
location that was deflected in the congruent left-downward
direction (M = -0.09); when they manipulated the greater
number, they clicked more right-upward (M = 0.11).
The size of this spatial deflection, moreover, was
moderated by the task, b = -0.14 ± 0.06 SEM, t = -2.4 p =
.02. The size of the magnitude-based spatial deflection in
the Magnitude task (b = 0.30 ± 0.03 SEM) was significantly
larger than in the Algebra task (b = .18 ± .04 SEM), even
though the magnitude-based deflection was significant in
both tasks (both ps < .0001). Thus, magnitude induced an
overall spatial deflection of numeral manipulations, and the
size of this deflection was task-dependent.

Axis-specific spatial deflections
We next investigated whether this task-sensitive spatial
deflection was specific to either the vertical or horizontal
axis. Along the vertical axis, there was no evidence that
responses differed by Task, b = 0.001 ± .02 SEM, p > 9. By
contrast, a number’s relative magnitude had a systematic
impact on where it was clicked, b = .18 ± .02 SEM, t = 7.7,
p < .0001. When the selected number was greater than the
other number in the equation, it was clicked 0.18 standard
deviations higher than when it was less than the other
number. This spatial-numerical deflection was moderated by
the task, as revealed by a significant interaction, b = -0.14 ±
.05 SEM, t = -2.3, p = .02. Additional analyses confirmed
that a spatial-numerical deflection occurred for both tasks,
and differed only in size. In the Magnitude task, greater
numbers were clicked higher than lesser numbers, b = 0.23

2678

± 0.04 SEM, p < .0001. In the Algebra task, greater numbers
were still clicked significantly higher, but the deflection was
dampened, b = 0.12 ± .03 SEM, p = .0001. Thus, there was
spatial-numerical deflection in both tasks, but the amount of
deflection was greater with explicit attention to magnitude.
On the horizontal axis, the effect of Magnitude was
smaller but still significant (b = 0.06 ± 0.02 SEM, t =2.9, p
< .01). While there was no evidence that this magnitudebased deflection was moderated significantly by the Task (b
= -0.02 ± 0.04 SEM, t = -0.5, p > .6), additional analysis
revealed that the magnitude-based horizontal deflection was
only reliable in the Magnitude task, b = 0.07 ± .03 SEM, p =
.01. In the Algebra task, by contrast, there was no evidence
of a magnitude-based deflection along the horizontal axis, b
= 0.05 ± 0.04 SEM, p = .17.

Figure 2: Magnitude-based spatial deflection while
manipulating equations. The vertical axis indicates mean
spatial deflection, normalized for each subject (i.e., zscored). Interactions with greater numbers (red squares)
were deflected upward and rightward; interactions with
lesser numbers (blue circles), downward and leftward. This
occurred in both tasks, but it was significantly more
pronounced in the Magnitude task. (Error lines = SEM.)

Discussion
We investigated whether symbol-mediated algebraic
reasoning activates spatial representations of number, using
dense recordings of algebraic manipulations (DREAM).
Manipulations of algebraic equations were deflected upward
and rightward when interacting with greater numbers, and
downward and leftward when interacting with lesser
numbers. The strength of this magnitude-based deflection,
however, was moderated by the task. Spatial deflection was
greatest when the task required explicit attention to
numerical magnitude, and was dampened when the task

Spatializing numbers during algebra 5

required algebraic reasoning. This was true even though the
two tasks involved interacting with identical equations using
comparable movements. In sum, when manipulating
equations, people automatically activate a spatial
representation of numerical magnitude, and the strength of
this activation depends on the task’s mathematical demands.
Spatial deflection along the horizontal axis was less
pronounced than along the vertical axis. One explanation of
this finding is that algebraic notation uses horizontal spacing
for another purpose: to indicate syntactic hierarchy. In
algebraic notation, higher-precedence operations are often
written with little space between operands (e.g., 3•x•y) or no
space at all (e.g., 3xy), while lower-precedence operations
often introduce additional space between operands (e.g., 3 +
x + y). Thus, during equation manipulation, the horizontal
axis may be co-opted to represent algebraic structure,
dampening horizontal representations of numerical
magnitude (Landy & Goldstone, 2007; Landy, Allen, &
Zednik, 2014). By contrast, on purely numerical or
arithmetic tasks, numerical magnitude does deflect hand
movements along the horizontal axis: to the left for lesser
magnitudes, and to the right for greater magnitudes
(Marghetis et al, 2014; Faulkenberry, 2016).

A new DREAM for studying algebraic reasoning
The study reported here is the first to use a methodology
that we have dubbed dense recording of algebraic
manipulations (DREAM) to gain insight into the cognitive
processes at work during algebraic reasoning. Similar
computer mousetracking approaches have been used to
study the dynamics of simple numerical judgments (e.g.,
Faulkenberry, 2016; Song & Nakayama, 2008) and mental
arithmetic (e.g., Marghetis et al, 2014). DREAM extends
this mousetracking methodology to a domain where manual
interaction with external symbols is not just an artificial
feature of the experimental design, but an integral part of the
mathematical activity itself. One contribution of this study
is to introduce this data-rich paradigm, which we hope can
open new avenues of inquiry into mathematical cognition.
Algebraic reasoning is powerful because it transforms
difficult conceptual tasks into a series of simple, robust
physical manipulations of stable external symbols
(Hutchins, 1995). Indeed, it is a canonical example of a
cognitive accomplishment that depends on distributing the
cognitive load across time and space. This requires
coordinating skull-internal processes (perception, planning)
with external processes like writing and gesturing. At its
core, therefore, the practice of algebra demands the skillful
use of hands: writing and erasing equations; using a finger
to point to some aspect of an equation. DREAM allows us
to analyze this distributed ‘manual labor’ that is a natural
part of algebraic activity.

2679

Soft-assembling space for mathematics
This is the first evidence that spatial representations of
number are activated during algebraic reasoning. Previous
research, however, has documented other spatial processes
that play a role in algebraic reasoning. The conventions of
our algebraic notation use horizontal spacing to indicate
syntactic hierarchy: higher-precedence operations are
compressed (e.g., xy), while lower-precedence operations
introduce more space between symbols (e.g., x + y).
Participants are sensitive to these conventions (Landy &
Goldstone, 2007; Landy et al, 2014). Once participants
master the basic syntax of algebra, moreover, they retrain
their visual system so that they literally see equations as
consisting of visual objects that respect the syntactic
hierarchy of algebra (e.g., x • a + y • b is perceived as two
objects: ‘x • a’ and ‘y • b’; Marghetis, Landy, & Goldstone,
2016). The current study adds to this list of spatial processes
that are deployed to solve algebraic equations.
This menagerie of spatial processes raises the question of
how they are all brought into coordination. We favor an
account where these different brain-based spatial resources
are soft-assembled: they are brought into coordination in a
way that is both transient and situated, responding to the
demands of the task and the material environment (Clark,
2008). On this account, the development of mathematical
expertise is not merely a process of piling new insights on
top of old. Instead, the mathematical expert learns to
combine, flexibly, a range of spatial processes, sometimes
deploying one representation, other times another.
This account raises just as many questions as it answers.
First, what is the time course of these processes? Are they
all activated at once, or are they brought online sequentially
in a cascade of activations? Marghetis and colleagues
(2014), for instance, documented how, when individuals
perform exact symbolic arithmetic (e.g., 2 + 7), they first
activate a spatial representation of the magnitude of the first
number, then of the arithmetic operation, and finally of the
solution. A similar cascade may occur in algebra.
Second, given our limited cognitive resources, how do all
these mathematical facets—magnitude, arithmetic, algebraic
syntax—become coupled to space without conflicting with
each other? The spatial impact of relative magnitude was
dampened significantly when the goal was to solve the
equation rather than to judge relative magnitude. This
suggests that spatial representations of number may fade
over time, particularly when it comes to mathematical
activities, like algebra, that foreground structural
relationships over numerical magnitudes.
This fading may occur on multiple timescales, from the
developmental to the momentary. On a developmental
timescale,
mathematical
expertise
might
involve
redeploying spatial resources to represent arithmetic or
algebraic relations, pushing aside representations of
magnitude. On shorter timescales, the activation of spatial

Spatializing numbers during algebra 6

representations may be task-dependent, as it was in this
study, or change from moment-to-moment—for instance, as
an individual goes from identifying the symbol they intend
to manipulate, to actually moving that symbol. Thus, as
attention shifts away from magnitude or as other concepts
acquire spatial associations, a symbol may become
“semantically bleached” of its spatial-numerical content.
Indeed, the current results leave open the question of
whether these spatial-numerical associations play a
functional role in algebraic reasoning. Taken to the extreme,
our results are consistent with an account wherein, for
higher mathematics, spatial representations of number are
largely epiphenomenal, playing a diminished role as spatial
circuits are re-deployed to represent other aspects of the
mathematical content (e.g., hierarchical algebraic structure).

Conclusion
Are spatial representations of number really as ubiquitous as
some have assumed, or are they limited to simple numerical
tasks? Using dense behavioral recordings of equation
manipulations, we found that numerical magnitude did,
indeed, cause deflections that suggest a bottom-to-top and
left-to-right spatial representation of number. This occurred
even when the task was entirely algebraic, though the
deflections were more pronounced when the task did require
attending to magnitude. Our capacity for algebraic
reasoning depends on a host of skills and processes — many
of which are spatial — that must be brought in and out of
coordination during situated reasoning. This singular ability
would be impossible without the capacity to cobble together
such processes both flexibly and dynamically.

Acknowledgments
We thank C. J. Casper, V. Updike, B. Graves, and S.
Malpeddi for data collection, and B. Rogers for comments.

References
Cipora, K., & Nuerk, H (2013). Is the SNARC effect related
to the level of mathematics? QJEP, 66, 1974-1991.
Cipora, K., Patro, K., Nuerk, H. (2015). Are Spatial
Numerical Associations a Cornerstone for Arithmetic
Learning? Mind, Brain, & Education, 9, 190-206.
Clark, A. (2008). Supersizing the Mind. Oxford U. Press.
Dehaene, S., Bossini, S., & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental
representation of parity and number magnitude. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 371.
Faulkenberry, T. J. (2016). Testing a direct mapping versus
competition account of response dynamics in number
comparison. J. of Cognitive Psychology, 28, 825-842.
Gunderson, E., Ramirez, G., Beilock, S., Levine, S. (2012).
The relation between spatial skill and early number
knowledge. Developmental Psychology, 48, 1229-1241.

2680

Hartmann, M., Grabherr, L., Last, F. (2011). Moving along
the mental number line. JEP: HPP, 38, 1416-1427.
Hubbard, E. M., Piazza, M., Pinel, P., & Dehaene, S.
(2005). Interactions between number and space in
parietal cortex. Nature Rev. Neuroscience, 6, 435-448.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. MIT Press.
Knops, A., Thirion, B., Hubbard, E., Michel, V., Dehaene,
S. (2009). Recruitment of an area involved in eye
movement during mental arithmetic. Science, 324, 1583
Lakoff, G., & Núñez, R. (2000). Where Mathematics Comes
From. New York: Basic Books.
Landy, D, Goldstone, R. (2007). How abstract is symbolic
thought? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 33, 720–733.
Landy, D, Allen, C, Zednik, C (2014). A perceptual account
of symbolic reasoning. Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 275.
Marghetis, T., & Núnez, R. (2013). The motion behind the
symbols: a vital role for dynamism in the
conceptualization of limits and continuity in expert
mathematics. Topics in Cognitive Science, 5, 299-316.
Marghetis, T, Núñez, R, Bergen, B (2014) Doing arithmetic
by hand: Hand movements during exact arithmetic
reveal systematic, dynamic spatial processing.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 67,
1579-1596.
Núñez, R & Marghetis, T (2015). Cognitive linguistics and
the concept (s) of number. In R. Cohen-Kadosh & K.
Dowker (eds.), Oxford Handbook of Numerical
Cognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sella, F., Sader, E., Lolliot, S., & Cohen Kadosh, R. (2016).
Basic and advanced numerical performances relate to
mathematical expertise but are fully mediated by
visuospatial skills.Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 42, 1458–1472.
Shaki, S., Fischer, M. H., & Petrusic, W. M. (2009).
Reading habits for both words and numbers contribute
to the SNARC effect. PBR, 16, 328-331.
Siegler, R. S., & Ramani, G. B. (2009). Playing linear
number board games—but not circular ones—improves
low-income preschoolers’ numerical understanding.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 101, 545.
Song, J. J., & Nakayama, K. (2008). Numeric comparison in
a visually-guided manual reaching task. Cognition, 106,
994-1003.
Winter, B., Marghetis, T., & Matlock, T. (2015). Of
magnitudes and metaphors. Cortex, 64, 209-224.
Zorzi, M., Priftis, K., & Umiltà, C. (2002). Neglect disrupts
the mental number line. Nature, 417, 138-139.

