Experimental and Computational Investigation of the Effect of Caffeine on
Human Time Perception
Remya Sankar 1 (remya.s@research.iiit.ac.in)
Anuj K. Shukla1 (anuj.shukla@research.iiit.ac.in)
Raju S. Bapi1,2 (raju.bapi@iiit.ac.in)
1 Cognitive
2 School

Science Lab, International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad, India
of Computer and Information Sciences, University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, India
Abstract

Perception of time is an active process that takes place continually. However, we are yet to learn its exact mechanisms conclusively. The temporal bisection task is ideal to investigate the
circuitry underlying time perception. Caffeine, a commonly
used stimulant, has been known to play a role in modulation of
time perception. The objective of this article is to explore the
role of caffeine, a neuromodulator, in the perception of time in
human beings by conducting suitable experiments. The experiment shows that an expansion of time is perceived by subjects
after caffeine ingestion and that caffeine has an accelerating
effect on our time perception system. Additionally, we present
a preliminary 2-step decision model that fits the results of the
experiment and potentially gives insights into the mechanisms
of caffeine. We conclude by pointing out future directions towards a more biologically realistic computational model.
Keywords: Caffeine; Timing; Perception; Temporal bisection;
Computational modeling; Decision making

pate in our perception of time (Cheng, Meck, & Williams,
2006). Findings from psychopharmacological studies also
suggest that caffeine and other psychoactive drugs affect
these nuclei (Dunlap, 1999). Further, literature also shows
that dopaminergic drugs influence the speed of internal pacemaker (Buhusi & Meck, 2002). In general, caffeine has
been known to have effects on other cognitive processes
like vigilance, attention, memory and other cognitive functions (McLellan, Caldwell, & Lieberman, 2016). There have
been a wide range of studies that have investigated the role
of caffeine in time perception. However, the findings are still
largely inconclusive (Hussain & Cole, 2015; Favila & Kuhl,
2014; Borota et al., 2014).

Introduction
Time perception is essential for human survival. It is a multilayered process which covers a wide range of timescales,
from microsecond estimation to the maintaining of the circadian rhythm. However, there is still a lack of consensus on
the mechanisms behind temporal perception.
Researchers have proposed several qualitative and quantitative models to explain the data obtained in various temporal judgement experiments (Jeffress, 1948; Machado, Malheiro, & Erlhagen, 2009; Oprisan & Buhusi, 2011), with Internal Clock Theory being one of the most widely accepted
ones. It suggests that our perception of time highly relies
on the clock speed. Akin to an internal clock, the theory of
scalar expectancy postulates that a group of oscillating neurons would work as a pacemaker and help in the judgement
of durations (Gibbon, 1977; Gibbon, Church, & Meck, 1984;
Wearden, 1991). As described in the information processing
model in Figure 1, a pacemaker oscillates at a mean frequency
and produces regular clock pulses, which are gated to an accumulator in working memory via a switch. The accumulator
records and stores the number of pulses from the onset of the
stimulus. A comparator decides if the current record in the
working memory is close enough to the reference memory
and responds accordingly. If the response is reinforced, the
time value recorded in the working memory is stored in the
permanent reference memory for reinforced values.
In the previous findings, it has been argued that the nuclei involved in the circadian rhythm in the brain partici-

Figure 1: Information-processing model for Scalar Expectancy Theory (adapted from SET, Gibbon (Gibbon et al.,
1984)).
Given the above theoretical basis, we hypothesized that the
administration of caffeine would cause a difference in perception of duration by influencing the speed of the internal
pacemaker. The aim of the current experiment is to explore
the role of caffeine, a neuromodulator, on time judgement via
suitable experiments and to design a computational model,
based on decision-making, to investigate the possible mechanisms underlying the perception of duration.
The temporal bisection task was initially used in 1977
to study temporal discrimination in rats (Church & Deluty,
1977). As the task requires several time-dependent cognitive functions, such as the comparison of durations, it is

3052

an ideal technique to study perception and processing of
time (Wearden, 1991; Allan & Gibbon, 1991). We have thus
chosen the temporal bisection task as the paradigm to investigate the modulation of judgement of duration by caffeine.

Experiment
Participants
The study sample consisted of 24 adults (8 females and 16
males, mean age = 21 years, SD=0.89), who were students of
the International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad, India. All participants gave informed consent prior to
the experiment. A Python script was used to randomly assign
each subject to either the control group (0mg caffeine) or the
experimental group (200mg caffeine). All participants were
right-handed and had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.

Materials and apparatus
Each participant was tested individually in a quiet room in
the institute. The experiment was presented on a Macintosh
laptop, which controlled the presentation of the experimental stimuli and recorded the participants’ responses with Psychopy (Peirce, 2009). The participants were asked to convey
their response using the ‘S’ and ‘L’ keys on the keyboard, for
‘short’ and ‘long’, respectively. The stimuli used for representation of duration in the bisection task were a white rectangle (during the training phase) and a white triangle (during
the testing phase) on a black background, presented in the
center of the screen. During the training phase, post-response
feedback was presented as white text on a black background.
The feedback was presented for 2s in the center of the laptop
screen (Droit-Volet, Brunot, & Niedenthal, 2004).
The participants were administered plain or caffeinated
milk orally, in the control or experimental group, respectively. The participants in the group were administered a
moderate dose of 200mg caffeine since it has been observed
that caffeine enhances performance in several cognitive tasks
with minimal side effects, in doses up to approximately 300
mg (Lieberman, Tharion, Shukitt-Hale, Speckman, & Tulley,
2002).
Peak plasma levels of caffeine are found in the body about
30 minutes after ingestion (Blanchard & Sawers, 1983), following which the effects are felt substantially for approximately 30 minutes (Barry, Clarke, Johnstone, & Rushby,
2008). Hence, the experiment was conducted 20 to 25 minutes after the administration of plain or ceffeinated milk. One
session of the experiment lasted for a duration of about 35
minutes.

Experimental Procedure
The temporal bisection task comprises duration judgement
between two reference durations. The task involves subjects
classifying various probe durations as either ‘short’ or ‘long’.
The conscious realm of time perception occurs in the range of
seconds and minutes (Mauk & Buonomano, 2004). Effects of
emotion, age, etc. on time perception have been studied via

temporal bisection tasks in this time range (Droit-Volet et al.,
2004). In order to see the effects of caffeine on this time range
and to investigate conscious time estimation, we have chosen
400ms (short standard) and 1600ms (long standard), as the
reference durations for our experiment.
The temporal bisection task consisted of two phases: training and testing. The training phase, in itself, was composed
of three sections. In the first section, participants were presented with the short(S) and long(L) standard stimulus durations. Each standard was initially presented five times each
and the subjects were asked to observe carefully. In section
two of the training phase, the participants were presented with
5 trials each for S and L, in randomised order. In each trial,
after the presentation of stimulus, the participants were asked
to decide if the given stimulus was short or long by pressing the ‘S’ or ‘L’ keys, respectively. On responding, they
were presented with a feedback, informing them if their response was accurate or not. The feedback message lasted on
the screen for a duration of 2s. In section three of the training phase, the participants were again presented with 5 trials
each of S and L in randomised order, similar to section 2 and
asked to respond if they perceived the duration as short or
long. However, this time, they were provided with no feedback. The inter-stimulus interval (ISI) in this phase was fixed
at 1s. After the completion of section three, participants with
a score higher than 7 correct trials out of 10 (in section three)
were selected for the testing phase. The testing phase was
conducted after a break of 1 minute.

Figure 2: Schematic diagram of the testing phase.

In the testing phase, as depicted in Figure 2, the participants were presented with 5 intermediate probe durations,
600ms, 800ms, 1000ms, 1200ms, 1400ms in addition to the
400ms (S) and 1600ms (L) reference durations, in a randomised order and asked to respond if they perceived the
given duration as short or long (Droit-Volet et al., 2004). The
inter-stimulus interval was randomly chosen between 0.8s
and 1.2s. No accuracy feedback was presented in the testing phase. Each block consisted of 35 trials, i.e. each probe
duration occurred 5 times in a block in a random order. After
each block, the participants were asked to take a 30s break.
The participants were presented with 10 such blocks.

3053

Results and Analysis: Experiment
For each participant, the proportion of ‘long’ responses was
calculated for each probe duration. In Figure 3, the proportion of ‘long’ responses from all participants in both groups
has been plotted against the probe durations. The point of
subjective equality (PSE) is the stimulus duration for which
a subject recorded a response of ‘long’ with a 50% probability. The PSE was calculated for each participant by fitting a Weibull curve to the plot of proportion of ‘long’ responses vs probe duration. The PSEs for the 12 participants in the control group (M = 1.137s, SD = 0.118) was
found to be generally higher than in the experimental group
(M = 0.929s, SD = 0.140). An independent samples t-test revealed that there was a statistically significant difference between the two groups, t(22) = 3.76, p = 0.001.

sends pulses at a mean frequency from the onset of stimulus,
gated by a switch, to the accumulator. In the working memory, a comparator judges if the number of pulses accumulated
is closer to a reference memory value of the short or the long
standard and responds accordingly (Gibbon et al., 1984). In
accordance with this information processing model, we can
infer that caffeine could influence discrimination of temporal
durations in one or more of the following ways.
• By increasing the frequency with which pulses are generated by the pacemaker. This would lead to a higher number
of pulses getting accumulated for a given duration, due to
which the comparator would associate it to be closer to the
long reference duration.
• By causing distortion in the memory of the reference durations. Since the recall in the long-term memory has a
higher variance, the interactions between these distorted
representations of the reference durations would lead the
working memory to make inaccurate comparisons, which
could in turn result in increased ‘long’ responses.

Computational Model
The dataset obtained from the above experiment was modeled using a simple decision model that fits the data, although
biologically infeasible. This computational model is a twostep Gaussian model which has only two free parameters and
is capable of reproducing the characteristics of the empirical
data. The memories of the short and long reference durations in the temporal bisection task are modeled using scalar
Gaussian distribution. The Gaussian helps depict the inherent
noise in human memory (Kopec & Brody, 2010).
Figure 3: Proportion of ‘long’ responses as a function of stimulus duration, by subjects from the control and experimental
groups. Also, the PSEs of both groups are depicted (not to
scale).

Discussion: Experiment
An independent samples t-test showed that the PSE for the
participants in the two groups remarkably varied from each
other. This allows us to conclude that the administration of
caffeine leads to a notable change in the perception of duration. The mean PSE of the 12 participants in the control
group is higher than the mean PSE of the participants in the
experimental group. Moreover, as shown in Figure 3, a clear
shift in the PSE of the experimental group towards the shorter
reference duration is observed. This shift in PSE implies that
for a given stimulus duration, there is a higher probability that
a participant responds ‘long’ in the experimental group than
in the control group. In other words, a given probe duration
is perceived as longer by participants under the influence of
caffeine. These results lead us to conclude that caffeine produces a perception of expansion of time in humans.
The scalar expectancy theory postulates that a pacemaker

Description of the Model
The model proposed by us comprises of two steps. In step I,
the model determines if the given stimulus is one of the reference durations, in which case, it responds accordingly, or is
an intermediate duration, in which case it moves to the second
step in order to make a decision. In step II, the model computes the difference between the stimulus and its memories
of both the reference durations, and responds according to
the one which is lesser in magnitude (Kopec & Brody, 2010).
Each of the two steps is explained in detail below.

Model Step I
The memory of each of the two reference durations is modeled as a Gaussian distribution over durations, with a mean
equal to the reference duration, and a standard deviation proportional to the reference duration. This proportion, referred
to as the coefficient of variation, is randomly chosen from a
suitable range of values (discussed in “Results and Analysis:
Computational Model” section). The height of the Gaussian
distribution of a particular reference duration at a given stimulus duration is taken as the probability of the stimulus being
labelled as that reference duration(pL and pS). As a participant can potentially classify the reference duration correctly

3054

with 100% accuracy, discounting human error, the Gaussian
distributions range from 0 to 1 (Kopec & Brody, 2010). We
take the probability of a stimulus duration being labeled as
‘intermediate’ (pI), to be the sum of the probabilities of the
two reference memory distributions at that stimulus duration
subtracted from 1, i.e. pI = 1 − (pL + pS).
If the probabilities of the 2 reference memory density distributions at the stimulus duration are approximately equal,
then the model responds either ‘short’ or ‘long’ with an equal
probability. Otherwise, a choice is made if a given stimulus
is long, short or intermediate depending upon the values of
their respective probability distributions, pL, pS and pI. If the
stimulus is determined to be either the short or the long reference duration, then the model responds ‘short’ or ‘long’,
respectively. If the stimulus is deemed to be ‘intermediate’,
the model proceeds to step 2.
Figure 4: Bubble chart of p-values of independent samples
t-test between the empirical data of the control group and the
simulated data at varying CV and B values.

Model Step II
The model computes if the stimulus duration ‘s’ is closer to
either reference duration stored in memory and responds accordingly. The scalar Gaussian distributions for the short(TS)
and long(TL) standards are used to model the reference duration values pulled from memory. One value ts is drawn from
the TS distribution, and one value tl is drawn from the TL
distribution. In order to model the shift in PSE brought about
due to caffeine administration, the model is explicitly biased
in this step towards responding ‘short’ or ‘long’, depending
upon whether it’s simulating the control group or the experimental group. The bias factor, B, is randomly picked from a
certain optimal range (discussed below) depending upon the
group. If abs(ts − s) ∗ B < abs(tl − s), then the subject responds ‘short’, and otherwise, the subject responds ‘long’.

Results and Analysis: Computational Model
The model contains only two free parameters, the coefficient
of variation (CV) of the two probability distributions used to
model the reference memories, and B, an intrinsic bias factor influencing the decision process. The values for these
parameters were chosen by testing the parameter space over
a range of values (CV range : 0.18 − 0.27, resolution : 0.01;
Brange : 0.6 − 1.4, resolution : 0.1). The data generated by
a certain value of CV and B was evaluated on the basis of
an independent samples t-test between the data generated by
the model and the empirical dataset collected from the control
group. It can be observed from the Figure 4 that the following
range of values are optimal for the 2 parameters:• For experimental group, CV : 0.23 − 0.26 and B : 1.0 − 1.4
• For control group, CV : 0.17 − 0.22 and B : 0.6 − 1.0
The lesser the p-value, the more significant the difference
between the simulated data and the data collected from the
control group. Thus, Figure 4 shows that for low values of
CV and B, the data generated by the model is significantly
similar to the empirical data for the control group.

The final model generates a dataset over 12 runs consisting
of 350 trials each, simulating 12 subjects each for both the
control and experimental groups. At the beginning of each
run, the values for CV and B are randomly chosen from the
optimal range for the concerned group.
To analyse the data generated by the model, the proportion of ‘long’ responses was calculated for each probe duration for every run. The point of subjective equality (PSE)
was calculated for each run by fitting a Weibull curve to the
plot of proportion of ‘long’ responses vs probe durations. The
PSEs for the 200mg caffeine group (M = 0.907, SD = 0.022),
similar to the empirical data, was found to be lower than
the PSEs for the control group (M = 1.014, SD = 0.047).
An independent samples t-test between the data showed a
statistically significant difference between the two groups,
t(22) = 6.736, p < 0.001.

Discussion: Computational Model
From the statistics regarding the PSEs for the 2 groups, we
can see that for corresponding groups, the simulated dataset
as well as the human dataset gives similar mean PSE values.
The standard deviation of the PSEs generated by the model
is considerably lesser than the same in the human dataset.
The higher variance in the human dataset might be due to human error, fatigue and slight inconsistencies in perception of
time by different participants. The model tries to incorporate this variance between the PSEs for different subjects, by
randomly picking a CV and B value, for each run, from the
optimal range for the concerned group. Yet, this does not give
rise to sufficient variation in the generated data as compared
to the human dataset. However, the mean PSE is accurately
simulated for both groups.
The independent samples t-test and the Weibull fit between
the generated datasets for the experimental and control groups
show that the model closely mimics human temporal judg-

3055

Figure 5: Effect of setting the parameter CV on the size of
decision regions A. When CV is set to optimal values found
for the 0mg group, the central region expands B. When CV
is set to optimal values found for the 200mg group, the central region shrinks and there is more overlap of the Gaussians
corresponding to the reference durations.

having a larger mean. This implies that for a given stimulus, if the decision is made in step 1 itself, there is a higher
probability that the response be ‘long’.
The decision to proceed to step 2, is dependent on the value
of pI, i.e., the probability that the stimulus is judged as ‘intermediate’ in step 1. In the experimental group, as the model
uses higher CV values, for a given stimulus, the values of pS
and pL would be higher than the values for the same in the
control group, where the model uses lower CV values. This
would cause a decrease in pI for a given stimulus in the experimental group’s simulation. Therefore, the probability of the
decision being made in step 1 increases, implying that there is
a higher probability of the response being ‘long’ as compared
to the control group, as explained in the previous paragraph.
A higher value of CV, while mean remains fixed, implies
a larger standard deviation (SD). As the experimental group
is being modeled accurately with a higher range of CV values as compared to the control group, the width of the Gaussian distributions used to model the reference durations is
higher in the experimental group. This change in the width
implies that caffeine might have the potential to cause distortion in the memory of durations. This leads us to infer that
caffeine mechanism possibly works via the memory pathway
rather than an attentional pathway, as the latter would require
a leaner spread of the probability distribution. Despite investigative experiments, there is no general consensus on the
nature of acute effects of caffeine on memory (McLellan et
al., 2016). However, our model indicates an increase in uncertainty in the reference memory caused by caffeine.

Limitations and Future Work
ment.
As mentioned in the previous section, high values of the
parameters, CV and B, were found to be suitable to model the
experimental group, while low values of CV and B were suitable to simulate the control group. These parameter ranges
might lend us some insight into the mechanism of caffeine
action, as discussed below.
In the model, the value for B increases or decreases the distance of the stimulus from the short standard, depending upon
whether it is high or low. If the distance of the stimulus from
the short standard is higher than the distance from the long
standard, the model would respond ‘long’. This explains why
a high value of B is suitable for modeling the experimental
group and vice versa. We can, therefore, infer that this range
of values for ‘B’ can be indicative of the frequency of the
pacemaker. A rise in the rate at which pulses are generated
would lead to more pulses being accumulated for a given duration and could lead to a perceived expansion of time.
In addition to the range of B-values, we also find that high
values of CV are suited to modeling the experimental group.
This can be explained as follows (see Figure 5). In step 1 of
the model, the probability distribution for the ‘long’ reference
duration has a larger standard deviation, as it has the same coefficient of variation as the ‘short’ reference duration, despite

One major shortcoming of the model suggested by us is that it
is purely a decision model and does not take into account the
neural circuitry mediating time perception in humans. The
model is pitched at an abstract level and in order to obtain biologically rooted insights, there is a need for a more realistic
model.
Substantial evidence has been found that indicates that the
basal ganglia and its dopaminergic pathways control time
perception to an extent. For instance, it has been observed
that PD patients, when administered medication that brings
the dopamine concentration back to normal, are capable
of performing time estimation accurately, unlike when offmedication (Jones, Malone, Dirnberger, Edwards, & Jahanshahi, 2008). Furthermore, time perception studies can help
in the early detection of such diseases that affect dopamine
production and will also increase our understanding of the
pathways and the brain areas that may be involved in such
diseases.
The fundamental circuitry behind caffeine’s action has
been established to be the antagonism of adenosine receptors in the central nervous system which leads to interaction
with dopamine receptors (Davis et al., 2003; Ferré, 2016).
Caffeine blocks A2A receptors in the striatum and promotes
a direct excitatory potentiation of D2 receptors. This leads

3056

to an increase in the stimulation of psychomotor activity by
dopamine (Ferré, 2016). Hence, we think that a model can be
conceptualised which shows caffeine indirectly affecting time
processing in the basal ganglia by modulating dopamine.
Alternatively, it has been observed that a cortical neuronal
network, without the use of any kind of pacemaker, may
have the potential to track duration by storing recent information (Mauk & Buonomano, 2004). This can be used as inspiration for another biologically feasible model. Furthermore,
there is indication in literature that a reinforcement learning
based model of interval timing might be able to explain several behavioural as well as neural phenomena (Gershman,
Moustafa, & Ludvig, 2014). These are few methods that can
be explored to further investigate the effect of caffeine on time
perception.

Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Government of India under
Indo-French CEFIPRA Grant for the project Basal Ganglia
at Large (No. DST-INRIA 2013-02/Basal Ganglia dated 1309-2014) grants awarded to RSB.

References
Allan, L. G., & Gibbon, J. (1991). Human bisection at the
geometric mean. Learning and Motivation, 22(1), 39–58.
Barry, R. J., Clarke, A. R., Johnstone, S. J., & Rushby, J. A.
(2008). Timing of caffeine’s impact on autonomic and central nervous system measures: clarification of arousal effects. Biological psychology, 77(3), 304–316.
Blanchard, J., & Sawers, S. (1983). The absolute bioavailability of caffeine in man. European journal of clinical
pharmacology, 24(1), 93–98.
Borota, D., Murray, E., Keceli, G., Chang, A., Watabe, J. M.,
Ly, M., . . . Yassa, M. A. (2014). Post-study caffeine administration enhances memory consolidation in humans.
Nature neuroscience, 17(2), 201–203.
Buhusi, C. V., & Meck, W. H. (2002). Differential effects
of methamphetamine and haloperidol on the control of an
internal clock. Behavioral neuroscience, 116(2), 291.
Cheng, R.-K., Meck, W. H., & Williams, C. L. (2006).
α7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors and temporal memory: synergistic effects of combining prenatal choline and
nicotine on reinforcement-induced resetting of an interval
clock. Learning & Memory, 13(2), 127–134.
Church, R. M., & Deluty, M. Z. (1977). Bisection of temporal intervals. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal
Behavior Processes, 3(3), 216.
Davis, J. M., Zhao, Z., Stock, H. S., Mehl, K. A., Buggy,
J., & Hand, G. A. (2003). Central nervous system effects
of caffeine and adenosine on fatigue. American Journal
of Physiology-Regulatory, Integrative and Comparative
Physiology, 284(2), R399–R404.
Droit-Volet, S., Brunot, S., & Niedenthal, P. (2004). Brief
report perception of the duration of emotional events.
Cognition and Emotion, 18(6), 849–858.

Dunlap, J. C. (1999). Molecular bases for circadian clocks.
Cell, 96(2), 271–290.
Favila, S. E., & Kuhl, B. A. (2014). Stimulating memory
consolidation. Nature neuroscience, 17(2), 151–152.
Ferré, S. (2016). Mechanisms of the psychostimulant effects of caffeine: implications for substance use disorders.
Psychopharmacology, 233(10), 1963–1979.
Gershman, S. J., Moustafa, A. A., & Ludvig, E. A. (2014).
Time representation in reinforcement learning models of
the basal ganglia.
Gibbon, J. (1977). Scalar expectancy theory and weber’s law
in animal timing. Psychological review, 84(3), 279.
Gibbon, J., Church, R. M., & Meck, W. H. (1984). Scalar
timing in memory. Annals of the New York Academy of
sciences, 423(1), 52–77.
Hussain, S. J., & Cole, K. J. (2015). No enhancement of 24hour visuomotor skill retention by post-practice caffeine
administration. PloS one, 10(6), e0129543.
Jeffress, L. A. (1948). A place theory of sound localization. Journal of comparative and physiological psychology,
41(1), 35.
Jones, C. R., Malone, T. J., Dirnberger, G., Edwards, M., &
Jahanshahi, M. (2008). Basal ganglia, dopamine and temporal processing: performance on three timing tasks on and
off medication in parkinsons disease. Brain and cognition,
68(1), 30–41.
Kopec, C. D., & Brody, C. D. (2010). Human performance
on the temporal bisection task. Brain and cognition, 74(3),
262–272.
Lieberman, H. R., Tharion, W. J., Shukitt-Hale, B., Speckman, K. L., & Tulley, R. (2002). Effects of caffeine, sleep
loss, and stress on cognitive performance and mood during
us navy seal training. Psychopharmacology, 164(3), 250–
261.
Machado, A., Malheiro, M. T., & Erlhagen, W. (2009).
Learning to time: A perspective.
Journal of the
Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 92(3), 423–458.
Mauk, M. D., & Buonomano, D. V. (2004). The neural basis
of temporal processing. Annu. Rev. Neurosci., 27, 307–
340.
McLellan, T. M., Caldwell, J. A., & Lieberman, H. R. (2016).
A review of caffeines effects on cognitive, physical and
occupational performance. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral
Reviews, 71, 294–312.
Oprisan, S. A., & Buhusi, C. V. (2011). Modeling pharmacological clock and memory patterns of interval timing in a
striatal beat-frequency model with realistic, noisy neurons.
Frontiers in integrative neuroscience, 5, 52.
Peirce, J. W. (2009). Generating stimuli for neuroscience
using psychopy.
Wearden, J. (1991). Human performance on an analogue
of an interval bisection task. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 43(1), 59–81.

3057

