Experimental Investigation on Top-down and Bottom-up Processing
in Graph Comprehension and Decision
Misa Fukuoka (fukuoka@cog.human.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Kazuhisa Miwa (miwa@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Akihiro Maehigashi (mhigashi@cog.human.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Informatics, Nagoya University, Japan

Abstract
Graph comprehension requires both bottom-up processing
from the graph representation and top-down processing guided
by knowledge and attitude. In the current study, we
investigated which of the bottom-up process phases: extraction,
interpretation, and decision: were affected by the top-down
processing derived by the impressions and social attitudes. The
experimental results showed that the top-down processing
driven by impressions temporarily formed in specific contexts
affected both the extraction of information and the following
decision phase whereas top-down processing driven by attitude
formed over a long time based on social norms affected only
the decision phase. In the latter case, a decision was made
without any need for bottom-up processing.
Keywords: graph representation,
processing, top-down processing

decision,

bottom-up

Introduction
People make decisions by perceiving and understanding
external resources. Visual representations such as graphs are
effective for such processes. Visual representations are
known for making the understanding of information easier,
as graphs and diagrammatic presentations including scatter
plots reduce cognitive errors (Ancker, Senathirajah, Kukafka,
& Starren, 2006; Lipkus & Hollands, 1999). On the other
hand, graphical representations can also bias interpretation:
e.g., Woller-Carter et al. (2012) confirmed that an
intentionally biased graph produces information reading
errors.
Previous studies have confirmed that understanding graphs
is best achieved from both top-down and bottom-up
processing. Freedman and Shah (2002) proposed a CI model
for graph comprehension based on the text understanding CI
model proposed by Kintsch (1988). The model assumed that
there was an interaction between the two information
processing stages; bottom-up from the visually represented
information encoded in the external resources and top-down
from knowledge stored in long-term memory.
Many studies have shown that the bottom-up processing of
graphs depends on the graphical representations. Shah and
Carpenter (1995) found that the contents of reading
information changed depending on which of the independent
variables were assigned to the x-axis or the graph legend.
Sanchez and Wiley (2006) found that fascinating and
attractive visual information distracted participant focus from
the crucial information related to the primary task, which
implied that such information should be carefully restrained
to ensure participant focus on the target information.

In top-down processing, many experimental findings have
been reported that have found that a participant’s knowledge
and attitudes toward the topics significantly influence an
understanding of the information in the graphs. Freedman and
Smith (1996) found in their experiments with scatter plot
graphs that the participants read the information not only
using the bottom-up processing that arises from perceiving
plot patterns in the graph, but also using top-down processing
which is based on pre-formed knowledge. Kanzaki and Miwa
(2012) found that in experiments with line graphs,
information reading was performed with both bottom-up and
top-down processing, but the top-down processing did not
violate the reading of the bottom-up processing.
CaMeRa (Tabachneck-Schijf, Leonard, & Simon, 1997)
demonstrated two stages of bottom-up processing. In the
preceding extraction stage, primary symbolic information
was drawn from the visual representation of the graph: e. g.,
a y-axis value in the experimental condition in which an
experimental manipulation was made was greater than the
value in the control condition, and there was a substantial
difference between the two conditions. Such difference
perceptions at this stage were formed based mainly on the
perceptual information processing in the working memory
without accessing domain knowledge in declarative memory.
In the following interpretation stage, the experimental results
represented on the graph were interpreted with an integration
of the symbolic information drawn from the graphical
representation and knowledge stored in declarative memory:
e.g., a medical material x is effective for improving activity
y.
In actual situations, the final decision stage, may follow
from an understanding of the information drawn from the
graph: e. g., sales promotion for the medical material x was
decided on.
Figure 1 shows the bottom-up processing series: extraction,
interpretation, and decision.
The first aim of the current study was to confirm the
bottom-up processing series shown above. In particular, we
examined whether internally extracted information, such as
mentally represented difference between experimental
conditions, that is constructed from information represented
on the graph as an external resource, drove the following
bottom-up information processing. We should note that how
information is extracted from external resources is generally
different for each person who reads the graph, implying that
there is a possibility that different internal information could
be extracted from identical external resources. Therefore, in

2049

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 consisted of Experiments 1a and 1b.

Participants

Figure 1: Top-down/ bottom-up processing model of
graph comprehension and decision.
this study, we set up difference perception stage in which
internal information is constructed from “extracted”
information on the graph.
In Experiment 1, we constructed an experimental setting in
which we had participants represent perceived difference
independently from the external resource. Through the
experiment, we explicitly confirmed that based on the
internally represented information, the following
interpretation and decision stages were performed.
Next, we considered impressions and attitudes to be the
factors that drove the top-down processing. Impressions are
usually temporarily constructed with insufficient information
based on stimuli presented in a situation or a context (Wang
& Nelson, 2014). On the other hand, attitudes seem to be
more continuously formed based on social and moral norms,
and are directed toward people, places, and social policies
(Greenwald & Banaji, 1995).
The second aim of this study was to understand which of
the initial or final bottom-up processing stages was affected
by the top-down processing derived from impressions and
attitudes. The research question was whether top-down
processing affected only the final decision stage, or also
affected the initial extraction. Many studies on human
perception have indicated that top-down processing derived
from beliefs and knowledge bias human perception; however,
previous studies on graph comprehension have investigated
top-down processing using the dependent variables related to
the latter bottom-up processing phases.
In Experiment 2, we performed an experiment to examine
the top-down processing derived from impressions; and in
Experiment 3, we further investigated the top-down
processing based on attitudes.

56 undergraduates (29 males and 27 females: Mage = 18.64,
SDage = 0.82) from Nagoya University participated in
Experiment 1a. The experiment was performed in small
groups of at most eight members. 54 undergraduates from
Nagoya University (30 males and 24 females: Mage = 18.46,
SDage = 0.97) participated in Experiment 1b. The experiment
was performed as class practice in a cognitive science class.

Materials
In Experiment 1a, an experimental context was introduced in
which an ingredient A that was expected to improve
biological vitality was assumed, and the effect of ingredient
A was examined using a laboratory rat experiment with a
hamster wheel. Participants were presented with a graph that
indicated the number of cases out of 20,000 in which the rats
continued to perform the hamster wheel task for more than
three minutes. Figure 2 shows the presented graphs in which
there is a substantial difference in the number of cases for the
experimental rat group in which ingredient A was given to
the rats and the control group in which it was not.
Figure 3 shows the graphs used in Experiment 1b. The
graphs had perceptual features identical to those in
Experiment 1a but the information content was different. The
perceptual features of the graphs implied that there was a
difference in the number of cases between the two conditions;
however, the reality was the same. The scalability of the yaxis of the graphs was manipulated; as a result, across all
graphs, the numbers of cases were only 1190 (5.95%) for the
experimental group and 1110 (5.55%) for the control group.

Procedure
Based on the presented graphs, participants were instructed
to indicate their opinion as an expert advisor about a nursing
tonic that an assumed company was developing to improve
biological vitality.
The experimental procedure consisted of the following
four stages.
Graphical presentation Participants were assigned to one
of three groups. Each group consisted of 18, 19, and 19
participants respectively in Experiment 1a and 19, 18, and 17

Figure 2: Graphs used in Experiment 1a.

2050

Figure 3: Graphs used in Experiment 1b.
participants in Experiment 1b. The participants in each group
were presented with one of the three graphs shown in Figures
2 or 3. A score of 1 to 3 was assigned to each of the three
types of graphs for the following regression analysis.
Difference perception After the graphical presentation,
participants estimated the degree of difference in the number
of cases between the two conditions and were asked if there
were any differences in the two conditions on a five-point
scale from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree).
Interpretation Then, the participants were required to
estimate to what degree ingredient A was effective in
improving biological vitality on a five-point scale.
Decision Finally, the participants were asked whether
ingredient A should be included in the nursing tonic the
company was developing on a five-point scale.
The experiment took about 30 minutes.

Result
Single regression analyses were performed with the score
recorded in one of the four experimental stages as the
independent variable and the score in the following stage as
the dependent variable. Figure 4 shows the results of
Experiment 1a. There were significant relationships found
between the presented graphs and the difference perceptions
(β = .51, t(54) = 4.36, p < .001, R² = .26), the difference
perceptions and the interpretations (β = .42, t(54) = 3.35, p
< .01, R² = .17), and the interpretations and the decisions (β

Figure 4: Results of the single regression analyses for
Experiment 1a.

Figure 5: Results of the single regression analyses for
Experiment 1b.

= .48, t(54) = 4.01, p < .001, R² = .23). The same analyses
were performed for Experiment 1b and Figure 5 shows the
results, in which there were significant relationships found
between the difference perceptions and the interpretations (β
= .42, t(52) = 3.30, p < .01, R² = .17), and the interpretations
and the decisions (β = .58, t(52) = 5.11, p < .001, R² = .33);
however, no significant relationships were detected between
the presented graphs and the difference perceptions (β = .14,
t(52) = 1.01, p = .32, R² = .02).

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was performed to investigate how top-down
processing driven by impressions affected each of the
bottom-up processing phases confirmed in Experiment 1.
Experiment 2 consisted of the former and the latter sessions.
For each participant, the former session was followed by the
latter session; and between the two sessions, a 5 minute break
was inserted.

Participants
60 undergraduates (30 males and 30 females: Mage = 18.87,
SDage = 0.65) from Nagoya University participated in
Experiment 2. The experiment was performed in small
groups of at most eight members.

Materials
The former session in Experiment 2 was performed to
replicate Experiment 1b. In the latter session, the graphs were
the same as those in Experiment 1b, but a further
experimental setting was introduced to manipulate the
participants’ impressions toward the medical material in
which a fictional ingredient, a “proten” or a “rubison,” rather
than ingredient A was assumed. For the manipulation,
reading material that described one of the two pharmaceutical
companies was used to give the participants positive
impressions about the one company developing the “proten”
and negative impressions of the other company developing
the “rubison.”
In Experiment 2, two experimental contexts were
introduced, with the assignment of each of the two contexts
to the former or the latter session being counterbalanced. One
context was the same as that in Experiment 1: i.e., the
development of a medical ingredient to improve biological
vitality was introduced. The other context was the

2051

development of an ingredient to recover physical strength
after fatigue. In the latter case, a rat experiment was assumed
with a 100 meter running test.

Procedure
Based on the graphs that indicated the experimental results,
participants were instructed to indicate their opinion as an
expert advisor about a nursing tonic to improve biological
vitality, or as an expert advisor about an energy drink to
recover physical strength after fatigue.
The experimental procedure consisted of the following
five phases.
Impression manipulation Before the graphical presentation
stage, in the former session, participants answered a
questionnaire about their impressions of an ingredient A that
had been developed by an company X they belonged to. In
this stage, no information about the ingredient was provided.
They estimated, on a five-point scale, their impressions about
ten items, such as “ingredient A is reliable,” with a higher
estimation score meaning more positive impressions toward
ingredient A.
The following four experimental stages, graphical
presentation, difference perception, interpretation, and
decision, were the same as in Experiment 1. Participants were
assigned to one of three groups. Each group consisted of 20
participants respectively. The participants in each group were
presented with one of the three graphs. In the final decision
stage, participants were asked to decide whether ingredient A
should be included in the nursing tonic or the energy drink,
on a five-point scale.
In the latter session, the impressions of the ingredients
“proten” or “rubison” were manipulated using reading
materials in which information about company Y which is
developing the ingredient was given. First, the participants
were presented with a text describing the information about
the company Y. One text included characteristics of an
excellent company (e.g., There is an excellent welfare
program in company Y.), to persuade participants to have a
positive impression of the ingredient “proten.” The other text
had characteristics of an evil company (e.g., There is no
welfare program in company Y.), and persuaded participants
to have negative impressions toward the ingredient “rubison.”
One of the two texts was presented to each participant. Then,
the participants answered the same questionnaire as used in
the former session, in which they were asked to give their
impressions of the ingredient “proten” or “rubison.”
From the graphical presentation through to the decision
stages, the same procedure was utilized as in the former
session.
The total time for Experiments 2 was about an hour.

Result
Multiple regression analyses were performed with two
independent variables; i.e., a score recorded in one of the four
experimental stages and an impression score; and a
dependent variable; i.e., a score from the following phase.
Figure 6 shows the results from the former session. The

results replicated Experiment 1b. There were significant
relationships found between the difference perceptions and
interpretations (β = .59, t(57) = 5.50, p < .001, R² = .38), and
the interpretations and the decisions (β = .66, t(57) = 6.30, p
< .001, R² = .42); however, no significant relationship was
detected between the presented graphs and the difference
perceptions (β = .23, t(57) = 1.82, p = .07, R² = .11). There
were no relationship found between the impressions and any
of the three bottom-up processing phases; difference
perception, interpretation, or decision (β = .24, t(57) = 1.95,
p = .06, R² = .11; β = .09, t(57) = .84, p = .40, R² = .38; β = .05,
t(57) = .49, p = .63, R² = .42).
The same analysis was performed for the latter session.
Figure 7 shows the results, from which it can be seen that the
difference perceptions were affected by the impressions (β
= .28, t(57) = 2.25, p < .05, R² = .11) but not by the graphical
presentations (β = .18, t(57) = 1.42, p = .16, R² = .11), the
interpretations were not affected by the impressions (β = .21,
t(57) = 1.99, p = .05, R² = .44) but by the difference
perceptions (β = .58, t(57) = 5.61, p < .001, R² = .44), and the
decisions were affected by both the impressions (β = .31,
t(57) = 3.27, p < .01, R² = .57) and the interpretations (β = .58,
t(57) = 6.20, p < .001, R² = .57).

Figure 6: Results of the multiple regression analyses for
the former session in Experiment 2.

Figure 7: Results of the multiple regression analyses for
the latter session in Experiment 2.

Experiment 3
Experiment 3 was performed to investigate how top-down
processing driven by attitudes affected each of the bottom-up
processing phases. In Experiment 3, we investigated how the
participants’ social attitudes toward smoking affected their
decisions about a smoking cessation policy.

2052

Participants

Discussion

55 undergraduates (33 males and 22 females: Mage = 18.51,
SDage = 0.86) from Nagoya University participated in
Experiment 3. The experiment was performed as class
practice in a cognitive science class.

Materials
An experimental context was introduced in which a health
survey was conducted in an assumed city X. Participants
were presented with graphs that indicated the survey results.
Specifically, the graph showed how many of the 20,000
respondents suffered from pulmonary problems. The
perceptual features of the graphs were the same as those in
the preceding experiments. It was assumed that one group
had a family with a smoker and the other group did not.

Procedure
One week before the experiment, the participants answered a
questionnaire to measure their social attitudes toward
smoking. They estimated, on a five-point scale, their attitudes
toward smoking behavior for 10 items, such as “smoking is
only malevolent for society,” with a higher estimation score
indicating greater negative attitudes toward smoking.
Participants were assigned to one of three groups. Each
group consisted of 18, 17, and 19 participants respectively.
The participants in each group were presented with one of the
three graphs. In the final decision stage, participants were
asked to indicate their opinion, as a health consultant, about
whether or not employees in an assumed company should be
prohibited from smoking both inside and outside the
company.

Result
The same multiple regression analyses as those in
Experiment 2 were performed. Figure 8 shows the result. The
difference perceptions were not affected by the graphical
presentations or by the attitudes (β = .03, t(52) = .23, p = .82,
R² = .002; β = .03, t(52) = .20, p = .84, R² = .002), the
interpretations were affected only by the difference
perceptions (β = .66, t(52) = 6.61, p < .001, R² = .48) but not
by the attitudes (β = .16, t(52) = 1.63, p = .11, R² = .48), and
the decisions were affected only by the attitudes (β = .50,
t(52) = 4.18, p < .001, R² = .28) but not by the interpretations
(β = .09, t(52) = .71, p = .48, R² = .28).

Figure 8: Results of the multiple regression analyses for
Experiment 3.

The first aim of this study was to confirm a series of the
bottom-up process phases, information extraction from
graphs as an external resource, interpretation, and decision.
In Experiment 1a, bar graphs with assumed experimental
results in two conditions were used. In Experiment 1a, we
manipulated the differences in the values of the independent
variable in two experimental conditions, and confirmed that
bottom-up processing was driven by internally represented
differences extracted from the graph as the external resource.
In Experiment 1b, we used another set of graphs in which the
values for the independent variable were equivalent, and
obtained the same results as in Experiment 1a, indicating that
bottom-up processes also arise based on the participants’
internally represented differences. It is important that bottomup processing is performed from internally represented
information that is extracted from an external resource, and
independent of the actual information represented in the
external resource.
In Experiment 1b, we used graphs in which the visually
represented differences were equivalent to the actual
differences in the graphs used in Experiment 1a, even thought
there was no actual difference in the two conditions. As a
result, no correlation was found between the internal
differences represented by the participants and the pseudo
differences in the graphs. This indicated that the participants
in this study were not affected by the visual biases included
in the external resource when extracting the information in
the graphs. Previous studies have found that the reading
quality of graphical information depends on critical thinking
capabilities (e.g., Woller-Carter et al., 2012). The critical
thinking abilities of the participants in our experiments
appeared to be relatively high, which needs to be considered
when interpreting the experimental results in this current
study.
In Experiment 2, we manipulated the participants’
impressions of the target topic. First, we found the same
bottom-up process that had been confirmed in Experiment 1b
in which top-down processing was not assumed.
The first finding was that the final decision was made
based on both top-down processing derived from impressions
and bottom-up processing from the extraction of information
from the external resource. Previous studies have consistently
confirmed that impressions significantly affect decision
making. Kostopoulou et al. (2017) experimentally found that
in medical diagnoses by home doctors, the first impression of
the patients affected diagnostic planning decisions. Jaros et
al. (2000) reported that a perceptual impression of foods at a
glance affected food selection.
The latter session in Experiment 2 confirmed that topdown processing using impressions affected the extraction
phase in the initial bottom-up processing phase. The halo
effect is when the impressions about one specific
characteristic affect the estimation of other characteristics
that may not even be related to the initial characteristic (e.g.,
Murphy et al., 1993). In the latter session, we manipulated
the impression of the office environments of an assumed

2053

company that had developed a medical ingredient. The
participants’ estimation about the ingredient depended on the
manipulated impressions, even though the efficacy of the
ingredient had no explicit relationship with the office
environments.
In Experiment 3, we manipulated another factor that drives
top-down processing; that participant attitudes are formed
over a long period based on moral and social norms. The
experimental results showed that different from Experiment
2, the final decision was made only based on the participants’
attitudes toward the target topic, rather than depending on the
interpretation drawn from the bottom-up processing.
This finding about the relationship between attitude and
decision was consistent with findings in previous studies. It
has been found that attitudes are crucial in predicting
behavior (Conner & Armitage, 1998), and that there is a
strong relationship between attitudes and behavior (Fazio et
al, 1982).
An important point from Experiment 3 is that when making
the final decision, top-down processing was not concerned
with the bottom-up processing output. The topic dealt with in
the current study was smoking; therefore, as this was a
familiar social topic for everyone, this may have driven the
strong top-down processing.
The results in Experiment 3 showed that the top-down
processing did not affect the bottom-up processing initial
extraction phase, implying that such initial bottom-up
processing may be isolated by top-down processing.
In the current study, we examined two factors; impressions
and social attitudes; that drive top-down processing. In
summary, when one factor that is formed temporarily is
followed by a specific context, impressions take a central role
in the comprehension and decision making about graphical
information, indicating that bottom-up processing functions
are compatible with top-down processing. On the other hand,
when another top-down factor is socially formed over a long
period, such as social attitudes, bottom-up processing tends
to be separated from top-down processing, with top-down
processing predominating.

References
Ancker, J. S., Senathirajah, Y., Kukafka, R., & Starren, J. B.
(2006). Design features of graphs for communicating
health risks: A systematic review. Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association, 13(6), 608-618.
Conner, M., & Armitage, C. J. (1998). Extending the theory
of planned behavior: A review and avenues for further
research. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 28(15),
1429-1464.
Fazio, R. H., Chen, J., McDonel, E. C., & Sherman, S. J.
(1982).
Attitude
accessibility,
attitude-behavior
consistency, and the strength of the object evaluation
association. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
18(4), 339-357.
Freedman, E. G., & Smith, L. D. (1996). The role of data and
theory in covariation assessment: Implications for the

theory-ladenness of observation. Journal of Mind and
Behavior, 17(4), 321-343.
Freedman E. G., & Shah P. (2002). Toward a model of
knowledge-based graph comprehension. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, 18-30.
Garcia-Retamero R., & Cokely, E T. (2013). Communicating
health risks with visual aids. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 22(5), 392-399.
Greenwald, A. G., & Banaji, M. R. (1995). Implicit social
cognition: Attitudes, self-esteem, and stereotypes.
Psychological Review, 102(1), 4-27.
Jaros, D., Rohm, H., & Strobl, M. (2000). Appearance
properties – A significant contribution to sensory food
quality? –. LWT - Food Sci. Technol., 33, 320–326.
Kanzaki, N., & Miwa, K. (2012). Experimental investigation
of the effects of representations and perspectives for the
comprehension of line graphs. The Japanese Journal of
Psychology, 83(3), 163-173.
Kintsch, W. (1988). The role of knowledge in discourse
comprehension. A construction-integration model.
Psychological Review, 95(2), 163-182.
Kostopoulou, O., Sirota, M., Round, T., Samaranayaka, S., &
Delaney, B. C. (2017). The role of physicians’ first
impressions in the diagnosis of possible cancers without
alarm symptoms. Medical Decision Making, 37(1), 9-16.
Lipkus, I. M., & Hollands, J. G. (1999). The visual
communication of risk. Journal of National Cancer
Institute Monographs, 25, 149-163.
Murphy, K. R., Jako, R. A., & Anhalt, R. L. (1993). Nature
and consequences of halo error: A critical analysis. Journal
of Applied Psychology. 78(2), 218-225.
Sanchez, C. A., & Wiley, J. (2006). An examination of the
seductive details effect in terms of working memory
capacity. Memory and Cognition, 34(2), 344-355.
Shah, P., & Carpenter, P. A. (1995). Conceptual limitations
in comprehending line graphs. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 124(1), 43-61.
Tabachneck-Schijf, H. J. M., Leonardo, A. M., & Simon, H.
A. (1997). CaMeRa: A computational model of multiple
representations. Cognitive Science, 21(3), 305-350.
Wang, Z., & Nelson, M. R. (2014). Tablet as human: How
intensity and stability of the user-tablet relationship
inﬂuences users’ impression formation of tablet computers.
Computers in Human Behavior, 37, 81-93.
Woller-Carter, M. M., Okan, Y., Cokely, E. T., & GarciaRetamero, R. (2012). Communicating and distorting risks
with graphs: An eye - tracking study. Proceedings of the
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 56th Annual
Meeting, 1723-1727.

2054

