Experimental Investigation into the Continuous Pattern of the Relationship
Between Color Focality and Short-Term Memory Performance for Colors
Siyuan Fang (siyuanfang@asagi.waseda.jp)
Graduate School of Human Sciences, Waseda University, 2-579-15 Mikajima
Tokorozawa City, Saitama Prefecture 359-1192, Japan

Tatsunori Matsui (matsui-t@waseda.jp)
Faculty of Human Sciences, Waseda University, 2-579-15 Mikajima
Tokorozawa City, Saitama Prefecture 359-1192, Japan
Abstract
Past studies reported that language-specific color focality has
substantial influence on the short-term memory (STM) performance of colors of the speakers of the language, which we call
the ”focality effect.” This study attempts to clarify the continuous pattern of this effect, that is, the manner in which correct
recognition possibilities and misrecognition error distances of
colors, which are two aspects of the STM performance for colors, change in a gradual fashion along the continuum of color
focality. Our experiment, which tests the Japanese language,
finds that a U-shaped relationship exists between the focality
and the possibility of correct recognition, and that the misrecognition error distance increases as the focality decreases.
We speculate that the subjects’ frequent and conscious employment of the memorization strategy of coding colors using linguistic categories is one important cause of the detected effect
patterns.
Keywords: color focality; short-term memory; continuous
pattern; color discriminability; basic color terms

Introduction
While color sensation changes gradually along the perceptual
dimensions of hue, lightness, and chroma (Munsell, 1919),
in languages, this is conceptualized into a series of categories. Every language contains a set of basic color terms
in its lexicon, such as black, white, red, green, blue, yellow,
brown, gray, orange, pink, and purple in the English language
(Berlin & Kay, 1991). The categories signified by the basic
color terms (called ”basic color categories” for short) are natural categories that have their inner structures formed around
their prototypes. This means that within a basic color category, the member colors differ in their focality, namely their
”closeness” to the prototype, or in other words, their goodness as a typical example of the category (Rosch, 1973).
In this case study, which tests the Japanese language,
we aim to experimentally evaluate the universality of the
phenomenon that language-specific color focality influences
short-term memory (STM) for colors of the speakers of the
language, which we call the ”focality effect.” More important, we attempt to clarify the continuous pattern of this effect
if its existence turns out to be supported in our experiment.
The focality effect first appears in the English language
in Heider (1972). In her experiment, Heider used a simplified version of the color array that Berlin and Kay (1991)
used. The array was composed of 160 Munsell color chips,
24 of which were selected as test chips. Eight of these chips
were focal colors, that is, the colors of the highest focality for

each of the eight chromatic basic color categories that were
shared by numerous languages but generally corresponded to
the English categories Red, Green, Yellow, Blue, Brown, Purple, Pink, and Orange (Roberson, Davies, & Davidoff, 2000;
Roberson, J. Davidoff, & Shapiro, 2005). The other 16 chips
were of lower focality for these categories, and thus were
classified as nonfocal colors. The selection and categorization
of the test chips were based on the color-naming data gathered
by Berlin and Kay (1991). In each trial in Heider’s experiment, a subject was required to watch a color chip for 5 s and
then search for it in the color array after a 30-s interval, where
the chip was hidden from the subject. For either stimulus
type, two indexes of STM performance were measured. The
first index was the ”memory accuracy score (MAS),” which
was defined as the mean number of correct recognitions for
this stimulus type across the subjects. The second index was
the ”error distance score (EDS),” which measured the mean
error distance across the incorrect trials of this stimulus type.
The English-speaking subjects showed superior performance
for both measures of the focal colors relative to the nonfocal
ones. Roberson et al. (2000) employed the same experimental
paradigm and stimuli. Regarding the English-speaking subjects, a focality effect similar to that reported by Heider was
detected in terms of MAS. However, no focality effect was
found in terms of EDS. Roberson et al. (2005), which also
used this experimental paradigm and stimuli, found that the
mean d’ score (a modified version of MAS) of the test chips
that were focal only in Himba (a language mainly spoken in
Southern Africa) were significantly higher than that of the test
chips that were focal only in English. This effect was also detected in the language of Berinmo, which is mainly spoken in
Papua New Guinea. The index of EDS was not used in this
study.
Overall, these studies have provided some evidence for the
universal existence of the focality effect across languages in
terms of MAS. On the other hand, no robust focality effect
has been observed in terms of EDS. More empirical evidence
is necessary to test whether the focality effect exists for these
two STM performance measures. Because no Asian language
has been studied in this field, we regard the Japanese language
to be suitable as our target language. Furthermore, in these
studies, color focality was treated as a categorical variable
with only two values: ”focal” and ”nonfocal.” This precluded

1985

any elaborate descriptions of the focality effect. Therefore,
in this study, we quantified the concept of color focality in a
continuous fashion and delved into the continuous pattern of
the focality effect, that is, how STM performance for colors
changes gradually along the continuum of color focality.

Experimental Settings
Participants, Materials and Environment
Twenty-two subjects (11 males and 11 females of ages M =
31.45 and SD = 14.34, all native Japanese speakers with no
color-related art experience), who are either undergraduate
or graduate students at Waseda University, took part in the
experiment. They all passed the Ishihara Color Vision Test
(38 plates, International Edition), and no one reported having
color vision deficiencies. Hence, these subjects were considered to have normal color vision.
A color array of Heider (1972)’s design was used. Its layout is shown in Figure 1. This array was made of cardboard
(58.5 cm * 28.5 cm), and had color chips embedded in its
white surface. Thirty colors (called ”test colors” for short)
were tested in the formal trials of Session 1. These colors
were mounted on the white surface of a 5.0 cm * 5.0 cm piece
of cardboard when being presented to the subjects. Chips in
the Munsell Book of Color (Glossy Edition) were used.

retrieved by the experimenter. After a 30-s interval, the color
array was presented to the subject, and the subject was asked
to report which color in the array he/she thought was the previously presented one by writing the coordinates of the color
on an answer sheet. There was no conversation between the
experimenter and the subject. Each test color was tested at
least once with each subject, and for each subject, the order
of color testing was randomly determined. Thus, for each
subject, there were three repeated trials, which were intended
to prevent the subject from using a strategy of excluding the
already tested colors. Before the formal experiment began,
a two-trial training session using a different set of test colors
was conducted. For each subject, the colors tested during the
training were randomly selected.
After all 33 formal trials were completed, a questionnaire
was given to the subject. This questionnaire asked the subject to report freely on the strategies that he/she adopted to
memorize the test colors during this session.
Session 2 was targeted to elicit the coverage of six basic color categories corresponding to the six Japanese basic color terms akairo (red), pinkuiro (pink), kiiro (yellow),
orenjiiro (orange), chairo (brown), and murasakiiro (purple)
(Uchikawa & Boynton, 1987). Then, the focality of each test
color was quantified using a modified version of Berlin and
Kay (1991)’s method. First, the subject was required to write
on six answer sheets (one for each basic color term) all colors
that he/she thought could be named by the term. The answer
sheets were provided to each subject in random order. Next,
the subject was asked to report the colors they thought were
the best examples of each of the six basic color terms. This
was accomplished by writing the coordinates of the colors
on an answer sheet. Multiple answers were allowed for each
term, but the subject was instructed to narrow his/her selections as much as possible.

Statistical Analysis and Results
Variable Definitions

Figure 1: Layout of color array.
The experiment was performed indoors with fluorescent
lighting (type: National FHF 32EX-N-H, daylight color,
color temperature: 5000 K). The experimenter and subject
being tested sat opposite each other at a table. The distance
between the stimuli and the subject’s eyes was controlled at
50 cm. A cardboard separating the two persons was erected
along the middle of the table, making the subject unable to
see the experimenter’s face when observing the stimuli, waiting during the 30-s interval, and filling out the answer sheets.

Procedure
The entire experiment, which was carried out in Japanese,
consisted of two sessions.
Session 1, which used a procedure similar to that used by
Heider (1972), aimed to measure the subjects’ STM performance for the test colors. This consisted of 33 trials. In each
trial, a test color was presented to the subject for 5 s and then

Focality Score We used the data obtained from Session 2
to specify the coverages of the six basic color categories over
the array, and quantified the focality of the test colors. We
first computed the six attributes for each test color: Red Index, Pink Index, Yellow Index, Orange Index, Brown Index,
and Purple Index. These attributes measured the intersubject
naming consistency of the color in terms of each basic color
term. The Red Index was defined as the percentage of subjects who named the color as red, and the other five indexes
were similarly defined. Then, we designated the Overall Index (OI) of a color as the largest of the six single-term-based
indexes of the color. We classified a color into the color category Red if its OI was its Red Index, the color category Pink
if its OI was its Pink Index, and so forth. Figure 2 shows
the distribution of the nonzero OIs and the partition of the six
basic color categories.
For each basic color category, most of the colors having the
largest OIs were also frequently selected as the best examples

1986

during the second part of Session 2. Thus, it is reasonable to
deem the OI of a color as reflecting the appropriateness of the
color as a typical example of the category to which the color
belongs. In this manner, we defined the focality score (FS) of
a color as its OI value.

Figure 2: Distribution of Overall Indexes of test colors (colors within area covered by thin diagonal stripes) and other
relevant colors, and partition of the six basic color categories.
Color depth represents Overall Index magnitude. [*: Orange
Index = Brown Index]
Discriminability Score We defined the discriminability
score (DS) of a test color on the color array as the average of
the color differences between the test color and its eight adjacent colors. In this study, a color difference was defined as a
Euclidean distance in the CIE L*a*b* color space. Thus, before calculating color differences, we transformed the Munsell coordinates of all relevant colors into CIE xyY coordinates using the O.S.A.-developed conversion tables (Newhall,
Nickerson, & Judd, 1943), then XYZ coordinates, and finally
the L*a*b* coordinates. In the final transformation step, the
parameter values of the CIE D50 standard illuminant, which
resembled the light source used in this experiment, were used.
STM Performance Index 1: Memory Accuracy Score
We adopted MAS as one index of STM performance. It measures the probability for which a color can be accurately recognized. Since FS is continuous in our study, it is necessary
to take MAS also as continuous. We defined the MAS of a
test color as the percentage of the trials where the subjects
correctly recognized the color.
STM Performance Index 2: Error Distance Score The
EDS is adopted as another index of STM performance. EDS
measures the expected error extent in the case of misrecognition. As in Heider (1972)’s and Roberson et al. (2000)’s
studies, the EDS for a test color is defined as the mean of the
color differences between the test color and the colors mistaken for the test color in the incorrect recognition trials.

The Relationship Between FS and MAS
In order to determine the continuous pattern of the relationship between FS and MAS, we first conducted regression
analyses on the FS data and the original MAS data of the

test colors to obtain a general impression of the relationship
pattern. No statistically significant linear relationship could
be detected (R2 = 0.066, P = 0.171 [BFS = 0.152, P = 0.171]),
but a significant quadratic relationship was found (R2 = 0.237,
P = 0.026 [BFS = -1.064, P = 0.045; BFS∗FS = 1.073, P =
0.021]).
Brown and Lenneberg (1954) found that color discriminability could facilitate STM performance for colors, which
we call the ”discriminability effect.” Later, Heider (1972) and
Lucy and Shweder (1979) pointed out that because the colors in the color array were unequal in discriminability, it was
possible that it was color discriminability, not color focality, that caused the detected variance in STM performance
for colors. This possible source of distortion was checked
by using the following procedure. First, we looked into the
relationship between DS and MAS. A significant positive linear regression model could be established between these two
variables (R2 = 0.353, P = 0.001 [BDS = 0.024, P = 0.001]).
Then, regression analyses investigating the relationship between FS and DS were conducted. These analyses produced
neither a significant linear model (R2 = 0.014, P = 0.534 [BFS
= 1.710, P = 0.534]) nor a significant quadratic one (R2 =
0.029, P = 0.675 [BFS = -7.032, P = 0.618; BFS∗FS = 7.712, P
= 0.527]). Nevertheless, we noticed that a slight U-shaped relationship could be recognized when we scrutinized the scatter plot. This means that the possibility that DS mediated the
FS-to-MAS relationship could not be ruled out. Hence, we
conducted partial linear and quadratic regressions on FS and
MAS while excluding the influence of DS on MAS. No significant linear relationship was found (R2 = 0.054, P = 0.217
[BFS = 0.111, P = 0.217]), but a significant quadratic one was
detected (R2 = 0.233, P = 0.028 [BFS = -0.893, P = 0.037;
BFS∗FS = 0.885, P = 0.018]. This is plotted in Figure 3A).
This is similar to the results of the initial regressions, and indicates that a significant quadratic relationship exits between
FS and MAS even if DS has been treated as a control variable.

Figure 3: (A)Relationship between Focality Score and Memory Accuracy Score (corrected);(B)Relationship between Focality Score and Error Distance Score (corrected) in the general case, with a data point unexplained by the regression
model depicted by a magenta-colored rhombus.

1987

The Relationship Between FS and EDS
The continuous pattern of the relationship between FS and
EDS was investigated in the following manner. First, to obtain a preliminary impression of what the relationship pattern looks like, we carried out linear and quadratic regression analyses on the FS data and the original EDS data. Only
the quadratic model reached statistical significance (quadratic
model: R2 = 0.250, P = 0.027 [BFS = -30.113, P = 0.019;
BFS∗FS = 22.376, P = 0.041]; linear model: R2 = 0.110, P
= 0.084 [BFS = -4.694, P = 0.084]). Then, a positive linear
relationship was found between DS and EDS through a regression analysis (R2 = 0.299, P = 0.003 [BDS = 0.692, P =
0.003]). In order to remove the distorting influence of the discriminability effect (as in the case of MAS), the regressions
on the FS and EDS data were repeated but with the impact
of DS on EDS partialed out. A significant quadratic model
appeared (R2 = 0.221, P = 0.044 [BFS = -22.166, P = 0.041;
BFS∗FS = 15.895, P = 0.085]), but not a linear one (R2 = 0.121,
P = 0.070 [BFS = -4.110, P = 0.070]). This resembles the results of the initial regressions.
Nevertheless, there exists a test color that appears to be isolated from the cluster of other high-FS test colors at the EDS
coordinates. Owing to the employment of the least squares
method, this data point could have exerted a disproportionately strong influence on the relationship pattern. In order to
determine what pattern the relationship actually takes in the
general case, we reran the regressions on the corrected dataset
but did not include this data point. This time we obtained a
linear relationship (R2 = 0.236, P = 0.010 [BFS = -5.669, P =
0.010], which is plotted in Figure 3B), instead of a quadratic
one. (When adding FS*FS to the regression as a predictive
variable, neither BFS nor BFS∗FS achieved significance, although the model remained significant). The removed color
is 5YR 4/8. It was mistaken as the color one-unit above it
(5YR 5/12) in all its misrecognition cases. This misrecognition pattern is difficult to explain by the strategy of linguistic
categorical color coding which will be discussed later. We
thus conjecture that it might result from other memorization
strategies, which needs further exploration.

Memorization Strategies

Table 1: Memorization Strategies Reported by Subjects in
Questionnaire.
Number of Reports
16

14

3
2
1

1

Brief Description
Use basic color concepts as reference points, and then fine-tune along
the dimensions of lightness and/or
saturation
Associate the test color with the
color of a familiar object, e.g., the
banner of Waseda University, a Bordeaux wine, or lipstick, and then
fine-tune along the dimensions of
lightness and/or saturation
Directly memorize the visual image
of the test color
Use the degree of preference for the
test color as a cue
Use the color of an object located in
the experimental environment, e.g.,
an answer sheet, as a reference
point, and then fine-tune along the
dimensions of lightness and/or saturation
Use a previously presented test color
as a reference point, and then finetune along the dimensions of lightness and/or saturation

formance is best for colors at the two terminals of the focality
continuum, and begins to decrease as the focality moves toward the intermediate level. In addition, a significant negative
linear regression function can be established between FS and
EDS under general circumstances. This suggests that the average error distance in the case of misrecognitions for a color
decreases as its focality increases.

One Cause of the Focality Effect Patterns

In the questionnaire conducted at the end of Session 1, the
subjects reported a total of six memorization strategies. For
each strategy, Table 1 offers a brief description and shows
how many subjects reported it.

General Discussion
The Continuous Patterns of the Focality Effect
Our experimental results demonstrated that in the Japanese
language, color focality can affect STM performance for colors in a statistically significant way in terms of both correct recognition possibility and misrecognition error distance.
With regard to the continuous patterns of the focality effect, a
significant U-shaped quadratic regression function can be established between FS and MAS, which implies that STM per-

To determine what caused the continuous patterns, we examined the memorization strategies reported by the subjects (Table 1). We noticed that the strategy of encoding colors using
linguistic color categories, which has the highest number of
reports, might have played an important role in the formation
of the detected focality effect patterns.
A detailed description of the procedure of this strategy in a
single trial is as follows: The subjects consciously encoded
the test color using the basic color terms while observing
the test color. The basic color terms were used as reference
points, which means that the subject anchored the test color
to the central points of the basic color categories, namely, the
most typical colors of these categories. The subject then retained this linguistic code in his/her STM during the waiting

1988

period. Finally, during the phase of color searching, the subject decoded the code to recover the test color.
For convenience of discussion, color focality is generally
divided into the levels of ”high,” ”medium,” and ”low,” and
their respective ways of being coded are described as follows:
A high-focality color can be encoded using only one basic
color term since it is, or is substantially close to, the central
point of the basic color category. With regard to a mediumfocality color, its coding needs some modifiers in hue and
(or) lightness besides a basic color term, for example, bright
orange, dark brown, and purplish pink. For a low-focality
color, because it is situated at the border region between two
basic color categories, the two basic color terms corresponding to the two categories are used to constitute the code for
this color.
With the employment of this strategy, it is obvious that
the correct recognition possibility for a color is mainly determined by 1) how easily the code for the color can be retained in STM during the waiting period, and 2) the semantic
ambiguity of the code for the color, or in other words, how
accurately the encoded color can be recovered from the code.
Since codes for colors of all three types can be formed by just
a few words, they will not cause a memory burden. This implies that the rate of successful retaining should be high for
each color type. On the other hand, the variable of semantic ambiguity bears a much larger intertype variance, which
indicates its chief role in mediating the impact of color focality on STM performance for colors. For a high-focality
color, its code generally consists of a sole basic color term,
which possesses a fairly plain meaning since any Japanese
speaker is able to understand the definition of a basic color
term. Thus, during the searching phase, the signifier of the
code can be pinpointed in high precision. By contrast, the
modifiers in the code for a medium-focality color have much
vaguer meanings. Even if the subjects have carried the code
into the decoding phase without mistakes, they will find themselves lost in numerous candidates, all of which more or less
match the description. This will surely lower their chances
of finding the one that they have actually coded. Following
this logic, the code for a low-focality color, which involves
basic color terms but no modifiers, should also be regarded
as unequivocal in meaning. The central points of the basic
color terms, as in the case of a high-focality color, can serve
as reliable reference points for the localization of the encoded
color. In brief, the semantic ambiguity of color codes, which
negatively influences the likelihood of correct recognition for
colors, is low for high- and low-focality colors and high for
medium-focality colors. Thus, high- and low-focality colors
tend to have higher rates of correct recognition than those of
medium-focality ones. This is exactly what our experimental results have shown. In addition, owing to the fact that for
any color the semantic ambiguity of its code is a languageinherent and thus subject-independent attribute, this continuous pattern can be expected to have a high degree of intralanguage consistency, or in other words, a high likelihood to be

replicated if the experiment is repeated using the same language.
With regard to the misrecognition error distance of a color,
within the framework of linguistic categorical coding, this
mainly depends on which parts of the code the subjects have
forgotten, and how many times each of these parts have been
forgotten. For a high-focality color, once a subject has forgotten the sole basic color term during the waiting period, in
the searching phase he/she is unable to tell the basic color
category to which the test color belongs. His/her selection
will thus be random, although other memory clues, such as
the visual image of the test color, can be of help. It is easy to
imagine that under this circumstance, a large error will occur.
The loss of the basic color term for a medium-focality color
or both of the basic color terms for a low-focality color will
lead to similar consequences. For a medium-focality color,
when only the modifiers have been forgotten, given that the
basic color term has become the only guide, the central point
of this basic color category may pull the subjects’ selections
toward it. In this case, a misrecognition is expected to occur, but within a moderate error range that is approximately
half the ”category radius.” Following the same logic, with regard to the code for a low-focality color, when one of its two
basic color terms has been forgotten, the remaining one will
tend to drag the subjects’ selections toward the central point
of the category it represents. On this occasion, because the
test color is situated at the border region of the category, a selection with a error distance of approximately one categoryradius long might take place. Note that owing to the small total number of memory losses suggested by the small memory
burden imposed by the color codes, it is possible that some
of these ”forgetting types” did not occur in our experiment.
Thus, one explanation for the focality effect pattern that we
detected is that our subjects have never forgotten the basic
color terms in the codes for the high- and medium-focality
colors. In addition, the small sample size of memory losses
means that the distribution of occurrence frequency across
the forgetting types can hardly be consistent across experiments even when using the same language. In other words, if
the experiment is repeated, a substantially different frequency
distribution across the forgetting types will occur, which will
lead to a very different focality effect pattern.

The Universality of the Focality Effect Patterns
Several past studies on STM performance for colors, which
used English-speaking subjects, also recorded their subjects’
memorization methods. Lucy and Shweder (1988) recorded
the subjects’ incidental remarks on memorization strategies
during the course of their experiments, and they carried out
a questionnaire on memorization strategies when the experiments were finished. They provided a quantitative report
which showed that the strategy of linguistic categorical coding was the most frequently adopted, followed by the strategies of direct retention of visual image, present object association, and absent object association. This coincides well
with the results of our questionnaire. Brown and Lenneberg

1989

(1954), Lucy and Shweder (1979), and Garro (1986) also reported the use of linguistic categorical coding by their subjects, although they did not provide detailed statistics. The
fact that linguistic categorical coding is employed as a chief
memorization strategy by both Japanese speakers and English
speakers suggests that its applicability is possibly universal
across languages. Moreover, considering the hypothesized
close ties of this strategy to the formation of the continuous
patterns of the focality effect, this further implies that all languages may share a common language-based mechanism for
focality-effect generation.
In terms of the focality effect pattern for the possibility of
correct recognition, considering its presumed intralanguage
consistency, it can be expected to be observed in other languages. This conjecture is supported by the agreement between the FS-to-MAS relationship detected in our experiment and the superiority of focal colors to nonfocal colors in
correct recognition possibilities reported by Heider (1972),
Roberson et al. (2000) and Roberson et al. (2005). On the
other hand, even if the use of the strategy of linguistic categorical coding is universal across languages, because of the
lack of intralanguage consistency, it is difficult to find a consistent focality effect pattern across languages in terms of the
misrecognition error distance. A comparison of the results of
Heider (1972)’s and Roberson et al. (2000)’s studies and our
study demonstrated such interlanguage inconsistency.
A trivial case as it might be, reports show that there
exit languages that possibly lack basic color terms, e.g., Piraha and Warlpiri (Everett, 2005; Wierzbicka, 2008; but see
Regier, Kay, & Khetarpal, 2009). This means that the linguistic definition of color focality and the memorization strategy
of linguistic categorical coding possibly cannot be applied to
such languages. Thus, the discussions in this section may be
unsuitable for these languages.

Conclusion and Implications for Future Work
This study is the first to probe into the continuous patterns of
the focality effect. Our experiment confirmed the existence of
the focality effect in the Japanese language, and clarified its
continuous patterns in terms of correct recognition possibility
and misrecognition error distance, which were two aspects of
short-term memory performance. Correct recognition possibility is highest at the ends of the continuum of color focality, and decreases as color focality moves toward the medium
region from either end. In addition, misrecognition error
distance for colors, in the general case, decreases as color
focality increases. We speculate that the subjects’ frequent
and conscious use of memorization strategies, especially the
strategy of encoding colors using linguistic color categories,
played an important role in the formation of focality effect
patterns. The interstudy agreement on the recordings of memorization strategies suggests that the employment of linguistic categorical coding is possibly universal across languages.
For this reason, and also owing to its likely high intralanguage consistency, we expect that the focality effect pattern

for correct recognition possibility that we detected can also
be found in other languages. Empirical evidence for more
languages is needed to evaluate this hypothesis. In addition,
it is also interesting to see whether this focality effect pattern
can also be found in the categories of other domains. These
domains can be simple perceptual categories such as shapes
and phonemes, complicated multimodal concepts such as animals and tools, or even emotionally or socially meaningful
signals such as human facial expressions.

References
Berlin, B., & Kay, P. (1991). Basic color terms: their universality and evolution. Oakland, California: University of
California Press.
Brown, R. W., & Lenneberg, E. H. (1954). A study in language and cognition. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 49(3), 454–462.
Everett, D. (2005). Cultural constraints on grammar and
cognition in Piraha: another look at the design features of
human language. Current Anthropology, 46(4), 621–646.
Garro, L. C. (1986). Language, memory, and focality: a
reexamination. American Anthropologist, 88(1), 128–136.
Heider, E. R. (1972). Universals in color naming and memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 93(1), 10–20.
Lucy, J. A., & Shweder, R. A. (1979). Whorf and his critics: linguistic and nonlinguistic influences on color memory. American Anthropologist, 81(3), 581–615.
Lucy, J. A., & Shweder, R. A. (1988). The effect of incidental conversation on memory for focal colors. American
Anthropologist, 90(4), 923–931.
Munsell, A. H. (1919). A color notation. New York: Munsell
Color Company.
Newhall, S. M., Nickerson, D., & Judd, D. B. (1943). Final report of the OSA subcommittee on the spacing of the
Munsell colors*. Journal of the Optical Society of America,
33(7), 385–418.
Regier, T., Kay, P., & Khetarpal, N. (2009). Color naming
and the shape of color space. Language, 85(4), 884–892.
Roberson, D., Davies, I. R. L., & Davidoff, J. (2000). Color
categories are not universal: replications and new evidence
from a stone-age culture. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 129(3), 369–398.
Roberson, D., J. Davidoff, I. R. L. D., & Shapiro, L. R.
(2005). Color categories: evidence for the cultural relativity hypothesis. Cognitive Psychology, 50(4), 378–411.
Rosch, E. H. (1973). Natural categories. Cognitive Psychology, 4(3), 328–350.
Uchikawa, K., & Boynton, R. M. (1987). Categorical color
perception of Japanese observers: comparison with that of
Americans. Vision Research, 27(10), 1825–1833.
Wierzbicka, A. (2008). Why there are no ’colour universals’
in language and thought. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 14(2), 407–425.

1990

