Exploring the decision dynamics of risky intertemporal choice
Emmanouil Konstantinidis (em.konstantinidis@gmail.com)1 ,
Don van Ravenzwaaij (d.van.ravenzwaaij@rug.nl)2 ,
& Ben R. Newell (ben.newell@unsw.edu.au)1
1 School

of Psychology, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
of Psychology, University of Groningen, 9712 TS Groningen, The Netherlands

2 Department

Abstract

putational models and offer testable predictions regarding the
choice process.
The experimental results relating to path dependency and
sequential evaluation are not readily explained by traditional
expected discounted utility models. These models focus on
predicting choice outcomes (descriptive as-if models), hence
arguably not accounting for the underlying psychological
processes that are responsible for choice behavior, or simplifying strategies (e.g., heuristics) that people may employ
in their decision-making. For instance, some expected utility models assume that people integrate probability and delay information into a common metric of psychological distance (e.g., Baucells & Heukamp, 2012; Vanderveldt, Green,
& Myerson, 2015). However, Öncüler and Onay (2009) observed in their process data that this strategy was not favored
(i.e., transitions between probability and delay information
were the least frequent), thus rendering the “common psychological distance” account less likely among competing explanations.
The main purpose of the current work is to extend Öncüler
and Onay’s (2009) investigation from a pricing task, in which
participants had to indicate the present certainty equivalent
or pCE of a risky delayed prospect (the minimum amount of
money that one is willing to accept instead of a delayed gamble) to a choice task in which participants choose between
two risky delayed prospects. We then examine the predictions for path dependency and sequential evaluation in both
tasks. This comparison allows us to ask whether choice is
also characterized by path dependency and whether the characteristics of this dependency are similar between choice and
pricing. The identification of such characteristics and processing strategies can also inform the development of models that rely on psychologically plausible accounts of choice
behavior (i.e., psychological process models). Such models
have become increasingly popular in many areas of decisionmaking (e.g., Koop & Johnson, 2013), and often assume that
decision-making follows simple rules of information processing, such as dimension-wise evaluation, sequential processing, and partial integration of available information (see e.g.,
Brandstätter, Gigerenzer, & Hertwig, 2006).

Previous research on the effects of probability and delay on
decision-making has focused on examining each dimension
separately, and hence little is known about when these dimensions are combined into a single choice option. Importantly,
we know little about the psychological processes underlying
choice behavior with rewards that are both delayed and probabilistic. Using a process-tracing experimental design, we monitored information acquisition patterns and processing strategies. We found that probability and delay are processed sequentially and evaluations of risky delayed prospects are dependent on the sequence of information acquisition. Among
choice strategies, directly comparing the values of each dimension (i.e., dimension-wise processing) appears to be most favored by participants. Our results provide insights into the psychological plausibility of existing computational models and
make suggestions for the development of a process model for
risky intertemporal choice.
Keywords: Risky Intertemporal Choice; Process Tracing;
Path Dependency; Sequential Processing; Decision Strategies

Introduction
While research on risky choice and intertemporal choice have
separately provided significant insights into the effects of
probability and delay, decisions which involve both elements
have received less scrutiny. Two unresolved questions are
whether probability and delay are processed sequentially (and
if yes, which dimension is considered first), and whether evaluation of risky delayed prospects is path dependent. Öncüler
and Onay (2009) found that the order in which participants
processed risky delayed prospects affected the final evaluations of these prospects. Using a process-tracing design, they
found that amount-related (i.e., money) information was acquired first most often, followed by information about delay
and then probability. Interestingly, when participants were required to process delay first, they provided higher evaluations
of the same prospect compared to when they processed probability first, supporting the view of path dependency in risky
intertemporal choice.
Despite being central to the characterization of choice behavior, no other studies have utilized process-tracing methods in the domain of risky intertemporal choice. Processtracing methods can provide insightful observations about the
processes that take place before the actual decision, such as
search, integration, and processing of available information
(e.g., Reisen, Hoffrage, & Mast, 2008). In risky intertemporal
choice they can provide information about the order in which
participants integrate amount, delay, and probability information as well as choice strategies adopted. Accordingly, process data can set the foundations for the development of com-

Method
Participants
We tested a total of 63 undergraduate students (42 female;
Age: M = 19.02, SD = 1.56) at the University of New South
Wales who participated in return for course credit.

694

A

Amount

Probability

Delay

B

Amount

Probability

Delay

13

120
Amount

pCE:

Probability

Option 1

Delay

Option 2
Figure 1: Schematic representation of the experimental design in the pricing (A) and choice (B) tasks. In the pricing task,
participants could open as many boxes as they wanted before they gave the pCE of the delayed lottery. There was no limit about
the time inspecting a box. The position of each dimension on the screen (Amount, Probability, and Delay) was randomized
across trials. The association between colored boxes and dimensions remained invariant throughout each experimental session
but was randomized across participants. The design was identical in the choice task and participants had to choose between two
delayed lotteries. In this screenshot, the mouse opens an Amount box in the pricing task (i.e., $120) and a Delay box of Option
1 in the choice task (i.e., 13 months).

Task and design

participants could familiarize themselves with the processtracing character of the task. For the pricing task, there was
a box where they could type in their evaluation (Figure 1A).
For the choice task, they were told that the task is exactly the
same as before, with the only differences being that there was
an extra option on the screen and they had to choose between
the two, by clicking on the corresponding option label (Figure
1B).

We used a process-tracing design (i.e., similar to a MouseLab
information board; see Payne, Bettman, & Johnson, 1993)
to monitor information acquisition strategies and processing
steps. The experiment consisted of two parts: the first part
was a pricing task, where participants had to indicate the pCE
of 68 delayed lotteries (presented sequentially and in random
order). For each delayed lottery, there were 3 colored boxes in
the center of the screen, each containing the numerical value
of each lottery’s dimensions: Amount of money (in $), Probability (in %), and Delay (in months; see Figure 1A). However,
this information was hidden and revealed only upon clicking
on each corresponding box. When participants clicked on a
box, it stayed active (i.e., showing its value) as long as the
mouse cursor was within the borders of the box. When they
moved the mouse out of the box, it returned to its default state
(i.e., hidden). There was no limit in the amount of clicks or
the time inspecting a box. In addition, participants could return to an already seen box if they wanted to. The position of
each box was randomized across trials.
The second part was a choice task (Figure 1B), which always followed the pricing task and involved a choice between
two delayed lotteries. Unbeknownst to the participants, the
choice dyads were formed using pairs of prospects from the
pricing task (34 choice pairs from 68 delayed lotteries). The
procedure of acquiring information about each delayed lottery was identical to the pricing task.

Results
Pricing Task
All participants completed the experiment. We excluded
one participant because they never acquired probability and
delay-related information. Our initial objective was to explore the basic properties of information acquisition in the
pricing task (see Figure 2): the frequency that each dimension was inspected, the frequency that each dimension was
inspected first (i.e., at the beginning of each trial), last (i.e.,
before participants provided the pCE value), and intermediate (i.e., excluding first and last inspection items), and the
mean inspection time for each dimension. For the analysis
of frequency data, we used a linear multilevel model with dimension as fixed-effect and random intercepts for each participant. We applied a square root transformation for the
frequency data.1 As Figure 2A suggests, participants acquired more amount-related information, followed by probability and delay, and this pattern was present in all categories
of interest (All: χ2 (2) = 269.07, p < .001; First: χ2 (2) =
60.67, p < .001; Intermediate: χ2 (2) = 77.69, p < .001; Last:

Procedure
Participants sat in front of a computer screen and were given
instructions about the task (e.g., details about the information acquisition in the pricing task and what pCE represents).
There was also a practice stage prior to the main task where

1 This analysis is equivalent to a chi-squared test of independence, but it accounts for individual heterogeneity in the data (see
Willemsen & Johnson, 2011).

695

χ2 (2) = 96.18, p < .001).2 The same pattern is observed in
the mean inspection time (Figure 2B): participants spent more
time looking at amount information, followed by probability
and delay (χ2 (2) = 67.20, p < .001; significant differences
between each dimension). Also, the relative preference for
inspecting each dimension does not seem to change over time
as can be seen in Figure 2C: block × dimension interaction,
χ2 (6) = 1.19, p = 0.98.

Proportion

0.6

A

Amount

Probability

suggests that participants are not attempting to create a common metric of psychological distance by integrating these two
dimensions (cf. Öncüler & Onay, 2009).
Table 1: Transitions between dimensions in Experiment 1.
The ↔ symbol indicates all transitions from one dimension
to the other.

Delay

0.5
0.4

Transition

All: N

All: %

First: %

Last: %

Amount ↔ Probability
Delay ↔ Amount
Delay ↔ Probability

8,834
5,117
4,335

0.46
0.27
0.23

0.47
0.28
0.22

0.50
0.27
0.19

Note: Relative frequencies do not add up to 1 because transitions
between the same dimension (e.g., Amount ↔ Amount) are not included in the table.

0.3
0.2
0.1

1000
750
500
250
0

All

First

B

Mean Number of Open Boxes

Inspection Time (in ms)

0.0

Intermediate

●

40

●

●

25
20

C
●

35 ●
30

We then explored the concept of path dependency as suggested by Öncüler and Onay (2009) by comparing the final evaluations of lotteries when Amount ↔ Probability or
Amount ↔ Delay was the first occurring transition. Öncüler
and Onay found that when participants followed the Amount
↔ Delay path they gave higher evaluations of the same
prospect compared to the Amount ↔ Probability path. Our
results replicate this effect: when examination of delay preceded that of probability, participants gave higher evaluations
for the majority of trials (70%). However, it is not clear how
subsequent transitions in our experiment might have affected
the final evaluation of the prospect. We try to address this
issue along with the issue of imbalance in transitions (which
emerges due to the higher frequency of Amount ↔ Probability transitions) in a following experiment.

Last

●

●

●

●

2

3

●

●

1

●
4

Block

Figure 2: Graphical representation of information acquisition in the pricing task: A) Relative frequencies of opened
boxes of each dimension (All: Overall; First & Last: First and
Last boxes opened in a trial; Intermediate: Excluding First
and Last boxes). B) Mean inspection time for each dimension. C) Pattern of acquisition items across blocks of trials
(17 trials/lotteries each).

Choice Task
Figure 3 presents information acquisition for each dimension
in the choice task, aggregated across the two choice options.
The pattern of results looks similar to the pricing task with
a few exceptions: First, looking at the overall trend of dimension inspection, there is no difference between amount
and probability (Figure 3A; b = −0.01,t = −0.84, p = .40),
but both differ with respect to delay (pairwise contrasts, p <
.001). A similar pattern is observed in the intermediate inspection items (no difference between amount and probability, b = 0.07,t = 0.34, p = .73, but they both differ from delay, p < .001). This presents a difference between the two
methods of preference elicitation, indicating that in a choice
setting amount and probability may have the same degree of
influence on choice. As in the pricing task, the first dimension considered followed the amount > probability > delay
scheme, χ2 (2) = 37.23, p < .001, but there was no difference between dimensions regarding the last information item,
χ2 (2) = 2.68, p = .26. The mean time spent at each dimension (Figure 3B) was not different between amount and probability (p = .95), but both were higher than delay (p < .001).
Regarding selection of each dimension across time, Figure
3C suggests that it does not change between the two halves of
the choice task, χ2 (2) = 2.67, p < .001.

The next step in our analysis was to inspect transitions between consecutive (n ↔ n + 1) information items. This analysis can provide us with information about the sequential nature of risky intertemporal choice. For example, based on
the adjacency principle (“information used in temporal proximity should be acquired in close proximity”; see Johnson,
Schulte-Mecklenbeck, & Willemsen, 2008, p. 264), if the
Amount ↔ Probability transition occurs more often and temporally precedes the Amount ↔ Delay transition, it means
that participants pay more attention to the amount and probability aspects of the prospect and probability discounting (or
processing of probability) occurs prior to delay discounting
(or processing of delay). Table 1 suggests that the Amount
↔ Probability transition not only occurs more often than any
other transition (All column), but it seems to precede any
other transition (First column), and be considered more often
before the final evaluation of the lottery (Last column). The
relatively low proportion of Delay ↔ Probability transitions
2 All

pairwise contrasts were significant, p < .05, apart from the
contrast between probability and delay regarding the last item, and
the contrast between amount and probability regarding intermediate
items.

696

0.6
Proportion

0.5

Amount

A

Probability

roughly equal use of both strategies.

Delay

Table 2: Categories of transitions in the choice task. Arrows
indicate the direction of the transition within the information
board (see Figure 1B).

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

500
400
300
200
100
0

Transition
All

First

B

Mean Number of Open Boxes

Inspection Time (in ms)

0.0

Intermediate

●
●

Dimension
Alternative
Diagonal
Same

C

60

50

Last

●
●
●

40

All: %

First: %

Last: %

7,115
8,072
3,117
146

0.39
0.44
0.17
0.01

0.58
0.39
0
0.02

0.54
0.39
0.07
0.01

However, Böckenholt and Hynan (1994) argued that the
SI is a biased measure of strategy use when there is a different number of alternatives and dimensions. Specifically,
if the number of dimensions is larger than the number of the
alternatives3 , then a positive SI is to be expected, indicating
more alternative-wise processing. Böckenholt and Hynan developed an index (strategy measure; SM) which takes into
account all possible transitions (e.g., including Diagonal and
Same in Table 2):
√
N[( AD )(ra − rd ) − (D − A)]
(1)
SM = p N
A2 (D − 1) + D2 (A − 1)

●
1

↑↓

.
%
–

All: N

2
Block

Figure 3: Graphical representation of information acquisition in the choice task, aggregated across the two options:
A) Relative frequencies of opened boxes of each dimension
(All: Overall; First & Last: First and Last boxes opened in a
trial; Intermediate: Excluding first and last). B) Mean inspection time for each dimension. C) Pattern of acquisition items
across blocks of trials (17 trials/choices each).

where N is the total number of all types of transitions, A is the
number of alternatives, D is the number of dimensions, and ra
and rd denote frequency for alternative-wise and dimensionwise transitions, respectively. As with the SI, negative values
of the SM indicate more dimension-wise processing, as can
be seen in Figure 4. Specifically, dimension-wise processing
becomes more prevalent as time progresses, as indicated by
the linear decrease of the SM value.

Next, we examined transitions between consecutive information items (n ↔ n + 1) which are informative of the
strategies that participants use. Assuming a 2 × 3 information board/grid where rows represent choice alternatives and
columns dimensions (as in Figure 1B), transitions between
items can be categorized as dimension-wise (or intradimensional: when the transition examines the same dimension between the two choice options, e.g., Amount in Option 1 ↔
Amount in Option 2), alternative-wise (or interdimensional:
when the transition moves between different dimensions of
the same option, e.g., Amount in Option 1 ↔ Delay in Option 1), diagonal (i.e., when the transition moves from one
dimension of one option to a different dimension of the other
option, e.g., Probability in Option 2 ↔ Delay in Option 1),
and same (i.e., two consecutive inspections of the same dimension in the same option, e.g., Probability in Option 1 ↔
Probability in Option 1). Table 2 presents the frequency of
each of the categories of transitions in the choice task: a first
inspection of all transitions (All column) suggests that participants equally combined dimension and alternative-wise
strategies. One of the most commonly used strategy indices
(SI; Payne, 1976) suggests that participants equally used both
strategies to make decisions. The SI is a ratio of the difference between alternative and dimension-wise transitions and
it is defined as SI = (ra − rd )/(ra + rd ), where ra is the total
number of alternative-wise transitions and rd is the total number of dimension-wise transitions. It ranges between −1 to
+1, with negative numbers suggesting more dimension-wise
processing and positive numbers suggesting more alternativewise processing. For our data, the SI equaled 0.06, indicating

1.0

Mean SM

0.5
0.0
−0.5
−1.0
0

10

20

30

Trial

Figure 4: Strategy measure (SM) averaged across participants for each trial/choice of the task.

Experiment 1B: Constrained sequential search
Method The purpose of this experiment was to examine in
detail the effect of path dependency observed in the pricing
task. Participants (N = 40, Mage = 19.08) provided the pCE
of risky delayed prospects sequentially (i.e., in two stages;
3 This is the case in our experiment. In fact, it is twice as likely
for an alternative-wise transition to occur (6 transitions) compared
to a dimension-wise (3 transitions).

697

see also upper panel in Figure 6): in the first stage, they could
see either probability or delay (amount was always visible on
the screen), and give the present value of the prospect (if delay was presented first), or the certainty equivalent value (if
probability was presented first). The value they provided in
the first stage appeared in the second stage along with the
numerical value of the unseen dimension, and participants
had to provide a second and final value for the prospect. We
manipulated (three experimental parts) the way that participants acquired probability and delay-related information: a)
a free search part where participants could select to see either
probability or delay in the first stage, and b) two constrained
search parts where either probability or delay was presented
to participants first. Hence, participants were presented with
the same risky delayed prospect three times.

with delay information first (see also the table in the upper
panel). Even though Figure 6 essentially ignores interactions
between each dimension and collapses across all amount,
probability, and delay values, it shows some interesting patterns. First, as the probability in a prospect increases, the
proportion of participants who gave a higher evaluation when
they were presented with probability first increases, as shown
by a multilevel logit regression with probability as fixed effect and participant-specific random intercepts (standardized
b = 0.40, z = 4.44, p < .001). Second, there is a similar trend
in the delay panel (as temporal distance increases, the proportion of participants that gave a higher evaluation of the
same gamble when they were presented with probability first
increases) but it is not as pronounced as in the probability
panel (standardized b = 0.24, z = 2.70, p = .007). Interestingly, this pattern seems to apply to small values of probability and delay, as when we constrain our analysis in the upper
half of both scales (i.e., 50% to 90% for probability; 16 to 24
months for delay) the effect disappears (both multilevel logit
regressions, p > .05). Overall, our results replicate the path
dependency patterns in Öncüler and Onay (2009) and suggest that path dependency is not stable, but is moderated by
the numerical values of each dimension.

Results We first examined search patterns in the free search
part of the experiment: we found that in 68.50% of all trials,
participants chose to see probability first, replicating the effect we observed in the pricing and choice tasks, that is a preference for inspecting and integrating probability information
before delay information. We also examined search patterns
as a function of the amount offered (amount was always visible on the screen). Figure 5 presents an interesting pattern:
participants’ tendency to inspect the probability dimension
first increases as amount increases. Despite the overall preference for acquiring probability first (even in the lowest amount
category, [50, 175), it is 64.38%) the difference between the
lowest and highest amount categories is about 10% (74.16%
in the last category).

Probability First
Stage 1
Stage 2

Proportion

0.8

Proportion

0.8
●

0.7
●

●

●

●

$450
XPF

2%→
21 M →

Delay First

XPF
YPF

$450
XDF

21 M →
2%→

XDF
YDF

A
●

●

0.6
0.4

>

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

0.2

0.6

2

9

12

18

20

45

50

55

75

85

90

Probability (in %)

0.5
0.8

[50, 175)

Proportion

0.4
[175, 325) [325, 400) [400,1500) [1500,3500]

Amount ($)

Figure 5: Proportion of trials in which participants chose to
see probability first as a function of Amount (in $; binned in
five equal categories).

B
●

0.6

●

●

0.4

●

●

●

16

18

20

●

●

●
●

0.2
4

6

8

12

15

21

24

Delay (in months)

Figure 6: Upper panel: Representation of the task (M:
Months). Lower panel: Proportion of participants who gave a
higher final pCE (i.e., YPF > YDF ) for the same gamble when
they were presented with information about probability first
across Probability (A) and Delay levels (B).

Regarding path dependency, we examined the final pCEs
in the constrained search parts of the task. Figure 6 shows
the proportion of participants that gave a higher final evaluation when they were constrained to inspect probability first
(as compared to delay first) as a function of the numerical
values of each gamble’s probability (lower panel A) and delay (lower panel B). For example, the leftmost data-point in
Figure 6A indicates that for the same risky delayed prospect
(which has a probability of 2%) about 40% of all participants gave a higher final pCE when they were presented with
probability information first than when they were presented

Discussion
We set out to uncover the strategies and information acquisition patterns that people use when they evaluate and make
decisions about risky delayed prospects. Using three differ-

698

ent process-tracing tasks to elicit preferences, we observed
systematic patterns relating to search, integration, processing,
and strategy-use. First, participants acquired more amountrelated information, followed by probability and delay in the
pricing task, whereas in the choice task amount and probability appeared to have the same degree of influence on determining choice. Our results are in accordance with recent
studies in intertemporal risky choice which found that probability might play a more important role than delay (e.g., Konstantinidis, van Ravenzwaaij, Güney, & Newell, 2017; Vanderveldt et al., 2015), but are at odds with Öncüler and Onay
(2009) who found that participants preferred to acquire delay information before and more frequently than probability
information.
Second, Amount ↔ Probability transitions were more frequent and preceded any other transition in the pricing task.
This pattern of results suggests that evaluation of risky delayed prospects is subject to sequential processing. Also, the
integration of probability and delay into a common psychological distance measure seems less likely as the Probability
↔ Delay transition occurs less frequently and temporally follows other types of transitions.
Third, regarding path dependency and sequential processing, our constrained search experiment revealed that the final
evaluation of risky delayed prospects is not only dependent
on the path taken (i.e., integrating probability information before delay information, and vice-versa), but on the numerical
values of each dimension. For example, when participants
were first presented with low probability values, they largely
discounted the final value of the same prospect as compared
to when they saw delay-related information first about the
same prospect. We found that the effect of path dependency
observed in Öncüler and Onay (2009), that is, the Delay →
Probability path generating higher values than the Probability
→ Delay path, is only observed with small probabilities.
Fourth, examination of transitions in the choice task reveals
that participants employ dimension-wise strategies more frequently than alternative-wise strategies to make decisions in
risky intertemporal choice settings. Even though there was no
reliable difference between dimension and alternative-wise
processing regarding the total number of transitions, taking
into account different measures of strategy use (e.g., search
indices, overall, first and last inspection items, and transitions between items), we found that dimension-wise processing may be more prevalent among participants, supporting recent studies which found that dimension-wise models in the
domains of risky choice and intertemporal choice outperform
their alternative-wise counterparts (e.g., Dai & Busemeyer,
2014).
Lastly, even though individual information acquisition patterns might reflect noisy and idiosyncratic use of strategies,
we identified systematic processing strategies and information acquisition patterns that a process model (or any other
type of model) in the field of risky intertemporal choice
should take into account. Our results also provide testable

grounds for psychological assumptions in models of risky intertemporal choice: we found little evidence that participants
treat probability and delay as representing a common factor
of psychological distance, or that probability can be translated
into delay, and vice-versa.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by an Australian Research
Council Discovery Project Grant (DP140101145). We thank
Emma Williams and Dominic Tran for their help in collecting
the data, and Ashley Luckman for helpful discussions.

References
Baucells, M., & Heukamp, F. H. (2012). Probability and time
trade-off. Management Science, 58, 831–842.
Böckenholt, U., & Hynan, L. S. (1994). Caveats on a processtracing measure and a remedy. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 7, 103–117.
Brandstätter, E., Gigerenzer, G., & Hertwig, R. (2006). The
priority heuristic: Making choices without trade-offs. Psychological Review, 113, 409–432.
Dai, J., & Busemeyer, J. R. (2014). A probabilistic, dynamic,
and attribute-wise model of intertemporal choice. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 143, 1489–1514.
Johnson, E. J., Schulte-Mecklenbeck, M., & Willemsen,
M. C. (2008). Process models deserve process data: Comment on Brandstätter, Gigerenzer, and Hertwig (2006).
Psychological Review, 115, 263–272.
Konstantinidis, E., van Ravenzwaaij, D., Güney, S., &
Newell, B. R. (2017). Now for sure or later with a risk?
Modeling risky inter-temporal choice as accumulated preference. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Koop, G. J., & Johnson, J. G. (2013). The response dynamics of preferential choice. Cognitive Psychology, 67,
151–185.
Öncüler, A., & Onay, S. (2009). How do we evaluate future
gambles? Experimental evidence on path dependency in
risky intertemporal choice. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 22, 280–300.
Payne, J. W. (1976). Task complexity and contingent processing in decision making: An information search and protocol analysis. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 16, 366–387.
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1993). The
adaptive decision maker. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Reisen, N., Hoffrage, U., & Mast, F. W. (2008). Identifying
decision strategies in a consumer choice situation. Judgment and Decision Making, 3, 641–658.
Vanderveldt, A., Green, L., & Myerson, J. (2015). Discounting of monetary rewards that are both delayed and
probabilistic: Delay and probability combine multiplicatively, not additively. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 41, 148–162.
Willemsen, M. C., & Johnson, E. J. (2011). Visiting the decision factory: Observing cognition with MouselabWEB
and other information acquisition methods. In M. SchulteMecklenbeck, A. Kühberger, & R. Ranyard (Eds.), A handbook of process tracing methods for decision research (pp.
21–42). New York, NY: Psychology Press.

699

