Exploring the relations between oral language and reading instruction in a
computational model of reading
Ya-Ning Chang (y.chang5@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University, Lancaster, LA1 4YF, UK

J. S. H. Taylor (joanne.taylor@rhul.ac.uk)
Kathleen Rastle (kathy.rastle@rhul.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Royal Holloway, University of London, TW20 0EX, UK

Padraic Monaghan (p.monaghan@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University, Lancaster, LA1 4YF, UK
Abstract
To become a proficient reader, children have to learn
mappings between print, sound and meaning. There is
debate over whether reading instruction should focus on the
relations between print and sound, as in phonics, or on the
relationship between print and meaning, as in sight word
reading. In a study where participants learned a novel
artificial orthography, Taylor, Davis and Rastle (2017)
compared print to sound focused or print to meaning
focused reading training, demonstrating that sound training
was superior for learning to read. However, a benefit from
sound focused training is likely dependent on prior
acquisition of effective sound to meaning relations of words.
To explore this issue, we developed a connectionist model
of reading. We exposed the model to a sound or a meaning
focused training, but varied the model’s pre-acquired oral
language skills. The simulation results showed that
proficiency in oral language is a determinant of the
advantage of print to sound focused reading training,
suggesting that reading training should address both oral
language skills and print to sound mappings.
Keywords: reading instruction; oral language; reading
development; computational modelling; word learning.

Introduction
Learning to read requires mastery of a set of complex
skills involving encoding phonology (P), semantics (S), and
learning to map orthographic (O) forms onto those
representations of sound and meaning. Even for alphabetic
orthographies, where a letter, or set of letters, corresponds
approximately regularly to a phoneme in the word, learning
to read is effortful and frequently fraught with difficulties
(Seidenberg, 2017). Effective early reading instruction is
therefore critical to help children become proficient readers.
There has been a vigorous debate over whether reading
instruction should focus on the relations between print and
sound or on the relationship between print and meaning. The
former is typically characterized by phonics-style training,
where the phonemes associated with particular letters or
letter clusters are trained intensively, enabling children to
decode letter-by-letter. The latter is often referred to as
meaning-focused or whole-word language instruction,
where the meaning and pronunciation of the whole word is
provided to the child during training.

Proponents of the phonics method argue that reading
instruction should focus on learning spelling-to-sound
mappings because exploiting the systematicity of alphabetic
writing systems ought to be substantially easier than
acquiring more arbitrary spelling-to-meaning mappings,
where the arbitrariness of the sign is dominant and learning
can only be accomplished word by word, without the benefit
of generalising from one learned word to the next. Evidence
for the strong predictive relation between phonological
decoding skills and reading acquisition (see, e.g., Rayner et
al., 2001, for a review) demonstrates that phonological skills
are key to reading success.
Alternatively, researchers who advocate the meaningfocused method (see, e.g., Davis, 2013, for a review) argue
that the primary goal of reading is to access the meanings of
words and so this ought to be the priority of reading training
approaches. Although spelling-to-meaning mappings are
hard to learn, they may still be acquired early in reading
development (Nation, 2009; Taylor et al., 2015). For
example, Nation and Cocksey (2009) demonstrated that 7year-old children could access semantic categories of words
from orthography very quickly without evidence that the
phonological form of the words mediated responses.

Effectiveness of sound-focused and meaningfocused reading instruction
According to the Simple View of reading (Gough &
Tunmer, 1986), reading comprehension is the product of
phonological decoding and oral vocabulary. During reading
training, learners acquire mappings from print to sound, and
access meaning based on their knowledge of sound-tomeaning mappings acquired pre-literacy. There is some
evidence that both print to sound mapping skills (as indexed
by pseudoword reading tasks) as well as sound to meaning
mapping skills (as reflected in oral vocabulary tasks) are
predictors of silent reading comprehension performance
(e.g., Curtis, 1980; Nation & Snowling, 2004; Ouellette &
Beers, 2010; Ricketts, Nation, & Bishop, 2007). However,
the Simple View of reading does not consider an alternative,
which involves the role of accessing meaning directly from
print (Taylor et al., 2015).
Within the connectionist view of reading (Seidenberg &
McClelland, 1989; Harm & Seidenberg, 2004; Plaut et al.

1740

1996), learning to acquire the meaning of written forms of
words could be via developing direct orthographic to
semantic mappings. Alternatively, acquisition could be
indirect, through the learner developing orthographic to
phonological mappings, which then map, via oral language
knowledge, onto semantic representations. Computational
modelling investigations have established that there is
division of labour along these direct and indirect pathways
from orthography to semantics over development (Harm &
Seidenberg, 2004; Plaut et al. 1996). However, comparisons
between reading training that focuses on developing the
direct orthographic-to-semantic, versus the indirect
orthographic-to-phonological, pathways have not as yet
been undertaken.
One exception to this is a recent study by Taylor, Davis
and Rastle (2017). In a laboratory study using adults, Taylor
et al. compared reading acquisition when training was
biased toward orthography-to-semantics (OS) mappings
versus orthography-to-phonology (OP) mappings. They
trained literate adult participants to read two sets of 24 novel
words which were written in two different unfamiliar
alphabetic orthographies (in each orthography, one character
related to one phoneme) – see Figure 1. Each novel word
was assigned a familiar concrete noun meaning (e.g., /gɛd/
referred to camel, and /kɛs/ referred to parsnip), and the
mappings between novel words and their referents were
counterbalanced across participants).

Figure 1. /gɛd/ and /kɛs/ in the artificial orthography from
Taylor et al. (2017).
Prior to reading training, participants were exposed to the
mappings between phonology and semantics for the novel
words. Then, participants learned orthographic-tophonological and orthographic-to-semantic mappings for
both orthographies. For one orthography, participants
received OP focused training, which involved three times as
many orthographic-to-phonological training trials as
orthographic-to-semantic training trials, whereas for the
other orthography they received OS focused training, which
involved three times as many orthographic-to-semantic as
orthographic-to-phonological training trials. The results
demonstrated that OP focused training led to better accuracy
and speed in reading aloud, and it also had a transferable
benefit to reading comprehension. By contrast, OS focused
training resulted in faster but not more accurate reading
comprehension, and showed no transferable benefit for the
reading aloud task.
Taylor et al. (2017) demonstrated that both reading aloud
and reading comprehension accuracy could be promoted by
focusing on OP mappings during reading training. However,
unlike children learning to read for the first time,
participants were acquiring an orthography which very
likely piggy-backs on the reading system that the
participants already have. Thus, an outstanding question is
the extent to which prior language skills, particularly

between phonology and semantics, are critical to the OP
versus OS focused reading training differences.
Furthermore, a key aspect of Taylor et al.’s (2017) study
design was that participants were pre-trained on mappings
between phonological and semantic forms for the novel
words. This previously tuned phonology-semantics system
is crucial to allow the transference of knowledge from
training on OP mappings to access meaning from print,
since this requires using not only the OP but also the PS
routes within the reading system.
According to the connectionist view of reading, then,
phonics instruction will be most successful if the participant
has acquired an effective level of oral language knowledge.
Thus, in relating the laboratory-based studies of reading
acquisition to the child’s task of learning to read, the relative
contribution of training from OP and OS on reading
acquisition needs to be considered alongside the
contribution of pre-literate oral language skills.

Computational models of reading
Computational models of reading have converged on an
architecture involving two different pathways that are active
during reading – a subword orthographic to phonological
pathway and an orthographic whole word pathway, which
may map onto a whole-word phonological representation
and/or a semantic representation of the word (Coltheart et al.
2001; Plaut et al. 1996). There are also mappings between
phonological and semantic representations, meaning that
words can be comprehended both by direct OS mappings,
and also indirectly via OP then PS mappings.
In the
connectionist tradition, the relative contribution for
generating phonology or semantics via different reading
pathways is flexible, and can be determined by properties of
individual words, such as high-frequency words more likely
to be read via direct OS mappings, or due to properties of
the orthographic system itself, such as ideographic writing
systems more likely to utilize the direct OS mappings than
alphabetic writing systems (Chang, Welbourne & Lee, 2016;
Harm & Seidenberg, 2004; Plaut et al. 1996).
In this study, we implemented the two reading schemes
tested in Taylor et al.’s (2017) study, in order to determine
whether the connectionist triangle model of reading is able
to replicate the behavioural effects of an OP focused versus
an OS focused training regime. Furthermore, we examined
whether the advantage for the OP focused training
demonstrated in Taylor et al.’s (2017) study was present
even for the model with poor oral language skills, or only
when well-established mappings between phonological and
semantic representations were in place. Tracking the relative
benefit of OP and OS focused training according to preliterate oral language skills enables greater clarity on how
different reading training schemes may benefit readers with
varying language abilities.
Following Harm and Seidenberg (2004), we developed a
fully implemented connectionist model of learning to read,
that mapped between representations of orthography,
phonology, and semantics of words. The model was

1741

pretrained to different degrees of proficiency in mapping
between phonological and semantic representations of
words, to simulate pre-literate oral language skills. We
tested three different quantities of pre-training to reflect a
model with moderate, medium, and high levels of oral
language skills, in terms of the overall fidelity of
phonological and semantic representations within the model,
and the proportion of words in the language for which the
model was able to generate the correct semantic and
phonological representations. We then compared the effects
of two reading training regimes with different focuses of
reading instruction – orthography to phonology (OP)
focused model or orthography to semantics (OS) focused
model. Prior to learning to read, both models received three
different amounts of pretraining (i.e. 500, 1000, or 2000
epochs) on mappings between semantics and phonology.
The OP focused model then received three times as much
training on the OP mappings, while the OS focused model
received three times as much training on the OS mappings.
We evaluated the model’s performance under these different
training regimes using tasks of reading aloud and reading
comprehension.

!

Semantics
(2446)

!

Hidden
(300)

!

Phonology
(200)

Attractor
(50)

!

Hidden
(300)

Attractor
!
(50)

Hidden
(500)

Hidden
(500)

Orthography
(364)

Figure 2. The architecture of the developmental model of
reading.

Method
Network Architecture
The architecture of the model is shown in Figure 2, which
was the same as the developmental model of reading
implemented in Monaghan, Chang, Welbourne, and
Brysbaert et al. (2017) and Chang, Monaghan, and
Welbourne (2016). The model consisted of three key
processing layers representing orthographic, phonological
and semantic representations respectively, and four hidden
layers that learned to map between the processing layers. An
attractor layer, which contained 50 hidden units, was
connected to and from the phonological layers. Similarly,
there was a set of 50 hidden units for the semantic layer. The
use of attractors was to help the model to develop stable
phonological and semantic representations of words. The
semantic layer was connected to the phonological layer
through a set of 300 hidden units, and the phonological layer
was connected back to the semantic layer through another

set of 300 hidden units. The orthographic layer was
connected to both the phonological and semantic layers
through different sets of 500 hidden units.

Training Corpus: Artificial Words
The training corpus comprised 24 artificial words, taken
from the materials in Taylor et al. (2017). For the
phonological forms, all items were monosyllabic consonantvowel-consonant pseudowords. All items were constructed
from 12 consonants (/m/, /t/, /g/, /b/, /k/, /d/, /n/, /s/, /z/, /v/,
/p/, and, /f/) and four vowel phonemes (/ɛ/, /I/, /ɔ/, and, /ʌ/).
For phonology, each word was represented in the 3rd, 4th and
5th slots of a set of eight phoneme slots, with each slot
consisting of 25 phonological features. Each word was thus
positioned with its vowel at the fourth phoneme slot. The
first three slots were for onset consonants, and the last four
slots were for coda consonants, but because all words in the
set had one onset and one coda consonant, only one of these
slots was used during training (so for the word “tep” its
phonology was represented as _ _ t ɛ p _ _ _, where _
indicates an empty slot). For orthographic forms, the
correspondence between letters and phonemes was
transparent (i.e., there was a one-to-one correspondence).
For orthography, each word was represented across a layer
containing 14 letter slots with each slot comprising 26 units,
each of which could represent a distinct letter, so an
alphabet up to 26 letters could be represented. Words were
positioned with their vowel aligned on the fifth slot.
Consonants preceding the vowel were positioned in slots
right before the vowel and consonants following the vowel
were positioned starting from the seventh slot. This
representation was in alignment with Chang et al. (2016),
which enabled words up to 14 letters to be represented.
However, because all words were three letters in length,
with one onset and one coda consonant, words occupied
only the 4th, 5th, and 7th slots (so for the word “tep” its
orthography was represented as _ _ _ t e _ p _ _ _ _ _ _ _).
Note that we use here Roman alphabet as a short hand to
reflect the alphabet used in the laboratory-based study.
There is nothing particular in the representations used in the
model regarding the particular alphabet used, only that the
model is able to distinguish the letters from one another
from the outset, but does not know the properties of the
letters in other respects in advance of commencing training.
For semantics, a set of familiar objects consisting of six
fruits and vegetables, six vehicles, six animals, and six tools
were randomly assigned to the 24 artificial words. The
semantic representation for each word was derived from
Wordnet (Miller, 1990), following Harm and Seidenberg
(2004). Each semantic representation was composed of 2446
semantic features. The presence of semantic features was
encoded as 1 and the absence of semantic features was
encoded as 0 in the respective slot.

Training Procedure
The model was trained on the 24 artificial words. All the
training parameters were exactly the same as those used in

1742

our previous modelling work (Chang et al., 2016). The
training process had two phases: pretraining and reading
training. For the pretraining, the model learned to map from
phonological to semantic (PS) representations in an oral
vocabulary task and from semantic to phonological (SP)
representations in a meaning naming task (e.g. picture
naming). To investigate how oral language skills affected
literacy development, three different amounts of pretraining
were used – 500, 1000, or 2000 learning trials. For the oral
vocabulary (PS) task, the phonological representation of the
word was clamped at the phonological layer for eight time
steps, and the model generated a semantic representation at
the semantic layer. The difference between the actual and
the target semantic representation was then calculated, and
the weights on connections between all the layers were
adjusted according to gradient descent backpropagation
through time in order to reduce the error. The training rate
was 0.1. Similarly, for the meaning naming task (SP), the
semantic representation was clamped at the semantic layer
for eight time steps, and the model was required to produce
a phonological representation. In pretraining, the model
additionally learned to develop a stable phonological
attractor (PP), and a stable semantic attractor (SS), by
presenting the phonological or the semantic representation
for two time steps, then allowing the model to cycle
activation for a further six time steps to reproduce the initial
representation. During pretraining, these four tasks (PS, SP,
PP, and SS) were interleaved, with 40% of trials for the oral
vocabulary task, 40% of trials for the meaning naming task,
10% of trials for the phonological attractor and 10% for the
semantic attractor. For each trial, a word was randomly
selected.
After pretraining, the weights on connections between the
semantics and the phonology layers were frozen. The model
was then trained to learn to read with different focuses of
reading instruction, in two separate simulations as either the
OP focused or OS focused model. For the OP focused
model, there were three OP trials for every OS trial, and for
the OS focused model the reverse was true. For an OP trial,
the model’s error at the phonological layer at the final time
step was computed and then backpropagation with gradient
descent adjusted the weights to reduce this error. For an OS
trial, error was propagated from the semantic representation.
Each model was trained for 1000 reading trials. For each
reading learning trial, a word was randomly selected and
presented at the orthographic layer for 12 time steps. Five
versions of each model were trained with different random
initial weights and different random samplings from the
words.

Testing Procedure
For testing the model’s phonological output, we
determined the number of words for which all phonemes
were correctly produced. The closest phoneme
representation from the set of all phonemes in the language
was derived from the model’s actual production and this was
then compared against the target phoneme. If the actual and

target phonemes were the same, then the model was judged
to have spoken the word correctly. For testing the model’s
semantic output, the activation of units at the semantic layer
was recorded. Accuracy was measured by computing the
Euclidean distance between the model’s actual semantic
representation and the semantic representation of each word
in the training corpus. If the smallest distance was for the
target representation then the model was judged to be
correct. We examined how the different training focuses
affected reading performance at various stages during
training.

Results
Network Performance
For the pretraining tasks, the model that was trained with
500, 1000, and 2000 presentations achieved 74%, 89.6%,
and 100% accuracy on the meaning naming (PS) task and
41.7%, 80.2% and 97.9% accuracy on the oral vocabulary
(PS) task, respectively. This pattern of results is in line with
performance of the model when trained with a substantially
larger vocabulary (Monaghan et al., 2017). The three
training schedules thus reflect different levels of pre-literate
oral language skills, from poorer through to near-perfect
vocabulary knowledge.
Figure 3 shows the average performance of the OP and
OS focused models with the different amounts of pretraining
at different stages of reading training. We analysed the
model’s performance by using generalized linear mixed
effects models with accuracies in reading aloud or reading
comprehension as the dependent variable, depending on the
task. Item and simulation (simulations one to five) were
included as random factors, and training focus (OP or OS),
reading time (epoch 100 to 1000) and pretraining (500, 1000,
or 2000) were included as fixed factors.
Overall, the model performed better on the tasks for
which it had undergone intensive training. For reading aloud,
the OP focused model performed better than the OS focused
model. Adding training focus as a fixed factor resulted in a
significant improvement in model fit compared to a model
with random effects of item and simulation and with fixed
effects of reading time and pretraining, χ(1) = 398.86, p
< .001. For reading comprehension, the OS focused model
performed better than the OP focused models, as again
indexed by the fact that adding training focus improved
model fit, χ(1) = 314.25, p < .001.
However, the effect of pretraining had an asymmetric
effect on the reading aloud and reading comprehension tasks,
according to whether the model had been trained with OP or
OS focus. For reading aloud, the effect of different levels of
pretraining, reflecting oral language skills, had a null effect
on performance for both the OP and the OS focused models.
Adding pretraining as a fixed factor did not result in a
significant improvement in model fit compared to a model
with random effects of item and simulation and with fixed
effects of reading time and training focus, p > .05. Note that
the trajectories of the lines for the OS focused model for 500

1743

and for 2000 pretraining trials are very close together, as
they are for the OP focused model. In contrast for reading
comprehension, the effect of pretraining had a substantial
effect on the OP training focused model - adding pretraining
as a fixed factor improved model fit compared to a model
with random effects of item and simulation and with fixed
effects of reading time and training focus, χ(2) = 34.42, p
< .001. Specifically, after substantial pretraining (2000
pretraining trials, producing close to 100% in oral
vocabulary and meaning naming tasks), the performance of
the OP focused model began to converge with that of the OS
focused model. The beneficial effect of the OP training
focus is strongest for the model with advanced oral skills
prior to literacy onset. This observation was confirmed by
the fact that adding the interaction between pretraining and
training focus as a fixed factor improved model fit compared
to the model containing random and fixed effects, χ(2) =
9.86, p < .001. Looking at each level of pretraining, the
difference between the OP focused model and the OS
focused model was the smallest for 2000 pretraining trials, β
= 1.47, followed by 1000 pretraining trials, β = 1.81, and
then 500 pretraining trials, β = 2.01.
These results for the skilled oral language model are in
tune with the behavioural results from Taylor et al. (2017).
Figure 3 (right) shows the performance of the participants
trained with the OP versus OS focus languages on each day
taken from Taylor et al.’s figures 3 and 4. Similar to the
behavioural data, the performance of the OP and OS focused
models converged after substantial training and this is likely
due to the fact that the training sample was relatively small.
Simula%on'Data'

Human'Data'(Taylor'et'al.'2017)'

Propor%on'Correct'(Phonology)'

100"
90"
80"
70"
60"
50"

OP"Focus,"Pretrained"500"
OP"Focus,"Pretrained"1000"
OP"Focus,"Pretrained"2000"
OS"Focus,"Pretrained"500"
OS"Focus,"Pretrained"1000"
OS"Focus,"Pretrained"2000"

40"
30"
20"
10"
0"

Propor%on'Correct'(Seman%cs)'

100"
90"
80"
70"
60"
50"

OP"Focus,"Pretrained"500"
OP"Focus,"Pretrained"1000"
OP"Focus,"Pretrained"2000"
OS"Focus,"Pretrained"500"
OS"Focus,"Pretrained"1000"
OS"Focus,"Pretrained"2000"

40"
30"
20"
10"
0"
0"

100" 200" 300" 400" 500" 600" 700" 800" 900" 1000"

Training'Epoch'

Figure 3. The performance of the OP and OS focused
models with different amounts of pretraining over the time
course of the reading training (Left). The performance of the
participants trained with the OP and OS focus languages on
each day from Taylor et al. (2017, right). The error bars
indicate ±SEM.

Discussion
We developed a fully implemented connectionist model of

reading that mapped between orthography, phonology, and
semantics and explored the influence of oral language on the
effectiveness of different types of reading instruction. The
laboratory study on which this work was based indicated
that focusing on learning mappings between print and sound
also transferred to promote mapping between print and
meaning, whereas focusing on learning print to meaning
mappings resulted in deficiencies in learning print to sound
and had little advantage for mapping from print to meaning.
The consequences of this, if they extend to children’s
learning, are that, given limited instructional time, learning
should focus on phonics, rather than on meaning-based
strategies for reading acquisition.
Our model replicated these effects: a model which
focused on print to meaning (i.e., OS training focused model)
had deficiencies in learning to map from print to sound,
whereas a model which focused on print to sound (i.e., OP
training focused model) was better at learning reading aloud
tasks, and converged in performance for reading
comprehension tasks with the OS training focused model
which had three times as much experience of
comprehension trials during training.
However, importantly this convergence was dependent
upon the model’s preliteracy training. Only when the model
had high accuracy in its mappings between phonology and
semantics was it able to transfer performance from OP
training trials to perform well on reading comprehension.
This pattern of performance from the OP training focused
model with high oral language skills was similar to the
behavioural data reported in Taylor et al. (2017). Our
computational results demonstrate that the advantage of OP
focused training only pertains in cases where good oral
language skills are present. This is because the transfer from
OP training trials to OS task performance requires effective
mappings from phonology to semantics. If these are not
present then the effective learning of OP mappings in the
model stops just there – any high fidelity representation of
phonology cannot then accurately activate the target
semantic representation. OP training, then, is only
advantageous for reading comprehension when the learner
has good oral language knowledge, consistent with the view
that addresses the role of oral language in reading (Gough &
Tunmer, 1986; Harm & Seidenberg, 2004; Plaut et al. 1996).
The results are thus far compatible with empirical
evidence of the benefit of both print to sound decoding skills
and oral language skills on reading ability (e.g. Curtis, 1980;
Nation & Snowling, 2004; Ouellette & Beers, 2010;
Ricketts, Nation, & Bishop, 2007), which relate to the two
segments of the indirect route from orthography to
semantics via phonology. Further investigation of the
model’s performance will enable us to determine whether
this is the way in which the model functions to solve the
mapping tasks. We suggest that, for reading aloud, the direct
OP pathway is likely to be most effective for performing the
task regardless of the training focus, because the systematic
mappings are easier to learn compared to the indirect OSP
pathway which requires two arbitrary mappings. Thus, more

1744

training of the direct OP pathway is likely to be beneficial.
In contrast, for reading comprehension, the indirect OPS
pathway may again be more effectively used, because it
exploits a regular OP mapping and a previously learned
arbitrary PS mapping, whereas the direct OS pathway is
arbitrary and needs to be acquired. We might then expect the
indirect pathway to have a substantial contribution to
reading comprehension performance for both OP and OS
focused training, in the context of highly accurate PS
mappings.
Previous studies have showed that the division of labour
between the phonological and semantic pathways in
connectionist models of reading could be shaped by word
properties or orthographic systems (Chang, Welbourne &
Lee, 2016; Harm & Seidenberg, 2004; Plaut et al. 1996). In
this work we show that reading instruction and prior oral
language skill also seem to alter the division of labour. This
is likely due to the broadly systematic versus arbitrary
nature of OP versus OS mappings in English.
In summary, our simulation results have demonstrated that
oral language skills mediate the effectiveness of reading
instruction in early literacy development. In particular, the
beneficial effects of print to sound instruction for reading
comprehension depend on high levels of oral vocabulary
knowledge. Thus, in line with the Simple View of reading,
our modelling work suggests that teaching children about
spelling-to-sound mappings needs to be accompanied by
substantial training on oral vocabulary, in order to promote
reading comprehension. Interventions based on promoting
print to sound skills should also ensure effective oral
language skills, in order to exploit the benefit of enhancing
the regularities available in OP mappings in alphabetic
writing systems.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by ESRC grant RES-000-224049 and ESRC grant ES/L002264/1.

References
Chang, Y.-N., Welbourne, S., & Lee, C.-Y. (2016).
Exploring orthographic neighborhood size effects in a
computational model of Chinese character naming.
Cognitive
Psychology,
91,
1-23.
doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cogpsych.2016.09.001
Chang, Y.-N., Monaghan, P., & Welbourne, S. (2016).
Effects of experience in a developmental model of reading.
Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 38th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
Philadelphia.
Coltheart, M., Rastle, K., Perry, C., Langdon, R., & Ziegler,
J. (2001). DRC: a dual route cascaded model of visual
word recognition and reading aloud. Psychological
Review, 108(1), 204.
Curtis, M. E. (1980). Development of components of
reading skill. Journal of Educational Psychology, 72(5),
656.

Davis, A. (2013). To read or not to read: decoding Synthetic
Phonics. Impact, 2013(20), 1-38.
Gough, P. B., & Tunmer, W. E. (1986). Decoding, reading,
and reading disability. Remedial and Special
Education,7(1), 6-10.
Harm, M. W., & Seidenberg, M. S. (2004). Computing the
meanings of words in reading: Cooperative division of
labor between visual and phonological processes.
Psychological Review, 111(3), 662-720.
Miller, G. A. (1990). WordNet: An on-line lexical database.
International Journal of Lexicography, 3, 235-312.
Monaghan, P., Chang, Y.N., Welbourne, S., & Brysbaert,
M. (2017). Exploring the relations between word
frequency, language exposure, and bilingualism in a
computational model of reading. Journal of Memory and
Language, 93, 1-21.
Nation, K. (2009). Form–meaning links in the development
of visual word recognition. Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 364(1536),
3665-3674. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2009.0119
Nation, K., & Cocksey, J. (2009). Beginning readers
activate semantics from sub-word orthography. Cognition,
110(2), 273-278. doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2008.11.004
Nation, K., & Snowling, M. (2004). Beyond phonological
skills: Broader language skills contribute to the
development of reading. Journal of Research in Reading,
27, 342–356.
Ouellette, G., & Beers, A. (2010). A not-so-simple view of
reading: How oral vocabulary and visual-word recognition
complicate the story. Reading and Writing, 23, 189-208.
Plaut, D. C., McClelland, J. L., Seidenberg, M. S., &
Patterson, K. (1996). Understanding normal and impaired
word reading: Computational principles in quasi-regular
domains. Psychological Review, 103(1), 56-115.
Rayner, K., Foorman, B. R., Perfetti, C. A., Pesetsky, D., &
Seidenberg, M. S. (2001). How psychological science
informs the teaching of reading. Psychological science in
the Public Interest, 2(2), 31-74.
Ricketts, J., Nation, K., & Bishop, D. (2007). Vocabulary is
important for some, but not all reading skills. Scientific
Studies of Reading, 11, 235–257.
Seidenberg, M. (2017). Language at the speed of sight: How
we read, why so many can’t, and what can be done about
it. New York: Basic Books.
Seidenberg, M. S., & McClelland, J. L. (1989). A
distributed, developmental model of word recognition and
naming. Psychological Review, 96(4), 523-568.
Taylor, J. S. H., Davis, M. H., & Rastle, K. (2017).
Comparing and validating methods of reading instruction
using behavioural and neural findings in an artificial
orthography. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General. Advance online publication.
Taylor, J.S.H., Duff, F.J., Woollams, A., Monaghan, P., &
Ricketts, J. (2015). How word meaning influences word
reading. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 24,
322-238.

1745

