Extraneous visual noise facilitates word learning
Katherine E. Twomey (k.twomey@lancaster.ac.uk), Lizhi Ma (malizhi110@hotmail.com)
Gert Westermann (g.westermann@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University
Lancaster, LA1 4YF UK
Abstract
Variability is important to learning; however, whether it
supports or hinders language acquisition is unclear. 3D object
studies suggest that children learn words better when target
objects vary, however storybook studies indicate that
contextual variability impairs learning. We tested a dynamic
systems account in which background variability should boost
learning by speeding the emergence of new behaviors. Two
groups of two-year-old children saw arrays of one novel and
two known objects on a screen, and heard a novel or known
label. Stimuli were identical across conditions, with the
exception that in the constant condition objects appeared on a
white background, and in the variable condition backgrounds
were colored. Only children in the variable condition showed
evidence of word learning, suggesting that extraneous
variability
supports
learning
by
decontextualizing
representations, and indicating that adding low-level entropy
to the developmental system can trigger a change in behavior.
Keywords: word learning; language acquisition;
variability; memory decontextualization; dynamic systems

Children’s early word learning has long fascinated
researchers. When a child hears the new word spaceship,
linking it with a new toy flying machine rather than their toy
dog – or indeed the flying machine’s wings, its color, the
way it moves, and so on – seems to pose little problem.
Given that the space of potential referents is theoretically
infinite (Quine, 1960), this ability to quickly map a novel
word to a novel object is impressive; indeed, robust referent
selection has been observed in children as young as 18
months (Carey & Bartlett, 1978; Halberda, 2006; HoustonPrice, Plunkett & Harris, 2005; Markman & Wachtel, 1988).
However, there is mounting evidence that a single episode
of referent selection is not sufficient for full word learning;
rather,
children
learn
word-object
associations
incrementally, forming in-the-moment mappings between
labels and objects and strengthening memories of these
mappings across repeated encounters via cross situational
learning (Horst & Samuelson, 2008; Smith & Yu, 2008;
Yurovsky, Fricker, Yu, & Smith, 2014). Clearly, then,
memory and language are linked from very early in
development (Taylor, Liu, & Herbert, 2016): learning a new
word depends critically on children’s ability to form and
retain word-object associations. Consequently, the field has
recently focused on the multiple factors that affect
children’s ability to retain word-object mappings,
demonstrating that referent selection and word learning are
flexible, even fragile processes which depend heavily on the
temporal and visual availability of information in the
learning environment, for example repetition, competition,

and timing (e.g., Arias-Trejo & Plunkett, 2010; Horst, Scott,
& Pollard, 2010; Mather & Plunkett, 2009).
Developmental research has demonstrated that variability
of to-be-learned items is a key influencing factor in early
learning. For example, visual variability encountered across
stimuli facilitates categorization in 6- to 7-month-old infants
(Quinn & Bhatt, 2010), and phonological variability in
affect or speaker has been shown to support early word
recognition (Rost & McMurray, 2009). Recent work has
revealed a similar effect of variability on word learning:
when shown a novel 3D object category with exemplars that
varied in color, 30-month-old children learned category
labels, but did not when exemplars were identical, or varied
in shape and color simultaneously (Twomey, Ranson, &
Horst, 2014). Thus, while some target variability supports
word learning, too much variability appears to disrupt it.
In addition to target variability there is good theoretical
reason to expect extraneous, non-target variability – entropy
– to support word learning. Evidence from adult problemsolving studies suggests that introducing entropy to a task
facilitates learning. For example, adults solving a series of
gear system problems presented on a computer screen
learned a short-cut solution faster when the task contained
entropy in the form of variability in spatial location of the
stimuli than when stimuli were presented in a consistent
spatial location (Stephen, Dixon, & Isenhower, 2009). On
dynamic systems theories of cognition and development,
cognitive structure emerges from the dynamic interactions
of multiple, coupled components including the learner’s
body, learning history and in-the-moment characteristics of
the task (Thelen & Smith, 1996). Cognitive structure is
instantiated as a stable state (“attractor”) in the behavior of
this complex system. Dynamic systems of this type exhibit
“phase shifts” from one attractor to another, resulting in
qualitative and quantitative changes in the system’s
behavior. Because phase shifts result in behavioral change,
from the dynamic systems perspective, they index learning.
As Stephen et al. (2009) demonstrate, extraneous entropy
during learning destabilizes attractor states, speeding the
onset of a phase shift. During development, then, non-target
variability should speed up learning by helping new
cognitive structure emerge via a shift from one behavioral
state to another.
Despite this strong theoretical prediction, evidence for an
effect of non-target variability in early learning is mixed.
The categorization literature suggests that non-target
variability helps learning. For example, Goldenberg &
Johnson (2015) presented 16- to 20-month-old infants with
a looking time task. Children saw novel category exemplars

3404

on backgrounds which (a) repeated, (b) varied randomly, or
(c) varied within interleaved blocks. Only infants who saw
backgrounds which varied in interleaved blocks correctly
generalized category labels at test. In contrast, the word
learning literature suggests that lack of contextual variability
supports word learning: when learning words from a
storybook, repeating the context in which 3-year-old
children encounter novel words by reading from the same
book repeatedly boosts word retention relative to teaching
children the same novel words from multiple different
books (Horst, Parsons & Bryan, 2011; Williams & Horst,
2014). More broadly, however, the prediction from dynamic
systems theory that additional entropy should boost word
learning in a single task has yet to be explicitly tested.
Critically, if background variability helps children learn
words, this would provide evidence for continuity in the
low-level mechanisms driving learning, from toddlerhood to
adulthood. The current study addressed this gap by
presenting children with a word learning task in which
objects appeared either on a white background or on
multiple colored backgrounds. We selected two-year-old
children in line with previous research which demonstrates
this age group’s success in similar looking-based referent
selection tasks (Bion, Borovsky & Fernald, 2013). On the
dynamic systems account, children in the variable color
condition should show stronger retention of label-object
associations than children in the constant color condition.

Method
Participants
Thirty typically developing, monolingual English-learning
two-year-old children (14 girls, M = 22.77 months, SD =
1.87 months; range = 20.0 – 26.0 months) with a mean
productive vocabulary of 176.04 words (SD = 117.50
words, range = 4 – 413 words) and no family history of
colorblindness participated. Half of the children were
randomly assigned to the constant color condition, and half
to the variable color condition. Children’s ages and
productive vocabularies were the same in either condition
(ps >.30). Data from six children were excluded due to
fussiness (1), parental interference (3), bilingualism (1), and
an eye tracker sample rate of under 25% (1). Parents were
reimbursed for travel expenses and children received a small
gift for participating.
Stimuli
Each child saw a warm-up, referent selection and test phase.
Critically, stimuli for each phase were identical across
conditions with the exception that during warm-up and
referent selection in the variable color condition objects
appeared on colored backgrounds, and in the constant color
condition backgrounds were always white. Children also
saw engagement and attention-getting stimuli. Overall,
warm-up, referent selection and retention stimuli were
videos containing 2D photographic images of known and/or
novel objects (depicted in Fig. 1).

Known 1

Known 2

Novel

Novel label

Set
1

zorch

Set
2

tife

Set
3

blick

Fig 1. Object depicted in the current study.
Known objects were an apple, a ball, a banana, a car, a
cup and a fork, and were selected because their labels are
familiar to children of this age group (Fenson et al., 1993).
Novel objects were a purple, green and black foam rocket
(labeled zorch), a spherical yellow object with multiple
flexible legs capped with pink and green balls (labeled tife),
and a blue kazoo with raised orange spots (labeled blick),
selected from an online database of objects unfamiliar to
children of this age (NOUN Database; Horst & Hout, 2015).
Each trial consisted of a single video of three objects.
Videos were created in Microsoft Powerpoint 2010, and
converted to .avi format using Microsoft Windows Live
Movie Maker 2011. Each video was accompanied by
embedded audio consisting of the same female speaker
saying Can you find the [label]? Look at the [label]!
Where’s the [label]?, as well as sound effects to keep
children engaged in the task. Known labels were the
appropriate English labels for those objects, and novel labels
were blick (kazoo), tife (legs/balls) and zorch (rocket),
selected as plausible but unfamiliar English object names.
Auditory stimuli commenced 5 s after the start of each trial.
First label onsets occurred from 0.78 – 0.90 s after the
beginning of the auditory stimulus and offsets from 1.27 to
1.58 s; second label onsets from 2.20 – 2.48 s and offsets
from 2.65 – 3.25 s; and third label onsets from 3.54 s – 4.21
s and offsets from 4.22 s to 5.19 s.
Engagement. Engagement stimuli consisted of a 7 s video
of a female experimenter on a white background, smiling
and saying Hello! Let’s play a game! Can you find what I’m
looking for? in child-directed speech.
Warm-up. Warm-up stimuli were 16 s videos, each
depicting a set of three of the known objects, designed to
familiarize children with the task. In the first 0.5s, a small
colored rectangle appeared in the middle of a black screen
and spun in an anticlockwise circle, expanding until it filled
the whole screen, at which point it became the background
on which the objects would appear. In the constant color
condition, the background on each of the three warm-up
trials was white. In the variable color condition, the
background was blue, green, pink, purple or red. In the next
2 s the three objects appeared in the top left-hand corner of
the screen and bounced diagonally downwards accompanied
by a boing sound, coming to a rest in the center of the
screen and remaining there for 9.5 s, during which time the

3405

target object was labeled three times (e.g., Can you find the
apple? Look at the apple! Where’s the apple). During the
next 3 s the target object rotated accompanied by a
twinkling sound, followed by ostensive auditory feedback
(e.g., There’s the apple!). In the final 1 s the objects
bounced diagonally towards the bottom right hand corner
and offscreen, accompanied by the sound of children
cheering.

of objects were pseudorandomized across children such that
no object appeared on more than two successive trials.
Referent selection. Fifteen referent selection trials
immediately followed the warm-up phase. An example
referent selection phase for the variable color condition is
depicted in Fig. 1. Again, the corresponding warm-up phase
in the constant color condition was identical with the
exception that backgrounds were white. Referent selection
trials were presented in three blocks of five trials for each
set. Sets were kept constant across trials to maximize
children’s retention of novel labels (Axelsson & Horst,
2014); thus, one child might see a block of five repetitions
of the apple + fork + zorch set, followed by the banana +
cup + tife set, and finally the car + ball + blick set, with
block order Latin square counterbalanced across children. In
each referent selection block children were asked to look at
a known object on two trials and a novel object on three
trials. Known/novel trial order and background color
(variable color condition only) was pseudorandomized such
that no more than two of the same trial type appeared in
succession.

Referent selection. Referent selection trials were 13 s long,
and identical to warm-up trials with the exception that
children saw one novel and two known stimuli, and there
was no ostensive feedback phase. Background colors were
either white (constant color) or pseudorandom (variable
color), as in the warm-up trials. Object location was
pseudorandomized.
Retention. Retention trials were 9.5 s long and proceeded in
an identical manner to referent selection trials except that
the background was always gray and appeared immediately
(i.e., there was no 0.5 s period where the background
appeared) and all three objects were novel. Each object was
labeled on two trials.
Procedure and Design
Before the experiment began the experimenter showed
caregivers pictures of the known and novel objects to ensure
they were appropriately known and novel to the child. All
children were familiar with the known objects and
unfamiliar with the novel objects. Caregivers were asked to
complete a UK adaptation (Hamilton, Plunkett, & Schafer,
2000)
of
the
MacArthur-Bates
Communicative
Development Inventory (Fenson et al., 1994), a vocabulary
inventory commonly used to score toddlers’ receptive and
productive vocabulary. Caregivers completed the
vocabulary inventory either before or after the experiment,
depending on the child’s level of engagement.
The eyetracking session took place in a quiet, dimly-lit
room. Children sat on their caregiver’s lap 50-70 cm in front
of a 21.5” 1920 x 1080 computer screen. Beneath the screen
a Tobii X120 eyetracker recorded the child’s gaze location
at 17 ms intervals, and a video camera above the screen
recorded the caregiver and child throughout the procedure.
Caregivers were instructed not to interact with their child or
look at the screen during the task to avoid biasing their
child’s behavior, and were asked to sit at a 90° angle from
their child to ensure the eyetracker tracked the child’s eyes
only.
The eyetracker was first calibrated using a five-point
infant calibration procedure available in Tobii Studio.
Immediately following calibration, children saw the
engagement stimulus once.
Warm-up. The three warm-up trials immediately followed
the engagement stimulus. The warm-up phase in each
condition was identical with the exception that in the
constant variable color condition, backgrounds were
multiple, uniform colors, while in the constant color
condition, backgrounds were white. Which objects
appeared, which served as targets, and left-right positioning

Can you find the tife? Look at the tife! Where’s the tife?
What’s next?
Can you find the tife? Look at the tife! Where’s the tife?
Can you find the apple? Look at the apple! Where’s
the apple?
Can you find the tife? Look at the tife! Where’s
the tife?
What’s next?
Can you find the fork? Look at the
fork! Where’s the fork?

Fig. 2. Example referent selection phase.
During referent selection an attention getting stimulus
appeared six times pseudorandomly such that it was always
succeeded by at least one referent selection trial, and
consisted of a 3 s video of the speaker saying What’s next?.
Finally, after the referent selection phase, children saw a 5 s
“Well done” video of the speaker saying Well done! All
finished! See you soon!
Break. Following referent selection, children took a fiveminute break. During this time they either remained on their
caregiver’s lap and watched an age-appropriate animation or
moved to a seating area in the same room and colored
pictures from a book.
Warm-up. After the break children saw a further warm-up
trial, presented on a gray background.
Test. Three memory recativtaion and three retention trials
immediately followed the warm-up trial, each depicting the
three novel objects seen during referent selection. Trial
order and object location were pseudorandomized.
Coding and data cleaning. Left, middle and right AOIs
were square and centered on each object’s stationary
position after they had bounced into the screen.
Unreliable/offscreen and non-AOI looks were discarded,

3406

resulting in a final dataset of 115,762 referent selection and
61,247 test gaze samples. Individual gaze samples were
numerically coded (1 = target look, 0 = non-target look),
creating a raw looking time measure, which was further
collapsed into 100ms time bins for statistical tractability. All
subsequent analyses use this target looking measure, and are
standardized from the offset of the first label plus 233ms
(Swingley, Pinto, & Fernald, 1999) to 6733ms postlabeling.

Results
Because the focus of the current paper is the effect of
extraneous variability on children’s word learning, and due
to space constraints, we present here the results from the test
phase. Analyses of looking during referent selection are
reported separately and discussed in detail in Twomey, Ma
& Westermann (under review); overall, however, we found
chance level looking and no difference between conditions.
At test, each novel object served as a target on one memory
reactivation trial and one retention trial. Fig. 3 depicts
looking times during the memory reactivation trials and
shows little difference in target looking in the two
conditions. This conclusion was supported by a linear mixed
effects model with main effects of time bin (treated as
continuous) and condition and their interaction, with byparticipant random slopes and intercepts for condition and
by-item random intercepts to rule out item effects (Barr,
Levy, Scheepers & Tily, 2013). As in referent selection,
there was a small but robust increase in looking with time
(beta = 0.0019, SE = 0.00063, t = 2.99, χ2(1) = 10.49, p =
.0012). However, condition had no independent effect on
looking times, and did not interact with time bin (main
effect of condition: beta = 0.043, SE = 0.00098, t = 0.66,
χ2(1) = 0.12, p = .73; time bin x condition interaction: beta =
-0.0080, SE = 0.00098, t = -0.81, χ2(1) = 0.67, p = .41).
Data from the three retention trials show a markedly
different pattern, however. As Fig. 4 illustrates, children in
the variable color condition looked at the target at abovechance levels immediately following labeling and again at
around 4000ms, suggesting that encountering variable
colored backgrounds during referent selection facilitated
their retention of the novel label-object mappings. A mixed
effects model with the same fixed effects structure as above
and by-participant and by-item random intercepts and slopes
for condition revealed that target looking decreased over
time (time bin: beta = -0.029, SE = 0.00078, t = -3.65, χ2(1)
= 32.55, p < .001). This effect was constant for children in
either condition (time bin x condition: beta = -0.0010, SE =
0.0011, t = -0.87, χ2(1) = 0.75, p = .39). Critically, however,
proportion target looking was greater for children in the
variable color condition than in the constant color condition
(beta = -0.26, SE = 0.090, t = 2.85, χ2(1) = 5.41, p = .020).

Fig. 3. Proportion target looking during memory
reactivation trials. Error bars represent 95% CIs. Where bins
are marked with a point, looking is significantly above
chance (0.33; p < .05, one-sample, two-tailed t-tests; ditto
for Fig. 4).

Fig. 4. Proportion target looking during retention trials.

Discussion
The current study explored whether extraneous variability
would boost young children’s word learning. We trained
two groups of two-year-old children with novel label-object
associations via multiple referent selection trials. Stimuli
presented to both groups were identical except that half the
children saw arrays of novel objects displayed on a white
background (constant color condition), and half saw objects
on multiple colored backgrounds (variable color condition).
Analyses of test trials revealed a clear effect of background
variability: while children did not appear to correctly
identify previously-seen novel objects during the memory
reactivation trials, on retention trials children who had seen
variable backgrounds during referent selection looked for
longer at target objects than did children who had seen
constant colored backgrounds, and did so at levels greater
would be expected by chance. Thus, infants who had seen
objects on variable backgrounds learned and retained the
novel object-label mappings, but infants who had seen the
objects on a constant background did not. These results
offer converging evidence that following reactivation of
memory traces, background variability facilitates learning,
raising several interesting issues (see also Twomey et al.,
under review).
The importance of memory reactivation Children in the
variable color condition looked at target objects at chance
levels on the three memory reactivation trials, but at levels

3407

greater than expected by chance on the subsequent three
retention trials. Typically in word learning studies children
see only a single retention trial for each object. Our results
suggest that null findings in these studies could be due to a
lack of recall ability rather than a lack of learning. These
data indicate that including memory reactivation trials in
future studies could help shed light on whether children are
failing to learn, or failing to recall. Establishing the locus of
memory reactivation in the word learning field is therefore
critical for a thorough understanding of the delicate memory
processes underlying early language acquisition.
Decontextualization in early learning The fact that only
children in the variable color condition retained novel labelobject associations may seem unexpected in light of recent
work in word learning indicating that consistency in context
supports, not impairs, word learning (e.g., Axelsson &
Horst, 2014). Given these results, why should what seems to
be a more challenging task (i.e., variable color versus
constant color backgrounds) lead to better learning? In fact,
our results are in line with a wealth of adult literature
demonstrating that background variability supports recall
(e.g., Godden & Baddeley, 1975). More recent work has
explored the effect of context on adults’ category learning;
for example, Finch, Carvalho and Goldstone (2016) showed
that variable backgrounds led to better retention of
previously-seen exemplars of a bird category.
These results are attributed to a decontextualisation
mechanism. When memories are formed after a single
encounter, both context and target are encoded. On
subsequent encounters, if the context stays the same, it
remains part of the representation. These context-dependent
memories are harder to recall when the context changes.
Godden and Baddeley (1975) describe a classic example of
this effect, showing that divers who had learned word lists
either on dry land or underwater were better at recalling
words learned underwater when tested underwater, and
better at recalling words learned on dry land when tested on
dry land. When an item is encountered in multiple different
environments, however, the representation becomes
decontextualized: the context becomes less important to the
representation. If an item with a decontextualized
representation is encountered in a new environment, then, it
is easier to recall than if the representation were contextdependent.
The same mechanisms that explain these adult data can
account for children’s word learning in the current study.
During referent selection, children in the constant color
condition learned context-dependent representations, while
children in the variable color condition learned
decontextualized representations. At test children
encountered objects on a gray screen – and critically, neither
group had seen objects presented on a gray screen until this
point. Thus, recall was possible for children in the variable
color condition, who were able to generalize their
decontextualized memory traces to the new test context.
This raises the question of why contextual consistency in
existing studies supports word learning – the opposite of

the current findings. It is possible that different types of
context have qualitatively different effects. Here, in line
with Stephen et al. (2009), “context” was low-level,
extraneous variability. In contrast, the contexts in the
existing literature were rich and salient: in the storybook
studies, books were constructed from photograph-like
images, resulting in a complex visual scene that varied from
page to page. In addition, the sentence contexts in which
novel words appeared also varied (Horst et al., 2011).
Similarly, in the referent selection work, “context” consisted
of the competitor objects presented alongside the targets,
which were considerably more complex than a simple block
of color (Axelsson & Horst, 2014). Thus, it may be that in
rich learning environments, restricting complexity supports
learning (Radesky & Christakis, 2016), while in simpler
learning environments, increasing complexity by adding
background noise helps learning.
This decontextualization account provides a mechanism
by which added variability can support learning, as
predicted by the dynamic systems account. Importantly,
decontextualization is one among many potential
mechanisms by which learning under the dynamic systems
account may be shaped. As noted above, this theory predicts
that background entropy should facilitate learning by
speeding up the emergence of new stable behavioral states
(Stephen et al., 2009). However, the dynamic systems
account also suggests that other types of variability should
support learning, raising the intriguing possibility for future
work that entropy introduced in a different modality, for
example sound or spatial location, could also support word
learning. Work is underway to test these predictions.
Overall, however, on either the specific decontextualization
account or the broader dynamic systems approach, the
current work extends a well-established phenomenon in
adult cognition to children with a new task, pointing to a
view of development as a continuous process driven by
domain-general mechanisms.
Acknowledgements
Data are available on request from the authors. The support
of the Economic and Social Research Council is gratefully
acknowledged (LuCiD: ES/L008955/1; Future Research
Leaders grant to KT: ES/N01703X/1). GW was further
supported by a British Academy/Leverhulme Trust Senior
Research Fellowship (SF150163). We thank the parents and
children who made this work possible.
References
Arias-Trejo, N., & Plunkett, K. (2010). The effects of
perceptual similarity and category membership on early
word-referent identification. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 105(1-2), 63–80.
Axelsson, E. L., Churchley, K., & Horst, J. S. (2012). The
right thing at the right time: Why ostensive naming
facilitates word learning. Frontiers in Psychology, 3.

3408

Axelsson, E. L., & Horst, J. S. (2014). Contextual repetition
facilitates word learning via fast mapping. Acta
Psychologica, 152, 95–99.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013).
Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis
testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and
Language, 68(3), 255–278.
Bion, R. A., Borovsky, A., & Fernald, A. (2013). Fast
mapping, slow learning: Disambiguation of novel word–
object mappings in relation to vocabulary learning at 18,
24, and 30months. Cognition, 126(1), 39–53.
Carey, S., & Bartlett, E. (1978). Acquiring a single new
word. Papers and Reports on Child Language
Development, 15, 17–29.
Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., Bates, E., Thal, D. J.,
& Pethick, S. J. (1994). Variability in early
communicative development. Monographs of the Society
for Research in Child Development, 59(5), R5–+.
Finch, D., Carvalho, P., & Goldstone, R. L. (2016).
Variability in category learning: The effect of context
change and item variation on knowledge generalization. In
Papafragou, A., Grodner, D., Mirman, D., & Trueswell,
J.C. (Eds.) (2016). Proceedings of the 38th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX.:
Cognitive Science Society.
Godden, D. R., & Baddeley, A. D. (1975). Contextdependent memory in two Natural environments: On land
and underwater. British Journal of Psychology, 66(3),
325–331.
Goldenberg, E. R., & Johnson, S. P. (2015). Category
generalization in a new context: The role of visual
attention. Infant Behavior and Development, 38, 49–56.
Halberda, J. (2006). Is this a dax which I see before me?
Use of the logical argument disjunctive syllogism supports
word-learning in children and adults. Cognitive
Psychology, 53(4), 310–44.
Hamilton, A., Plunkett, K., & Schafer, G. (2000). Infant
vocabulary development assessed with a British
communicative development inventory. Journal of Child
Language, 27(3), 689–705.
Hildreth, K., & Rovee-Collier, C. (1999). Decreases in the
response latency to priming over the first year of life.
Developmental Psychobiology, 35(4), 276–289.
Horst, J. S., & Hout, M. C. (2015). The Novel Object and
Unusual Name (NOUN) Database: A collection of novel
images for use in experimental research. Behavior
Research Methods, 1–17.
Horst, J. S., Parsons, K. L., & Bryan, N. M. (2011). Get the
story straight: contextual repetition promotes word
learning from storybooks. Frontiers in Psychology, 2.
Horst, J. S., & Samuelson, L. K. (2008). Fast mapping but
poor retention by 24-month-old infants. Infancy, 13(2),
128–157.
Horst, J. S., Scott, E. J., & Pollard, J. P. (2010). The role of
competition in word learning via referent selection.
Developmental Science, 13(5), 706–713.

Houston-Price, C., Plunkett, K., & Harris, P. (2005).
“Word-learning wizardry” at 1;6. Journal of Child
Language, 32(1), 175–189.
Hsu, V. C., Rovee-Collier, C., Hill, D. L., Grodkiewicz, J.,
& Joh, A. S. (2005). Effects of priming duration on
retention over the first 1 1/2 years of life. Developmental
Psychobiology, 47(1), 43–54.
Markman, E. M., & Wachtel, G. F. (1988). Children’s use
of mutual exclusivity to constrain the meaning of words.
Cognitive Psychology, 20(2), 121–157.
Mather, E., & Plunkett, K. (2009). Learing words over time:
The role of stimulus repetition in mutual exclusivity.
Infancy, 14(1), 60–76.
Morgan, K., & Hayne, H. (2006). Age-related changes in
memory reactivation by 1-and 2-year-old human infants.
Developmental Psychobiology, 48(1), 48–57.
Quine, W. V. O. (1960). Word and object: An inquiry into
the linguistic mechanisms of objective reference.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Quinn, P. C., & Bhatt, R. S. (2010). Learning perceptual
organization in infancy: The effect of simultaneous versus
sequential variability experience. Perception, 39(6), 795–
806.
Radesky, J. S., & Christakis, D. A. (2016). Keeping
children’s attention: The problem with bells and whistles.
JAMA Pediatrics, 170(2), 112–113.
Rost, G. C., & McMurray, B. (2009). Speaker variability
augments phonological processing in early word learning.
Developmental Science, 12(2), 339–349.
Smith, L. B., & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics.
Cognition, 106(3), 1558–1568.
Stephen, D. G., Dixon, J. A., & Isenhower, R. W. (2009).
Dynamics of representational change: Entropy, action, and
cognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 35(6), 1811.
Swingley, D., Pinto, J. P., & Fernald, A. (1999). Continuous
processing in word recognition at 24 months. Cognition,
71(2), 73–108.
Taylor, G., Liu, H., & Herbert, J. S. (2016). The role of
verbal labels on flexible memory retrieval at 12-months of
age. Infant Behavior and Development, 45, Part A, 11–17.
Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1996). A Dynamic Systems
Approach to the Development of Cognition and Action.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Twomey, Ma & Westermann (under review). All the right
noises: Background variability helps early word learning.
Infancy.
Twomey, K. E., Ranson, S. L., & Horst, J. S. (2014). That’s
more like it: Multiple exemplars facilitate word learning.
Infant and Child Development, 23(2), 105–122.
Yurovsky, D., Fricker, D. C., Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2014).
The role of partial knowledge in statistical word learning.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 21(1), 1–22.

3409

