Failure to use probability of success in deciding whether to pursue one
goal or two.
Warren R. G. James (r01wj16@abdn.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, The Univerity of Aberdeen
Alasdair D. F. Clarke (a.clarke@essex.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, The University of Essex
Amelia R. Hunt (a.hunt@abdn.ac.uk)
School of Pscyhology, The University of Aberdeen

Abstract
Difficult tasks should be attempted one at a time, while easy
tasks can be undertaken in parallel. Reinforcing our previous conclusion that people are surprisingly poor at applying
this logic, we find people fail to select standing positions that
maximize their probability of success in throwing a beanbag
into one of two possible hoops. We asked participants to explicitly report their odds of successfully throwing a beanbag
into each hoop from the location they had chosen to stand,
and estimates were highly accurate. Nonetheless, participants
failed to use estimates of success appropriately to maximize
success, suggesting a failure of insight, rather than limited or
inaccurate information, can account for suboptimal decisions
about standing position.
Keywords: Bounded Rationality; Optimal Behaviour;
Awareness; Decision Making.

Introduction
Human skill is limited, and effective decisions must take
these limitations into account. In Chess and Go, for example, it is impossible to select the optimal move by mentally
simulating every possibility. An effective strategy must take
into account the constraints of ones own memory capacity.
Simon (1990) used the term bounded rationality to describe
decisions that are rational given known constraints.
We recently reported a surprising failure to make effective
decisions about whether to pursue one goal or two (Clarke
and Hunt, 2016). In one experiment from that study, participants had to throw a beanbag into one of two hoops. The
distance between the hoops varied and participants were told
which one of the two hoops had been randomly selected to
be the target only after they chose a place to stand. The optimal strategy when the hoops are relatively close together is to
choose a standing position equidistant from both hoops, making an accurate throw possible irrespective of which hoop is
the target. However, as the hoops move further apart, the

probability of a successful throw from the center position
drops below 50%. Now the best strategy is to stand close
to one of the two hoops and hope it is the target on that trial.
Despite the availability of this simple strategy, the distance
between the hoops had no systematic effect on where people
stood, demonstrating a profound failure to optimize throwing
accuracy. The same failure to adjust strategy in response to
difficulty was observed in deciding where to fixate to detect
one of two targets (see also Morvan and Maloney, 2012) and
in allocating attention when trying to memorize digit strings.
These experiments took into account each individuals performance limitations by measuring throwing ability, visual acuity, and memory capacity in a separate session involving only
single targets with no decisions. This allows for an individualized estimate of when a given participant should switch
from attempting both goals to prioritising one. Nonetheless,
bounded rationality could explain this failure as participants
could be unaware of, or incorrect about, their own abilities
(Schraw and Dennison, 1994).

In the current experiment, we repeated the beanbagthrowing task but explicitly asked participants to report on
their expected accuracy before each throw. This allows direct
comparison of estimated and actual throwing performance.
Three outcomes are possible, all of which are informative
about the cause of suboptimal decisions in this task. First,
consistent with bounded rationality, participants may be unaware of their throwing ability and therefore fail to account
for it when selecting standing positions. Second, participants
may not adequately attend to their own abilities. Self-talk
can improve throwing (Chang et al., 2014), suggesting explicitly reporting about ones own ability can improve task
performance. Third, participants may have an accurate representation of their own skill, and drawing their attention to
this information may not influence their standing position decisions. In this case, the results would suggest failure to maximize success in this paradigm is an example of a more fundamental limitation in decision competence.

2279

Methods
Participants
Twenty-four participants (17 female) were recruited via the
SONA systems at the University of Aberdeen and took part
in return for course credit. The sample size of 24 (12 in each
group) was based on our previous experiment (Clarke and
Hunt, 2016). Average age was 19 years (SD = 1.5).

Procedure
We used a similar protocol to that of Experiment 2 in Clarke
and Hunt (2016). The experiment was carried out over two
sessions, with participants carrying out Session 2 a week after
Session 1. Both sessions took place in the same sheltered
paved area. The paving slabs were used as a convenient unit
for measuring distances as they were approximately the same
size as the hoops (the slabs measured 0.46 x 0.61m and the
hoops had a diameter of 0.4m).
The aim of Session 1 was to measure how well each participant could throw a bean bag into hoops placed at seven
evenly-spaced distances from three (1.38m) to fifteen (6.90m)
slabs away, in two different directions (direction was counter
balanced). A total of 84 throwing trials were completed in
this session (12 beanbags for each of the 7 target distances).
The data gathered from the first session were used to model
how participants accuracy decreases as the distance to the target hoop increases (see Figure 1).
In Session 2, participants were again throwing beanbags
into hoops, but there were now two hoops, and either one
could be the target. Participants were asked to choose a
place to stand before throwing, and were not told which hoop
would be their target until after they had made this decision.
To avoid having to re-position hoops from trial to trial, the
area contained six hoops of three different colours, with blue
hoops at the furthest distance, yellow at an intermediate distance, and red at the closest distance. The actual distance of
each hoop colour depended on performance in the first session, with each colour corresponding to an estimate of the
participants throwing accuracy from the centre: Blue hoops
were placed at the slab distance where accuracy was expected
to be closest to 10%, yellow hoops at 50%, and red hoops at
90% (see Figure 2). The beanbag on each trial was randomly
drawn from a bag, which initially contained nine beanbags,
three of each colour. The colour of the beanbag drawn from
the bag determined which hoop pair was the target on that
trial. Once all nine had been thrown they were replaced. This
process was repeated 5 times for a total of 45 trials.
On each trial in Session 2, participants retrieved a beanbag
and then chose somewhere to stand (the participants were told
that they could stand anywhere on the paved area). The experimenter then informed them about which hoop (north or
south) was their throwing target on that trial. The direction
was randomised, with each direction equally likely on every
trial. It was made clear to the participants that the direction

Figure 1: This shows the set up for session 1 from the participant’s point of view.
of each throw was random and had been predetermined, with
each direction being equally likely. They then performed the
throw and their standing position and throwing accuracy were
recorded.
All participants followed the protocol described above, and
half of the participants were also instructed to give an estimate (in percentages) of their expected throwing accuracy
for both hoops from the location they had chosen to stand.
They were prompted to provide this estimate after they chose
a place to stand but before they actually threw the beanbag.
This group will be referred to as the Online Estimation Group.
This condition was included to test whether drawing the participants attention to this component of the problem they were
faced with would help them to perform better.
Upon completion of the 45 trials in Session 2, all participants then performed a task similar to Session 1, but instead
of throwing, they were required to give an estimate of their accuracy, in percentages, for each distance that had been tested
in the first session. Participants stood in one spot, and one
hoop was moved to different distances from them in either
direction. The distances were split into two sets: 3, 7, 11,
15 and 5, 9, 13. One set was presented to the participants
first, in ascending order (i.e. getting further from the participant); then the other set was presented to them in a descending order (i.e. getting closer). The order of sets was counterbalanced across participants so each set was presented first
equally often. Results were analysed in R (R Core Team,

2280

Standing position

Figure 2: The setup for session 2

2016) and modelled using the lmer function from the lme4
package (Bates et al., 2014).

Results
Actual accuracy vs. Estimated accuracy
Participants throwing performance in Session 1 is shown in
Figure 3. The relationship between accuracy and distance for
each participant was modelled using logistic regression. Participants estimate of their own throwing ability is superimposed in blue. The majority of our participants were accurate
in their ability to estimate their own throwing ability. This
can be summarised by looking at the correlation between actual and estimated accuracy for each individual. This gives a
median Pearsons correlation coefficient r of 0.89 (min=0.72,
max=0.96).

Figure 3: These graphs illustrate the accuracy (proportion
correct) over the various distances for each participant (actual, in red), and their estimates of their own accuracy over
the same distances (in blue).

The optimal strategy for the closest hoop distance in Session
2 would be to stand in the middle, as the expected accuracy
is 90% regardless of which hoop was selected as the target.
For the farthest hoop distance, the optimal strategy would be
to stand next to one of the two blue hoops, as this means that
they would be approximately 100% accurate for that hoop
and 0% accurate for the other hoop. Considering that each
hoop was equally likely to be selected, this means that standing next to one blue hoop gives the participant a 50% chance
of success, which is much greater than the 10% accuracy they
would achieve by simply standing in the middle. The point
where participants should switch between a centre and a side
strategy is marked by a blue line in Figure 3 (the 50% point in
their reported estimate of accuracy is shown by the red line).
For the majority of the participants, it makes no difference
whether we use their actual accuracy or their estimated accuracy to determine the ideal switch point, given the resolution
of our experiment. The black dots illustrate the chosen standing positions on each trial: it is clear from these results that
participants do not switch their strategy at either point; in fact,
generally speaking, participants do not alter their standing position systematically with the distance of the hoops. These
data are similar to those from the throwing task reported in
Clarke and Hunt (2016). Interestingly, we can see that one
participant (participant B11 in Figure 4) approaches the optimal strategy, particularly with respect to their estimated accuracy. Taken in aggregate, however, participants did not tend
to stand closer to the hoop when they were further apart (a
paired samples t-test comparing standing position for farthest
to the closest hoop distance was non-significant; t(23)= -.49).

Standing positions across groups
To explore whether being asked to estimate the probability
of successfully completing both possible throws had an effect
on participants decisions, we compared the standing positions
for the control group (Group A) to the online estimate group
(Group B). For the closest hoops, participants in Group A
stood on average 0.13 (standard deviation = 0.21) of the way
from the central point to one of the two hoops, and participants in Group B stood at 0.14 (standard deviation = 0.27).
Similarly, there was little difference between the two groups
for the blue (far) hoops: participants chose to stand slightly
further away from the central point (Group A: M= 0.128, SD=
0.17, Group B: M= 0.2, SD= 0.22). We conclude that being
prompted to verbally report estimated accuracy for each trial
had no effect on the strategies participants used to complete
the task (close; t(22) = .09, far; t(22) = .895).
Analysis was also carried out to examine whether the accuracy of a participant’s estimate of their own ability was correlated with how closely they followed the optimal strategy.
To do this, the r value for each participant (representing the
accuracy of their estimate) was correlated with a normalised
value for the average distance of the standing position from

2281

Figure 4: Black dots show the standing positions of each participant on each trial in Session 2 as a function of distance of
the hoops from the centre (x-axis). Standing position was normalised so that 0 represents having stood at the centre and 1
being one of the side hoops . Red lines represent the distance
at which participant should have switched between standing
at 0 and standing at 1 based on their actual accuracy, and the
blue lines is the switch point based on their own estimates of
their accuracy.
the optimal position (in the 10% accuracy and 90% accuracy
trials). The Pearson’s correlation coefficients were very weak
for both the 10% accuracy (r = -0.12) and the 90% accuracy
conditions (r = -0.12). To clarify, had there been an effect
of accuracy of estimates, there should have been a negative
correlation for both accuracy conditions. The lack of a relationship suggests that participants with a greater awareness of
their ability were not better at making using this information.

Discussion
Participants do not select standing positions that maximize
their throwing performance, reinforcing the conclusion that
participants fail to solve this task, as previously found by
Clarke and Hunt (2016). This experiment was designed to
test whether limitations in self-awareness of throwing ability
could account for participants poor choices in standing positions. The results suggest participants were highly accurate
in reporting on the expected outcome of their decision, but
failed to make use of this information when deciding where
to stand.
The second possibility we considered in the introduction is
that participants have an accurate representation of their own
skill, but fail to use this information in making their decision.
If this is the case, asking participants to explicitly judge their
expected accuracy before each throw should prompt them to
make better decisions about where to stand. However, compared to the control group, the standing positions selected by
participants who were explicitly asked about their accuracy
before each throw were not more optimal. We asked partici-

pants only to state their expected accuracy for each hoop from
the position they had selected; it may be that this was too indirect to cause participants to actually use this information
in deciding where to stand. In future studies, it may be of
interest to ask more probing questions. For example, asking
them to explain why they choose to stand may lead to better
decisions.
We conclude that participants fail to adopt an optimal strategy despite having highly accurate information about the expected outcome of their decisions. It is possible that the participants were not aware that this information was relevant to
making a decision and therefore did not pay it due attention
(Gegenfurtner et al., 2011) or were unable to use the information in an effective manner (Hardman and Cowan, 2016).
It is also possible that participants were distracted by other,
less relevant information. Gaissmaier and Schooler (2008)
suggest that some people may engage in searching for a pattern that they may be able to exploit in order to form their
decisions even when there is no pattern to the task. With this
in mind, it may be of interest to investigate what information people deem to be relevant to a task they are performing.
Finally, our sample did not widely vary in throwing ability
and in self-awareness. A sample of participants with a wider
range of throwing ability, and particularly including highly
skilled throwers, may provide further insight into whether
confidence in the relevant information can elicit optimal decisions for maximising accuracy.
We encounter situations with multiple goals and targets frequently in daily life, from deciding which locations to monitor while driving, to deciding how to invest time and resources
in various projects. It is therefore surprising that our participants are so poor at making these decisions. In daily life
these situations tend to be far more complex than the situation we have constructed here, and the expected outcomes of
possible decisions would be similarly complex to calculate.
Heuristics are simple rules of thumb to cope with decision
making in complex environments. They can often lead to
near-optimal behavior using less computation and information. For example, an effective rule for intercepting a high
ball (e.g. in baseball) is to keep the ball at a fixed gaze position as you run towards it (Gigerenzer and Brighton, 2009).
This simple heuristic allows a fielder to behave as if they had
solved the differential equations that govern the balls movement. However, in our task the optimal solution can be fully
described by a simple heuristic (i.e., always stand in the center when the hoops are close, and switch to one hoop when
they are far apart). Our results suggest that participants are
nonetheless unsystematic in their decisions.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a James S. McDonnell
scholar award (A.R.H.).

2282

References
Bates, D., Mächler, M., Bolker, B., and Walker, S. (2014).
Fitting linear mixed-effects models using lme4. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1406.5823.
Chang, Y.-K., Ho, L.-A., Lu, F. J.-H., Ou, C.-C., Song, T.-F.,
and Gill, D. L. (2014). Self-talk and softball performance:
The role of self-talk nature, motor task characteristics, and
self-efficacy in novice softball players. Psychology of Sport
and Exercise, 15(1):139–145.
Clarke, A. D. F. and Hunt, A. R. (2016). Failure of intuition when choosing whether to invest in a single goal or
split resources between two goals. Psychological Science,
27(1):64–74.
Gaissmaier, W. and Schooler, L. J. (2008). The smart potential behind probability matching. Cognition, 109(3):416–
422.
Gegenfurtner, A., Lehtinen, E., and Säljö, R. (2011). Expertise differences in the comprehension of visualizations: A
meta-analysis of eye-tracking research in professional domains. Educational Psychology Review, 23(4):523–552.
Gigerenzer, G. and Brighton, H. (2009). Homo heuristicus:
Why biased minds make better inferences. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1(1):107–143.
Hardman, K. O. and Cowan, N. (2016). Reasoning and memory: People make varied use of the information available
in working memory. Journal of experimental psychology.
Learning, memory, and cognition, 42(5):700–722.
Morvan, C. and Maloney, L. T. (2012). Human visual search
does not maximize the post-saccadic probability of identifying targets. PLoS Comput Biol, 8(2):e1002342.
R Core Team (2016). R: A Language and Environment for
Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.
Schraw, G. and Dennison, R. S. (1994). Assessing metacognitive awareness. Contemporary educational psychology,
19(4):460–475.
Simon, H. A. (1990). Invariants of human behavior. Annual
review of psychology, 41(1):1–20.

2283

