Familiarity-matching in decision making:
Experimental studies on cognitive processes and analyses of its ecological rationality
Masaru Shirasuna (m.shirasuna1392@gmail.com)
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The University of Tokyo
3-8-1, Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 153-8902, Japan

Hidehito Honda (hitohonda.02@gmail.com)
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The University of Tokyo
3-8-1, Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 153-8902, Japan

Toshihiko Matsuka (matsuka@chiba-u.jp)
Department of Cognitive and Information Science, Chiba University
1-33, Yayoi-cho, Inage-ku, Chiba-shi, Chiba, 263-8522, Japan

Kazuhiro Ueda (ueda@gregorio.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The University of Tokyo
3-8-1, Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 153-8902, Japan
fluent or familiar with) Chiba, s/he tends to choose the
recognized (or the more familiar or fluent) city –as the one
with a larger population size. An interesting observation is
that, in many cases, this simple inference can often lead to
correct inferences. Thus, a simple heuristic using subjective
memory experiences can be ecologically rational (e.g.,
Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 2002; Hertwig et al., 2008;
Schooler & Hertwig, 2005; Honda et al., in press).

Abstract
Previous studies have shown that individuals often make
inferences based on heuristics using recognition, fluency, or
familiarity. In the present study, we propose a new heuristic
called familiarity-matching, which predicts that when a decision
maker is familiar (or unfamiliar) with an object in a question
sentence, s/he will choose the more (or less) familiar object from
the two alternatives. We examined inference processes and
ecological rationality regarding familiarity-matching through
three studies including behavioral experiments and ecological
analyses. Results showed that participants often used familiaritymatching in solving difficult binary choice problems, and that
familiarity-matching could be applied in an ecologically rational
manner in real-world situations. A new perspective on human
cognitive processes is discussed in this study.

Choice of an object based on similarity of
familiarity: Familiarity-matching

Keywords: binary choice task; heuristic; familiarity;
familiarity-matching; ecological rationality

Introduction
When making decisions, individuals often use simple
inference strategies such as heuristics. In the field of
heuristics research, many researchers initially focused on
cognitive biases involved in heuristics (e.g., Tversky &
Kahneman, 1973, 1974, 1983). In contrast, recent studies
have discussed the adaptive aspect of heuristics (e.g.,
Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996; Gigerenzer & Todd, 1999;
Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 2002). Some studies investigated
human inference cues or inference strategies using binary
choice tasks (e.g., Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 2002; Hertwig,
Herzog, Schooler & Reimer, 2008; Honda, Abe, Matsuka &
Yamagishi, 2011; Honda, Matsuka & Ueda, in press). These
studies showed that subjective memory experiences, such as
recognition, fluency, or familiarity of an object could be
valid inference cues. For example, in the binary choice task,
“Which city has a larger population, Tokyo or Chiba?”
when a decision maker recognizes (or is more fluent or
familiar with) Tokyo and does not recognize (or is less

So far, previous studies have investigated the effects of
subjective memory experience for finding correct
alternatives in a binary choice task. However, if the
familiarity of an object in alternatives can serve as a valid
inference cue, it is possible that the same holds true for the
familiarity of an object in a question sentence. For example,
if we consider the binary choice task, “Which country is
Hameln in, Germany or Liechtenstein?” A decision maker
may infer it as “I have heard the name ‘Hameln’ and I am
familiar with this city. Further, I am more familiar with
Germany than Liechtenstein; therefore, Hameln should be in
Germany!” In this case, the decision maker chose the more
familiar alternative because the familiarity of the chosen
alternative was similar to that of the object in the question
sentence. Likewise, in the task, “Which country is
Schellenberg in, Germany or Liechtenstein?” A decision
maker may infer it as “I have never heard the name
‘Schellenberg’ and I am unfamiliar with the city. Further, I
am less familiar with Liechtenstein than Germany; therefore,
Schellenberg should be in Liechtenstein!” In this case, the
decision maker chose the less familiar alternative because
the two objects were similarly unfamiliar. A decision maker
may thus use an inference strategy like “matching
familiarity” between an object in the question sentence and
another object in the alternatives. That is, a decision maker
makes inferences based on similarity of familiarity between

3143

objects. Similarity judgments are closely connected to
decision making and similarities between the familiarity of
an object in a question sentence and that of an object in
alternatives may become an important cue for making
decisions. In fact, a recent study (Hiatt & Trafton, in press)
has shown that familiarity can be one of the most important
cues in similarity judgments.
Based on these considerations, we propose a new
heuristic termed as familiarity-matching: If an object in a
question sentence is familiar (or unfamiliar) for a decision
maker, then s/he will choose the more (or less) familiar
object from the two alternatives in a binary choice task. The
goal of this study was to examine if cognitive processes in
binary choice can be explained in terms of familiaritymatching and to investigate its ecological rationality. In the
following sections, we shall report on three studies. In Study
1, we conducted a behavioral experiment and examined if
familiarity-matching could adequately explain inference
processes. In Study 2, we examined the ecological
rationality of familiarity-matching. Finally, in Study 3, we
analyzed the real-world environment in terms of familiarity.

alternatives are expressed as “Fam(Q),” “Fam(A1),” and
“Fam(A2),” respectively. In the following analyses, we
excluded the questions in which Fam(A1) was identical to
Fam(A2).
Can familiarity-matching predict inference patterns?
First, we analyzed the accordance rate of observed
inferences with familiarity-matching for each participant.
For example, when Fam(Q) = 45, Fam(A1) = 30, and
Fam(A2) = 80, familiarity-matching predicts that the
participant would choose A1. Figure 1 shows the
accordance rate for each participant. In 29 out of the 31
participants, accordance rates were above chance level. The
mean accordance rate was .88. These results indicate that
the observed choices were predicted accurately by
familiarity-matching.

Study 1: Examination of inference processes
The purpose of Study 1 was to investigate if individuals
tend to rely on familiarity-matching in a binary choice task.

Method
Participants Japanese under graduate students (N = 31)
participated in this study.
Tasks, materials, and procedure We conducted the binary
choice task and the measurement of familiarity.
In the binary choice task, participants answered 100
binary choice questions. All question sentences had the
following format: “X is a city in, country A1 or A2?” (e.g.,
“Sikasso is a city in, Mali or Switzerland?”). The order of
the 100 questions was randomized (see Appendix for the
procedure to generate the questions). For each question,
participants were also asked to rate the difficulty level in
answering the question using a visual analog scale (VAS).
The scale consisted of a horizontal line labeled “very easy”
on the left end and “very difficult” on the right end.
Participants’ responses were recorded over a range of 101points (i.e., from 0 = “very easy” to 100 = “very difficult”).
In the measurement of familiarity, participants were
asked to indicate how familiar they were with each object
presented in the binary choice task (i.e., 20 countries and
100 cities) using a VAS. Participants’ responses were
recorded over a range of 101-points (i.e., from 0 = “do not
know at all” on the left end of the scale to 100 = “know
much” on the right end of the scale).
We conducted the above two tasks using a questionnaire.
Participants completed the binary choice task followed by
the measurement of familiarity.

Results
Hereafter, the familiarity ratings for the object in the
question sentence and for the two objects presented as

Figure 1: Accordance rate of observed inferences with
familiarity-matching (individual data). The red line denotes
chance level (.50) and the dotted line shows the mean
accordance rate (.88).
Does the difficulty of a problem affect the use of
familiarity-matching? Previous studies have shown that
individuals do not always use heuristics but tend to rely on
them for solving a difficult problem (e.g., Kahneman &
Frederick, 2005; Honda et al., in press). Therefore, we
examined if experiencing difficulty in a problem affected
the use of familiarity-matching. We defined a dichotomized
difficulty rating, high or low difficulty, based on the
difficulty ratings being above or below the median for each
participant. Hereafter, a problem assigned a rating above the
median is expressed as “difficult problem” and a problem
assigned a rating below the median as “easy problem”. We
examined the use of familiarity-matching for both types of
problems.
Some researchers have debated that accordance rates are
not always a good indicator for examining if individuals
“truly” use heuristics (e.g., Hilbig & Richter, 2011). Thus,
we used Discrimination Index (DI) (Hilbig & Pohl, 2008) as

3144

an indicator of the blind usage of familiarity-matching by
the participants. DI was calculated using the following
equation:
DI = (Hit) – (False Alarm)
where (Hit) and (False Alarm) denote the proportion in
which the accordance of a heuristic results in a correct or
false inference, respectively. Since DI is defined as the
difference between (Hit) and (False Alarm), DI ranges from
–1 to +1. It is assumed that when a decision maker always
follows a heuristic (i.e., s/he blindly uses a heuristic), DI
should reach zero, as s/he uses the heuristic irrespective of
its correctness, suggesting that s/he does not take advantage
of specific knowledge relevant to the inference problem.
For each participant, we calculated DI for the two
problem types. Figure 2 shows the distributions of DI for
the two cases. We found that DI for the difficult problem
was generally lower than DI for the easy problem. We also
found that the mean DI for the difficult problem was not
significantly deviated from zero (Mean = .07, t(30) = 1.23, p
= .23, Median = .06), while the mean DI for the easy
problem was significantly deviated from zero (Mean = .41,
t(30) = 6.47, p < .001, Median = .39). These results implied
that individuals used memory-based simple heuristics when
they experienced difficulty in solving inference problems,
which was consistent with the previous finding in Honda et
al. (in press).

Figure 2: DI (Discrimination Index) for the difficult
problem (left) and for the easy problem (right).

Discussion
In this behavioral experiment, the accordance rate of the
prediction by familiarity-matching was sufficiently high
(mean accordance rate = .88), showing that familiaritymatching predicted inference patterns effectively.
Furthermore, our findings implied that participants used
familiarity-matching when they experienced difficulty in
problems. These results suggest that individuals take

advantage of the familiarity of objects in both question
sentences and alternatives as a cue when making inferences.
In the behavioral experiment, the materials used were
selected by experimenters to serve as stimuli for the binary
choice task. Therefore, the question of using familiaritymatching in a binary choice task as a valid inference
strategy remains open for evaluation. Thus, we examined
the ecological rationality of familiarity-matching.

Study 2: Analysis of ecological rationality
The purpose of Study 2 was to examine if familiaritymatching could serve as an ecologically rational strategy. In
this study, we measured individuals’ familiarity of objects
and then examined whether familiarity-matching was
generally a valid inference strategy in a binary choice task.

Method
Participants Japanese under graduate students (N = 39)
participated in the task. None of them had participated in
Study 1.
Materials, tasks, and procedure We used the 50 countries
with the highest population in the world and their 50
capitals as materials. We investigated the participants’
familiarity with each of the 100 objects (i.e., 50 cities and
50 countries). We conducted the measurement of familiarity
which was similar to the method used in Study 1.
Analysis of the validity of familiarity-matching
Familiarity ratings in Study 2 were converted into z-scores
for each participant and the following analyses were
conducted.
We analyzed the validity of familiarity-matching in the
binary choice task using the familiarity ratings for the 50
countries and their capitals collected from participants.
Specifically, we calculated the accuracy rate (i.e., validity)
of familiarity-matching using the following procedure:
1. A hypothetical binary choice task such as “X is a city
in, A1 or A2?” was conducted and each problem “was
inferred” based on Fam(Q), Fam(A1) and Fam(A2).
2. For each question, if the absolute difference between
Fam(Q) and Fam(A1) was less than that between
Fam(Q) and Fam(A2), then A1 was selected, and vice
versa (i.e., in the same manner as the prediction by
familiarity-matching in Study 1).
3. We applied the above two steps to all possible
combinations (50 cities * 49 alternative pairs) using the
familiarity ratings provided by each participant, and
then calculated his/her accuracy rate.

Results and discussion
Figure 3 shows participant accuracy rates calculated as
described above (N = 39). The horizontal and vertical axes
shows the participants (individual data) and the accuracy
rate, respectively, while the red line in the graph indicates
chance level (.50). Participant accuracy rates (Mean = .67)
exceeded the chance level for all participants. Therefore, it
is suggested that participants can accurately “make correct

3145

inferences” by matching more familiar objects in the binary
choice task, even in the real-world environment.

Figure 4: Correlation between the number of hits for cities
and that for countries (log-transformed z-scores).

Figure 3: Accuracy rate of familiarity-matching by
individual familiarity ratings. The red line denotes chance
level (.50) and the dotted line shows the mean accuracy rate
(.67).

Study 3: Analysis of the real world
According to previous studies (e.g., Goldstein & Gigerenzer,
2002; Honda et al., in press), if a city or country appears
more frequently in the real-world environment (e.g.,
mentioned in media), then individuals will be more familiar
with it because they are more likely to see or hear the name.
Therefore, it can be estimated that familiarity-matching can
be applied effectively in the binary choice task when the
frequency of appearance of the name of a city is correlated
with that of the name of a country in the real-world
environment.
In this section, we investigated this issue using the
following procedure. As an index of the frequency of
appearance in the real-world environment, we used the logtransformation of the mean number of hits for each object in
two online databases of Japanese newspapers 1 . When we
searched for objects in both databases, we traced back from
the oldest to latest date as possible (see footnote) on national
news. We converted the log-transformed index into z-scores,
which were used in this analysis.
First, we calculated the correlation coefficient between
the number of hits for the 50 cities and that for the 50
countries using z-scores. This correlation coefficient was .86
(p < .001; 95% CI: .77 ~ .92; Figure 4). Therefore, it was
found that the frequency of appearance of a city name in the
media was highly correlated with that of the country name
that corresponded to the city.

1 The two databases were “Kikuzo II Visual” (online database of
Asahi Shimbun; date range: January 1, 1984 to May 23, 2016) and
“Yomidasu Rekishikan” (online database of Yomiuri Shimbun;
date range: January 1, 1986 to May 23, 2016).

Although the correlation between participants’ familiarity
with an object and the number of appearances in the media
has already been reported in previous studies (e.g.,
Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 2002; Schooler & Hertwig, 2005),
we confirmed that we could replicate such a correlation in
the present study. Subsequently, using z-scores, we
calculated the correlation coefficient between participants’
familiarity with each object (z-scores of the mean
familiarity ratings for 39 participants in Study 2) and the
number of hits for each object. This correlation coefficient
was .88 (p < .001; 95% CI: .84 ~ .92; Figure 5). Therefore,
it was found that the more often an object appeared in the
media, the more familiar with the object individuals were,
which was consistent with previous studies.

Figure 5: Correlation between familiarity of objects (zscores) and the number of hits for these objects (logtransformed z-scores).
The combined results of Study 2 and Study 3 suggest that
familiarity-matching can be valid even in the real-world
environment, as the frequency of appearance of a city name
in the media is highly correlated with that of the
corresponding country name, and individuals’ familiarity
with an object is also highly correlated with its frequency of
appearance in the media. In other words, since a more
frequently appearing object in the environment is likely to

3146

(“alternatives,” in this study), has revealed a new
perspective on human inferences.

be more familiar for individuals, inferences based on
similarity of familiarity can be valid in a binary choice task.
Therefore, familiarity-matching can be applied as an
ecologically rational strategy.

Acknowledgment

General discussion
In the present study, we proposed a new heuristic,
familiarity-matching, which predicts that if an object
presented in a question sentence is familiar for a decision
maker, then s/he is likely to choose the more familiar object
presented as alternatives in a binary choice task. The results
of Study 1 showed that familiarity-matching could predict
individuals’ inference patterns effectively. In particular, the
results implied that individuals used familiarity-matching
when they experienced difficulty in inference problems. In
addition, the results of Study 2 and Study 3 showed that
familiarity-matching could be an ecologically valid strategy
in the binary choice task, because of the high correlations
between the frequency of appearance of a city name and that
of a country name, and between the frequency of
appearance of an object and individuals’ familiarity with it.
So far, only the use of “familiarity” in making inferences
has been primarily examined. Generally, in a binary choice
task, “familiarity” of an object can be an informative cue
(e.g., Honda et al., 2011, in press). In a binary choice task,
“unfamiliarity,” contrary to “familiarity,” is often
considered uninformative in making inferences. The present
findings, however, indicate that individuals can also use
“unfamiliarity” as an informative inference cue. Familiaritymatching can be applied for both, a familiar object and an
unfamiliar object, in a question sentence. According to
familiarity-matching, when presented with an unfamiliar
object, a decision maker will infer the following: “The
correct answer will also be the unfamiliar object.” In this
situation, the “unfamiliarity” can become an informative cue.
Perhaps, in cases where a decision maker uses
“unfamiliarity” as an inference cue, the cognitive processes
may differ from those involved in a situation where s/he
uses “familiarity” as an inference cue. The present study did
not examine this issue, which, therefore, should be
investigated in the future.
However, familiarity-matching still has some limitations
in the practical aspect. The definition of the familiaritymatching is limited to a binary choice task. We think that
familiarity-matching can be applied to a multiple-choice
task, because a decision maker has only to “match”
familiarity of an object in a question sentence with that of
an object in alternatives, no matter how many alternatives
the task contains. However, it is not clear how familiaritymatching can be extended to other more complex tasks, so
we may also need to investigate this issue.
To the best of our knowledge, the present study was the
first study to examine the effect of familiarity of objects in a
question sentence. We believe that focusing on the
relationship between objects presented as both, a main
theme (“question sentence,” in this study) and a supplement

This research was supported by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific
Research (A, 16H01725; B, 25280049, 16H02835) and
Young Scientists (B, 16K16070), and Grants-in-Aid for
Scientific Research on Innovative Areas (16H06569).

References
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. G. (1996). Reasoning the
fast and frugal way: Models of bounded rationality.
Psychological Review, 103, 650–669.
Gigerenzer, G., & Todd, P. M. (1999). Simple heuristics
that make us smart. New York: Oxford University Press.
Goldstein, D. G., & Gigerenzer, G. (2002). Models of
ecological rationality: The recognition heuristic.
Psychological Review, 109(1), 75–90.
Hertwig, R., Herzog, S., Schooler, L., & Reimer, T. (2008).
Fluency Heuristic: A Model of How the Mind Exploits a
By-Product of Information Retrieval. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition，34, 5, 1191–1206.
Hiatt, L. M., & Trafton, J. G. (in press). Familiarity,
Priming, and Perception in Similarity Judgments.
Cognitive Science.
Hilbig, B. E. & Pohl, R. F. (2008). Recognizing Users of the
Recognition Heuristic. Journal of Research in Personality,
42, 1641–1645..
Hilbig, B. E. (2010). Precise models deserve precise
measures: A methodological Dissection. Judgment and
Decision Making, 5(4), 272-284.
Hilbig, B. E., Erdfelder, E., & Pohl, R. F. (2010). Onereason decision making unveiled: A measurement model
of the recognition heuristic. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 36(1),
123–134.
Hilbig, B. E., Erdfelder, E., & Pohl, R. F. (2011). Fluent,
Fast, and Frugal? A Formal Model Evaluation of the
Interplay Between Memory, Fluency, and Comparative
Judgments. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 37(4), 827–839.
Hilbig, B. E., & Richter, T. (2011). Homo heuristicus
outnumbered: Comment on Gigerenzer and Brighton
(2009). Topics in Cognitive Science, 3, 187–196.
doi:10.1111/j.1756-8765.2010.01123.x
Honda, H., Abe, K., Matsuka, T., & Yamagishi, K. (2011).
The role of familiarity in binary choice inferences.
Memory and Cognition, 39 (5), 851-863.
Honda, H., Matsuka, T., & Ueda, K. (in press). Memorybased simple heuristics as attribute substitution:
Competitive tests of binary choice inference models.
Cognitive Science.
Kahneman, D., & Frederick, S. (2005). A model of heuristic
judgment. In K. J. Holyoak & R. G. Morrison (Eds.),

3147

Cambridge handbook of thinking and reasoning (pp. 267–
293). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Schooler, L. J., & Hertwig, R. (2005). How forgetting aids
heuristic inference. Psychological Review, 112, 610–628.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A
Heuristic for Judging Frequency and Probability.
Cognitive Psychology, 5, 207-232.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgments under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 1124–
1131.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional versus
intuitive reasoning; The conjunction fallacy in probability
judgement. Psychological Review, 90, 293-315.

name is included in that of a historical treaty,
conference, or a similar historical event,” “has a
world heritage site,” or “has hosted the Olympic or
the Paralympic Games.”

Appendix. Binary choice task

…

The binary choice task (Study 1) was generated by
following the four steps listed as under:
1.

2.

Alternative A2
Canada
Bolivia
Italia
Ukraine
Switzerland
Iran
Spain
Kazakhstan
New Zealand
Morocco

Using the groups, “Alternative A1” and “Alternative
A2” described above, we created 10*10 = 100 pairs
as alternatives for the binary choice task.
1
2
3
4
98
99
100

3.

Sikasso
Puebla
Tlatelolco
Guadalajara
Monterrey
Villahermosa
Rabat
Marrakesh
Tangier
Fes
Casablanca

For “objects presented as alternatives,” we selected
20 countries (more than 2 countries from 5 regions:
Asia, Europe, Africa, North America, and South
America) and randomly assigned these 20 countries
to 2 groups: “Alternative A1” and “Alternative A2”
(each group consisted of different 10 countries).
Alternative A1
America
Sweden
Mexico
Columbia
Holland
Egypt
Turkey
Saudi Arabia
Australia
Mali

Alternative A1 Alternative A2
Holland
Iran
Australia
Bolivia
Columbia
Kazakhstan
Saudi Arabia
Morocco
…
Turkey
New Zealand
Mexico
Switzerland
America
Ukraine

From each country (“objects presented as
alternatives”), we selected 5 cities (total of 20*5 =
100 cities) using the following criteria:
(I) Out of the 5 cities, we selected the 2 cities with
the largest population size in the country.
(II) For the remaining 3 cities, we selected cities
which satisfied following one (or more) of the
following criteria: “is the high population size”, “its

Countries
America
America
America
America
America
Italia
Italia
Italia
Italia
Italia
Iran

Cities
New York
Washington D.C.
Portsmouth
San Francisco
Bretton Woods
Rapallo
Trent
Roma
Milano
Genova
Teheran

Mali
Mexico
Mexico
Mexico
Mexico
Mexico
Morocco
Morocco
Morocco
Morocco
Morocco

Note: We provided criterion (II) for two reasons: First, if all
alternatives consisted of top cities in terms of population,
participants might be more likely to know the answer (i.e.,
to use knowledge-based inference cues instead of heuristics),
as it seemed that larger cities were comparatively more
famous. Second, we wanted to create objects presented as
question sentences (i.e., cities) that would be the only
familiar element for participants (i.e., when participants are
only familiar with a city, they often do not know the country
it belongs to). However, even if a city satisfied criterion (I)
or (II), we excluded cities whose names included the name
of the country (e.g., Mexico City) or were located in several
countries (e.g., Melbourne is located not only in Australia
but also in America).
4.

In order to make one of the two alternatives (from
step 2) a correct answer, we placed a city (from step
3) in “X” in each question sentence (“X is a city in,”).

1. Ramsar is a city in,
2. La Paz is a city in,
3. Bogota is a city in,
4. Rabat is a city in,

Alternative A1

Alternative
A2

Holland
Australia
Columbia

Iran
Bolivia
Kazakhstan
Morocco

Saudi Arabia

…
98. Ankara is a city in,
99. Villahermosa is a city in,
100. Bretton Woods is a city in,

Turkey
Mexico
America

New Zealand

Switzerland
Ukraine

Note: Sentences in the actual questionnaire were written in
Japanese.

3148

