Finding Creative New Ideas:
Human-Centric Mindset Overshadows Mind-Wandering
Yung-Yi Juliet Chou (juliet.chou@columbia.edu)
Barbara Tversky (btversky@stanford.edu)
Teachers College, Columbia University
New York, NY10027 USA
Abstract
Finding creative new ideas requires both release from fixation
and a productive search mindset. Recent research has shown
that messy desks, walking, and mind-wandering can lead to
more new uses for old objects. Here we show that a humancentric mindset is superior to mind-wandering for generating
more alternative uses and more creative uses because it
provides both release from fixation and an effective search
strategy. A human-centric mindset entails perspective-taking,
and perspective-taking is likely to be an effective general
strategy for enhancing creativity, problem-solving and
innovation.
Keywords: creativity; design; mindset;

Introduction
How do you get an original idea? One way to catalyze the
creative process is to recombine or transform old ideas into
new ones. But starting with established ideas can often be
counter-productive, leading to fixation (e.g., Jansson &
Smith, 1991; Finke, Ward, & Smith, 1992; Smith, Ward, &
Schumacher, 1993; Purcell & Gero, 1996; Chrysikou &
Weisberg, 2005). Finding new associations is regarded as
key to overcoming fixation (e. g., Finke, 1990; Finke, Ward,
& Smith, 1992; Jansson & Smith, 1991; Mednick, 1962;
Smith, Ward, & Finke, 1995).
Recent studies have shown a variety of ways to stimulate
new ideas for alternative uses of ordinary objects, a classic
creativity task (Guilford, Christensen, Merrifield & Wilson,
1978) that is also frequently used in design classes as a
warm-up activity. Messy desks in contrast to tidy ones have
enabled people to think of more new uses for ping-pong
balls (Vohs, Redden, & Rahinel, 2013). Messy desks create
ambiguous configurations and ambiguous configurations are
deliberately used by designers to generate new ideas and
successful in doing so (Tversky & Suwa, 2009). Taking a
walk rather than sitting has helped people generate more
novel uses for common objects (Opezzo & Schwartz, 2014);
taking a walk exposes people to new stimuli that might
inspire new associations. Mind-wandering has facilitated
creative incubation for finding new uses for common
objects (Baird, Smallwood, Mrazek, Kam, Franklin, &
Schooler, 2012; Smallwood & Schooler, 2006) though this
strategy has not always been successful (Hao, Wu, Runco,
& Pina, 2015). The proponents of mind-wandering use
neuroscience research on the default network to argue for
mind-wandering (Baird, et al., 2012). The default network

is activated when the mind turns inward rather than
responding to external stimuli (Mason, Norton, Van Horn,
& Wegner, 2007; Smallwood, Beach, Schooler, & Handy,
2008). Wandering in the mind, like wandering in the world,
can bring new stimuli, and consequently new responses.
Messy desks, taking a walk, and mind wandering succeed
in releasing thinkers from fixation by bring in new stimuli.
An even simpler manipulation, interleaving different design
problems rather than blocking them, accomplishes the same
(Tversky & Chou, 2010)—remember the old adage: Take a
break. But bringing in new stimuli doesn’t by itself provide
a productive way to search for new ideas. Innovators need
effective search strategies as well as release from fixation.
Designers in prominent design firms, notably IDEO, have
developed a systematic approach, Human-Centric design, to
do exactly that. They have instituted elaborate practices to
enable their designers to put themselves in the shoes of
potential users in order to design effective systems,
procedures or products for the target community (Kelley &
Littman, 2006). Although widely adopted, the humancentric approach has not been systematically evaluated.
Here we evaluate the Human-Centric approach by using a
design task that laypeople frequently need to do, finding
new uses for everyday objects. In our daily lives we often
find ourselves improvising, to grasp an object out of reach
by twisting a coat hanger or to tie a shoe together with a
paper clip when a shoelace has snapped. This improvised
design requires finding new uses for familiar objects. The
new uses task has been used in considerable previous
research, including the studies that stimulated our own. It is
also used as a warm-up exercise in design course typically
asking students to come up with many ways to use a brick.
We asked participants to find new uses for ordinary objects
under three mindsets: Human-Centric, Mind-Wandering,
and a control condition with no special mindset. For the
Human-Centric mindset, for each object, we directed
participants to think of how different human roles might use
the object. We chose roles that participants would be
familiar with in their everyday interactions, such as artist,
chef, physician, mechanic, and athlete. We pretested the
roles to make sure our intuitions were correct. We selected
six objects, also after pretesting to make sure that laypeople
could generate alternative uses for the objects.
Adopting the perspectives of many roles should fulfill
both requirements for original ideas. Changing perspective
should lead to release from fixation and taking new

1776

perspectives should provide effective ways to search for
new ideas. The Human-Centric group was asked “to
imagine how different people in different roles might reuse
the objects in their activities.” The Mind-Wandering group
was given the instructions of Baird et al. (2012) “to simply
relax and let your mind wander.” The control group was
given no special mindset.

Measuring Fluency and Originality of Ideas
Here ideas generated by participants were evaluated on
quantity or fluency and on creativity, that is degree of
originality. The primary interest is in fluency, as in design
evaluating suitability can only come after ideas are
generated. Evaluating originality or creativity has typically
been based either on judgments of creativity or on statistical
rarity in the larger group (e.g. Hennessey & Amabile, 2010;
Runco & Jaeger, 2012; Runco, 2004). Judgments of
creativity can be biased and unstable (e.g. Kaufman, Baer,
Cole, & Sexton, 2008). Here we use the Sample-Specific
Percentage Score of Mouchiroud and Lubart (2001) derived
from Torrance's classic paradigm (1968). One point is given
to each idea given by 2-5% of the sample and two points to
each idea given by less than 2% of the sample. This method
has been criticized for failing to differentiate the quality of
originality from the fluency of responses. For example, a
participant who gave 10 common responses might get a
higher total originality score than a participant who gave
only 2 answers, even if the 2 answers were more unusual.
However, this did not seem to be a problem in the present
study as the people who gave original ideas also gave many
ideas.

Methods
Participants

object or rolling up a magazine to swat flies. Then
participants were invited to discover and generate
uncommon uses for six ordinary objects. All three mindset
conditions next read general instructions: “On each trial you
will be presented with the name of the object. Your job is to
produce as many different novel uses as you can, uses that
are different from the normal use. You will type your ideas
in a text box, using only a few words, one idea at a time.
Please do not repeat ideas. Eventually, you may run out of
new ideas and then you will have a chance to proceed to the
next object and generate new ideas for it. There are SIX
objects. You will have 5 minutes to generate novel uses for
each object. Please do not use any resources besides your
own creative mind in this task.” Participants were also told:
“It's OK to use more than one of the objects and it’s OK to
use parts of the object.”
Participants in the Mind-Wandering group were told that
“One proven way to generate new ideas is to simply relax
and let your mind wander. Please use that mindset to
generate as many new uses as you can think of.”
Participants in the Human-Centric group were told that
“One proven way to generate new ideas is to imagine how
different people in different roles might reuse the objects in
their activities. Other roles might include various kinds of
athletes, gardeners, artists, chefs, musicians, mechanics,
craftspeople, dancers, teachers, police, firefighters,
plumbers, tailors, architects, physicians, writers and more.
Please imagine the mindset of a variety of roles to generate
as many new uses as you can think of.” The Control group
was not given any specific strategy or exemplars. Each
participant had a practice trial with clothes hanger for 3
minutes before starting the real experiment. The screenshot
of the human-centric mindset condition are shown after
participants entered responses in Figure 1. Each response
was assigned a position number by the system.

Participants (N=105) were recruited through Amazon
Mechanical Turks Web service, receiving $5 for
approximately 40 minutes of time. Participants’ ages ranged
from 21-65, with a mean of 33.19 and came from a wide
range of educational backgrounds. Participants were
randomly assigned to the three mindset conditions. There
were 18 women and 17 men in the Mind-Wandering Group,
15 women and 20 men in the Human-Centric Group, 18
women and 17 men in the Control Group.

Stimuli
The objects were selected from a review of objects in
previous research and from a pilot study to make sure that
they could be decomposed and would stimulate new uses
from ordinary people: broom, flashlight, chair, umbrella,
shoe, and smartphone. A smartphone is representative of
contemporary and future design challenges.

Procedure
The first screen that greeted participants described everyday
ingenuity, such as using a hanger to grab an out of reach

Figure 1: Screenshot of the Human-Centric mindset
condition after entering new responses.
Participants were then presented with the names of six
objects, one at a time, for the unusual uses task: Broom,
Flashlight, Chair, Umbrella, Shoe, and Smart Phone. Each
of those 5 objects except for Smart Phone was randomly
ordered for each participant. For each object, the common
use was presented under the name of the object on the
screen After generating ideas for those 5 objects, the Smart

1777

Phone was presented along with a new instruction by adding
a paragraph, “Now that you’ve warmed up generating new
uses for old objects, try your mind at generating new uses,
including new apps, for a smart phone.”
After participants finished generating new uses,
participants responded to a questionnaire asking whether
they used the mindset strategy suggested and how easy, how
helpful it was to follow. The control group was asked if
they used a mindset strategy, and if so, what?

Results
Coding Counting ideas was a two-step process. Responses
were first put through a spreadsheet that (a) counted the
total number of answers, and (b) identified the likely
original answers by eliminating all duplicates (repeated
identical answers). During the initial examination, all
duplicate answers were removed; total numbers generated
for each participant were accurate, and all the unusual /
unique answers were identified. Generalized items (e.g., “a
broom to clean off the cobweb on the ceiling”) were
counted toward a participant’s total number of responses but
were not coded as original. To measure the originality of
ideas, the task was coded with Sample-Specific Percentage
scoring method derived from the classic Torrance's (1968)
paradigm. Examples of both original and ordinary examples
are provided in Figure 2.

was applied to interpret the F statistics for the post hoc
results.
Welch's Robust ANOVA showed significant differences
in fluency of three mindset groups, F (2, 65.38) = 5.407, p =
.007. Continuing, the Games-Howell post hoc testing
revealed that the Human-Centric mindset group generated
more ideas than the mind-wandering mindset group a mean
increase of 15.229, 95% CI [2.18 to 28.27]. There was also
a mean increase of 17.514, 95% CI [4.42 to 30.61] between
the Human-Centric and Control groups, but there was no
significant mean difference between the Mind-Wandering
and Control groups, 2.229, 95% CI [-7.11 to 11.57]. The
mean number of ideas generated by each mindset condition
for each object can be viewed in Figure 4.

Figure 3: The Human-Centric mindset group generated
more uses than Mind-Wandering and Control groups.

Figure 4: The Human-Centric mindset group generated
more uses than the other groups for each object.

Figure 2: Examples of original and ordinary ideas
Fluency of Ideas The 3 mindsets differed substantially in
fluency (i.e. total number of ideas); the Human-Centric
group (M = 54.06, SD = 27.30) generated far more ideas
than the Mind-Wandering (M = 38.77, SD = 15.52) and
Control groups (M = 36.54, SD = 17.05) in Figure 3.
Because Levene's test was significant (p < .001), revealing
that variances in the Human-Centric group were differed,
violating the assumption of homogeneity of variance, a
more robust Games-Howell method (instead of Tukey HSD)

Originality of Ideas For originality, Levene's test was
significant, and the assumption of homogeneity of variance
was violated. The Welch test table was applied. There was a
significant effect for the three mindset conditions differed
significantly in originality of ideas F (2, 67.21) = 4.34, p =
.017. The post-hoc comparison using the Games-Howell test
indicated that the mean score of originality for the HumanCentric group (M = 31.89, SD = 21.67) was significantly
different from the Mind-Wandering group (M = 20.43, SD =

1778

16.61) and from the Control group (M = 18.77, SD = 17.12).
There were no differences between the Mind-Wandering
and Control conditions, as shown in Figure 5.
Fluency of Original Ideas Two Pearson’s product-moment
correlations were run to assess the relationship between the
quantity and originality of ideas. The first correlation refers
to the total number of ideas, a summation of the number of
ideas that each participant generated across 6 objects (5 min
per object) and the sum of the originality score for those
ideas. There was a strong correlation between the quantity
of ideas generated by a participant and the overall
originality scores irrespective of mindset conditions in the
study, r (103) = .885, p < .001. The overall originality score
(i.e. 2 points for each idea given by less than 2% of the
sample; 1 point for each idea with a frequency seen in 2% to
5% of the sample; 0 points for ideas given more than 5% of
the sample) is a summation of the originality score for 6
objects. The average participant generated approximately 43
ideas in the 30 minutes of the idea generation task. The
second correlation refers to the total number of ideas and the
average originality of ideas for each participant. There was a
moderate positive correlation between the quantity of ideas
and the mean originality score (sum of originality score
divided by total number of ideas), r (103) = .434, p < .001.
There were no differences in quantity of ideas and
originality of ideas for the different objects.

Position of Ideas: Original Ideas Come Later Many
studies have found that ideas generated later tend to be
better than early ideas since Christensen, Guilford, &
Wilson (1957) first demonstrated the effect. This result
aligns with those from prior studies (Beaty & Silvia, 2012).
Two methods were used to confirm that original ideas do
come later. The graph in Figure 6 shows the mean score of
originality (from 0 to 2) for ideas that appear in the ith
position, i = 1, 2,...10, regardless of conditions and objects
for this study. It was reasonable to choose 10 positions,
because about half of the sample size generated at least 10
ideas. It appears that participants came up with more
original ideas at the later position. Another bar graph Figure
7 is to show the percentage of ideas that were original (less
than 5% of the sample generated the idea) for each position.

Figure 7: Original ideas tended to come later.
Self Report / Manipulation Check Regarding whether
participants used the suggested mindset strategies to
generate ideas; it appears that more than 75% of participants
in both Human-Centric and Mind-Wandering groups
claimed that they did follow the instruction. 69% of
participants in the Human-Centric group and 60% of
participants in the Mind-Wandering group did think it was
helpful with the suggested strategy. Regarding how easy
participants used the suggested mindset strategies to
generate ideas; it appears that more than 50% of
participants in both Mind-Wandering and Human-Centric
groups self-reported it was easy for them to use the mindset.
89% of participants in the Control group self-reported that
they simply let things come to mind, using a mindwandering mindset strategy.

Figure 5: The Human-Centric mindset group generated
more original ideas than the Mind-Wandering and Control
groups.

Discussion

Figure 6: Participants who generated at least 10 ideas for
any object were more likely to produce more original ideas.

Designers and problem solvers--and we are all designers
and problem solvers--often get stuck. They/we get fixated
on one idea or a set of them and then thinking goes in
circles. Breaking fixation, breaking that circle, finding new
ideas requires new associations. Messy desks, walks, and
mind-wandering have all proven helpful for finding new
uses for familiar objects. They work because each leads to
new stimuli and new stimuli can bring new associations and
perhaps new ideas.
Although wandering eyes, wandering bodies, and
wandering minds can expose us to new stimuli, the paths of

1779

search are still wandering, not directed in any meaningful
way. There is no guarantee that the meandering and the
associations are in any way related to the design or problem.
Designers and problem solvers also need productive ways to
search for and generate new ideas that are relevant to the
problem at hand. The human-centric mindset does just that.
The human-centric approach entails taking the perspectives
of others, here diverse roles that participants are familiar
with. Participants could make use of their knowledge of the
roles to generate relevant uses: what could a gardener do
with an umbrella? An artist with a shoe? An athlete with a
chair? Participants with the Human-Centric mindset did use
the roles that we gave them, and invented new roles of their
own. Using a high criterion for relevance, nearly half the
ideas generated by the group using the Human-Centric
approach were directly related to one of the roles provided
and another 10% derived from roles they invented,
presumably because they used the mindset to take the
perspectives of various roles. The most productive role was
artist, followed by gardener, athlete, policeperson,
mechanic, chef, and musician.
Consistent with that analysis, the Human-Centric mindset
yielded more ideas than either the Mind-Wandering mindset
or the no-mindset control. In fact, the Mind-Wandering
mindset was no more successful than the no-mindset control
group at generating new uses. This turns out to be
unsurprising; in response to a question about how they
searched for new ideas, many in the control group reported
that they just let their minds wander.
Participants using the Human-Centric mindset generated
more new uses and also generated more original new uses
than those who adopted the other mindsets. Original new
uses tended to come later; it’s as if participants have to first
get the ordinary alternative uses out of their heads in order
to free their minds to find unusual ones. Sadly, one of the
most common uses suggested for most of the objects was
weapon. The vast majority of original responses were not
only reasonable and appropriate, but clever, even if unusual.
Remember that the instructions allowed using more than
one of the objects. For a shoe, sound-proofing; for a chair, a
water strainer; for a smart phone, a wrist splint, for a
flashlight, a martini shaker.
Because of the overall quality of the original ideas, it is
apparent that participants were editing their own responses.
That process, of generating ideas and evaluating them, is
supported by neuroscience research (Beaty, Benedek, Silvia,
& Schacter, 2016; Chrysikou, in press; Ellamil, Dobson,
Beeman, & Christoff, 2012; Mason, Norton, Van Horn,
Wegner, Grafton, & Macrae, 2007). The neuroscience
findings suggest that creative problem solving is
characterized by alternating activation in the default
network, indicative of internal processing, and the frontal
system, indicative of executive control. This iterative
process, of generating ideas and evaluating them coincides
with the experience of designers and problem solvers. It
remains to be seen whether the neuroscience tools are
sensitive enough to detect the large differences in mindset

demonstrated here. In the meantime, it should be clear that
Mind-Wandering is not to be recommended as a general
mindset for finding innovative ideas. A Human-Centric
mindset is far more productive.
The Human-Centric mindset clearly has wide
applicability. Diplomats negotiating peace agreements take
the perspectives of each party, as do lawyers. Writers of
books and screenplays take the perspectives of their readers
or viewers. Product designers think deeply about the ways
different users will interact with their products. Using the
Human-Centric mindset entails adopting relevant and
varying human roles. Yet there are many problems that
demand creative solutions but do not involve humans,
except as thinkers. Problems in mathematics or physics.
Design of machines or robots for tasks that do not involve
humans, except as designers. Taking different human
perspectives might help, but that is probably not be the best
way for those problems. However, taking different human
perspectives is at its foundation taking different
perspectives, and that mindset might just work for
everything. Or nearly everything. Mathematicians reframe
problems algebraically or geometrically. Temple Grandin,
in designing runways for cattle, famously adopts the
perspective of the cattle (Grandin & Deesing, 2008). Taking
different perspectives might sound simple, but deciding
which alternative perspectives are relevant and productive
also requires creative thought.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the following grants that provided direct
or indirect support to the research described or to the
preparation of the manuscript: NSF CHS-1513841, NSF
HHC 0905417, NSF IIS-0725223, NSF IIS-0855995, and
The John Templeton Foundation through The Varieties of
Understanding Project at Fordham University. The opinions
expressed here are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of The Varieties of Understanding Project,
Fordham University, or The John Templeton Foundation.

References
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., Mrazek, M. D., Kam, J. W. Y.,
Franklin, M. S., & Schooler, J. W. (2012). Inspired by
distraction: Mind wandering facilitates creative
incubation. Psychological Science, 23, 1117–1122.
Beaty, R. E., Benedek, M., Silvia, P. J., & Schacter, D. L.
(2016). Creative cognition and brain network
dynamics. Trends in cognitive sciences, 20(2), 87-95.
Beaty, R. E., & Silvia, P. J. (2012). Why do ideas get more
creative across time? An executive interpretation of the
serial order effect in divergent thinking tasks. Psychology
of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 6(4), 309-319.
Chrysikou, E. G. (in press). The costs and benefits of
cognitive control for creativity. In O. Vartanian and R. E.
Jung (Eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of the
Neuroscience of Creativity. Cambridge University Press.
Chrysikou, E. G., & Weisberg, R. W. (2005). Following the
wrong footsteps: fixation effects of pictorial examples in

1780

a design problem-solving task. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31, 11341148.
Ellamil, M., Dobson, C., Beeman, M., & Christoff, K.
(2012). Evaluative and generative modes of thought
during the creative process. Neuroimage, 59(2), 17831794.
Finke, R. A. (1990). Creative imagery: Discoveries and
inventions in visualization. Hillsdale NJ: Erlbaum.
Finke, R. A., Ward, T. B., & Smith, S. M. (1992). Creative
Cognition: Theory, Research, and Applications.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Grandin, T., & Deesing, M. (2008). Human livestock
handling: understanding livestock behavior and building
facilities for healthier animals. Storey publ., North
Adams.
Guilford, J. P., Christensen, P. R., Merrifield, P. R., &
Wilson, R. C. (1978). Alternate uses: Manual of
instructions and interpretations. Orange, CA: Sheridan
Psychological Services.
Hao, N., Wu, M., Runco, M. A., & Pina, J. (2015). More
mind wandering, fewer original ideas: Be not distracted
during creative idea generation. Acta Psychologica, 161,
110–116. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2015.09.001
Hennessey, B. A., & Amabile, T. M. (2010). Creativity.
Annual Review of Psychology, 61(1), 569–598.
Jansson, D. G., & Smith, S. M. (1991). Design fixation.
Design Studies, 12(1), 3-11.
Kaufman, J. C., Baer, J., Cole, J. C., & Sexton, J. D. (2008).
A comparison of expert and nonexpert raters using the
consensual assessment technique. Creativity Research
Journal, 20, 171–178.
Kelley, T., & Littman, J. (2006). The ten faces of
innovation: IDEO's strategies for defeating the devil's
advocate and driving creativity throughout your
organization. Crown Business.
Mason, M. F., Norton, M. I., Van Horn, J. D., Wegner, D.
M., Grafton, S. T., & Macrae, C. N. (2007). Wandering
minds: the default network and stimulus-independent
thought. Science, 315(5810), 393-395.
Mednick, S. (1962). The associative basis of the creative
process. Psychological Review, 69, 220–232.
Mouchiroud, C., & Lubart, T. (2001). Children's original
thinking: An empirical examination of alternative
measures derived from divergent thinking tasks. The
Journal of Genetic Psychology, 162(4), 382-401.
Oppezzo, M., & Schwartz, D. L. (2014). Give your ideas
some legs: The positive effect of walking on creative
thinking. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 40(4), 1142-1152.
Purcell, A. T., & Gero, J. S. (1996). Design and other types
of fixation. Design Studies, 17, 363-383.
Runco, M. A. (2004). Everyone has creative potential. In R.
J. Sternberg, E. L. Grigorenko, & JL. Singer (Eds.),
Creativity: From Potential to Realization (pp. 21-30)
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Runco, M. A., & Jaeger, G. J. (2012). The standard
definition of creativity. Creativity Research Journal,
24(1), 92-96.
Silvia, P. J. (2008). Creativity and intelligence revisited: A
latent variable analysis of Wallach and Kogan (1965).
Creativity Research Journal, 20(1), 34-39
Smallwood, J., and Schooler, J. W. (2006). The restless
mind. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 946- 958.
Smallwood, J. Beach, E., Schooler, J. W. and Handy, T. C.
(2008). Going AWOL in the brain: mindwandering
reduces cortical analysis of external events. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 20-3, 458-469.
Smith, S. M., Ward, T. B., & Schumacher, J. S. (1993).
Constraining effects of examples in a creative generation
task. Memory & Cognition, 21(6), 837-845.
Smith, S. M., Ward, T. B., & Finke, R. A. (Eds.). (1995).
The creative cognition approach. Cambridge: MIT.
Torrance, E. P. (1968). Torrance tests of creative thinking.
Princeton, N.J: Personnel Press, Inc.
Tversky, B. & Suwa, M. (2009). Thinking with sketches. In
A.B. Markman & K.L. Wood (Eds.) Tools for innovation.
Pp. 75-84. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tversky, B. and Chou, J. Y. (2010). Creativity: Depth and
breadth. In T. Taura and Y. Nagai (Editors). Design
creativity. Pp. 209-214. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer.
Vohs, K. D., Redden, J. P., & Rahinel, R. (2013). Physical
order produces healthy choices, generosity, and
conventionality,
whereas
disorder
produces
creativity. Psychological Science, 24, 1860-1867.
Wilson, R. C., Guilford, J. P., & Christensen, P. R. (1953).
The measurement of individual differences in originality.
Psychological Bulletin, 50(5), 362-370.

1781

