Gaze Shifts between Text and Illustrations are Negatively Related to Reading
Fluency in Beginning Readers
Karrie E. Godwin (kgodwin1@kent.edu)
Kent State University, Department of Educational Psychology
150 Terrace Drive, White Hall, Kent, OH 44243 USA

Cassondra M. Eng (cassonde@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Ave.
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Anna V. Fisher (fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology
5000 Forbes Ave. Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract

considerably more malleable than factors intrinsic to the
child, and thus can be leveraged to improve learning.
The typical layout of books for beginning readers
intermix text with illustrations in close proximity (see
Figure 1). In many cases illustrations are detailed, colorful,
and engaging. There are a number of reasons for including
illustrations in books for beginning readers, including:
defining the setting and characters, contributing to text
coherence, reinforcing the text, providing additional
information, or motivating the reader (Carney & Levin,
2002; Fang, 1996). However, the close proximity of text and
illustrations may create competition for attentional
resources, a situation that could be particularly problematic
for beginning readers.

Learning to read is often considered the most important skill taught
in school because reading is a gateway to other learning. Many
children struggle to acquire this fundamental skill. Suboptimal
design of books for beginning readers may contribute to the
difficulties children experience as close proximity between text
and illustrations could promote attentional competition hampering
literacy skills. The present work utilized eye-tracking technology
to examine how beginning readers allocate attention and whether
these patterns are related to fluency (Experiment 1) and
comprehension (Experiment 2). Results suggest when reading
books in which text and illustrations are in close proximity,
children frequently shift attention away from the text. This pattern
of attention was negatively associated with fluency, but not
associated with comprehension. This line of research aims to
provide theoretical insights about design principles for reading
materials that can be employed to optimize instructional materials
and promote literacy development in young children.
Keywords: attention; reading; reading fluency; reading
comprehension; illustrations; eye tracking

Introduction
Reading is often considered the most important skill taught
in elementary school: it is not only important in its own
right, but it is a key gateway to other learning within and
outside of school. Failing to ‘learn to read’ early in life is
followed by failure to ‘read to learn’ later in life (National
Association for the Education of Young Children, 1998).
Many children struggle to acquire this fundamental skill for
a variety of reasons, including but not limited to
neurodevelopmental disorders (e.g., Dyslexia and ADHD),
poor pre-reading skills (e.g., phonological awareness), and
vulnerabilities in general cognitive functioning (e.g.,
working memory, processing speed, etc.) (e.g., Armbruster,
Lehr, & Osborn, 2009; Biederman et al., 2004; Dykman, &
Ackerman, 1991; Jacobson et al., 2011). In addition to
these factors, empirical and theoretical work in the field of
cognitive science may offer insights into how subtle
changes in reading materials can affect the process of
learning-to-read. It is important to understand how the
properties of reading materials may affect children’s
emerging literacy skills because these factors are

Figure 1. Examples of books for beginning readers where
text and illustrations are in close proximity (i.e., embedded
within the illustration).

There are theoretical reasons and related empirical
findings that support the notion of competition between
illustrations and text. According to the Dual-channel Theory
of Multimedia Learning (Mayer et al., 2001), combining
text with graphical representations can lead to split attention
between the two sources of information. Similarly, the
Cognitive Load Theory suggests that illustrations in close
proximity to text may increase extraneous cognitive load on
the learner thereby reducing the amount of cognitive
resources available for text decoding (Torcasio, & Sweller,
2010; Chandler & Sweller, 1992).
A number of studies examined the effects of
supplementing text with illustrations on a variety of

415

outcome measures (e.g., comprehension, retention, and
problem-solving) relating to the goal of reading-to-learn in
college students (presumably, a population of fluent
readers). Some studies found that competition between text
and graphical representations lead to reduced performance
(e.g., Kalyuga, Chandler, & Sweller, 1998; Mayer et al.,
2001), whereas other studies reported facilitatory effects
(e.g., Bétrancourt & Bisseret, 1998; Ginns, 2005; Moreno &
Mayer, 1999). On the basis of this large body of evidence,
researchers have formulated a number of principles
regarding how to combine text with illustrations in a way
that facilitates the process of reading-to-learn depending on
the nature of the illustrations (e.g., illustrations that are well
or poorly aligned with the text content), the level of
difficulty of the text, and individual characteristics of the
learners (e.g., learners possessing or lacking background
knowledge relevant to the text content) (Carney & Levin,
2002; Levin & Mayer, 1993; Mayer, 2014).
However, the multimedia principles of effectively
combining text and illustrations for the purpose of readingto-learn in fluent readers may have limited applicability to
the design of reading materials for young children whose
goal is learning-to-read. Conceivably, the detrimental
effects of competition for attentional resources between
difficult-to-decode text and easy-to-interpret illustrations on
emerging literacy skills may be more pronounced in
beginning readers in whom reading has not yet become an
automatized skill.
In contrast to the large body of research investigating
the effects of combining illustrations with text for the
purpose of reading-to-learn, few studies examined this
question in the context of learning-to-read. The ubiquitous
practice of combining illustrations and text in materials for
beginning readers was first questioned in a handful of
studies nearly five decades ago (Braun, 1969; Samuels,
1967). In these studies children were taught to read sight
vocabulary with words either presented in isolation or next
to corresponding illustrations during the training phase.
During the testing phase, printed words were presented
without pictures. The results of these studies showed
performance was better during the training phase for words
that were accompanied by pictures than for words presented
in isolation; however, the opposite was true during the
testing phase, suggesting that pictures presented alongside
printed words interfered with the acquisition of sight
vocabulary. In another study, kindergarten-age children
were given reading instruction using a storybook in which
text was either accompanied by illustrations or presented
without illustrations (Samuels, 1970). For more skilled
readers, there was no difference in learning gains whether
children received reading instruction using a storybook with
or without illustrations; however, less skilled readers
showed higher gains in the no-pictures condition. More
recently, Torcasio and Sweller (2010) reported that reading
proficiency in 6- to 7-year-old children improved more
when children practiced reading a story without illustrations
compared to reading the same story with illustrations.

The studies above provide suggestive evidence that
close proximity of text and illustrations in books for
beginning readers may interfere with learning-to-read.
However, these studies have two critical shortcomings that
limit their impact. First, although prior studies have
proposed a mechanism by which illustrations in storybooks
may disrupt reading fluency, they have not assessed this
mechanism directly. Specifically, Samuels (1970) suggested
that pictures may distract children from printed text.
Similarly, Torcasio and Sweller (2010) suggest that when
text is accompanied by illustrations, children devote
working memory resources to processing the illustrations
thus having less resources for processing the text. While this
possibility is plausible, there is no direct evidence showing
that children devote less resources to processing text in the
presence of illustrations.
Second, prior studies focused on children’s ability to
read words quickly and accurately (i.e., a component of
reading fluency) but largely did not consider reading
comprehension. However, it is possible that the detrimental
effect of illustrations for decoding could be offset by the
potential beneficial effects of illustrations on reading
comprehension. Indeed, instructing children to refer to
illustrations to aid comprehension as well as decoding is a
common instructional strategy in elementary school
(Samuels, 1970) (although we should note the paucity of
research on the effectiveness of this strategy). Alternatively,
it is possible that by interfering with fluency, illustrations
also interfere with comprehension, as Torcasio and Sweller
(2010) suggested. When considering possible effects of
illustrations on learning-to-read it is essential to assess both
reading fluency and comprehension in order to obtain
evidence that can have an impact on educational practice.
The present research investigates how beginning
readers allocate their attention while reading and explores
the possibility that gaze shifts away from the text
(hypothesized to be due to the close proximity of text and
illustrations) are negatively correlated with reading fluency
(Experiment 1) and comprehension (Experiment 2). As
noted previously, while we hypothesize that children’s gaze
shifts are a result of attentional competition induced by the
close proximity between text and illustrations, it is also
possible that these gaze shifts are an explicit strategy
children deploy to aid decoding and comprehension. The
present study does not rule out this alternative interpretation,
a point we return to in the Discussion section.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants
The sample consisted of 24 children (Mage=7.20 years, SD =
0.35 years, 10 females, 14 males). Participants were
recruited from schools in and around Pittsburgh
Pennsylvania. Children were tested individually by trained
hypothesis-blind research assistants.

416

Design and Procedure

Running Record. While participants read the story aloud,
the experimenter completed a Running Record (Clay, 1972)
in which the experimenter recorded the child’s decoding
accuracy for each word in the story. The percentage of
correct responses was then calculated.

Book Selection
To maintain a high level of ecological validity, children read
commercially available books designed for beginning
readers from the I Can Read book series (Children read
either Biscuit Wants to Play (2002), or Biscuit Goes to
School (2003) written by Alyssa Satin Capucilli).

Results
On average, children switched their point of fixation away
from the text 3.68 times (range = 1.50 to 11.29 times) per
page. The average number of words per page was 6.94; thus
even when the text length was relatively short many
children frequently shifted their attention away from the text
(see Figure 2).

Children read aloud a commercially available book for
beginning readers in which the text and illustrations are in
close proximity. A Tobii X2-60 portable eye tracker was
used to measure children’s patterns of attention allocation
indexed by gaze shifts. Prior to reading the story an
independent measure of reading fluency was administered
(i.e., Word Recognition in Isolation Test). Reading fluency
was also assessed while children were reading the story
using a Running Record. Additional details regarding each
measure are provided below.

Measures
Gaze Shifts
Eye gaze is a common measure of attention in a variety of
settings and is a particularly appropriate measure in the
context of reading, a complex cognitive task in which eye
gaze location and the focus of attention are difficult to
dissociate as they are thought to overlap (for review see
Rayner, 2009). The Tobii X2-60 portable eye tracker was
utilized to measure children’s eye movements while
reading. On each page of the book, text, picture, and white
space Areas Of Interest (AOI’s) were created. A python
script was then used to calculate the number of times a child
shifted fixation away from the text AOI’s (i.e., to
illustrations or white space AOI’s) and the average number
of gaze shifts per page was then calculated.

Figure 2. A sample gaze plot showing multiple gaze
shifts away from the text.

Furthermore, children’s tendency to switch their point of
fixation away from the text while reading was negatively
associated with the WRI (M=.41, SD=.27), an independent
measure of reading fluency, as shown in Figure 3 (Panel A);
r=-.60, p=.002. Additionally, Running Record accuracy was
obtained for a subset of participants1 (n=13; M=.97, SD
=.04). Critically, this online measure of fluency was also
negatively (and strongly) correlated with the number of gaze
shifts away from the text (Figure 3, Panel B); r=-.96;
p<.0001. Thus, less fluent readers (as measured by both the
WRI and the Running Record) tended to make more
frequent gaze shifts away from the text.
The present results indicate gaze shifts away from text
are negatively associated with reading fluency; however, it
is an open question as to whether gaze shifts away from the
text are also associated with reading comprehension.
Experiment 2 begins to explore this possibility.

Reading Fluency Measures
Fluency is defined as “accurate and automatic decoding of
the words in the text, along with expressive interpretation of
the text” (Rasinski, 2004, p. 2). In the present experiment
one component of reading fluency, decoding accuracy, was
assessed. Two measures of reading fluency were utilized:
the Word Recognition in Isolation test and a Running
Record. Both measures are described below.
Word Recognition in Isolation Test. Children completed a
modified Word Recognition in Isolation (WRI) test, which
is a common measure of reading fluency (Morris, 2013). In
the WRI, participants were shown leveled lists of words
presented individually on a computer screen. The participant
is tasked with reading as many words as they can within the
allotted time limit (in order to avoid frustration, a ceiling
was imposed such that testing ceased if a participant failed
to read at least 50% of the words correctly on a given word
list). The child’s score was based on the number of words
the participant correctly read aloud within the time limit
(i.e., number of words read correctly out of 100 total
possible words).

Experiment 2
Method
Participants
The sample consisted of 17 children (Mage=7.15 years, SD =
0.59 years, 6 females, 10 males, and 1 child whose sex was
not reported by the parents). Due to technological issues, for
1 child no eye tracking data was available. Participants were
1
A running record was included in the test battery to obtain an online
measure of decoding accuracy and was included after the experiment
commenced. Thus, 13/24 participants have running record data available.

417

recruited from schools and camps in and around Pittsburgh

children’s reading comprehension was assessed. Additional
details regarding each measure are provided below.

Measures
Gaze Shifts
A RED250 mobile eye tracker (SensoMotoric Instruments,
Inc.) was used to measure children’s patterns of attention
allocation. We used the RED250 mobile eye tracker in
Experiment 2 (opposed to the Tobi X2-60 utilized in
Experiment 1) due to its higher sampling rate which makes
it better suited for reading studies. On each page of the
book, text, picture, and white space AOI’s were created. The
SMI BeGaze Eyetracking Analysis Software was then used
to calculate gaze shifts away from the text AOI’s (i.e., to
illustrations or white space AOI’s) and the average number
of gaze shifts per page was then calculated.
Reading Fluency Measures
The reading fluency measures (WRI and Running Record)
were identical to those described in Experiment 1.
Reading Comprehension Measures
Retelling Prompt Retelling is a common measure of
reading comprehension in elementary school (Nilson, 2008).
Children were asked to orally recount the story. Retelling
accuracy was scored by calculating the number of key
events correctly recounted (out of 5 possible events). Scores
are reported as the proportion of correct responses.
Story Questions At the end of the story children were
asked 3 questions probing their memory for details from the
story. For example, in the story various animals escape from
a pet store including cats, dogs, birds, rabbits, and frogs.
Children might be asked to recall which pets escaped.
Children could receive full credit if in their response the
child identified 4 or more animals that escaped and 0 points
if they failed to recall the animals that escaped or provided
an incorrect response. Children could also receive partial
credit if the child recalled correctly a subset of the animals.
Accuracy on the Story Questions was scored as the
proportion of correct responses (out of 7 possible points).

Figure 3. Association between gaze shifts away from text and
performance on two measures of reading fluency: WRI (Panel A)
and Running Record (Panel B). Note only a subset of the sample
had Running Record data available; thus, the gaze shift range
differs across the two panels.

Pennsylvania. Children were tested individually by trained
hypothesis-blind research assistants.

Design and Procedure
Book Selection
In order to test the generalizability of the results from
Experiment 1, a new book was selected for Experiment 2.
We selected a book that had a more complex story line in
order to address the question of whether gaze shifts away
from the text are also negatively associated with reading
comprehension. As in Experiment 1, children read a
commercially available book designed for beginning readers
in order to maintain a high level of ecological validity.
Children read a book from the Hooked on Phonics Learn to
Read series entitled Good Job Dennis written by Amy Kraft.

Results
On average, children switched their point of fixation away
from the text 8.03 times per page (range = 1.75 to 15.5
times). The average number of words per page was 42.67.
As in Experiment 1, there was a significant correlation
between the number of gaze shifts and both measures of
reading fluency (WRI and Running Records). Children’s
tendency to switch their point of fixation away from the text
while reading was negatively associated (r=-.78, p<.0004)
with the WRI (M=.69, SD =.19) as shown in Figure 4 (Panel
A) and with their Running Record accuracy (M=96%,
SD=5%; Panel B; r=-.63, p=.009). This pattern of results
provides corroborating evidence that gaze shifts away from
the text are related to poorer reading fluency scores.

Akin to Experiment 1, children read aloud a commercially
available book in which the text and illustrations are in close
proximity. A RED250 mobile eye tracker was used to
measure children’s patterns of attention allocation indexed
by gaze shifts. Prior to reading the story an independent
measure of reading fluency was administered (i.e., Word
Recognition in Isolation Test). Reading fluency was also
assessed using a Running Record. After reading the story

418

Panel C). In contrast to the results for fluency, the observed
pattern of results for comprehension are not consistent with
the hypothesis that the close proximity between illustrations
and text could impede reading skills. Interestingly, the
results also seem to suggest that children are not utilizing
illustrations (or perhaps not utilizing illustrations in an
effective manner) to aid comprehension, as one might
expect to observe a positive correlation between gaze shifts
and reading comprehension if referencing illustrations was
in fact scaffolding children’s reading comprehension. Future
research is needed to expound upon this initial work, a point
we return to in in the discussion section.

Discussion
Although the practice of using illustrations in materials for
teaching children to read has undergone little change in over
250 years (Samuels, 1970), no research has systematically
examined the possible costs and benefits of this practice for
children’s attention, reading fluency, and comprehension.
By leveraging mobile eye tracking technology, the present
research found that gaze shifts away from the text
(hypothesized to be due to the close proximity of text and
illustrations) are negatively associated with reading fluency,
an important component of literacy. This work highlights
the importance of investigating experimentally more
optimal book designs for beginning readers. This work also
addresses an important gap in the prior literature, which
focused almost exclusively on components of reading
fluency. The present work adds to the prior literature by
investigating the relationship between attention allocation
(indexed by eye gaze) and both reading fluency as well as
reading comprehension.
Our working hypothesis is that the majority of gaze
shifts away from the text occur as a result of the competition
between text and illustrations being resolved in favor of the
latter. The findings reported above are consistent with this
hypothesis: across two experiments with different samples
of children and different reading materials we observed a
strong and negative relationship between the frequency of
gaze shifts away from text and measures of reading fluency.
However, given the correlational nature of the study, other
interpretations of these findings are of course possible. For
example, it is possible that less proficient readers attempt to
use illustrations to help with decoding and comprehension.
Future experimental work is necessary to adjudicate
between these possibilities. Towards this goal, we are
currently collecting data in which we assess children’s
reading fluency and comprehension while children are
reading stories in which the placement of illustrations
relative to the text is experimentally manipulated.
Overall, the present study provides evidence that gaze
shift patterns are associated with reading performance, and
thus highlights the need for further research into the nature
of this association. Future research should also expound
upon these findings to ascertain whether, illustrations in
close proximity to text allow children to bypass the
important work of decoding as this “shortcut” may have

Figure 4. Association between gaze shifts away from text and
two measures of reading fluency (Panel A-B) and reading
comprehension (Panel C) in Experiment 2.

A composite variable was created for the reading
comprehension measures. Retelling score (M=.45 SD=.23)
and Story Question score (M=.59, SD=.29) were
standardized using Z-scores and averaged together to create
the composite variable, Comprehension Composite Score.
Thus, the comprehension composite score reflects how
many standard deviations the child is away from the overall
mean. A score of 0 would indicate the child’s performance
is equal to the overall mean (an average performer on the
Story Question and Retelling measures). There was no
significant correlation between gaze shifts and the
Comprehension Composite, r = -.13, p = .62 (See Figure 4

419

cumulative effects on children’s literacy acquisition and
subsequent learning. Additional research is also needed to
systematically examine the role of individual differences.
One future direction we are currently pursuing is whether
the negative association between illustrations and reading
fluency can be offset by modifying the design of books to
reduce the competition between text and illustrations
through increased spatial separation, a layout we
hypothesize to be more optimal for beginning readers.
This work begins to build an important foundation of
research that has direct implications for educators and
publishers and that aims to ultimately improve children’s
literacy acquisition.

often overlapping disorders. Journal Of Learning
Disabilities, 24(2), 96-103.
Fang, Z. (1996). Illustrations, text, and the child reader.
What are pictures in children’s storybooks for? Read.
Horizons 37: 130–142.
Ginns, P. (2005). Meta-analysis of the modality
effect. Learning and Instruction, 15, 313-331.
Jacobson, L. A., Ryan, M., Martin, R. B., Ewen, J.,
Mostofsky, S. H., Denckla, M. B., & Mahone, E. M.
(2011). Working memory influences processing speed
and reading fluency in ADHD. Child Neuropsychology,
17(3), 209-224.
Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1998). Levels of
expertise and instructional design. Human Factors, 40, 117.
Levin, J. R., and Mayer, R. E. (1993). Understanding
illustrations in text. In B. K. Britton, A. Woodward, & M.
R. Brinkley (Eds.), Learning from Textbooks: Theory and
Practice (pp. 95-113). Hillsdale, NJ, US: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Mayer, R. E. (Ed.) (2014). The Cambridge handbook of
multimedia learning. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Mayer, R.E., Heiser, J., & Lonn, S. (2001). Cognitive
constraints on multimedia learning: When presenting
more material results in less understanding. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 93, 187-198.
Moreno, R., & Mayer, R. E. (1999). Cognitive principles of
multimedia learning: The role of modality and contiguity.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 91(2), 358.
Morris, D. (2013). Diagnosis and correction of reading
problems (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
National Association for the Education of Young Children
(1998). Learning to read and write: Developmentally
appropriate practices for young children. A joint position
statement of the International Reading Association and
the National Association for the Education of Young
Children. Young Children, 53(4), 30–46.
Nilson, N. L. (2008). A critical analysis of eight informal
reading inventories. The Reading Teacher, 6(17), 526536.
Rasinski, T. V. (2004). Assessing reading fluency. Pacific
Resources for Education and Learning. Honolulu:
HI.
Retrieved
from:
http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED483166.pdf
Rayner, K. (2009). Eye movements and attention in reading,
scene perception, and visual search. The Quarterly
Journal Of Experimental Psychology, 62(8), 1457-1506.
Samuels, S. J. (1967). Attentional process in reading: The
effect of pictures on the acquisition of reading responses.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 58(6), 337-342.
Samuels, S. J. (1970). Effects of pictures on learning to
read, comprehension, and attitudes. Review of
Educational Research, 40(3), 397-407.
Torcasio, S., & Sweller, J. (2010). The use of illustrations
when learning to read: A cognitive load theory approach.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 24(5), 659-672.

Acknowledgments
We thank Kristen Boyle, Lindsay Gorby, Ashli-Ann
Douglas, Rebeka Almasi, Hyunji Do, Graciela Garcia, and
Clara Lee for their help collecting data and Marcus Godwin
for creating the Python script to compute participants’ gaze
shifts. We also thank the children, parents, and teachers at
the CMU Children’s School, St. Edmund’s Academy, and
Sacred Heart Elementary School in Pittsburgh (PA) who
made this project possible. This work was partially
supported by the ProSEED/Simon Initiative Seed grant from
Carnegie Mellon University and by the James S. McDonnell
Foundation 21st Century Science Initiative in Understanding
Human Cognition – Scholar Award (220020401) to A.V.F.

References
Armbruster, B. B., Lehr, F., & Osborn, J. (2009). Put
reading first: The research building blocks of reading
instruction: Kindergarten through grade 3 (3rd ed.). C. R.
Adler (Ed.). National Institute for Literacy. Retrieved
from https://lincs.ed.gov/publications/pdf/PRFbooklet.pdf
Bétrancourt, M., & Bisseret, A. (1998). Integrating textual
and pictorial information via pop-up windows: an
experimental
study.
Behaviour
&
Information
Technology, 17(5), 263-273.
Biederman, J., Monuteaux, M. C., Doyle, A. E., Seidman, L.
J., Wilens, T. E., Ferrero, F., Morgan, C. L., & Faraone,
S. V. (2004). Impact of executive function deficits and
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) on
academic outcomes in children. Journal Of Consulting
And Clinical Psychology, 72(5), 757-766.
Braun, C. (1969). Interest-loading and modality effects on
textual response acquisition. Reading Research Quarterly,
4(3), 428-444.
Carney, R. N., & Levin, J. R. (2002). Pictorial illustrations
still improve students’ learning from text. Educational
Psychology Review, 14(1), 5-26.
Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1992). The split-attention effect
as a factor in the design of instruction. British Journal of
Educational Psychology, 62(2), 233-246
Clay, M. (1972). The early detection of reading difficulties:
A diagnostic survey.
Dykman, R. A., & Ackerman, P. T. (1991). Attention deficit
disorder and specific reading disability: Separate but

420

