Generic and Universal Generalisations:
Contextualising the ‘Generic Overgeneralisation’ Effect
Dimitra Lazaridou-Chatzigoga (dl518@cam.ac.uk)
Institut für Anglistik und Amerikanistik, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin/University of Cambridge
Unter den Linden 6, 10099, Berlin, Germany

Napoleon Katsos (nk248@cam.ac.uk)
Department of Theoretical and Applied Linguistics, University of Cambridge
9 West Road, Cambridge, CB3 9DP, UK

Linnaea Stockall (l.stockall@qmul.ac.uk)
School of Languages, Linguistics and Film, Queen Mary, University of London
Mile End Road, London, E1 4NS, UK
Abstract

of genericity, generic meaning is obtained as the effect of an
underlying operator or quantifier dubbed ‘GEN’, which is
not phonologically realised but which is active in the
composition of the sentence meaning and is an unselective
variable binding operator similar to adverbs of
quantification like usually, typically, always, as analysed in
Lewis (1975). This operator is sentential and is represented
by a tripartite structure as in (4) (Krifka et al. 1995). Thus,
the logical form of (2) may be given as follows in (5):

In this study, we focused on the Generic Overgeneralisation
(GOG) effect (Leslie, Khemlani, and Glucksberg 2011) and
tested the relevance of context and an explanation based on
quantifier domain restriction for the pattern of judgement data
observed. Participants judged generic majority characteristic
statements like tigers have stripes or statements with
universal quantifiers that have different sensitivity to context
(‘all’, ‘all the’, ‘each’) preceded by one of three levels of
context: a) neutral, where the information in the context does
not interact with the truth value of the critical statement, b)
contradictory, where it presents an exception which should
rule out a universally quantified statement, and c) supportive.
Our results suggest that proponents of the generics-as-default
view ruled out context prematurely and that in fact context is
a viable alternative explanation for much of the so-called
GOG effect.

(4) GEN [restrictor] [matrix]
(5) GENx [Lions (x)] [Roar (x)]
Generic generalisations can be made using a wide range of
different grammatical means, including definite and
indefinite singulars and bare plurals in English, but no
language has a unique, unambiguous marker of genericity
equivalent to a quantifier or determiner. It is important to
note that none of the analyses that posit a ‘GEN’ operator
offer an explanation for this, a point that a recent
psychological approach to generics, capitalises upon.
This growing body of experimental and developmental
psychological work on the topic proposes that genericity is
categorically different from (and significantly simpler than)
quantification (Leslie 2007, 2008, Gelman 2010). This latter
hypothesis, called the Generics-as-Default view (GaD view
henceforth), treats generics as an innate and default mode of
thinking. This idea is linked to the 2-system view of
cognition argued for by Kahneman and Frederick (2002)
among others, which includes a distinction between System
1, a fast, automatic, effortless lower-level system, and
System 2, a slower, more effortful higher-level rulegoverned system. According to this view, the fact that no
language has a dedicated overt ‘GEN’ operator does not
come as a surprise: given that generics are the most
primitive default generalisations, children do not need to
learn anything in order to acquire them.
The GaD approach argues that the fact that there is no
overt generic operator in any known language is because
generics are the unmarked, System 1, case. On this view,
only effortful, non-default quantificational generalisations

Keywords: context; generalisation; genericity; quantification;
quantifier domain restriction

Introduction
Quantificational generalisations, as in (1), are expressed in
quantitative, statistical terms, while generic generalisations,
as in (2)-(3), make general claims about kinds of entities
and refer to a property that is characteristic of the kind in
question, but not necessarily statistically prevalent, as in (3):
(1) Some lions live in cages.
(2) Lions roar.
(3) Lions have manes.
Generic generalisations have long been studied in formal
semantics, within which genericity is frequently viewed as a
species of quantification. Even though generics have been
studied since the seventies (see Dahl 1975; Carlson 1977),
how to characterise their semantic interpretation and how to
model their truth conditions remains a controversial topic
(see discussion in Mari, Beyssade, and del Prete 2013).
Within formal semantics, modal logic and probabilistic
approaches are most prominent, both of which treat
genericity as akin to quantification. According to the modal
approach, which is the most widely adopted formal analysis

724

require overt linguistic exponence. However, while
assigning generics to a more basic, unmarked System 1,
mode of thinking may sound intuitive at some level, it rests
on a vague and undefined notion of markedness. Leslie
refers to Chomsky (2000), but she gives no definition of
markedness. Intuitively, it seems that what is at stake is
surface level overt realisation (third notion of markedness of
Haspelmath 2006).
A challenge for both types of approach is to determine
which properties can be used in generic statements. Generic
generalisations range from definitional statements that do
not tolerate any exceptions (triangles have three sides) to
statements that involve characteristic properties and are true
of the majority of the kind with only a few exceptions
(tigers have stripes) - which are called ‘majority
characteristic’ by Leslie et al. (2011) - through statements
that are true of a minority of the kind yet are characteristic
(ducks lay eggs) - which are called ‘minority characteristic’to statements that have low prevalence but involve a
property that is noteworthy in some way (sharks attack
people) - which are called ‘striking’. A further complication
is that statistical prevalence is neither a necessary nor a
sufficient condition to license generic generalisations, as
statements like books are paperbacks may be true of the
majority of the kind, but are typically judged as false and
thus fail as generic generalisations (‘false generalisations’).
In Lazaridou-Chatzigoga, Katsos and Stockall (2015) we
juxtaposed the linguistic approach to genericity and the
experimental research investigating the GaD hypothesis and
we highlighted the significant challenges for each approach.
We concluded that interdisciplinary work, integrating the
tools and perspectives of both strands of investigation, is
needed in order to advance our understanding of genericity.
In Lazaridou-Chatzigoga, Stockall and Katsos (2017) we
focused on the effect called ‘Generic Overgeneralisation’
(GOG) (Leslie et al. 2011), which has been used to support
the GaD view on generics. The Generic Overgeneralisation
(henceforth ‘GOG’) effect is “the tendency to
overgeneralise the truth of a generic to the truth of the
corresponding universal statement” (Leslie et al. 2011:17).
In that paper, we discuss a set of four non-mutually
exclusive explanations for the GOG effect: a) ignorance of
the relevant facts, b) subkind (taxonomic) interpretation, c)
the atypical behaviour of all and d) Quantifier Domain
Restriction (QDR), which will be explained in more detail
in the next section. We proposed that all these factors play a
role in explaining the attested behaviour by adults. These
factors are independently attested and known to interact
with the interpretation of generic and quantified statements.
We suggested that even the name of the GOG effect might
be misleading. The effect mainly tries to capture the
behaviour observed with the quantifier all, which
supposedly gets a generic interpretation as a result of an
overgeneralisation bias. Thus, perhaps a better name for that
effect would be ‘Quantifier Reanalysis’ effect, because this
term would direct the focus where we believe it belongs: on
the interpretation of all, or more generally of quantifiers,

rather than the interpretation of generic statements. The
overall aim in that paper was to showcase the role of
linguistic factors (both semantic and pragmatic) in the
interpretation of generic and quantified statements, and to
underscore the relevance of linguistically motivated
explanations.
In this paper, we address the effect of context on generic
and universally quantified generalisations empirically.

The GOG effect
The first detailed investigation of the GOG effect is found in
Leslie et al. (2011). In their experiment 1, participants
performed a truth-value judgement task on sentences that
were presented in one of three forms: generic, universal
(all), or existential (some). The statements involved
different kinds of properties: quasi-definitional (triangles
have three sides), majority characteristic (tigers have
stripes), minority characteristic (ducks lay eggs), majority
non-characteristic (cars have radios), striking (pit bulls
maul children), and false generalisations (Canadians are
right-handed). The authors report that adults sometimes
judge universal statements as true, despite knowing that
they are truth-conditionally false. For example, participants
judged a quantified statement like all tigers have stripes as
true, even though they know it is false given that there are
albino tigers. The authors claim that the participants made
this ‘error’ because they relied on the corresponding generic
statement, which is true. They find that the GOG effect is
restricted to characteristic properties and that it occurs in
more than half the trials: 78% for majority characteristic and
51% for minority characteristic statements.
The authors argue that these elevated acceptance rates are
due to participants interpreting the ‘false’ universally
quantified statements as if they were their ‘true’ generic
counterparts, and are thus a clear case of GOG. Before
reaching that conclusion, the authors acknowledge three
alternative explanations, which they argue are ruled out with
subsequent experiments: a) ignorance of the relevant facts,
namely, that participants do not know that male ducks do
not lay eggs, which they ruled out by administering a
knowledge test that confirmed knowledge of the relevant
facts (their experiment 3), b) subkind interpretation,
namely, that participants interpret all ducks lay eggs as ‘all
kinds/types of ducks lay eggs’, which is a true statement,
which they discarded through a paraphrase task (their
experiment 2b), where only 1% of the paraphrases explicitly
mentioned subkinds, and c) Quantifier Domain Restriction
(henceforth QDR), to which we turn in the next paragraph.
Under an explanation based on QDR participants might
interpret a statement like all ducks lay eggs as applying only
to a relevant subset of ducks, namely the mature fertile
female ducks. Quantified statements are interpreted within a
context, which may restrict the scope of the quantifier (see
Stanley and Szabó 2000). Thus, the reason why people
accept the all statement is because (they believe) it is true
once the quantifier has been restricted to the relevant subset
of ducks. The authors addressed this alternative explanation

725

in their experiment 2a, where they provided the participants
with a background context, which was presented before
each statement. These contexts included artificial population
estimates of the following form:

critical utterance, we would have evidence that the observed
tendency to accept universally quantified statements as true
can be explained through independently motivated
mechanisms and that there is no need to appeal to GOG.
Rather than the population statistics contexts used by
Leslie et al. (2011), which only had a moderate effect on
participant behaviour, we decided to use three different
types of contexts. Furthermore, because of the design we
adopted, we decided to focus only on majority characteristic
statements (‘tigers have stripes’) leaving minority
characteristic statements (‘ducks lay eggs’) for future
investigation. We varied the context preceding the critical
utterance as follows: a) neutral, where the information in the
context does not interact with the truth value of the critical
statement; b) contradictory, where exceptions which should
rule out a universally quantified statement are made salient,
and c) supportive, where a paraphrase of the critical
property is given, which makes its generality salient. Two of
the three context types (contradictory and supportive) made
the relevant domain for QDR salient, while the neutral
context served as a baseline measure. The contradictory and
supportive contexts turned the implicit restriction to ‘all
normal’ individuals to an explicit one by either highlighting
some abnormal individuals (contradictory) or by stating that
the relevant individuals had the relevant property, i.e. they
were normal individuals (supportive).
In addition to manipulating context, however, a
compelling test of the QDR view also requires testing
whether the GOG effect is observed only with all or
whether different universal quantifiers would show such an
effect. There are reasons to believe that all should not be
treated as a representative universal quantifier. It has been
argued to a) participate in fallacious reasoning (Jönsson and
Hampton 2006), b) be prone to hyperbolic/loose use similar
to ‘almost all’ (Claridge 2011), and c) be ambiguous
between distributive and collective interpretation (Beghelli
and Stowell 1997). Thus, using different types of universal
quantifiers is essential to test the scope of the GOG effect.
Furthermore, a study that specifically addresses the
relevance of QDR should include universal quantifiers with
different sensitivity to QDR. More specifically, QDR is less
likely if the universal quantifier used does not require
linking with a set under discussion, as is the case with all,
compared to each and all the, which have to be interpreted
as D(iscourse)-linked (Partee 1995, Pesetsky 1987).
To recapitulate, (a) the contextual manipulations used
were expected to make the implicit domain restriction
explicit and salient to the participants and (b) this
manipulation was expected to influence truth-value
judgements by showing a decrease in acceptance rates in the
contradictory condition and an increase in acceptance rates
in the supportive condition.

(6) ‘‘Suppose the following is true: there are 431
million ducks in the world. Do you agree with
the following: all ducks lay eggs.’'
This information was supposed to prime quantification
over every individual duck in the world, and thereby make it
difficult/impossible to interpret all as restricted to only the
ducks that are presupposed by lay eggs. If acceptance of all
ducks lay eggs in the first experiment was driven by QDR
the authors predicted that it would disappear in the context
of population information of the kind above. However, the
GOG effect still occurred on a substantial portion of trials
for statements with all, with a 60% acceptance rate for
majority characteristic statements and 30% for minority
characteristic statements - less than when the statements
appeared with no preceding context (78% and 51%
respectively), but still a high percentage. The authors thus
concluded that domain restriction could not be the sole
explanation for the GOG effect.
On the above grounds, Leslie et al. (2011) rejected all
three alternative explanations and argued they had found
evidence for a strong generic bias, according to which
people sometimes treat universally quantified statements as
if they were generic.

Overview of the present study
In the present study, we addressed QDR as an explanation
for the GOG effect building on a design used by LazaridouChatzigoga and Stockall (2013). We chose to focus on the
relevance of context and QDR given that the latter is a
pervasive phenomenon affecting quantifiers and their
interpretation within a context, and is routinely invoked in
quantification (Heim 1991). According to QDR, the domain
of a universal quantifier can be restricted in the following
sense: in a discourse like ‘There was rhubarb pie for
dessert, Everyone developed a rash’ (example modified
from von Fintel 1994) a quantifier like everyone does not
quantify over all the individuals in the world, but rather over
the contextually restricted set of individuals. Furthermore,
listeners are known to be charitable (Grice 1975). Thus, in a
conversation one assumes that speakers take the most
sensible positions and make the most plausible assertions.
Under this view, interpreting everyone as quantifying over
all the individuals in the world seems a rather unlikely
intended interpretation and moreover one that is not
charitable to the speaker because it renders her utterance
false, whereas interpreting everyone with respect to the
available set of individuals is not only plausible but also
charitable to the speaker.
We hypothesised that if we could show that the amount of
GOG behaviour can be altered by carefully manipulating
different levels of contextual information preceding the

Method
Participants and procedure
120 volunteers (49 male, 70 female, 1 other; aged 19-67;
mean age 37.28; SD 13.06) participated in the experiment

726

over the Internet. Participants were recruited through
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk system for human interface
tasks. All spoke English as their first language and lived in
the United States. The study was presented in the online
platform Qualtrics. Each trial consisted of three displays. In
the first display participants read a background context, in
the second display they read a statement and in the third
display they were asked to judge whether they agreed with
the statement they just read. Their response was recorded by
selecting keyboard keys (‘A’ for yes and ‘K’ for no).

DISPLAY 2:
Statement: All tigers have stripes.
DISPLAY 3:
Do you agree with the statement?
o Yes (A)
o No (K)
The definitional and false generalisations were in the
generic form in all lists. Fillers served to ensure the
percentage of expected True/False responses was similar.
The definitional and false generalisations, as well as the
fillers, were preceded by a context that did not vary across
conditions. The materials can be viewed at
http://www.dimitra-lazaridou-chatzigoga.com/cogsci-paper/

Materials and design
Participants were presented with 84 statements, including 48
fillers presented in a randomised order. The 12 test items
consisted of majority characteristic statements like tigers
have stripes and horses have four legs. We included 26
control items, 12 definitional statements like ants are
insects and 12 false generalisations like books are
paperbacks to get baseline measures and to (semi)counterbalance the percentage of expected True/False
responses. All the contexts and items were normed
beforehand by English native speakers, who did not take
part in the experiment. This was done to make sure that the
context manipulations worked as intended. Most of the
experimental items used are a subset of the items used by
Leslie et al. (2011). The two conditions we manipulated for
the majority characteristic items were: a) determiner type:
bare plural generic/all/all the/each, and b) context type:
neutral/contradictory/supportive. The statements were
presented in one of the determiner forms and were preceded
by one of three types of context: a) neutral, b) contradictory,
or c) supportive, examples of which are given below:

Results and discussion
The final model used included 116 out of the 120
participants. 4 participants were excluded based on their
responses to definitional statements; we excluded subjects
that responded correctly at fewer than 10 out of 12 items.
Acceptance rates
Table 1 summarises the proportion of ‘TRUE’ responses to
the TVJ question for the test items (majority characteristic
statements) in each condition. We report proportion of
‘TRUE’ responses rather than the actual number of
responses to facilitate comparison with Leslie et al.’s (2011)
results.
Table 1: Mean Proportion (SE) of ‘TRUE’ responses as a
function of context and determiner type.

(7)
a. neutral context: Linton Zoo is home to three tigers,
Tibor, Baginda and Kaytlin, whose playful games visitors
love to watch and photograph.
b. contradictory context: Linton Zoo is home to three
tigers, Tibor, Baginda and Kaytlin, whose fur is all white
due to a recessive gene that controls coat colour.
c. supportive context: Linton Zoo is home to three tigers,
Tibor, Baginda and Kaytlin, whose black and orange coats
visitors love to photograph.

determiner
GEN (ø)
all
all the
each

neutral

Context
contradictory

supportive

99.14 (3.12)
80.56 (3.82)
78.33 (3.78)
79.17 (3.72)

87.07 (0.86)
48.15 (4.83)
37.50 (4.43)
30.83 (4.23)

100 (0)
87.96 (3.14)
90 (2.76)
85.83 (3.2)

As we see above, generics were accepted at higher rates
overall than universals, as expected, given that we had
chosen items that were true in generic form. Both in the
neutral and the supportive condition acceptance rates for
generics were at ceiling (99% and 100% respectively) and
were only lower in the contradictory condition (87%). With
universals, the picture is more complicated. All three
universals (all, all the, each) were accepted at similar rates
in both the neutral and the supportive condition, showing
only a small increase in the supportive condition. In the
neutral condition, all-statements were accepted 81% of the
time, all the-statements 78% of the time and eachstatements 79% of the time. In the supportive condition, allstatements were accepted 88% of the time, all thestatements 90% of the time and each-statements 86% of the
time. Universals after a contradictory context yielded fewer
acceptances overall, as expected: all-statements were
accepted 48% of the time, all the-statements 38% of the
time and each-statements 31% of the time. Acceptance rates

Given the 4 determiners (generic/all/all the/each) we
created 4 lists with 3 sublists each that varied with respect to
the pairing of the items with context type, which gave us 12
lists in total. There were 10 participants in each sublist, who
were assigned randomly. Here is a sample of a trial of a
statement with all after a neutral context:
(8)
DISPLAY 1:
Background:
Linton Zoo is home to three tigers, Tibor, Baginda and
Kaytlin, whose playful games visitors love to watch and
photograph.

727

for both generics and universals differed significantly
between the neutral and the contradictory condition.
On the surface, we do get many ‘TRUE’ responses to
universal quantifiers, as in the GaD literature, which might
look like a GOG effect. We predicted that contradictory
context should decrease acceptances across the board, while
supportive context should increase them. We expected a
smaller effect for generics because the generic statements
were constructed so as to be true and because of their
resistance to contextual restriction (i.e. we expected ceiling
effects) and we predicted differences between the universal
Qs depending on their sensitivity to QDR/D-linking.
Nevertheless, we had specific predictions about the relative
rates depending on the level of context, which according to
Leslie et al. should not differ. In order to appreciate the
relative effect of context on acceptance rates, we subtracted
the average means of the contradictory condition from the
average means of the neutral condition, as well as the
average means of the supportive condition from the average
means of the neutral. We took acceptance rates in the
neutral condition as our baseline plotted at 0. Negative
values mean fewer acceptances and positive values mean
more acceptances. We interpreted the rates obtained as the
relative effect of context on acceptance rates plotted in
figure 1 below.

We used R (R Core Team, 2012) and the lme4 package
(Bates et al. 2015) to perform a generalised mixed-effects
linear analysis of the relationship between determiner and
context, specifying a binomial family. Responses were
treated as a dummy coded categorical variable and were
modelled with glmer. First, we fitted a full model with
det.type and context.type as fixed effects (with an
interaction term) and with random intercepts for subjects
and items. We performed a likelihood ratio test of the full
model with an interaction term against a model without the
interaction term and the comparison proved non-significant
(χ2(6) = 8.3455, p = 0.2139). Thus, including an interaction
term did not improve model fit, so we used the model
without the interaction term for all subsequent
analyses/comparisons.
We then fitted versions of the full model, in which a single
effect was removed and we compared the reduced model to
the model without interaction. To test the main effect of
context, we removed context. A likelihood ratio test of the
model without interaction against the model without context
proved highly significant (χ2(2) = 311.81, p < 2.2e-16).
Thus, we concluded that there was a main effect of context.
To test the main effect of determiner, we removed
determiner. A likelihood ratio test of the model without
interaction against the model without determiner proved
highly significant (χ2(3) = 58.183, p = 1.436e-12). Thus, we
concluded that there was a main effect of determiner.

General Discussion
We set out to explore one of the alternative explanations for
the judgement data that concern universally quantified
statements, which have been used as evidence of a GOG
effect. The study presented here provides experimental
evidence for the relevance of a QDR-based explanation of
the purported GOG effect. In our study, context did not only
affect acceptance rates for all and other universal quantifiers
(all the, each), but it further predicted the levels of QDR
depending on the level of context. The effect of context was
greater for all the and each, two quantifiers that require
QDR, while it was smaller for all, whose domain is only
optionally restricted. Leslie et al. had ruled out the relevance
of context and hence predicted no differences in acceptances
across contexts for all. Furthermore, even though they only
discuss all they make general claims about (universal)
quantification being prone to the GOG effect. We argue that
drawing conclusions about universal quantification (and by
extension about genericity) requires more subtle
manipulations. The differences we found between the
different universal quantifiers are predicted according to the
QDR view advanced here, but ought to be inconsistent with
the GaD view, were they to discuss them.
We also find that context matters for generics too, a fact
that bears further investigation, but is in line with recent
work that claims that generics display some context
sensitivity (Sterken 2015). This might be more consistent
with an analysis in which GEN also involves (some form of)
quantification rather than one that treats GEN as

Figure 1: The relative effect of context.
We get the effect for the contradictory context exactly as
predicted for the universal Qs. The relative effect is bigger
for those quantifiers that require QDR because of their
semantics (all the, each) than for the one that allows but
does not require QDR to the relevant subset (all). We also
find that context does affect GEN in the contradictory
context.
The prediction about the supportive context was not borne
out because of ceiling effects in the neutral condition.
Adding explicit information supporting the statement hardly
mattered, as acceptance rates did not rise significantly. The
ceiling effect might be due to participants being charitable
and/or exceptions not being immediately salient.

728

categorically/ontologically
different
from
universal
quantifiers.
Overall, we argue that there exist alternative explanations
for big portions of the supposed GOG effect. The study
discussed here did not address all the alternatives, but so far
in the literature it has been shown that at least pure error,
ignorance and now context all significantly affect
acceptance rates. In work in progress, we address crosslinguistic variation in the realisation of generic and
universal generalisations. The general thrust of this work is
that, rather than being under the influence of a default bias,
adults are simply sensitive to the subtle interplay of
quantifier semantics and pragmatics on the one hand, and
context on the other. This approach has the advantage of
accounting for data without postulating ad-hoc mechanisms
such as GOG just for generics.

Jönsson, M. L., & Hampton, J.A. (2006). “The inverse
conjunction fallacy.” Journal of Memory and Language
55, 317–334.
Kahneman, D. and Frederick, S. (2002). Representativeness
revisited: Attribute substitution in intuitive judgment. In
T. Gilovich, D. Griffin, and D. Kahneman (Eds.)
Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive
Judgment. CUP. New York, 49-81.
Krifka, M., Pelletier, F., Carlson, G., ter Meulen, A.,
Chierchia, G. and Link, G. (1995). Genericity: An
Introduction. In G. Carlson and F. J. Pelletier (Eds.) The
Generic Book. Chicago. Chicago University Press, 1-125.
Lazaridou-Chatzigoga, D., and Stockall, L. (2013).
Genericity, exceptions and
domain
restriction:
experimental evidence from comparison with universals.
In Proceedings of Sinn und Bedeutung 17, edited by E.
Chemla, V. Homer, and G. Winterstein, 325-343. École
Normale Supérieure, Paris.
Lazaridou-Chatzigoga, D., Katsos, K. and Stockall, L.
(2015). Genericity is easy? Formal and experimental
perspectives. RATIO 28(4), 470-494.
Lazaridou-Chatzigoga, D., Stockall, L. and Katsos, N.
(2017). A new look at the ‘Generic Overgeneralisation’
effect. Inquiry. Advance online publication. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0020174X.2017.1285993
Leslie, S.J. (2007). Generics and the structure of the mind.
Philosophical Perspectives 21, 375-405.
Leslie, S.J. (2008). Generics: Cognition and acquisition. The
Philosophical Review, 117(1), 1–49.
Leslie, S.J., Khemlani, S. and Glucksberg, S. (2011). All
Ducks Lay Eggs: The Generic Overgeneralization Effect.
Journal of Memory and Language 65(1), 15-31.
Lewis, D. (1975). Adverbs of Quantification. In Formal
Semantics in Natural Languages, edited by E. Keenan, 315. Cambridge University Press.
Mari, A., Beyssade, C. and del Prete, F. (2013). Genericity.
Oxford: OUP.
Partee, B. (1995). Quantificational structures and
compositionality. In E. Bach, E. Jelinek, A. Kratzer and
B. Partee (eds.). Quantification in Natural Languages.
Dordrecht: Kluwer, 541–601.
Pesetsky, D. (1987). Wh-in-Situ: Movement and
Unselective Binding. In the Representation of
(In)definiteness, Eric J. Reuland & Alice G. B. ter
Meulen, eds. MIT Press: Cambridge, Mass.
R CoreTeam (2012). R: A language and environment for
statistical computing. Vienna, Austria: R Foundation for
Statistical Computing.
Stanley, J. and Szabó, Z.G. (2000). On Quantifier Domain
Restriction. Mind and Language 15 (2-3), 219-61.
Sterken, R. (2015). Leslie on Generics. Philosophical
Studies, 172(9), 2493-2512.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a British Academy/Leverhulme
Trust Small Research Grant (SG-132271). We are grateful
to Faidra Faitaki and Valentina Hu for their help with
experimental materials and data entering, to Anne Beshears,
Patrick Elliott, Shivonne Gates, David Hall, Jessica Soltys,
Tom Stanton, Nikola Vukovic and Elspeth Wilson for their
help with norming and the experimental software, and to
Stephen Politzer-Ahles for advice on the statistics.

References
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B. & Walker, S. (2015).
Fitting Linear Mixed-Effects Models Using lme4. Journal
of Statistical Software, 67(1), 1-48.
Beghelli, F., & Stowell, T. (1997). Distributivity and
negation. In Ways of Scope Taking, edited by A.
Szabolcsi, 71-107. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Carlson, G. (1977). Reference to kinds in English. PhD
dissertation, University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Chomsky, N. (2000). New Horizons in the Study of
Language and Mind. Cambridge: CUP.
Claridge, C. (2011). Hyperbole in English: A corpus-based
study of exaggeration. Cambridge, UK: CUP.
von Fintel, K. (1994). Restrictions of quantifier domains.
PhD dissertation: University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Gelman, S.A. (2010). “Generics as a window onto young
children’s concepts”. In F.J. Pelletier (Ed.), Kinds, things,
and stuff: The cognitive side of generics and mass terms.
New directions in cognitive science, 100-123. New York:
OUP.
Grice, H.P. (1975). "Method in Philosophical Psychology:
From the Banal to the Bizarre", Proceedings and
Addresses
of
the
American
Philosophical
Association (1975), 23-53.
Haspelmath, M. (2006). Against markedness (and what to
replace it with). Journal of Linguistics 42, 25-70.
Heim, I. (1991). Artikel und Definitheit. In A. von Stechow
and D. Wunderlich (eds.), Semantik: Ein internationales
Handbuch der zeitgenössischen Forschung, 487-535.
Berlin: de Gruyter.

729

