Gricean epistemic reasoning in 4-year-olds
Alyssa Kampa (akampa@udel.edu)
Department of Linguistics, 125 E. Main St, University of Delaware
Newark, DE 19716 USA

Anna Papafragou (annap@udel.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 105 The Green, University of Delaware
Newark, DE 19716 USA
Abstract

(4)   Chip, Dale and Max collect acorns.

Recent experimental evidence suggests that adults incorporate
speaker knowledge into the derivation of pragmatic
implicatures. Developmental studies report that 5-year-old
children also succeed in taking speaker knowledge into
account in implicature computation, but 4-year-olds fail. The
present study investigated the pragmatic competence of 4year-olds, specifically the ability to incorporate speaker
knowledge into the derivation of ad hoc scalar implicatures.
Using a simple paradigm inspired by referential
communication, we found that 4- year-olds are able to
incorporate speaker knowledge into implicature derivation.
These results have implications for our understanding of the
linguistic, pragmatic, and epistemic abilities of young
children.
Keywords: implicatures; pragmatics; speaker knowledge

Background
As established by Grice (1989), communication involves
partners in a conversation working towards the same
cooperative goal (cf. also Sperber & Wilson, 1986). To that
end, speakers must be as informative as required by the
purpose of the exchange. If a speaker is less than fully
informative, as in (1), the listener will assume that – as far
as the speaker knows - the stronger alternative in (2) is not
true.
(1)   Some chipmunks collect acorns.
(2)   All chipmunks collect acorns.
The inference that the stronger statement in (2) does not
hold is known as a scalar implicature and requires
pragmatic reasoning. Scalar implicatures take their name
from the fact that they rely on a comparison to a lexical item
on an informativeness scale that the speaker could have used
but did not (Grice, 1989). In the case of (1) and (2), the
lexical alternatives involved form a scale ordered in terms of
logical strength (Horn, 1998). Furthermore, this logically
ordered scale is a feature of the language that needs to be
accessed in order for the hearer to compute an implicature.
Other types of scalar implicatures rely on ad hoc scales that
depend upon contextual information. For instance, a speaker
can utter (3) to communicate that the stronger statement in
(4) does not hold:
(3)   Chip and Dale collect acorns.

Past findings in the literature have indicated that children
struggle with deriving scalar implicatures until late in
development: unlike adults, they fail to reject weak
(underinformative) statements when a stronger alternative is
true (Chierchia et al, 2001; Noveck, 2001). Eye-tracking
methods have also revealed weaknesses in early implicature
computation (Huang & Snedeker, 2009). However, 5-yearolds have increased success in computing scalar
implicatures when task demands set up an expectation of a
stronger utterance (Papafragou & Musolino, 2003; Skordos
& Papafragou, 2016; Katsos & Bishop 2011; see
Papafragou & Skordos, 2016 for a review), and even 3-yearolds succeed in deriving ad hoc scalar implicatures in a
simple referent selection task (Stiller, Goodman, & Frank,
2015; cf. also Barner, Brooks, & Bale, 2011). At present,
there is much discussion in the field about whether early
failures with implicatures were due to children’s increased
pragmatic tolerance in judgment tasks (Katsos & Bishop,
2011), lack of linguistic processing abilities (Chierchia et al,
2001; Reinhart, 2004), inability to access stronger lexical
alternatives (Barner et al., 2011), failures in assessing which
alternatives are conversationally relevant (Skordos &
Papafragou, 2016), or some combination of these factors.
The present study seeks to incorporate speaker knowledge
into the task of implicature derivation (Sauerland, 2004;
Fox, 2007; Chierchia, Fox, & Spector, 2009). There is
evidence that adults consult the speaker’s knowledge state
when computing implicatures (Bergen & Grodner, 2012;
Breheny, Ferguson & Katsos, 2013). For instance, the
hearer upon encountering a statement such as (1) or (3) is
justified in concluding that the listener does not know
whether the stronger alternative is true (or, in other cases,
that the speaker knows that the stronger alternative is false).
However, developmental studies have shown that young
children have difficulties with such epistemic aspects of
implicature computation. Hochstein and colleagues (2016)
conducted a study with 4- and 5-year-olds investigating
their ability to compute non-scalar “ignorance” implicatures
which require the incorporation of the speaker’s knowledge
state into their derivation. They found that 5-year-olds were
able to succeed on this task but 4-year-olds failed.
In a study most closely related to the present experiment,
Papafragou, Friedberg and Cohen (in press) found a similar
pattern. In that study, 4- and 5-year-old children watched

2362

short videos of two twins. In one video, an observer only
saw part of one twin’s action, and in the other video, the
observer saw the whole action. Children themselves had
access to the completed action that was the same in both
videos (e.g., a girl colored a star). Children then heard a
statement made by one of the observers about the action
(e.g. ‘The girl colored some/all of the star’) and had to
decide which observer said it. Five-year-olds were able to
successfully incorporate speaker knowledge into their
pragmatic reasoning, attributing weak statements to the
partly informed observed and strong statements to the fully
informed observer, but 4-year-olds struggled. In later
manipulations, when the observers’ access to the actions
was identical to the children’s (and hence there was no need
to reason about someone else’s belief), 4-year-olds’
performance improved.
The present paper revisits the issue of whether 4-year-olds
can incorporate the speaker’s knowledge state into the
computation of implicatures, as 5-year-olds and adults have
been shown to do. The task designed for this experiment
was created with the goal of keeping task demands as
simple as possible. The design borrows from the referential
communication paradigm (see, e.g., Nadig & Sedivy, 2002).
In this paradigm, speaker knowledge is established through
the speaker’s visual perspective without the need to set up
an elaborate background scenario (cf. also Matthews et al.,
2006). The task also has a clear goal (referent selection; see
Stiller et al., 2014) and targets ad hoc scalar implicatures
that rely on contextual knowledge set up within the
experimental scene.

Experiment
Participants
Thirty-one 4-year-olds (mean age: 4;6, range: 4:0 to
16 female) participated. Children were recruited
Newark (DE) preschools. A control group of 26
participants was also tested. Adult participants
recruited with a HIT posted on MTurk.

4:11,
from
adult
were

Method
For the test phase, participants were shown pairs of
pictures displayed side by side on a laptop screen (see
Figure 1). Within a pair, each picture showed the same
person sitting across a table behind a two-compartment box
with identical objects (e.g. a spoon and a bowl), facing the
camera. In one picture, the girl could see the contents of
both compartments in her box (full access box), but in the
other, she could only see the content of one compartment
(e.g. the spoon) because the other compartment was blocked
(limited access box). The participants could see the full
contents of both boxes. Within a pair, the first (leftmost)
picture was displayed for 2 seconds, followed by the
appearance of the second picture that remained on the
screen for 2 seconds. Then an audio recording of a sentence
was heard (both pictures remained on the screen). The

sentences were either weak (e.g. “I see a spoon”) or strong
(e.g. “I see a spoon and a bowl”).

Figure 1. An example stimulus.
Before the test phase, children were introduced to the
limited access box and an explanation of how it worked.
The explanation involved showing a picture of the girl with
the limited access box in front of her and one object in the
hidden compartment. The children were asked whether they
could look through the open and closed compartments. For
the closed compartment, the children were then asked why
they could not look through it (answers typically mentioned
that it was closed or blocked). They were asked if they
thought the girl could look through the blocked
compartment. The children were then asked whether the
girl knew there was a hidden item in the blocked
compartment. To remind children of the properties of the
boxes, after the first 4 test trials, children were again asked
whether they could look through both compartments of the
limited access box and whether they thought the girl could
look through both sides and knew there was an object there
(for the importance of such reminders of the visual
properties of the display, see Nadig & Sedivy, 2002).
Children who answered “yes” both times to the question of
whether the girl knew there was an object in the hidden
compartment were excluded because they did not
understand the nature of the limited-access box (N = 6).
The participants were given two pre-test trials. These
trials involved a two-picture set-up, as in the test phase.
Participants were told that they would see some pictures of
the girl looking at a box that was open on both sides, and
then looking at a box that was open on one side and closed
on the other. The participants were told that the girl was
going to talk about only one of the boxes. They were
instructed that they would hear a sentence and would have
to decide which box she was talking about. For the first pretest trial, the items in the two boxes were different across
boxes rather than identical as in the test trials (a book and a
cup in one box; an orange and a spoon in the other). The
sentence unambiguously described the full access box (“I
see a book and a cup”). For the second pre-test trial, the
boxes had different objects again: the full access box had
two objects but the limited access box only had an object in

2363

the closed compartment, but no object in the open
compartment. The sentence was: “I see nothing.” Neither of
the pre-tests involved perspective taking. One child failed
both pre-tests and was excluded.
The test phase was identical to the pre-test trials, but with
identical objects in the two boxes. After hearing either the
weak or strong sentence, participants were asked, “Which
box is she talking about?”, and had to point to the correct
picture. The pictures were counterbalanced in terms of
whether the limited access box was on the left or the right
within the pair. Participants were given 4 strong and 4 weak
sentences in a mixed order. Two presentation lists were
created; assignment of Type of Sentence (strong, weak) to
pairs of pictures was counterbalanced across lists.
In order to succeed on the task, participants had to inhibit
their own perspective, since both boxes had identical
contents from the children’s point of view. If participants
successfully incorporated the perspective and knowledge of
the speaker, they should say that the strong statement “I see
a spoon and bowl” described the full access box, because
the spoon was not visible to the speaker in the limited access
box. For weak statements, such as “I see a spoon,”
participants should pick the limited access box because,
although the full access box also had a spoon, it would be
underinformative to only mention the spoon if the speaker
could also see a bowl.

Results
Results are presented in Table 1. In accordance with our
predictions and adult judgements, correct answers were
defined as choosing the full access box for the strong
sentences and the limited access box for the weak sentences.
For each of the participants, a mean score across the four
trials was calculated for both the strong and weak
conditions. Because most of the 4-year-olds received a
score of 0 or 1 in the critical weak condition (21 out of 26),
participants were divided into passers (score ≥ .75) and
failers (score ≤ .50).
Adults performed at ceiling in both the strong and weak
conditions. For the 4-year-olds, Fisher’s exact test revealed
a marginally significant difference in the number of passers
and failers for the strong vs. weak condition (p=.05, 2tailed).
Comparisons across age groups revealed a
significant difference between adults and 4-year-olds in the
weak condition (p=.01), but no significant difference in the
strong condition (p=1). Nevertheless, in the critical 4-yearold weak condition the number of passers was significantly
different from the expected ratio due to chance (p=.029).

Table 1: Task performance.
________________________________________________
Classification
Condition___________
Strong
Weak
Adults
Passers
26
26
Failers
0
0
Children
Passers
25
19
Failers
1
7

Discussion
This experiment investigated 4-year-olds’ ability to
incorporate speaker knowledge into the computation of ad
hoc scalar implicatures. The results suggest that 4-year-olds
display the ability to incorporate speaker knowledge into
implicature derivation. These findings lower prior age
estimates of children’s ability to take the epistemic step
during implicature computation – but align with reports in
the literature about the epistemic ability of very young
children in non-linguistic tasks (Surian, Caldi & Sperber
2007; Baillargeon, Scott & He, 2010). Notice that epistemic
stance per se was not as demanding (see strong sentences):
when taking someone else’s perspective was combined with
computing an implicature that this person could have
intended, given their knowledge state (weak sentences),
performance dropped.
An interesting question is why 4-year-olds were able to
succeed at this task when they failed at prior studies
targeting sensitivity to the speaker’s epistemic stance in
implicature-computation (Hochstein et al., 2016;
Papafragou et al., in press). In the present experiment, 4year-olds needed to compute implicatures, but they also
needed to reason about what a person had access to,
determine how that would affect the speaker’s utterances,
and inhibit their own perspective. Nevertheless, our
paradigm was based on a simple, clear way of establishing
that someone’s knowledge differs from the child’s own;
furthermore, the present paradigm included a clear
conversational goal (the identification of the box that the
speaker is talking about). In both of these respects, the
current study is simpler than past attempts to link the
informativeness of a sentence to a speaker’s mental state.
These findings and the paradigm used in this experiment
provide fertile ground for a continued investigation into the
pragmatic ability of young preschool children. It is possible
that children younger than 4 could be found to demonstrate
these abilities with an even simpler task. We are currently
pursuing this possibility in ongoing work.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under grant no. 1632849.

References
Baillargeon, R., Scott, R.M., & He, Z. (2010). False-belief
understanding in infants. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
14, 110-118.

2364

Barner, D., Brooks, N., & Bale, A. (2011). Accessing the
unsaid: The role of scalar alternatives in children’s
pragmatic inference. Cognition, 188, 87-96.
Bergen, L., & Grodner, D. J. (2012). Speaker knowledge
influences
the
comprehension
of
pragmatic
inferences. Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 38, 1450.
Breheny, R., Ferguson, H., & Katsos, N. (2013). Taking the
epistemic step: Toward a model of on-line access to
conversational implicatures. Cognition, 126, 423-440.
Chierchia, G., Crain, S., Guasti, M. T., Gualmini, A., &
Meroni, L. (2001). The acquisition of disjunction:
Evidence for a grammatical view of scalar implicatures.
In A. H.-J. Do et al. (eds.), BUCLD 25 Proceedings, 157168. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Chierchia, G., Fox, D., & Spector, B. (2009). Hurford’s
constraint and the theory of scalar implicatures.
Presuppositions and Implicatures, 60, 47–62.
Fox, D. (2007). Free choice and the theory of scalar
implicatures. In Uli Sauerland & Penka Stateva (eds.),
Presupposition and Implicature in Compositional
Semantics.
Palgrave
Macmillan.
Houndmills,
Basingstoke.
Frank, M. C., & Goodman, N. D. (2014). Inferring word
meanings
by
assuming
that
speakers
are
informative. Cognitive Psychology, 75, 80-96.
Grice, P. (1989). Studies in the way of words. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Hochstein, L., Bale, A., Fox, D., & Barner, D. (2016).
Ignorance and Inference: Do Problems with Gricean
Epistemic Reasoning Explain Children’s Difficulty with
Scalar Implicature? Journal of Semantics, 33, 107-135.
Horn, L. (1989). A natural history of negation. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Huang, Y. & Snedeker, J. (2009). Semantic meaning and
pragmatic interpretation in 5-year-olds: Evidence from
real-time spoken language comprehension.
Developmental Psychology, 45, 1723-1739.
Katsos, N., & Bishop, D. V. (2011). Pragmatic tolerance:
Implications for the acquisition of informativeness and
implicature. Cognition, 120, 67-81.
Matthews, D., Lieven, E., Theakston, A., & Tomasello, M.
(2006). The effect of perceptual availability and prior
discourse on young children’s use of referring
expressions. Applied Psycholinguistics, 27, 403-422.
Nadig, A.S., & Sedivy, J.C. (2002). Evidence of
perspective-taking constraints in children’s on-line
reference resolution. Psychological Science, 13, 329–336.
Noveck, I. (2001). When children are more logical than
adults: Experimental investigations of scalar implicature.
Cognition, 78, 165-188.
Noveck, I.A. & Sperber, D. (2007). The why and how of
experimental pragmatics: The case of ‘scalar inferences’.
In N. Burton-Roberts (ed.) Advances in Pragmatics, 184212. Basingstoke: Palgrave.

Papafragou, A., Friedberg, C., & Cohen, M. (in press). The
role of speaker knowledge in children’s pragmatic
inferences. Child Development.
Papafragou, A. & Musolino, J. (2003), Scalar implicatures:
experiments at the semantics-pragmatics interface.
Cognition, 86, 253-282
Papafragou, A., & Skordos, D. (2016). Scalar implicature.
In J. Lidz, W. Snyder & J. Pater (eds.), Oxford Handbook
of Developmental Linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Papafragou, A., & Tantalou, N. (2004). Children’s
computation of implicatures. Language Acquisition, 12,
71-82.
Reinhart, T. (2004). The processing cost of reference-set
computation: Acquisition of stress shift and focus.
Language Acquisition, 12(2), 109–155.
Skordos, D., and Papafragou, A. (2016). Children’s
derivation of scalar implicatures: Alternatives and
relevance. Cognition, 153, 6-18.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1986). Relevance:
Communication and cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press. 2nd ed. 1995.
Stiller, A., Goodman, N. D., & Frank, M. C. (2015). Ad-hoc
implicature in preschool children. Language, Learning,
and Development, 11, 176-190.
Sauerland, U. (2012). The computation of scalar
implicatures: Pragmatic, lexical or grammatical?
Language and Linguistics Compass, 6, 36-49.
Sauerland, U. (2004), Scalar implicatures in complex
sentences. Linguistics and Philosophy, 27, 367–91.
Surian, L., Caldi, S. & Sperber, D. (2007). Attribution of
beliefs to 13-month-old infants. Psychological
Science, 18, 580–586.

2365

