Harmony in a non-harmonic language: word order learning in French children
Guillaume Braquet (s1577900@sms.ed.ac.uk)
Department of Linguistics and English Language, 3 Charles Street
Edinburgh, EH8 9AD UK

Jennifer Culbertson (jennifer.culbertson@ed.ac.uk)
Centre for Language Evolution, 3 Charles Street
Edinburgh, EH8 9AD UK
Abstract

make them harmonic (e.g., by changing the order of one of
the modifiers to match the other). Indeed, even when children were taught a completely regular non-harmonic pattern
(e.g., adjectives always follow and numerals always precede
the noun), they still produced a harmonic output (Culbertson
& Newport, 2015b).

Recent studies using artificial language learning have argued
that the cross-linguistic frequency of harmonic word order
patterns–in which heads are ordered consistently before or after dependents across syntactic categories–reflects a cognitive
bias (Culbertson, Smolensky, & Legendre, 2012; Culbertson
& Newport, 2015a). These studies suggest that English speaking adults and children favor harmonic orders of nouns and
different nominal modifiers (adjectives, numerals). However,
because they target English learners, whose native language
is harmonic in the nominal domain (Num-Adj-N), this preference may be based on transfer rather than a universal bias
for harmony. We present new evidence from French-speaking
children, whose native language is non-harmonic in this domain (Num-N-Adj). Our results reveal clear effects of native
language transfer, but also evidence that a harmonic pattern is
favored even in this population of learners.
Keywords: cognitive biases; artificial language learning; typology; syntax; word order; French

Cognitive bias or native language influence?
These studies suggest the possibility that learners may preferentially change non-harmonic patterns to harmonic ones,
rather than the reverse, offering a potential explanation for a
similar typological asymmetry. Frequencies of the relevant
nominal word order patterns are reported in the World Atlas
of Language Structures Online, shown in Table 1. Harmonic
patterns (both modifiers either pre-nominal or post-nominal)
outnumber non-harmonic patterns. Note in addition, that
within both harmonic and non-harmonic pattern types, the
one with post-nominal adjectives is more frequent (i.e., NAdj with N-Num; N-Adj with Num-N).

Introduction
Cross-category harmony (Greenberg, 1963; Hawkins, 1983)
is perhaps the most well-known typological generalization of
syntax: while it has been revised many times over the years
(Dryer, 1992; Biberauer, Holmberg, & Roberts, 2014), most
linguists continue to assume that it reflects some underlying
“law of human behavior” (Greenberg, 1966). Nevertheless,
like most typological generalizations, harmony is a statistical tendency, and researchers have pointed to the possibility
that correlations in word order across categories may largely
reflect the effects of language contact and shared inheritance
rather than universal properties of human cognition (Dunn,
Greenhill, Levinson, & Gray, 2011; Ladd, Roberts, & Dediu,
2014).
To provide evidence of a link to cognition, a number of
recent studies have investigated word order harmony using
artificial language learning experiments. Culbertson et al.
(2012) taught English-speaking adults a miniature artificial
language in which simple noun phrases, including a noun
and either an adjective or a numeral word, are used to describe a set of pictures. The languages feature variable patterns of nominal word order that tend toward either harmonic
or non-harmonic. Learners tended to regularize harmonic input patterns–using the input harmonic order more frequently
than it appeared in the input. By contrast, they tended
to shift non-harmonic patterns toward harmonic ones rather
than regularizing. Culbertson and Newport (2015a) found
an even stronger effect in English-speaking children, who almost across the board altered non-harmonic input patterns to

Table 1: Frequency of harmonic and non-harmonic combinations of noun with adjective and numeral (Dryer, 2013a,
2013b).
Num-N
N-Num

Adj-N
251
37

N-Adj
168
509

Data from English-speaking learners reflects both a harmony bias and a bias for post-nominal adjectives to some
extent. For example, English-speaking adults were equally
likely to regularize pre- and the post-nominal harmonic patterns, despite the latter having less surface-level overlap
with English than either non-harmonic pattern. They were
also least likely to regularize the non-harmonic pattern with
pre-nominal adjectives (Culbertson et al., 2012). Englishspeaking children did not exhibit any differences among nonharmonic patterns, however, their overall preference for harmonic patterns was in fact skewed toward the post-nominal
N-Adj with N-Num (Culbertson & Newport, 2015a).
Nevertheless, evidence of a harmony preference in English speakers does not unequivocally suggest an explanation
for the typological asymmetry seen here. This is of course
because English itself exemplifies one of the two harmonic

156

patterns–Adj-N with Num-N. Thus a preference for harmony
in this population may be due to transfer at a more abstract
level. In other words, English speakers may find the postnominal harmonic pattern easy to learn because they are used
to treating numerals and adjectives similarly in terms of their
relative order with the noun. If abstract transfer is responsible for the harmony bias in English speakers, then French
speaking learners should behave quite differently. The default
nominal word order in French exemplifies the more common
non-harmonic pattern, N-Adj with Num-N. Numeral order
is strictly pre-nominal, while adjectives are typically postnominal but exhibit some flexibility. Most importantly, there
is a small lexically-specified set of adjectives which precede
the noun. Examples of default order are shown in (1).1
(1)

complete the experimental session (2), or extremely low score
on vocabulary learning (1).

Materials
The artificial language consisted of 10 words: 4 nouns corresponding to novel objects, 3 adjectives, and 3 numeral
words. Following Culbertson and Newport (2015a), nouns
were nonce words which were phonotactically plausible in
the participants’ native language, and modifiers were pseudononce words resembling the corresponding native language
words. This lexicon was used to describe pictures like those
shown in Figure 1. Importantly, all of the adjectival modifiers
used here appear in the default post-nominal order in French,
they are not in the set of pre-nominally ordered adjectives.

a. maison bleue
house blue
‘blue house’
b. deux maisons
two houses
‘two houses’

Table 2: Artificial language lexicon.
Nouns
[bogi]
[sefi]
[voli]
[kani]

French speakers could therefore be reasonably expected to
prefer non-harmonic patterns over harmonic ones, since their
prior language experience provides evidence that these two
types of modifiers behave differently with respect to order.
On the other hand, if the preference for harmony reflects a
universal cognitive bias, then even French speakers–whose
native language violates it–may exhibit its effects.

Adjective
[bly] (bleu ‘blue’)
[tachu] (tacheté , ‘spotted’)
[pølu] (poilu, ‘furry’)

Numerals
[doks] (deux, ‘two’)
[tKa] (trois, ‘three’)
[kitK] (quatre, ‘four’)

Figure 1: Example visual stimuli.

Experiment 1
Here we explore the potential effects of native language influence and cognitive biases on nominal word order learning in French-speaking children. We follow the general design and procedure of Culbertson and Newport (2015a) and
Culbertson and Newport (2015b). Children are taught a variable version of one of four patterns corresponding to those
in Table 1. They are trained on simple phrases comprising
a noun with an adjective or a noun with a numeral, and are
then tested on their production of those phrases. The extent
to which learners accurately reproduce and regularize these
variable patterns is used to infer their relative preferences.

Design & Procedure
Participants were randomly assigned to one of four input
word order conditions. Each condition featured a dominant
pattern for each modifier type, used in 75% of utterances.
The remaining 25% used the alternative order. The variation
present in the input was unpredictable; it was not conditioned
on any particular lexical items. These conditions are illustrated in Table 3.
Table 3: Conditions, according to dominant pattern type
(shaded cells are non-dominant.

Participants
Participants were 48 children (24 females), 6-7 years of
age (mean=6;7, matched with participants in Culbertson and
Newport (2015a)). They were recruited from elementary
schools in Southwest France, and were native speakers of
French, who were either monolingual, or bilingual in French
and Occitan (a Romance language spoken in this region,
which uses the same nominal word order as French). Parental
consent was obtained for all participants. Three additional
children were excluded from the analysis due to failure to

Harmonic dominant
Pre-N
Post-N
Non-harmonic dominant
N-Adj, Num-N
Adj-N, N-Num

Adj-N

N-Adj

Num-N

N-Num

75%
25%

25%
75%

75%
25%

25%
75%

25%
75%

75%
25%

75%
25%

25%
75%

Following Culbertson and Newport (2015b), the experiment consisted of a single session, lasting approximately 30
minutes. During this session participants were trained and

1 For

a more complete discussion of the flexibility of adjective
ordering in French, including features which predict whether an adjective can be pre-nominal, see Fox and Thuilier (2012).

157

1.00
Proportion dominant order

tested on the language with an experimenter present. The
experiment was presented using PsychoPy software (Peirce,
2009) on a Macintosh laptop in a quiet corner of the child’s
classroom. Children were told they would be playing a game
to learn an alien language with the help of a friendly alien
named Clémy.
The experiment began with a series of games designed to
teach children the novel nouns and their meanings. The first
game (20 trials) involved seeing a grayscale picture of a single
object, listening to the label provided by the alien speaker,
and repeating the label aloud. The second game (20 trials)
involved listening to a label and clicking on whichever of the
four novel objects it corresponded to. Feedback highlighting
the correct picture was given on all trials. A sound indicated
whether the child’s choice was correct or incorrect. The third
game (20 trials) tested children’s ability to provide the correct
label for an object shown on the screen. Feedback in the form
of the correct noun label was provided on all trials.
The second part of the experiment consisted of a series of
similar games designed to teach children simple phrases in
the language. Recall that each phrase consisted of either a
noun with an adjective or a noun with a numeral, but never
both. Half of all trials featured an adjective, and half a numeral. The first game (48 trials) involved seeing pictures as
in Figure 1 above, and hearing a phrase to describe it provided by the alien speaker. Participants were told to repeat
the phrase. The second game (48 trials) involved hearing a
phrase and choosing the corresponding picture from an array
of four choices. Feedback was given as described above. Finally, children were shown a picture, and were asked to provide a description for it (48 trials). No feedback was given,
however if the child had trouble with one of the words, the
experimenter would help.

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

Pre−N

Post−N

N−Adj Adj−N
Num−N N−Num
Condition

Figure 2: Average proportion use of dominant input order by
condition. The dotted line is the proportion of the dominant
order used in the input (75%). Error bars represent 95% CIs.
tended to appear post-nominally: the adjective in the Frenchlike N-Adj, Num-N condition, and the numeral in the AdjN, N-Num condition. In other words, learners’ productions
in these three conditions tended to move the language away
from the input pattern and toward a post-nominal harmonic
pattern.
Pre−N

N−Adj
Num−N

Adj−N
N−Num

Proportion dominant order

1.00

Post−N

0.75

Results

0.50

Here we report results from the final phrase production task.
Comprehension of phrases was uniformly high across conditions (> 85%). Figure 2 shows the average proportion of trials in which children used the dominant word order in each of
the four word order input conditions. Children used the dominant order almost exclusively in the post-nominal harmonic
condition, however dominant order use in the other three conditions was much lower. Children roughly matched the input
proportions in the non-harmonic N-Adj, Num-N condition,
which is most similar to their native language pattern.
Figure 3 shows use of the dominant pattern broken down
by the type of modifier, illustrating more clearly what learners are producing when they don’t match the input. While
in the post-nominal harmonic condition both modifier types
are regularized equally often, there is a clear difference between modifier types for the other three conditions. In the
pre-nominal harmonic condition, children tended to use the
numeral in the dominant input order more often, however neither modifier type reproduces the input pattern closely. In
the two non-harmonic conditions, children were more likely
to match the dominant input order for whichever modifier

0.25

0.00

Adj Num

Adj Num Adj Num
Condition

Adj Num

Figure 3: Average proportion use of dominant input order
for each modifier type by condition. The dotted line is the
proportion of the dominant order used in the input (75%).
Error bars represent 95% CIs.
These data were analyzed using mixed-effects logistic regression as implemented in the lme4 R package (Bates,
2010), with condition (input pattern type) and modifier type
(adjective or numeral) as fixed effects and participants and
items (stimulus picture) as random effects. Modifier type
was sum coded; condition was treatment coded with the
most French-like pattern (N-Adj, Num-N) as the baseline

158

level. This model revealed a significant difference between
the French-like (N-Adj, Num-N) condition and each of the
other three conditions: compared to this condition there was
significantly less use of the input order in the pre-nominal harmonic condition (β = −3.99 ± 0.56, p < 0.001) and the nonharmonic Adj-N, N-Num condition (β = −3.60 ± 0.54, p <
0.001), but significantly more use of the input order in the
post-nominal harmonic condition (β = 17.88 ± 17.03, p =
0.03). A significant main effect of modifier type was also
present, indicating less matching of numeral order overall
(β = −2.28 ± 0.22, p < 0.001). Finally, significant interactions between condition and modifier type were found.
As suggested by Figure 3, the main difference between
the French-like and post-nominal harmonic conditions is in
use of the dominant order for the numeral (β = −12.50 ±
17.04, p = 0.04). By contrast the opposite was true for both
the pre-nominal harmonic (β = 4.45 ± 0.33, p < 0.001) and
non-harmonic Adj-N, N-Num (β = 4.89 ± 0.31, p < 0.001)
conditions where the bigger difference with the French-like
condition was in use of the dominant adjective order.2
A visualization of the general direction of change from the
input in each condition can be seen in Figure 4. This shows
the proportion of pre-nominal adjectives and numerals each
individual child produced, colored by their input condition.
Learners generally cluster in the harmonic post-nominal area
of the space, no learners for whom this was the input condition shifted away from this pattern. A smaller cluster appears
around the non-harmonic French-like (N-Adj, Num-N) area,
with children in that input condition plus some from the prenominal harmonic input condition who have switched only
the adjective order to post-nominal. Figure 5 summarizes this
picture by calculating each child’s preferred pattern, determined by the order used in the majority of utterances (greater
than 50%) for each modifier type. For example, one child
in the French-like N-Adj, Num-N condition produced adjectives post-nominally 100% of the time, and numerals postnominally 88% of the time. This child was thus classified as
having the post-nominal harmonic pattern.

●

1.00

●
●
●

●

●

Proportion Num−N

●

●●

●
● ●

●

0.75

●

●

●

Condition
●

0.50

●
●
●
●

●

Pre−N
Post−N
N−Adj, Num−N
Adj−N, N−Num

●

0.25

●

●

●●

●

0.00

●
●● ● ●
● ●
●●
●● ● ●
●
●●●
●
●●●
●● ●
●

0.00

0.25
0.50
0.75
Proportion Adj−N

1.00

Figure 4: Output patterns for each individual participant, colored by condition, defined as proportion pre-nominal order
for each modifier type. Points are jittered to prevent overplotting. Larger points outlined in black represent input proportions for each condition. Dashed lines provide a visualization of rough pattern types.

Number of participants

30

20

Condition
Pre−N
Post−N
N−Adj, Num−N
Adj−N, N−Num

10

0
Pre−N Post−N N−Adj Adj−N
Num−N N−Num

Preferred Pattern

Figure 5: Number of participants in each condition whose
preferred pattern (used in > 50% of utterances) corresponds
to each pattern type.

Discussion
French-speaking children learning variable patterns of harmonic or non-harmonic nominal word order showed a striking pattern of behavior in their productions. When their input
featured the post-nominal harmonic pattern N-Adj, N-Num
as the dominant order, they regularized this pattern, producing nearly deterministic output. When their input featured a
dominant pattern similar to their own native language, N-Adj,
Num-N, they matched or regularized the adjective order, but
not the numeral order. To the extent that children were fail-

ing to match the pre-nominal numeral order, they were necessarily switching it to post-nominal, in harmony with the adjectives. This same behavioral pattern, of switching the predominantly pre-nominal modifier to match the post-nominal
one, is seen to a more extreme degree in the non-harmonic
Adj-N, N-Num condition. Children in that condition generally matched the post-nominal numeral order, and showed
a very strong tendency to switch the adjective to follow as
well. In the pre-nominal harmonic condition, a similar pattern is again found: children generally produced more postnominal phrases than were present in the input for both modifier types, but particularly the adjective. Overall then, most

2 Note that the standard error on estimates for coefficients encoding contrasts between the French-like condition and the postnominal harmonic condition is very high. This is likely due to individual variation in the French-like condition, where some participants strongly regularized the input order (similar to behavior in the
post-nominal harmonic condition), while others shifted away from
the input dramatically. This is illustrated in Figure 4.

159

of the children in this experiment produced a pattern corresponding most closely to the post-nominal harmonic N-Adj,
N-Num.
Recall that above we suggested two competing hypotheses which generated different predictions about the behavior
of French-speaking learners in our experiment. Under the
first hypothesis, influence from the native language is the primary driver of behavior. Previous results with English speaking learners were consistent with abstract level transfer (i.e.,
a general preference for harmonic patterns). Thus French
speakers would be predicted to prefer non-harmonic patterns,
though a preference for the specific native language pattern
(here N-Adj, Num-N) is also possible. The second hypothesis
is that a cognitive bias favoring harmonic patterns is present
universally across learners, even learners whose native language actively violates it. This predicts that French-speaking
learners will, like English speakers, prefer harmonic patterns.
The results reported here are not fully consistent with either
hypothesis. Most obviously, learners did not show a preference for the pattern, or pattern type, most similar to their
native language. Neither did they prefer harmonic patterns
across the board. However, a combination of native language
transfer effects and a universal harmony bias provides a coherent explanation. French-speaking children in our experiment exhibited a strong preference for post-nominal adjective
order, in accord with their native language. This preference
was generalized to numerals under a pressure for harmony.
In order for this explanation to work, we need to rule out
a potential alternative: that French-speaking children age 67 years do not distinguish numerals from adjectives, or have
not fully mastered the order of numerals in their native language. This could lead to the over-use of post-nominal ordering if children have, by contrast, mastered the default adjective order. There is relatively little work on the acquisition
of nominal word order in monolingual French children. Indeed, we are not aware of corresponding work on the acquisition of numeral-noun order. We therefore extracted all instances of noun phrases including one of the numeral words
‘two’ through ‘ten’ in the Lyon corpus (Demuth & Tremblay,
2008).3 This is a publicly available corpus of naturalistic
parent-child interactions including 5 children, recorded for
1 hour every 1-2 weeks from age 1 to 3 years (185 hours of
speech total). Children’s first noun phrases with a numeral
word occurred as early as 1;9. Out of a total of 258 instances,
no word order errors were found. Based on this evidence,
it appears likely that by 6-7 years of age, French-speaking
children have long since mastered the pre-nominal order of
numerals words in their language. Given the variation in adjective ordering in French, it would seem plausible that children may take longer to acquire this aspect of the syntax of
their native language. However, evidence from spontaneous
speech suggests that French-English bilingual children have

mastered French adjective order very early as well, by 2;5 at
least (Nicoladis, 2002). This may be accomplished earlier in
monolinguals, in line with the early documented acquisition
of adjective order in English by the age of 2 (Brown, 1973).
In our study then, it does not seem likely that French-learning
children’s preference for post-nominal order in both adjectives and numerals is the result of a lack of knowledge about
the syntax of these categories in their native language.
What remains then, is to understand how the results of
this study fit with with the previous findings from Englishspeaking adults and children. As mentioned above, Englishspeaking child learners did not generalize their native prenominal order preferentially, but rather readily produce both
harmonic patterns. If anything, there was somewhat stronger
preference for the post-nominal harmonic pattern (Culbertson
& Newport, 2015a, 2015b). For English-speaking adults,
both harmonic patterns were regularized, and among nonharmonic patterns the one with pre-nominal adjectives (AdjN, N-Num), was particularly dispreferred (Culbertson et al.,
2012). Recall that the typological distribution in Table 1 suggests both a preference for harmonic patterns, and a general
preference for post-nominal adjectives. Thus among the harmonic patterns, the post-nominal one is more common, and
within the non-harmonic patterns, N-Adj, Num-N is the most
common. If these two pressures are at work across both
learner populations, English and French, then we expect to
see behavior mirror the typology. However, if these two biases are, as suggested above, influenced by learners’ native
language experience, then a more complex picture emerges.
For English-speaking children (and adults), the harmony bias
is strengthened by native language experience, while the preference for post-nominal adjectives is weakened. As a result,
learners strongly prefer harmonic languages, and only weakly
prefer post-nominal over pre-nominal order. For Frenchspeaking children, the opposite holds. The harmony bias is
weakened, while the preference for post-nominal adjectives
is strengthened. This results in a strong preference for the
post-nominal harmonic pattern only, and changes to the input
in each other condition which move the language toward that
pattern via the adjective. Based on differences found between
English-speaking adults and children, we would predict that
French adults should show a similar but less dramatic pattern
of preferences to children in our study.

Why these biases?
Both of the biases we have argued to be at work here reflect
potentially quite general cognitive mechanisms. Harmonic
patterns are simpler, in the sense that they involve fewer, more
general rules, which can be generalized across categories. For
extensive discussion of this idea, see Culbertson and Kirby
(2016). The preference for post-nominal adjectives may reflect a pressure to establish the object of modification first,
particularly in cases where the meaning of the noun is predictive in determining the meaning of the adjective, e.g., for
gradable adjectives like ‘tall’ (Kamp & Partee, 1995; Ramscar, Yarlett, Dye, Denny, & Thorpe, 2010). Interestingly,

3 The numeral ‘one’ in French, un(e), corresponds to the indefinite article ‘a’, and therefore may be acquired differently or much
earlier than other numerals.

160

Nicoladis (2006) shows that French-English bilingual children (2;11-5;3) produce more reversals of adjective order than
their monolingual counterparts in both French and English.
These reversal errors were more likely to involve adjectives
incorrectly in the post-nominal position than the reverse. In
French, this corresponded to placing a typically pre-nominal
adjective like grand ‘big’ after the noun. In English, this corresponded to placing adjectives in an incorrect post-nominal
position when they were post-nominal in French (e.g., ‘a
monkey purple’). This is in line with our findings in the sense
that post-nominal adjective order seems to be more readily
generalized than pre-nominal order. Overall then, the preference for post-nominal adjective ordering found among languages of the world and reflected in both English and French
learners, may be related to general properties of learning and
processing.

Culbertson, J., & Newport, E. L. (2015b). Language learning and word order regularities: Children’s errors reflect a
typological preference for harmonic patterns. Talk given at
BUCLD 40.
Culbertson, J., Smolensky, P., & Legendre, G. (2012). Learning biases predict a word order universal. Cognition, 122,
306-329.
Demuth, K., & Tremblay, A.
(2008).
Prosodicallyconditioned variability in children’s production of French
determiners. Journal of Child Language, 35(1), 99-127.
(Cited By (since 1996): 1)
Dryer, M. (1992). The Greenbergian word order correlations.
Language, 68(1), 81-183.
Dryer, M. (2013a). Order of adjective and noun. In
M. Haspelmath, M. S. Dryer, D. Gil, & B. Comrie (Eds.),
The world atlas of language structures online (chap. 87).
Munich: Max Planck Digital Library. Retrieved from
http://wals.info/chapter/87
Dryer, M. (2013b). Order of numeral and noun. In
M. Haspelmath, M. S. Dryer, D. Gil, & B. Comrie (Eds.),
The world atlas of language structures online (chap. 89).
Munich: Max Planck Digital Library. Retrieved from
http://wals.info/chapter/89
Dunn, M., Greenhill, S., Levinson, S., & Gray, R. (2011).
Evolved structure of language shows lineage-specific
trends in word-order universals. Nature, 473(7345), 79–
82.
Fox, G., & Thuilier, J. (2012). Predicting the position of
attributive adjectives in the french np. In New directions in
logic, language and computation (pp. 1–15). Springer.
Greenberg, J. (1963). Some universals of grammar with
particular reference to the order of meaningful elements.
In J. Greenberg (Ed.), Universals of language (p. 73-113).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Greenberg, J. (1966). Language universals. The Hague:
Mouton.
Hawkins, J. A. (1983). Word order universals. New York:
Academic Press.
Kamp, H., & Partee, B. (1995). Prototype theory and compositionality. Cognition, 57(2), 129 - 191.
Ladd, D. R., Roberts, S. G., & Dediu, D. (2014). Correlational studies in typological and historical linguistics. Annual Review of Linguistics, 1.
Nicoladis, E. (2002). The cues that children use in acquiring
adjectival phrases and compound nouns: Evidence from
bilingual children. Brain and Language, 81(1), 635–648.
Nicoladis, E. (2006). Cross-linguistic transfer in adjective–
noun strings by preschool bilingual children. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 9(01), 15–32.
Peirce, J. W. (2009). Generating stimuli for neuroscience
using psychopy. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 2(10).
Ramscar, M., Yarlett, D., Dye, M., Denny, K., & Thorpe, K.
(2010). The effects of feature-label-order and their implications for symbolic learning. Cognitive Science, 34(6),
909–957.

Conclusion
This study tested a classic hypothesis in linguistics: that harmonic word order patterns, which maintain a consistent order of syntactic heads relative to modifiers, are preferred to
non-harmonic alternatives. Previous studies have shown that
English-speaking learners prefer harmony in the nominal domain, however this could reflect abstract transfer since English exemplifies a pre-nominal harmonic pattern. Here, we
targeted French-speaking child learners, whose native language is non-harmonic. If a harmony bias is present in this
population it would provide a strong indication that this is
indeed a universal pressure. By contrast, if transfer is the
main driver of learning behavior, then no harmony bias is
expected in this population–instead, non-harmonic patterns
may be preferred. Our results revealed a strong preference
for post-nominal harmonic order, which we argue reflects the
effects of a harmony bias in conjunction with a preference for
post-nominal adjectives.

Acknowledgments
We thank the schools, parents and children who participated
in this study and the developmental linguistics reading group
at the University of Edinburgh for comments on this work.

References
Bates, D. (2010). lme4: Mixed-effects modeling with R.
http://lme4.r-forge.r-project.org/book.
Biberauer, T., Holmberg, A., & Roberts, I. (2014). A syntactic universal and its consequences. Linguistic Inquiry,
45(2), 169-225.
Brown, R. (1973). A first language: The early stages. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Culbertson, J., & Kirby, S. (2016). Simplicity and specificity
in language: Domain general biases have domain specific
effects. Frontiers in Psychology, 6(1964). doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01964
Culbertson, J., & Newport, E. L. (2015a). Harmonic biases
in child learners: In support of language universals. Cognition, 139, 71-82.

161

