How Does Instance-Based Inference About Event Frequencies Develop?
An Analysis with a Computational Process Model
Christin Schulze (cschulze@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Thorsten Pachur (pachur@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Ralph Hertwig (hertwig@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Lentzeallee 94
Berlin, 14195 Germany

Abstract
To make inferences about the frequency of events in the
world (e.g., the prevalence of diseases or the popularity of
consumer products), people often exploit observations of
relevant instances sampled from their personal social network.
How does this ability to infer event frequencies by searching
and relying on personal instance knowledge develop from
childhood to adulthood? To address this question, we
conducted a study in which children (age 8–11 years) and
adults (age 19–34 years) judged the relative frequencies of
first names in Germany. Based on the recalled instances of the
names in participants’ social networks, we modeled their
frequency judgments and the underlying search process with a
Bayesian hierarchical latent-mixture approach encompassing
different computational models. We found developmental
differences in the inference strategies that children and adults
used. Whereas the judgments of most adults were best
described by a noncompensatory strategy that assumes limited
and sequentially ordered search (social-circle model), the
judgments of most children were best described by a
compensatory strategy that assumes exhaustive search and
information aggregation (availability-by-recall). Our results
highlight that already children use instance knowledge to infer
event frequencies but they appear to search more exhaustively
for instances than adults. One interpretation of these results is
that the ability to conduct ordered and focused search is a
central aspect in the development of noncompensatory
instance-based inference.
Keywords: child development; sampling; probabilistic
inference; heuristics; availability

Introduction
The relative frequency of events in the world is an important
ecological characteristic that impacts many actions and
decisions. For instance, the relative frequency of other
people’s behaviors hints at social norms that should be
followed; the number of people having bought different
products may indicate differences in product quality that
influence consumer choice; and the prevalence of diseases
hints at health risks that may guide precautionary actions.
Decision makers commonly do not have access to summary
tables of these frequency statistics but need to infer them.
An easily accessible but informative indicator for event
frequencies in the population is their occurrence among the
people one knows personally. That is, by searching for
relevant instances in their personal social network people
can collect a variety of information about the frequency of
events in the world, and use this information to form

subjective frequency judgments. In this paper, we examine
how this ability to search proximate social spaces to judge
the relative frequency of events develops from childhood to
adulthood.
Previous work has garnered much insight into how adults
make instance-based inferences. Most prominently,
according to Tversky and Kahneman’s (1973) availability
heuristic, adults judge the frequency of events by assessing
the ease with which instances of the events can be brought
to mind. More recent research has elaborated the specific
mechanisms guiding this search in and retrieval from
mnemonic sample spaces. For instance, it has been shown
that adults often restrict search to directly experienced
instances in their social circles and that these social circles
are searched sequentially (e.g., Hertwig, Pachur, &
Kurzenhäuser, 2005; Pachur, Hertwig, & Rieskamp, 2013).
Yet, currently only little is known about how search for
information in proximate social spaces develops
ontogenetically. Do already children exploit their social
memories to draw inferences about the frequency of events
in the world? And if so, how much do they sample, in which
order do they consult social circles, and how do they
integrate the information to draw inferences? Existing
developmental work on judgment and decision making is
consistent with opposing predictions. On the one hand,
working memory limitations may confine young children to
using information-frugal strategies because processing and
integrating large amounts of evidence may be difficult (e.g.,
Bereby-Meyer, Assor, & Katz, 2004). On the other hand,
limitations in the ability to selectively focus attention on
relevant information may lead young children to use more
exhaustive but unsystematic search strategies (e.g.,
Davidson, 1991; Mata, von Helversen, & Rieskamp, 2011).
To disentangle these opposing predictions, we first
introduce the social-circle model, a cognitive process model
that parameterizes key components of the inference
process—including search order, evidence threshold, and
response noise. Second, we take a Bayesian hierarchical
mixture approach to modeling the inferences of children and
adults in a task in which they made judgments about the
relative frequency of common first names in Germany.

The Social-Circle Model
To model people’s inferences based on recalled instances,
Pachur et al. (2013) proposed that people search

1053

sequentially through the circles of their social network—
defined as self, family, friends, and acquaintances—and
stop search as soon as the instance evidence in a circle
allows them to make an inference. It is thus assumed that
people’s search for relevant instances is guided by the welldocumented hierarchical structure in the ordering of discrete
social groups that make up a person’s social network (e.g.,
Hill & Dunbar, 2003; Milardo, 1992), which has also been
shown to be important for search in social memory (e.g.,
Hills & Pachur, 2012). Adults’ frequency judgments have
been found to be equally well described by a model that
assumes such a noncompensatory strategy and by a more
exhaustive, compensatory search strategy (Pachur et al.,
2013). Here, we formalize and extend the assumptions in
Pachur et al.’s (2013) analysis and propose a generalized
social-circle model (SCM) that allows for variability in the
order in which circles are inspected and for probabilistic
aspects in the search, stopping, and decision stages of
inference.
The SCM assumes that in order to judge which of two
events, A or B, is more frequent in the population, decision
makers search distinct social circles, defined as self, family,
friends, and acquaintances. At each inspected circle i the
evidence, ei, is represented as the difference in the number
of instances recalled for each event, expressed as a
proportion:
=

−

.

(1)

assumed that, if the evidence in a given circle (with added
error) meets or exceeds d, then the decision maker selects
option A (i.e., | + " | ≥ ); if the evidence meets −d, then
the decision maker selects option B (i.e., | + " | ≤ − ).
Thus, the probability of making a choice after inspection of
circle i is given by
ℎ

= Φ'

=∑

.

(2)

Once a circle has been inspected, it is not considered further
(i.e., the denominator is calculated only over circles that
have not yet been inspected). Note that search is thus
assumed to be probabilistic. The probability of following a
particular search order
is given by the product of
the individual probabilities of circle inspection,
=∏

.

(3)

Stopping Rule
In the SCM it is assumed that the proportional evidence
obtained from each circle is compared against a decision
threshold, d. If the evidence from the recalled instances
reaches or exceeds the threshold, a choice is made; if it is
lower than the threshold, the next circle is inspected. The
SCM implements a probabilistic version of this stopping
rule by assuming normally distributed error for each circle,
denoted as εi, generated from a normal distribution with
mean zero and standard deviation σ. Specifically, it is

( )*
+

,+Φ'

+

)( )*
+

+" ≤−
,,

(4)

where Φ(·) is the standard normal cumulative distribution
function.

Decision Rule
The probability of selecting option A based on a particular
order,
-|-. , follows from combining the choice
probabilities resulting from circle inspection in that order
(cf. Rieskamp, 2008). For example, for the order j = 1,2,3,4:
/0,2,3,4

-|-. =

0

-|-. + 51 −

-|-. + 51 − 0 ℎ
3 -|-. + 51 − 0 ℎ
51 − 3 ℎ
6 × 4 -|-.
2

0

6 × 51 −
6 × 51 −

ℎ
2
2

ℎ
ℎ

6×

6×
6×

.

(5)

The total probability of selecting option A is defined as the
sum of all
-|-. , each weighted by the probability of
the decision maker following the order (see Equation 3):
-|-. = ∑8!/0

Search Rule
The order in which the circles are inspected is represented
by circle-weight parameters, one for each circle (wi;
constrained by ∑ = 1; see Bergert & Nosofsky, 2007),
that can be estimated from the data. These weights represent
the probability that a circle is inspected as

| +" |≥
+" ≥

=
=

-|-. ×

.

(6)

In sum, the SCM parameterizes three key components of
instance-based inference: the decision maker’s preferred
search order (circle weight parameters, wi), evidence
threshold (d), and response noise (σ). Thus, depending on its
parametrization, the model can capture various
noncompensatory inference processes. In what follows, we
apply the SCM to inference data from an experiment in
which children and adults were asked to judge the relative
frequency of common first names in Germany, and examine
how well it accounts for participants’ inferences compared
to a compensatory strategy and a guessing strategy.

Experiment
Method
Participants Forty children (age 8–11 years; 18 female) and
40 adults (age 19–34 years; 19 female) who were recruited
via the subject pool of the Max Planck Institute for Human
Development participated in the experiment. The data of
five additional children were excluded from the analysis
because the children showed insufficient readingcomprehension (two children aged 7 years); did not recall
any or only one instance for each name in the same social
circle, yielding a guessing prediction for instance-based
models on every trial (two children); or terminated the
experiment prematurely (one child). Participants received a
performance-based payment (earning 0.04 EUR for each

1054

correct inference but losing the same amount for each
incorrect inference; 1 EUR ≈ 1.12 USD at the time of the
experiment), and an additional flat fee of 10 EUR.

Table 1: The 22 first names used in the experiment, their
approximated frequency rank in Germany, and the total
number of instances children and adults recalled from their
own social networks.

Materials Table 1 lists the 22 first names (11 female) that
were used in the experiment. Because no census data about
the frequency and distribution of first names in Germany
was available, we approximated a frequency ranking by
weighting popular baby names between 1911 and 2010
(Bielefeld, 2016) with each cohort’s proportion in the
population to date (Statistisches Bundesamt, 2014).1 We
constructed a set of all possible 231 paired comparisons of
the names, and informed participants that the accuracy of
their inferences was judged on the basis of the available
data. Participants were instructed to ignore the particular
spelling of each name and to judge the relative frequency of
names by taking possible variants of a name into account.
Procedure The experiment consisted of two tasks, an
inference and a retrieval task, that were completed by all
participants in this order. In the inference task, participants
were asked to judge which of two first names is more
frequent in Germany for each of the 231 name pairs. The
pairs were presented sequentially on a computer screen in
blocks of 23 pairs (24 pairs in the final block). The order in
which name pairs were presented was randomized across
participants; the order of names in each pair was
predetermined so that correct and incorrect inferences
(according to our statistics) were distributed equally across
the two response alternatives. Each trial started with the
display of a fixation cross at the center of the screen,
followed by the presentation of two black silhouettes (either
male or female) which were labeled with the respective
names in the comparison (see Figure 1A). Participants made
a selection by pressing one of two designated keys on the
keyboard. After each choice, the selected name’s silhouette
was shown on a podium at the center of the screen to
confirm the selection to the participant. There was no trialby-trial feedback about the accuracy of decisions.
Participants were encouraged to make as many correct
judgments as possible. There was a self-paced pause after
each block and participants completed two training trials
with fictitious names before the start of the inference task.
In the retrieval task, participants were asked to recall how
1
We scored the top 30 male and top 30 female first names
between 1911 and 2010 in Germany (Bielefeld, 2016) on a scale
from 30 (for the most popular male/female name in a year) to zero
(for names not listed during a year). These scores were then
weighted, for each gender separately, by the proportion of people
in the German population who belong to the cohort (Statistisches
Bundesamt, 2014). We selected the most popular male and female
name in each decade based on the summed raw scores each name
received across these ten-year periods. In addition to these 20 most
popular names from each decade, we selected the most frequent
male and female name in the population (that was not already in
the list) based on the total sum of the weighted scores across all
years. Finally, the 22 selected names were ranked based on the
sum of their weighted scores across all years.

Name
Michael
Thomas
Peter
Andreas
Jan
Hans
Christian
Karin
Ursula
Julia
Anna
Sabine
Stefanie
Renate
Helga
Günter
Tim
Horst
Angelika
Lukas
Hannah
Gertrud

Gender

Rank

m
m
m
m
m
m
m
f
f
f
f
f
f
f
f
m
m
m
f
m
f
f

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22

Total number of recalled
instances
Children
Adults
35
66
34
72
29
45
34
65
40
67
22
26
29
76
14
24
4
15
34
78
41
70
29
44
24
58
19
20
18
17
11
16
40
43
11
17
16
27
39
46
42
44
6
9

many people with each of the 22 names shown in Table 1
they knew personally. For each name, participants counted
each person among their family, friends, and acquaintances
with that name by dragging and dropping pictorial
representations of family members, friends, and
acquaintances on a black silhouette labeled with the
respective name (see Figure 1B). Following the retrieval of
a person, participants were also asked to indicate their
contact frequency with that person on a scale from one (less
than once every six months) to five (multiple times per
week). Additionally, participants could allocate a pictorial
person labeled “self” to indicate the shown name was their
own. Each recalled person was listed on the screen and
counted toward an overall tally of persons with a particular
name also shown on the screen. Before the start of the
retrieval task, a training trial familiarized participants with
the controls of this task. At the end of the experiment,
participants were informed about their overall accuracy on
the inference task and paid in cash by the experimenter.
Bayesian Hierarchical Mixture Modeling Based on the
instances of names that each participant recalled from their
social network in the retrieval task, we modeled each
participant’s decisions in the inference task with a Bayesian
latent-mixture approach (see, e.g., Bartlema, Lee, Wetzels,
& Vanpaemel, 2014). Hierarchical mixture modeling allows

1055

a participant’s instance knowledge allowed each strategy to
make an unambiguous prediction. The two instance-based
strategies did not make a prediction, if a participant recalled
no or equal numbers of instances for both names in a
comparison. The posterior distributions of model parameters
were estimated via Gibbs sampling methods implemented in
JAGS (Plummer, 2003). We used reasonably uninformative
priors: For the wi and d parameters of the SCM we assumed
uniform priors on the group-level mean (beta distributions
with shape parameters of 1) and gamma priors (with a shape
parameter of 1.1051 and a scale parameter of 0.01051; see
Bartlema et al., 2014) on the group-level precision. For the σ
parameters of the SCM and availability-by-recall we
assumed uniform distributions constrained between 0.01–40
on the group-level mode and standard deviation. For the
latent-mixture indicator variable we assumed a categorical
prior that assigned equal weight to each strategy.2 To ensure
efficient mixing, we used pseudo-priors that approximate
the posterior density for the individual-level parameters.
These pseudo-priors were obtained from an initial Bayesian
hierarchical estimation procedure that was performed
separately for each model (without a mixture component).
In the model estimation, 16 chains each with 50,000
samples drawn from the posterior distributions were run
after an initial burn-in period of 2000 samples. Gelman–
Rubin statistics and visual inspections of the four chains
indicated adequate chain convergence.

Figure 1: Illustration of the task screen and controls used
during the inference task (A) and retrieval task (B).
us to simultaneously estimate discrete classes of participants
who use categorically different inference strategies and to
robustly model variation within each group of strategyusers, thus combining the advantages of pooling continuous
individual differences hierarchically and assuming discrete
differences among groups of individuals. We assumed three
latent subgroups of participants, each using a different
inference strategy: (a) the social-circle model, (b)
availability-by-recall, which assumes a compensatory
process (Hertwig et al., 2005; Pachur, Hertwig, &
Steinmann, 2012), and (c) a random guessing strategy.
According to availability-by-recall, all instances of an
event are tallied across the entire social network and the
option with the larger summed instance-evidence is chosen.
For comparability, we applied the same response noise
mechanism as for the SCM, which gives the probability of
choosing option A as
:;<

-|-. = Φ '

)
+

,,

Results
Behavioral Data We found differences between the age
groups in inferential accuracy, t(78) = 5.17, p < .001,
d = 1.16, BF10 = 8362, and in reported instance knowledge,
t(60.00) = 4.68, p < .001, d = 1.05, BF10 = 1456. On
average, adults picked the more frequent first name more
often than children (M = .64 vs. M = .57) and recalled more
people with any of the 22 first names in their social network
(M = 23.63 vs. M = 14.28; see also Table 1). One possible
reason for children’s lower inferential accuracy is that the
instances they reported were less valid indicators of the
actual frequency distribution of first names in the population
(possibly because they recalled fewer instances overall).
That is, for adults, there was a significant rank correlation
between reported instances and actual frequency ranks,
rS(20) = .524, p = .012, BF10 = 4.99. For children, however,
no such correlation was found, rS(20) = .203, p = .364,
BF10 = 0.39.3

(7)

where nA denotes the number of instances recalled for event
A across all circles and σ is a response noise parameter. For
the guessing strategy, we assumed that participants
randomly selected one of the two names in each pair with
probability .50. With this approach, we can estimate the
proportion of participants using each strategy based on
inference and recall data while taking into account the
uncertainty surrounding such a classification. We modeled
participants’ inferences for all paired comparisons on which

2
For few participants, this resulted in the mixture collapsing on
the SCM. For these participants, we used a prior that assigned low
initial weight to the SCM (e.g., .001) and equal weight to the other
two strategies. To ensure unbiased estimation of latent groupmembership, these unequal priors were taken into account in the
calculation of membership probabilities.
3
Yet children’s inferences were well calibrated to their cohort’s
instances. Evaluating inferences based on a ranking derived from
children’s reported number of instances, flips the accuracy pattern
such that children significantly outperform adults, t(78) = −2.40,
p = .019, d = −.536, BF10 = 2.70.

1056

Figure 2: Allocation of adult and children participants to three latent subgroups of strategy users.
Computational Modeling Figure 2 shows the membership
probability of each adult (left panel) and each child (right
panel) in each group of strategy-users, as derived from the
posterior distribution of the latent-mixture variable. The
figure shows that the judgments of most adults were best
described by the SCM (55% of adults compared to 38% of
children). By contrast, the judgments of most children were
best described by availability-by-recall (48% of children
compared to 40% of adults). Only few participants were
best described by the guessing strategy. Overall, there was
greater uncertainty in the classification of children to latent
groups than in the classification of adults. This was partly
due to the lower number of instances children recalled
resulting in poorer discriminability between the models.
Next, we compared children’s and adults’ search and
decision processes by evaluating their group-level SCM
parameter estimates. As shown in Figure 3, children and
adults weighted the different circles in their social network
similarly (although adults showed greater inter-individual
variability in the weighting of different circles), applied
similar decision thresholds, and did not differ on the
response noise parameter (for all parameters, 95% HDIs
overlapped). Children’s lower inferential accuracy was thus
not due to a more error prone execution of an instance-based
inference strategy. This also held for inferences described
by availability-by-recall.

search strategies (e.g., Davidson, 1991; Mata et al., 2011). A
possible explanation for why children use more informationintensive strategies is that they have difficulties to
selectively attend to relevant and diagnostic information (cf.
Betsch, Lehmann, Lindow, Lang, & Schoemann, 2016). In
young children, this inability to effectively focus search may
be driven by the required executive control functions being
not yet fully developed (see Best & Miller, 2010). In light of

Discussion
Our results suggest that already children systematically
exploit their instance knowledge to make inferences about
the frequency of events in the world. However, they do so
differently than adults. Whereas the judgments of most
adults were best described by a strategy that assumes limited
information search, the judgments of most children were
best accounted for by a strategy that assumes exhaustive
search. This finding echoes previous research on multiattribute choice and cue-based inference which has found
young children to use more exhaustive but unsystematic

1057

Figure 3: Posterior distributions of the group-level
parameters of the SCM. Small circles and diamonds below
the density plots show the posterior means for adults and
children, respectively; lines show 95% HDIs.

children’s more limited and less ecologically valid instance
knowledge, their greater tendency to adopt exhaustive
sampling strategies might represent an adaptive response to
these limiting factors. However, it should also be noted that,
due to children’s lower instance knowledge, the
discriminability between models was lower, which might
have contributed to the more balanced strategy classification
in children as well.
Our results extend previous research that has found
children to use availability as a cue for judging the relative
frequency of and their own memory for names (Davies &
White, 1994; Geurten, Willems, Germain, & Meulemans,
2015). This prior work, however, did not use cognitive
modeling to formalize and quantitatively analyze the
development and use of instance-base inference strategies.
By taking a formal computational modeling-based approach,
our analysis enabled us to simultaneously detect
developmental differences in the use of discrete strategies
and parameterize the specific mechanisms underlying search
for instances in memory. This approach highlighted that
children search for instances more exhaustively but weight
the subgroups in their social network similarly as do adults.
The analysis also revealed substantial individual differences
in the process of search for instances in memory among
both age groups. In this respect, the social-circle model that
we applied provides an advantage over previously proposed
models of instance-based inference (e.g., Tversky &
Kahneman, 1973), which are silent regarding the specific
mechanisms and order of instance sampling.
We conclude that the social-circle model provides an
effective tool for capturing and illuminating individual and
group differences in the cognitive processes that underlie
instance-based inference. The insights gained with this
model are consistent with the finding that search in social
memory is guided by factors such as social proximity (Hills
& Pachur, 2012) and suggest that one important factor in the
development of information-frugal strategies for judging
frequencies is the ability to limit and selectively focus
search on relevant instance knowledge.

References
Bartlema, A., Lee, M., Wetzels, R., & Vanpaemel, W.
(2014). A Bayesian hierarchical mixture approach to
individual differences: Case studies in selective attention
and representation in category learning. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 59, 132–150.
Bereby-Meyer, Y., Assor, A., & Katz, I. (2004). Children’s
choice strategies: The effects of age and task demands.
Cognitive Development, 19, 127–146.
Bergert, F. B., & Nosofsky, R. M. (2007). A response-time
approach to comparing generalized rational and take-thebest models of decision making. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33, 107–
129.
Best, J. R., & Miller, P. H. (2010). A developmental
perspective on executive function. Child Development,
81, 1641–1660.

Betsch, T., Lehmann, A., Lindow, S., Lang, A., &
Schoemann, M. (2016). Lost in search: (Mal-)adaptation
to probabilistic decision environments in children and
adults. Developmental Psychology, 52, 311–325.
Bielefeld, K. (2016). Statistiken der häufigsten Vornamen
für jeden Geburtsjahrgang [Statistics of the most common
first names for every cohort; data set]. Retrieved from
http://www.beliebte-vornamen.de/jahrgang
Davidson, D. (1991). Children’s decision-making examined
with an information-board procedure. Cognitive
Development, 6, 77–90.
Davies, M., & White, P. A. (1994). Use of the availability
heuristic by children. British Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 12, 503–505.
Geurten, M., Willems, S., Germain, S., & Meulemans, T.
(2015). Less is more: The availability heuristic in early
childhood. British Journal of Developmental Psychology,
33, 405–410.
Hertwig, R., Pachur, T., & Kurzenhäuser, S. (2005).
Judgments of risk frequencies: Tests of possible cognitive
mechanisms. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31, 621–642.
Hill, R. A., & Dunbar, R. I. M. (2003). Social network size
in humans. Human Nature, 14, 53–72.
Hills, T. T., & Pachur, T. (2012). Dynamic search and
working memory in social recall. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 38, 218–
228.
Mata, R., von Helversen, B., & Rieskamp, J. (2011). When
easy comes hard: The development of adaptive strategy
selection. Child Development, 82, 687–700.
Milardo, R. M. (1992). Comparative methods for
delineating social networks. Journal of Social and
Personal Relationships, 9, 447–461.
Pachur, T., Hertwig, R., & Rieskamp, J. (2013). Intuitive
judgments of social statistics: How exhaustive does
sampling need to be? Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 49, 1059–1077.
Pachur, T., Hertwig, R., & Steinmann, F. (2012). How do
people judge risks: Availability heuristic, affect heuristic,
or both? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied,
18, 314–330.
Plummer, M. (2003). JAGS: A program for analysis of
Bayesian graphical models using Gibbs sampling. In K.
Hornik, F. Leisch, & A. Zeileis (Eds.), Proceedings of the
3rd International Workshop on Distributed Statistical
Computing.
Rieskamp, J. (2008). The probabilistic nature of preferential
choice. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 34, 1446–1465.
Statistisches Bundesamt. (2014). Bevölkerung nach
Geburtsjahren und Geschlecht für Deutschland [German
population by year of birth and gender; data set].
Retrieved from http://www.zensus2011.de
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A
heuristic for judging frequency and probability. Cognitive
Psychology, 5, 207–232.

1058

