How Relative is the Relative Frame of Reference?
Front and back in Norwegian, Farsi, German, and Japanese
Sieghard Beller (sieghard.beller@uib.no)
Andrea Bender (andrea.bender@uib.no)
Department of Psychosocial Science, University of Bergen
N-5020 Bergen, Norway

Abstract
Across languages, people differ in which of the three basic
frames of reference (FoRs) they prefer when describing
spatial relations: absolute, intrinsic, or relative. But how much
variation is there with regard to the relative FoR, which is
anchored in the observer and occurs as one of three variants?
Is the reflection variant canonical, as assumed by many
scholars? And how are objects in a person’s back referred to:
by turning towards the objects? Results from two studies, one
with speakers of Norwegian and Farsi, the other with speakers
of German and Japanese, reveal that reflection is not
canonical, but that translation and even rotation are used as
well. In addition, turning towards objects arranged in a
person’s back is very rare; what people use instead is a
backward projection strategy that goes without rotation.
Keywords: Spatial cognition, frames of reference (FoR),
relative FoR, cross-linguistic study.

Introduction
“Where is the ball in relation to the box?” In order to answer
questions like this, we have to establish a coordinate
system—a frame of reference (FoR)—that allows us to
derive a specific response such as “The ball is in front and
to the right of the box.” Across languages, people differ in
the frame of reference they preferentially adopt. Variation
has been documented especially with regard to which of the
three basic FoRs is used: the absolute FoR anchored in a
superordinate field like the cardinal directions, the intrinsic
FoR anchored in a reference object like an arrow, or the
relative FoR anchored in an observer (Levinson, 2003;
Majid et al., 2004; Senft, 1997). Less attention has been
devoted to the variants of the relative FoR, despite the fact
that variation in relative referencing has been known since
Hill’s (1982) comparison of English and Hausa speakers.
This paper adds to a survey exploring variation in the use
of the relative FoR in different languages (for results on
German, English, Mandarin Chinese, and Tongan, see
Beller et al., 2015), by extending the set of sampled
languages. In two studies, one with speakers of Norwegian
and Farsi, and another with speakers of German and
Japanese, we inspected which variant of the relative FoR
speakers of these languages apply in frontal and dorsal tasks
with objects laid out in front of or behind an observer.

to do so from an observer’s viewpoint V. As objects can be
in front of or behind the observer, the distinction between
frontal and dorsal is indispensable.

FoRs in Frontal Settings
Constructing a relative frame of reference requires the
coordinate system that is originally anchored in the
observer—his or her FRONT/BACK and LEFT/RIGHT—to be
projected onto the ground object G. In frontal settings, this
can be done in three ways (Levinson, 2003): The coordinate
system can be translated into G so that FRONT is assigned in
gaze direction of the observer to the space beyond G (see
Figure 1A). It can be reflected in G so that FRONT is
assigned to the space between the observer and G (Figure
1B). In both cases, assignment of LEFT and RIGHT remain
unaffected. Finally, it can be rotated in G by 180°; in this
case, FRONT is, again, assigned to the space between the
observer and G, but assignment of LEFT and RIGHT are
swapped (Figure 1C).
Of these variants, reflection is often assumed to be the
canonical one (Clark, 1973; Grabowski & Miller, 2000;
Janzen et al., 2012). In our cross-linguistic survey (Beller et
al., 2015, cf. Table 3, p. 11), such a preference for reflection
was found most strongly among speakers of German (89%)
and English (73%), whereas speakers of Mandarin Chinese
and Tongan clearly preferred translation (64%) over
reflection (24%). The rotation variant was chosen rarely in

G

L

R

L

G

R

F

L

V

R

R

G

L

F

L

V

R

F

L

V

R

(A) Translation

(B) Reflection

(C) Rotation

The ball is behind
and to the right of
the box.

The ball is in front
and to the right of
the box.

The ball is in front
and to the left of
the box.

Variants of the Relative Frame of Reference
Frames of reference are used to describe the position of a
figure object F in reference to a ground object G. In contrast
to the absolute and intrinsic FoR, the relative FoR requires

Figure 1: Variants of the relative FoR for frontal settings
(according to Levinson, 2003); L/R: left/right; F/G:
figure/ground; V: viewpoint of the observer.

118

all four languages. Extending our survey to other languages
so as to broaden our knowledge with regard to intra- and
cross-linguistic variation in the use of these variants of the
relative FoR is the first aim of the current paper.

L

V

R

L

G

R

(A) TranslationBP

R

near is
in front

F

L

V

L

G

L

V

F
F
R

(B) ReflectionBP

R

F

L

G

R

(C) Turn-rotation

“The ball is in front and to the right of the box.”

Figure 2: Three variants of the relative FoR for dorsal
settings (Beller et al., 2015); BP: backward projection.

oriented G

FoRs in Dorsal Settings
Research on the relative FoR has focused nearly exclusively
on how people describe relations of objects that are laid out
in front of an observer—for obvious reasons the most
natural situation—although adopting someone’s perspective
already includes the distinction between what is in front of
and what is behind that person. But how, if at all, would
objects laid out behind that person be referred to?
One hypothesis put forward by Grabowski and Miller
(2000) is that people refrain from referring to objects in
their back. Rather, they turn around toward the objects,
thereby converting the dorsal into a frontal setting, and then
employ the FoR they prefer for frontal settings. However,
the first studies on dorsal references (Beller et al., 2015,
2016) provided only weak evidence for this turn hypothesis.
Despite participants’ preferences for reflection or translation
in frontal tasks, only a few responses in dorsal tasks were in
accordance with the corresponding strategies turn-reflection
and turn-translation. What most participants seemed to do
instead was a kind of backward projection of the observer’s
coordinate system (without rotating the observer’s perspective) either in a back translation version (Figure2A) or a
reflection “with eyes in the back of one’s head” (Figure 2B).
For logical reasons, both of these backward projection
strategies lead to the same responses as the turn-rotation
strategy (turn the perspective and apply the rotation variant
to the resulting frontal setting; see Figure 2C). The reasons
for why we assumed that the participants applied backward
projection were twofold: First, these strategies do not
necessitate two laborious (mental) rotations, and second,
participants applied the rotation variant (Figure 1C) only
rarely in frontal tasks—why should they do so in dorsal

dorsal, animate

non-oriented G

frontal, inanimate

The white {circle, starfish} is located …
□ in front of
□ behind
□ to the left of
□ to the right of

□ in front and to the left of
□ in front and to the right of
□ behind and to the left of
□ behind and to the right of

… the black {square , flower, arrow, scorpion}.

Figure 3: Four example items (Beller et al., 2015, p. 6).

tasks? Exploring backward projection further, as compared
to the turn-hypothesis, is the second aim of the current
paper.

Study 1
The first study was implemented as a paper-and-pencil
survey that followed the design described in Beller et al.
(2015) and included two languages from the Indo-European
language family: Norwegian from the Germanic branch and
Farsi from the Indo-Iranian branch.

Methods
Materials. The materials were the same as in Beller et al.
(2015): twelve items in each of two conditions (frontal and
dorsal), six with a non-oriented ground object (three
depicting inanimate objects, three depicting living beings)
and six with an oriented ground object (again three
depicting inanimate objects and three depicting living
beings). Participants were asked to indicate for each item
the relation between figure F and ground G from the
viewpoint V of a depicted observer, by choosing one of
eight options (in front of, behind, to the left of, to the right
of, and combinations of in front of/behind and to the
left/right of). Four example items are shown in Figure 3. All
materials were translated into Norwegian and Farsi by
bilinguals.

119

Results and Discussion
In the frontal condition, we distinguished between the three
variants of the relative FoR: translation, reflection, and
rotation (Figure 1). In the dorsal condition, we distinguished
between three variants according to the turn-hypothesis:
turn-translation, turn-reflection, and turn-rotation, the latter
one being equivalent to two backward projection strategies,
translationBP and reflectionBP (Figure 2). For items with an
oriented ground object, we also considered the intrinsic
FoR.
In a first step, we checked the two samples for differences
in the mean number of responses that are not covered by one
of these FoRs. Overall, this number of “unexplained
responses” was fairly low (M = 8.6%; Table 1). An analysis
of variance with two between-subjects factors, language
(Norwegian vs. Farsi) and perspective (frontal vs. dorsal),
and one within-subject factor ground object (non-oriented
vs. oriented) indicated no significant effects (all F(1,190) <
1.53; p ≥ .218; η2 ≤ .008), suggesting that neither the

Study 1

Type of item
Frontal, non-oriented
Frontal, oriented
Dorsal, non-oriented
Dorsal, oriented

Norwegian
5.7
8.3
7.8
7.3

Farsi
10.6
10.1
10.7
8.6

Study 2

Table 1: Frequency (%) of responses that are not covered
by one of the FoRs under scrutiny in Study 1 and Study 2.

Type of item
Frontal, non-oriented
Frontal, oriented
Dorsal, non-oriented
Dorsal, oriented

German
3.7
4.8
4.0
4.2

Japanese
3.7
3.5
2.6
3.5

Study 1

Design and Procedure. For each of the two conditions
(frontal vs. dorsal), two item orders were prepared: The first
one started with the six non-oriented items (in a random
order) and then proceeded with the six oriented items (also
in a random order); the second order was the exact reversal
and thus started with the six oriented items. The eight
response options were always presented in the same order.
A between-subjects design was used. Participants were
assigned randomly (but equally) either to the frontal or to
the dorsal condition; the two item orders per condition were
balanced in each subgroup. Participants were tested
individually or in small groups, and were instructed to work
on all tasks in the given order.

Table 2: Individual consistency in FoR adoption (in % of
items) in Study 1 and Study 2.
Type of item
Frontal, non-oriented
Frontal, oriented
Dorsal, non-oriented
Dorsal, oriented

Norwegian
88.5
85.4
87.0
78.6

Farsi
79.5
68.2
85.2
68.5

Study 2

Participants. The Norwegian sample consisted of 64
students from the University of Bergen (51 female; age M =
23.3 years, SD = 5.3), and the Farsi sample of 130
participants, most of them students from the Universities of
Teheran, Schiraz, and Ghazwin, but also some non-students
(88 female; age M = 26.8 years, SD = 15.9).

Type of item
Frontal, non-oriented
Frontal, oriented
Dorsal, non-oriented
Dorsal, oriented

German
93.5
89.8
92.6
91.2

Japanese
87.3
82.1
90.7
83.9

unusual dorsal perspective nor the type of ground object
influenced the coverage of responses by the FoRs under
scrutiny in the two samples alike.
In the next step, we determined whether the individual
participants adopted one FoR consistently and, if so, which
one. To this end, we counted for each participant how often
each FoR variant could be coded in each of the four blocks
of six items (frontal non-oriented, frontal oriented, dorsal
non-oriented, and dorsal oriented). For example, if
reflection could be coded on 6 out of the 6 frontal oriented
items, consistency would be 100% for reflection; if
reflection could be coded on 5 items and translation on 1
item, consistency would be 83.3% for reflection and 16.7%
for translation; etc. We then used the maximum of these
values (among the different FoR variants) as estimate of a
participant’s consistency in FoR adoption across the items
of the respective block (100% and 83.3% in the examples).
Mean consistency values are displayed in Table 2.
Overall, FoRs were adopted with a mean consistency of
80.1% across the two samples. In other words: Participants
adopted their individually preferred FoR in 4.81 of 6 items
of a block. An analysis of variance with two betweensubjects factors, language (Norwegian vs. Farsi) and
perspective (frontal vs. dorsal), and one within-subject
factor ground object (non-oriented vs. oriented) indicated
three significant effects: Consistency was generally higher
for the Norwegian speakers than for the Farsi speakers
(84.9% vs. 75.3%; F(1,190) = 11.3; p = .001; η2 = .056); it
was higher for non-oriented items than for oriented items
(85.1% vs. 75.2%; F(1,190) = 31.8; p < .001; η2 = .144);
and there was an interaction of the two factors language ×
ground object (F(1,190) = 5.6; p = .019; η2 = .029). Thus,
the possibility of applying an additional FoR (here:
intrinsic) was a source of inconsistency, but to a different
extent in the two languages. Interestingly, the unusual dorsal
perspective per se did not matter: Consistency did not differ
significantly between the frontal and the dorsal condition
(84.4% vs. 79.8%; F(1,190) = 0.045; p = .832; η2 < .001).
Finally, we identified each participant’s preferred FoR as
the one FoR variant that was coded (a) more often than all
others and (b) in at least 4 out of the 6 items of a block (i.e.,

120

Table 3: Preferred FoR (in %), adopted in at least 4 out of 6 items of a block (frontal non-oriented, frontal oriented, dorsal
non-oriented, and dorsal oriented) in Study 1 and Study 2.
Study 1
Non-oriented G
Oriented G
FoR

Norwegian

Farsi

Frontal items
Intrinsic
Translation
Reflection
Rotation
No preference

(N = 32)

(N = 66)

Dorsal items
Intrinsic
Turn-translation
Turn-reflection
TranslationBP/reflectionBP/turn-rotation
No preference

(N = 32)

n.a.
21.9
71.9
—
6.3
n.a.
3.1
3.1
81.3
12.5

n.a.
28.8
40.9
10.6
19.7
(N = 64)

n.a.
—
—
82.8
17.2

Norwegian
(N = 32)

3.1
15.6
71.9
—
9.4
(N = 32)

6.3
—
—
71.9
21.9

Farsi
(N = 66)

19.7
18.2
16.7
4.5
40.9
(N = 64)

18.8
—
—
40.6
40.6

Study 2
Non-oriented G
Oriented G
German Japanese
(N = 140)

n.a.
7.1
88.6
0.7
3.6
(N = 140)

n.a.
—
5.7
88.6
5.7

(N = 109)

n.a.
48.6
36.7
1.8
12.8
(N = 109)

n.a.
1.8
2.8
89.0
6.4

German Japanese
(N = 140)

2.9
4.3
85.0
—
7.9
(N = 140)

3.6
—
6.4
85.7
4.3

(N = 109)

4.6
45.9
28.4
0.9
20.2
(N = 109)

6.4
2.8
2.8
78.9
9.2

Note. BP: backward projection; n.a.: not applicable; modal response printed in bold face.

with a consistency of ≥ 66.7%). Participants’ preferred FoRs
are presented in Table 3. Log-linear analyses of FoR
preferences revealed differences between the two languages
for the two blocks of frontal items (non-oriented: G2 = 12.7;
df = 3; p = .005; oriented: G2 = 33.7; df = 4; p < .001), and
for the block of oriented dorsal items (G2 = 8.9; df =2;
p = .012), but not for the block of non-oriented dorsal items
(G2 = 4.7; df = 3; p = .194).
If adopting the intrinsic FoR was possible, some
participants preferred this FoR1, particularly in the Farsi
sample (mean percentage across all items with an oriented G
for Norwegian: 4.7%; Farsi: 19.2%). Other participants
seemed to change their referencing strategy itemspecifically, as indicated by the increased number of
participants with no clear preference for any FoR variant as
compared to the items with a non-oriented ground object.
Among the variants of the relative FoR for frontal tasks,
both translation and reflection were adopted, but to a
different extent in the two samples. The reflection variant
prevailed most strongly among the Norwegian speakers
(mean percentage across all frontal items for Norwegian:
71.9%; Farsi: 28.8%), while translation was preferred by a
substantial proportion of speakers in both samples
(Norwegian: 18.8%; Farsi: 23.5%); the rotation variant, in
contrast, was confined to some Farsi speakers (7.6%).
Among the variants of the relative FoR for dorsal tasks,
one variant clearly stood out, namely the one that is indicative of the application of backward projection and turnrotation (Figure 2). Its frequency (mean percentage across
1

Inspecting the oriented items with inanimate objects versus
living beings indicated no differences in how often the intrinsic
FoR was applied. The two types of items were therefore pooled.

all dorsal items for Norwegian: 76.6%; Farsi: 61.7%)
approximates the sum of translation, reflection, and rotation
from the frontal tasks. But since the factor perspective was
implemented between-subjects, the frontal and dorsal data
cannot be related to one another on an individual basis,
which would have provided a stronger argument in favor of
this correspondence. In either case, the two FoR variants
predicted by the turn-hypothesis—turn the view towards the
objects and then apply the FoR preferred for frontal settings
(i.e., reflection or translation)—were adopted very rarely.
In sum, Study 1 demonstrated that the reflection variant of
the relative FoR is not canonical. While being the most
frequent FoR in frontal tasks, the translation variant is
adopted as well, and some participants even adopted the
rotation variant. Participants’ dorsal references suggested
backward projection as the main strategy, but the data are
not fully conclusive due to the between-subjects design.

Study 2
In order to allow us to relate a participant’s referencing
preference in dorsal tasks to that in frontal tasks, the second
study included perspective (frontal vs. dorsal) as a withinsubject factor. The study was implemented as an online
survey and compared two languages from different language
families: German, another Germanic language, and Japanese
from the Japonic language family.

Methods
Materials. The items were the same as in Study 1. The
materials were translated from German into Japanese by
bilinguals and were implemented as a web-based online
questionnaire.

121

Participants. The German sample consisted of 140
and non-student participants (105 female; age M
years, SD = 10.9), and the Japanese sample of 109
and non-student participants (64 female; age M
years, SD = 10.4, with 15 not indicating their age).

student
= 27.3
student
= 28.5

Table 4: Preferred FoR in dorsal item blocks depending on
the preferred FoR in frontal item blocks in Study 2.
Dorsal
preference

Frontal preference
Translation Reflection Rotation Other

Design and Procedure. The two perspectives (frontal vs.
dorsal) were implemented within-subject. Which came first
was assigned randomly for each participant. Within each
perspective, non-oriented and oriented items were presented
in blocks, and within each block in random order.

Turn-translation
Turn-reflection
BP/turn-rotation
Other

3
2
106BP
8

—
20
278BP
16

—
—
3
1

2
1
40
18

N = 498

119

314

4

61

Results and Discussion

Note. Data are summed over non-oriented and oriented item blocks and the
two samples. BP: backward projection (translationBP or reflectionBP); the
category other includes participants with no preference (from all tasks) and
with a preference for the intrinsic FoR (from tasks with an oriented G).
Grey cells: Responses according to the turn-hypothesis.

The data were analyzed in the same way as in Study 1. In
the first step, we checked the two samples for differences in
the mean number of responses that are not covered by one
of the FoRs under scrutiny. Overall, this number of
“unexplained responses” was very low (M = 3.7%; Table 1)
and lower still than for Norwegian and Farsi. An analysis of
variance with the between-subjects factor language
(German vs. Japanese) and two within-subject factors,
perspective (frontal vs. dorsal) and ground object (nonoriented vs. oriented), indicated no significant effects (all
F(1,247) < 1.9; p ≥ .171; η2 ≤ .008). Neither the unusual
dorsal perspective nor the type of ground object influenced
the coverage of responses by the FoRs under scrutiny in the
two samples alike.
Then, we checked how consistently each FoR variant was
adopted. Overall, FoRs were adopted with a mean
consistency of 88.9% across the two samples (Table 2). In
other words: Participants adopted their individually
preferred FoR in 5.33 of 6 items of a block. An analysis of
variance with the between-subjects factor language
(German vs. Japanese) and two within-subject factors,
perspective (frontal vs. dorsal) and ground object (nonoriented vs. oriented), detected the same three effects as in
Study 1: main effects of language and ground object, and an
interaction of the two factors. Consistency was higher for
the German speakers than for the Japanese speakers (91.8%
vs. 86.0%; F(1,247) = 15.2; p < .001; η2 = .058). It was also
higher for non-oriented items than for oriented items (91.0%
vs. 86.8%; F(1,247) = 32.2; p < .001; η2 = .115), indicating
again that the possibility of applying the intrinsic FoR was a
source of inconsistency, but to a different extent in the two
languages (as reflected in the interaction; F(1,247) = 5.1;
p = .024; η2 = .020). And, as in Study 1, the unusual dorsal
perspective per se did not matter: Consistency was nearly
the same for the frontal items as for the dorsal items (88.2%
vs. 89.6%; F(1,247) = 2.258; p = .134; η2 = .009).
Participants’ preferred FoRs are shown in Table 3. Loglinear analyses of FoR preferences indicated differences
between the two languages for the same three item blocks as
in Study 1: for the two blocks of frontal items (non-oriented:
G2 = 78.3; df = 3; p < .001; oriented: G2 = 96.0; df = 4;
p < .001), and for the block of oriented dorsal items
(G2 = 10.4; df =4; p = .034), but not for the block of nonoriented dorsal items (G2 = 4.6; df = 3; p = .201).

If adopting the intrinsic FoR was possible, again some
participants preferred this FoR (mean percentage across all
items with an oriented G for German: 3.2%; Japanese:
5.5%), but less so than in the Farsi sample. Some participants also seemed to change their referencing strategy
item-specifically, as indicated by the increased number of
participants with no clear preference for any FoR variant as
compared to the items with a non-oriented ground object.
Among the variants of the relative FoR for frontal tasks,
translation and reflection were preferred most often, but
again to a different extent in the two samples. The reflection
variant prevailed most strongly among the German speakers
(mean percentage across all frontal items for German:
86.8%; Japanese: 32.6%). This finding replicates data from
a German sample collected with a paper-and-pencil
questionnaire (Beller et al., 2015), thereby validating the
methodological change to an online assessment (see Beller
et al., 2015, 2016, for a broader discussion of the paperpencil assessment and other methodological issues). In
contrast, the translation variant prevailed among the
Japanese speakers (German: 5.7%; Japanese: 48.6%). The
rotation variant was adopted only by very few participants
(German: 0.4%; Japanese: 1.4%).
Among the variants of the relative FoR for dorsal tasks,
the variant indicating the application of backward projection
and turn-rotation strongly dominated in the two samples
alike (mean percentage across all dorsal items for German:
87.1%; Japanese: 83.9%).
The implementation of perspective as a within-subject
factor in this study allows us to relate each participant’s
preference in dorsal tasks to his or her preference in frontal
tasks and thereby to disambiguate the dorsal response
(cf., Beller et al., 2016). To this end, we cross-tabulated
participants’ preferred FoRs for frontal and dorsal tasks
(summed over non-oriented and oriented item blocks and
the two samples). The results are reported in Table 4. Of the
498 preference pairs, 26 (5.2%) were indicative of the turnhypothesis (grey cells). Most of these participants adopted
the turn-reflection variant in line with the overall higher

122

prevalence for reflection. This provides some support for the
turn-hypothesis. However, the vast majority of pairings (384
or 77.1%) pointed at backward projection as the prevailing
strategy (translationBP: 21.3%; reflectionBP: 55.8%).
In sum, Study 2 corroborated further that the reflection
variant of the relative FoR is not universally adopted. While
being the most frequent FoR used for frontal tasks in the
German sample, the translation variant predominated in the
Japanese sample. In line with the results from Beller and
colleagues (2016), participants’ dorsal references indicated
backward projection as the main strategy.

General Discussion
The goal of this paper was to broaden our knowledge
regarding intra- and cross-linguistic variation in the use of
different variants of the relative FoR for spatial references in
frontal and dorsal settings. In particular, we asked two
questions: Do people have a canonical preference for the
reflection variant of the relative FoR in frontal settings, as
assumed by some scholars? And do people (mentally) turn
around to an object configuration in their back and apply the
FoR they prefer for frontal settings (turn-hypothesis)? Our
findings indicate that neither is the case.
With regard to the first question, we detected a great deal
of intra- and cross-linguistic variation in people’s use of the
relative FoR in frontal settings. The speakers of Norwegian,
German, and Japanese exhibited high intra-individual
consistency. Almost all participants applied the same variant
of the relative FoR repeatedly for a whole set of tasks.
Among the speakers of Farsi, consistency was lower,
indicating more task-specific references, particularly in
cases where the intrinsic FoR was also possible. With regard
to the inter-individual consensus within the samples, we
observed high consensus among the German speakers (i.e.,
most speakers adopted the same FoR variant as everybody
else: reflection), moderate consensus among the Norwegian
and Japanese speakers (some of which preferred the
reflection variant, others the translation variant), and an
even weaker consensus among the Farsi speakers (for which
the data also indicate a rare but consistent use of the rotation
variant). All in all, reflection and translation were the
dominant variants of the relative FoR for frontal settings,
replicating the general pattern found for German, English,
Mandarin Chinese, and Tongan (Beller et al., 2015).
In spite of this diversity in frontal tasks, most participants
converged on the very same response in the dorsal tasks. In
most cases, this response could be attributed to backward
projection strategies that are in line with people’s frontal
preference for translation or reflection, but get by without
(mental) rotation, and are thus quite adaptive given the fact
that mental rotation comes with substantial cognitive costs
(Duran, Dale, & Kreuz, 2011; Shepard & Cooper, 1982).
Finally, the degree of linguistic variation is revealing in
yet another regard. The intra-linguistic variation we found
reflects the fact that spatial prepositions like “in front of” or
“behind” are inherently underspecified. Nothing in these
words tells us where exactly FRONT or BACK is. This can

only be established after having adopted a specific point of
view, or frame of reference. Yet, which FoR a speaker
adopts is either due to his or her individual preference or to
conventions within his or her speech community. Viewed in
this way, the variation we found is a cultural rather than a
purely linguistic phenomenon.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft DFG through a Heisenberg Fellowship to AB
(Be 2451/8-1,2) and through a grant for the project Spatial
referencing across languages: Cultural preferences and
cognitive implications to AB (Be 2451/13-1) and SB (Be
2178/7-1). For data collection, we thank Solveig Dittmann,
Aurora Bratterud Helgesen, Anette Sollund, and Tora
Standal-Knudsen (Norwegian), Atifeh Esfandiari (Farsi),
and Meike Rosemeyer (German and Japanese). We thank
Lisa Hüther for assisting AE and MR, and Lisa Hüther and
Fiona Wilke for comments on earlier versions of this paper.

References
Beller, S., Bohlen, J., Hüther, L., & Bender, A. (2016).
Perspective taking in referring to objects behind versus in
front of an observer: Frames of reference, intra-individual
consistency, and response latencies. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 69, 1384-1408.
Beller, S., Singmann, H., & Hüther, L., & Bender. A.
(2015). Turn around to have a look? Spatial referencing in
dorsal versus frontal settings in cross-linguistic
comparison. Frontiers in Psychology, 6: 1283, 1-17.
Clark, H. H. (1973). Space, time, semantics, and the child.
In T. E. Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and the
acquisition of language. New York: Academic Press.
Duran, N. D., Dale, R., & Kreuz, R. J. (2011). Listeners
invest in an assumed other’s perspective despite cognitive
costs. Cognition, 121, 22-40.
Grabowski, J., & Miller, G. A. (2000). Factors affecting the
use of dimensional prepositions in German and American
English: Object orientation, social context, and prepositional pattern. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research,
29, 517-553.
Hill, C. A. (1982). Up/down, front/back, left/right. A contrastive study of Hausa and English. In J. Weissenborn &
W. Klein (Eds.), Here and there. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Janzen, G., Haun, D. B. M., & Levinson, S. C. (2012).
Tracking down abstract linguistic meaning: Neural
correlates of spatial frame of reference ambiguities in
language. PLoS ONE, 7(2), e30657.
Levinson, S. C. (2003). Space in language and cognition.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Majid, A., Bowerman, M., Kita, S., Haun, D., & Levinson,
S. C. (2004). Can language restructure cognition? The
case for space. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 108-114.
Shepard, R. N., & Cooper, L. A. (1982). Mental images and
their transformations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Senft, G. (Ed.) (1997). Referring to space. Oxford: Clarendon.

123

