How Many People Know? Representing the Distribution of Knowledge
Stanka A. Fitneva (Fitneva@queensu.ca)
Department of Psychology, Queen’s University
Kingston, ON K7L 3N6, Canada

Abstract
The representation of the distribution of knowledge guides
information gathering, help seeking, and communication. The
research aimed to explore adults’ and 4-year-olds’
representation of the distribution of common (conventional
and procedural) knowledge and expert knowledge associated
with five occupations in their community. In addition, we
examined estimates of occupation-related everyday (nonexpert) knowledge. Both groups estimated that common
knowledge is more widely held than expert knowledge, with
everyday knowledge in between. For adults, but not children,
the distribution of expert knowledge was correlated with
estimates of the proportion of people in each occupation.
Keywords: knowledge distribution; expertise; children;
development

Introduction
People act competently and adaptively in their physical and
social surroundings. Yet, their understanding of the physical
and social worlds is staggeringly shallow. The solution of
this paradox likely rests in the social embedding of human
behavior: we rely on each other to fill the holes in our
understanding (Keil, 2003). Understanding who knows what
and how knowledge is structured is thus a critical aspect of
human social cognition. Equally important, though less well
understood, is understanding the distribution of knowledge
in the population. Distinguishing widely distributed from
narrowly distributed knowledge could affect both the
selectivity of our interpersonal interactions and the structure
of our social networks.
Knowledge is clearly unevenly distributed. Some
knowledge, such as conventional knowledge of common
object labels and functions, is shared by all members of a
community. Similarly, some experientially derived
knowledge, e.g., that grass is green, can be expected to be
known by all in virtue of shared bodily experience. In
contrast to this “common knowledge,” other knowledge is
privy to only groups of people within the community. The
division of labor that characterizes most modern
communities leads to concentration of different expertise in
different people.
Surprisingly, the question of the relative spread of
different kinds of knowledge has received little attention.
Most of the literature on expertise has focused on explaining
the attainment of expertise in various domains of activity
(Feltovich, Ford, & Hoffman, 1997) and on understanding
of the clustering of knowledge in different kinds of experts
(Danovitch & Keil, 2004; Keil, Stein, Webb, Billings, &
Rozenblit, 2008). For instance, preschoolers appear to
recognize that expertise is topic-specific and that being an

expert in one domain does not entail being an expert in
other domains (Koenig & Jaswal, 2011). Furthermore, by
age 5, children appear to be able to link their skeletal
understanding of knowledge domains (psychology, physics,
biology) with how knowledge is clustered in individual
minds. That is, they can make an inference from what a
person knows to what other things the person is likely to
know (Keil et al., 2008).
With respect to the spread of knowledge, previous
research on children’s understanding of expertise provides
evidence exclusively for the existence of understanding of
non-overlaps in knowledge. For instance, Lutz and Keil
(2002) presented 3- to 5-year-old children with a list of
items representing the expertise of doctors and car
mechanics. Children were asked questions like “Who would
know more about how to fix a broken arm?” While children
identified above chance the relevant expert, this suggests
sensitivity to non-overlaps in knowledge and that not
everyone knows a given item. The data do not speak to the
question of whether children recognize that expert
knowledge is relatively narrowly distributed in the
population.
Similar issues arise with other studies that have addressed
children’ understanding of differences in knowledge. For
instance, a number of studies address children’s
understanding of the difference between child and adult
knowledge (Aguiar, Stoess, & Taylor, 2012; Fitneva, 2010;
Fitneva, Ho, & Hatayama, 2016; Taylor, Cartwright, &
Bowden, 1991; VanderBorght & Jaswal, 2009).
Nevertheless, these studies only reveal that children identify
non-overlaps of knowledge between social groups. They
don’t address children’s representation of the size of social
groups and therefore fail to capture children’s representation
of the spread of different kinds of knowledge. Perhaps the
only study that allows such an inference, Burton and
Mitchell (2003) showed that by age 7, children limited
private knowledge to the self and denied its possession by a
range of adults and children.
The question of children’s representation of the
distribution of knowledge has been also examined for
conventional knowledge such as word meaning (Graham,
Stock, & Henderson, 2006; Henderson, Weighall, Brown, &
Gaskell, 2013). The dominant method here involves
examining whether children extend novel conventional
knowledge (e.g., of an object label or a game rule) to a new
person. Although the young children in these studies appear
to appropriately extend conventional knowledge to others
but restrict idiosyncratic knowledge such as desires to
individuals, it is not clear that they see conventional
knowledge as widely distributed. The reason is that in these

2003

studies, new individuals are generally not introduced as
randomly sampled from the population.
Recent evidence does suggest, however, that children are
sensitive to indices about the spread of knowledge. For
examples, Cimpian and Scott (2012) tested the beliefs of 4
to 7 year olds on how many people would know generic and
non-generic facts. Children associated generic facts with
“many” and non-generic facts with “few” people.
Presumably this performance implies that children assume
that generic information concerns how the world works and
see adults as experts about the world (Cimpian & Scott,
2012).
The question of how knowledge is distributed in the
population highlights the social embeddedness of expertise.
Experts function within a community. The division of labor
– in many cases the motivator for the development of
expertise – would not be feasible and workable if it were not
for the social relations allowing for exchange of goods,
services, and ideas. Communicating and interacting with
various experts both rests upon and develops relevant
knowledge. This knowledge is neither conventional nor
shared in the same way perception of color is. In contrast to
conventional and common experiential knowledge, it can
show considerable individual differences based on
experience with the problem domains and/or access to
experts. We call this knowledge “everyday knowledge.”
To sum up the goal of this study was to examine young
children’s understanding of the distribution of expert,
everyday, and conventional knowledge. In particular, we
had three questions: 1) Do children associate expert
knowledge with a smaller proportion of the population than
common knowledge? 2) Do they associate it with a smaller
proportion of the population than everyday knowledge? 3)
Is the perceived distribution of expert knowledge related to
the perception of number of experts in the community?
Even though past research has documented that by age
four children understand that the knowledge of adult experts
is not co-extensive (Lutz & Keil, 2002), they may
nevertheless associate expert knowledge with large portions
of the population and not recognize that expert knowledge is
more narrowly distributed than common and everyday
knowledge. This would be consistent with children seeing
adults as omniscient (Piaget, 1959), or at least people
capable of exceptional performance in more than one
domain. Alternatively, we expected that even 4-year-olds
might associate expert knowledge with a smaller portion of
the population than everyday and common knowledge. This
is because even very young Canadian children have first
hand contact with experts (e.g., doctors) and observe the
exchange of goods, services, and ideas ensuing from the
division of labor.
There are a number of ways in which people can develop
understanding of the spread of expertise. One of them is
keeping track of the people they encounter in different
occupations. If this is the case, participants’ estimates of the
proportions of experts among adults would correlate with
their estimates of the proportion of people with expert

knowledge. Thus, the study included questions asking
participants to estimate the prevalence of different
occupations in their community.
The study included adults and 4-year-old children who are
among the youngest to demonstrate recognition of nonoverlaps in the knowledge of adults (Lutz & Keil, 2002). At
this age, children are also sensitive to relative magnitude.

Method
Participants
Thirty-six 4-year-old children and 18 adults participated in
the study. The children lived in the mid-size urban
community of Kingston, Ontario and the adults were
students at Queen’s University in the same city. Six children
were excluded due to not completing the study (2), selfprofessed silly attitude (1) and clear pattern in responding
(i.e., going up / down the scale, 3). Thus the final sample
included 30 children (average age 54 months, range 48-60;
19 girls, 11 boys).

Materials
We asked participants to indicate their perception of the
distribution of expert knowledge, everyday knowledge in
the same domains, and common knowledge. The expert
knowledge pertained to five occupations: farmers, builders,
pilots, car mechanics, and doctors. These occupations
include the ones frequently appearing in the literature and
vary in frequency in the community (more builders, car
mechanics and doctors relative to farmers and pilots). An
example of an expert knowledge question is “How many
grown-ups know how to fix a broken arm?”. The
corresponding everyday knowledge question was “How
many grown-ups know how to take their temperature?”
The five common knowledge items referred to
conventional knowledge, e.g., “How many grown-ups know
how to use a fork?” and procedural knowledge, e g., “How
many grown-ups know how to lock their front door?” To
examine whether the reported spread of expert knowledge
corresponded to participants’ perceived number of experts
in the community, we also asked an occupation-focused
question in each domain, e.g., “How many grown-ups in
Kingston are doctors?” Participants were also presented
with 12 questions about the distribution of various
individual characteristics and behaviors, e.g., “How many
grown ups in Kingston go to work / have pets?” These
property questions aimed to further prompt thinking about
wider and narrower sets of the population.
Children answered the questions on a 5-point scale with a
slider. The five points depicted with pie charts 0%, 25%,
50%, 75%, and 100% of the population. Note that this scale
was not designed for recording realistic estimates of
prevalence. This would have required a logarithmic scale
and we were not aware of evidence of successful use of such
a scale with children.
For the adults, the questions were presented on a piece of
paper. The instructions and a figure representing a 0-100

scale with the pie charts used with the slider appeared on
top of the page.

Procedure
Adults Adult participants answered the questions by writing
down their answers next to each question. They were free to
answer the questions with any number they wished in the 0100 range. Adults received course credit for participating.
Children The experiment began by explaining to children
that they will be asked questions about grown-ups. After
that, the experimenter informed them that they were to
answer the questions by moving the slider to the pie chart
that showed the relevant proportion of grown-ups who
know. As a warm-up, children were asked to position the
slider in the all, none, and half positions. Children were also
asked “How many grown ups in Kingston are shorter/taller
than you?” to provide practice answering with the slider.
Children were asked the experimental questions in the
same random order, with the property questions interspersed
among them. Although children were free to position the
slider anywhere on the 0-100 scale, they used the five
points, consistent with the directions they received.
Subsequently, children were asked whether or not their
parents knew the items, e.g., “Do mom and dad know how
to fix a broken arm?” These questions aimed to provide an
assessment of whether children encountered the relevant
information in their homes. The study included several
additional questions the data from which have not yet been
analyzed. These questions were presented later and do not
affect the current results. Parents also answered questions
regarding their child’s familiarity with a large set of
occupations.

Results
Figures 1 and 2 show respectively adults’ and children’s
responses to the questions about adults in the occupations of
builder, car mechanic, doctor, farmer, and pilot, and related
expert and everyday knowledge. In addition, they show the
groups’ estimates of the prevalence of common knowledge.
The research questions identify two key comparisons in
the data: expert – common knowledge and expert –
everyday knowledge. In addition, we examined the
correspondence between participants’ estimates of the
proportion of people in the five occupations and the
distribution of expert knowledge related to these
occupations in the population. Thus, the analytical approach
included a combination of targeted t-tests and analyses of
variance and correlation.

Adults
As Figure 1 suggests, on average, adults associated expert
knowledge with a significantly smaller proportion of the
population than common knowledge (Mexpert = 9.93; Mcommon
= 92.16; t(17) = 36.36, p < .001).

Figure 1. Adults’ estimates of the proportion of the
population in five occupations and of the distribution
of related expert and everyday knowledge. Adults’
estimate of the distribution of common knowledge
appears on the right. Error bars represent ± 1 SE.

knowledge questions, t(17) = 1.08, p = 0.295. Given the
significant interaction effect between area and question
(F(8, 136) = 47.7, p < . 01), we conducted two follow-up
analyses. First, we examined the difference between expert
and everyday knowledge items in each area. Although
always in the expected direction, this difference was
significant in three of the five areas (the exception being
farmer and pilot).
Second, as we were interested in the relationship
between participants’ perceptions of the proportion of
professionals and of the distribution of expert knowledge,
we calculated the correlation between these variables (rather
than their difference). The correlations ranged from .45 to
.89 (p’s ≥ .06) suggesting an overall significant relation
between these variables.
In sum, adults recognized that expert knowledge is less
prevalent than common knowledge. Furthermore, their
estimates of the distribution of expert knowledge was tightly
linked to their beliefs about the proportion of people in each
occupation.

Children

Figure 2. Children's estimates of the proportion of
the population in five occupations and of the
distribution of related expert and everyday
knowledge. Children’s estimate of the distribution of
common knowledge appears on the right. Error bars
represent ± 1 SE.
We conducted an area (5) x question (occupationfocused, expert knowledge, everyday knowledge) repeated
measures ANOVA to assess the differences in adults’
assessments of the prevalence of the five occupations,
expert knowledge, and everyday knowledge. Both main
effects and the interaction effect were significant. The effect
of area (F(4, 68) = 42.7, p < . 01) reflected that some
occupations and related knowledge were perceived as more
common in the community than others. Of key interest, was
the effect of question, F(2, 34) = 138.2, p < . 01. As Figure
1 suggests, there was a significant difference in the
estimates of the distribution of expert and everyday
knowledge (Mexpert = 9.93; Meveryday = 41.42; t(17) = 11.66, p
< .001). Furthermore, there was no difference in
participants’ responses to the occupation and expert

2004

As Figure 2 suggests, 4-year-olds associated the common
knowledge items on average with 79% of the population,
which was significantly larger than their estimate of the
prevalence of expert knowledge 53%, t(29) = 5.1, p < 0.01.
As for the adults, we conducted an area (5) x question
(professional, expert knowledge, everyday knowledge)
repeated measures ANOVA on children’s responses to the
questions about the distribution of expert and everyday
knowledge and occupations. The analysis only showed a
significant effect of question type, F(2, 58) = 6.2, p < .01.
Children associated expert knowledge with a significantly
smaller proportion of the population than everyday
knowledge (Mexpert = 53; Meveryday = 67; t(29) = 3.61, p <
.01). The difference in children’s estimates of the number of
professionals in the population and the distribution of expert
knowledge was not significant, t(29) = 1.35, p = 0.19. The
correlations between children’s answers to these two
questions in the individual areas ranged between .3 and .45
and with the exception of highest (for farmer domain) failed
to reach significance.
Interestingly, children’s estimate of the proportion of
people in the five occupations was on average of 58%. It
was higher than their estimate of the proportion of people
with related expert knowledge (53%) but lower than their
estimate of the distribution of everyday knowledge (67%).
The next analysis examined 4-year-old’s responses to the
questions regarding their parents’ knowledge. Children’s
answers were averaged across area. Common knowledge
was attributed to parents on average 90%, significantly
more often than either expert or everyday knowledge (both
t’s < .01). Everyday knowledge was more likely to be
attributed to parents than expert knowledge (Mexpert = 35;
Meveryday = 64; t(29) = 4.86, p < .01). The difference between
expert and everyday knowledge was significant for all areas
except car mechanic.

Discussion
The present findings enrich our understanding of children’s
and adults’ representation of the spread of different kinds of
knowledge. Adults showed clear differentiation between
expert knowledge and related everyday knowledge as well
as between expert knowledge and common knowledge.
Furthermore, their estimates of the distribution of expert
knowledge closely corresponded to their estimates of the
frequency of different occupations. Children also indicated
that expert knowledge is less widely distributed than
everyday knowledge and common knowledge. Past research
has revealed that children recognize that different adults
know different things (Keil et al., 2008; Lutz & Keil, 2002).
The current study extends these findings to demonstrate that
both children and adults see differences in the spread of
different kinds of knowledge.
It is important to note that children’s responses in the
present study are unlikely to be affected by generic
language that distinguishes knowledge that most people
have from idiosyncratic knowledge of individuals. As
mentioned, children can use generic language to distinguish
widely and narrowly known novel facts (Cimpian & Scott,
2012). Generic language did not distinguish the stimuli in
the different conditions in present study. Thus, 4-year-olds
not only judge widely and narrowly held knowledge based
on linguistic cues but have built representations of how
knowledge in their environment varies in its spread.
How do people arrive at these representations, especially
with regards to expert knowledge? One possible route to
representing the spread of expert knowledge is through
considering the frequency of different occupations. Indeed,
there was a clear relationship between adults' estimates of
the proportion of people with the target occupations and the
proportion of people with occupation-related knowledge.
However, no such relationship was evident in the
children's data. In fact, children’s estimates of the frequency
of different occupations were in-between the spread of
expert and everyday knowledge. This finding suggests that
children may not arrive at a representation of the
distribution of knowledge considering the frequency of
experts. It is possible that children’s estimates of the
distribution of expert knowledge and people in related
occupations derive from different sources. Naturally, the
occupation questions focused on social actors while the
expert knowledge questions focused on mental states
associated with activities. For young children, tracking
activities may be easier (given that their estimates were
lower and thus more realistic) than the social agents
associated with those activities.
Another route children can take to developing
understanding of whether something is widely or narrowly
known is through observations of adults in the family.
Indeed, the analyses revealed that children crisply
differentiated expert, everyday, and common knowledge
when asked whether their parents have that knowledge.
Children appear to believe that the number of people in
each of the five occupations targeted by the study is over

50%. This conflicts with a number of assumptions adults
make about expertise, e.g., that a person does not have an
opportunity to develop professional expertise in many areas,
but is consistent with findings suggesting that children
extend expertise to other domains (Taylor et al., 1991). It
may not be warranted, however, to make much of the
absolute value of these numbers. First, children may have
very well been providing relative answers (e.g., “many” vs.
“few”) and, second, the scale was not conducive to
capturing realistic estimates of the small proportion of the
population in the target professions. It will be useful to
explore in future research whether children can work with a
logarithmic scale.
On the flip side, even though high, children’s estimate of
the number of people in different occupations suggests that
they realize that not everyone has the same profession (only
half do!). In other words, although they may consider adults
to be well rounded, they do not consider them omniscient.
Clearly, the present conclusions are limited by the
occupations that were represented and the associated items
chosen for the study. As the analyses suggested, the
magnitude of the difference between expert and everyday
knowledge varied substantially across areas. The domains
were intentionally chosen to vary in the representation of
the different occupations in the community. This could have
affected the results, as the low frequency of pilots and
farmers could have led to floor effects in the answers to both
knowledge questions. It is also possible that the variability
by area is due to the particular items chosen for the study.
Nevertheless, even though the effect sizes varied across
occupation for both age groups, their direction was
consistent.
In conclusion, the present study is one of the first to
provide clear evidence pertaining to adults’ and children’s
beliefs about the relative spread of common, expert, and
everyday knowledge. Even 4-year-olds discriminated
between what everyone in their community is likely to
know and expert knowledge, i.e., knowledge obtained
through extensive experience and training. These findings
complement our current understanding of people’s
representation of the clustering of knowledge (Danovitch &
Keil, 2004; Keil et al., 2008) and help build a
comprehensive picture of the social landscape in people’s
minds which supports adaptive behavior in the face of
incomplete knowledge.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Megan Loma who assisted with designing the
study and stimuli and to Megan Loma, Katherine Lillico,
and Jennifer Zhang who collected and coded the data.
Thanks also to the families who supported the research.

References
Aguiar, N. R., Stoess, C. J., & Taylor, M. (2012). The
development of children’s ability to fill the gaps in their
knowledge by consulting experts. Child Development,
83(4), 1368–1381.

Burton, S., & Mitchell, P. (2003). Judging who knows best
about yourself: Developmental change in citing the self
across middle childhood. Child Development, 74(2),
426–443.
Cimpian, A., & Scott, R. M. (2012). Children expect generic
knowledge to be widely shared. Cognition, 123(3), 419–
433.
Danovitch, J., & Keil, F. C. (2004). Should you ask a
fisherman or a biologist?: Developmental shifts in ways
of clustering knowledge. Child Development, 75(3),
918–931.
Feltovich, P. J., Ford, K. M., & Hoffman, R. R. (Eds.).
(1997). Expertise in context. Boston: MIT Press.
Retrieved from https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/expertisecontext
Fitneva, S. A. (2010). Children’s representation of child and
adult knowledge. Journal of Cognition and
Development, 11(3), 458–484.
Fitneva, S. A., Ho, E., & Hatayama, M. (2016). Japanese
and Canadian children’s beliefs about child and adult
knowledge: A case for developmental equifinality?
PLOS ONE, 11(9), e0163018.
Graham, S. A., Stock, H., & Henderson, A. M. E. (2006).
Nineteen-Month-Olds’
Understanding
of
the
Conventionality of Object Labels Versus Desires.
Infancy, 9(3), 341–350.
Henderson, L., Weighall, A., Brown, H., & Gaskell, G.
(2013). Online lexical competition during spoken word
recognition and word learning in children and adults.
Child Development, 84(5), 1668–1685. Keil, F. C.
(2003). Folkscience: Coarse interpretations of a complex
reality. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(8), 368–373.
Keil, F. C., Stein, C., Webb, L., Billings, V. D., &
Rozenblit, L. (2008). Discerning the division of
cognitive labor: An emerging understanding of how
knowledge is clustered in other minds. Cognitive
Science, 32(2), 259–300.
Koenig, M. A., & Jaswal, V. K. (2011). Characterizing
children’s
expectations
about
expertise
and
incompetence: Halo or pitchfork effects? Child
Development, 82, 1634–1647.
Lutz, D. J., & Keil, F. C. (2002). Early understanding of the
division of cognitive labor. Child Development, 73(4),
1073–1084.
Piaget, J. (1959). The language and thought of the child.
New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co, Inc.
Taylor, M., Cartwright, B. S., & Bowden, T. (1991).
Perspective taking and theory of mind: Do children
predict interpretive diversity as a function of differences
in observers’ knowledge? Child Development, 62(6),
1334–1351.
VanderBorght, M., & Jaswal, V. K. (2009). Who knows
best? Preschoolers sometimes prefer child informants
over adult informants. Infant and Child Development,
18(61–71).

2005

