I know what you need to know: Children’s developing theory of mind and
pedagogical evidence selection
Ilona Bass (ilona.m.bass@rutgers.edu)1 , Elizabeth Bonawitz (elizabeth.bonawitz@rutgers.edu)1 ,
Patrick Shafto (patrick.shafto@gmail.com)2 , Dhaya Ramarajan (dhayar@gmail.com),
Alison Gopnik (gopnik@berkeley.edu)3 , Henry Wellman (hmw@umich.edu)4
1

Department of Psychology, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ 07102
Department of Math and Computer Science, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ 07102
3 Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720
Center for Human Growth and Development, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109
2

4

Abstract

more of the rules, and 3) used a more diverse range of teaching strategies. Similarly, Strauss, Ziv, and Stein (2002) found
that five-year-olds taught others by providing verbal explanations, whereas three-year-olds used more demonstrationbased teaching strategies. There is also evidence that older
children possess more declarative knowledge about pedagogy
in general (Ziv & Frye, 2004).
What are the fundamental cognitive underpinnings that
support the development of children’s pedagogical skills?
Theory of Mind (the ability to represent others’ mental states
and to understand that others may experience mental states
that are different from one’s own) has been proposed as being critical for children’s teaching. Intuitively, a relationship
between Theory of Mind (ToM) and children’s developing
teaching skills makes sense: ToM involves monitoring the
mental states of others, and effective teaching requires understanding what your student does and does not know. Additionally, ToM undergoes drastic qualitative change between
the ages of three and five, the same period during which children’s pedagogical skills are developing. Indeed, there is a
wealth of empirical work that provides evidence for a link between ToM development and pedagogical skill (Davis-Unger
& Carlson, 2008; Strauss et al., 2002). ToM may thus be an
important cognitive mechanism that drives the development
of children’s ability to teach others.

Natural pedagogy emerges early in development (Knudsen &
Liszkowski, 2012), but good teaching requires presenting evidence specific to learners’ knowledge (Shafto, Goodman, &
Griffiths, 2014). How might the development of Theory of
Mind (ToM) relate to the ability to select pedagogical evidence? We present a training study in which we investigated
the link between preschool-aged children’s false-belief understanding and their ability to select evidence for teaching. Our
results suggest that children with more advanced ToM abilities were better evidence selectors, even when controlling for
effects of age and numerical conservation abilities. We also
found that children who improved more in false-belief understanding from pre- to post-test performed better on the pedagogical tasks over the course of the training. Finally, we report
tentative evidence for a link between the pedagogical training and improvements in ToM. Our findings suggest important
connections between ToM and evidential reasoning in natural
pedagogy in early childhood.
Keywords: pedagogy, theory of mind, evidence selection

Introduction
The ability to teach and be taught by others is an indispensable human capability. Social transmission of information
is one of the key ways in which both children and adults
learn about the world, and some have argued that the natural tendency to teach and to be ready to learn from others
may be what sets human intelligence apart from other animals (e.g., Moll & Tomasello, 2007). Indeed, teaching in
children emerges at an early age: Three-year-olds spontaneously engage in teaching behavior with their peers (Ashley
& Tomasello, 1998), and infants as young as 12 months selectively point to convey information to naı̈ve (as opposed to
knowledgeable) adults (Knudsen & Liszkowski, 2012). Investigating children’s developing ability to teach others may
shed insight into the cognitive mechanisms that support natural pedagogy. We will suggest that the factors that support
this skill – reasoning about the knowledge states of others and
reasoning about evidence – are intertwined.

Evidence Selection in Teaching
The past work on children’s teaching and ToM ability has operationalized teaching ability in various ways, including by
the length of the teaching interaction, the types of strategies
used, and whether children recognize that some individuals
need to be taught while others do not. An additional and
perhaps more detailed way of conceptualizing pedagogical
skill comes from the distinct but related body of literature on
concept learning and pedagogical sampling. Research in this
field emphasizes the importance of selecting and presenting
a learner with specific evidence that will allow them to infer
a particular conclusion (e.g., Gweon, Tenenbaum, & Schulz,
2010; Shafto et al., 2014). According to this view, being a
“good” teacher requires more than just recognizing whether
or not someone needs to be taught, or even that some learners need to be taught more than others; rather, good teaching
depends on having a deeper understanding of the precise ev-

Teaching in Early Childhood and Theory of Mind
Children’s teaching abilities improve considerably between
the ages of three and five years. Davis-Unger and Carlson
(2008) had three- to five-year-old children teach a confederate how to play a novel board game, and found that older
children 1) taught for longer periods of time, 2) explained

99

idence that certain learners may or may not need in order to
infer a particular conclusion.
Prior work has shown that children are sensitive to learning goals in pedagogical scenarios. Six-year-olds will select
diverse samples to teach a novel concept to a peer, but not
to learn a novel concept for themselves (Rhodes, Gelman, &
Brickman, 2010). Preschoolers are even capable of selectively presenting evidence to intentionally deceive learners.
Rhodes, Bonawitz, Shafto, Chen, and Caglar (2015) showed
three- to six-year-olds a novel toy that activated when any
block was placed on it. They then asked children to pick two
blocks to either 1) teach a naı̈ve puppet how the toy really
worked, or 2) trick her into thinking that only red blocks made
it go. Children reliably selected blocks that would best communicate the pedagogical goal, regardless of whether the goal
was to teach or to deceive (Rhodes et al., 2015).
There is also an abundance of work demonstrating that
when learning from others, children use the evidence presented to them to make inferences about the knowledgeability of their teachers (see Kushnir and Koenig (in press) for
a recent example). Pasquini, Corriveau, Koenig, and Harris (2007) showed children videos of adults naming familiar objects with varying rates of accuracy; children were then
asked from whom they would prefer to learn the names of
novel objects. Three- and four-year-olds preferred to learn
from more accurate teachers, suggesting that children use presented evidence in pedagogical scenarios to update their beliefs about whether teachers are knowledgeable or not. Despite this robust preference for accurate teachers, there has
also been work showing that children are able to exonerate
previously inaccurate teachers whose past inaccuracies occurred for legitimate reasons (Nurmsoo & Robinson, 2009).
Children therefore additionally monitor teachers’ epistemic
states in conjunction with the evidence they’ve presented in
order to make inferences about their competence.
Together, the works cited in this section suggest that children are developing the ability to reason about evidence in the
service of teaching in the early childhood years. However, we
are unaware of any work that has investigated the precise relationship between ToM development and children’s ability to
effectively select pedagogical evidence to teach others. ToM
may play an especially important role in supporting this aspect of teaching, because effective evidence selection requires
the on-line monitoring of a learner’s epistemic state relative to
a particular learning goal. The current paper presents a novel
experiment that explores the relationship between children’s
pedagogical evidence selection and ToM development.

that training pedagogical skill might lead to improvements
in ToM reasoning abilities. To explore this, we assessed
children’s false-belief understanding before and after training
them on two pedagogical tasks. We also assessed children’s
understanding of numerical conservation; we wanted to be
sure that any improvements we saw due to the pedagogical
training was specific to ToM abilities and not to other unrelated domains of cognitive development.
We chose to use false-belief tasks to measure ToM; between the ages of three and five, children reliably transition
from predicting others’ actions based on the veridical state
of the world to understanding that others’ actions are in fact
guided by their (sometimes false) beliefs (Wellman, Cross,
& Watson, 2001). Some have argued that implicit falsebelief understanding emerges at much earlier ages (between
10 and 15 months), and that apparent developments in ToM
between the ages of 3 and 5 years are actually reflections of
task demands (Baillargeon, Scott, & He, 2010). Nevertheless, there is ample evidence that the changes that occur in
children’s ToM understanding during the preschool years are
critical: This is the time during which children gain the ability to provide explicit causal explanations for others’ actions
based on epistemic states (e.g., Bartsch & Wellman, 1989);
further, differences in preschoolers’ false-belief understanding are predictive of numerous other capabilities, including
children’s tendency to talk about people in everyday conversation, and their social competence more broadly (see Astington & Jenkins, 1995; Imuta, Henry, Slaughter, Selcuk, &
Ruffman, 2016), suggesting an important link between performance on these tasks in early childhood and real cognitive
development. We therefore used false-belief tasks to measure
ToM abilities.

Methods
Participants
Sixty-one children (M age = 47 months, range = 39 − 55
months) were recruited from and tested at local preschools.

Tasks
False-Belief Children’s ToM was assessed using two classic false-belief tasks. In the first task, children saw a storybook in which Sally put her cookie in a box and then left
the room. While Sally was gone, Anne came in and moved
Sally’s cookie from the box to a bag. Children were then
asked, “When Sally comes back, where will she look for
her cookie?” Children earned a point if they correctly reported that Sally would look for her cookie in the box. In
the second task, children were shown a crayon box that, it
was soon revealed, actually contained some keys. Experimenters asked the children 1) what they thought was inside
the box when they first saw it, and 2) what was really inside.
Children earned one point if they correctly answered both of
these questions. The experimenter then introduced a doll, and
asked children the same two questions (“What will the doll
think is inside this box? What’s really inside?”). Children

Teaching Training and Theory of Mind Study
We investigated the relationship between children’s Theory of
Mind ability (as measured by a false-belief battery; Wimmer
& Perner, 1983; Gopnik & Astington, 1988) and their ability
to select evidence to teach another. Assuming this link, we
predicted that children with more proficient Theories of Mind
would be better at pedagogical evidence selection, and also

100

again received one point for correctly answering both questions. False-belief scores could thus range from zero to three.
Numerical Conservation Control Task To assess children’s understanding of numerical conservation, experimenters showed children two parallel rows of ten objects
each, both of which were equal in length. Children were
asked if row A or B had more objects, or if they were the
same. Then, experimenters lengthened one of the rows, and
again asked children if row A or B had more objects, or if
they were the same. This process constituted one trial; children had to answer both questions correctly on a given trial to
earn one point. Experimenters administered two trials; conservation scores could thus range from zero to two.
Pedagogical Training and Test The pedagogical training
entailed a novel word learning task and a causal toy activation task. In the novel word learning task, children were told
that a novel word (e.g., “Dax”) represented the concept they
were trying to learn. They were shown a picture of an object
with two discrete features (e.g., a fork that is white), and were
told that this picture represented the target concept (“This is
a Dax!”). Given the inherent ambiguity in the word’s extension, the experimenter explained what the novel word really
meant (“Dax means fork.”). The experimenter then presented
two additional pictures, each of which contained an item that
overlapped with exactly one of the original picture’s two features (e.g., a white spoon, and a black fork). The experimenter then asked children to teach a confederate what the
novel word meant by providing examples using the three pictures, without explicitly telling the confederate what the novel
word meant. In order to provide a correct response, children
had to present the necessary and sufficient examples to identify the correct rule while ruling out other hypotheses1 .

“Oh, so you showed me both at the same time. It could be
that you need to do both at the same time to make it go, or
it could be that the wheel by itself could make it go, or that
the bell by itself could make it go. Can you teach me?” Note
that often children would need to present negative examples
to rule out plausible hypotheses (e.g., showing that the wheel
by itself did not make it go). The number of prompts children
required before providing complete evidence was the primary
DV for both pedagogical training tasks; these scores could
range from a minimum of zero (i.e., children who provided
necessary and sufficient evidence spontaneously) to a maximum of two (i.e., children who required prompting after each
demonstration until all evidence had been provided).
There were six different versions of each task: The novel
words were fep, dax, modi, toma, wug, and blicket; the causal
toys were phone, gear toy, helicopter, shadowbox, red airplane, and purple. Some of the novel words represented just
one of the two categories to which the example object belonged (“Dax means fork”), while others represented both
categories (“Dax means white fork”). Likewise, some causal
toys would activate any time one of the mechanisms was operated (“Any time you ring the bell, it makes the toy go”),
while others would only activate if both mechanisms were
operated simultaneously (“You need to ring the bell and spin
the wheel at the same time to make the toy go”). Varying the
stimuli in this way ensured that children would have distinct
teaching goals on different trials, and would thus have to select evidence that corresponded to the particular teaching goal
of a given trial in order to provide a correct response.

Procedure
Children’s understanding of false-belief and numerical conservation was assessed on a preliminary testing day. Children who scored fewer than two out of three points on the
false-belief task were classified as copy theorists (i.e., those
who think that beliefs are always consistent with the world),
while children who scored two or more points were classified as perspective theorists (i.e., those who understand that
beliefs may vary with perspective, and can thus be false; see
Goodman et al., 2006). Copy theorist (CT) children (N = 40)
were randomly assigned to either the control or the training
condition. Over the course of the following six weeks (beginning on the preliminary testing day), children in the training
condition (N = 22; M age = 46 months) received two training
sessions per week on both pedagogical tasks. One version of
each task was administered on a given testing session, with
the novel word task always being presented first. As there
were six versions of both the novel word task and the causal
toy task, the experimenter administered the same version of
each task across both sessions of a given week. The order in
which the different versions of the tasks were presented was
randomized across participants. At the end of this six week
period, children’s understanding of false-belief and numerical
conservation were reassessed using the same measures with
slightly different stimuli.
CT children in the control condition (N = 18; M age = 46

In the causal toy activation task, children were presented
with a novel toy with two distinct mechanisms (e.g., a wheel
and a bell). The experimenter first showed children how to activate the toy, causing it to perform some desirable outcome
such as lighting up or playing music (“You need to ring the
bell and spin the wheel at the same time to make the toy go.”).
As in the novel word task, children were then instructed to
teach a confederate about the toy by providing examples of
which combinations of mechanisms did and did not make the
toy go. In order to provide a correct response, children had
to demonstrate both necessary and sufficient evidence for the
confederate to rule out all alternative explanations and correctly infer which mechanism(s) activated the toy.
For both tasks, if children provided insufficient evidence,
the confederate prompted the child by musing aloud about
the remaining possible explanations. For example, if the child
only showed the confederate that operating both mechanisms
simultaneously made the toy go, the confederate might say:
1 To

help children understand the hypotheses under consideration, the confederate announced the full set of hypotheses before
the child began teaching (e.g., “I see, Dax could mean fork, or Dax
could mean white, or it could mean white fork.”).

101

Figure 1: A schematic of our study design, with examples of possible pedagogical training schedules for CT children in the
training condition and PT children.
months) received no pedagogical training, and their falsebelief and conservation understanding was reassessed after
a six-week delay. Perspective theorist (PT) children (N = 21;
M age = 49 months) did not receive longitudinal pedagogical
training, since they had little to no room for improvement on
the false-belief tasks; instead, they received just one session
of the pedagogical tasks on the preliminary testing day, allowing us to measure their initial teaching abilities. The versions
of the pedagogical tasks used with PT children were randomized across participants. PT children’s false-belief and conservation understanding was not reassessed. See Figure 1 for
a schematic of our study design.

CIdiff = [.26, 1.15]), there were no significant differences between the two groups on the novel word task (CT: M = 1.64;
PT: M = 1.52; p = .584, 95% CIdiff = [-.30, .53]). This disparity may be explained by the seemingly increased difficulty
of the novel word task relative to the causal toy task. Indeed,
two paired-samples t-tests revealed that both CT and PT children performed better on the causal toy task than on the novel
word task on the preliminary testing day (CT: t(21) = 5.05,
p < .001, 95% CIdiff = [.56, 1.35]; PT: t(20) = 2.16, p = .042,
95% CIdiff = [.01, .71]); additionally, more children required
the maximum of two prompts on the novel word task (N = 29)
than on the causal toy task (N = 12). The novel word task
might have been more difficult for children than the causal
toy task for several reasons; perhaps children are more generally familiar with toys, or have more experience teaching
about toys than about words. Future work could explore the
differences between these two tasks.
There are many possible reasons why PT children may
have outperformed CT children on the causal toy task, including age or other cognitive factors. To control for this,
we ran two between-subjects ANCOVAs, with theorist type
(CT vs. PT) predicting performance on the causal toy task;
we included preliminary conservation scores as a covariate in
one analysis, and age at pre-test in the other. PT children still
outperformed CT children on the causal toy task, even when
controlling for effects of age (F(1, 40) = 6.11, p = .018) and
conservation scores (F(1, 39) = 9.35, p = .004), providing
stronger evidence for a direct link between false-belief understanding and teaching ability.

Results
One CT child in the training condition did not complete one
session of the causal toy task, another CT child did not complete one session of both tasks, and one PT child’s numerical conservation abilities were not assessed; these individual
data points were treated as missing in subsequent analyses.
Otherwise, all children completed all training sessions and
assessments. We created a composite pedagogical skill score
for each training session by calculating the average number
of prompts children required across both tasks in a given session. Lower scores indicated better task performance.

Initial False-Belief & Pedagogical Skill
We first investigated the effects of preliminary false-belief
understanding on initial (i.e., non-trained) pedagogical skill.
An independent-samples t-test compared CT children in the
training condition to PT children on the average number of
prompts required on the preliminary testing day. We found
that PT children (M = 1.05, SD = .57) provided complete
evidence with significantly fewer prompts than CT children
(M = 1.45, SD = .55), t(41) = 2.38, p = .022, 95% CIdiff =
[.06, .75]; see Figure 2A. We also looked at the novel word
and causal toy tasks separately: While PT children (M = .57,
SD = .68) significantly outperformed CT children (M = 1.27,
SD = .78) on the causal toy task (t(41) = 3.17, p = .003, 95%

False-Belief Improvement & Pedagogical Skill
Next, we investigated the relationship between overall aggregate performance on the two pedagogical tasks and improvement on the false-belief task from pre- to post-test. Using
data from CT children in the training condition, we ran a
correlation between false-belief improvement (i.e., pre-test
false-belief scores subtracted from post-test scores) and the

102

Figure 2: A. PT children provided the confederate with complete evidence after receiving significantly fewer prompts than CT
children on the first day of pedagogical testing. B. Children required fewer prompts over the course of the pedagogical training.
C. For children who answered all false-belief questions incorrectly at pre-test, those in the training condition significantly
improved in false-belief understanding from pre- to post-test, whereas those in the control condition did not. Asterisks denote
significance at the p < .05 level. All error bars represent two standard errors.
without necessarily leading to general improvement in cognitive reasoning. Note that this result does not directly compare training to control children, and should be interpreted
with caution. However, coupled with our finding that initial
false-belief understanding is related to non-trained pedagogical skill, this may suggest an important link between reasoning about others’ minds and pedagogical evidence selection.

mean number of prompts required across all twelve training
sessions. We found a statistically significant negative linear
relationship between these two factors, r(20) = −.43, p =
.047. In other words, children who required fewer prompts
over the course of the training generally improved more in
false-belief understanding from pre- to post-test. Two partial
correlations revealed that this finding qualitatively persisted
when statistically controlling for average age (r(19) = −.43,
p = .054) and improvement in conservation understanding
(r(19) = −.41, p = .063).

Discussion
Past work has shown that children’s developing ToM reasoning abilities are related to their pedagogical skill, but has not
looked at the precise relationship between ToM development
and the ability to select optimal evidence to teach others. Our
results suggest that having a more developed ToM is broadly
related to being better at evidence selection, even when controlling for age and more general cognitive abilities. Further,
we found tentative supporting evidence for the idea that training pedagogical evidence selection may in turn improve children’s ToM reasoning abilities. Taken together, our results are
consistent with prior work on the relationship between ToM
and teaching skills, and provide support for a strong link between pedagogical evidence selection and theory of mind.
Our results speak to existing models of ToM development that postulate genuine conceptual change during the
preschool years. Specifically, we found evidence for a link
between performance on a false-belief task and the discrete
developmental capability of pedagogical evidence selection,
suggesting that the changes in false-belief understanding that
occur between the ages of 3 and 5 may reflect deeper qualitative changes in children’s Theories of Mind. As we noted
in the introduction, we recognize that there is a diverse range
of perspectives on the course of children’s ToM development,
and we will not attempt to resolve that debate here. Rather,
we simply suggest that our findings cannot be explained in
their entirety by false-belief task demands (especially given
that our results persist when controlling for effects of age),
and may therefore be indicative of some type of conceptual
change in ToM during the preschool years.

Effect of Training on False-Belief Understanding
Finally, we evaluated the possible effects of pedagogical
training on children’s false-belief scores. Our first question
was whether the training was actually effective in improving
children’s pedagogical skills. A repeated-measures ANOVA
on the mean number of prompts children required on each
of the twelve training sessions revealed a significant effect
of session (F(11, 220) = 4.96, p < .001), as well as a significant linear trend (i.e., a straight line fit the data at better
than chance levels; F(1, 20) = 20.85, p < .001). Children’s
performance on the pedagogical tasks thus did improve with
training (see Figure 2B).
Next, we ran an independent-samples t-test comparing CT
children in the training condition (N = 22) to those in the control condition (N = 18) on false-belief improvement. This direct comparison between training and control participants did
not yield significant results (p = .65). However, CT children
who answered one false-belief question correctly at pre-test
had less room for improvement. Indeed, looking only at CT
children who answered zero false-belief questions correctly at
pre-test, we did observe improved false-belief understanding
for children in the training condition (N = 12; M improve = .19,
SD = .26; t(11) = 2.55, p = .027), but not for those in the
control condition (N = 8; M improve = .08; p = .170); see Figure 2C. Importantly, conservation scores did not differ for either group between pre- and post-test (Training: p = .551;
Control: p = .197), suggesting that the training targeted ToM

103

Our findings also have implications for current theories and
models of natural pedagogy and epistemic trust. Shafto et
al. (2014) propose a Bayesian model of pedagogical teaching and learning, according to which the evidence that teachers choose to present directly depends on the learner’s prior
knowledge and the learning goal that the teacher is trying to
communicate. This pedagogical model is a special case of the
broader model of epistemic trust (Shafto, Eaves, Navarro, &
Perfors, 2012; Eaves & Shafto, 2012, in press), which explicitly connects developmental changes in reasoning about others’ beliefs to interpretation of evidence selection by others.
Our results support these models that link evidence selection
and reasoning about other minds. We also extend their findings, showing that this link 1) exists even in young children
who have not yet been exposed to formal schooling, and 2) is
manifest in their selection of evidence for others.

Gopnik, A., & Astington, J. W. (1988, February). Children’s
understanding of representational change and its relation to
the understanding of false belief and the appearance-reality
distinction. Child Dev, 59(1), 26–37.
Gweon, H., Tenenbaum, J., & Schulz, L. (2010). Infants consider both the sample and the sampling process in inductive
generalization. PNAS, 107(20), 9066–9071.
Imuta, K., Henry, J. D., Slaughter, V., Selcuk, B., & Ruffman, T. (2016). Theory of mind and prosocial behavior
in childhood: A meta-analytic review. Dev Psychol, 52(8),
1192–1205.
Knudsen, B., & Liszkowski, U. (2012). One-year-olds warn
others about negative action outcomes. J Cogn Dev, 14(3),
424–436.
Kushnir, T., & Koenig, M. (in press). What I don’t know
won’t hurt you: The relation between professed ignorance
and later knowledge claims. Dev Psychol.
Moll, H., & Tomasello, M. (2007). Cooperation and human
cognition: The Vygotskian intelligence hypothesis. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci, 362(1480), 639–648.
Nurmsoo, E., & Robinson, E. J. (2009). Children’s trust in
previously inaccurate informants who were well or poorly
informed: When past errors can be excused. Child Dev,
80(1), 23–27.
Pasquini, E. S., Corriveau, K. H., Koenig, M., & Harris, P. L.
(2007). Preschoolers monitor the relative accuracy of informants. Dev Psychol, 43(5), 1216–1226.
Rhodes, M., Bonawitz, E., Shafto, P., Chen, A., & Caglar,
L. (2015). Controlling the message: Preschoolers’ use of
information to teach and deceive others. Front Psychol, 6,
867.
Rhodes, M., Gelman, S. A., & Brickman, D. (2010). Children’s attention to sample composition in learning, teaching and discovery. Dev Sci, 13(3), 421–429.
Shafto, P., Eaves, B., Navarro, D. J., & Perfors, A. (2012,
February). Epistemic trust: Modeling children’s reasoning
about others’ knowledge and intent. Dev Sci, 15(3), 436–
447.
Shafto, P., Goodman, N. D., & Griffiths, T. L. (2014). A rational account of pedagogical reasoning: Teaching by, and
learning from, examples. Cogn Psychol, 71, 55–89.
Strauss, S., Ziv, M., & Stein, A. (2002). Teaching as a natural cognition and its relations to preschoolers’ developing
theory of mind. Cogn Dev, 17(3), 1473–1487.
Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Metaanalysis of theory-of-mind development: The truth about
false belief. Child Dev, 72(3), 655–684.
Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and constraining function of wrong beliefs in
young children’s understanding of deception. Cognition,
13(1), 103–128.
Ziv, M., & Frye, D. (2004). Children’s understanding of
teaching: The role of knowledge and belief. Cogn Dev,
19(4), 457–477.

Along with this prior work, our paper also speaks to
broader theories of natural pedagogy, and supports a potential
link between the uniquely human ability to teach others and
the development of the ability to reason about others’ minds;
this raises questions about whether these skills may even be
evolutionarily intertwined. Whatever the case may be, reasoning about other minds, as conceptualized in the field, is
composed of multiple interrelated inference problems. Understanding the role of these social inferences in learning requires investigating how children approach several conjoined
problems, as we have done. Our work exemplifies and shows
the value of that approach.

References
Ashley, J., & Tomasello, M. (1998). Cooperative problemsolving and teaching in preschoolers. Soc Dev, 7(2), 143–
163.
Astington, J. W., & Jenkins, J. M. (1995). Theory of mind
development and social understanding. Cogn Emo, 9(2-3),
151–165.
Baillargeon, R., Scott, R. M., & He, Z. (2010). False-belief
understanding in infants. Trends Cogn Sci, 14(3), 110–118.
Bartsch, K., & Wellman, H. (1989). Young children’s attribution of action to beliefs and desires. Child Dev, 60(4),
946–964.
Davis-Unger, A. C., & Carlson, S. M. (2008). Development of teaching skills and relations to theory of mind in
preschoolers. J Cogn and Dev, 9(1), 26–45.
Eaves, B., & Shafto, P. (2012). Unifying Pedagogical Reasoning and Epistemic Trust. In F. Xu & T. Kushnir (Eds.),
Advances in child development and behavior (pp. 295–
319). Elsevier.
Eaves, B., & Shafto, P. (in press). Parameterizing developmental changes in epistemic trust. Psychon Bull Rev.
Goodman, N. D., Baker, C. L., Bonawitz, E., Mansinghka,
V. K., Gopnik, A., Wellman, H., . . . Tenenbaum, J. (2006).
Intuitive theories of mind: A rational approach to false belief. Proc 28th Annual Conf Cogn Sci Soc.

104

