“If It Matters, I Can Explain It”: Social Desirability of Knowledge Increases
the Illusion of Explanatory Depth
Christian Gaviria (cdgaviriam@unal.edu.co)
Javier Corredor (jacorredora@unal.edu.co)
Zadkiel Zuluaga-Rendón (zzuluagar@unal.edu.co)
Department of Psychology, Universidad Nacional de Colombia
Cr. 30 # 45-03, Ed. 202 Of. 219, Bogotá, 111321. Colombia

has also been found in both physical (Lawson, 2006;
Fernbach, Sloman, St. Louis & Shube, 2013; Fisher & Keil,
2015) and social mechanisms (Alter, Oppenheimer &
Zemla, 2010; Fernbach, Rogers, Fox & Sloman, 2013).
These previous works have focused on demonstrating how
pervasive is the IOED in different domains of knowledge
and on searching for conceptual properties of objects/topics
associated to different degrees of this phenomenon.
However, when people evaluate how much they know about
a particular topic, it is still possible they do not just keep in
mind what they do know, but also the representation of what
they should know. This representation can be inferred
explicitly or implicitly from contextual and motivational
cues, such as the perceived social desirability of knowledge.
In the following sections, we review some empirical results
from research both on IOED and metamemory that are
consistent with this interpretation.

Abstract
This paper explores whether social desirability affects the
illusion of explanatory depth (IEOD) by comparing the
magnitude of this illusion in topics with different levels of
social desirability within several domains. This question was
chosen because prior literature shows that social expectations
about how much a person should know about a certain topic
affect the magnitude of the IOED. Previous research shows
also that social desirability has an effect on a similar illusion
related to argumentation, and that the IOED is affected by the
way a person thinks knowledge is distributed in his or her
social group. In order to do so, 184 participants were assigned
randomly to three knowledge domains (history, economics,
and devices) and in each domain they rated their
understanding of a high-desirability and a low-desirability
topic following a standard IOED procedure. Results show that
social desirability has an effect on the IOED magnitude and
that overestimation of understanding varies among domains.
Particularly, participants tend to overestimate their
understanding of high desirability topics only. This effect was
stronger in the historical domain.

IOED and Social Desirability of Knowledge

Keywords: Illusion of explanatory depth; social desirability
of knowledge; feeling of knowing; metacognition; motivated
cognition.

Introduction
There is extensive evidence that people are often
overconfident regarding the quality and accuracy of their
knowledge (Moore & Healy, 2008; Zell & Krizan, 2014).
This metacognitive bias has been consistently found in the
context of tasks as diverse as recalling memorized
information (e.g., Koriat, Lichtenstein, & Fischhoff, 1980),
solving general-knowledge questions (e.g.,
Atir,
Rosenzweig & Dunning, 2015), evaluating text
comprehension (e.g., Jaeger & Wiley, 2015), and making
consumer decisions (e.g., Alba & Hutchinson, 2000).
The discrepancy between what people think they know
and what they really know seems to be more conspicuous in
certain kinds of knowledge. Thus, Rozenblit and Keil
(2002) found that college students are prone to overestimate
their ability to explain the mechanisms of devices or natural
processes, but not their understanding of facts, narratives or
procedures. This “Illusion of Explanatory Depth” (IOED),
have been robustly documented in recent years, both in
experts and non-experts (Lawson, 2006; Fisher & Keil,
2015) as in young children (Mills & Keil, 2004). The IOED

Fisher and Keil (2015) investigate whether expertise in a
given domain of knowledge is associated to a more accurate
self-evaluation of the understanding of objects and
processes. In order to do so, they distinguish between
passive and formal expertise; passive expertise refers to
knowledge coming from the “exposure through life
experience and the position one occupies in a society or
culture” (p.1251; e.g., specific knowledge or skills
culturally associated to gender or age), whereas formal
expertise is the final outcome of systematic, continued and
deliberate training in a specific domain with definite
milestones (e.g., academic degrees). Fisher and Keil found
that participants with less formal expertise (e.g., with no
college major) overestimated more their understanding of
topics related to their passive expertise than they did
regarding their understanding of other topics. This
difference was not replicated in the group with more formal
expertise. In this group, participants overestimated their
understanding of topics related to their area of formal
expertise more than of other topics. These results suggest
that people tend to overestimate their ability to explain
topics related to their area of expertise. In the case of people
with formal education, it happens with topics related to their
formal expertise; in the case of people with no formal
training, it happens with topics related to their passive one.
In both cases, a critical factor affecting the IOED magnitude

2073

seems to be the participants’ beliefs about how much they
should know about certain topics because of his or her type
of expertise, regardless of how that knowledge was
acquired.
In the same vein, Fisher and Keil (2014) asked their
participants to write their arguments supporting their
position about controversial topics. Before and after this
task, they were asked to evaluate how well they could
support their own positions. Additionally, participants
judged how important the topics were for them. Using an
experimental paradigm quite similar to that of the IOED
research, they found evidence of an “Illusion of
Argumentative Justification” (IAJ): participants’ ratings of
their ability to support their point of view decreased after
writing their arguments. Importantly, caring for each topic
was positively associated with both previous and posterior
evaluations of the ability to rationally justify their own
position, and this pattern was not replicated when arguments
were rated by a different group of participants. In short, IAJ
seems to be stronger in topics that matter to participants.
In apparent contradiction with these more recent findings,
Rozenblit and Keil (2002, study 11) reported that perceived
social desirability of explanations was not associated with
the magnitude of overconfidence in any domain of
knowledge (facts, procedures, narratives, or explanations).
They even claim that “if anything, high desirability may
cause people to more carefully assess their self-knowledge
in a domain and, therefore, be more accurate.” (p. 547).
However, at least one important difference between
Rozenblit and Keil (2002) and Fisher and Keil (2014)
studies can account for this discrepancy: whereas Rozenblit
and Keil compare differences in overconfidence between
kinds of knowledge (e.g., facts, procedures, narratives, and
explanations), Fisher and Keil contrast the IAJ magnitude
between topics with different degrees of personal
significance, within a same kind of knowledge (e.g.,
arguments). From a methodological point of view,
comparing between kinds of knowledge could be not the
optimal strategy to establish whether social desirability and
IOED are related, as far as the latter is a phenomenon
essentially linked to explanations. In this context,
comparing the IOED magnitude between more or less
socially desirable topics or explanatory domains might be
more informative than contrasting the effect of social
desirability between explanations and other kinds of
knowledge (e.g., arguments). Exploring this alternative is
the main purpose of this study.
The influence of social cues in the process of knowledge
self-assessment is not an exclusive finding of the IOED
paradigm. In the next section, we review some evidence
from metamemory research suggesting the inferential nature
of such process, and identifying a number of contextual
factors affecting perceptions about how likely some specific
content is to be recalled from memory.

Social Desirability and the Feeling of Knowing
The research on metacognitive judgments in memory tasks
has inquired about the sources of information people use to
infer whether a particular content can be learned or recalled.
Specifically, the “feeling of knowing” (FOK) has been
extensively investigated. In general, this feeling is
experienced by an individual when he or she thinks to have
certain items stored in memory and the ability to recall or
recognize them in the future, even when they cannot do it at
the present (Hart, 1965).
In order to elucidate the metacognitive mechanism
underlying to FOK, researchers have explored factors
associated to the accuracy of these judgments. Consistently,
it has been found that FOK is not the output of a unique
mechanism. Instead, diverse factors can affect the
metacognitive processes driving to it, depending on both
recovery timing and task restrictions (for review, see
Thomas, Lee & Hughes, 2016). For example, whereas
perceived familiarity with items can increase the FOK
before the recall phase, related information accessibility has
a major role when recalling is not successful (Koriat &
Levy-Sadot, 2001). These findings support the hypothesis
that the FOK mechanism is not an encapsulated directaccess module (Hart, 1965), but the result from multiple
inferential processes, working with information derived
from cues previously or simultaneously generated along
with the recall process (Thomas et al., 2016).
Supporting this hypothesis, Costermans, Lories and
Ansay, (1992, exp. 2) explore several cues related to the
magnitude of FOK judgments. In particular, they find that
confidence is a better predictor of answers accuracy than
FOK. Interestingly, both question familiarity and the
estimated amount of people knowing the correct answer
were positively associated with the FOK magnitude. In the
same vein, De Carvalho and Yuzawa (2001) report that the
FOK magnitude in college students with low levels of
metacognitive ability increases when they are provided with
information about fictitious students having high
performances in a similar task and, correspondingly,
diminishes it when these fictitious performances were
presented as low. These results are compatible with the Self
Consistency Model of Subjective Confidence (SCM; Koriat,
2012), which postulates that correlation between confidence
and accuracy in FOK judgments is positive when people
agree on the correct answer. In contrast, the confidenceaccuracy correlation is negative when there is a similar level
of consensus about an answer that is ultimately wrong. Once
again, these results confirm that FOK is not directly
computed, but inferred from internal cues such as
familiarity, processing fluency, and the perceived
distribution of knowledge in the population.
Although the effect of social desirability of knowing the
correct answer has not been directly tested on the FOK
paradigm, there are reasons to think it might well be an
informative cue about how likely a content in memory is to
be recalled (Gruneberg, Monks & Sykes, 1977). In a related
area of research, Soderstrom and McCabe (2011) found that

2074

college students judge that they will be more able to learn
items whose successful recall is better rewarded in the
experimental setting. In the same vein, the predicted grades
of college students in a course exam are biased by their
desired level of performance (Serra & Demarree, 2016).
On the other hand, though experimental paradigms of
FOK differ from IOED in that they had used pieces of nonexplanatory knowledge (e.g., historical events, dates, names,
places, etc.), this fact does not rule out the possibility that
both IOED and FOK engage analogous or common
metacognitive mechanisms. If that is the case, factors
related to the FOK magnitude might be responsible of
differences in the IOED magnitude between topics and
domains. Examining the influence of inferential cues such
as social desirability on the IOED will allow us to identify
the conditions that lead to the overestimation of the
explanatory knowledge about a certain topic. In turn, this
information would be useful in creating cognitive strategies
to help people to re-calibrate their understanding and
monitoring their own learning processes of specific contents
in more accurate and effective ways (Dunlosky & Thiede,
2013). In this context, the aim of this study is to determine
whether social desirability of knowledge is used by
participants as an informative cue when they are assessing
their understanding of mechanisms in different domains of
explanatory knowledge.

perceived social desirability of knowledge about 21 topics
(seven in each domain). Specifically, they reported how
embarrassed they would feel if they did not have a good
understanding on each topic in a 7-point scale, ranging from
1 (“If someone asked me to explain this topic and I had a
poor understanding of that item, I would not feel
embarrassed at all”) to 7 (“If someone asked me to explain
this topic and I had a poor understanding of that item, I
would feel very embarrassed”). Six items -the two topics
showing greater difference in the desirability scale within
each domain- were selected for the main study (see Table
1).
Table 1: Means of social desirability of each topic in the
preliminary study
95% CI
M

SE

Historical Long duration
of the
Colombian
armed conflict

5.02a

.135

4.76

5.29

Creation of
the FARC-EP
guerilla

4.58b

.132

4.32

4.84

Economic Why inflation
rises in
Colombia

4.37b

.133

4.11

4.63

How the stock
market works

3.65c

.128

3.39

3.90

How a fishing
rod works

3.40c

.151

3.10

3.70

How a jet
engine works

2.43d

.130

2.18

2.69

Domain

Method
The experiment has two goals: First, we intend to establish
whether social desirability of knowledge about a specific
topic predicts the IOED magnitude. Second, we want to
know whether the relationship between IOED magnitude
and social desirability differs among explanatory domains
(e.g., historical, economic, and devices).

Devices

Participants
In this study participated one hundred and eighty-four
students from a large research university (88 women)
attending different undergraduate programs, with ages
ranging from 18 to 42 years (M = 20.7, SD = 2.04). Most of
them received academic extra-credit for their participation
in this study.

Design
A mixed experimental design, 3x2x2, was used, with
explanatory domain (historical, economic and devices) as
the between-subjects factor, and social desirability of topics
(high and low), and pre-post measures as within-subjects
factors. The dependent variable was the IOED magnitude,
measured as the rating of understanding of each topic.

Materials and Procedure
The same procedure used by Rozenblit and Keil (2002,
study 11) was used to select high and low desirability topics
for each domain. In a preliminary study, one hundred and
ninety-four participants (117 women) evaluated the

Topic

Lower Upper
bound bound

Note: M = mean; SE = standard error; CI = Confidence
interval; Means marked with different letters differed
significantly from each other (p < .01)
In an isolated and noise-free room, participants did the
experimental task at their own pace in individual cubicles.
For task presentation and response recording, the Qualtrics
web-based survey software was used. During the session, it
was verified that participants did not check other websites.
After registering their demographic information,
participants completed an instructional manipulation check
(Oppenheimer, Meyvis & Davidenko, 2009) to ensure the
careful reading of the instructions. The following phases
were aligned with the IOED experimental paradigm:
initially, participants evaluated their knowledge about
twelve topics (six of which were not part of the design),
using a 7-point scale, with 1 meaning “vague or poor
understanding” and 7 “detailed and fine-grained

2075

understanding”. The instructions to use this rating scale
were adapted from Rozenblit and Keil (2002) and Fernbach,
Rogers, et al. (2013). Next, participants were randomly
assigned to one of the three domains (historical, economic,
and devices), and they were asked to explain in a step-bystep way the causal mechanism of one of the object/topic in
this domain (explanation phase). In particular, they were
provided with the following instruction:
“We want to know your explanation of some topics. The
aim of this explanation is to show clearly how each step
causes the next one, placing them in a sequence from the
emergence of the causes until the moment when the
phenomenon occurs. In other words, try to tell a story as
complete as you can (with no plot holes) that might be
understood by anyone.”
When the explanation was completed, participants
evaluated again their understanding of the object/topic they
had previously explained (post-evaluation phase). The
sequence explanation-post evaluation was then repeated for
the second object/topic. The presentation order of high and
low desirability topics within each domain was randomly
assigned.

Table 2: Means of understanding in each domain
of knowledge by judgment timing.

Domain

Time

M (SE)

Historical

Pre
Post
Pre
Post
Pre
Post

4.20 (.182) **
3.35 (.171) **
2.90 (.182)
2.26 (.171)
3.16 (.185)
2.83 (.174)

Economic
Devices

95% CI
Lower
Upper
bound
bound
3.84
4.56
3.01
3.68
2.54
3.26
1.92
2.59
2.79
3.52
2.48
3.17

** p < .01

Results
A mixed ANOVA was conducted as the main analysis, with
judgment timing (pre and post explanation) and perceived
social desirability of knowledge on the topic (high and low)
as within-subject factors, and both domain of knowledge
and presentation order as the between-subjects factors. The
dependent variable was the rating in the 7-point
understanding scale.
Replicating the IOED phenomenon, a main effect of
evaluation time was found. Ratings of understanding before
the elaboration of explanations (M = 3.42, SE = .105) were
higher than those produced after explanations (M = 2.81,
SE= .10), F (1, 178) = 52.43, p < .001, η2p = .23.
Additionally, there was a significant interaction between
judgment timing and domain of knowledge, F (2, 178) =
3.33, p < .05, η2p = .03. Post hoc analysis (Tukey’s HSD)
revealed that the decrease of understanding ratings was
higher for the historical domain, p <.01 (see Table 2).
Additionally, social desirability of knowledge interacted
with judgment timing, F (2, 178) = 56.27, p < .001, η2p=.24.
In particular, it was found a decrease on understanding
ratings between judgments before and after the elaboration
of explanations, only for high desirability topics (see Figure
1).
It was also found a marginally significant three-way
interaction between judgment timing, social desirability and
domain of knowledge, F (2, 178) = 3.06, p = .049, η2p = .03.
Specifically, the reduction of understanding after generating
explanations in low social desirability topics is slightly
greater in the historical domain (why FARC-EP guerrilla
was created), than both in devices (how a jet engine works)
and economic topics (how stock markets work; see Figures
2 and 3).

Figure 1. Means of understanding in high and low social
desirability topics by judgment timing. Bars represent 95%
confidence intervals.

Figure 2. Means of understanding in each domain on high
social desirability topics) by judgment timing. Bars
represent 95% confidence intervals.

2076

Figure 3. Means of understanding in each domain on low
social desirability topics by judgment timing. Bars represent
95% confidence intervals.
Finally, there was a robust and unexpected three-way
interaction between judgment timing, social desirability, and
topic order, F (2, 178) = 31.03, p < .001, η2p = .14.
Particularly, when low social desirability topics were
evaluated first, the understanding ratings for the second
(high desirability) topic showed a lower IOED (Mpre = 3.85,
SE=.186; Mpost = 3.05, SE=.171) than when high desirability
topics were evaluated first (Mpre= 4.35, SE=.187; Mpost=2.68,
SE=.172)

Discussion
In the present study, we examined the relationship between
IOED magnitude and social desirability of knowledge about
specific topics in three different domains. Our results show
that people overestimate their knowledge about causal
mechanisms related to physical devices, as well as to
economic and historical phenomena. Furthermore, the IOED
seems to be stronger in the historical domain and that
difference might be related to the higher social desirability
of this domain.
Within each domain, the IOED was exhibited for the
highly desirable but not for the less desirable topics. This
finding confirms that perceived social desirability of
knowledge is a relevant cue in the processes of knowledge
self-assessment, as it is suggested by previous research on
metamemory judgments. It is possible however that other
factors like familiarity, accessibility or perceived
distribution of information about topics play a role
moderating the IOED effect. This could explain, for
instance, why the initial understanding of unfamiliar and
non-accessible topics (like the low desirability topic in the
domain of devices) could be underrated rather than
overrated. In this vein, future studies should separate the
effect of social desirability from that of potential confounds
as far as possible. Even if the influence of other informative
cues is demonstrated, it would support the idea that the
IOED is not only a consequence of the coarseness of
intuitive theories (Rozenblit & Keil, 2002), but also a by-

product of the inferential nature of metacognitive
mechanisms. In other words, people overestimate their
ability to explain objects and phenomena because they use
multiple cues to assess how well they know them (including
social desirability of that knowledge), and not only because
they confuse their skeletal understanding with full-detailed
representations of mechanistic knowledge.
Fernbach, Rogers, et al. (2013) found that the IOED
magnitude correlated positively with the moderation of
extreme political attitudes on controversial issues.
Accordingly, if the social desirability of knowledge about a
political issue enhances the related IOED, it is possible that
extreme attitudes about more desirable topics to be also
more likely to be moderated after trying to explain them.
However, if an individual holds an extreme position about a
socially relevant topic (e.g., abortion, gay marriage, gun
control, etc.) and this position is relevant to his or her
identity, previous evidence suggests that he or she will
engage in a form of ideologically motivated cognition,
making the related attitude more resistant to change (Kahan
2013). Eventually, this motivational bias could affect the
metacognitive processes involved on the IOED. Thus, in
some cases, social desirability of knowledge and motivated
cognition could influence the IOED magnitude in opposed
directions, depending on the personal relevance of topics
related to extreme political attitudes. Testing empirically
this potential interaction would shed light on the
motivational mechanisms involved in the self-assessment of
explanatory knowledge. This is important not only in
theoretical terms, but also in applied situations like the
decision making on complex policies in core political
moments (e.g., Brexit referendum or Colombia’s peace
plebiscite).
Finding that highly desirable knowledge about relevant
topics is more likely to be overestimated is not encouraging
for deliberative democracies. However, our results suggest
that asking participants to explain less desirable topics first
can make them less willing to re-calibrate their initial
ratings of knowledge about highly desirable topics. Further
studies manipulating social desirability of topics betweenrather than within-subjects- would be useful to determine
whether previous exposure to low IOED magnitudes can
improve the accuracy of understanding estimation about
socially desirable topics.
Our purpose in this paper is to bring together the FOK
and IOED literatures in order to identify social desirability
as an inferential cue in the process of understanding selfassessment. Exploring other interactions between cognitive,
motivational and pragmatic factors in metacognitive
processes can provide us with a more comprehensive picture
of how we know that we know. Although social desirability
cannot be randomly assigned, this study shows how it
relates to the IEOD in natural settings. Separating social
desirability from other factors might be impossible in
natural settings and non-ecological in experimental ones. To
give an extreme example, separating social desirability from
social relevance be done if the former depends intrinsically

2077

of the latter. So we consider that the manipulation here
exposed is enough for to establish the relationship between
both variables. Further experimental research is required to
check if the relationship stands in experimental
environments.

Acknowledgments
Christian Gaviria was funded by the National Doctoral
Programs Scholarship 647 from the Colombian
Administrative Department of Science, Technology, and
Innovation (COLCIENCIAS). We thank Daniela Bermúdez
and Camila Garzón for their help on the data collection
process.

References
Alba, J. W., & Hutchinson, J. W. (2000). Knowledge
calibration: What consumers know and what they think
they know. Journal of Consumer Research, 27, 123-156.
Alter, A. L., Oppenheimer, D. M., & Zemla, J. C. (2010).
Missing the trees for the forest: A construal level account
of the illusion of explanatory depth. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 99(3), 436-451.
Atir, S., Rosenzweig, E., & Dunning, D. (2015). When
knowledge knows no bounds: Self-perceived expertise
predicts claims of impossible knowledge. Psychological
Science, 26(8), 1295-1303.
Costermans, J., Lories, G. & Ansay, C. (1992). Confidence
level and feeling of knowing in question answering: The
weight of inferential processes. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18(1),
142–150.
De Carvalho Filho, M. K., & Yuzawa, M. (2001). The effect
of social influences and general metacognitive knowledge
on metamemory judgments. Contemporary Educational
Psychology, 26, 571-587.
Dunlosky, J., & Thiede, K. W. (2013). Four cornerstones of
calibration research: Why understanding, students’
judgments can improve their achievement. Learning and
Instruction, 24, 58-61.
Fernbach, P. M., Rogers, T., Fox, C. R., & Sloman, S. A.
(2013). Political extremism is supported by an illusion of
understanding. Psychological Science, 24(6), 939-946.
Fernbach, P. M., Sloman, S. A., St. Louis, R., & Shube, J.
N. (2013). Explanation fiends and foes: How mechanistic
detail determines understanding and preference. Journal
of Consumer Research, 39(5), 1115-1131.
Fisher, M., & Keil, F. C. (2014). The illusion of argument
justification. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 143(1), 425–433.
Fisher, M., & Keil, F. C. (2015). The curse of expertise:
When more knowledge leads to miscalibrated explanatory
insight. Cognitive Science, 40(5), 1251-1269.
Gruneberg, M. M., Monks, J., & Sykes, R. N. (1977). Some
methodological problems with feeling of knowing studies.
Acta Psychologica, 41, 365-371.

Hart, J. T. (1965). Memory and the feeling-of-knowing
experience. Journal of Educational Psychology, 56, 208216.
Jaeger, A. J., & Wiley, J. (2015). Reading an analogy can
cause the illusion of comprehension. Discourse
Processes: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 52(5), 376-405.
Kahan, D. M. (2013). Ideology, motivation and cognitive
reflection: An experimental study. Judgement and
Decision Making, 8, 407-424
Koriat, A. (2012). The self-consistency model of subjective
confidence. Psychological Review, 119(1), 80-113.
Koriat, A., & Levy-Sadot, R. (2001). The combined
contributions of the cue-familiarity and the accessibility
heuristics to feelings of knowing. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27, 3453.
Koriat, A., Lichtenstein, S., & Fischhoff, B. (1980).
Reasons for confidence. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 6, 107-118.
Lawson, R. (2006). The science of cycology: Failures to
understand how everyday objects work. Memory &
Cognition, 34(8), 1667-1675.
Mills, C., & Keil, F. C. (2004). Knowing the limits of one’s
understanding: The development of an awareness of an
illusion of explanatory depth. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 87, 1-32.
Moore, D. A., & Healy, P. J. (2008). The trouble with
overconfidence. Psychological Review, 115(2), 502-517.
Oppenheimer, D. M., Meyvis T. & Davidenko N. (2009).
Instructional manipulation checks: Detecting satisficing to
increase statistical power. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 45(4), 867–872.
Rozenblit, L, & Keil, F. (2002). The misunderstood limits of
folk science: An illusion of explanatory depth. Cognitive
Science, 92, 1-42.
Serra, M. J., & DeMarree, K. G. (2016). Unskilled and
unaware in the classroom: College students’ desired
grades predict their biased grade predictions. Memory &
Cognition, 44(7), 1127-1137.
Soderstrom, N. C., & McCabe, D. P. (2011). The interplay
between value and relatedness as bases for metacognitive
monitoring and control: Evidence for agenda basedmonitoring. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 37, 1236-1242.
Thomas, A. K., Lee, M., & Hughes, G. (2016).
Introspecting the elusive: The uncanny state of the feeling
of knowing. In J. Dunlosky & S. K. Tauber (Eds.). The
Oxford Handbook of Metamemory. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Zell, E., & Krizan, Z. (2014). Do people have insight into
their abilities? A metasynthesis. Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 9(2), 111-125.
Zeveney, A. S., & Marsh, J. K. (2016). The illusion of
explanatory depth in a misunderstood field: The IOED in
mental disorders. Proceedings of the 38th Annual Meeting
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1020-1025). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.

2078

