Individual Differences in Transfer Mediated by Conceptual Priming
Jairo Navarrete (jnavarrete@ubiobio.cl)
Departamento de Ciencias Básicas, Universidad del Bío-Bío
Avda. Andrés Bello 720, Chillán, Chile
by participants during the second episode. Burns explained
these order effects as the formation of analogical mappings
during the first analogical episode which afterwards are
transferred to the second analogical episode.

Abstract
Research in analogical transfer suggests a simple type of
transfer that occurs due to the activation of key relational
concepts. Analysis on mental structured representations
indicates that this transfer may act differently depending upon
structural and perceptual features of the priming task. Two
hundred eight participants were assigned to three
experimental groups where they received a structure-priming,
tested once and afterwards they received a perceptual-priming
and tested again. As predicted, the effect of structure-priming
was found across conditions whereas the effect of perceptualpriming (a six-second animation) was detected only in
subjects with high levels of cognitive reflectiveness. These
individual differences are interpreted as evidence that only
highly reflective subjects were able to process visuospatial
cues in the animation and to extract their structural features,
hence activating relational concepts that influenced their
interpretations of subsequent tasks.
Keywords: Analogy, transfer, priming, cognitive reflection.

abc : abd :: xyz : ???
Figure 1: This analogical problem can be stated as "if you changed
abc to abd, how would you change xyz in the same way?”

However, Burns’ theoretical explanation cannot account
for the “piecemeal transfer” observed in the aforementioned
studies because the referred problems are not analogical
episodes: Within the biochemistry problem, there are no
analogical mappings that can be transferred to the genetics
problem. Similarly, no analogical mappings in the physical
system can be transferred to the domain of urban planning.
Hence, this study adopts the view that the activation of key
concepts (i.e. priming) helps subjects to spontaneously
interpret subsequent tasks according to the primed concept.
The research presented here contributes by identifying
differences among two kinds of priming referred here as
structural priming and perceptual priming. The former
being akin to the effect documented by Burns whereas the
latter more akin to the one observed by Day & Goldstone.
A proper outline of the method and predictions for this
study requires an analysis of the mental representations
underlying tasks such as the one in Figure 1. The next
section provides such analysis and proposes mechanisms by
which priming may affect the interpretation of these tasks.

Introduction
In the fields of problem solving and analogy research,
certain transfer effects have been linked to the low level
cognitive process of priming. In one study, subjects were
confronted with a biochemistry problem and learned that an
inhibitory enzyme decreased virus reproduction (Schunn &
Dunbar, 1996). The next day, the same subjects confronted
a genetics problem involving the concept of an inhibitory
gene. Although the two problems were not analogous,
subjects exposed to the key concept of inhibition in the first
session were more likely than control subjects to develop a
solution based on the concept of inhibition for the transfer
problem. Similarly, Day and Goldstone (2011) showed that
subjects familiarized with a simulated physical system of
motion were able to transfer the notion of “oscillatory
motion” to interpret transfer tasks posed in a context of
urban planning. This transfer arises not from a systematic
mapping from source to target, but it is due to the activation
of one or more key concepts (i.e. priming) and thus it has
been called a “piecemeal transfer” (Holyoak, 2012, p. 246).
Similar effects were observed by Burns (1996) when
researching transfer between episodes of analogical
reasoning. The experimental tasks involved four-term letterstring analogies such as the one depicted in Figure 1. Burns
had participants justify a given answer to a first analogy
prior to having them propose solutions to a second (nonanalogous) one. Half of the subjects had the two analogical
problems presented in the reversed order, and the differences
between the two groups on the relative frequencies of all
defensible solutions suggest order effects that are consistent
with the hypothesis that concepts activated during the first
episode effectively biased the solution strategies followed

Representations of Four-term Analogies
Four term analogy problems have the form A : B :: C : ?
where A and B comprise the source of the analogy whilst C
along with the unknown constitute the target of the analogy.
To solve this problem, one must interpret the source domain
and then look for a solution D such that the relations
between A and B can be mapped to the relations between C
and D. This kind of problems promote the identification of
the source’s structure (Indurkhya, 1989) and thus they will
be used in the present study to induce structural priming.
Additionally, these tasks will be used here as a manner
to measure the priming effect by assessing the interpretation
given to the source domain when solving these problems.
This is possible because four term analogies in letter-strings
(see Figure 2) can be represented by propositions (Burns,
1996). For example, the “append” concept may be
represented by the schema “+” in a way that “+(ab, cd)”
represents “abcd”. And certain notion of reflection can be
represented by the schema “mirror” so that “mirror(xyzw)”
becomes a representation of “wzyx”.
Relational schemas (such as the ones mentioned above)
play an important role in cognitive research because there is

841

evidence that they allow encoding structural knowledge as a
combination of schemas and primitive elements (Halford,
Bain, Maybery, & Andrews, 1998). For example, the string
“aab12aab” can be seen as emerging from two primitive
elements, namely “aab” and “12”. And the source domain of
the problem in Figure 2 (i.e. the first two terms) can be
represented as it is depicted at the top of Figure 3. In such
case, dominant theories of analogical mapping (Gentner,
1983; Holyoak & Thagard, 1989) predict that “cde12edc”
would be the response to this analogical problem.

rational, analytic thinking (Shah, Michal, Ibrahim, Rhodes,
& Rodriguez, 2017) whereas subjects with lower scores are
less sensitive to notice abstract aspects of a task (Toplak,
West, & Stanovich, 2011).
+(aab +(12, aab)) : +(aab +(12, mirror(aab))
+(cde +(12, cde)) : +(cde +(12, mirror(cde))
Figure 3: (Top) The domain “aab12aab : aab12baa” is represented as a
combination of schemas—“append” and “mirror”—and primitive
elements—“aab” and “12”. (Bottom) The answer “cde12edc” for the
problem in Figure 2 results from applying the same combination of
schemas to the target domain by mapping primitive elements.

aab12aab : aab12baa :: cde12cde : ????????
Figure 2: An ambiguous four term analogy problem

Summarizing, structural-tasks should force the generation of
structured representations, meaning that the effect of this
structural-priming on interpreting a subsequent episode is
independent of participant’s cognitive reflection. In contrast,
perceptual-tasks may evoke structured representations only
in subjects with high cognitive reflectiveness, meaning that
the effect of perceptual-priming on interpreting subsequent
episodes is expected to be effectively modulated by
participant’s cognitive reflection.

However, the structure depicted in Figure 3 is not the only
one that fits the problem, since the base analog could be
alternatively conceptualized by a “shift” schema, namely an
operation that takes the last letter and moves it to the first
position (e.g. shift(xyzw) = wxyz). Although shift and
mirror schemas represent different concepts, they sometimes
cannot be differentiated from their action on one particular
instance. As an illustration, notice that
mirror(aab) = shift(aab) = baa.
This makes the analogy in Figure 2 an ambiguous
problem: replacing all the “mirror” occurrences in Figure 3
by “shift” leads to another structured representation which
predicts a different answer, namely “cde12ecd”. This
provides a basis to detect the priming effect by assessing the
interpretation used by subjects in resolving the problem: if
they conceptualized it through the mirror schema, they
would prefer “cde12edc” as an answer, whereas if they used
the shift schema, they would rather prefer “cde12ecd”.
The present study tests the hypothesis that tasks requiring
the generation of structured representations can prime a
schema in a different manner than those tasks that do not
require such structured representations. Several studies from
analogical transfer research emphasize differences between
abstract, structural aspects of an episode and its perceptual,
concrete aspects. The evidence indicates that both aspects
influence analogical transfer but that structural aspects have
a greater impact than perceptual ones (Blanchette & Dunbar,
2000; Holyoak & Koh, 1987). Structural and perceptual
features of a priming task may influence transfer as follows:
a structure-based task (e.g. the one in Figure 2) might force
subjects to create structured representations, thus activating
the involved relational schemas. In contrast, a perceptionbased task (e.g. describing a dynamic visual stimulus) may
evoke structured representations only in specific individuals,
thus leaving open the possibility that schemas remain
deactivated while performing the task. More precisely, these
individuals may extract structural features from visuospatial
cues in the perception-based tasks thus activating relational
schemas that influence their interpretations of subsequent
tasks. To address for this possibility, the cognitive reflection
test (CRT, Frederick, 2005) was taken into account because
research in decision making has shown that people who
score highly on this test are more likely to engage in

Method
Participants
An initial sample of 231 undergraduate students at a Chilean
university (Age range 19-29 years, M = 20.6 SD = 2.1)
participated in the study for course credits. They were
randomly assigned to one of three conditions: two priming
conditions and one control condition.

Procedure and Design
Subjects in the “first mirror then shift” condition (M-S)
received a structure-priming favoring a “mirror” schema and
were presented with a first test. Afterwards they received a
perceptual-priming favoring the “shift” schema and were
presented with a second test. Similarly, subjects in the “first
shift then mirror” condition (S-M) received a structurepriming favoring the “shift” schema and were presented
with the first test. Afterwards they received a perceptualpriming favoring the “mirror” schema and were presented
with the second test. This design (detailed below) permits
assessing the desired effect of priming on interpreting a
transfer episode as follows: the effect of structure-priming
can be assessed by comparing the experimental groups in
terms of the scores collected in the first test. The effect of
perceptual-priming will be assessed through comparing the
change of scores (from the first test to the second test)
experienced by each experimental group. The no-priming
condition (NP) was taken as a control condition: subjects in
this condition were primed to activate different schemas
than the mirror and shift ones.
The experiment was administered in small groups at the
computer laboratory of the university, with each participant
working individually at her own pace. Participants took

842

conceptualized in terms of mirroring operations, and thus it
was expected participants to massively assign high scores to
fed432 (derivable via mirroring) and low scores to both
edf324 and 4def23 (not derivable via such operation). This
should lead to an increased activation of the mirror-schema
in relation to other possible transformations. Participants in
the S-M condition received the mno678: omn867 :: def234
: ??? problem, an analogy whose only acceptable solution
involved applying the "shift" operation that transform the
base structures “mno” and “678” into “omn” and “867”,
respectively. We expected participants in this group to
assign high scores to fde423, and low scores to both edf324
and 4def23 alternatives. Participants in the NP condition
received the human:lungs::fish:??? analogy, followed by
the alternatives "gills", "spine" and "fins". Given that this
analogy should be solved by evoking the relation "X
breathes through Y", we expected this control condition to
prime neither a mirroring nor a shifting operation. In these
and all subsequent analogical problems, three competing
solutions were presented in random order, with their
corresponding sliding bars preset to one.

between 15-20 min (M = 17.6; SD = 4.6) to complete the
experiment. The Qualtrics online platform was used to
build a questionnaire comprising the following phases: (1)
Introduction, (2) Structure priming, (3) Test 1, (4) Cognitive
Reflection Test, (5) Perceptual priming, (6) Test 2 and (7)
Test 3 (a hinted repetition of Test 2). As noted above, the
between-subjects manipulation was restricted to phases 2
and 5; the other phases were identical across conditions. A
detailed description of each phase is provided now.

Test 1 To assess whether the structure-priming received in
the previous phase can bias subsequent processing,
participants of all conditions received the ambiguous
problem aab12aab : baa12baa :: cde12cde : ???. This
analogy is solvable by applying either mirroring or shifting
operations (options edc12edc and ecd12ecd, respectively).
The remaining option (dec12dec) could not be derived from
the leftward term of the analogy, and thus was expected to
receive low scores regardless of condition.

Figure 4: Display for the acquisition of preference scores.

Introduction: In order to familiarize participants with 4-term
analogies, the computer screen presented the analogy
“Chile:Santiago::Argentina:???”, along with its meaning i.e.
“Chile is related to Santiago in the same way that Argentina
is related to which city?”. Three alternative answers were
given (Buenos Aires, Mendoza and Paris) each one coupled
with a sliding bar ranging from 1 to 100 (see Figure 4). A
text below explained that the three scores must add up to
100, and that they should reflect how good each answer
seemed to be. The options were preset at scores of 90, 9 and
1, respectively, with an accompanying text stating that while
Mendoza might be a plausible answer (score of 9) because
the fact that it belongs to Argentina parallels the fact that
Santiago belongs to Chile, a much better answer should be
Buenos Aires (score of 90), because its being the capital of
Argentina matches the "capital of" relation that holds
between Santiago and Chile. Finally, the instructional text
stated that Paris is not a good answer (score of 1) because it
is hard to find a relation between Paris and Argentina that
parallels some relation between Santiago and Chile.

Cognitive Reflection Test (CRT) This stage was presented
to participants as a problem solving section. It comprised
three algebra problems whose correct solution does not
require complex calculations, but requires participants to
suppress an "impulsive" solution that easily comes to mind 1.
As an example, the first item of the CRT consisted of the
following problem: "A bat and a ball cost $1.10. The bat costs
$1.00 more than the ball. How much does the ball cost?"
Participants had no time limit to answer the problems. No
particular criterion was taken into account in order to place
the CRT here (between the two main measurement stages).
After completing the third item, a yes/no question queried
participants about whether they were familiar with any of
the problems prior to the experimental session.
Perceptual priming: After being presented with a web
video player, participants were asked to run a (six seconds)

Structure-priming: This phase was intended to activate
particular schemas in participants' minds through a priming
method similar to the one presented in Burns (1996).
Participants in the M-S condition received the mno678 :
onm876 :: def234 : ??? problem. According to my
analysis, this problem allows only one acceptable solution
that involves projecting onto the rightward term of the
analogy the mirroring operations that transform the base
structures “mno” and “678” into “onm” and “876”,
respectively. The above transformations could only be

1

CRT is correlated with cognitive ability (Frederick, 2005;
Toplak, West, & Stanovich, 2011), but can still predict rational
thinking and performance on heuristics and biases tasks after
controlling for the variance associated with assessments of
intelligence, thinking dispositions, executive functions and
cognitive skills. Thus, people who score highly on the CRT can be
categorized as being more likely to engage in rational, analytic
thinking (Shah, Michal, Ibrahim, Rhodes, & Rodriguez, 2017).

843

video animation. They were told that they would be able to
watch the animation just once, and that they should pay
careful attention in order to answer one brief question about
the animation (answer limited to 200 characters). This
question was aimed to provide a control mechanism to
assess whether participants attended to the animation.
Depending on the condition, the animation displayed a
geometrical array whose dynamic movement was either
compatible with a mirroring operation (S-M), with a shift
operation (M-S) or unrelated to both (NP).
For the S-M condition, the animation showed how a
transparent panel containing three horizontally arranged card
figures performed a 180º turn along the middle vertical axis2.
As the left-to-right order of the figures changed from “club,
diamond, heart” to “heart, diamond, club”, this animation
was a visuospatial representation of the “mirror” operation.
Participants were asked about how the spatial configuration
of the club changed during the animation.
For the M-S condition, the animation showed a hammer
imparting a rightward motion to the leftmost of three
horizontally arranged geometrical figures; this rightward
motion was transmitted to the middle figure and ultimately
transmitted to the rightmost figure, making it slide-off
through a circular circuit that ended up relocating it in the
leftmost position3. As the left-to-right order of the figures
changed from “circle, square, rhombus” to “rhombus, circle,
square”, this animation was intended to convey a
visuospatial representation of the "shift" operation.
Participants were asked about how the spatial configuration
of the rhombus changed during the animation.
For the NP condition, the animation displayed a
transparent rectangle containing three horizontally-arranged
card figures (club, diamond and heart) which performed a
360º turn along its middle horizontal axis, thus leaving the
left-to-right ordering of the figures unchanged4. As this
rotational movement was unrelated to either the mirror or
shift operations, it was intended to avoid the activation of
the mental representations associated to the two crucial
operations. Subjects were asked how the spatial
configuration of the club changed during the animation.

minds while reading the analogy and/or evaluating the
presented alternatives.
Test 3 This is a control measure aimed to assess the extent
to which participants were potentially able to use the
information contained in the animation for solving the
problem presented in Test 2. Participants received the
analogy and the same solution options as in Test 2, but it
was preceded by an explicit hint, namely, to take into
account the animation for assigning scores to the presented
alternatives.

Data Analysis
Participants were classified as having low cognitive
reflection if their CRT score was equal to zero, and as
having high cognitive reflection in the other cases. Since
this study is based on priming effects, I discarded data from
23 participants (4 in the M-S condition and 19 in the S-M
condition) who failed to assign high scores (>= 80) to the
only defensible solution to the unambiguous problem of
phase 2, which was meant to operate as a structure-priming
for the following phase. A preliminary analysis of the data
revealed that a non-negligible proportion of participants in the
control condition assigned high scores to the “incorrect”
solution for the ambiguous problem presented during Test 1,
thus lessening preferences for the meaningful alternatives. To
prevent this unanticipated behavior of the NP group from
engendering spurious correlations, raw preference scores
were converted to normalized scores which reflect the
proportion of preference assigned to the mirror-alternative in
relation to the total amount of preference assigned to the two
competing and meaningful alternatives:
NSPM  100*

Pm
Pm  Ps

As an example, if a subject assigned a preference of 10 to
the mirror-alternative, 40 to the shift-alternative and 50 to
the incorrect alternative, its NSPM would be 20%, reflecting
that one fifth of the total amount of (the relevant) preference
was assigned to the mirror-alternative whereas the
remaining 80% was assigned to the shift-alternative. Due to
the ratio form of NSPM scores5, I report geometric means
(GM) obtained by computing arithmetic means on the
logarithm of NSPM scores (see Table 1).

Test 2 To assess whether the visuospatial animations
received during the previous phase altered subsequent
processing, participants of all conditions received the
ambiguous problem pq89pq : qp89qp :: xyz89xyz : ???.
According to our analysis, this analogy is solvable by
applying either mirroring or shifting operations (options
zyx89zyx and zxy89zxy, respectively). As in Test 1, the
remaining option (xyz89xyz) could not be derived from the
leftward term of the analogy, and thus was expected to
receive low scores regardless of condition. Upon assigning
scores to each of the presented alternatives, subjects were
asked to answer a yes/no question about whether the
watched video had spontaneously popped up into their

5
A possible drawback of normalized scores (such as the NSPM)
is that they are prone to overestimations. An extreme example can
illustrate this situation: If a participant assigned a preference of 2
to the mirror-alternative and 1 to the shift-alternative, her NSPM
score would be 66.6%, thus having a strong additive effect in
computing averages, even though the mirror-alternative was
ranked as negligible. This can be controlled by using geometric
means: when a score is a ratio such as Xi/Yi, the geometric mean is
the only mean with the property GM(Xi/Yi) =GM(Xi)/GM(Yi) i.e. it
"normalizes" the ranges being averaged in such a way that no range
dominates the weighting (Fleming & Wallace, 1986).

2

See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n2gRewFVssY
See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d56jnzPwBOU
4
See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ALris6B4yj4
3

844

effects emerged for condition F(2, 197) = 42.42, ηp2= .069,
p < .0001, but neither for cognitive reflection F(1,197) =
0.32, ηp2 < .001, p = .57 nor for session F(1,197) = 3.152,
ηp2= .0011, p = .077. As expected, the three-way interaction
was significant F(2, 197) = 3.06, ηp2 = .017, p = .045. To
further understand this interaction, planned comparisons in
each CRT-level were conducted. In the high-CRT group, the
change of mirror-preferences was in agreement with the
perceptual-priming: changes in the M-S condition (-7%)
were significantly different from the change experienced in
the S-M condition (23.2%), t(63.36) = -2.63, p = .011, d =
0.644. In contrast, the low-CRT group presented changes of
mirror-preferences incompatible with the perceptualpriming: changes in the M-S condition (14.3%) were not
significantly different from the changes in the S-M
condition (-2.7%), t(48.31) = .75, p = .46, d = .177. Data in
Table 1 suggests that the control group increased its
appraisal for the mirror-alternative from Test 1 to Test 2,
which indicates an inherent bias in the experimental design.
Still, the results are consistent with the expectations: within
participants with high reflectiveness, those who watched the
visuospatial representation of the shift-scheme tended to
lower their appraisal for the mirror-alternative and those
who watched the visuospatial representation of the mirrorscheme increased their appraisal for the mirror-alternative.
This is in line with the idea that participants with high
reflectiveness were able to process the visuospatial primingtask and extract its relational features thus activating a
schema that lessened the effect of the one activated in the
previous structure-priming phase. In contrast, participants
with low reflectiveness completed the visuospatial primingtask without noticing its structural features, thus not
activating any schema and leaving “untouched” the effect of
the schema activated in the structure-priming phase.
The differential effect of visuospatial representations
between the two experimental groups was not due to the
relative proportions of subjects consciously recalling the
animations: A chi-squared test showed that the low-CRT
and high-CRT groups had similar proportions of
participants stating to recall the video while solving the
analogy presented during Test 2 (21.5% vs. 28.3%,
respectively), χ2 (1, N = 146) = 0.58, p = .45. Only a minor
proportion of participants spontaneously recalled the
animation while solving the analogy in Test 2. This
evidences that such stimuli have primed—rather than
consciously induced—participants' appraisal of the mirroralternative since a lack of conscious awareness represents a
definitional feature of priming.
As cognitive reflection is correlated with general
intellectual abilities (Frederick, 2005), an alternative
interpretation for why participants with lower levels of
cognitive reflection were not sensible to perceptual priming
is that they are intrinsically less capable of translating the
perceptual content of the animations to the more structured
domain of letter-string problems. To assess this possibility,
preferences on the two experimental groups was
investigated when subjects were explicitly asked to recall

Table 1
NSPM scores at each stage of this study
Log of NSPM scores
Geometric Means GM Ratios
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Test 1 Test 2 Test 3 T2/T1T3/T1
Condition N
M
SD
M
SD
M SD
GM GM GM
Low CRT
NP
34
3,52 1,59 3,82 1,48 3,45 1,57 32,8 44,6 30,5 1,36 0,93
M-S
47
4,01 1,15 4,24 0,71
2,5 2,15 54,1 68,4 11,2 1,26 0,21
S-M
32
3,23 1,66 3,12 1,89 3,54 1,83 24,3 21,6 33,5 0,89 1,38
High CRT
NP
28
4,09 1,21 4,18 1,01 3,95 1,43 58,7 64,4 50,9 1,10 0,87
M-S
35
3,98 1,06 3,84 1,28 1,86 2,12 52,5 45,5 5,4 0,87 0,10
S-M
32
2,71 1,94 3,64 1,31 3,91 1,38 13,9 37,1 48,4 2,67 3,49

Table 1: The rows of the table report the (within-subjects) change of NSPM
scores across the three measurement phases. The effect of structural
priming is reported in the columns associated to Test 1. The column T2/T1
reports the ratio of geometric means associated to Test 1 and Test 2 and
suggests a between-groups change of preferences detected only in subjects
with higher levels of cognitive reflectiveness.

Results
Structure-priming A two-way ANOVA was conducted to
examine the effect of condition (S-M, M-S and NP) and
CRT level (low vs. high) on the NSPM scores collected
during Test 1. Main effects emerged for condition F(2, 203)
= 10.09, ηp2 = .085, p < .0001. Cognitive reflection does not
affect the interpretation of the problem in Test 1 since the
main effect of cognitive reflection, F(1,203) = .0001, ηp2 =
0, p = .99 and the interaction condition x cognitive
reflection, F(2,203) = 2.3, ηp2 = .022, p = .10 were not
statistically significant. Planned comparisons confirmed
differences on NSPM scores between the two competing
conditions in each one of the two CRT levels. For high-CRT
participants, the S-M condition produced significantly lower
NSPM scores (GM = 13.85) than those of the M-S condition
(GM = 52.41), t(47.16) = 3.31, p = .0017, d = .58. For lowCRT participants, the S-M condition produced significantly
lower NSPM scores (GM = 24.18) than the M-S condition
(GM = 54.09), t(50.99) = 2.32, p = .024, d = .19. As a base
line for comparison, NSPM scores of subjects in the control
condition (NP) are reported in Table 1. These results are
consistent with those obtained by Burns (1996), and extend
those findings by confirming that the effect of structuralpriming on interpreting subsequent analogical tasks takes
place regardless of whether participants exhibit (or not) a
natural propensity to engage in rational, analytic thinking.
Perceptual-priming In order to detect possible small
effects of perceptual priming, this experiment was designed
to measure the extent to which a perceptual-priming can
counteract the effect of a prior structure-priming. Therefore,
participants whose structure-priming favored the mirror
scheme later received a perceptual-priming favoring the
shifting schema, and vice-versa. The eventual effect of
perceptual-priming was assessed by analyzing the change of
NSPM scores within subjects (from Test 1 to Test 2) i.e. the
change of subject’s appraisal for the mirror-compatible
solution. To investigate this change of preferences at the
level of individual participants, a 3x2x2 ANOVA was
conducted with condition (S-M, M-S and NP) and cognitive
reflection (High vs. Low) as between-subjects factors and
session (Test 1 vs. Test 2) as a within-subjects factor. Main

845

the videos and use them into solving the analogy problem
presented in Test 3 (same problem presented in Test 2). A
two-way ANOVA was conducted to examine the effect of
condition (S-M, M-S and NP) and cognitive reflection (low
vs. high) on NSPM scores collected during Test 3. Main
effects emerged for condition F(2, 203) =17.88, ηp2 = .147,
p < .0001; but neither for cognitive reflection F(1,203) =
.08, ηp2 = 0, p = .77, nor for the condition x cognitive
reflection interaction, F(2,203) = 2.21, ηp2 = .021, p = .11. This
confirms that the uneven effect of perceptual animations as
a function of cognitive reflection did not originate in a
higher intrinsic ability of the higher cognitive reflection
group to understand the correspondences between the
visuospatial animation and the subsequent analogical activity.

aforementioned study reported that participants who have
taken advanced courses of mathematics were indeed more
affected by the compatibility between the two motions.
The results presented in this study are in line with claims
in literature suggesting that deep structural aspects are more
influential than perceptual-concrete aspects in achieving
learning and transfer. But although these results must be
viewed as preliminary given the specificity of this study’s
materials and scope, they open a question for further
research: Can this general dichotomy between perceptual
and structural aspects be linked to individual differences
between subjects?
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Universidad del Bío-Bío
grant 124009 3/D and FAPEI Fund. Thanks to Máximo
Trench for constructive and helpful discussions. And thanks
to various anonymous reviewers for useful comments.

General Discussion
Theoretical analyses suggest a simple mechanism whereby
transfer mediated by conceptual priming may occur, namely
the activation of relational schemas—organized in
structured representations—that influence the interpretation
of subsequent tasks. The fact that analogical transfer is
influenced both by structural and superficial features
suggests that transfer mediated by priming should be also
subjected to these two aspects: I expected differences of
priming effects among tasks requiring structured
representations and tasks requiring perceptual descriptions
of visuospatial animations. The results confirm this
hypothesis and link the disparity of effects to individual
differences of subjects: structure-priming effects were found
across conditions, whereas only those subjects with higher
propensity to engage in analytical thinking were sensitive to
perceptual-priming. These individual differences cannot be
accounted for by group differences in neither the proportion
of subjects consciously recalling the visual stimulus nor the
ability to understand the correspondences between the
visuospatial prime and the transfer task. Hence, the rationale
is that highly reflective subjects unconsciously extract
structural features from visuospatial cues thus activating
relational schemas that influence their interpretations of
subsequent tasks.
This seems to be consistent with certain evidence in
literature. For example, students were asked to solve
algebraic equations superimposed on a vertically oriented
grating continuously moving either to the left or to the right
(Goldstone, Landy, & Son, 2010). This was meant to
investigate the effect of these background motions on the
“spatial transposition strategy” e.g. moving the number 8
from the left to the right of the equality in 4*y+8 = 24. The
study found that the compatibility of the background motion
and the motion of numbers implicated by the spatial
transposition strategy affects accuracy. The analysis and
results presented here indicate that participants with higher
propensity to engage in analytical thinking should be more
affected by this compatibility because they are more likely
to activate a motion-schema from the background motion
which, depending on the condition, either conflicts or agrees
with the “spatial transposition strategy”. Interestingly, the

References
Blanchette, I., & Dunbar, K. (2000). How analogies are generated:
The roles of structural and superficial similarity. Memory &
Cognition, 28(1), 108–124.
Burns, B. D. (1996). Meta-analogical transfer: Transfer between
episodes of analogical reasoning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22(4), 1032.
Day, S. B., & Goldstone, R. L. (2011). Analogical transfer from a
simulated physical system. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 37(3).
Fleming, P. J., & Wallace, J. J. (1986). How not to lie with
statistics: the correct way to summarize benchmark results.
Communications of the ACM, 29(3), 218–221.
Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive reflection and decision making.
The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(4), 25–42.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical framework
for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7(2), 155–170.
Goldstone, R. L., Landy, D. H., & Son, J. Y. (2010). The
Education of Perception. Topics in Cognitive Science, 2(2),
265–284.
Halford, G. S., Bain, J. D., Maybery, M. T., & Andrews, G.
(1998). Induction of relational schemas: Common processes
in reasoning and complex learning. Cognitive Psychology,
35(3), 201–245.
Holyoak, K. J. (2012). Analogy and relational reasoning. The
Oxford Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning, 234–259.
Holyoak, K. J., & Koh, K. (1987). Surface and structural similarity
in analogical transfer. Memory & Cognition, 15(4), 332–340.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical mapping by
constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science,13(3),295–355.
Indurkhya, B. (1989). Modes of Analogy (pp. 217–230). London,
UK, UK: Springer-Verlag.
Schunn, C. D., & Dunbar, K. (1996). Priming, analogy, and
awareness in complex reasoning. Memory & Cognition,
24(3), 271–284.
Shah, P., Michal, A., Ibrahim, A., Rhodes, R., & Rodriguez, F.
(2017). What Makes Everyday Scientific Reasoning So
Challenging? In Psychology of Learning and Motivation
(Vol. 66, pp. 251–299). Elsevier.
Toplak, M. E., West, R. F., & Stanovich, K. E. (2011). The
Cognitive Reflection Test as a predictor of performance on
heuristics-and-biases tasks. Memory & Cognition, 39(7).

846

