Individual Differences in Spontaneous Analogical Problem-Solving: The Reflective
Mind Account
Slavi Todorov Slavov (s.t.slavov5@gmail.com)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology, Montevideo Str. 21, Sofia, Bulgaria

Penka Hristova (phristova@cogs.nbu.bg)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology, Montevideo Str. 21, Sofia, Bulgaria

Abstract
Analogical problem-solving involves transfer of knowledge
that has been obtained from a source analog and successfully
applying it in the solution of a structurally similar target
problem. What is usually found in the so-called hint/no-hint
paradigm is that spontaneous solution to a problem is hard to
achieve. This leaves the possibility for individual differences.
This study searched for and found a positive correlation to
exist between scores on the Cognitive Reflection Test and
spontaneously solved analogical problems which, although a
weak one, possibly accounts for the differences that exist
between people who need a hint to solve an analogical
problem, and people that do not need a hint.
Keywords: Analogy; Analogical problem-solving; Reflective
Mind thinking; Cognitive Reflection Test

Introduction
Imagine you are presented with a problem – an oil well is on
fire and is consuming large amounts of petrol every minute.
You know you have enough foam to put out the fire, but if
you use the one large hose that is available to shoot it at the
well, the fire can be extinguished, but the pressure would
also destroy the machines around the well that facilitate the
oil extraction, which would be an expensive cost. If you use
one of the several smaller hoses that are also available, the
machines will be spared, but the fire would not be
extinguished. How can this problem be resolved? Now,
imagine that without any external hint to relate the problem
to anything, you recall a story about an exhibition designer,
who has to figure out a way to illuminate a replica of a ship,
that is positioned in the center of transparent tank filled with
water and fish that are sensitive to light. If the designer
illuminates the replica with a powerful spotlight, the fish
will be disturbed, but if she uses a low-powered spotlight,
the ship would not be illuminated enough. So she decides to
use several low-powered spotlights to illuminate the replica
from several directions, which will not disturb the fish, but
the focused light would be enough to illuminate the ship. In
fact, these two superficially dissimilar problems are
analogous – the solution to the fire problem is to shoot the
foam using many small hoses from different directions so as
to spare the machines, but also to provide enough foam to
extinguish the fire. How many people would spontaneously
think of using the solution of the problem they know to
solve the analogous one? Probably not many, given that the
stories appear to be different on the surface. The successful

solver would probably need to be able to reflect on what he
is processing, to suppress the irrelevant information, and set
his priorities in accordance to the task at hand.
The paradigm that is used in studying analogical problemsolving requires a relevant analog known to the solver to be
available, as well as the target problem that is presented to
be sufficiently novel and challenging in order for the
analogy to be useful (Gick & Holyoak, 1983). The
framework that is generally required for the solver to
represent the analogical relationships involves first of all a
story describing the problem and how it is solved to be read
and understood. Once the information is represented, it can
be used to generate solution to the target problem by
mapping the similar relations of the two systems, employing
a top-down reasoning, forming expectations, and finally
using the mapping in order to generate the solution to the
target problem (Gick & Holyoak, 1980).

The “retrieval gap” in analogical problem-solving
In order to analogously solve the problem, participants must
retrieve the correct analogical relationships. The role of
retrieval is usually investigated in the so-called hint/no-hint
paradigm (Novick & Holyoak, 1991). By giving a hint to
the solver in one of the two experimental conditions, they
are informed that the two stories are connected and the
solution to one of them can be used in solving the other. If
they are not given a hint in the no-hint condition, solving the
target problem would indicate spontaneous analogical
transfer. What is usually found is that about 75% of the
people solve the Radiation problem1 using the correct
analogical solution when the appropriate analog story2 had
1

The Radiation problem is about a doctor who wishes to destroy
a tumor in his patient’s stomach using a ray. However, if he emits
the rays at high intensity, the tumor will be destroyed, but so will
be the healthy tissues of the patient. If a lower intensity is applied,
the tissues will not be affected, but neither will be the tumor. In
fact, the solution to this problem is analogous to the base AttackDispersion problem and requires the doctor to emit the rays at
lower intensity from different directions simultaneously in order
for the concentrated forces of the rays to destroy the tumor.
2 The Attack-Desperation Problem was considered to be the
superficially dissimilar analog of the Radiation Problem in Gick
and Holyoak’s study (1980). In that story a general wants to
capture a fortress located in the center of the country. The problem
arises when the general realizes he cannot send his troops all at
once due to the mined roads, but if he divides his troops to small

3191

been previously presented and they are given explicit hint to
use that story for the solution (Gick & Holyoak, 1983).
However, if no base story analog is presented, only less than
10% of the participants manage to find the correct solution.
What Gick and Holyoak (1983) have found when their
participants read the Attack-Dispersion story as a base,
disguised to be remembered for a subsequent recall, is that
30% of them arrived at the correct solution of the Radiation
problem presented subsequently, without receiving any hint,
i.e. spontaneously. This apparent difference in the difficulty
of mapping and retrieving the correspondences of an analog
are referred to as “retrieval gap” (Holyoak, 2012), and can
be considered in terms of at least 3 explanations:
Structural and surface similarity Problem-solving using
analogs is very much dependent on the level of structural
and surface similarity between the two stories in terms of
the level of facilitation of retrieval (Blanchette & Dunbar,
2000; Holyoak & Koh, 1987). More specifically, if the
superficial features of the base story are more similar to the
ones of the target problem, spontaneous retrieval of
convergence solution to the Radiation problem is as high as
90%, compared to about 20% if the surface features were
dissimilar (Blanchette & Dunbar, 2000). It is suggested that
because an analog that is from a remote domain, it does not
share many of the salient surface features of the target,
which might block the spontaneous retrieval of relevant
analogs, unless the solver is able to focus on aspects that are
causally related for the target (Holyoak & Koh, 1987).
The experimental paradigm Blanchette and Dunbar
(2000) show in their experiments the importance of the
experimental setting in which the participants reason
analogically. In the so-called “reception paradigm”, the
participants are given base and target problems and are
required to identify the relations between them. As
Blanchette and Dunbar’s (2000) experiment shows, this type
of setting constraints the participants and prompts them to
make more analogies based on superficial similarity. On the
other hand, an experimental setting organized in a
“production paradigm” involves participants being given the
target problem and being asked to generate possible source
stories, arguably resulting in analogy generation based on
deep structural features. Two of the experiments in
Blanchette and Dunbar’s study (2000) involved analogical
reasoning using production paradigm. The results clearly
indicated production of more analogies that were
structurally similar. Their third experiment used arguments
from the previous two experiments as stimuli, but the task
was arranged in a reception paradigm. The results showed
domination of retrieval of superficially similar stories. The
findings are explained in terms of different type of encoding
in the different types of tasks. In “reception paradigm”
tasks, the initial presentation of the problem is usually
guised as a comprehension evaluation or measuring recall,
units and attacks from many directions, they will not be affected
and the combined forces will capture the fortress.

which arguably causes the encoding to be more superficial.
Furthermore, the base representation building may not
necessarily include the relevant relations for the subsequent
analogical problem solving. The “production paradigm”, on
the other hand, involves the participants in deeper structural
encoding of the problem from the beginning, possibly
resulting in more structurally similar analogies.
Possibility for individual differences The previously
mentioned source Radiation problem, when learned in a
different context, enables problem solvers to spontaneously
produce the correct analogous solution to the superficially
similar Lightbulb problem for 81% of the participants even
several days after the presentation of the base problem
(Holyoak & Koh, 1987). The results for the spontaneously
solved problems are discussed in terms of the possible
demand characteristics of the task, or in other words that the
participants might suspect the two stories to somehow be
related due to them being present in the same experiment
(Gick and Holyoak, 1983). This might suggest the
possibility of individual differences to be present,
specifically that some people might be sensitive to events
occurring in the same context and interpret them as
connected. Day and Goldstone (2011) discuss the possibility
of individual differences in intelligence or the level of
engagement in the experiment to be responsible, at least to
some extent, for the difference between the transfer and the
reported understanding of the analogy itself. Another
possibility for individual differences in spontaneous
analogical problem solving can be drawn from the so called
Reflective Mind (Stanovich, 2012). According to the
Tripartite model (Stanovich, 2012), the Reflective Mind is
able to initiate the suppression of the initial response, due to
its higher cognitive level control, that is carried out by the
Algorithmic mind3. The Reflective mind is tested in the socalled typical performance situations, in which participants
solve tasks without overt instructions to maximize their
success. Spontaneous problem solving resembles a typical
performance situation, since participants in the no-hint
condition are not explicitly instructed to find and use the
analogy with previous problems. Moreover, the mechanisms
of Reflective mind such as cognitive decoupling operation,
allows a suppression of the initial response that is provided
by the Autonomous mind and creating a secondary
representation of the world that could be manipulated until
the correct solution is reached and then applied in reality.
Just like Day and Goldstone (2011) have argued that some
individual differences due to intelligence (i.e. Algorithmic
Mind) may explain the superior problem solving
performance of some individuals, we argue that differences
regarding the Reflective Mind can also be expected in
analogical problem solving. Indeed, spontaneous analogies
are especially interesting case for individual differences
3 Algorithmic mind can be associated to fluid intelligence
capacities. It is a Type 2 processing, which is typically linked to
situations that require an optimal performance and a correct answer
should be obtained (Stanovich, 2012).

3192

stemming from the Reflective mind. On the one hand, the
ability to create a secondary representation of the problem
that may hold and manipulate the base and target problems
seems to guarantee a successful analogical problem solving.
On the other hand, Holyoak (2012) has argued that the
difficulties which people experience in spontaneous
analogical problem solving in particular indicate that
analogical mapping requires a Type 2 processing.

Correlation between Reflective mind thinking
and spontaneous analogical problem solving
The main goal of this study is exploratory – given that not
much is known about individual differences in spontaneous
problem solving, especially with regard to the Reflective
mind, the aim would be to find a correlation between these
two variables. More specifically, possible individual
differences might be expected in the no-hint condition,
where spontaneous analogy-making depends on the correct
identification of the structural similarities in the two
problems, as well as the appropriate mapping, which might
be reasonable to expect from people with higher rational
dispositions who are arguably better at prioritizing goals and
performing well without overt instructions what exactly is
expected of them.

Method
Design
This is a correlational study, aiming to research whether a
positive correlation exists between scores on the Cognitive
Reflection Test and the analogical problems that are solved
spontaneously. For the purposes of the research, a reception
paradigm was used. The research has been approved by the
ethical commission at the New Bulgarian University.

Stimuli
Analogical stories The stimuli for the analogical problemsolving task consisted of six problems: three bases and three
targets. The problems were selected so that they can be
structurally identical, but superficially dissimilar.
• Red Adair & Aquarium problems
The first set of analogous stories consisted of the Red
Adair problem (Kurtz & Loewenstein, 2007) and the
Aquarium problem (Catrambone & Holyoak, 1989). The
former described a problem, in which an oil well that is
burning has to be extinguished. If a big hose is used to shoot
the foam into the well, the machines in the well that
facilitate petrol extraction will be destroyed, even though
the fire will be put out. But if one of the many smaller hoses
is used, the machines will be spared, but the fire will not be
extinguished. For the Aquarium problem, a replica of a ship
had to be illuminated for an exhibition, without disturbing
the fish swimming around it, which were sensitive to light.
If one powerful spotlight was used, the fish would be
disturbed and the replica illuminated, and if one less
powerful spotlight was used – the fish would not be

disturbed, but the replica would not be illuminated. The
solution for both problems involved “convergence of
forces”, or using small amounts of force from different
directions (small hoses to put out the fire and low-powered
spotlights to illuminate the ship). The Red Adair problem
was modified so as to obtain full structural similarity with
the Aquarium, by making the using of large force from one
direction causing damage to peripheral elements (machines
for petrol extraction in Red Adair and the fish in Aquarium).
• Garden and Marching band problems
The second set of stories were the Garden problem and
the Marching band problem (Novick & Holyoak, 1991).
These were mathematical problems, involving finding how
many plants a family can have in their garden, given that
they had chosen the exact number of plants, which could be
divided into 10, 4, and 5 kinds of plants, but there would be
space for 2 more plants. Only when they divide them in 6,
they fit in without remainder. The Marching band described
musicians marching in rows of 12, 8, and 3, but having one
musician march alone. Only when they march in rows of 5,
there is nobody left out. The successful solution procedure
for both problems is to find the lowest common multiple of
the given three divisors that leave a constant remainder, then
to generate multiples of that number, add the remainder to
each of them, and finally find from this set the number that
is divisible to the fourth number without a remainder.
• Orange and Tribe problems
The third pair of stories consisted of the story about the
sisters, who were quarreling because each of them wanted
one orange for herself. The problem was resolved when the
mother found out that one of the sisters wanted to use the
peel of one orange for baking, and the other wanted to eat
the fruit, so each of them took the respective part of the
whole orange (adapted from Fisher, Ury, & Patton, 2011).
An analog to this story was created, which was about two
clans from the same tribe, that have recently captured an
island, and each of the clans wants the whole island for
themselves. So the chief of the tribe steps in and finds out
that one of the clans wants the island for its territory, and the
other one wants it because the people on the island pertain
to their clan. The solution, then, is to divide the people from
the territory, so that each side can be satisfied.
Cognitive Reflection Test The extended version of
Cognitive Reflection Test (CRT) (Toplak, West &
Stanovich, 2014) was used as a measure of Reflective Mind.
CRT was introduced by Frederick (2005) and measures
cognitive reflection – a concept defined as “the ability or
disposition to resist reporting the first response that comes
to mind”. Toplak et al (2014) have expanded the CRT to a
total of seven questions in a study assessing people’s
tendency to process information miserly. Each of the seven
questions presented a problem, which had an intuitive, but
wrong answer immediately coming into mind, and requiring
the suppression of that answer and searching for the correct
one. For example, a problem describing that a bat and a ball
cost 1.10 dollars in total, and the bat costs a dollar more

3193

than the ball, asks how much the ball costs. An intuitive
answer would be 10 cents, but the correct one is 5 cents.

were randomly assigned to the base or target position, thus
any differences between the base and target task cannot
account for the observed faster solutions of the target
compared to the base problem. Moreover, only response
time for correctly solved, but not for unsolved targets was
faster than the base solution time: F (1,66)=38.32, p=.00
(Figure 1). Solved targets were worked out faster than
solved base problems. Unsolved problems took up
approximately the same amount of time, irrespective of the
base-target role they have played in a given analogy.
Therefore, analogy, rather than task order, may explain the
obtained facilitation in solving the target tasks.

Participants
A total of sixty-seven participants took part in the study
(18 males). All of them were native Bulgarians. They
participated either for partial fulfilment for a course credit,
or voluntarily. Forty-seven of the participants were students
at the New Bulgarian University. The participants’ age
ranged from 18 to 53 years (M = 25.18, SD = 8.21).

Procedure
The procedure consisted in participants signing an
informed written consent, and solving all six problems and
the CRT individually in a single 45-50 minute session. First,
the three base problems were presented one by one, with
participants having 5 minutes to solve for each problem. If
the participants failed to produce the correct solution, it was
given to them. Then the CRT was given, with 10 minutes
time to complete it. Finally, the three remaining target
problems were given one at a time.
In order to control which of the target problems were
solved spontaneously, the participants were given 5 minutes
per problem, and if they did not produce the correct
solution, they were given a hint to use one of the previously
solved problems and additional 2 minutes were allowed. If
again there was no correct solution, a second hint was given
to use the specific analogous base problem to solve the
current one, again allowing for additional 2 minutes.
The analogical problems were chosen in such a way, so as
to be symmetrical, as well as structurally identical. Due to
this fact, the analogical pairs were alternated with respect to
being either a base or a target, with the Red Adair problem
appearing half of the times as base, half of the times as
target. The same applied for all six problems. The
presentation of the base and target stories was balanced,
with each of the stories appearing first, second or third as a
base and first, second and third as a target equal amount of
times. The full randomization resulted in 72 possible
presentations of the problems without repetition of the
presentation order. Thus, each participant was given a
unique sequence of problems arrangements, with 67 out of
the 72 randomized possibilities being used in the study.

Figure 1: Time needed to solve successfully or not a base
and a target problem (in seconds).
Huge differences in both response time and accuracy,
however, were observed between the individual problem
pairs which share analogous relational structure. The
analogical pair Garden and Marching band (noted G and M,
respectively) were correctly solved as bases for average of
183.43 sec (s = 44.17), which took the longest amount time
to be solved out of the three pairs. The Orange and Tribe
pair (noted O and T, respectively) took 70.52 sec on average
(s = 73.22) or was fastest of the three problems to be
successfully solved as bases, and the Red Adair and
Aquarium problems (noted R and A, respectively) took on
average 146.00 sec (s = 90.25) to be solved correctly as
bases (see Figure 2).

Results and discussion
Analysis of the analogical problems
Several types of analyses were made on the obtained data.
Firstly, the time to solve the base and target problems was
calculated. The mean time to solve all three base problems
was 198.29 sec (s4=115.44), whereas the target problems
were solved faster for an average of 161.88 sec (s=129.77).
That difference was significant (t(66)=3.76, p=.00),
indicating that some facilitation due to analogical transfer
may have taken place. The tasks in each analogical pair
4

Standard deviation in seconds.

Figure 2: Time needed to correctly solve a problem from
an analogical pair as a base and as a target (in seconds).
One-Way ANOVA yielded statistically significant
difference with respect time to solve the bases (F (2, 104) =
14.40, p =.00). Specifically, according to a Fisher LSD post

3194

hoc test the pair O and T was solved correctly faster as a
base compared to G and M (p =.001) and faster than R and
A (p =.00). The pair G and M did not differ from R and A (p
> .05). Target problems from the analogical pair G and M
were solved for 187.75 sec (s = 72.62), which again was the
longest amount of time out of the three problems. O and T
were correctly solved for 67.18 (s = 91.88), and R and A –
for 62.18 sec (s = 64.43) (see Figure 2). There was again
significant difference between time needed to solve targets
from each pair (F (2, 117) = 4.82, p= .01). Fisher LSD posthoc test showed that the G-M pair was correctly solved as a
target for the slowest amount of time compared to O-T (p
=.004) and R-A (p =.002), while there was no significant
difference between R-A and O-T pairs (p > .05).
Additionally, the number of spontaneously solved target
analogies was calculated for each pair. The analogical pair
G-M was solved spontaneously only 4 times, or by 5.97% of
the people. For the pair O-T the number was 55 (82.01%),
and for the pair R-A it was 61 (91.05%) (Figure 3). The
difference between the number of spontaneously solved
problems from the pair G-M was significant from that of OT (χ² (1, N=59) = 78.76, p=.00) and also from R-A (χ² (1,
N=65) = 97.07, p = .00). The difference between O-T and
R-A pairs was not significant. Likewise, participants
reported less often that they have been aware of the analogy
between the problems in the G-M, compared to the other
analogous pairs: F (2, 200) = 39.72, p=.00.

Holyoak, 1991), it could be reasonable to expect that for this
specific analogical pair, some additional factors might have
operated by impeding the transfer. The retrieval gap
(Holyoak, 2012), however, seems to be wider for some
analogous problems, but not for others, probably depending
on the specific expertise of participants, as suggested in our
study, where most participants had background in
humanities5 and failed to solve the G-M problem that
requires mathematical skills (Novick & Holyoak, 1991).

Correlational analyses: who solves problems by
means of spontaneous analogies
A correlational analysis was conducted between the
variables scores on the Cognitive Reflection Test and the
number of analogical problems that were solved correctly
without an explicit hint (i.e. spontaneously). Importantly, a
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was applied to test for normality
the two variables. Both of them were not normally
distributed (p = .000), which required utilizing a nonparametric correlational test, such as Spearman’s rank order
correlation. There was a significant positive correlation
obtained between the two variables (rs (67) = .25, p = .045).
The results indicate that a high score on the CRT tends to go
together with higher number of spontaneously solved
analogical problems. A scatterplot summarizes the results
(Figure 4).

Correlation Chart
4
3
2
1
0

Figure 3. Relative frequency of solved target problems for
each analogical pair
In sum, the superficially dissimilar analogous problems
used in that study were quite different with respect to
solution time and accuracy. Some of the target problems
were solved faster and more accurately (i.e. O-T and R-A)
than others (i.e. G-M). The target problem itself can hardly
explain that discrepancy, since both tasks in each pair were
randomly assigned as base and target for each participant.
The order of the three base and the three target tasks was
also randomized across participants.
In this specific case, the G-M pair consisted of mathematical
problems that, although analogical, might be impeding the
correct mapping or retrieval that is necessary for correct
solution just because of the difficulty of the problem itself.
Given that mathematical expertise has been found to be an
important predictor of analogical transfer (Novick &

2

4

6

8

Figure 4: Scatter plot with jitter, showing the correlation
between scores on CRT and spontaneously solved
analogical problems. The x-axis represents the score on
CRT, the y-axis represents the number of spontaneously
solved analogical target problems.

Discussion
This study demonstrates that a positive correlation exists
between the score on the Cognitive Reflection Test and the
number of analogical problems that are solved
spontaneously. Given the rationale of the hypothesis, this
result can be explained in terms of individual differences
with respect to the Reflective mind (Stanovich, 2012) at
least partially accounting for the analogical problems that

3195

5

64 out of the 67; 3 participants had studied technical specialties

are solved without a hint. Although the correlation is weak,
the results indicate that the goals and hypothesis of the
research are in the right direction.
Generally, what was found in this investigation was that
people solve different analogical problems with a different
amount of speed and also different degree of success. The
finding that the analogical pair G – M was solved less than
the other ones and for more amount of time might point to
the idea that the nature of the problems themselves might
play a role in how easy or how fast the solution is extracted
from the base problem in order to be applied to the target
one. A possible explanation remains to be looked for in
expertise in solving mathematical problems (Novick &
Holyoak, 1991) In addition, the nature of the CRT itself
could be questioned as to the extent it requires a certain
level of expertise. Thomson and Oppenheimer (2016) have
developed an alternate version of the CRT which addresses
the criticisms to the original form – that it relies on
mathematical sophistication to produce the correct answer.
The weak correlation that was found between scores on
CRT and the spontaneously solved analogical problems
needs to be compared to other similar correlations of CRT
and cognitive abilities. For example, Toplak, West, &
Stanovich (2011) show significant correlations to exist
between CRT and syllogistic reasoning tasks (r = .36),
heuristic-and-biases tasks (r = .42), executive functions
measures (.17 to .34) and thinking dispositions measures
(.18 to .19). Thus, the current study seems comparable to
others with respect the strength of association between CRT
and tasks involving reasoning measurement.
It should be noted, however, that correlations between CRT
and cognitive ability measured by Wechsler Abbreviated
Scale of Intelligence has been found to exist (r = .32),
suggesting some overlap between the two (Toplak et al.,
2011). A possibility to search for a partial explanation of
spontaneously solved analogical problems in the cognitive
ability of intelligence, thus, cannot be fully overruled.

Conclusion
The reported correlation between the Reflective Mind
measure and spontaneous analogical problem solving adds a
new explanation for the retrieval gap in analogical
reminding. Low superficial similarity and non-compatible
relational structures between the base and target problems
may explain the difficulties that participants robustly
demonstrate in psychological labs when analogical problem
solving abilities are tested by the means of the reception
paradigm. Nevertheless, generally 20% of participants find
the analogous solution (Holyoak, 2012), despite the
mentioned difficulties that the reception paradigm seems to
impose on them. The reported correlation indicates that
among the key abilities within the profile of the successful
problem solver is the reflective reasoning. It presumably
enables the motivated search for possible connections
between the tasks, and possibly a re-representation of the
relevant relations, if needed for the purposes of the
analogical problem solving. Therefore, spontaneous analogy

making may benefit from the reflective reasoning, since it
most probably transforms the task into an explicit task for
searching the analogy, or at least boosts the motivation to
cope with the task.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported financially by the European
Office for Aerospace Research and Development under
grant FA9550-15-1-0510 (Anticipating Future by AnalogyMaking).

References
Blanchette, I., & Dunbar, K. (2000). How analogies are
generated: The roles of structural and superficial
similarity. Memory & cognition, 28(1), 1-33.
Catrambone, R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1989). Overcoming
contextual limitations on problem-solving transfer. JEP:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15(6), 1147-1156.
Day, S. B., & Goldstone, R. L. (2011). Analogical transfer
from a simulated physical system. JEP: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 37(3), 551-567.
Fisher, R., Ury, W. L., & Patton, B. (2011). Getting to yes:
Negotiating agreement without giving in. Penguin.
Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive reflection and decision
making. Journal of Economic perspectives, 25-42.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical problem
solving. Cognitive psychology, 12(3), 306-355.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction
and analogical transfer. Cognitive psychology, 15(1), 1-38.
Holyoak, K.J. (2012). Analogy and relational reasoning. The
Oxford handbook of thinking and reasoning, 234-259.
Holyoak, K. J., & Koh, K. (1987). Surface and structural
similarity in analogical transfer. Memory& Cognition, 15(4),
332-340.
Kurtz, K. J., & Loewenstein, J. (2007). Converging on a
new role for analogy in problem solving and retrieval: When
two problems are better than one. Memory & Cognition,
35(2), 334-341.
Novick, L. R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1991). Mathematical
problem solving by analogy. JEP: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 17(3), 398-415.
Stanovich, K. E. (2012). On the distinction between
rationality and intelligence: Implications for understanding
individual differences in reasoning. The Oxford handbook of
thinking and reasoning, 343-365.
Thomson, K. S., & Oppenheimer, D. M. (2016).
Investigating an alternate form of the cognitive reflection
test. Judgment and Decision Making, 11(1), 99-113.
Toplak, M. E., West, R. F., & Stanovich, K. E. (2011). The
Cognitive Reflection Test as a predictor of performance on
heuristics-and-biases tasks. Memory & Cognition, 39(7),
1275-1289.
Toplak, M. E., West, R. F., & Stanovich, K. E. (2014).
Assessing miserly information processing: An expansion of
the Cognitive Reflection Test. Thinking & Reasoning, 20(2),
147-168.

3196

