Inductive reasoning influences perception of interspecies disease transmission risk
Micah B. Goldwater (micah.goldwater@sydney.edu.au)
School of Psychology
University of Sydney

Molly E. Ireland (molly.ireland@ttu.edu)
Department of Psychological Sciences
Texas Tech University

Nick Gaylord (nlgaylord@gmail.com)
Independent researcher
Oakland, CA USA

Jason Van Allen (jason.vanallen@ttu.edu)
Department of Psychological Sciences
Texas Tech University

Tyler Davis (tyler.h.davis@ttu.edu)
Department of Psychological Sciences
Texas Tech University
Abstract
Zoonoses (diseases that enter the human population via animal
contact) are a major global health concern. Because of how
zoonoses emerge, understanding human reasoning about the
risk factors associated with animal contact is central to combating their spread. However, little is known about the factors
that influence perception of these risks. We present an inductive account of zoonosis risk perception, suggesting that it is
influenced by beliefs about the range of animals that are able to
transmit diseases to each other. In Study 1, we find that participants who endorse higher likelihoods of cross-species disease
transmission have stronger intention to report animal bites. In
Study 2, adapting real world descriptions of Ebola virus from
the WHO and CDC, we find that communications conveying
a broader range of animals as susceptible to a disease increase
intentions to report animal bites and decrease perceived safety
of wild game meat. These findings suggest that cognitive factors may be harnessed to modulate zoonosis risk perception
and combat emerging infectious diseases.
Keywords: Induction; categorization; risk perception; public
health; premise number; premise diversity

Introduction
Emerging infectious diseases are a major economic and public health concern. A majority of such diseases are of
zoonotic origin (i.e. come from animals, Jones et al., 2008),
with drivers including animal bites, consumption of wild
game meat, and contact with livestock (Daszak, Cunningham, & Hyatt, 2000). Human-animal interaction is central
to all these drivers, but little is known about how people reason about potential risks in such scenarios (Janes, Corbett,
Jones, & Trostle, 2012). Similarly, research on cognitive factors is largely absent from public health initiatives targeting
zoonoses, including interdisciplinary approaches such as One
Health (Heymann & Dar, 2014). The present work aims to
bridge this gap by examining cognitive principles that influence zoonosis risk perception and how they can be harnessed
to shape communications regarding disease transmission risk.

The literature on zoonoses lacks extensive research on the
role of human reasoning, though several recent studies have
examined factors that determine whether people will eat wild
game meat (Kamins et al., 2015) and report adverse animal
contact, such as bites, to a health professional. One particularly suggestive study (Bingham, Budke, & Slater, 2010)
found that survey respondents were more likely to report dog
bites if they knew that bats could transmit rabies to humans.
At first glance, this seems surprising – people’s inferences
about the risk associated with one species appear to be influenced by their knowledge of a completely different species.
The finding that knowlege about one animal can affect
beliefs about other animals may be partly accounted for
by two principles from the literature on inductive reasoning, namely premise number and premise diversity (Hayes,
Heit, & Swendsen, 2010; Osherson, Smith, Wilkie, Lopez,
& Shafir, 1990). According to the premise number principle,
people are more confident in inferences that apply to a large
number of category members (Li, Cao, Li, Li, & Deak, 2009;
McDonald, Samuels, & Rispoli, 1996), where for example a
property known to hold for both lions and giraffes will be
more likely to hold for rabbits as well. According to the
premise diversity principle, people find inferences sound to
the extent that they hold for a wider range of category members (Heit & Feeney, 2005; Lopez, 1995), where for example
a property known to hold for lions and giraffes is more likely
to generalize to rabbits, compared to one that holds for lions
and tigers. In terms of zoonosis risk perception, knowing that
both dogs and bats can transmit rabies may increase perceptions of human risk because they are often viewed as very
different members of the mammal category.
Although premise number and diversity are plausibly related to the previous observations surrounding bite reporting

2102

intentions, research on inductive reasoning has not been extended to many concrete domains such as work on risk perception in health or real-world decision making about health
behaviors. Similarly, while people’s judgments regarding
contagion have been studied in social and health psychology
research (Nemeroff, 1995), these studies have focused on affective and cultural factors as opposed to underlying cognitive
processes such as inductive reasoning.
In the present work, we test two specific hypotheses
from our theory that inductive reasoning principles influence
zoonosis risk perception. First, consistent with the aforementioned rabies study, individual differences in perceived
risk from animal contact should be associated with individual differences in beliefs about interspecies disease transmission. Second, perceptions of risk to humans should increase
as a result of being presented with communcations depicting
transmissibility amongst a wider range of species.

In the bite reporting section, participants were asked to
judge their likelihod of reporting bites from various target
animals to a health professional (of any type). Participants
judged likelihood of reporting for each animal using a slider
that could be adjusted in units of 1 from 0–100 and also
contained descriptive labels ranging from “Very Unlikely” to
“Very Likely”. Mammal and bird reporting were presented
in a random order on separate screens. Mammals included
dogs, skunks, monkeys, bats, and squirrels. Birds included
grackles, swans, robins, blue jays, and peacocks.
The species-to-species disease transmission beliefs section
employed the same sliding scales as the bite reporting section,
but participants were asked to rate the likelihood of betweenanimal disease transmission for a hypothetical new disease.
Each question took the following form:
Scientists discover that a new disease can infect the liver
tissue of [premise animal]. How likely is it that this
disease can infect the following animals?

Study 1
The goal of Study 1 was to examine whether perceived disease risk (measured by intentions to report animal bites) is associated with beliefs about interspecies disease transmission
likelihood. Based on the premise number principle, we hypothesized that individuals who endorse stronger likelihoods
of disease transmission between a number of different animal
species would be more likely to perceive human risks from
animal bites. To test this hypothesis, we conducted a survey
measuring intentions to report bites from common mammals
and birds along with judgments of interspecies disease transmission likelihood for a ficticious novel disease.
Method. Participants were 289 adults (55% men; mean age
= 33.6, SD = 10.2) who completed an online survey and were
recruited through the Mechanical Turk crowdsourcing platform. The survey was available to Mechanical Turk workers in the following countries where English is the primary
language: USA, Australia, Canada, Great Britain, Ireland,
New Zealand, and the Bahamas. The majority of participants
had undergraduate (48.8%) or advanced degrees (8.7%). The
sample was predominantly White (80.6%), with 5.9% Asian,
3.8% Black, 6.9% Hispanic, 1% Native American or Alaska
Native, and 1.7% other ethnicities. A majority of the sample
(73.4%) reported currently owning a pet. Participants were
compensated $2 for participation in the survey. Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants in the study,
no participants were excluded from the survey results, and all
protocols were approved by the Texas Tech University IRB.
Design. The study materials consisted of an electronic
survey containing sections on demographics, bite reporting
intentions, and species-to-species disease transmission beliefs. Demographics questions included sex, sexual orientation, ethnicity, education level, parents’ education level, language(s) spoken, and pet ownership.

The conclusion animals were listed on separate lines, each
with their own response slider. Premise animals included
bats, dogs, skunks, monkeys, grackles, blue jays, swans, and
peacocks. Conclusion animals included bats, dogs, skunks,
monkeys, squirrels, grackles, robins, blue jays, swans, and
peacocks. Fewer premise animals were used so that less time
would be required to complete the survey and to reduce participant attrition. Animals only appeared as conclusion categories when they were not the premise. Premises were presented in a random order on separate screens.
Results. Intentions to report bites were highly reliable
within person (mammals: Cronbach’s α = 0.86; birds α =
0.95), as were judgments of interspecies disease transmission
likelihood (mammal-to-mammal: α = 0.96, bird-to-bird: α
= 0.97; between birds and mammals: α = 0.99). Nonetheless, linear mixed effects models revealed that intentions to
report bites varied considerably between different species
[Mammals: F(4, 1152) = 111.1, p < .001, η p 2 = 0.28; Birds:
F(4, 1152) = 35.23, p < .001, η p 2 = .11] and ratings of interspecies disease transmission likelihood varied between
the different premise types [mammal-to-mammal, bird-tobird, between birds and mammals; F(2, 576) = 356.3, p <
.001, η p 2 = 0.55]. Intentions to report bites were stronger
for mammals than for birds [t(288) = 27.06, p < .001, d =
1.59; Figure 1A], and diseases were rated as more likely
to be transmissible within mammals or birds than between
them [mammal-to-mammal vs. between birds and mammals,
t(288) = 18.77, p < .001, d = 1.10; bird-to-bird vs. between
birds and mammals, t(288) = 23.42, p < .001, d = 1.38].
Consistent with previous work suggesting bats are viewed as
similar to both mammals and birds (Davis et al., 2013), bats
were rated as more likely than other mammalsto share diseases with birds [t(288) = 7.03, p < .001, d = 0.41].

2103

.04, .05, and .26 respectively) (Figure 1C)]. Coupled with
weaker intentions to report bird bites overall, these results
suggest that people may only judge birds as risky to the extent
that they believe birds and mammals can share diseases.
Discussion. Study 1’s results suggest that inductive reasoning principles may underlie people’s perceptions of zoonosis risk. Although the correlations are between a small and
medium correlation given Cohen’s (1992) criteria, they are
within those expected between general health attitudes and
behaviors (Azien & Timko, 1986; Glasman & Albarracin,
2006). However, because the results are correlational, it is
difficult to infer the causal direction between the beliefs about
interspecies disease transmission risk and bite reporting. It is
possible that both are influenced by a common underlying
factor, such as beliefs about contagion (Haidt, McCaluey, &
Rozin, 1994) or risk attitudes (Dohmen et al., 2011). Moreover, because the results examine individual differences, it is
not clear from Study 1 whether such inductive reasoning principles could be harnessed to influence people’s beliefs about
the risks associated with animal contact.

Study 2

Figure 1: (A) Intentions to report animal bites. (B) Association between intentions to report mammal bites and mammalto-mammal disease transmission ratings. (C) Association between intentions to report bird bites and between bird and
mammal disease transmission ratings. Error bars reflect 95%
within-subject confidence intervals.

In support of our primary hypotheses, we found that
individual differences in endorsement of bird-to-bird and
mammal-to-mammal disease transmission were both positively associated with individual differences in intentions to
report mammal bites [Mammal-to-mammal: Kendall’s τ =
.147, p < .001 (Figure 1B); Bird-to-bird, τ = .140, p < .001;
Between birds and mammals: τ = .009 (Pearson’s r of .21,
.21 and .009 respectively)].
Consistent with the premise number principle, endorsing
greater odds of interspecies disease transmission was associated with stronger intentions to report mammal bites.
For bird bites, only ratings of disease transmission between
birds and mammals were associated with reporting intentions
[Mammal-to-mammal τ = .043, Bird-to-bird τ = .077, Between birds and mammals τ = .219, p < .001 (Pearson’s r of

The goal of Study 2 was to test whether it is possible to influence people’s perceptions of zoonosis risk through framing
communications to portray a greater number of animals as
susceptible to a disease. As a case study, real-world communications about Ebola virus vary in terms of how they describe
the range of animals susceptible to the disease. The Centers for Disease Control’s factsheet (CDC, 2016) lists contact with fruit bats and nonhuman primates (apes and monkeys) as sources of human Ebola infection. Contrastingly, the
World Health Organization’s factsheet (WHO, 2016) lists a
much wider range of animals: chimpanzees, gorillas, fruit
bats, monkeys, forest antelope, and porcupines.
According to the premise diversity principle, the WHO’s
factsheet should lead to stronger perceptions of Ebola risk
from animal conact because it lists a broader range of animals
as sources of human Ebola infection. To test this hypothesis,
in Study 2 we gave particpants two different communications
about Ebola derived from the CDC and WHO factsheets (tailored to control all other differences in wording).
Method. Participants were 152 adults recruited from Mechanical Turk in the same manner as for Study 1. Sample
demographics were comparable to those in Study 1; additionally 94.7% of the sample in Study 2 reported eating meat. No
participants were excluded from the results, and all protocols
were approved by the Texas Tech University IRB.
Design. The study materials consisted of an electronic survey containing a demographics section, an experimentally
manipulated reading prompt about Ebola (derived from CDC
and WHO factsheets), an Ebola susceptibility section, a bite
reporting intentions section, and a meat safety section.

2104

For the reading prompt, participants were given the following description about Ebola and asked to fill in a blank box
by detailing the animals listed in the description:
The Ebola virus causes an acute, serious illness which is often
fatal if untreated. Ebola virus disease (EVD) first appeared in
1976 in 2 simultaneous outbreaks, one in what is now Nzara,
South Sudan, and the other in Yambuku, Democratic Republic
of Congo. The latter occurred in a village near the Ebola River,
from which the disease takes its name. Ebola is introduced into
the human population through close contact with the blood,
secretions, organs, or other bodily fluids of infected animals
such as [animal 1], [animal 2], [animal 3], and [animal 4].

The animals listed in the description were experimentally
manipulated between participants. Participants were randomly assigned to read either a CDC-inspired set of animals
with lower premise diversity (fruit bats, gorillas, monkeys,
and chimpanzees; n=81) or a WHO-inspired set with higher
premise diversity (fruit bats, monkeys, forest antelope, and
porcupines; n=70). To verify that these prompts did indeed
differ in premise diversity, we had a separate group of participants (N=53) provide pairwise similarity judgments between
each of the premise animals. Consistent with our expectations, participants judged the CDC prompt animals to be significantly more similar (i.e. less diverse, t(52) = 14.56, p ¡
.001).
Next participants completed the Ebola susceptibility questionnaire. For each question, participants were asked “How
likely is it that [animal] can get Ebola?” (1 = Very Unlikely,
7 = Very Likely). Animals included both mammals and birds:
bats, monkeys, zebras, meerkats, anteaters, giraffes, gazelles,
storks, flamingos, cranes, vultures, and parrots.
Next participants completed the bite reporting questionnaire. Participants were told to “imagine that you are on safari
and get bitten by an animal, but the bite just barely breaks the
skin” when considering whether they would report a bite to
a health professional. Each question asked them to rate (1 =
Very Unlikely, 7 = Very Likely), “how likely would you be to
report being bitten by a [animal]?”
Last, participants completed the meat safety questionnaire.
Participants were asked to rate (1 = Very Unsafe, 7 = Very
Safe), “how safe you think it is for people in general to eat
meat from each animal” and to “consider only immediate
health risks from disease transmission.”
Results. The results were consistent with predictions based
on the premise diversity principle. Participants in the WHO
(diverse) wording condition rated individual mammals as
more susceptible to Ebola [t(150) = 3.70, p < .001, d =
0.6; Figure 2A], were more likely to report mammal bites
[t(150) = 2.85, p = .005, d = .46; Figure 2B], and perceived
mammal meat as less safe [t(150) = 2.66, p = .009, d = .434;
Fiture 2C].
The WHO (diverse) wording condition also increased perception of birds’ susceptibility to Ebola [t(150) = 2.06, p =
.040, d = 0.33] but did not significantly increase intentions to
report bird bites [t(150) = 1.10, d = 0.18] or lower perceptions of meat safety [t(150) = 1.28, d = 0.21].

We additionally used linear regression to test whether the
effect of wording condition on bite reporting and perceptions of meat safety was mediated by its effect on Ebola susceptibility ratings. First, we found that Ebola susceptibility was significantly associated with bite reporting and meat
safety perceptions for both mammals and birds, even after
taking into account the effect of wording condition [Mammal
bites: standardized b = 0.47;t(149) = 6.40; p < .001; Mammal meat: standardized b = −0.43;t(149) = 5.67, p < .001;
Bird bites: standardized b = 0.51;t(149) = 7.32, p < .001;
Bird meat: standardized b = −0.45;t(149) = 6.01, p < .001].
Next, we found that including Ebola susceptibility in the regression model with the effect of wording condition made
the effect of condition non-significant for all models [Mammal bites: b = 0.18,t(149) = 1.20; Mammal meat: b =
−.18,t(149) = −1.16; Bird bites: b = .009;t(149) = 0.063;
Bird meat: b = −0.06;t(149) = 0.43], suggesting that the
effects of condition on meat safety and bite reporting were
fully mediated by the effect of the different wordings on participants’ perceptions of Ebola susceptibility. Finally, using a
bootstrapping procedure (Preacher & Hayes, 2008), we found
that the indirect pathways between wording condition and
the bite reporting and meat safety ratings were significant for
both birds and mammals.

General Discussion
Results from both studies indicate an important role that cognitive research can play in combating emerging zoonoses. Although rarely studied in the public health literature, humans’
inferences about risk are central to their interactions with potential disease vectors. We found that cognitive principles
related to premise number and diversity impact perceptions
of zoonotic disease transmission risk and associated health
behaviors. To the extent that people believe it is possible for
many diverse species to transmit diseases to one another, they
become more wary of their own risk of infection.
An experiment based on CDC and WHO Ebola factsheets
further revealed that individuals’ inductive reasoning strategies can be harnessed to make communications about disease
risk more effective. Through the use of cognitive framing
strategies, it may be possible to reduce adverse contact with
animals and increase rapid reporting of potential disease exposure. Such approaches may be particularly effective for
rural communities that are difficult to reach with other interventions. These results have the potential to contribute goals
of identifying low-cost strategies for reducing emerging disease risk before outbreaks occur (Heymann & Dar, 2014).
To our knowledge, the present results are the first to suggest that inductive reasoning processes studied in cognitive
psychology also influence health behaviors. With such connections established, future studies on disease transmission
risk perception would benefit from even stronger connections
with cognitive research. One question is how people judge
risks from different species. Here we focused on person-level
characteristics that relate to perceived risk of animal contact

2105

Figure 2: Effect of communication wording on (A) Perceived susceptibility of animals to Ebola, (B) Intentions to report animal
bites, and (C) Perceived meat safety. Error bars reflect 95% within-subject confidence intervals.
(bites and game meat), averaging over differences between
species. However, not all animals are associated with the
same zoonosis risk, and it will be important to understand
how to tailor communications to impact species selectively.
For example, bats have a very strong association to emerging zoonosis (Calisher, Childs, Field, Holmes, & Schountz,
2006), and it may be useful to tailor messages to focus on
bats specifically. Although bats were associated with high
levels of intended bite reporting and were perceived as being
unsafe to eat, participants also may have underestimated the
risks bats pose to other animals – indeed, participants rated
disease transmission risk between bats and other mammals
as lower than for more typical mammals. Because wildlifelivestock interactions are a major driver of emerging zoonosis
(Jones et al., 2008), this finding suggests that people may underestimate the risk of keeping livestock near bat habitats.
One limiation of our second study is that much of the sample is not at high risk for Ebola virus. However, because
zoonoses are common within the countries surveyed and can
be transmitted via many different interactions with animals
all of our participants were at some risk of zoonosis exposure. Still, future research should examine whether risk level
or other variables may moderate the effect of inductive reasoning principles on risk perception. We anticipate that people’s personal experience with zoonosis, as opposed to pure
risk level per se, may strengthen the relationship between beliefs and health intentions. Indeed, in the broader attitudes
and public health literatures, many associations between attitudes and behaviors are rather weak in the general population,
but are much stronger in groups with direct experience (Fazio
& Zanna, 1978; Glasman & Albarracin, 2006). Thus while

many people in these studies do not have direct experience
with Ebola virus, we would expect attitudes and health intentions to be even stronger in those who do.
The present research is primarily aimed at building interdisciplinary connections between public health research (particularly inerdisciplinary efforts such as One Health) and cognitive psychology. Still, the current results may have implications for basic psychological research on contagion and
induction as well. The law of contagion is a prominent social psychology construct that describes people’s tendencies
to believe that negative (and positive) properties, including
diseases and social ills, can be transmitted to objects or people through mere contact (e.g. Rozin and Royzman (2001)).
Current theories of sympathetic magical thinking often make
distinctions between the law of contagion and the law of similarity, a separate construct that describes the belief that objects that share surface features also share deeper common
essences (e.g., leading to disgust with fudge shaped like dog
feces, and beliefs that voodoo dolls can affect the person they
resemble; Rozin, Markwith, and Ross (1990)).
The present results suggest that the laws of contagion and
similarity may not be fully separate, and similarity-based effects may influence perceptions of contagion. Indeed, theories suggest that inductive reasoning principles like premise
number and diversity can increase generalization of properties (such as disease susceptibility) via similarity relationships between known and novel/unknown examples. For example, the diverse prompts in our second experiment may
have increased perceptions of Ebola susceptibility by increasing the likelihood that the unknown examples would match
the known examples in some respect. A major question in

2106

cognitive psychology is how different respects in which items
can be similar (Medin, Goldstone, & Gentner, 1993) impact
generalization of novel/unknown properties. Although our
data does not distinguish between different candidate theories for similarity-based transfer of contagion, the results are
suggestive that beliefs about contagion can be transferred via
such similarity relationships.
In conclusion, emerging diseases from animals pose a substantial public health concern, yet little is known about how
people judge risks associated with different drivers of zoonosis. The present studies illustrate that basic cognitive principles related to inductive reasoning not only impact individuals’ perceptions of disease risk and associated health behaviors, but also can be harnessed for tailoring messages to properly convey risks associated with emerging diseases.

References
Azien, I., & Timko, C. (1986). Correspondence between
health attitudes and behavior. Basic and Applied Social
Psychology, 7, 259–276.
Bingham, G. M., Budke, C. M., & Slater, M. R. (2010).
Knowledge and perceptions of dog-associated zoonoses:
Brazos County, Texas, USA. Preventative Veterinary
Medicine, 93, 211–221.
Calisher, C. H., Childs, J. E., Field, H. E., Holmes, K. V.,
& Schountz, T. (2006). Bats: Important reservoir hosts
of emerging viruses. Clinical Microbiology Reviews, 19,
531–545.
Cohen, J. (1992). A power primer. Psychological Bulletin, 1,
155–159.
Daszak, P., Cunningham, A. A., & Hyatt, A. D. (2000).
Emerging infectious diseases of wildlife – threats to biodiversity and human health. Science, 287, 443–449.
Davis, T., Goldwater, M. B., Gaylord, N., Worthy, D., Otto,
A. R., & Glass, B. D. (2013). The cognitive psychology of
human-bat interactions: Implications for ecological policy
and zoonotic disease transmission. In Bats: Phylogeny and
evolutionary insights, conservation strategies and role in
disease transmission (pp. 1–17). Hauppage: Nova.
Dohmen, T., Falk, A., Huffman, D., Sunde, U., Schupp, J., &
Wagner, G. G. (2011). Individual risk attitudes: Measurement, determinants, and behavioral consequences. Journal
of the European Economic Association, 9, 522–550.
Fazio, R. H., & Zanna, M. P. (1978). On the predictive validity of attitudes: The roles of direct experience and confidence. Journal of Personality, 46, 228–243.
for Disease Control, C. C., & Prevention).
(n.d.).
About ebola virus disease.
(Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/about.html)
Glasman, L. R., & Albarracin, D. (2006). Forming attitudes that predict future behavior: A meta-analysis of the
attitude-behavior relation. Psychological Bullletin, 132,
778–822.
Haidt, J., McCaluey, C., & Rozin, P. (1994). Individual differences in sensitivity to disgust: A scale sampling seven

domains of disgust elicitors. Personality and Individual
Differences, 16, 701–713.
Hayes, B. K., Heit, E., & Swendsen, H. (2010). Inductive reasoning. Wiley interdisciplinary reviews: Cognitive Science,
1, 278–292.
Heit, E., & Feeney, A. (2005). Relations between premise
similarity and inductive strength. Psychonomic Bulletin
and Review, 12, 340–344.
Heymann, D. L., & Dar, O. A. (2014). Prevention is better
than cure for emerging infectious diseases. The BMJ, 348,
g1499.
Janes, C. R., Corbett, K. K., Jones, J. H., & Trostle, J. (2012).
Emerging infectious diseases: the role of social sciences.
The Lancet, 380, 1884–1886.
Jones, K. E., Patel, N. G., Levy, M. A., Storeygard, A., Balk,
D., Gittleman, J. L., & Daszak, P. (2008). Global trends in
emerging infectious diseases. Nature, 451, 900–993.
Kamins, A. O., Rowcliffe, J. M., Ntiamoa-Baidu, Y., Cunningham, A. A., Wood, J. L., & Restif, O. (2015). Characteristics and risk perceptions of Ghanaians potentially
exposed to bat-borne zoonoses through bushmeat. EcoHealth, 12, 104–120.
Li, F., Cao, B., Li, Y., Li, H., & Deak, G. (2009). The law
of large numbers in children’s diversity-based reasoning.
Thinking and Reasoning, 15, 388–404.
Lopez, A. (1995). The diversity principle in the testing of
arguments. Memory & Cognition, 23, 374–382.
McDonald, J., Samuels, M., & Rispoli, J.
(1996).
A hypothesis-assessment model of categorical argument
strength. Cognition, 59, 199–217.
Medin, D., Goldstone, R. L., & Gentner, D. (1993). Respects
for similarity. Psychological Review, 100, 254–278.
Nemeroff, C. J. (1995). Magical thinking about illness virulence: conceptions of germs from “safe” versus “dangerous” others. Health Psychology, 14, 147–151.
Organization), W. W. H.
(n.d.).
Ebola virus
disease (fact sheet no. 103).
(Retrieved from
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs103/en/)
Osherson, D. N., Smith, E. E., Wilkie, O., Lopez, A., &
Shafir, E. (1990). Category-based induction. Psychological
Review, 97, 185–200.
Preacher, K. J., & Hayes, A. F. (2008). Asymptotic and resampling strategies for assessing and comparing indirect
effects in multiple mediator models. Behavior Research
Methods, 40, 879–891.
Rozin, P., Markwith, M., & Ross, B. (1990). The sympathetic
magical law of similarity, nominal realism and neglect of
negatives in response to negative labels. Psychological Science, 1, 383–384.
Rozin, P., & Royzman, E. B. (2001). Negativity bias, negativity dominance, and contagion. Personality and Social
Psychology Review, 5, 296–320.

2107

