Information density of encodings: The role of syntactic variation in comprehension
Les Sikos (sikos@coli.uni-saarland.de), Clayton Greenberg (claytong@coli.uni-saarland.de),
Heiner Drenhaus (drenhaus@coli.uni-saarland.de) and Matthew W. Crocker (crocker@coli.uni-sb.de)
Department of Language Science and Technology, Saarland University, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
Abstract
The Uniform Information Density (UID) hypothesis links
production strategies with comprehension processes,
predicting that speakers will utilize flexibility in encoding in
order to increase uniformity in the rate of information
transmission, as measured by surprisal (Jaeger, 2010).
Evidence in support of UID comes primarily from studies
focusing on word-level effects, e.g. demonstrating that
surprisal predicts the omission/inclusion of optional words.
Here we investigate whether comprehenders are sensitive to
the information density of alternative encodings that are more
syntactically complex. We manipulated the syntactic
encoding of complex noun phrases in German via meaningpreserving pre-nominal and post-nominal modification in
contexts that were either predictive or non-predictive. We
then used the G-maze reading task to measure online
comprehension during self-paced reading. Results were
consistent with the UID hypothesis. In predictive contexts,
post-nominal encodings elicited a more uniform distribution
of processing effort. Conversely, in non-predictive contexts,
more uniform effort was found for pre-nominal encodings.
Keywords: Language comprehension; surprisal; uniform
information density hypothesis; G-maze; self-paced reading.

Introduction
Levy and Jaeger’s (2007) Uniform Information Density
hypothesis postulates that speakers adjust their lexical and
syntactic realization of a message for the benefit of
comprehenders. Specifically, they suggest that there is an
overarching preference to produce message encodings that
distribute information as evenly as possible across the
linguistic signal. This account fundamentally links encoding
and decoding processes, asserting that language producers
will exploit the flexibility in encoding so as to increase
uniformity in the rate of information transmission, as
measured by surprisal (Hale, 2001; Levy, 2008). As such,
the UID hypothesis can be viewed as part of a rational
theory of communication — from an information theoretic
perspective — in which encoding strategies take into
account resource limitations of the comprehender.
There is robust empirical evidence that surprisal accounts
for cognitive load during comprehension — at least at the
level of individual words in a sentence (Drieghe, Rayner &
Pollatsek, 2005; Kliegl, Grabner, Rolfs & Engbert, 2004;
Rayner, Aschby, Pollatsek & Reichle, 2004; Rayner &
Well, 1996). However, there exists little direct online
evidence that comprehenders are indeed sensitive to the
surprisal and density profiles of alternative syntactic
encodings — a critical assumption underlying the UID
hypothesis. Furthermore, current support for UID in
production is limited to relatively local encoding choices,

such as that-deletion (Jaeger, 2010; Levy & Jaeger, 2007),
contraction (Frank & Jaeger, 2008), and the use of single
word equivalents that vary in word length (chimpanzee vs.
chimp; Mahowald, Fedorenko, Piantadosi & Gibson, 2013).
Although the above studies provide important and
compelling support for the notion that UID modulates
aspects of syntactic encoding, the generality of the findings
is limited by the observation that all the phenomena are
instances of highly local syntactic reduction.
The goal of the current study is to investigate whether
comprehenders are sensitive to the information density of
more complex alternative syntactic encodings. Consider the
following examples:
(1)
(2)

The journalist published…
The man evaluated…

Predictive context
Non-predictive context

a. …[the carefully written essay].
b. …[the essay that was carefully written].

Obj NPadj
Obj NPrel

Each object noun phrase (NP) above arguably expresses the
same message,1 however (a) uses a pre-nominal adjective
phrase while (b) uses a post-nominal relative clause. While
the head noun (essay) is more expected in the predictive (1)
than non-predictive (2) contexts, the expectation for the
adjective carefully presumably does not differ across
contexts. One potential encoding strategy for increasing the
uniformity of information density would be to produce lowsurprisal words early in the sentence, as this may facilitate
the processing of subsequent less predictable words. For
instance, in the non-predictive context, the UID hypothesis
predicts a processing advantage for the pre-nominal
encoding because carefully written should reduce the
surprisal of essay. In the predictive context, on the other
hand, the pre-nominal encoding may result in a trough in
information density at essay, as it is highly expected (and
thus not very informative) following the verb and modifiers.
In this case, the post-nominal relative clause may distribute
the informational content more uniformly. The UID
hypothesis therefore, predicts a greater benefit for the
relative clause encoding in more predictive contexts.
We tested the above predictions using a self-paced
reading design to measure online differences in cognitive
load during the critical object NP.

1

Choices in linguistic encoding are known to be influenced by
aspects of information structure, including contrastive focus,

3168

Experiment
Our primary goal was to test whether comprehenders are
sensitive during online processing to differences in the
information density of alternative syntactically-complex
encodings that nevertheless convey a similar message. The
materials crossed two factors (context × encoding), as
illustrated in Table 1. Because this manipulation distributes
information within the critical region differently across
conditions, we assessed cognitive load using a variation of
self-paced reading that is less susceptible to spill-over
effects than standard forms of self-paced reading. The
grammaticality maze task (G-maze; Forster, Guerrera &
Elliot, 2009) can precisely identify the word at which
processing time differences emerge during online
comprehension (Witzel, Witzel & Forster, 2010) and is
therefore well-suited for our purposes. In this task sentences
are presented word by word as a sequence of forced choices
between two alternatives, only one of which continues the
sentence grammatically. If the participant successfully
navigates the “maze” by choosing the correct word from
each pair, the selected words form a coherent sentence
(Figure 1).

combinations were neutral with respect to the object noun in
the non-predictive context (e.g., Der Mann bewertete, “The
man evaluated”), but were semantically associated with the
object in the predictive contexts (e.g., Der Journalist
veröffentlichte, “The journalist published”). Importantly,
however, highly expected object nouns (e.g., Artikel,
“article”) were avoided in order to increase the possibility of
detecting surprisal differences between predictive/prenominal and predictive/post-nominal conditions.
The information density of object NPs was manipulated
via pre- and post-nominal modification, affecting both the
linear ordering and length (in words) of the message. Prenominal modifiers (e.g., sorgfältig verfassten, “carefully
written”) were shorter, containing 2 to 4 words, but
positioned the head noun at the end of the NP. Post-nominal
modifiers used a relative clause construction (e.g., der
sorgfältig verfasst worden war, “that was carefully written”)
and were therefore longer, ranging from 4 to 6 words, and
constrained the head noun to the beginning of the NP. To
avoid having any words within the critical object NP region
be sentence-final, all items ended with an adverbial phrase.

Methods

The$$$$$$x&x&x$

Participants Twenty-seven native German speakers (age M
= 24, SD = 2.6) with normal or corrected to normal vision
were recruited from the Saarland University community and
were compensated 8€ for their participation. Participants
that did not successfully navigate at least 70% of mazes in
all experimental conditions were excluded (n = 3).

went$$$$$$man$$$
evaluated$$$$$sink$
the$$$$$$$hosed$
while$$$$carefully$

Materials Forty-eight sets of sentences were constructed in
German by crossing context (predictive, non-predictive) and
syntactic encoding of the object NP (pre-nominal
modification, post-nominal modification), resulting in four
conditions per item (Table 1). In order to create the context
manipulation, the same object noun (e.g., Essay, “essay”)
was used in all conditions, but the object was designed to be
more expected in predictive contexts than non-predictive
contexts. This was accomplished by choosing different
subject–verb combinations for each context. Subject–verb

wri8en$$$$$river$
some9me.$$$$$essay.$

Figure 1: Example trial structure of G-maze task.
Sentences (in German) were presented word by word as a
sequence of forced choices between two alternatives, only
one of which continued the sentence grammatically.

Table 1: Example stimulus item in four conditions with approximate English translations. The critical region of interest
was the object NP. RTs were analyzed separately for the object noun (bold) and modification region (underlined).
Context

Encoding

Example

Predictive

Post-nominal

Der Journalist veröffentlichte den Essay, der sorgfältig verfasst worden war, unter Einbeziehung des größeren Kontextes.
“The journalist published the essay that was carefully written, taking into account the larger context.”

Predictive

Pre-nominal

Der Journalist veröffentlichte den sorgfältig verfassten Essay unter Einbeziehung des größeren Kontextes.
“The journalist published the carefully written essay, taking into account the larger context.”

Non-predictive Post-nominal

Der Mann bewertete den Essay, der sorgfältig verfasst worden war, unter Einbeziehung des größeren Kontextes.
“The man evaluated the essay that was carefully written, taking into account the larger context.”

Non-predictive Pre-nominal

Der Mann bewertete den sorgfältig verfassten Essay unter Einbeziehung des größeren Kontextes.
“The man evaluated the carefully written essay, taking into account the larger context.”

3169

Four counterbalanced lists were constructed from these
materials according to a Latin Square design such that each
list contained 12 items in each condition, but no item
appeared more than once in the same list. An additional 48
sentences with the same structures as above, but containing
highly predictable object nouns, were constructed as fillers
(e.g., Der Schneider zerschnitt den stark gemusterten Stoff
am Mittwoch., “The tailor cut the heavily patterned fabric on
Wednesday.”). Half of the filler sentences contained prenominal modification of the object noun and the other half
contained post-nominal modification. No object nouns were
repeated across experimental or filler items.
Cloze probability and contextual constraint An offline
Cloze completion study was conducted to confirm that
object nouns were more expected following predictive than
non-predictive contexts, but were not highly expected in
either context. A separate group of 58 native German
speakers (age M = 22.0, SD = 2.9) were presented with
sentence fragments from the 48 experimental items
described above. Fragments contained only the contexts,
followed by a blank (e.g., Der Mann bewertete___; Der
Journalist veröffentlichte___). Predictive and non-predictive
contexts were counter-balanced across two lists. Participants
were asked to fill in the blank with the first determiner–
noun combination that came to mind. Cloze probabilities
were computed as the percentage of participants who
provided the experimental object noun for a particular item.
As expected, object nouns had low cloze probabilities in
both contexts but were reliably more expected following
predictive (cloze = 0.06, SD = 0.18) than non-predictive
contexts (cloze = 0.00, SD = 0.01), t(47) = -2.32, p < .05.
The percentage of the most frequently occurring response
to each sentence fragment in the cloze test was also used to
assess the contextual constraint of predictive and nonpredictive contexts. As expected, the mean constraint of
predictive contexts was reliably greater (51.3%) than that of
the non-predictive contexts (21.3%), t(47) = -8.46, p < .001.
Surprisal profiles To compare our response time results
against a more theoretical notion of predictability, we
computed surprisals for all experimental stimuli using an
interpolated modified Kneser-Ney 5-gram language model
trained on a 2017-01-01 dump of German Wikipedia. To
obtain the corpus, we filtered the original XML dump using
the tool WikiExtractor, split the corpus into sentences using
the NLTK sentence splitter for German, and preprocessed
the resulting dataset.2 After replacing all types occurring
fewer than 15 times with <unk>, the vocabulary size was
833,734.3 We split the corpus into training, development,
2

and test sections with the ratio 8:1:1. The resulting training
section contained 666,561,150 tokens. The model was
trained using the SRILM toolkit (Stolcke, 2002) and
achieved perplexities of 25 on the training section, 201 on
the test section, and 1583 on our stimuli.4
Procedure Participants were randomly assigned to a
stimulus list (6 per list). The G-maze task was implemented
in E-prime (Schneider, Eschman, & Zuccolotto, 2002). Each
trial began with two crosses (+) that remained on screen for
1000 ms, indicating where subsequent word pairs would
appear. Each word in the sentence (except the first word)
was then presented together with a foil word,5 which was
not a grammatical continuation of the sentence. The first
word in every sentence was paired with “x-x-x”. The
presentation side (left, right) was randomized such that the
correct word appeared equally often on each side. Any
punctuation (i.e., comma, period) that appeared with a word
also appeared with its foil. Participants were instructed to
choose as quickly and as accurately as possible the word
that best continued the sentence. Participants indicated their
selection by pressing the left or right button on a button box
and the amount of time required for selecting the
grammatical continuation was recorded as the response time
(RT). If the correct word was chosen, the next pair of words
appeared automatically. However, if a foil word was
selected, negative feedback (Inkorrekt, “Incorrect”) was
displayed and the trial was aborted. Once the end of a
sentence was reached, positive feedback (Korrect,
“Correct”) was given. Participants initiated each new trial
by button press.
To confirm that participants read the sentences for
meaning, a Yes/No comprehension question appeared after
1/3 of the items. Half of the questions asked about the
subject noun and half about the object noun. The correct
answer was Yes for 50% of questions. Participants used the
button box to respond. No feedback was given.
In order to familiarize participants with the task, five
practice items (three with comprehension questions) were
presented before the experiment began. Participants took
approximately 40 minutes to complete the experiment.

4

Lowercased, replaced punctuation with space, replaced digits
with NUM, removed empty lines, replaced tabs with spaces,
removed multiple spaces, removed multiple NUMs, replaced
umlauts by their conventional character bigrams, and added
sentence begin and end markers.
3
A threshold of 15 was selected since this was the highest
possible while maintaining a less than 1% out of vocabulary rate
on a different corpus (EUROPARL).

The sharp difference in perplexity scores between the test
corpus and stimuli suggests that the German Wikipedia corpus is
not an ideal match for our stimuli. We return to this point in the
discussion.
5
Foils were created in a two-stage process. First, a custom
Python script randomly selected a foil candidate for each word in
each experimental and filler item. Foil candidates were constrained
such that they did not appear in bigrams with the correct word at
the previous position in the sentence within a large German corpus.
Second, each foil was then hand checked by at least two trained
native-German linguists to ensure that it was not a grammatical
continuation of the sentence. The same foil was used for identical
words (or derivationally related words) across conditions.

3170

Results and Discussion
Completed mazes Overall performance on the G-maze task
was high, with participants successfully navigating 85.6%
(SD = 0.08) of experimental and filler items to completion.
However, because the critical region of interest was the
object NP, the RT analyses reported below were conducted
on all experimental items that were completed through at
least the end of the critical region (M = 0.90, SD = 0.06).
Comprehension question accuracy Performance on the
comprehension questions was near ceiling (M = 0.97, SD =
0.04), confirming that participants were reading the
sentences for meaning during the G-maze task.
Response time RTs were analyzed with linear mixed effects
models with participants and items as crossed, independent,
random effects. All models included maximal random
effects structures (Barr, Levy, Scheepers & Tily, 2013).
Analyses were conducted using the lmer function (lme4
library, version 1.1-10; Bates & Sarkar, 2007) in the
statistics software package R, version 3.2.2 (R Development
Core Team, 2013). Fixed effects were evaluated via
likelihood ratio tests implemented in lmerTest (Kuznetsova,
Brockhoff & Christensen, 2015), where denominator df was
estimated using the Satterthwaite method. We report
estimates, standard errors, t and p values associated with
likelihood ratio tests for significant results only.
All raw RTs that were abnormally low (below 200 ms) or
abnormally high (above 5000 ms) were excluded (0.3%),
and outliers exceeding 3 standard deviations by participant
were then trimmed (1.8%). The remaining RTs were
adjusted for word length (Ferreira & Clifton, 1986) and
punctuation using a linear mixed effects regression model
with fixed effects for word length, punctuation (i.e., whether
or not a comma or period was presented with the word), and
their interaction. The residuals of this model, lengthadjusted RTs, served as the dependent variable in the
analyses reported below.6 Because the number of words
used to modify object nouns varied across items and
conditions, we computed the length-adjusted RT for the
modification region by averaging across modifier words.
The upper panel of Figure 2 presents the mean lengthadjusted word-by-word RTs for each condition. Differences
first emerge at the subject noun, where RTs were slower for
predictive than non-predictive contexts. This is not
surprising as these words (e.g., journalist) are less frequent
than their non-predictive counterparts (e.g., man). More
relevant to the research question, all four conditions diverge
within the critical object NP region (Table 2).

Figure 3 (left panel) shows that object nouns were read
more quickly in predictive than non-predictive conditions, β
= -161.01, SE = 29.59, t(44.22) = -5.44, p < .001. This
finding replicates previous work demonstrating that
expected linguistic material is easier to process than
unexpected material.
Within the non-predictive conditions, pre-nominal
modification clearly facilitated the processing of unexpected
object nouns. Length-adjusted RTs for object nouns were
faster for pre-nominal modification than for post-nominal
modification, β = -124.86, SE = 30.42, t(23.07) = -4.104, p
< .001. This result is consistent with the UID hypothesis,
which predicts a processing advantage for the pre-nominal
encoding: pre-modification reduces the surprisal of the
unexpected word and results in a more uniform distribution
of processing effort across the linguistic signal.
Within the predictive conditions, length-adjusted RTs for
object nouns were also faster for pre-nominal modification
than for post-nominal modification, β = -51.00, SE = 18.67,
t(29.26) = -2.73, p < .05. However, the facilitation effect
was weaker for predictive conditions, resulting in a context
× encoding interaction, β = 73.67, SE = 33.02, t(53.56) =
2.23, p < .05. The UID hypothesis predicts a trough in
information density for words that are both highly expected
and pre-modified. Figure 2 (upper panel) is compatible with
this prediction. RTs drop steeply in the predictive / prenominal condition at the object noun. Note that this is true
despite the fact that object nouns were selected to be lowcloze. Thus, as shown in Figure 3, the post-nominal
condition distributes the informational content more
uniformly, resulting in a smoother RT profile.
Modification region analysis. Length-adjusted RTs for the
modification region were analyzed using the same mixed
effects model as above. Figure 3 (right panel) shows that
encoding influenced the processing of the modification
region in a way that was complementary to its effect on
object nouns (see also Table 2). Pre-nominal modification
was read more slowly than post-nominal modification in
both contexts, β = 106.04, SE = 15.02, t(75.75) = 7.06, p <
.001. However the magnitude of this effect was greater in
the non-predictive context, reflected in a context × encoding
interaction, β = -53.44, SE = 18.69, t(51.68) = -2.86, p < .01.

Object noun analysis. Length-adjusted RTs for object
nouns were regressed onto a model including fixed-effect
factors for context (predictive, non-predictive), encoding
(pre-nominal, post-nominal), and their interaction. In order
to control for task adaptation, a main effect of stimulus
order was also included.

Table 2: Mean length-adjusted RT (ms) by condition for
object noun (upper panel) and modification region
(lower panel). Standard deviation in parentheses.
Object Noun
Predictive
Non-predictive
Mean

Pre-nominal
-54 (77)
27 (70)
-13 (56)

Post-nominal
-5 (54)
56 (98)
76 (62)

Mean
-30 (50)
92 (46)

Pre-nominal
54 (46)
113 (53)
84 (30)

Post-nominal
2 (39)
10 (30)
6 (22)

Mean
28 (31)
61 (34)

Modification Region

6

Qualitatively identical results are obtained when raw RTs are
used.

3171

Predictive
Non-predictive
Mean

Sentence Position
determiner
Word−by−Word
1

subject noun
Reading
2 Times

verb
(collapsed
3 over

determiner
modification)
4

object noun /
modification region
5

object noun /
modification region
6

200

●

Length-Adjusted
(ms)
Length−Adjusted
RTRT
(ms)

100

as.factor(shp)

●
●
●
●

0

●

●

●
●

● 21
22

as.factor(ltyp)

●

1

−100

––– Predictive

2

----- Non-predictive
Post-nominal
−200

Pre-nominal

Word−by−Word
Surprisal Values (collapsed over modification
●●
6

2●

4

6

●

●
Surprisal

Surprisal

●●
Sentence Position

5

as.factor(shp)

●

●

21
22

4

as.factor(ltyp)

3

1
2

1

●●

●●

4

6

2

●●
2

SentenceRTs.
Position
Figure 2: Upper panel: Mean length-adjusted word-by-word
Lower panel: Surprisal profiles as determined by
a language model trained on the German Wikipedia corpus. RTs and surprisals for the modification region were
calculated by averaging across all modifiers words. Error bars represent one standard error of the mean.

AdjustedObject
ReadingNoun
Times for Target
Adjusted
word
Reading Times
for Modification Region
Modification
Region
(r =

-0.06). There are at least two plausible explanations for
this divergence. First, the predictable contexts may not have
made our atypical (i.e., low cloze) object nouns statistically
––– Predictive
●
more predictable, given our German Wikipedia corpus. For
----- Non-predictive
instance, verpackte (“boxed”, a verb in the predictive
●
100
100
context) and Geschenk (“gift”, the corresponding object
as.factor(c(2, 2, 1, 1))
as.factor(c(2, 2, 1, 1))
noun) were both present in the corpus but never co-occurred
●
1
1
in the same sentence. We assessed this possibility and found
●
2
2
●
that, on average, subject nouns in predictive contexts did not
●
0
0
●
substantially increase the predictability of object nouns
above the general case. Verbs, however, did so by a factor
●
of 6. Second, the dependencies that existed in the training
−100
−100
corpus may not have been fully captured by the language
post
pre
post
pre
model. To test this possibility, we calculated the mean gram
Post-nominal Pre-nominal
Post-nominal Pre-nominal
pre.post
pre.post
size used for surprisal predictions in the object NP region
Linearization
(M = 1.86). This finding indicates that despite being trained
Figure 3: Mean length-adjusted RTs for object nouns
on 5-grams, the model predictions in this region were based
(left panel) and the modification region (right panel).
predominantly on more local statistics (i.e., bigrams),
Error bars represent one standard error of the mean.
effectively modeling only the non-predictive conditions.7
Despite these caveats, the results broadly confirm our
Surprisal profiles. The lower panel of Figure 2 shows the
assumptions about the distribution of surprisal across presurprisal profiles produced by the language model.
nominal and post-nominal encodings of the critical object
Surprisals at sentence positions 1-4 patterned closely with
RTs, reflected in a positive correlation within this region (r
7
= 0.36). However, the surprisal pattern differed somewhat
Note, however, that the cloze results validate both the stimuli
from the pattern of RTs during the critical object NP region
and the RT findings.
200

Adjusted Reading Time (ms)

Adjusted
Reading Time
(ms)
Length-Adjusted
RT (ms)

200

3172

NP: according to the language model, the pre-nominal
encodings had more uniform information densities. To
capture the behavior found for reading times in the
predictive conditions, either a closer domain match between
training corpus and stimuli would be required, or a language
model architecture that is less sensitive to word position.

General Discussion
The UID hypothesis links production strategies with
comprehension processes and predicts that speakers utilize
flexibility in encoding to distribute information as evenly as
possible across the linguistic signal (Jaeger, 2010; Levy &
Jaeger, 2007). While prior evidence for UID comes
primarily from word-level effects (Frank & Jaeger, 2008;
Jaeger, 2010; Levy & Jaeger, 2007; Mahowald et al., 2013),
a critical assumption underlying the UID hypothesis is that
comprehenders should also be sensitive to the information
density of alternative syntactically-complex encodings. To
our knowledge, the current study is the first to investigate
this important and challenging question.
We manipulated the syntactic encoding of complex noun
phrases via meaning-preserving pre-nominal and postnominal modification in contexts that were either predictive
or non-predictive. The results were consistent with the UID
hypothesis. In predictive contexts, post-nominal encodings
elicited a more uniform distribution of processing effort
than pre-nominal encodings. This makes sense because the
head noun is already expected in such contexts, thus prenominal modification could lead to a trough in information
density at the noun. Conversely, in non-predictive contexts,
a more uniform RT profile was found for pre-nominal
encodings, where pre-modification served to reduce the
surprisal of the unexpected head noun. This pattern of
comprehension results provides indirect support for UID as
a rational strategy for producers to adopt. An important
question for further investigation is whether speakers are
indeed attentive to such factors when making their encoding
decisions.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the German Research
Foundation (DFG) as part of SFB 1102 Information Density
and Linguistic Encoding.

References
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013).
Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis
testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and
Language, 68(3), 255-278.
Bates, D., & Sarkar, D. (2007). lme4: Linear mixed-effects
models using S4 classes. ‘R’ package. Version 0.9975-12.
http://CRAN. R-project.org
Drieghe, D., Rayner, K., & Pollatsek, A. (2005). Eye
movements and word skipping during reading revisited.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 31(5): 954–969.

Ferreira, F., & Clifton, C. (1986). The independence of
syntactic processing. Journal of Memory and Language,
25(3), 348-368.
Forster, K. I., Guerrera, C., & Elliot, L. (2009). The maze
task: Measuring forced incremental sentence processing
time. Behavior Research Methods, 41, 163-171.
Frank, A. & Jaeger, F. (2008). Speaking rationally: Uniform
information density as an optimal strategy for language
production. In Proceedings of the Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society, (Vol. 30, No. 30).
Hale, J. (2001). A probabilistic Earley parser as a
psycholinguistic model. In Proceedings of the second
meeting of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics on Language technologies,
(pp. 1-8). Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jaeger, T. F. (2010). Redundancy and reduction: speakers
manage syntactic information density. Cognitive
Psychology, 61(1): 23-62.
Kliegl, R., Grabner, E., Rolfs, M., & Engbert, R. (2004).
Length, frequency, and predictability effects of words on
eye movements in reading. European Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 16: 262-284.
Kuznetsova, A., Brockhoff, P. B., & Christensen, R. H. B.
(2016). lmerTest: Tests in linear mixed effects models
(Version 2.0-30) http://cran.r-project.org/web/package=
lmerTest
Levy,
R.
(2008).
Expectation-based
syntactic
comprehension. Cognition, 106(3): 1126-1177.
Levy, R. & Jaeger, T. F. (2007). Speakers optimize
information density through syntactic reduction. In
Schöllkopf, B., Platt, J., and Hoffman, T., editors,
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
849-856, Cambridge, MA. MIT Press.
Mahowald, K., Fedorenko, E., Piantadosi, S. T., & Gibson,
E. (2013). Info/information theory: Speakers choose
shorter words in predictive contexts. Cognition, 126(2):
313-318.
R Core Team (2015). R: A language and environment for
statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria. https://www.R-project.org
Rayner, K., Aschby, J., Pollatsek, A., & Reichle, E. D.
(2004). The effects of frequency and predictability on eye
fixations in reading: Implications for the ez reader model.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 30(12).
Rayner, K. & Well, A. (1996). Effects of contextual
constraint on eye movements in reading: A further
examination. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 3(4): 504509.
Schneider, W., Eschman, A., & Zuccolotto, A. (2002). EPrime: User's guide. Psychology Software Incorporated.
Stolcke, A. (2002). SRILM – An extensible language
modeling toolkit. In Interspeech (Vol. 2002, p. 2002).
Witzel, N., Witzel, J., & Forster, K. (2012). Comparisons of
online reading paradigms: Eye tracking, moving-window,
and maze. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 41(2),
105-128.

3173

