Inner speech in post-stroke motor aphasia
Vanja Kljajevic (vanja.kljajevic@gmail.com)
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Vitoria &
IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain

Estibaliz Ugarte Gómez (estibaliz.ugarte@atecearaba.org)
Asociación de traumatismo cráneo-encefálico y daño cerebral adquirido de Álava (ATeCe), Vitoria, Spain

Cristina López (cristina.lopez@atecearaba.org)
ATeCe, Vitoria, Spain

Yolanda Balboa Bandeira (yolibalboa_b@yahoo.es)
ATeCe, Vitoria, Spain

Agustin Vicente (agustin.vicente@ehu.eus)
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Vitoria &
IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain

Abstract
The goal of the present study was to determine whether
chronic post-stroke patients with motor aphasia have impaired
inner speech abilities and whether they use inner speech in
everyday life. To answer these questions, we recruited eight
chronic post-stroke aphasic patients and 13 cognitively
healthy adults, who underwent testing on a range of
evaluative tests and four experiments specifically designed for
the purposes of this study. The experimental results suggest
that post-stroke patients with motor aphasia have impaired
inner speech. However, patients’ subjective reports indicate
that they use various types of inner speech, despite the
observed deficit. Taken together, our data suggest that
impairment of certain aspects of inner speech may still allow
a degree of use of other aspects of inner speech, emphasizing
a need to extend research on inner speech in aphasia to the
variety of its forms.
Keywords: aphasia; inner speech; anomia; working memory.

Introduction
Inner speech has been traditionally recognized as an
important component of human mental life, and in particular
its role in the relationship between language and thought has
been debated (Kinsbourne, 2000). The interest in inner
speech has been renewed recently, partly due to new
perspectives on how language contributes to consciousness
and whether conscious thought is possible without inner
speech (de Guerrero, 2005, Martínez-Manrique & Vicente,
2010), and partly due to recent developments in speech
production theories (e.g., Indefrey & Levelt, 2004) that
propose that inner speech is a stage in speech production
that precedes articulation (Levelt, 1995). Inner speech is
often defined as silently talking to oneself or speech-foroneself (Vygotsky, 1986), “the little voice in the head”
(Perrone-Bertolloti et al., 2014), an internalized verbal
thought that can be consciously explored (Marverl &
Desmond, 2012), “the subjective experience of language in
the absence of overt and audible articulation” (Alderson-

Day & Fernyhough, 2015, p. 931) or more generally as a
form of mental imagery (Oppenheim & Dell, 2008).
The unique cognitive status of inner speech is reflected in
its pervasive role in a variety of functions. It is involved not
only in language, but also in working memory (e.g., in
subvocal rehearsal) (Paulesu et al., 1993; Baddeley &
Loggie, 1999), complex reasoning (Baldo et al., 2015), selfregulation (Vygotsky, 1986), meta-cognition (Bermúdez,
2003), and self-awareness (Morin, 2009; Morin & Michaud,
2007). For example, impairment of inner speech has been
associated with the impairment of global self-awareness,
self-related memories and emotional awareness, along with
impaired “sense of individuality” and corporeal awareness
(Morin, 2009). It also contributes to auditory verbal
hallucinations in schizophrenia (Frith, 1992). In addition to
establishing that inner speech is implicated in a variety of
cognitive functions in healthy and impaired brains, research
so far has discerned various forms of inner speech, such as
condensed, dialogic, self-referent, involving others
(Alderson-Day & Fernyhough, 2015), with the evidence
indicating that these different forms of inner speech may
require support of different brain areas (Alderson-Day et al.,
2015).
However, investigating directly and objectively the highly
subjective and elusive psychological processes that support
inner speech represents a methodological challenge
(Vygotsky, 1986; De Bleser & Marshall, 2005). The
attempts to determine the elusive nature of inner speech fall
roughly into two types: the accounts that try to view inner
speech in its entirety and emphasize its subjective character,
and accounts that focus on a specific aspect of inner speech
that can be objectively tested. Thus, the hypotheses
generated by the first type of accounts cannot be objectively
tested, and the explanations based on the second type of
accounts do not exhaust the concept of inner speech.
As an example, Vygotsky’s (1986) concept of inner
speech is characterized by a highly subjective meaning,
predicative nature, and a reduced syntactic form. In

2432

contrast, an often studied proxy of inner speech in
contemporary research is phonological representation of a
word, which is tested via a person’s ability to silently judge
whether two words rhyme, whether one word is longer than
the other, or whether two words are homophones (Levine et
al., 1982; Feinberg et al., 1986). Making silent judgments in
such tasks requires the use of inner speech.
Another way of distinguishing between the two types of
approaches to studying inner speech is in terms of abstract
and concrete inner speech, where the former refers to inner
speech as relating language and thought, and the latter
considers inner speech a stage in speech production, i.e.,
phonological and/or phonetic level of inner speech (Levelt,
1995).
One interesting and still not well explored issue pertains
to inner speech abilities in persons with impaired overt
speech due to brain damage, such as post-stroke patients
with motor aphasia.
The available evidence suggests a great variability in
inner speech abilities in persons with post-stroke aphasia,
with patterns of partial as well as complete deficit in inner
speech (Levine et al., 1982; Feinberg et al., 1986; LanglandHassan et al., 2015). Furthermore, the degree of inner
speech deficit in these patients typically coincides with a
degree of overt speech impairment, although cases of
aphasia with discrepant overt-covert speech abilities were
also reported (Geva et al., 2011a).
In the present study, we investigated inner speech abilities
in chronic post-stroke patients with motor aphasia. The goal
was to determine whether these patients had impaired inner
speech abilities and how they used inner speech in everyday
life. To answer these questions, we tested chronic poststroke aphasic patients on a variety of evaluative tests and
four experiments specifically designed to assess their inner
speech abilities.

Methods
Participants
Eight post-stroke aphasic speakers (two males) were
recruited at a local rehabilitation center (Asociación de
traumatismo cráneo-encefálico y daño cerebral adquirido de
Álava, henceforth ATeCe). All patients were at the chronic
stage, with more than one year post-onset time. They all had
suffered a single stroke in the left hemisphere, affecting the
prefrontal or fronto-temporal areas, except one person, who
had a lesion in the left basal ganglia (A07). Seven patients
had motor aphasia, while one person’s aphasia was
characterized as mixed aphasia (A02). This person’s aphasia
was of a predominantly motor type, with a strong anomic
component it was labeled as “mixed” aphasia by the speech
pathologist (C.L.) on the basis of multiple extensive tests,
subjective observations and neurological reports. Severity of
patients’ aphasia ranged from moderate to severe. They
were all right-handed before the illness, except one patient

who was left-handed (A03). They had no other significant
neurological or psychiatric conditions.
Thirteen cognitively healthy adults for the control group
(four males) were recruited from the community. The
participants in the control group had no history of
neurological or psychiatric disease, drug abuse, and at the
time of testing they were not using any medications that
could affect cognition.
All participants had normal hearing and normal or
correct-to-normal vision.

Evaluative measures
To obtain more general information on patients’ cognitive
abilities relevant for the present study, we administered the
following evaluative measures: Montreal Cognitive
Assessment (MoCA) (Nasreddine et al., 2005) to assess
participants’ general cognitive status, Boston Diagnostic
Aphasia Examination (Goodglass & Kaplan, 1983) - the
Spanish version (García-Albea et al., 1996), Boston naming
test (Kaplan et al., 1983), phonological discrimination test
(Ardila et al., 1994), the Edinburgh handedness inventory
(Oldfield, 1971), the Month ordering test (Almor et al.,
2001) to test their verbal working memory, Raven’s
Progressive Color Matrices (Raven et al., 1990) to test their
nonverbal intelligence, Beck depression inventory (Beck et
al., 1961) to exclude severe depression, and the Varieties of
Inner
Speech
Questionnaire (McCarthy-Jones
&
Fernyhough, 2011) to obtain an insight into each patient’s
awareness of their use of different forms of inner speech in
everyday life.
Unlike other types of inner speech questionnaires, the
VISQ addresses important aspects of inner speech, such as
condensation and dialogicality. The condensed form, which
has by definition reduced syntax, and dialogic inner speech,
which is exchange among different internalized
perspectives, are of particular importance in studying inner
speech of patients with motor speech disorders. Thus, the
Questionnaire assesses four types of inner speech: dialogic,
condensed, other people in inner speech, and evaluative/
motivational inner speech Examples of stimuli for each
form are given in (1-4):
(1) My thinking in words is more like a dialog with
myself rather than my own thoughts in a
monologue. - Dialogic
(2) I think to myself in words using brief phrases and
single words rather than full sentences. Condensed
(3) I hear other people’s voice nagging me in my head.
- Other people in inner speech
(4) I talk silently to myself telling myself to do things.
- Evaluative/motivational inner speech
(McCarthy-Jones & Fernyhough, 2011).
Healthy controls (HCs) underwent MoCA and completed
the Varieties of Inner Speech Questionnaire. All tests were
administered in Spanish, which was the first language of all
participants.

2433

Experimental measures

Procedures

All participants were tested in four tasks, which require
inner speech for correct completion: silent judgments of
rhyming (experiment 1), syllable discrimination (experiment
2), identification of words in compounds (experiment 3) and
identification of words in names for numbers (experiment
4).
Experiment 1: The rhyming task in our study required
silent rhyming judgments of pairs of words associated with
pairs of drawings. The silent rhyming judgments paradigm
has been successfully used in previous studies on inner
speech in other languages (Langland-Hassan et al., 2015).
This paradigm is more appropriate for the Spanish language
than the classical paradigm, in which rhyming of written
words is judged, because judging whether Spanish written
words rhyme can be done visually, on the basis of words’
orthography and without evoking inner speech (e.g., avióncamión). There were 40 pairs of drawings in this
experiment, with 20 pairs representing objects whose names
rhyme in Spanish and 20 pairs representing objects whose
names do not rhyme in Spanish. The drawings were selected
from Snodgrass & Vanderwart (1980), based on a
standardization for Spanish (Sanfeliu & Fernandez, 1996),
considering name agreement, image agreement, familiarity,
and visual complexity. The stimuli were created from the
drawings with the highest ratings in Spanish-speakers.
Using the same pairs of words from this experiment, we
tested participants’ overt rhyming abilities at the end of
experimental session. In this overt rhyming judgment task,
the experimenter read aloud pairs of words and participants’
task was to judge if the words within each pair rhymed.
Experiment 2: The syllable discrimination task required a
silent discrimination of syllables in verbally presented
words (n=40). The stimuli consisted of sets of randomized
2-syllable (n=13), 3-syllable (n=15), and 4-syllable (n=12)
highly frequent Spanish words, such as bueno. The
experimenter read words and the participants were required
to determine the number of syllables in each word.
Experiment 3: The following test required silently
discerning words in compounds. The stimuli consisted of
compounds (n=20) and simple words (n=20). Like in
previous experiments, the stimuli included only highly
frequent Spanish words, such as girasol and were presented
in a randomized order. The experimenter read words and the
participants were required to determine the number of words
in each compound.
Experiment 4: The final test required silently discerning
words in names for numbers. The stimuli (n=20) included
trials that allowed 1, 2, 3, or 4 words to be discerned. For
example, eight contains only one word, whereas in fifty-six
two additional words can be discerned: fifty, six. The
experimenter read number words and the participants were
required to determine the number of words in each.
Except for the silent rhyming task, the stimuli in the
experiments were presented verbally.

Before evaluation began, each participant signed informed
consent. Prior to each experiment, participants completed
two to four practice trials. They were instructed to avoid
using strategies, moving the mouth or tongue, and to use
inner speech in all tests. The experimenter would read the
stimuli, except in Experiment 1 in which the stimuli were
presented visually, and participants were required to
respond as accurately as they could. There was no time limit
for answers. Participants’ responses for each experiment
were recorded manually on a separate response form and
later scored for accuracy. No feedback was provided during
testing.
Testing was carried out individually with each participant
in a quiet room, at ATeCe (patients) and at their homes
(HCs). Each patient was assessed in 3 sessions. The first
two sessions were devoted to evaluative measures (one
session with the certified speech pathologist, C.L., one
session with the neuropsychologist, E.U.G.) and the last
session was devoted to the experiments. Each session lasted
approximately 1 hour. HCs were tested in a single session.
The study was approved by the Basque Ethics Committee
for Clinical Research as well as by the ethics committee of
the University of the Basque Country. The study was
conducted in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration
guidelines on studies involving human subjects

Statistical analyses
We performed Mann-Whitney test for group comparisons in
experimental tasks and the modified –t-test (Crawford &
Howell, 1998) to compare performance in experimental
tasks of the patient with mixed aphasia to the mean scores of
the HCs group; the latter tests were one-tailed, as
recommended (Crawford & Howell, 1998), with α set at .05.
All statistical analyses were carried out in SPSS 22, except
for the modified t-test which was performed using the
SINGLIMS program (Crawford & Howell, 1998).

Results
The two groups did not differ considerably in age (t (19) = 1.433, p = .168) or in years of formal education (t (19) = .560, p = .582). However, they differed in general cognitive
status (t (19) = -7.213, p < .005), with the aphasic group
having achieved a mean score of 17.8 (±2.5) on MoCA and
HCs having a mean of 25.1 (±2.1).
Each patient achieved 100% correct scores on the
phoneme discrimination task. Their performance on Raven
Progressive Color Matrices (RPCM) and verbal working
memory (vWM) test varied, revealing different degrees of
deficit in non-verbal intelligence and vWM capacity
respectively across patients. The results of these tests are
summarized in Figure 1.

2434

Accuracy
(percent correct)

relative to HCs (silent rhyming, p = .16; overt rhyming, p
=.07; syllables, p =.33; compounds, p = .18; numbers, p
=.5), we repeated analyses excluding this patient from the
aphasic group.
The overall pattern of results remained unchanged, except
that the p value obtained in testing for differences in
distinguishing words in compounds reached statistical
significance (U = 22.000, Z = -1.93, p = .05). Thus, our
experimental data indicate that the persons with motor
aphasia had overall impaired inner speech, except when
inner speech involved words for numbers.

100
80
60
40
20
0
A01 A02 A03 A04 A05 A06 A07 A08
RPCM

vWM

Fig 1. Aphasic speakers’ performance on RPCM and vWM.
Furthermore, patients’ performance on the Varieties of
Inner Speech Questionnaire revealed different degrees of
use of the four types of inner speech (Fig. 2). The condensed
inner speech featured prominently, while inner speech
involving others was less present in their everyday
spontaneous use of inner speech.

Fig 2. Aphasic speakers’ use of four types of inner speech in
everyday life.
Looking at the results from experimental measures, we
found that, compared to HCs, the aphasic group performed
considerably worse on both rhyming tests (silent and overt),
and on the test of discrimination of syllables within words
(Table 1).Their ability to discern numbers and words in
compounds was comparable to that of HCs.
Table 1: Group differences across the experimental tasks.
Silent rhyming
Overt rhyming

U
4.500
1.500

Z
-3.475
-3.701

p
.001*
.005*

Syllables
Compounds
Numbers

25.500
32.000
43.500

-1.985
-1.513
-.631

.047*
.13/ .05*
.53

However, since the modified t-test has shown that the
person with mixed aphasia, A02, performed well in all tasks

Discussion
The goal of the present study was to assess whether poststroke patients with motor aphasia have deficits in inner
speech. To answer this question, we tested eight patients
with chronic aphasia using four tests of inner speech,
including the traditional tests such as silent rhyming
judgments and syllable discrimination, together with the
tests of word and number discrimination. The main finding
of the present study is that post-stroke patients with motor
aphasia have impaired inner speech. An additional,
unexpected finding is their preserved ability to silently
discern numbers in number words. The two findings are
discussed in turn.
Since all the aphasic patients achieved 100% correct on
the phoneme discrimination task (see Results), the deficit in
silent rhyme judgments cannot be due to impaired ability for
phonological discrimination. Instead of being solely due to
inner speech impairment, the silent rhyme judgments
impairment could be related to anomia, i.e. word finding
difficulty which to some extent characterizes all types of
aphasia (Benson & Ardila, 1996). A deficit in retrieval of
words referring to the presented images would preclude
making judgments on whether a pair of words referring to a
pair of drawings rhyme or not. Alternatively, a relatively
high working memory load in the silent rhyming task could
explain the deficit: the task requires interpreting pairs of
drawings, keeping track of semantic information derived
from the drawings, retrieving appropriate words, and
maintaining the retrieved words in working memory, while
judging whether the words rhyme.
Furthermore, the aphasic group had low scores in overt
rhyme judgments, a task in which the experimenter read
aloud pairs of words. Although this task imposes a smaller
cognitive load compared to the silent rhyme judgment task,
it still requires a certain amount of working memory
capacity, a cognitive resource that appears to be deficient in
the aphasic group (Fig. 1). Taken together, these results
indicate that the aphasic group’s deficit in judging rhymes
both covertly and overtly may be due to the verbal working
memory impairment. This explanation is compatible with
the aphasic group’s low scores on the subtests of MoCA
related to language and/or memory for language, including
repetition of sentences and verbal fluency. However,
although limited vWM capacity may have affected silent

2435

rhyming in the aphasic group, it does not explain their
overall poor scores on inner speech tasks, involving also
impaired discrimination of syllables in words and impaired
discrimination of words in compounds. These scores
indicate an impairment of inner speech, which could have
been further exacerbated by an increased verbal WM load
and anomia in the silent rhyming task.
The unexpected finding that the aphasic group was
successful in discerning numbers in number words is not
only interesting in itself, but it also has implications for the
theories on number processing. It suggests that the aphasic
speakers relied on a nonverbal, digital representation of
numbers (e.g. “57”) and not on spoken numerals
representations (“fifty-seven”). This explanation is
compatible with the proposals suggesting that number
processing is mediated by modality-specific processes, e.g.,
verbal code vs. digits (Kadosh & Walsh, 2009). While the
neural substrates supporting the two types of processing
differ, it remains unclear whether the differences pertain to
these representations supporting inner speech as well.
Wernicke originally proposed that the left superior
temporal gyrus (STG) supported auditory word-form
recognition, monitoring of speech output generated by
frontal regions as well as inner speech, while contemporary
models suggest a functional distinction between the anterior
STG, which supports auditory word-form recognition, and
posterior STG, which regulates speech production,
including inner speech (DeWitt & Rauschecker, 2013).
Neuroimaging studies have associated inner speech with a
range of brain areas, including the left supramarginal gyrus,
posterior STG, middle temporal gyrus and the inferior
frontal gyrus (Paulesu et al., 1993; Indefrey & Levelt, 2004;
Geva et al., 2011b; Fama et al., 2017). A recent voxel-based
lesion-symptom mapping study involving 40 lefthemisphere post-stroke patients indicates that inner speech,
at the phonological access stage of speech production, is
supported by the posterior STG and adjacent areas (Pillay et
al., 2014), and that the left inferior frontal gyrus in fact
supports working memory and control processes associated
with inner speech. Our data appear to support this model,
although we would interpret the working memory deficit in
our aphasic group in terms of affected network connectivity
(Kljajevic, 2014), because all the patients had deficient
vWM, regardless of each case’s specific site of lesion.
As pointed out in the Introduction, studying phonological
word form as a proxy of inner speech provides only a part of
the answer to the question of whether inner speech is
impaired in motor aphasia. A quick look at the patients’
subjective reports on their use of inner speech in everyday
life (Fig. 2) suggests a rather complex picture. It suggests
that, as in impaired overt speech – where some degree of
communication may take place despite the deficit-,
impairment of certain aspects of inner speech may still
allow use of its other forms. It is not surprising that aphasic
speakers in our study showed the most use of the condensed
type of inner speech in everyday life. The condensed form is
closest to the type of inner speech originally described by

Vygotsky (1986): compressed, and not necessarily
resembling overt speech.
In conclusion, our data indicate a degree of inner speech
impairment in post-stroke patients with motor aphasia,
regardless of lesion distribution (frontal, fronto-temporal,
deep grey matter structures). Like their overt speech, their
inner speech appears to be affected by difficulties in word
retrieval and reduced verbal WM capacity.

Acknowledgments
This study was funded by a grant from IKERBASQUE,
Basque Foundation for Science 111407EMDD (V.K.),
IT769-13 (Basque Government) (A.V.) & FFI2014-52196-P
(Spanish MINECO) (A.V).

References
Alderson-Day, B. & Fernyhough, C. (2015). Inner speech:
development, cognitive function, phenomenology and
neurobiology. Psychological Bulletin 141, 931-965.
Alderson-Day, B., Weis, S., McCarthy-Jones, S., Moseley,
P., Smailes, D. & Charles Fernyhough, C. (2015). The
brain’s conversation with itself: neural substrates of
dialogic inner speech. Social Cognitive and Affective
Neuroscience, doi: 10.1093/scan/nsv094.
Almairac, F., Herbet, G., Moritz-Gasser, S., Menjot de
Champfleur, N. & Duffau, H. (2015). The left inferior
fronto-occipital fasciculus subserves language semantics:
a multilevel lesion study. Brain Struct Funct 220, 19831985.
Almor, A., MacDonald, M. C., Kempler, D., Andersen,
E.S., & Tyler, L. K. (2001). Comprehension of long
distance number agreement in probable Alzheimer's
disease. Language & Cognitive Processes, 16(1), 35-63.
Ardila, A., Rosselli, M. & Puente, A. E. (1993).
Neuropsychological evaluation of the Spanish speaker.
Plenum Press: New York.
Baddeley A. D., Logie R. H. (1999). Working memory: the
multiple component model. In: Miyake A., Shah P. (Eds),
Models of Working Memory: Mechanisms of Active
Maintenance and Executive Control. New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press, pp. 28–61.
Baldo, J.V., Paulraj,S.R., Curran, B.C. & Dronkers, N.F.
(2015). Impaired reasoning and problem-solving in
individuals with language impairment due to aphasia or
language delay. Frontiers in Psychology 6: 1523.
Beck, A.T., Ward, C. H., Mendelson, M., Mock, J., &
Erbaugh, J. (1961). An inventory for measuring
depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 4, 561-571.
Benson, F.D. & Ardila, A. (1996). Aphasia: a clinical
perspective. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
De Bleser, R. & Marshall, J.M. (2005). Egon Weigl and the
concept of inner speech. Cortex, 41, 249-257.
De Guerrero, M.C.M. (2005). Inner Speech – L2: Thinking
Words in a Second Language. New York: Springer.

2436

DeWitt, I. & Rauschecker, J.P. (2013). Wernicke’s areas
revisited: parallel streams and word processing. Brain &
Language 127, 181-191.
Fama, M.E., Hayward, W., Snider, S.F., Friedman, R.B.,
Turkeltaub, P.E. (2017). Subjective experience of inner
speech in aphasia: preliminary behavioral relationships
and neural correlates. Brain & Language 164, 32-42.
Feinberg, T.E., Gonzalez-Rothi, L.J. & Heilman, K.M.
(1986). “Inner speech” in conduction aphasia. Arch
Neurol 43, 591-593.
Frith C. (1992). The Cognitive Neuropsychology of
Schizophrenia.
Hover:
Lawrence
Erlbaum
Associates.García-Albea, J.E., Sánchez Bernardos, M.L.
& Del Viso, S. (1996). Test de Boston para el diagnóstico
de la afasia: adaptación española. Editorial Médica
Panamericana, S.A., Madrid.
Geva, S., Bennett, S., Warburton, E.A. & Patterson, K.
(2011a). Discrepancy between inner and overt speech:
Implications for post-stroke aphasia and normal language
processing. Aphasiology 25, 323-343.
Geva, S., Jones, S., Crinion, J.T., Price, C.J., Baron, J.-C. &
Warburton, E.A. (2011b). The neural correlates of inner
speech defined by voxel-based lesion-symptom mapping.
Brain, 134, 3071-3082.
Goodglass, H. & Kaplan, E. (1983). Boston Diagnostic
Aphasia Examination. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger.
Goral, M., Clark-Cotton, M., Spiro, A., Obler, L.K.,
Verkuilen, J. et al. (2011). The Contribution of Set
Switching and Working Memory to Sentence Processing
in Older Adults. Exp Aging Research, 375(5), 516-538.
Heilman, K.H. (2006). Aphasia and the diagram makers
revisited: an update of information processing model.
Journal of Clinical Neurology, 2, 149-162.
Indefrey, P & Levelt, W.J. (2004). The spatial and temporal
signatures of word production components. Cognition 92,
101-144.
Kaplan, E., Goodglass, H. & Weintrab, S. (1983). The
Boston naming test. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger.
Kadosh, C. & Walsh, V. (2009). Numerical Representation
in the Parietal Lobes: Abstract or not Abstract? Behav
Brain Sci., 32, 313-28.
Kinsbourne, M. (2000). Inner speech and the inner life.
Brain & Language 71, 120-123.
Kljajevic, V. (2014). White matter architecture of the
language network. Translational Neuroscience 5, 239-252
Langland-Hassan, P., Faries, F.R., Richardson, M.J. &
Dietz, A. (2015). Inner speech deficits in people with
aphasia. Frontiers in Psychology 6:528, doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00528
Levine, D.N., Calvanio, R., Popovics, A. (1982). Language
in the absence of inner speech. Neuropsychologia 20,
391-409.
Levelt, W.J.M. (1995). Speaking. From intention to
articulation. The MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
Marvel, C.L. & Desmond, J.E. (2012). From storage to
manipulation: how the neural correlates of verbal working

memory reflect varying demands on inner speech. Brain
& Language 120, 42-51.
McCarthy-Jones, S. & Fernyhough, C. (2011). The varieties
of inner speech: links between quality of inner speech and
psychopathological variables in a sample of young adults.
Conscious Cogn. 20(4):1586-93.
Martínez-Manrique, F. & Vicente, A. (2010) What the…!’
The role of inner speech in conscious thought. Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 17, 141–67.
Morin, A. (2009). Self-awareness deficits following loss of
inner speech: Dr. Jill Bolte Taylor’s case study.
Consciousness and Cognition, 18, 524-529.
Morin, A. & Michaud, J. (2007). Self-awareness and the left
frontal gyrus: inner speech use during self-related
processing. Brain Research Bulletin 74, 387-396.
Nasreddine, Z.S., Phillips N.A., Bédirian, V., Charbonneau,
S., Whitehead, V. Collin, I. et al. (2005). The Montreal
Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: A Brief Screening Tool
for Mild Cognitive Impairment. Journal of the American
Geriatrics Society, 53, 695–699.
Oldfield, R.C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of
handedness: the Edinburgh inventory. Neuropshycologia
9, 97-113.
Oppenheim, G.M. & Dell, G.S. (2008). Inner speech slips
exhibit lexical bias, but not the phonemic similarity effect.
Cognition 106, 528–537.
Paulesu, E., Frith, C.D. & Frackowiak, R.S.J. (1993). The
neural correlates of the verbal component of working
memory. Nature 362, 342-345.
Perrone-Bertolloti, M., Rapin, L., Lachaux J.P., Baciu, M.,
Lœvenbruck, H. (2014). What is that little voice inside
my head? Inner speech phenomenology, its role in
cognitive performance, and its relation to self-monitoring.
Behav Brain Res.261, 220-239.
Pillay, S.B., Stengal, B.C., Humphries, C., Book, D.S. &
Binder, J.R. (2014). Cerebral localization of impaired
phonological retrieval during rhyme judgment. Ann
Neurol, 76, 738-746.
Raven, J. C., Court, J. H., & Raven, J. (1990). Manual for
Raven’s progressive matrices and vocabulary scales—
section 2: Coloured progressive matrices. Oxford: Oxford
Psychologists Press.
Sanfeliu, C.M. & Fernandez, A. (1996). A set of 254
Snodgrass-Vanderwart pictures standardized for Spanish:
Norms for name agreement, image agreement, familiarity,
and visual complexity. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 28(4), 537-555.
Snodgrass, J.G. & Vanderwart, M. (1980). A standardized
set of 254 pictures: Norms for name agreement, image
agreement, familiarity, and visual complexity. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory,
6, 174-215.
Vygotsky, L. (1986). Thought and language. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.

2437

