Interleaving area problems in the 4th grade classroom:
What is the role of context and practice?
Rachael Todaro (rtodaro@kent.edu) & Bradley J. Morris (bmorri20@kent.edu)
Department of Educational Psychology, 405 White Hall
Kent State University, Kent, OH 44242 USA

Abstract
Typical mathematics instruction involves blocked practice
across a set of conceptually similar problems. Interleaving, or
practice across a set of conceptually dissimilar problems,
improves learning and transfer by repeatedly reloading
information and increasing discrimination of problem
features. Similarly, comparing problems across different
contexts highlights relevant and irrelevant knowledge. Our
experiment is the first to investigate the relative effects of
interleaving geometry problems and interleaving contexts.
Thirty-three fourth-grade students received the same practice
problems but were randomly assigned to one of three
conditions: interleaved by math skill, interleaved by context,
and interleaved by math skill and by context (i.e., hyperinterleaved). Afterward, each participant was exposed to tests
assessing declarative and procedural knowledge. The results
suggest that interleaving math skill within varying contexts
enhances the acquisition of mathematical procedures.
Keywords: interleaving, cognitive development, mathematics
instruction

Introduction
Mathematics has been subject to a broad array of
interventions and techniques that could potentially improve
learning, retention, and transfer of knowledge to novel
contexts. One promising intervention is known as
interleaved practice, in which exposures to concepts (e.g.,
math skills) are followed by exposures to dissimilar
concepts (Rohrer, 2012). Another promising technique is
presenting concepts in multiple contexts, which supports
generalization (Vlach, Sandhofer, & Kornell, 2008). The
purpose of the present study was to examine the effects of
interleaving geometrical problems across two different, yet
familiar, contexts. We investigated the effects of
interleaving context, math skill, or context and math skill by
presenting this information in blocks (i.e., the same format
across a series of examples). The main hypothesis of the
present study was that interleaving across both context and
math skill (hereafter hyper-interleaving) produces an
additive effect, which would increase learning, retention,
and transfer beyond other conditions because such
presentation highlights differences between examples and
supports greater discrimination among math skills.

Mechanisms underlying Interleaving
Presenting math problems in an interleaved fashion
improves performance outcomes because this type of
presentation supports two fundamental mechanisms for

successful learning: discrimination training and repeated
reloading. Discrimination training involves comparing and
contrasting problem features, which may leading to a higher
likelihood of increased learning of concepts and procedures
as well as an increased ability to transfer solution strategies
to novel problems (Kang & Pashler, 2012; Rittle-Johnson &
Star, 2007). Repeated reloading occurs when a student
revisits the same type of problem and supports effortful
recall of the information, which increases the likelihood for
successful encoding (Bjork & Bjork, 2011).
Presenting interleaved problems typically consists of two
components. The first component is the presentation of
conceptually dissimilar problem types during the practice
session (e.g., a problem about the area of a square following
a problem about the area of a triangle). The second
component is the distribution of those problems across
multiple practice sessions. That is, the student returns to
practice the interleaved problems on more than one instance
(Rohrer et al, 2014). Presenting interleaved problems
supports comparisons and contrasts between members of
different categories (e.g., perimeter of squares vs. triangles).
In this manner, comparing and contrasting perceptual and
conceptual information not only promotes learning
regarding how to perform each procedure, but trains the
learner to discriminate which solution strategy is appropriate
for each problem example (i.e., discriminative contrast;
Birnbaum, Kornell, Bjork, & Bjork, 2013; Kornell & Bjork,
2008).
Initially, interleaved practice appeared to owe most of its
effectiveness to spacing. Spacing is inherent in interleaved
practice because there is time between each opportunity to
practice concepts. This is distinct from massed practice as it
allows students to forget irrelevant information between
learning events, which increases the potency of encoding on
subsequent presentations (Bjork and Allen, 1970; Cuddy
and Jacoby, 1982). However, interleaving does not solely
rely on the benefits and efficacy of spacing. Given the same
amount of temporal space between each exposure,
interleaved presentation produces greater gains in learning
than blocked presentation (Kang & Pashler, 2012). More
recent literature emphasizes the importance of repeated
reloading (Bjork & Bjork, 2011), which suggests that
accurate memory retrieval is enhanced when a learner must
repeatedly reload specific concepts from long-term to shortterm memory. In fact, interleaved practice may provide its
benefit more from repeated reloading rather than to the
amount of time between successful reloads (e.g. temporal
spacing; Kang & Pashler, 2012).

3344

Learning with Contexts
Learning is context-dependent (Willingham, 2009). Placing
math problems in familiar contexts may not only be an
effective presentation method but an additive one as it
activates domain knowledge that may facilitate learning and
problem solving by providing a framework in which the
student can make sense of the concept (Willingham, 2009;
Rittle-Johnson & Star, 2007). Context also offers the learner
cues to solve a problem because it draws his/her attention to
the right details and improves learning in memory retrieval,
problem solving (Godden & Baddeley, 1975), and reasoning
tasks (Cheng & Holyoak, 1985). The main finding across
studies regarding context is that when learning and testing
contexts are the same, there is an improvement in
performance. These findings also suggest that if a student
learns within a single context, she may fail to retrieve
information outside the context (i.e., context dependency,
Godden & Baddeley, 1975; Vlach et al., 2011). Distributing
learning across multiple events that use multiple contexts
can reduce context dependency (Rothkopf, Fisher &
Billington, 1982; Smith, 1982). Additionally, learning
across multiple contexts results in a greater number and
variance of salient cues during learning, which may increase
the likelihood of recall (Smith, 1982; Vlach et al., 2011).
When multiple contexts are presented across multiple
learning events and these contexts are similar, the shared
contextual support leads to greater learning than does
providing a single cue from one context (Thiessen &
Saffran, 2003; Vlach et al., 2011).
While ours is the first study to interleave both math skill
and context, Rau, Aleven, and Rummel (2013) investigated
how interleaving specific dimensions of math problems may
affect performance. By either interleaving fraction problems
(i.e., dividing fractions) or their graphical representations
(i.e., pie chart, number line), they found that interleaving
problems was most beneficial to learning whereas
interleaving the representations was not. In a follow-up
study, Rau, Aleven, Rummel, and Pardos (2014) found that
interleaving both dimensions significantly benefited
learning over interleaving problems alone.
The present study investigated the relative contributions
of interleaved sequencing across math skills and context on
declarative knowledge (i.e., knowledge of facts), procedural
knowledge (knowledge of how to choose and carry out a
procedure), and transfer assessments (i.e., ability to apply
knowledge in novel contexts). In addition, we investigated
whether these elements produce an additive effect in which
their combination produces greater learning gains than
either element presented individually. To test these effects,
we created a 2 x 2 factorial design as follows: math skill
interleaved (interleaved math skill/blocked context), context
interleaved (blocked math skill/interleaved context),
hyperinterleaved (interleaved math skill/interleaved
context). The authors chose to omit the fully condition
(blocked math skill/blocked context) since it does not
address the current research question, as both dimensions
are blocked. As mentioned in the introduction, we

hypothesized that the hyperinterleaved group would perform
better than the math skill interleaved and context interleaved
group on all assessments post-intervention (i.e., posttest,
delayed posttest, transfer, and delayed transfer) due to
increased discrimination training across contexts and
procedures. We also predicted that the math skill interleaved
group would perform better than the context interleaved
condition since relevant problem features are highlighted.

Method
Participants
Thirty-seven children (15 girls) ranging from nine to ten
years of age were recruited from an elementary school in
Northeast Ohio and completed up to six separate sessions.
Each child was enrolled in the 4th grade during the 20162017 school year. Four students completed the first session
but were not present for either the second or third session
and their data were excluded from all analyses. The
remaining 33 students completed both sessions of the
intervention and were subject to analyses.

Task
Participants were taught to define and solve for area of four,
two-dimensional geometrical shapes: square, triangle,
rectangle, and parallelogram. Although various problems
resulted in the same numerical solution during pretest,
intervention, post-test, transfer, delayed posttest and delayed
transfer test, no problem appeared more than once. In each
problem, the participants were given the necessary features
of each shape to solve the problems successfully (e.g., for a
triangle, the base, height, and length of the sides were
given). Throughout all sessions of the experiment, the
participants needed to select and carryout the appropriate
math skill (e.g., solving for the area of each shape).

Design & Procedure
The current study included five sessions: a pretest, first and
second intervention, a one-day delayed posttest and transfer
test, and a 30-day delayed posttest and transfer test. Each of
the first four sessions occurred across four consecutive days,
one session per day. The fifth session occurred 30 days after
the fourth session ended. All sessions occurred in the 4th
graders’ classroom. Each participant was randomly assigned
to one of three conditions: math skill interleaved, context
interleaved, or hyper-interleaved. Problems in the math skill
interleaved condition were presented such that the area
problems were interleaved but blocked by context. Problems
in the context interleaved condition were presented such that
problem contexts were interleaved but the math skill was
blocked. Problems in the hyperinterleaved condition were
presented such that both context and math skill were
interleaved. See Table 1. The math skills used in the study
were formulas in which to solve area (e.g., area of a square).
The contexts used in the current study were “indoor
maintenance” (How much carpet is needed to cover a
bedroom?) and “outdoor renovations” (How many feet of

3345

the playground is covered by mulch). The first author
administered all procedures described below.
Coding Rubric
The coding rubric was created for the purpose of
representing the performance expectations for all
assessments. The rubric was separated into two component
parts (i.e., declarative and procedural knowledge) and
provided clear descriptions of criteria needed to satisfy each
one. The declarative knowledge component assessed
adequate shape drawing as well as accurate defining of
geometrical terms (i.e., area). The rubric included
acceptable answers (i.e., “space inside of a shape”) ranging
from one to two points and unacceptable answers (i.e., area
around the shape”), which were worth zero points. For the
procedural knowledge component, the following criteria
were included: two points for the application of the correct
procedure, one point for correct answer, and one point for
correct unit notation. Inter-rater reliability was strong for the
declarative and procedural components, with Cohen’s kappa
= .90 and .96, respectively.
Table 1: Groups were presented problems interleaved by
math skill, context, or by both math skill and context.

Group

Sequence of Math
Skill

Sequence of
Context

Math Skill
Interleaved

Interleaved

Blocked

Context
Interleaved

Blocked

Interleaved

Hyperinterleaved

Interleaved

Interleaved

not contain a context but a box below asking for the area.
The participants were expected to show their work inside
the box.
Session 2: Intervention Phase 1
During the second session, students were given a
supplemental packet with the definitions of concepts (e.g.,
height, base, area, etc.) and worked examples (Sweller,
1988) of area problems across all four shapes.
Shortly afterward, students were given a brief lesson
about the area of each shape encouraging the students to
identify key words such as “cover” for area, show their
work in the specified boxes below each figure, and to use
their supplemental packet to follow along in the lesson. The
lesson lasted between 10-15 minutes.
After the lesson, participants were administered the first
phase of the training packet. The entire training packet
consisted of 24 area problems to be divided between three
sessions of training. Two area problems of each shape were
included in each training packet. The first phase of the
training packet consisted of a mixture of 8 area problems
across either one or both contexts depending on which
condition the participants pertained. If the participants had
questions, they were directed to the supplemental packet and
were advised to focus on the cue words in order to solve for
area of the four various shapes. Students were given
minimal feedback for the duration of the intervention. The
first phase of the intervention lasted approximately 30
minutes.
Session 3: Intervention Phase 2
The second intervention session was similar to the first. The
students received the second set of eight area problems of
four different shapes across one or both contexts. The
participants were given 25-30 minutes to complete the
second session of the intervention.

Session 1: Pretest
During the first session, participants were administered a
pre-test in order to assess prior declarative knowledge
regarding the concept of area. One question was asked
regarding the definition of area. Students earned up to two
points if they included key terms listed on the scoring
rubric. They were also asked to draw each shape, which was
worth one point. Participants were also asked to define the
shapes with the possibility of earning up to two points for
each shape’s definition. Additionally, within the pretest the
participants were given two area problems for each shape to
solve, which assessed prior procedural knowledge. Each
procedural problem was worth four points. As per the
scoring rubric, the participants needed to demonstrate the
correct procedure, correct answer, and correct notation of
units (e.g., ft.2). In total, participants were able to earn up to
46 points on the pretest. The participants were given 30
minutes to complete the pretest. The pretest problems did

Session 4: Posttest and Transfer Test
The posttest was similar to the pretest but differed in
numerical measurements across all four shapes in order to
avoid practice effects. The first section required that the
students define the concepts of area along with drawing and
defining the four different shapes. Again, this section
assessed declarative knowledge and was worth a possible 14
points. The participants then completed four area problems
of each shape for a total of eight posttest problems. Six
questions that contained novel contexts were included in the
posttest, in order to assess for transfer of procedural
knowledge. The purpose of including these problems was to
investigate whether any of the presentation conditions
would lead to increased transfer to novel contexts. The
transfer problems dealt with contexts distinct from those
seen previously in the experiment (baseball fields, cooking,
distances riding a bike, etc.). Like the pretest, participants
could earn up to four points on each posttest and transfer
procedural problem provided that they demonstrate the
correct procedure, answer, and unit notation. In total,

3346

participants were able to earn up to 46 points on the posttest
and 24 points on transfer problems.
Session 5: 30-day Delayed Posttest and Transfer Test
The delayed post-test and the delayed transfer test were
similar to the original post-test and transfer test. The first
section of the delayed posttest was identical to the one-day
posttest: the participants defined, drew, and described the
concepts and shapes listed. The problems on both the
delayed post-test and delayed transfer test only differed
slightly on the numerical measurements of the shapes and
novel figures in order to avoid practice effects. In total,
participants were able to earn up to 46 points on the delayed
posttest and 24 points on delayed transfer problems.
Table 2: Means and Standard Deviations (N = 33)

Pretest
Declarative
Procedural
Posttest
Declarative
Procedural
Transfer
Delayed
Posttest
Declarative
Procedural
Transfer

Math Skill
Interleaved
(n = 12)

Context
Interleaved
(n = 10)

Hyperinterleaved
(n = 11)

5.1 (3.0)
5.1 (4.6)

5.5 (2.8)
1.7 (1.8)

5.7 (2.8)
4.4 (4.5)

6.3 (1.6)
18.2 (8.2)
12.3 (6.9)

7.4 (2.2)
9.3 (5.9)
9.2 (5.8)

10

Math Skill

Context

Hyper

8

Points Earned

Test

In this analysis we used the three interleaving types as a
between-subjects variable and pretest, posttest, and delayed
posttest as a within subject variable. This was to examine
whether or not interleaving types influenced declarative
knowledge. The test of within subjects effects indicated a
main effect of test, F(2, 54) = 7.746, MSe = 27.033, p <
.001, ηp2= .223. Within subjects contrasts indicated that
participants performed better on the posttest declarative
questions compared to the pretest declarative questions, F(1,
27) = 6.133, MSe = 45.633, p = .020, ηp2= .185. Although
the mean for delayed posttest declarative questions was
higher than posttest, this difference was not statistically
significant, F(1, 27) = 3.381, MSe = 12.033, p = .077, ηp2=
.111. There was not a significant interaction between test
and group from posttest to delayed posttest declarative
questions, F(2, 27) = 2.931, MSe = 10.433, p = .07, ηp2=
.178. Tests of between-subjects effects determined that there
was not a significant effect of group, F < 1.

7.1 (2.2)
20.0 (9.3)
15.8 (9.0)

6
4
2
0

Pretest

Posttest Delayed Posttest

Figure 3: Mean scores of each group on declarative
knowledge. Error bars indicate standard errors of the means.
7.8 (1.9)
19.4 (11.8)
12.9 (7.0)

7.0 (2.3)
14.3 (5.8)
11.1 (5.1)

Interleaving x Procedural Problems

7.3 (2.7)
23.2 (5.2)
14.8 (7.0)

Results
Table 2 displays the means and standard deviations for the
pretest, posttest, transfer, delayed posttest, and delayed
transfer test separated by declarative items, problems, and
transfer problems. It is clear in the table that there was a
great deal of variability within each group on each of the
problem and transfer test scores.
Three repeated measures ANOVAs were conducted to
examine the differences in number of points scored as a
function of (1) 3 Interleaving Types (between; Math Skill
Interleaved, Context Interleaved, and Hyperinterleaved x 3
Procedural Problems (within; Pre, Post, Delayed); (2) 3
Interleaving Types x 2 Transfer Problems (within; Transfer
& Delayed Transfer); (3) 3 Interleaving Types x 3
Declarative Knowledge Problems (within; Pre, Post,
Delayed).

Interleaving x Declarative Knowledge

In this analysis we used the 3 interleaving types as a
between subjects variable and pretest, posttest, and delayed
posttest as a within subject variable. This was to answer the
question of whether or not the different interleaving types
impacted the problem solving accuracy of pre, post, and
delayed posttest problems. As is evident in Figure 1
regarding procedural problem accuracy, the test of within
subjects effects indicated that there was a main effect of test,
F(2, 54) = 53.46, MSe = 2235.54, p < .001, ηp2= .66. Within
subjects contrast indicated that students performed better on
the posttest problems compared to the pretest problems, F(1,
27) = 85.19, MSe = 4538.70, p < .001, ηp2= .76. Although
the mean for the delayed posttest problems was higher than
the posttest problems, it was not statistically significant,
F(1, 27) = 3.89, MSe = 407.01, p = .117, ηp2= .089. The
interaction between test and group was approaching
statistical significance, F(1, 27) = 3.157, MSe = 168. 175, p
= .059, ηp2= .190.
The test of between-subjects effects determined that there
was a significant main effect of group, F(1, 27) = 5.209,
MSe = 136.608, p = .012, ηp2= .278. A Bonferroni test of
multiple comparisons revealed that participants in the
hyperinterleaved condition performed significantly better

3347

from posttest to delayed posttest procedural problems when
compared to the context interleaved condition, p = .011,
whereas the math skill interleaved group did not, p = .108.
The hyperinterleaved condition did perform better than the
math skill interleaved condition on solving procedural
problems from post- to delayed post test, however, these
findings were not statistically significant, p > .088.
30

Math Skill

Context

Hyper

Points Earned

25
20
15
10
5
0

Pretest

Posttest Delayed Posttest

Discussion

Figure 1: Mean scores of each group on procedural
knowledge. Error bars indicate standard errors of the means.

Interleaving x Transfer
In this analysis we used the 3 interleaving types as a
between subjects variable and transfer and delayed transfer
test as a within subject variable. This was to answer the
question of whether or not the different interleaving types
impacted the participants’ problem accuracy of transfer and
delayed transfer test. The test of within subjects effects did
not find a main effect of test, F(1, 28) < 1, MSe = 1.492, p =
.805, ηp2= .040. Although represented in Figure 2, the
context and math skill interleaved groups encountered a rise
in performance from transfer to delayed transfer problems,
within subjects contrasts revealed that the interaction effects
were not significant, F(1, 28) < 1, MSe = 13.981, p = .566,
ηp2= .040. While the hyperinterleaved group performed best
on both transfer tests, tests of between-subjects effects
determined that there was not a significant effect of group,
F(1, 28) = 2.25, MSe = 127.801, p = .124, ηp2= .138.

Points Earned

20

Math Skill

problems in which the hyperinterleaved group performed
significantly better than the context interleaved group and
the math skill interleaved group did not. However, the result
pattern could be due to lower pretest scores for the context
interleaved group.
To further examine the effect of group on assessments,
change scores were computed and a one-way ANOVA was
conducted. The ANOVA demonstrated that change scores
from pretest to posttest of the hyperinterleaved group
significantly differed from the context interleaved group,
F(2, 28) = 3.301, MSe = 169.563, p = .05. Bonferroni tests
of multiple comparisons indicated this difference was not
statistically significant, p = .07. Change scores from pretest
to delayed posttest and from posttest to delayed posttest
indicated no significant differences between groups, ps >
.05. Furthermore, there were no differences between groups
in changes scores from transfer to delayed transfer, p > .05.

Context

Hyper

15
10
5
0

Transfer
Delayed Transfer
Figure 2: Mean scores of each group on transfer of
procedural knowledge to novel contexts. Error bars indicate
standard errors of the means.
Overall, all groups demonstrated significant learning of
procedural problems from pretest to posttest. In fact, there
was a main effect of group on the posttest procedural

Our results demonstrate that when math skill was
interleaved (i.e., in the math skill interleaved and
hyperinterleaved groups), procedural performance on
posttest was significantly better than when math skill was
blocked (i.e., context interleaved group). These findings
provide additional support for interleaved practice as a
technique that enhances memory by increasing the number
of repeated reloads and by promoting discriminative
contrast among problems. Recall that the context interleaved
group blocked the math skill problems and interleaved the
contexts. Blocking math skills does not allow the learner
space between problems to reload relevant information.
Additionally, blocking these problems does not allow the
learner to discriminate between the features of other shapes
in order to highlight key elements within the problem in
order to apply the appropriate procedure.
The lack of statistical differences between the math skill
interleaved and the hyperinterleaved group on posttest may
be due to the lack of variation between contexts. Recall that
practicing problems in multiple, varying contexts typically
reduces context dependency, which supports generalization
to novel situations. In the current study, the contexts may
not have been different enough to decrease the level of
context dependency. And, a stronger effect of
hyperinterleaving may have been observed if more than two
contexts were included in this study. Alternatively, the
spacing of practice across two separate sessions of
intervention may have equalized the effects of interleaving
math skill and hyperinterleaving.
The results of our experiment align with those of Rau et
al. (2013; 2014), suggesting two notions. One, math skill is
the problem dimension that benefits most from an
interleaved practice sequence. Two, interleaving both math
skill and another dimension (i.e., context) may enhance
learning when compared to interleaving math skill alone. It
is important to note that the hyperinterleaved group
demonstrated increased learning on all post, delayed
posttest, and transfer procedural problems. One explanation

3348

for these findings may be that interleaving context while
also interleaving math skill may require more effort on the
part of the learner during practice, resulting in enhanced
memory. Another explanation is that shuffling familiar
contexts during practice may facilitate the application of
knowledge outside of the context in which it was learned.
This experiment provided an important contribution in
understanding the benefits of more effortful interleaved
practice when learning new skills and transferring them to
novel contexts.
Although the fourth-grade sample size in the current
study was small, the apparent trend of interleaving math
skills within different contexts that led to better performance
seems to be promising. The results suggest that early
learning of math skills such as solving for area may benefit
from all types of practice, especially when spaced over time.
For future research, it may be beneficial to examine the
effect of context versus no context in interleaving
experiments that evaluate retention and transfer of
declarative and procedural knowledge.

Conclusion
Our experiment demonstrated the potential educational
benefits of hyperinterleaving math skill with contexts. The
results of the current study suggest that along with the
advantages that interleaving area problems offers, shuffling
contexts throughout this practice may also contribute to
better generalization of these skills. Our study is one of the
first to examine the effectiveness of combining interleaved
practice with another common instructional technique.
Placing examples in a familiar context is often used in
classroom settings to make learning tasks recognizable for
young learners and this study has provided unique insight
on how this technique interacts with that of interleaved
practice. More research is necessary to understand how
interleaved practice interacts with context and other
effective learning techniques, especially within the
classroom environment.

Acknowledgements
A special thanks goes to the fourth graders at Willyard
Elementary, Caitlin Fortson, Jennifer Roche, Christopher
Was, Tracy Arner, and Colleen Dragovich.

References
Bjork, R.A., Allen, T.W. (1970). The spacing effect:
consolidation or differential encoding? Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 9 567-572.
Bjork, E.L., Bjork, R.A. (2011). Making things hard on
yourself but in a good way: Creating desirable difficulties
to enhance learning. In Gernsbacher, M.A., Pew, R.W.,
Hough, L.M., & Pomerantz, J.R. (Eds.), Psychology and
the real world: Essays illustrating fundamental
contributions to society (pp. 56-64). New York, NY:
Worth Publishers.
Cheng, P.W., & Holyoak, K.J. (1985). Pragmatic reasoning
schemas, Cognitive Psychology, 17, 391-416.

Cuddy, L.J., Jacoby, L.L. (1982). When forgetting helps
memory: an analysis of repetition effects. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 21, 451-467.
Godden, D.R., & Baddeley, A.D. (1975). Contextdependent memory in two natural environments: On land
and under water. British Journal of Psychology, 66, 325331.
Kang, S.H.K., Pashler, H. (2012). Learning painting styles:
Spacing is advantageous when it promotes discriminative
contrast. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 26, 97-103.
Kornell, N., Bjork, R.A. (2008). Learning concepts and
categories: Is spacing the “enemy of induction”?
Psycholgical Science, 19, 585-592.
Rau, M.A., Aleven, V., Rummel, N. (2013). Interleaved
practice in multidimensional learning tasks: Which
dimension should we interleave? Learning and
Instruction, 21, 98-114.
Rau, M.A, Rau, M.A., Aleven, V., Rummel, N., Pardos, Z.
How should intelligent tutoring systems sequence
multiple graphical representations? A mutli-methods
study. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in
Education, 24, 125-161.
Rittle-Johnson, B., Star, J. (2007) Does comparing solution
methods facilitate conceptual and procedural knowledge?
An experimental study on learning to solve equations.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 99, 561-574.
Rohrer, D. (2012) Interleaving helps students distinguish
among similar concepts. Educational Psychology Review,
24, 355-367.
Rohrer, D., Dedrick, R.F., Burgess, K. (2014). The benefit
of interleaved mathematics practice is not limited to
superficially similar kinds of problems. Psychonomics
Bulletin and Review, 21, 1323-1330.
Rothkopf, E., Fisher, D., & Billington, M. (1982). Effects of
spatial context during acquisition on the recall of
attributive information. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 8, 126138.
Smith, S.M. (1982). Enhancement of recall using multiple
environmental contexts during learning. Memory &
Cognition, 10, 405-412.
Sweller, J. (1988). Cognitive load during problem solving,
Cognitive Science, 12, 257-285.
Theissen, E.D., & Saffran, J.R. (2003). When cues collide:
Use of stress and statistical cues to word boundaries by 7to-9 month old infants. Developmental Psychology, 39,
484-494.
Vlach, H.A., Sandhofer, C.M., & Kornell, N. (2008). The
spacing effect in children’s memory and category
induction. Cognition, 109, 163-167.
Vlach, H.A., Sandhofer, C.M. (2011). Developmental
differences in children’s context-dependent word
learning. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 108,
394-401.
Willingham, D.T. (2009). Why Don’t Students Like School?
San Fransisco: Jossey-Bass.

3349

