Interactivity and Ego Depletion in Insight Problem Solving
Frédéric Vallée-Tourangeau
Department of Psychology, Kingston University
Kingston-upon-Thames UNITED KINGDOM KT1 2EE
f.vallee-tourangeau@kingston.ac.uk

Abstract
In the triangle of coins problem coins are arranged to
create a triangle pointing down and the solution involves
moving a few coins to change its orientation. The task
ecology can be designed such that participants can work
on it in a low interactivity environment, maintaining a
mental representation of simulated moves, or in a high
interactivity environment, thinking with and through a
physical model of the problem. These task ecologies
involve working memory to a different degree: Problem
solving draws more on working memory the lower the
degree of physical interaction. Participants first engaged
in a writing task that required vigilance to inhibit
common word choices, a degree of self regulation
designed to induce a so-called ego depletion;
participants then worked on the ToC problem in either a
low or high interactivity environment. Solution rates
were determined by level of interactivity; the preceding
depletion experience did not impact performance.
Keywords: Interactivity, ego depletion, insight problem
solving, working memory

Introduction
The relative contribution of working memory in analytic
and insight problem solving has been explored using a
broad range of methodologies. Prototypical analytic
problems such as those requiring arithmetic operations
would involve the maintenance and updating of interim
results, the strategic allocation of attentional resources,
and retrieval of long term memory knowledge, processes
that draw heavily on working memory resources; high
working memory capacity (WMC) is a reliable predictor
of analytic problem solving performance (Wiley &
Jarosz, 2012). In turn, insight problems are designed to
resist initial analytic efforts or the direct transfer of long
term memory knowledge. They are presented in a manner
that trigger prepotent responses, but these lead to an
impasse. Solving these problems then requires letting go
of the incorrect interpretation. Less rather than more focus
and attentional control might facilitate abandoning the
incorrect interpretation, and hence a lower or transiently
lowered WMC may better predict insight problem solving
success (DeCaro & Beilock, 2010).

1248

However, there is also evidence that working memory
capacity is involved in solving insight problems (Gilhooly
& Fioratou, 2009). For example, verbal working memory
scores predict solution rates for compound remote
associates (Chein & Weisberg, 2014) and spatial working
memory scores correlate significantly with solution rates
for the nine-dot problem (Chein, Weisberg, Streeter, &
Kwok, 2010). Weisberg’s (2015) integrated framework
stresses the central role of analytic processes in solving
insight problems, processes that draw on WMC.
A temporary reduction in deliberate executive function
skills using a self-control exercise prior to engaging in an
insight problem solving task might offer an interesting
means to throw light on these somewhat conflicting
findings. Hoffman, Schmeichel and Baddeley (2012)
proposed that key features of executive functioning
subserve self-regulation. So-called ego depletion tasks
involve participants actively inhibiting a response set;
these inhibitory efforts have negative aftereffects in
subsequent tasks that require executive functions. For
example, in Schmeichel (2007) participants’ backward
digit span was significantly lower after they engaged in a
writing task that prohibited the use of the letters a and n
than after an unconstrained writing task. Such findings
support a fuel metaphor: executive control processes rely
on a limited resource that fluctuates as a function of
effort, rest and, more controversially, glucose level. The
transient depletion of executive functions may impact
analytic and insight problem solving differently. For
example, performance on a mental arithmetic problem
that requires temporary storage, retrieval of long term
arithmetic knowledge and the strategic allocation of
attentional resources, might be influenced by prior
exposure to an ego-depletion manipulation. The
prediction for insight problem solving however depends
on the purported involvement of WMC. If a looser focus
and ‘leaky’ attention (Wiley & Jarosz, 2012) are
important, then ego depletion might actually enhance
insight problem solving. In contrast, if, as Weisberg
(2015) contends, analytic processes are implicated in
insight problem solving, then an ego-depletion
manipulation should have a negative aftereffect on
performance.

Interactivity
The debate concerning the mental processes and
capacities involved in problem solving reflects a
commitment to methodological individualism (ValléeTourangeau & Vallée-Tourangeau, 2017): that the locus
of cognition is person, or more specifically, skull bound.
Problem solving outside the laboratory naturally involves
interacting with the world, recruiting artefacts, building
models of proto solutions, assembling non-mental
resources that scaffold creativity and problem solving.
The world is there to see and act upon, its dynamic
configuration triggers different actions and guides
attention. As such, then, the working memory burden of
keeping a detailed representation of the problem is not the
same when participants can interact with a physical model
of the problem. In some sense, interactivity might result
in a functional increase in WMC (Vallée-Tourangeau,
Sirota, Vallée-Tourangeau, 2016), and profiling
participants in terms of their WMC might not be as
informative as profiling the working memory resources of
the agent-environment system created through
interactivity.

Figure 1: The triangle points down: Which three coins
should be moved to make the triangle point up? Solving
the triangle of coins problem involves moving the coins
that mark the three vertices.
Real-world interactivity can be scaled down under
laboratory conditions if the problem solving environment,
or the cognitive ecosystem (Hutchins, 2010) affords
interacting with a physical model of the problem (ValléeTourangeau, Sirota, Vallée-Tourangeau, & Makri, 2015).
For example, Fleck and Weisberg (2013) used the triangle
of coins problem (ToC see Fig. 1), among other insight
problems, to explore problem solving strategies (based on
verbal protocols). For this problem, they supplied
participants actual coins to manipulate to determine the
solution. They quote, at length (see p. 452) the protocol of
one participant who works on the problem by initially
moving coins in a trial and error fashion. The changes in
the problem configuration guide and constrain the
problem solving trajectory. Fleck and Weisberg also

1249

describe what they term ‘data-driven’ restructuring, or
how a productive interpretation of the problem is
triggered by manipulating the physical model; for
example, an exploratory rotation of the entire model
helped a participant notice that only the three vertices
should be moved and the hexagonal core should be
untouched (see pp. 452-453). Thus a productive strategy
to solve the problem was triggered by changes in the
physical model of the problem, not through the mental
manipulation of a problem representation.

The Present Experiment
The present experiment explored the impact of an ego
depletion task and level of interactivity on insight
problem solving using the ToC problem. The experiment
employed a 2x2 between subjects design. The first
independent variable was the nature of a six-minute
writing task before participants tackled the ToC problem:
Half the participants had to closely monitor and inhibit
certain responses to ensure that words containing the
letters a or n were not used, while the other half wrote
freely. The second independent variable was the level of
interactivity. After the writing task, half of the
participants worked on the ToC in a low interactivity
condition, that is by looking at a static visual display of
the problem and dictating possible moves to an
experimenter. They did so by keeping their hands palm
down in front of them and could not point at the coins or
simulate movements with their fingers. The other half of
the participants worked on the problem in a high
interactivity condition: Participants were presented with a
physical model of the problem and they could touch,
point to or move the tokens in determining which three
could be moved to change the triangle’s orientation. The
low interactivity condition draws more heavily on WMC
since participants must mentally simulate move, keeping
track of the simulated movements of certain tokens, while
evaluating the movement of which other token(s) would
mentally change the orientation of the triangle. None of
this mental activity could be supported with
complementary actions (Kirsh, 1995). To the extent that
the constrained writing exercise prior to working on the
ToC problem depletes executive functions and solving the
ToC problem requires analytic processes that draw on
WMC, then performance should be better after the free
writing session than after the constrained writing session.
On the other hand, if solving the ToC does not proceed
from focused deliberate analytic efforts, then participants
might actually perform better with prior exposure to the
ego depletion task, that is a transient reduction in
executive functions might be beneficial. Participants
working on the ToC in the high interactivity condition are
not confronted with the same kind of WMC taxing
environment, and as such we predict a much higher rate
of problem solving success in the high than in the low
interactivity condition. In the high interactivity condition,

participants think with and through the physical model of
the problem. Transient executive functions depletion
might have little or no impact on problem solving
performance.

Method
Participants
Eighty undergraduate and postgraduate students (60
females) received course credits for their participation
(Mage = 24.2, SD = 7.3).

Procedure
Participants were tested individually in a quiet cubicle. The
experimental session was composed of three parts. Once
an information sheet was read and understood and a
consent form signed, participants first engaged for six
minutes in a writing exercise modelled after the one
reported in Schmeichel (2007). They were instructed “to
write a short story describing a trip you have taken
recently”. Half of the participants experienced the
depletion version of the task, where they were further
instructed that the letters ‘A’ or ‘N’ could not be used:
“you must pay close attention to the words you are using
and aim to describe the trip with words that don’t use these
two letters”. The other participants wrote freely without
having to inhibit word choice responses.
During the second part of the experiment, all the
participants were shown a sheet of paper (size A4) on
which 17 digits were randomly printed. They were
instructed to add these numbers as quickly and accurately
as possible; however, participants had to keep their hands
palm down on the table top and hence the mental
arithmetic could not be supplemented or supported by
complementary actions, such as touching the printed
numbers of pointing at them.
In the third and final part of the experiment participants
worked on the triangle of coins problem for five minutes;
half of the participants were allocated to the low
interactivity condition, half to the high interactivity
condition. The problem was illustrated on a 9x9 grid
printed on a sheet of paper: Columns were labelled with
letters (A-I) and rows with numbers (1-9). Ten tokens were
arrayed on that grid, each token labelled with an individual
letter (see Fig. 2); the solution to the problem involved
moving tokens R, W, A to cells E4, B7, and H7 to reorient
the triangle such that it pointed up rather than down.
Participants in the low interactivity condition worked on
the problem with hands palm down on the table top, and
voiced their proposed moves to the experimenter in groups
of three moves: They would name the token and then the
cell coordinate where it should be moved. The
experimenter noted the moves on a record sheet hidden
from the participants’ view, and provided feedback. It’s
important to note that the problem configuration always

1250

remained the same, that is participants had to mentally
project moves on the grid and verbalise these moves, while
looking at the instruction sheet show in Figure 2; the
experimenter never modified the triangle as such, and only
provided feedback. In addition, feedback provided was all
or none, that is participants were not informed if the
projected position of one or two tokens was right on a
given trial. In the high interactivity condition, participants
worked with a laminated 9x9 grid (measuring 21cm x
29cm) with rows and columns labelled as in the low
interactivity condition. Ten tokens (2.2cm in diameter)
were arrayed as in the low interactivity condition, creating
a triangle pointing down; each token had a letter printed on
it, just as it did in the low interactivity condition. The
token and grid coordinates helped the experimenter record
the participants’ moves, but the participants were not
required to verbalise moves by identifying tokens and cell
destinations. Rather participants were invited “to touch the
tokens” and “trace their movement with your finger”. If
after moving the three tokens, the pattern created did not
result in the correct answer, the experimenter put the
tokens back to their original place, and participants could
try to move a new set of three tokens

Figure 2: The problem instructions in the low interactivity
condition.

The experimental design was thus a 2 (Depletion:
constrained writing or free writing) x 2 (Interactivity: low,
high) between subjects design. Participants were allocated
randomly to each of the four experimental conditions.

Results
The mean number of words written in the constrained-ego
depletion version of the story writing task (Mdepletion = 28.7,
SD = 12.26) was significantly lower than in the
unconstrained free version of the task (Mno depletion = 122.7,
SD = 25.48), t(56) = -20.8, p < .001 (the degrees of
freedom were adjusted to account for heterogeneity of
variance). Thus participants complied with the task
instructions and struggled to write a story when they had to
suppress words containing the letters a or n. However,
performance on the mental arithmetic task, immediately
following the story writing task, was unaffected by the
prior exposure to the ego depletion manipulation in terms
of the magnitude of absolute calculation errors (Mdepletion =
3.45, SD = 5.16, Mno depletion = 5.23, SD = 8.18) t(66) = 1.16, p = .250, or latency (s) to solution (Mdepletion = 71.1,
SD = 42.64, Mno depletion = 79.4, SD = 57.81), t(72) = -0.729,
p = .469 (degrees of freedom were adjusted to account for
heterogeneity of variance).
Performance on the triangle of coin problem is illustrated
in Figure 3. With low interactivity, 4 participants (or 20%)
solved the problem following the constrained writing task,
while 5 (or 25%) did so after the unconstrained writing
task. With high interactivity, 14 participants (or 70%) and
10 (or 50%) solved the problem following the constrained
and unconstrained writing task, respectively. Summing
across depletion levels, more participants (60%) solved the
ToC problem in the high interactivity condition, than in the
low interactivity condition (23%), 2 (1, N = 80) = 11.61, p
= .001; solution rates between the two high interactivity
conditions did not differ significantly, 2 (1, N = 40) =
1.67, p = .196.
Depletion

Percent Correct

75%

70%

50%

50%

25%

No depletion

25%
20%

0%

Low Interactivity

High Interactivity

Figure 3: Percentage of correct solutions for the triangle of
coins problem in the low and high interactivity task
environment after engaging in a self-regulation task
(depletion) or not (no depletion).

1251

The solution rate data were analysed using a binary
logistic regression. The outcome variable was the
probability of solving the triangle of coin problem. Three
models were tested: the first included only depletion as a
predictor variable, the second included both depletion and
interactivity as predictors, and the third model included
depletion, interactivity, and their interaction as predictors.
The first model was not significant, 2 (1) = 0.465, p =
.495; adding interactivity produced a significant model, 2
(2) = 12.026, p = .001, Nagelkerke R2 = .195; however,
adding an interaction term did not increase the significance
of the model,2 (1) = 1.280, p = .258. The only significant
predictor of success using the Wald criterion was level of
interactivity (p = .001) with an odds ratio of 5.231 (see
Table 1).
Table 1: Summary of Binary Logistic Regression with the
Model Involving Depletion and Interactivity as Predictors.
Variable
Depletion
Interactivity

B
0.363
1.655

SE

OR

95% C.I. for OR
Lower Upper

Wald

p

0.494
0.500

1.438
5.231

0.546 3.789
1.962 13.947

0.541
10.937

.462
.001

Discussion
The triangle of coins problem was difficult to solve within
the time allocated for participants in the low interactivity
conditions; the success rate was very similar between those
who had undergone the ego-depletion manipulation and
those who had engaged in the free writing exercise. In turn,
the success rates were substantially higher for participants
in the high interactivity conditions. The interaction
between ego-depletion and level of interactivity was not a
significant predictor of the solution rate, however.
The level of interactivity afforded by the thinking
environment substantially influenced problem solving
performance, and corroborates recent findings with other
types of insight problems (e.g., matchstick algebra, the 17
animals problem, see Weller, Villejoubert, & ValléeTourangeau, 2011; Vallée-Tourangeau, Steffensen, ValléeTourangeau, & Sirota 2016). The overall solution rate in
the high interactivity condition in this experiment is similar
to the one reported in Fleck and Weisberg (2013) who
presented the ToC problem in a high interactivity
environment, even if their work did not explicitly explore
and contrast levels of interactivity in insight problem
solving. A physical and modifiable model of the problem
reduces working memory demands because changes in the
problem configuration cue new actions and guide attention.
Moves need not be premeditated, and need not be mentally
simulated; participants observe the results of their action,
and changes in the world, that is changes in the physical
model of the problem, convey new information.
Participants can more readily see how to solve the
problem, they need not mentally represent possible
changes, imagine their outcome, and while maintaining

this simulated modification to the problem in working
memory, project and simulate the next move.
As for the ego-depletion manipulation, whether the
constrained writing task achieved its purpose of
temporarily reducing executive functions, remains
uncertain. On the one hand, word production was much
lower in the constrained writing condition than with the
free writing task. This suggests that participants complied
with the task instructions and struggled to write. Assuming
that the sustained inhibition of common word choices led
to a depletion in executive functions, the predicted impact
of such transient depletions on insight problem solving
depends on the prominence attributed to deliberate
analytical processes. What is less controversial is how such
an ego-depletion manipulation should have influenced
performance on the mental arithmetic task immediately
following the writing exercise, but it did not; if anything
absolute calculation errors were marginally lower
following ego depletion. As for the ToC problem,
performance in the low interactivity conditions was very
poor, and such a floor effect might have masked any
influence of ego depletion. Thus, on the one hand, the
potential window on the importance of WMC in insight
problem solving that a purported depletion in executive
functions might offer was undermined by the very low
rates of success in both low interactivity conditions. On the
other hand, the mental arithmetic data suggest that the
depletion manipulation did not work. In the final analysis,
the controversy surrounding the very existence of the egodepletion phenomenon (Hagger, Chatzisarantis, Alberts,
Anggono, Batailler, et al., 2016) suggests that such a
manipulation does not offer an interesting tool to gauge the
importance of WMC and executive functions in problem
solving. There is also the possibility that the mental effort
invested in the mental arithmetic task depleted executive
functions more so than the constrained writing exercise,
and the low solution rate in the low interactivity conditions
reflects this depletion. Thus, possible avenues for future
research involve eliminating the intervening mental
arithmetic task (and devising an alternative ego depletion
manipulation check) or employing a more exacting
depletion task such as a computation span test of the kind
used to gauge WMC.
Fleck and Weisberg (2013) reported that some
participants solved the ToC problem through an analytic
and incremental strategy while for others the solution
appeared to reflect a non-incremental insight. On the basis
of concurrent verbal protocols or post-participation
interviews future research could thus better determine the
strategies and processes employed by a given participant,
and make more specific predictions as to the degree of
WMC involvement in solving that particular problem (I
thank Robert Weisberg for this point).
In light of the controversy surrounding the concept of
depletion and its potential negative aftereffects on
performance, perhaps an altogether more productive

1252

research programme could look at burdening working
memory with a secondary task (e.g., Lavric, Forstmeier, &
Rippon, 2000) to determine how it would affect insight
problem solving as a function of the level of interactivity
afforded by the task environment. Recent work suggests
that the impact of articulatory suppression on mental
arithmetic was much greater in a low than in a high
interactivity environment (Vallée-Tourangeau et al., 2016).
Such a paradigm might be usefully employed with insight
problem solving, not only as means to adjudicate the
different proposals concerning the involvement of working
memory but also to assess how working memory capacity
is functionally enhanced in a high interactivity
environment.

Concluding Remarks
Individual differences in cognitive capacities and thinking
dispositions are often measured to throw light on thinking
processes (e.g., Stanovich & West, 1998). Correlational
and latent variable analyses are conducted to determine the
underlying factors that best account for thinking
performance. This strategy is employed in problem solving
research as reviewed earlier (see also Chuderski, 2014).
The tests designed to measure cognitive capacities—such
as working memory—and the problem solving tasks
typically involve little or no interactivity with physical
problems. Thus, the commitment to methodological
individualism is implicitly reinforced rather than
challenged. The substantial improvement in problem
solving performance in the high interactivity environment
observed in this and other experiments (e.g., ValléeTourangeau, Abadie, & Vallée-Tourangeau, 2015; ValléeTourangeau et al., 2016) suggests that researchers should
be mindful of the importance of interacting with a physical
model when solving a problem.

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Juan Aracena and Paige Edwards for
recruiting and running the participants, as well as Emma
Henderson, Gaëlle Vallée-Tourangeau and Robert
Weisberg for thoughtful comments on a previous version
of this manuscript.

References
Chein, J. M., & Weisberg, R. W. (2014). Working memory
and insight in verbal problems: Analysis of compound
remote associates. Memory & Cognition, 42, 67-83.
Chein, J. M., Weisberg, R. W., Streeter, N. L., & Kwok, S.
(2010). Working memory and insight in the nine-dot
problem. Memory and Cognition, 38, 883-892.
Chuderski, A. (2014). How well can storage capacity,
executive control, and fluid reasoning explain insight
problem solving. Intelligence, 46,258-270.
DeCaro, M. S., & Beilock, S. L. (2010). The benefits and
perils of attentional control. In B. Bruya (Ed.),

Effortless attention: A new perspective in the cognitive
science of attention and action (pp. 51-73). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Fleck, J. I., & Weisberg, R. W. (2013). Insight versus
analysis: Evidence for diverse methods in problem
solving. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 25, 436-463.
Gilhooly, K. J., & Fioratou, E. (2009). Executive functions
in insight versus non-insight problem solving: An
individual differences approach. Thinking and
Reasoning, 15, 355-376.
Hagger, M. S., Chatzisarantis, N. L., Alberts, H., Anggono,
C. O., Batailler, C., Birt, A., & Zwienenberg, M.
(2016). A multi-lab pre-registered replication of the
ego-depletion effect. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 11, 546-573.
Hofmann, W., Schmeichel, B. J., & Baddeley, A. D.
(2012). Executive functions and self-regulation. Trends
in Cognitive Science, 16, 174-180.
Hutchins, E. (2010). Cognitive ecology. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 2, 705-715.
Kirsh, D. (1995). Complementary strategies: Why we use
our hands when we think. In J. M. Moore & J. L.
Lehman (Eds.), Proceedings of the Seventeenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 212217). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Publishers.
Lavric, A., Forstmeier, S., & Rippon, G. (2000).
Differences in working memory involvement in
analytical and creative tasks: An ERP study.
NeuroReport, 11, 1613-1618.
Schmeichel, B. J. (2007). Attention control, memory
updating, and emotion regulation temporarily reduce
the capacity for executive control. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 136, 241-255.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (1998). Individual
differences in rational thought. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 127, 161-188.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F. (2014). Insight, materiality and
interactivity. Pragmatics & Cognition, 22, 27-44.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Sirota, M., & Vallée-Tourangeau,
G. (2016). Interactivity mitigates the impact of working

1253

memory depletion on mental arithmetic performance.
Cognitive Research: Principles and Implications, 1, 26.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Steffensen, S. V., ValléeTourangeau, G., & Makri, A. (2015). Insight and
cognitive ecosystems. In D. C. Noelle, R. Dale, A. S.
Warlaumont, J. Yoshimi, T. Matlock, C. D. Jennings,
& P. P. Maglio (Eds.), Proceedings of the Thirtyseventh Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 2457-2462). Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Steffensen, S. V., ValléeTourangeau, G., & Sirota, M. (2016). Insight with
hands and things. Acta Psychologica, 170, 195-205.
Vallée-Tourangeau, G., & Vallée-Tourangeau, F. (2017).
Cognition beyond the classical information processing
model: Cognitive interactivity and the Systemic
Thinking Model (SysTM). In S. J. Cowley, & F.
Vallée-Tourangeau (Eds.), Cognition beyond the brain:
Interactivity, cognition and human artifice (2nd Edition,
pp. 133-154). Dordrecht: Springer.
Vallée-Tourangeau, G., Abadie, M., & Vallée-Tourangeau,
F. (2015). Interactivity fosters Bayesian reasoning
without instruction. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 144, 581-603.
Weisberg, R. W. (1995). Prolegomena to theories of
insight in problem solving: A taxonomy of problems.
In R. J. Sternberg & J. E. Davidson (Eds.), The Nature
of Insight (pp. 157-196). Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Weisberg, R.W. (2015). Toward an integrated theory of
insight in problem solving. Thinking & Reasoning, 22,
5–39.
Weller, A., Villejoubert, G., Vallée-Tourangeau, F. (2011).
Interactive insight problem solving. Thinking &
Reasoning, 17, 429-439.
Wiley, J., & Jarosz, A. F. (2012). Working memory
capacity, attentional focus, and problem solving.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 21, 258262.

