Is ambiguity detection in haptic imagery possible? Evidence for Enactive imaginings
Wim Pouw (pouw@fsw.eur.nl)1,
Asimina Aslanidou (410929aa@student.eur.nl)1
Kevin L. Kamermans (388422kk@student.eur.nl)1
Fred Paas (paas@fsw.eur.nl)1, 2
1. Department of Psychology, Education and Child Studies, Erasmus University Rotterdam
Burgermeester Oudlaan 50, 3062PA Rotterdam, The Netherlands
2.Early Start Research Institute, University of Wollongong
Wollongong NSW 2522, Australia
Abstract
A classic discussion about visual imagery is whether it affords
reinterpretation, like discovering two interpretations in the
duck/rabbit illustration. Recent findings converge on
reinterpretation being possible in visual imagery, suggesting
functional equivalence with pictorial representations.
However, it is unclear whether such reinterpretations are
necessarily a visual-pictorial achievement. To assess this, 68
participants were briefly presented 2-d ambiguous figures.
One figure was presented visually, the other via manual touch
alone. Afterwards participants mentally rotated the
memorized figures as to discover a novel interpretation. A
portion (20.6%) of the participants detected a novel
interpretation in visual imagery, replicating previous research.
Strikingly, 23.6% of participants were able to reinterpret
figures they had only felt. That reinterpretation truly involved
haptic processes was further supported, as some participants
performed co-thought gestures on an imagined figure during
retrieval. These results are promising for further development
of an Enactivist approach to imagination.
Keywords: visual imagery;
enactivism; the imagery debate

haptic

imagery;

gesture;

Introduction
Early phenomenological observations concerning voluntary
visual imagery suggested that nothing new can be
discovered in visual imagery that was not present in the
intention to imagine to begin with (Sartre, 1940). This fits
Descriptivist renderings of visual imagery (Pylyshyn, 2002),
where visual imaginings have a fixed mode of presentation,
and are “images under a description” (Fodor, 1975, p. 191).
This view gained substantive empirical traction (in part) by
research showing that when participants memorized an
ambiguous figure under a particular percept (e.g., duck),
they were unable to discover an alternate novel
interpretation (e.g., rabbit) when retrieving the ambiguous
figure in visual imagery (Chambers & Reisberg, 1985;
Slezak, 1991). These results were obtained even though the
memory of the figure was detailed enough to draw it out,
and which allowed for subsequent ambiguity detection when
perceiving the drawing.
Subsequent research within the ambiguity detection
paradigm showed that the previous studies may have
employed too difficult ambiguity examples (e.g.,
duck/rabbit figure), and failed to properly inform

participants by providing an ambiguity example
(Brandimonte & Gerbino, 1993; Finke, Pinker, and Farah,
1989; Hyman & Neisser, 1991). One of those studies
showed an ambiguity detection rate of 40% with slightly
less complex figures as the classic duck/rabbit figure and
providing an ambiguity example (Peterson, Kihlstrom,
Rose, & Glisky, 1992). Some shortcomings of previous
studies that found positive findings were resolved by Mast
and Kosslyn (2002), who noted that participants might have
been alerted by the ambiguity of the figures during
perception as they were shown an ambiguous figure before
memorizing the target figure. In their study they found that
44% of the participants were able to detect an alternative
interpretation while excluding possible confounds of
ambiguity detection in perception rather than imagery.
In a recent study we have expanded upon this research
(Kamermans, Pouw, Mast, & Paas, under review).
Participants in Mast and Kosslyn’s (2002) study were
provided partial visual cues of the ambiguous figure during
imagination. Therefore, it could not be fully excluded that
some raw sensory information is necessary for ambiguity
detection via imagery to occur, allowing for the possibility
that ambiguity detection via imagery alone is impossible
after all. In our previous study however, we found that
ambiguity detection is possible without visual cues as well
(30% detection rate), while excluding other possible
confounds such as ambiguity detection during perception
rather than retrieval in imagery.
The ambiguity detection paradigm has been primarily
regarded as being important for The Imagery Debate. This is
because, in contrast to the Descriptivist approach, the other
contender in The Imagery Debate – the Quasi-pictorial
account (Kosslyn, 2002) - explicitly argues for the
possibility of ambiguity detection. On such an account,
visual imaginations are constituted by internal
representations that are experienced as and function like
pictorial representations (drawings, diagrams, etc.). As such,
analogous to pictures, the representational content of visual
images are not intrinsically fixed, rather the mental image
preserves the “raw” visual-pictorial information of the
previously seen object which is open to reinterpretation.
In summary, there is converging evidence that visual
imagination allows for similar re-interpretative feats as
pictorial representations (Mast & Kosslyn, 2002;
Kamermans et al., under review). Such evidence has been

2925

mainly interpreted as a win for the Quasi-pictorial account
over the Descriptivist account (Mast & Kosslyn, 2002). Yet,
although reinterpretation in mental imaginings might afford
similar feats as pictorial representations (e.g., drawings), it
need not be the case that imagination functions exactly like
visual-pictorial representations. In fact, imagery-based
reinterpretation need not be visual-pictorial at all.

Enactive Imaginings
Indeed, Quasi-pictorial and Descriptivist accounts of mental
imagery are not the only game in town (Foglia & O’Regan,
2016). There are also views that promote an Enactive view
of sensory perception and imagination (Hurley, 2002;
O’Regan & Noe, 2001; Thomas, 1999)1. Our conception of
the Enactive position in relation to imaginings, is that
imaginings are something we do rather than an internal
state; the success of an imagining is not (primarily)
mediated by internally stored knowledge of properties of the
object imagined, but rather by a pre-reflective understanding
of sensori-motor relations that would hold if the object
would be present. The enactive logic is that since perception
is an accomplishment of an active embodied system
(Gibson, 2014) so too must perceptual imagination be
constituted in a practical understanding of the sensori-motor
relations that would hold when perceiving some object.
Evidence closely in par with an Enactive view concerns
findings that show a functional role for eye-movements in
visual imagination (Brandt & Stark 1997; Laeng &
Teodorescu 2002; Spivey & Geng, 2001). Note, that the
functional role eye-movements seem to have in visual
imagination is achieved even though eye-movements
themselves do not provide visual information in a classic
sense at all, e.g., eye-movements also occur and affect
visual imagery when eyes are closed (Spivey, Tyler,
Richardson, & Young, 2000). Note as such that although the
Quasi-pictorial account could be invoked here to explain the
eye-movements (as the eye-movements interact with
supposed internally stored visual information of the object),
it is difficult to explain the function of eye-movements
which provide no visual information in the classic sense. It
is precisely because an Enactive view does not adopt a
classic view of perception that it is able to recognize that
(pre-reflective knowledge of) bodily movements constitute
perception and imagination (O’Regan & Noe, 2001; Hurley,
2002). Imagination, on such a construal, involves being
attuned to sensori-motor potentialities of a particular object
imagined (Thomas, 1999; O’Regan & Noe, 2001). In visual
imagery this attunement seems to be achieved in part
through reenacting eye movements (a co-constituent of
visual perception).

Present study
In the current study participants memorize two figures in
succession for 30 seconds. Both of these figures have an
alternate interpretation when rotated 180 degrees (i.e.,
figures are ambiguous). One of these figures is provided
visually, the other via touch alone (i.e., haptic perception). It
is then assessed whether participants are able to find the
alternate interpretation for each figure in their imagination
by mentally rotating the memorized figure.
As a further extension of the possibility of ambiguity
detection in visual imagery we assess here whether
participants can perform visual reinterpretations without
being provided with an ambiguity example (cf. Kamermans
et al., under review). However, the most important
extension relative to previous research that we emphasize in
this article, is the assessment of whether ambiguity detection
can be performed in haptic imagery as well. That is, similar
to visual imagery, can ambiguity be detected upon a mental
imagining that is based on an ambiguous figure that was
explored via touch?
Importantly, it could be that feeling a figure allows for
ambiguity detection in imagery only insofar participants are
able to reconstruct visual information based on this haptic
perception. If true, ambiguity detection is always performed
on visual information. On such a construal it is plausible
that ambiguity detection rates of visually perceived figures,
is greater than when haptically perceiving figures. After all,
if ambiguity detection is a visual achievement, having had
direct visual access as opposed to second-hand access
(visual reconstruction via haptic perception) would improve
the quality of the mental image, and hence improve reinterpretability. Therefore, next to assessing the possibility
of ambiguity detection per condition individually, we will
assess possible differences in detection rate between the
haptically and visually perceived figures that would be
predicted if reinterpretation in imagery is strictly a visualpictorial achievement.
Additionally, in light of an Enactive approach to sensory
perception and imagination, and our previous theoretical
efforts concerning the cognitive function of co-thought
gesture (Pouw, de Nooijer, van Gog, Zwaan, & Paas, 2014),
we anticipated to observe co-thought (i.e., silent) handgestures that enacted interaction with the object during
haptic imagery. That is, similar to research showing that
eye-movements appear to co-constitute visual imagination,
so too might manual movements co-constitute haptic
imagery processes. Therefore, in the current study we
explored manual gestures that occur when retrieving the
haptically (as well as visually) memorized figure.

1

Enactive accounts may be disentangled from each other on the
basis of their differing commitment to the necessary involvement
of non-neural bodily states in mental imagery (see Foglia &
O’Regan, 2016; cf. Thomas, 1999). For the purposes of the present
paper the commonalities rather than the differences between these
approaches are highlighted.

2926

Method
Procedure
Participants & Design
Sixty-eight participants were tested (61 female, Mage =
20.03 years, SDage = 3.36 years, range 17-37 years)2.
Recruitment targeted both Dutch and non-Dutch students all
of whom received instructions in English. The participants
were enrolled in courses taught in English at the Erasmus
University Rotterdam. All of the participants took part in the
experiment for course credits.
The study had a within-subject design (Visual vs. Haptic
Condition; order counterbalanced) using two test figures
counterbalanced over condition assignment. Ambiguity
detection rate was the main dependent variable.
Additionally we assessed co-speech and co-thought gesture
occurrences.

Materials
Test Figures Two ambiguous test figures were cut out from
high density foam sheets, similar to Kamermans et al.
(under review). The figures were designed by Leo Burnett
(2015) for the “Upside Down” campaign retrieved from
Google images and further modified by us. Each figure had
two readily perceivable interpretations (see figure 1). An
alternate interpretation could be discovered by rotating the
figure 180 degrees.

Figure 1. Line drawings of the seal/doe, and the
penguin/giraffe test figure. As can be seen, one
interpretation always showed the body of an animal and the
second interpretation the head of a different animal.
Video Recording Performance was recorded using a JVC
Everio GZ-MG130 camcorder, to assess gesture occurrence
and inspection of the behavioral data when necessary.
Demographics and Control Questions Participants
reported their age, sex, and native language. To assess
participants’ beliefs about the nature of the experiment the
following questions were included: “What do you think was
the purpose of the current study? (If you have no idea, no
answer is necessary)”, and “What do you think the
researchers are expecting to discover with the current study?
(If you have no idea, no answer is necessary)”. Finally, the
experimenter would explicitly ask participants who reported
reinterpretation of one or two figures whether they had
noticed the alternate interpretation during memorization or
newly discovered it in visual imagery.
2

We failed to obtain age for two participants.

Participants were tested individually and were told that they
took part in a study about visual memory and memory of
touch. The experiment consisted of a memorization phase
and a testing phase.
In the memorization phase two figures were presented
successively (order counterbalanced). Participants were
informed that they would be given 30 seconds to inspect the
figure and memorize it. In the Visual Condition versus the
Haptic Condition participants were only allowed to see or
touch the figure, respectively. For the Haptic Condition
participants felt the contours of the figure which was
presented under a card-board box that prevented visual
inspection of the figure. The respective figure assigned to
the haptic condition was horizontally attached via velcrotape on a wooden base. The wooden base was shown to
participants as to inform them how the figure would be
placed on top of it (it was stressed that the wooden base was
not the object of inspection). Participants were informed not
to move the figure on the wooden base (experimenter
ensured that orientation of the figure was not altered, which
was assessable via an opening in the card-board box at the
experimenter side).
After each presentation of a figure, the participants were
asked what they had seen or felt (depending on condition)
and the experimenter noted down the response. If
participants reported a) two or more distinct interpretations
or b) only the interpretation that belonged to the 180 degree
alternative orientation, the associated testing phase would be
skipped as ambiguity was detected prematurely (a) or
signaled (b) during memorization.
After memorizing the two figures, in the subsequent
testing phase participants mentally retrieved the memory of
each
figure
consecutively
(order
of
retrieval
counterbalanced). They retrieved figures with their eyes
closed, as to ensure that visual input during retrieval was
consistent between participants. Once participants indicated
that they had brought back their memory of the respective
figure, the experimenter would inform them that this figure
had another interpretation next to the interpretation they
already gave. Participants were told that the alternate
interpretation could be discovered by rotating the mental
image 180 degrees. Participants were given no time
restrictions in discovering the alternate interpretation
(reaction times were timed however, but were not of special
interest).

Performance and Scoring
An answer was considered correct in case the same
interpretation was given by another participant in the
respective condition (visual or haptic) of the memorization
phase. For example, the answer “cow” for the head (doe)
orientation of the seal/doe figure in the haptic condition
would be considered correct if another participant had
reported the same answer in the memorization phase for the
haptic condition and the same orientation. For the main

2927

confirmatory analysis, we chose for checking answers in the
congruent modality because the crucial research question is
about the continuity between perception and imagination,
and this is distorted if both modalities will track properties
of objects idiosyncratically.
Note therefore, participants were primarily their own
raters in this study, minimizing post hoc experimenter
decisions. However, similar to our procedure in Kamermans
et al. (under review) we decided that in two cases answers
should be counted as correct/incorrect even though these
specific interpretations were (not) named by other
participants. Namely, we counted as correct “Walrus/Seal”
in the haptic condition for the figure seal and the “letter Y”
(which partially overlapped with “Y stick”) as an incorrect
combination in the haptic condition for the figure seal. Note,
that these post-hoc choices do not affect interpretation of the
results.

Descriptives
Retrieval time Participants in the haptic condition had an
average of 23.88 (SD=19.51) seconds to provide an
interpretation or abort attempt. Participants in the visual
condition took on average 27.68 (SD=21.23) seconds.
Haptic Imagery vs. Visual Imagery As the descriptives
show in Table 2, it seems that ambiguity detection is
possible both when the figure is memorized and identified
visually as well as through touch alone. Furthermore, four
participants were able to detect ambiguity in both the haptic
and visual conditions, and seven participants only detected
ambiguity in the visual (n = 4) or the haptic (n = 3)
conditions. Thus data is almost completely symmetrical
across conditions and our planned within subjects-test for a
binary outcome reflects this, McNemar p > 0.99.
Table 2: Overall detection rate
Visual
Haptic
Doe/Seal
1/12 (8.3%)
6/22 (27.3%)
Giraffe/Penguin
6/22 (27.3%)
2/12 (16.6%)
Total
7/34 (20.6%)
8/34 (23.6%)

Results
Interpretations
In Table 1 all the interpretations are given that overlapped
between participants in the perception and testing phase
(and therefore scored correct).
Table 1: Overlapping (re)interpretations
Visual Condition
Giraffe
Deer, Giraffe
Doe
(Baby) cow
Penguin
Penguin, Bird
Seal
Seal
Haptic Condition
Giraffe
Tree, Flower
Doe
Deer, Aeroplane, Bird, Propeller
Penguin
Penguin, Fish, Human Being
Seal
Sea Lion, Walrus/Seal*, Bird
Note. Overlaps between perception during memorization and
mental retrieval of figures between participants. Asterisk pertain to
post-hoc decision (1 instance).

Exclusion
A total of 46 (34%) out of 136 ambiguity detection trials
were excluded as there was either premature ambiguity
detection (10/46) or an interpretation was given during
memorization that did not match the orientation that the
figure was given in (36/46). However, we will exclude each
participant data if on any of the two trials within participants
premature ambiguity detection was obtained as this signals
awareness of ambiguity during the memorization phase, 34
participants were excluded (50%). The total sample to
assess ambiguity detection rates per condition thus consists
of participants who were not aware in any of the trials of
ambiguity in the figures during memorization, ensuring that
ambiguity detection ensued in imagery. Note that such high
exclusion rates are common in ambiguity detection research
as to maximally control for ambiguity detection during
perception rather than imagery (see e.g., Mast & Kosslyn,
2002).

Haptic-Visual Imagery: Effects of Crossmodal Scoring
However, it could be noted that since each condition (visual
vs. haptic) has its own rating system that this could
affect/distort our interpretation in significant ways. As such
we performed an additional exploratory re-analysis where
we counted any interpretation correct if it was named in the
visual or the haptic memorization phase (see Table 1). This
revealed a McNemar significance test p = .227, with a
detection rate of 38.2% for the visual condition and 23.6%
for the haptic condition (table 3). Thus, note that the more
lenient scoring system slightly inflated detection rates in the
visual condition but not to a degree that the null-hypothesis
could be rejected.
Table 3: Overall detection rate
Visual
Haptic
Doe/Seal
3/12 (25%)
6/22 (27.3%)
Giraffe/Penguin
10/22 (45.5%)
2/12 (16.6%)
Total
13/34 (38.2%)
8/34 (23.6%)
Exploratory: Gesture occurrence During testing we
observed that participants adopted spontaneous gestures
during the testing phase when retrieving and interpreting the
figure even though participants kept their eyes closed during
retrieval. Firstly, participants used co-speech gestures when
providing an interpretation (often accompanied by a
description) of the figure 44/68 (64.7%) in the haptic
condition and slightly less in the visual condition, 36/68
(52.9%). Perhaps, such co-speech gestures solely fulfill
communicative purposes, as the interpretation needed to be
communicated to the experimenter. However, we also found
that a select few performed gestures in silence (i.e., cothought gestures), as-if feeling the contours of the
previously felt figure (3 participants in the haptic condition)
and more pointing-and-tracing gestures in the visual

2928

condition (n = 3), e.g., tracing the contours of the figure on
the table. Further note that when premature ambiguity
detection is controlled for (sample = 34) we found that 20%
(4/20) of those who gestured in the haptic condition detected
ambiguity whereas 28.5% (4/14) of those did that did not
gesture. Furthermore, 23.5% (4/17) of gesturing participants
in the visual condition detected ambiguity as opposed to
17.6% (3/17) for non-gesturing participants.

ambiguity detection - relative to figures that were only
haptically perceived. However, even bearing this in mind it
does not exclude that ambiguity detection was not achieved
via visual imagery.
On the other hand however, we do find evidence that
reinterpretation of imagined haptically explored figures is
likely to involve some haptic processes, or at least at times,
given that a few participants were manually reenacting
manipulating an (imagined) figure. This directly relates to
eye-movements (i.e., “ocular reenactments”) during visual
imagery. These eye-movements reenact perceptual
affordances of previously seen figures. In the current
example, manual reenactments seem to exploit manual
affordances of previously felt figures. In sum, we find it an
attractive hypothesis that - at minimum - a cross-modal
visual-haptic imagination is performed when reinterpreting
previously felt figures. This is in par with a host of studies
showing that haptic and visual perception are co-informative
(e.g., Lacey, Campbell. Sathian, 2007; Wallraven, Bülthoff,
Waterkamp, van Dam, & Gaissert, 2014).

A New Imagery Debate?
Figure 2. Example co-thought gesture in haptic trial

Discussion
The current results replicate previous research showing
that ambiguity detection in visual imagery is possible (Mast
& Kosslyn, 2002; Kamermans et al., under review), i.e.,
when memorizing a figure under a particular percept this
figure can be discovered to have another interpretation by
re-inspecting it in visual imagery. This finding further
extends this research in that ambiguity detection in visual
imagery is possible without showing participants an
example of an ambiguous figure after memorization (in
contrast to Kamermans et al., under review). Further
research could employ more direct comparisons of the effect
of providing an ambiguity example or not after
memorization on ambiguity detection rates (for a discussion
on this see Peterson et al., 1992).
More importantly however, we have shown that
ambiguity detection of a figure in mental imagery is
possible even when the figure is explored via manual touch
alone, as evidenced by the approximate 23.6% detection rate
in the haptic condition (“approximate” barring different
coding schemes). The important question is whether this
shows that ambiguity detection was (solely) performed via
haptic imagery, or whether exploring a figure via touch
results in visual images upon which reinterpretation could
be performed. This is a question that this study does not
address directly.
However, in speculative vain it is striking that we did not
find statistically significant differences in a within-subject
test on ambiguity detection for visually or haptically
explored figures. If ambiguity detection is solely performed
in the visual modality of imagination, one would predict that
having direct visual access to an ambiguous figure would
support the quality of that imagination - hence inflating

As mentioned, discovery of a novel re-interpretation of a
visual imagining has been regarded as supporting the Quasipictorial account of visual imagery (Mast & Kosslyn, 2002)
and refuting the Descriptivist assumption that visual
imagery is necessarily fixed under an original perceptual
ascription (Chambers & Reisberg, 1985; Pylyshyn, 2001).
However, on our reading, ambiguity detection can also be
accounted for within an Enactive framework, where the
achievement reinterpretation requires a skill-full act that is
inherently unstable because of the lack of direct access
(O’regan & Noe, 2001; Thomas, 1999). This constraint of
imagery as inherently unstable may actually have some
explanatory power over the Quasi-pictorial account. Note,
for example that only a small portion (not more than 38%)
of the current sample is able to reassign meaning to a mental
imagining 3. This is striking as there is reason to believe that
the current figures are relatively easy and memorized up to a
point that participants can accurately draw them, as previous
research with shorter memorization times and more complex
figures has shown (Chambers & Reisberg, 1985). Thus, if it
were the case that ambiguity detection depends on internally
represented pictorial information, reinterpretation rates
should be much higher. If however, the achievement of
gaining access to a previously seen or felt object via
imagining consists in an effortful skill-based employment of
a coalition of sensory systems, then it is not surprising that
ambiguity detection is as difficult as it is. It does not require
a mere retrieval and re-inspection of internally represented
visual-pictorial imprints, but an attunement to sensori-motor
3

Studies generally show low ambiguity detection rates across a
range of more and less complex figures (detection rates are always
less than 50%; Brandimonte & Gerbino, 1993; Hyman & Neisser,
1991; Peterson, Kihlstrom, Rose, & Glisky, 1992; Mast &
Kosslyn, 2002)

2929

contingencies when interacting with an object. Further note,
that the proposed multimodality of imagery does not apply
to haptic ambiguity detection alone, as our findings show
that even in cases where participants reinterpret a figure in
visual imagery, non-communicative gestures are recruited
that exploit affordances of the figure as if it were visually
present (e.g., by tracing the contour on the table during
retrieval with eyes closed).
Before concluding, some shortcomings need to be shortly
stressed (as to invite further research). Firstly, no causal
relation can be inferred from manual action and haptic
imagery at this point. We are currently performing a study
that manipulates manual enactment to ascertain its role in
(haptic) imagery. Secondly, although results signal that
haptic processes may be directly involved in ambiguity
detection of previously felt figures, the current design does
not exclude the possibility that ambiguity detection is purely
a visual achievement. This is because haptic perception
might induce visual construals which allow for visual
reinterpretation. Additionally, as mentioned by a reviewer,
current participants remembered two figures that were alike
in their representation of an animal body/head. This likeness
might interfere with memorization of both figures, perhaps
making comparison between haptic/visual conditions more
problematic.
To conclude, we have provided evidence that
reinterpretations in mental imagery can be achieved when
figures are memorized visually or via manual touch alone.
We have argued on the basis of a) the observed manual
enactments during imagery, as well as b) the lack of
observed differences between visual and haptic ambiguity
rates, that ambiguity detection might not be purely visualpictorial. Instead, we have speculated that visual and/or
haptic imagery is mediated by a pre-reflective understanding
of the sensori-motor relations that would hold were the
object present.

Acknowledgments
This research is funded by the Excellence Initiative grant
(Erasmus University Rotterdam) awarded to the Educational
Psychology section.

References
Brandimonte, M. A., & Gerbino, W. (1993). Mental image
reversal and verbal recoding. Memory and Cognition, 21,
23-33. doi: 10.3758/BF03211161
Brandt, S. A., & Stark, L. W. (1997). Spontaneous eye
movements during visual imagery reflect the content of
the visual scene. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9,
27–38. doi: 10.1162/jocn.1997.9.1.27
Chambers, D., & Reisberg, D. (1985). Can mental images
be ambiguous? Journal of Experimental Psychology.
Human Perception and Performance, 11, 317-328. doi:
10.1037/0096-1523.11.3.317
Finke, R. A., Pinker, S., & Farah, M. J. (1989).
Reinterpreting visual patterns in mental imagery.
Cognitive Science, 13, 51-78. doi: 10.1016/03640213(89)90011-6
Fodor, J. A. (1975). The language of thought. Cambridge:

Harvard University Press.
Foglia, L., & O’Regan, K. J. (2016). A new imagery debate:
Enactive and sensorimotor accounts. Review of
Philosophy and Psychology, 7, 181–196. doi:
10.1007/s13164-015-0269-9
Gibson, J. J. (2014). The ecological approach to visual
perception: Classic edition. Psychology Press.
Hurley, S. L. (2002). Consciousness in action. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Lacey, S., Campbell, C., & Sathian, K. (2007). Vision and
touch: multiple or multisensory representations of
objects? Perception, 36(10), 1513–1521.
Laeng, B., & Teodorescu, D.-S. (2002/3). Eye scanpaths
during visual imagery reenact those of perception of the
same visual scene. Cognitive Science, 26, 207–231.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0364-0213(01)00065-9
Mast, F. W., & Kosslyn, S. M. (2002). Visual mental
images can be ambiguous: insights from individual
differences in spatial transformation abilities. Cognition,
86, 57–70. doi: 10.1016/S0010-0277(02)00137-3
O’Regan, J. K., & Noë, A. (2001). A sensorimotor account
of vision and visual consciousness. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 24, 973–1031. doi:
10.1017/s0140525x01000115
Kamermans, K. L., Pouw, W. T. J. L., Mast, F., & Paas, F.
(under review). Ambiguity detection in visual imagery is
possible without visual cues.
Peterson, M. A., Kihlstrom, J. F., Rose, P. M., & Glisky, M.
L. (1992). Mental images can be ambiguous: reconstruals
and reference-frame reversals. Memory & Cognition, 20,
107–123. doi: 10.3758/BF03197159
Pouw, W. T. J. L., de Nooijer, J. A., van Gog, T., Zwaan, R.
A., & Paas, F. (2014). Toward a more
embedded/extended perspective on the cognitive function
of gestures. Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 359. doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00359
Pylyshyn, Z. W. (2002). Mental imagery: In search of a
theory. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 25(2), 157–182.
doi: 10.1017/S0140525X02000043
Sartre, J. P. (1940). The psychology of imagination.
Academic Press: New york.
Spivey, M. J., & Geng, J. J. (2001). Oculomotor
mechanisms activated by imagery and memory: eye
movements to absent objects. Psychological Research,
65, 235–241. doi: 10.1007/s004260100059
Spivey, M. J., Tyler, M., Richardson, D., & Young, E.
(2000). Eye movements during comprehension of spoken
scene descriptions. In Proceedings of the 22nd annual
conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 487–
492).
Thomas, N. J. T. (1999). Are theories of imagery theories of
imagination? An active perception approach to conscious
mental content. Cognitive Science, 23, 207–245. doi:
10.1207/s15516709cog2302_3

2930

