Is it fair? Textual effects on the salience of moral foundations
Eyal Sagi (esagi@stfrancis.edu)
University of St. Francis
500 Wilcox St. Joliet, IL, 60435
international treaties. That person is using a type of argument
that emerges from reasoning about authority. Critically,
when analyzing any argument, it is important to remember
that such moral concerns are not exclusive, and that a single
argument can exhibit traits from several different concerns.

Abstract
Many of the important decisions we make have moral
implications. Moral Foundations Theory (Haidt & Joseph,
2004) identifies 5 distinct styles of moral reasoning that may
be applied to such decisions. This paper explores how reading
text that emphasizes one of these styles might affect our
reasoning. After participants read a series of tweets that
emphasized the Fairness/Cheating foundation they exhibited
an increased reliance on this style compared to when they
read tweets emphasizing the Care/Harm foundation. This
affected participants’ answers to a questionnaire designed to
measure the perceived importance of the different
foundations, as well as in their rating of the foundations
evident in other tweets. Interestingly, this effect was short
lived and was not observed for the Care/Harm foundation.
These results suggest that exposure to the moral reasoning of
others might temporarily influence what moral arguments we
are likely to accept and employ.
Keywords: Framing; Moral
Cognition; Priming; Text

Foundation

Theory;

Priming Moral Reasoning

Moral

Introduction
Many of the important decisions we make have moral
implications. But what factors might affect these decisions?
In this paper, I examine the effect that encountering moral
arguments might have on subsequent reasoning about moral
issues. More specifically, I will argue that moral reasoning is
subject to priming effects, where being confronted with a
particular style of moral reasoning will result in increased
salience for that style of reasoning.

Moral Foundations Theory
While psychological research on morality encompasses a
wide range of theoretical approaches (e.g., Gray, Young, &
Waytz, 2012; Malle, Guglielmo, & Monroe, 2014; Rai &
Fiske, 2011; Young & Saxe, 2011), in this paper I am
interested in comparing different styles of moral reasoning
and will therefore focus on Moral Foundations Theory
(Graham et al., 2013; Haidt & Joseph, 2004). Moral
Foundations Theory identifies five different types of moral
intuitions or concerns: Harm, Fairness, Loyalty, Authority,
and Purity. Each of these moral concerns accounts for a
different style of reasoning about moral dilemmas.
For instance, consider a person who believes that climate
change is a problem because it endangers the lives of people
and animals. This person is primarily concerned with the
harm that climate change could cause to living beings. In
contrast, another person might argue that climate change is
problem because of its complexity and global reach, making
it the obligation of nations to adhere to guidelines set by

Research based on Moral Foundations Theory has
demonstrated that sensitivity to the different moral concerns
varies across cultures (Graham, Haidt, & Nosek, 2009), as
well as based on ideological beliefs (Graham et al., 2009;
Koleva, Graham, Iyer, Ditto, & Haidt, 2012). Much of this
research implicitly assumed that these styles of reasoning are
stable and related to personality traits and beliefs. However,
many stable traits in psychology provide a baseline for
behavior that is affected by contextual and situational factors,
such as priming.
The study presented here is designed to test whether such
factors can also affect the salience of individual foundations.
Specifically, I hypothesize that exposure to moral ideas and
beliefs will result in temporary changes to the salience of the
foundations that are at the core of these ideas.
For example, if an individual is presented with a text that
relies on reasoning based on fairness, this individual might
then become sensitized to the Fairness/Cheating foundation
and be more likely to consider it as an important aspect of
other, more ambiguous lines of reasoning. Likewise, reading
a text about an individual that is harmed by a callous
individual is likely to predispose the reader to identify harm
as a more relevant consideration in subsequent texts that they
otherwise would have.
To test this prediction, participants will be presented with
a series of tweets that endorse either the Care/Harm
foundation or the Fairness/Cheating foundation. Following
this presentation, they will be asked to complete tasks that are
designed to measure their sensitivity to these concerns. If
moral reasoning is subject to priming effects, it is expected
that participants who were presented with tweets endorsing
the Fairness/Cheating foundation would find issues of
fairness to be more relevant and important. In contrast,
participants who read tweets that highlight Care/Harm should
show heightened concern for that foundation.

Method
Participants
Thirty-six native English speakers from the University of St.
Francis participated in the study in exchange for course
credit.

3028

Figure 1 - Mean scores on both parts of the MFQ30, by priming condition. The prime is administered after part 1 and before
part 2. Error bars represent standard of error of the mean.
Federal Shutdown of 2013 (cf. Dehghani et al., 2016; Sagi &
Dehghani, 2014b)1. Tweets were selected based on ratings of
moral language computed statistically based on the Moral
Foundations Dictionary (Graham et al., 2009) following the
method described in Sagi and Dehghani (2014a).
The first set of primes, used as the prime in the Care
condition, were uniformly high on the foundation of
Care/Harm and low on the other 4 foundations. Likewise, a
second set of primes served as the prime in the
Fairness/Cheating condition. These primes were high on
fairness and low on the other 4 foundations. Each of these
lists comprised of 14 tweets, 7 tweets from liberal users and
7 from conservatives (see Appendix A).
In addition, a list of 25 tweets was selected such that each
foundation was represented by 5 tweets. As before, for a
foundation to be so represented, the tweet had to rate high on
that foundation and low on all other foundations. This list of
tweets was used for the rating task.

Materials
Moral Foundations Questionnaire
One of the frequently used tools for assessing an individual’s
level of concern for each of the 5 foundations is the 30 item
Moral Foundations Questionnaire (MFQ30; Graham et al.,
2011).
This questionnaire is composed of 2 parts: The first part
asks participants to rate the relevance (on a 6-point scale) of
various considerations to whether an act is right or wrong
(e.g. “Whether someone suffered emotionally”). The second
part asks participants to rate their agreement (on a 6-point
scale) to various statements (e.g. “Chastity is an important
and valuable virtue”). Each part is comprised of 16 items, 3
items corresponding to each of the foundations and 1 catch
item.
It is important to note that while the two parts are
measuring the same underlying concepts, they are using
different approaches and therefore the scores on one part of
the MFQ are not directly comparable to scores on the other.
Nevertheless, a high score on a particular foundation in the
first part can be taken as an indication of high concern for that
foundation, and is therefore predictive of the score on the
second part.
In this study, I used the first part of the MFQ30 to establish
a baseline profile of the participants and the second part
(administered after the care or fairness prime) to test for a
priming effect.

Procedure
Participants first completed the first half of the 30 item Moral
Foundations Questionnaire (MFQ30; Graham et al., 2011).
Next, they rated their agreement, on a scale of 1 to 6, to a
series of 14 tweets that emphasized either the
Fairness/Cheating foundation (Fairness condition) or the
Care/Harm foundation (Care condition). After rating the
primes, they completed the second half of the MFQ30.
Finally, each of the 5 moral foundations was described to
the participants using the text from the website
moralfoundations.org and they were asked to rate, on a scale
of 1 to 6, the relevance of each of the foundations to 25
tweets. Of the 25 tweets, 5 were primarily associated with
each of the foundations. The tweets were presented in a

Tweets
In addition to the Moral Foundations Questionnaire, this
study made use of several sets of tweets. These tweets were
chosen from a corpus of over 700,000 tweets about the U.S.
1 This corpus was used because it was pre-analyzed and the
ratings were successfully used in previous studies.

3029

Figure 2 - Mean ratings of tweets on the foundations of Care/Harm and Fairness/Cheating by experimental condition and
order. Each block represents 5 tweets, in order of presentation. Error bars represent standard of error of the mean.
random order and its reverse, counterbalanced across
participants. The ordering of the tweets (i.e., whether
presented in the original random order or the reversed order)
did not affect any of the analyses.

Results
Moral Foundations Questionnaire
Figure 1 presents the mean scores on both parts of the
questionnaire. Since the prime is only presented after
participants complete the first part, no differences are
predicted in it. Agreement with the primes did not
significantly differ based on condition (Care: M = 3.69, SD =
0.68; Fairness: M = 3.61, SD = 0.63; t(34) = -0.36, n.s.)
Participants’ responses to the second part of the MFQ30
were analyzed using a separate general linear model for each
of the foundations, with the foundation score in the first part
of the MFQ30 and the prime condition (Fairness vs. Care) as
independent variables2. Participants’ scores on the second
part of the questionnaire were correlated to their scores on the
first part, at least marginally (after correcting for multiple
tests), for all but the Loyalty/Betrayal foundation (F(1, 32) =
1.87, p = .18; F(1, 32) > 6, p < .05, r2 > .19 for all other
foundations). Only the Fairness foundation showed the
predicted interaction between the score on the first part of the
MFQ30 and condition (F(1, 32) = 10.00, p < .01, r2 = .34;
Fairness condition: M = 4.30, SD = 0.78; Care condition: M
= 4.04, SD = 0.98; F < 1 for all other foundations).
2 Since the hypothesized effect is due to mere exposure to the text,
participants’ agreement with the primes was not predicted to affect
the results and it is therefore omitted from the analysis. Importantly,

Moreover, the scores on the fairness questions of the
second part of the MFQ30 of participants in the Care
condition correlated with their fairness score on the first part
(r(16) = .73, p < .001) while those of participants who read
tweets evoking fairness did not (r(16) = -0.11, n.s.). This
suggests that following the fairness primes participants
concern for fairness was uniformly high – the prime
essentially set all participants to the same level of concern on
fairness. In contrast, similar correlations on the harm scores
of the MFQ30 did not differ significantly (care condition:
r(16) = .42, p = .08; fairness condition: r(16) = .63, p < .01).
These results suggest that the fairness prime successfully
increased the salience of the Fairness/Cheating foundation,
the care prime did not increase the salience of the Care/Harm
foundation.

Ratings of Tweets
To simplify the analysis of the ratings and avoid repeated
tests, the analysis of the 25 rated tweets used a single model
that contrasted the ratings of harm and fairness (although a
similar, post-hoc, model using all 5 foundations yielded
qualitatively similar results). This model included the
participant and the tweet as random variables, and the
condition as well as the foundation being rated as
independent variables. To test for the possibility that this
effect diminishes over time, the 25 tweets were divided into
5 blocks of 5 tweets based on order of presentation and this
variable was included in the model (model r2 = .37). As
models that include this variable show no effect of agreement and
are otherwise unchanged.

3030

predicted, participants rated tweets as higher in fairness if
they were previously exposed to tweets that exhibited
fairness-based reasoning and vice versa (F(1, 1734) = 5.46, p
< .05). However, this effect quickly diminished as is evident
by its interaction with the order of presentation (F(1, 1734) =
3.88, p < .05; see Figure 2).

Discussion
The results of the present study demonstrate that reading texts
that evoke principles of moral reasoning can affect judgments
and decisions made later. The effects observed in this paper
are therefore best considered to be a type of priming effects.
Since priming effects are, for the most part, short lived, the
rapid decay of the effect in the second part of the study is also
easily explained. However, it is likely that, because the
second part of the study overtly asked participant to consider
all five styles of moral reasoning, it accelerated this decay
and that in a more natural setting the effect might last longer.
Perhaps more interesting is the fact that while reading
tweets involving fairness and cheating resulted in a priming
effect, reading tweets that favored the foundation of
Care/Harm did not. One possible explanation is that while the
federal shutdown readily appealed to the foundation of
Fairness/Cheating, its appeal to Care/Harm is less direct and
evident. This is reflected in the tweets – although Care/Harm
was a dominant foundation in the corpus for liberals,
considerations of fairness dominated the overall debate (cf.
Sagi & Dehghani, 2014b). It is possible that rather than
simply evoking a moral foundation, a consistent and/or clear
moral position might be required for a text to affect the moral
reasoning of its reader.
More generally, there are numerous studies that
demonstrate how the use of language can affect reasoning,
both in the lab (e.g., Tversky & Kahneman, 1981), and
outside of it (e.g., Goodwin, 1994). Moreover, it is possible
to use language to measure and trace the history of such
frames (Sagi, Diermeier, & Kaufmann, 2013).
In a similar vein, there is evidence that situational factors
affect an individual’s moral reasoning. The bystander effect,
where individuals are less likely to render assistance when
there are many other bystanders than when there are few, is a
prominent example of such an effect (Darley & Latane,
1968).
This study combines these two well-known effects and
demonstrates that this type of framing can provide a context
in which moral reasoning takes place. More interestingly, it
is possible that repeated exposure to particular styles of
reasoning might have a cumulative effect and eventually lead
to the salience of the relevant foundation being permanently
increased (or, perhaps, decreased, depending on the
circumstances of exposure). This type of effect might be at
the root of the development of moral beliefs and might
provide insight into how and why such beliefs change.
Moreover, even temporary effects might have important
implications. For example, the language used to draft jury
instructions might influence the verdict one way if it
highlights fairness and another if it highlights care. Likewise,

during negotiations, it is possible that a particular choice of
language and reasoning by one side can serve to focus the
negotiation in a particular direction, influencing all parties
towards emphasizing the importance of a specific concern.

References
Darley, J. M., & Latane, B. (1968). Bystander intervention in
emergencies: Diffusion of responsibility. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 8(4, Pt.1), 377–383.
https://doi.org/10.1037/h0025589
Dehghani, M., Johnson, K., Hoover, J., Sagi, E., Garten, J.,
Parmar, N. J., … Graham, J. (2016). Purity homophily in
social networks. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General,
145(3),
366–375.
https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000139
Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American
Anthropologist, 96(3), 606–633.
Graham, J., Haidt, J., Koleva, S., Motyl, M., Iyer, R., Wojcik,
S., & Ditto, P. (2013). Moral foundations theory: The
pragmatic validity of moral pluralism. Advances in
Experimental
Social Psychology, 47, 55–130.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721412456842
Graham, J., Haidt, J., & Nosek, B. A. (2009). Liberals and
conservatives rely on different sets of moral foundations.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96(5),
1029–1046. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0015141
Graham, J., Nosek, B. A., Haidt, J., Iyer, R., Koleva, S., &
Ditto, P. H. (2011). Mapping the Moral Domain. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 101(2), 366–385.
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0021847
Gray, K., Young, L., & Waytz, A. (2012). Mind Perception
Is the Essence of Morality. Psychological Inquiry, 23(2),
101–124. https://doi.org/10.1080/1047840X.2012.651387
Haidt, J., & Joseph, C. (2004). Intuitive ethics: How innately
prepared intuitions generate culturally variable virtues.
Daedalus, 133(4), 55–66.
Koleva, S. P., Graham, J., Iyer, R., Ditto, P. H., & Haidt, J.
(2012). Tracing the threads: How five moral concerns
(especially Purity) help explain culture war attitudes.
Journal of Research in Personality, 46(2), 184–194.
Malle, B. F., Guglielmo, S., & Monroe, A. E. (2014). A
Theory of Blame. Psychological Inquiry, 25(2), 147–186.
https://doi.org/10.1080/1047840X.2014.877340
Rai, T. S., & Fiske, A. P. (2011). Moral psychology is
relationship regulation: Moral motives for unity,
hierarchy, equality, and proportionality. Psychological
Review, 118(1), 57–75. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0021867
Sagi, E., & Dehghani, M. (2014a). Measuring Moral Rhetoric
in Text. Social Science Computer Review, 32(2), 132–144.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0894439313506837
Sagi, E., & Dehghani, M. (2014b). Moral Rhetoric in Twitter:
A Case Study of the US Federal Shutdown of 2013. In P.
Bello, M. Guarini, M. McShane, & B. Scassellati (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1347–1352).
Sagi, E., Diermeier, D., & Kaufmann, S. (2013). Identifying
Issue Frames in Text. PloS One, 8(7), e69185.

3031

Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of
decisions and the psychology of choice. Science,
211(4481),
453–458.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.7455683
Young, L., & Saxe, R. (2011). When ignorance is no excuse:
Different roles for intent across moral domains. Cognition,
120(2),
202–214.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2011.04.005

Refugees Waiting Overseas Are in Limbo as U.S.
Shutdown
Continues
#refugees
#shutdown
#resettlement #newcomers #USA

Fairness/Cheating Primes

Appendix A – Primes

Liberal #Congress members claim that the law must
apply equally to all...well, except them. #Obamacare
#Dems #GOP
Libs scream #obamacare = law of the land. Weird cuz
theyre VERY WILLING 2 ignore immigration borders,
ya kno another LAW OF THE LAND

Care/Harm Primes
Dr. Seuss's #Congress Who Stole #SNAP: Kids
seniors
face
health
risks
due
to
#GovernmentShutdown. #PublicPolicy

A bunch of liberals looked really stupid tonight,
talking about #obamacare. They're still ignorant of the
law. #tcot #election2014 #pathetic

New #Obama Doctrine: Protect oil, allies, the
homeland from terrorists weapons of mass destruction.

Fighting Republican hysteria with calm analysis on
the ACA. #p2 #toppage #dems #liberals #progressives
#healthcare

#governmentshutdown Day 9. Private charity pays
Military death benefits instead of #Pentagon. What do
you think?

Hey #GOP! #OBAMACARE website overloaded
huh? Looks like Americans want an alternative you
elephant sized asses!

As #soldiers we're told #WWII, #Vietnam, #Iraq,
were all to protect #Democracy, yet the latest attack
comes from The #TeaParty #Shutdown

I think it's hilarious T-Party called ACA #Obamacare
as a negative slur. The more popular it gets, the bigger
my SMILE gets POTUS's too!

#Shutdown: #Obama Keeps Military #Golf_Courses
#Open, #Closes Military #Grocery_Stores |

Hey #GOP look up the 14th amendment! If u love the
Constitution Founding Fathers so much, then
ADHERE to the law of the land. #JustVote

Mother of fallen #soldier denied death benefits:
#Criminal to treat our #soldiers this way #congress. via
@todayshow

Liberal #Congress members claim that the law must
apply equally to all...well, except them. #Obamacare

If #obama can treat our military and vets like he does
imagine how he's going to be with civilians and our
healthcare. Disgust

Equal under the law; all laws enforced equally - its
pretty simple for everyone to understand except Obama
#TeaParty #tcot #tngop #gop #ccot

#Obama is trying his hardest to create pain - Military
death benefits denied to families of fallen troops

Y did the unions get exempt from #Obamacare I
thought it was the law of the land doesn't it apply to
everyone like every other law #tcot

I don't care about the shutdown...PAY the families of
our fallen heroes!!! #shutdown #governmentshutdown
#Military #veterans #Obama

Funny how libs like @tamaraholder are all about
#obamacare being the law but other social issues like
upholding the sanctity of marriage..

I wish #Congress cared as much about war vets
benefits as they do about the war vets memorial.
#hypocrite #pander #teaparty

LIberals progressives say that #obamacare is the law
of the land, but they ignore illegals breaking the law of
the land!

Sickening that the families of our fallen heroes
denied benefits by shutdown. Time to stop the
madness.#shutdown

also calling progressives 'liberals' (not saying that
someone IS liberal, but calling them 'liberals') is #GOP
branding.

Outrageous not paying death benefits to families of
our fallen servicemen! This SOB #Obama looking for
a civil war to become dictator !

Smart Libs know Repubs hate that #Obama wins. He
beat them twice in elections, SCOTUS upheld #ACA.
It just kills em. 2BAD!

The D-Day memorial in Normandy, France has been
closed, upsetting tourists and veterans. via @WSJ
#shutdown

3032

