Learning About Causal Systems Through Play
Zi L. Sim* (zi@berkeley.edu)
Kuldeep K. Mahal* (kmahal@berkeley.edu)
Fei Xu (fei_xu@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

Abstract
It is commonly believed that children are able to learn through
play. Recent studies have found that children are able to learn
causal rules through free play (Sim & Xu, in press). One such
study found that children learned how to correctly activate
machines, using either a block that was the same shape or the
same color as the machine, when given five minutes to play
with them. However, would children be able to learn a more
complex causal rule through free play as well and would their
performance be comparable to children who were didactically
taught the same causal rule? In the current study, we show that
children are able to learn more complex causal rules through
free play. We also show that children perform significantly
better when learning these rules through free play or by first
engaging in free play and then observing, as opposed to solely
through observation.
Keywords: free play; causal learning; generalization

Introduction
It is widely accepted that play is important for young
children. Most elementary schools have a designated play
time, where children are free to play and socialize with their
peers. Studies have shown that on average children spend 51
hours a week, or 30% of their week, engaging in free play
(Hofferth & Sandberg, 2001). Play is also commonly
encouraged by parents and educators, and access to play has
been recognized by the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of the Child (UNCRC) as a fundamental human right
(Davey & Lundy, 2011). It is evident that children spend a lot
of time playing and are encouraged to do so, but it remains
unclear why this is the case. Why do children spend such a
large portion of their time playing, and why do adults actively
encourage play behavior?
One explanation is that play has the potential to result in
better learning than direction instruction because play
provides learners with the opportunity to choose what they
want to do (Whitebread, Coltman, Jameson, & Lander, 2009;
Weisberg, Hirsh-Pasek, & Golinkoff, 2013; Weisberg, HirshPasek, Golinkoff, & McCandliss, 2014). By doing so,
learners may better encode new information in their memory
(Metcalfe & Kornell, 2005); process the problem structure
more deeply (Sobel & Kushnir, 2006); they may pay more
attention and are more motivated (Corno & Mandinach,
1983); or they may be able to focus on acquiring data that can
address gaps in their knowledge (Markant & Gureckis, 2013).
There is some empirical evidence that adults benefit from the
opportunity to select the information that they want to learn.
In fact, research has shown that adults learn better when they

engage in active hypothesis testing, where they are able to
select the data they observe to test their hypotheses, as
compared to those who engaged in reception learning, where
they observed data generated by another adult (Castro et al.,
2009; Markant & Gureckis, 2014; Sobel & Kushnir, 2006).
For example, in one study, adults were shown a spectrum
of sixteen “alien eggs” on a computer that went from spiky to
smooth. Students were told that spiky eggs most likely
hatched into alien snakes while smooth eggs most likely
hatched into alien birds. They were asked to determine the
boundary between the two types of eggs, so they had to
determine the point at which the eggs shifted from hatching
one species to the other species. To do this, subjects either
selected a sequence of eggs to see which animal hatched from
them (active learning condition) or observed randomly
selected eggs being hatched (random condition). The study
found that participants in the active learning condition
generally performed better than those in the random
condition (Castro et. al, 2009), which suggests that adults
experience benefits in learning when they play an active role
in gathering information.
Within the developmental literature, several studies have
established that children learn successfully when they have
the opportunity to choose what they want to do as well. For
example, researchers have found that children as young as
five years were able to use self-generated evidence to learn
about an ambiguous causal system (McCormack, Bramley,
Frosch, Patrick, & Lagnado, 2016; Schulz, Gopnik, &
Glymour, 2007). In another study, Sim and Xu (in press)
found that three-year-olds were capable of forming higherorder generalizations about a causal system after a short play
period. In this study, children were presented with a causal
learning task in which blocks would activate machines either
based on a shape-rule (a block that matched the machine in
shape activated the machine), or a color-rule (a block that
matched the machine in color activated the machine).
Children were randomly assigned to a didactic condition,
such that an experimenter showed the children how to
activate the machines, or a free play condition, such that the
children were given the opportunity to play freely with these
machines and blocks. The children were then tested using a
first-order and a second-order generalization task. In the firstorder generalization task, children were asked to activate a
familiar machine, and in the second-order generalization
task, children were asked to activate a novel machine. The
study found that both groups performed at levels well above
chance, and there was no significant difference between the
accuracy between the two conditions (Sim & Xu, in press).

1078

Similarly, Smith and Dutton (1979) compared the
performance of children in a play condition to both a training
condition, where children were taught to use the materials by
an experimenter, as well as a control condition, where
children were neither taught by an experimenter nor played
with the materials. Although children in the play and training
condition performed significantly better in a problem-solving
task compared to the control condition, there was no
significant difference between the play and training
conditions.
Although all of these studies suggest that children are able
to learn through free play, there is as yet little evidence that
young children’s learning and generalizations under free play
conditions would actually differ from those in didactic
conditions. Learning in the free play condition has repeatedly
been found to be comparable to a didactic condition, but has
not been found to be different from a didactic condition.
Are there conditions under which young children may
benefit more from the free play that they engage in
independently, as compared to a training that is directed by
an adult? In the current study, we examined this question by
presenting children with a causal learning task in which the
generalization to be acquired was more complicated than that
examined in Sim and Xu (in press). To do so, machines in our
study were activated when either two blocks that were the
same shape as the machine, or two blocks that were the same
color as the machine, were placed on the machine. Prior
research have indicated that young children can learn causal
rules of a similar form: Walker and Gopnik (2014) showed
that after a short demonstration by an experimenter, 18- to
24-month-olds were able to learn a “same” or “different”
causal rule, i.e. that a machine was activated only by placing
two identical blocks on the machine, or that a machine was
activated only by placing two dissimilar blocks on the
machine. Given that the rule used in the current study is of a
more complex form – the two blocks had to match each other
and the machine on a specific dimension (i.e., shape or color)
– we chose to test 3- and 4-year-olds in the current study.
Children were randomly assigned to a free play condition,
where they were presented with six machines (three
categories of machines, with two identical machines within
each category) and twelve blocks to play with for
approximately 10 minutes, or the didactic condition, where
they observed an experimenter activate each machine once.
To further examine any potential benefits of play, children
who did not activate the machines at least once in the free
play condition were placed in a third condition, the free-playfirst condition, where they observed the experimenter
showing them how to activate the machines after they played
by themselves for approximately 10 minutes. Similar to the
study by Sim and Xu (in press), the children’s ability to learn
the correct rule was measured using a first- and second-order
generalization test, where they were asked to activate both a
familiar and a novel machine respectively.

Method
Participants
Sixty-one three- to five-year-old English-speaking children
(29 boys and 32 girls) with the mean age of 48.4 months
(range= 36.3 months to 59.1months) were tested. All were
recruited from Berkeley, California and its surrounding
communities. Children were tested either in a small testing
room at our lab or in a small quiet room in a preschool. Each
child was randomly assigned to the didactic (N=24) or free
play condition (N=22). Children assigned to the free play
condition but did not activate the machines at least once
during the free play phase were placed in the free play first
condition (N=15). The mean ages in the didactic, free play,
and free play first condition were 48.1 months, 49.7 months,
and 47.1 months respectively. An additional 9 children were
tested but were excluded due to parent interference (N=5) and
experimenter error (N=4).

Materials
Five different types of machines were constructed for this
experiment. Each type of machine made a distinct sound
when activated. This activation was completed using a foot
pedal connected to a remote that activated a doorbell that was
placed inside the machines. There were two blue rectangle
machines, two red triangle machines, two green circle
machines, and one orange L-shaped machine. In addition,
there was a colorful felt-covered plus-shaped machine
(demonstration machine) that looked considerably different
from the other four types of machines. Each machine was
approximately 20cm x 12cm x 10cm.
A variety of small blocks (approximately 7cm x 5cm x
1cm) were used to activate the machines. The activator
blocks were of different shapes and colors. Some matched the
machines in shape but not in color, or in color but not in
shape, while other distractor blocks matched in neither shape
nor color. In total, twenty-two blocks were used.

Procedure
Each child was tested individually. For children tested in our
lab, parents sat next to the child during the procedure and
were asked not to interact with their child. For children tested
at preschools, an observer watched the procedure through a
one-way mirror.
Both the didactic and free play conditions consisted of
three phases: a demonstration phase, a training/free play
phase, and a testing phase. For half the children, each
machine was activated by placing two blocks on the machine
that matched the machine in shape (shape rule). For the other
half, each machine was activated by placing two blocks on
the machine that matched the machine in color (color rule).
Children in the free play condition who did not activate the
machines at least once during the free play phase formed a
separate group: the free-play-first condition. This condition
consisted four phases: a demonstration phase, a free play
phase, a training phase, and a testing phase. In other words,
children who did not activate any machines during free play

1079

were then trained by the experimenter using the procedure of
the didactic condition. For four of these children, machines
were activated by the shape rule, and for eleven children
machines were activated by the color rule.
Training and Free Play Phase

First-Order Generalization Test

distractor

color-match shape-match

Familiar Machine
color-match shape-match distractor

Second-Order Generalization Test
color-match shape-match color-match

Novel Machine

distractor

distractor shape-match

Figure 1: Schematic of materials and procedure.
Didactic Condition For the didactic condition, the
children sat at a small table across from an experimenter. The
demonstration phase began with the experimenter showing
the child 12 blocks and pointing out that the blocks had
different shapes and different colors. The blocks were then
removed and the demonstration machine was placed on the
table along with one block. The experimenter then showed
the child how to make the machine go by placing the block
on the machine and pressing down. After the machine made
a sound, the experimenter noted that the blocks made the
machine go and then allowed the child to try. Two new blocks
were then placed in front of the child. The child activated the
machine by pressing down with these two blocks and the
experimenter stated that the blocks made the machine go.
This was repeated next with three new blocks. The blocks and
machine were then removed, ending the demonstration
phase. The duration of this phase was around four minutes.
The experimenter then told the child that she had some new
machines to show them. She also emphasized that these new
machines were much pickier than the demonstration
machine, so only some blocks would make them go.
The training phase that followed began with the
experimenter presenting the first machine (e.g., blue

rectangle machine). The experimenter placed four activator
blocks on the table next to the machine (e.g., the red, green,
yellow, and purple rectangle blocks if the machine was
activated by the shape rule; the blue triangle, blue circle, blue
heart, and blue star blocks if the machine was activated by
the color rule). The experimenter then stated, “Let me show
you how to make this machine go,” and placed two of the four
activator blocks (e.g., purple rectangle block and yellow
rectangle block, or blue circle block and blue star block) on
the machine and pressed both blocks down, activating the
machine. She then exclaimed, “The machine made a sound!
It played music!” The experimenter then told the child that
she had another machine that was identical to the one in front
of them. This machine was placed on the table, and the other
two activator blocks were now placed on the new machine,
activating it. The machines and blocks were then removed
and the process was repeated with the remaining two sets of
machines. Once the child had seen all six machines activated
one time each, the training phase was complete. The order of
the presentation for the types of machines was
counterbalanced. The duration of the training phase was
approximately five minutes.
The testing phase consisted of both a first-order
generalization test and a second-order generalization test.
The order of the tests was counterbalanced. For the first-order
test, the children were first presented with six separate
blocks: two blocks that matched the machine in shape, two
blocks that matched the machine in color, and two distractor
blocks that did not match the machine in shape or color (see
Figure 1). The experimenter presented the blue rectangle
machine from the training phase, and said, “Remember this
machine? Remember that I made this machine go just now?
Can you show me how to make this machine go?” If the child
placed the correct blocks on to the machine, the machine
activated and the experimenter neutrally stated that the
machine made a sound. If the child did not place the correct
blocks, the machine did not activate and the experimenter
neutrally stated that the machine did not make a sound. For
the second-order generalization, the child was presented once
more with six new blocks (see Figure 1). The child was then
shown a novel machine (the orange L-shaped machine) and
told that the machine “was a picky machine too”. The
experimenter then asked the child, “Can you show me how to
make this machine go?” Once again, the experimenter
neutrally stated that the machine made a sound if the child
was correct, or did not make a sound if the child was
incorrect.
Free Play Condition For the free play condition, the
children sat on a blanket on the floor. The demonstration
phase in the free play condition was identical to that in the
didactic condition.
The free play phase began with the experimenter saying
that she needed to check that all the machines worked (pilot
testing suggested that this step was necessary in order to
encourage children to keep playing even if they did not active
any machines after a few attempts). The machines were taken
behind a table and activated so that the child could hear them

1080

activate by the sound they made, but could not see how they
were activated. The experimenter then placed all six
machines (two blue rectangle machines, two red triangle
machines, and two green circle machines) in front of the child
and noted that these machines were pickier and that only
some blocks made them go. The twelve activator blocks
shown in the demonstration phase were placed in front of the
child as well. The experimenter then told the child, “I just
remembered I have to do some work now, but while I work,
you can play with these machines and these blocks.” The
children were given approximately ten minutes to play with
the machines and blocks. If the child did not make any
attempt to activate the machines for one minute, the
experimenter prompted the child by saying, “Why don’t you
try to make the machines go?” After ten minutes, the blocks
and machines were removed, ending the free play phase.
The testing phase was identical to that of the didactic
condition.
Free-Play-First Condition For the free-play-first
condition, the children sat on a blanket on the floor. The
demonstration phase and free play phase were identical to
that in the free play condition. Children were then moved to
a table and the training phase was identical to the training
phase in the didactic condition. The testing phase was
identical to that of the didactic and free play conditions.

Coding
For children exposed to the shape rule, selecting the two
blocks that matched the machine in shape was scored as one
point. On the other hand, for children exposed to the color
rule, selecting the two blocks that matched the machine in
color was scored as one point. Since each child completed
two tests, the maximum score that a child could receive was
two points.

Results
We analyzed effects on children’s responses with generalized
linear mixed effects models in R, using an alpha level of 0.05
for all analyses. Children’s responses were coded as a binary
variable where correct responses were coded as 1 and
incorrect responses were coded as 0. In the model, subjects
were specified as a random factor since this was a repeated
measures task; each subject gave two responses. Although
children in the didactic condition and the free play first
condition all saw a total of six activations, the same cannot
be said for children in the free play condition. In the free play
condition, the total number of activations (M= 17.6, SD=
12.6) each child saw as well as the amount of time that each
child played for (M= 7.91, SD= 2.34) varied. Although the
didactic condition did not receive any negative evidence (i.e.,
observing unsuccessful activations), this was not the case for
both the free play condition and the free-play-first condition.
The amount of negative evidence generated by each child in
the free play condition varied (M= 29.5, SD= 21.8). Children
in the free-play-first condition also generated a varied amount
of negative evidence (M= 28.1, SD= 16.1). Preliminary
analysis showed no significant effect of age, sex, or

presentation order of the machines and testing phases.
Additionally, there was no significant difference in the
children’s performance between first-order and second-order
generalization tests in each of the three conditions.

Figure 2: Percent accuracy for the conditions. Dashed line
represents a conservative calculation of chance. Error bars
represent standard error.
There was, however, a statistically significant difference
between the performance of children who were in the free
play condition (M= 0.4318, SD= 0.4168) and children who
were in the didactic condition (M= 0.10, SD=0.21), as shown
in Figure 2. More specifically, our analysis showed that the
free play condition performed significantly better than the
didactic condition (= 2.259, SE= 0.787, p= 0.004). Analysis
of the exponentiated coefficients revealed that being in the
free play condition increased the children’s odds of being
correct by 856%. The free-play-first condition (M= 0.4333,
SD= 0.4169) also performed significantly better than the
didactic condition (= 2.267, SE= 0.840, p= 0.007), and
being in the free play first condition increased the children’s
odds of being correct by 865%. However, there was no
significant difference between the performance of children in
the free-play-first condition and the free play condition. In
addition, we analyzed whether the amount of negative
evidence received was predictive of performance in the free
play and free-play-first conditions. It was found that the
amount of negative evidence did not have a significant effect
on performance (= -0.005, SE= 0.018, p= 0.787), indicating
that the extent to which children received negative evidence
during play did not influence their performance during the
generalization test trials.
The best fit model was also found by comparing various
models that included potential predictors of performance
such as condition, sex, age, rule, and amount of negative and
positive feedback. Through model comparisons, it was found
that the best fit model predicted accuracy from condition (2=
13.72, df= 2, p= 0.001). This model outperformed all other
models, including the null model.
A conservative value for chance was also calculated by
considering all possible two block combinations that could be
placed on the machine and then calculating the probability of

1081

placing the correct blocks. This resulted in a value of 0.067
for chance performance. Children in the free play condition
were significantly more likely to choose the correct blocks
compared to chance, t(43)= 4.834, p= 0.00002, as were
children in the free-play-first condition, t(29)= 3.985, p=
0.0004. Children in the didactic condition, however, were not
significantly more likely to choose the correct blocks over
chance, t(47)= 0.842, p= 0.404.

Discussion
In the current study, we demonstrate that 3- and 4-year-old
children can successfully acquire fairly complex causal
generalizations through free play. They independently
generated evidence that allowed them to understand the
causal system that they were presented with, and they formed
higher-order generalizations at a level above chance. More
strikingly, children’s learning in the free play condition and
the free-play-first condition was superior to that of children
in the didactic condition. Just as in the study by Sim and Xu
(in press), children were equally successful in learning firstorder and second-order generalizations during the course of
free play, and there was no difference in their performance
when it came to learning the shape or the color rule. It is
interesting to note that there were more children in the freeplay-first condition who had been exposed to the color rule
rather than the shape rule, which may indicate the potential
influence of a shape bias. However, we did not find an overall
difference in performance between children who were
exposed to the color rule vs. the shape rule.
We also sought to determine if there were scenarios in
which children benefited more from learning through free
play than through direction instruction by an experimenter.
We found that children who engaged in free play performed
significantly better at test than children in the didactic
condition. Even children who were unable to activate the
machines during play but who later observed an experimenter
doing so performed significantly better than those assigned to
the didactic condition, suggesting that the former group also
benefited from engaging in free play. To the best of our
knowledge, this study presents the first evidence that children
can learn about a causal system more effectively through play
than through training. So why was learning more effective
under free play?
One possible reason for this difference between the two
conditions is that children in the free play condition were able
to engage actively with the materials, whereas children in the
didactic condition played a passive role in learning about the
machines, observing an experimenter activate them but never
activating the machines themselves. Sobel and Sommerville
(2010) found that four-year-old children learned a causal
structure more accurately when they were given some time to
engage with a causal system. Likewise, McCormack et al.
(2016) showed that children who acted out interventions on a
causal system following specific directions from an
experimenter performed better than children who witnessed
the same interventions but watched as the interventions were
performed by an experimenter. Together, these studies

suggest that children may benefit more from intervening on a
causal system, rather than observing an experimenter do so.
This may explain why the free-play-first condition performed
significantly better than the didactic condition, even though
the children never successfully activated the machines while
playing.
It is also possible that the children in the didactic condition
struggled because they had different hypotheses about how
the machines worked which were not contradicted by the
evidence they witnessed (e.g., they may have thought that
each of the two blocks would activate the machine by itself).
Children in the free play condition and in the free-play-first
condition, in contrast, had the opportunity to carefully test
their own hypotheses, particularly through the generation of
negative evidence. In other words, children in these
conditions were able to see which combinations of blocks
would make the machine go, as well as which combinations
of blocks would not make the machine go. However, we did
not find in our additional analyses that the amount of negative
evidence that children generated was predictive of their
performance at test, suggesting that there was something
more to the evidence that the children saw during free play
that assisted them in forming the correct generalizations.
Further research is still necessary to understand the
differences we found between the free play and didactic
condition in our study. One worthwhile direction is to
conduct an additional “yoked” didactic condition, where the
experimenter presents children with evidence that was
generated by children from the free play condition. This
additional condition will clarify whether the differences
found in the present study can be attributed solely to the
difference in the quality of evidence between conditions.
We note that the current findings also appear to differ from
those of other studies comparing the performance of children
in free play and training/didactic conditions for other kinds of
tasks. For example, Klahr and Nigam (2004) compared
discovery learning, which they defined as learning that
children engaged in by themselves without the assistance or
feedback from a teacher, to direct instruction in third- and
fourth-grade children for designing unconfounded
experiments, which are experiments that clearly reveal the
effect of a particular variable. The researchers found that
children in the direct instruction condition performed
significantly better than children in the discovery learning
condition. However, in this particular study, children in the
direct instruction condition were engaged in designing and
manipulating variables during training as well, while children
in the didactic condition in the current study engaged with the
materials more passively, observing as an experimenter
taught them how the machines worked. Another difference
between the two studies is that in the study by Klahr and
Nigam (2004), children in the discovery learning condition
were given time to explore the ramp and marbles and design
experiments, however they were not provided with any
negative or positive feedback. In our study, on the other hand,
children in the free play condition were provided with both
negative and positive evidence, since the machine only made

1082

a sound when activated correctly. Although the finding from
Klahr and Nigam (2004) is sometimes used as evidence for
the benefits of direct instruction for teaching children science,
our study suggests that children have the potential to learn
causal systems effectively through play when provided with
useful feedback, even if the feedback does not come from an
instructor.
Previous work has demonstrated that children attending
child-centered preschools, where free play and child initiative
are highly encouraged, were more motivated to learn, showed
more pride in their accomplishments, and claimed to be less
worried than children attending didactic, highly academic
preschools (Stipek, Feiler, Daniels, & Milburn, 1995). The
current study extends these results by showing that children
can learn effectively through free play, and under some
conditions, learning within a free play context may be better
than learning in a didactic context. However, it is important
to note that free play is just one aspect of the child-centered
instructional approach in preschools, and our results cannot
speak directly to any potential learning differences between
the two instructional approaches.
In summary, the present study provides evidence that
young children can learn effectively through free play, and
this learning might be better than the learning achieved
through direct demonstration. Our results provide one source
of empirical evidence on why play is important for children
and why unstructured play should be incorporated into school
curriculums. This study also suggests that there is merit to
child-centered learning in preschools, as it appears that
children are able to learn through play and that they are able
to successfully engage in active learning.

Acknowledgments
We thank the Berkeley Early Learning Lab (BELL) for
their help in testing and recruitment, as well as the parents
and children for their participation. Mahal and Sim are joint
first authors.

References
Chalnick, A., & Billman, D. (1988). Unsupervised learning
of correlational structure. Proceedings of the tenth annual
conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 510-516).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Castro, R. M., Kalish, C., Nowak, R., Qian, R., Rogers, T., &
Zhu, X. (2009). Human active learning. In Advances in
neural information processing systems, 241-248.
Corno, L., & Mandinach, E. B. (1983). The role of cognitive
engagement in classroom learning and motivation.
Educational Psychologist, 18(2), 88-108.
Davey, C., & Lundy, L. (2011). Towards Greater
Recognition of the Right to Play: An Analysis of Article 31
of the UNCRC. Children & Society, 25, 3–14.
Hofferth, S. L., & Sandberg, J. F. (2001). How American
Children Spend Their Time. Journal of Marriage and
Family, 63, 295–308.
Klahr, D., & Nigam, M. (2004). The equivalence of learning
paths in early science instruction: Effects of direct

instruction and discovery learning. Psychological Science,
15(10), 661-667.
Markant, D. B., & Gureckis, T. M. (2014). Is it better to select
or to receive? learning via active and passive hypothesis
testing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
143(1), 94-122.
McCormack, T., Bramley, N., Frosch, C., Patrick, F., &
Lagnado, D. (2016). Children’s use of interventions to
learn causal structure. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 141, 1-22.
Metcalfe, J., & Kornell, N. (2005). A region of proximal
learning model of study time allocation. Journal of
Memory and Language, 52(4), 463-477.
Pepler, D. J., & Ross, H. S. (1981). The Effects of Play on
Convergent and Divergent Problem Solving. Child
Development, 52(4), 1202-1210.
Schulz, L. E., Gopnik, A., & Glymour, C. (2007). Preschool
children learn about causal structure from conditional
interventions. Developmental Science, 10(3), 322-332.
Sim, Z., & Xu, F. (in press). Learning Higher-Order
Generalizations through Free Play: Evidence from Twoand Three-Year-Old Children. Developmental
Psychology.
Smith, P. K., & Dutton, S. (1979). Play and training in direct
and innovative problem solving. Child Development,
50(3), 830-836.
Sobel, D. M., & Kushnir, T. (2006). The importance of
decision making in causal learning from interventions.
Memory & Cognition, 34(2), 411-419.
Sobel, D. M., & Sommerville, J. A. (2010). The importance
of discovery in children’s causal learning from
interventions. Front. Psychol., 1,176.
Stipek, D., Feiler, R., Daniels, D., & Milburn, S. (1995).
Effects of different instructional approaches on young
children's
achievement
and
motivation.
Child
Development, 66(1), 209-223.
Walker, C. M., & Gopnik, A. (2014). Toddlers infer higherorder relational principles in causal learning.
Psychological science, 25(1), 161-169.
Weisberg, D.S., Hirsh-Pasek, K., & Golinkoff, R. M. (2013).
Guided play: Where curricular goals meet a playful
pedagogy. Mind, Brain, and Education, 7(2), 104 – 112.
Weisberg, D.S., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R. M., &
McCandliss, B. D. (2014). Mise en place: Setting the stage
for thought and action. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
18(6), 276 – 278.
Whitebread, D., Coltman, P., Jameson, H., & Lander, R.
(2009). Play, cognition and self-regulation: What exactly
are children learning when they learn through play?
Educational and Child Psychology, 26(2), 40-52.

1083

