It’s all in your head: Effects of expertise on real-time access
to knowledge during written sentence processing
Melissa Troyer1 (mtroyer@ucsd.edu) & Marta Kutas1,2 (mkutas@ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science1, Neurosciences2, UCSD
9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, CA 92093

Abstract
Real-time sentence processing involves connecting linguistic input
with knowledge. Here, we ask how variability in semantic memory
(specific domain knowledge) may influence semantic access in realtime sentence processing. We recorded EEG while participants
more/less knowledgeable about the narrative world of Harry Potter
(HP) read sentences. In Experiment 1, all participants showed N400
predictability effects for general-knowledge sentences, but only
those with high HP knowledge showed predictability effects for
sentences about Harry Potter. This effect was driven by graded brain
responses to predictable endings as a function of knowledge.
Experiment 2 revealed greater semantic activation (inferred from
N400 effects) for HP items participants reported knowing. Highknowledge participants also showed greater semantic activation for
items they reported not knowing/remembering. These findings
suggest that amount and/or functional organization of knowledge
has real-time consequences on written sentence processing and
implicate implicit/partial access to domain knowledge for experts
when information is not explicitly recalled.
Keywords: sentence processing; knowledge; ERPs;
individual differences

Introduction
Depending on your background, the question, “What’s
your patronus?” might leave you bewildered. But if you’ve
spent a sizable chunk of your life obsessing over the fictional
world of Harry Potter created by J.K. Rowling, you might
have a response quickly at hand (e.g., a dolphin or a cat).
Variability in individual experiences helps determine an
individual’s knowledge, whether the domain is a fictional
narrative world like Harry Potter, a game like chess, or an
academic discipline, like physics. Moreover, knowledge
differences in many domains have been shown to
systematically influence various aspects of the organization
of knowledge, including depth, breadth, and hierarchical
information structure (Chi, 2006). Such differences in
knowledge seem likely to impact real-time semantic access,
including perceiving an utterance (or text), relating it to prior
knowledge, and forming expectations about upcoming
content. Yet despite the inevitable link between an
individual’s knowledge and semantic access, the specific
role(s) of knowledge variability has received relatively little
attention in models of real-time language processing.
Decades of psycholinguistic research have revealed that
language processing is incremental: we update our mental
representations word-by-word (e.g., Tanenhaus et al., 1995;
Kamide, Altmann, & Haywood, 2003). Upon encountering
an incoming word, world knowledge is used as soon as
possible (e.g., Kutas & Hillyard, 1980). Real-time access to
such knowledge is influenced by a host of contextual factors,

both linguistic and nonlinguistic, including sentence and
discourse context (Kutas & Hillyard, 1980), discourse
context (Nieuwland & Van Berkum, 2006), and who the
speaker is (Van Berkum et al., 2008).
These (and many other) studies have used event-related
brain potentials to investigate the activation and organization
of the semantic system during real-time language processing.
A well-known ERP signature called N400 (a broad centroparietally distributed, negative-going potential peaking
approximately 400 ms after stimulus onset) shows finegrained sensitivity to semantic relationships, with stronger
relations between context and input yielding less negative- or
more positive-going potentials between 200-500 ms postinput onset (Kutas & Federmeier, 2000).
The content and organization of long-term memory (i.e.,
knowledge) influence semantic access as reflected in N400
modulation both within sentences and simpler (or even no)
context. For words presented in isolation, N400 amplitude is
reduced for high-, compared to low-frequency, words (Kutas
& Federmeier, 2000). Moreover, N400 amplitude is sensitive
to category membership. Following a category label (e.g., ‘a
type of bird’), typical category exemplars (‘robin’) yield
reduced N400 amplitude compared to atypical exemplars
(‘turkey’), and both are reduced compared to unrelated words
(‘broom’) (Federmeier, Kutas, & Schul, 2010).
Such effects rely on long-term knowledge likely available
due to years of experience with concepts like birds. N400
studies, however, have also revealed sensitivities to
culturally-specific information (e.g., the fact that Dutch trains
are yellow, not white; Hagoort et al., 2004) and fictional
information (Nieuwland & Van Berkum, 2006; Filik &
Leuthold, 2013). Taken together, these N400 findings offer a
window into the relationship between language input and
structured, flexible knowledge use. Moreover, N400
amplitude provides an excellent proxy measure of the ease of
access to semantic information.
Here, we use the N400 to explore the notion that systematic
variability in the content and organization of individuals’
knowledge, as a function of their expertise, will have
systematic influences on real-time semantic access. To that
end, we conducted two ERP studies with individuals varying
in their knowledge of the narrative world of Harry Potter. We
first asked whether domain knowledge will systematically
influence N400 effects, possibly reflecting ease of semantic
access and/or availability of information in long-term
memory (Experiment 1). Next, we dissociated knowledge of
individual facts from domain knowledge, allowing us to ask
whether or not, and if so how, domain knowledge influences
ease of semantic access when individuals think they know, or
don’t know/remember, the information (Experiment 2).

1212

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, participants ranging in their knowledge
of Harry Potter (based on an objective offline measure) read
Control sentences about general, real-world topics as well as
sentences about the narrative world of Harry Potter (HP)
while we recorded EEG. Sentences of both types ended with
either a Predictable or an Unpredictable word.
Based on the literature (Kutas & Federmeier, 2000), we
expected predictability effects for Control sentences, with
Predictable items eliciting reduced N400 amplitudes
compared to Unpredictable items. Moreover, we expected
that for HP sentences, specific knowledge of Harry Potter
would have its effect during this N400 time window, with
knowledgeable individuals showing a reliable predictability
effect and less knowledgeable individuals showing a smaller
(or no) difference between Predictable and Unpredictable
words.
Though our study focused on predictions during the N400
time window, we also anticipated later positive effects. Late
positive complexes, often occurring post-N400, have been
related to attention-driven processing, including integration,
revision, or updating of ongoing interpretations in the
presence of unexpected items (e.g., Van Petten & Luka, 2012;
Brouwer et al., 2012). We suspected that we might observe
effects of Predictability on late positivities to words ending
Control sentences, and possibly (for knowledgeable
individuals) to words ending HP sentences, to the extent that
individuals revise their interpretations.

Methods
Participants 40 right-handed students at UCSD participated
for partial course credit and some monetary compensation.
Sentence Materials During the ERP portion of the study,
participants read sentence pairs of two types. Control
sentences described commonplace scenarios and ended in a
Predictable (Offline Cloze > 87%) or an Unpredictable
(Offline Cloze = 0%), albeit plausible, word, determined by
offline norming studies. Harry Potter (HP) sentences
described situations and entities from the Harry Potter book
series and ended in a Predictable (book-consistent) or an
Unpredictable (book-inconsistent) word. Unpredictable
words were matched to Predictable words for the broad
classes of words they belonged to (common noun, proper
noun, Harry Potter-specific noun) and in many cases
belonged to the same, more specific category. For example:
(1) Control: We had been watching the blue jay for days.
The bird laid her eggs in the nest. (Predictable)
yard. (Unpredictable)
HP: The character Peter Pettigrew changes his shape
at times. He takes the form of a rat. (Predictable)
dog. (Unpredictable)

1

Due to limited space, we do not report main effects of or
interactions with Channel. Main effects of and interactions with

The Predictable Harry Potter sentence endings were only
predictable assuming perfect knowledge of the books.
Unpredictable endings were inconsistent with the books but
were designed to be similarly plausible endings, assuming no
knowledge of the books. A total of 216 sentence frames (108
Control, 108 HP) were constructed, each with two ending
types (Predictable, Unpredictable). Two lists were
constructed such that each sentence frame appeared with only
one ending type. Participants therefore saw a total of 216
sentences (54 sentences of each type).
Experimental Procedures Participants were told they would
be reading sentences for comprehension and that they would
be asked questions about the materials at the end of the study.
After a practice session, blocks of Control sentences were
presented first, followed by blocks of HP sentences. For each
sentence pair, the first sentence appeared all at once in the
center of the screen. When ready, participants pressed a
button to move on to the second sentence, presented one word
at a time in the center of the screen with a 500 ms SOA (200
ms on, 300 ms off). Immediately following the ERP study,
participants were given a Control memory quiz followed by
an HP memory quiz. For each, participants saw a list of 90
words, 60 of which had appeared in sentence-final position
(half Predictable, half Unpredictable). They were instructed
to circle the words they remembered as an ending to the
second sentence of each pair in the study. After clean-up,
participants completed 10 multiple-choice questions about
the Harry Potter books. Raw scores are henceforth referred to
as HP Knowledge. A median split on these scores determined
High- and Low-Knowledge Groups.
ERP Recording and Data Analysis The electroencephalogram (EEG) was recorded from 26 tin electrodes
geodesically arranged in an ElectroCap, with impedances
kept below 5 KΩ. Recordings were referenced online to the
left mastoid and re-referenced offline to an average of the left
and right mastoids. EEG was recorded by Grass bioamplifiers with a bandpass of .01-100 Hz at a sampling rate
of 250 Hz. Trials contaminated by artifacts (e.g., eye
movements or blinks) were not included in analyses.
Grand average ERPs to sentence-final words were
computed across all 26 recording sites by Sentence Type
(Control/HP) and Ending Type (Predictable/Unpredictable).
We performed statistical analyses on mean amplitudes of
these waveforms in two time periods: a canonical N400 time
period (250-500 ms) and a post-N400 period (500-750 ms)
relative to a 500 ms pre-stimulus baseline. For each time
period, we subjected data to an omnibus ANOVA including
Channel1 (26 levels), Sentence Type (Control, HP), Ending
Type (Predictable, Unpredictable) as within-subjects factors
and Knowledge Group as a between-subjects factor.
Subsequently we focused on a region of interest (ROI)
including 8 centro-parietally distributed channels (MiCe,
LMCe, RMCe, MiPa, LDPa, RDPa, LMOc, and RMOc).
Channel in the N400 region reflect the fact that N400 amplitude (and
N400 effects) are largest over the middle and back of the head.

1213

Figure 1: ERPs from a central-parietal ROI to sentence-final critical words from Experiment 1 are plotted for
Predictable (black lines) and Unpredictable (red lines) endings relative to a 200 ms baseline for illustrative purposes.
Shaded regions depict the area between 250 and 500 ms (N400 time window). All participants showed Predictability
effects for Control sentences while Predictability effects for HP sentences were driven by the High-Knowledge group.

Results
Memory task Participants correctly recognized an average
of 15 out of 60 Control words (25%) and false alarmed to an
average of 2 words (7%). On the HP recognition test,
participants correctly recognized an average of 30 out of 60
HP words (50%) and false alarmed to an average of 2 words
(7%). Participants were therefore able to discriminate
between words they had and had not seen for both the Control
and HP memory tests.
To control for false alarms, we subtracted the number of
false alarms for each memory test (Control, HP) from the
number of items correctly recognized. We subjected these to
a repeated measures ANOVA with Sentence Type (Control,
HP) and Ending Type (Predictable, Unpredictable) as factors.
There was a main effect of Sentence Type (p < .0001), with
higher accuracy for HP compared to Control sentences. There
was also an interaction between Sentence Type and Ending
Type (p < .001); while memory for HP words was similar
irrespective of the Ending Type (corrected accuracy for
Predictable = 44%; corrected accuracy for Unpredictable =
40%), memory for Control words was better for
Unpredictable words (22%) compared to Predictable words
(15%).
As predicted, HP knowledge was not correlated with
accuracy for Control words, but HP knowledge was
correlated with accuracy for HP words (Predictable: r = .471,
p < .005; Unpredictable: r = .478, p < .005).
ERPs ERPs from our centro-parietal ROI are shown in Fig.
1. ERPs for both Control and HP sentences are characterized
by two early sensory components, a negative-going peak
around 100 ms (N1) and a positive-going peak around 200
ms (P2). Across all participants, for Predictable endings, the
P2 is followed by a positivity in the N400 time window

(~250-500 ms). For Unpredictable endings, the P2 is
followed by a relative negativity in this window.
Effects of knowledge during the N400 time window. Our
primary hypothesis was that specific domain knowledge
would influence semantic access, reflected by interactions
between Knowledge Group, Sentence Type, and Ending
Type during the N400 time window (250 to 500 ms). In the
omnibus ANOVA, we observed a main effect of Ending Type
(p < .005) but no effect of Sentence Type, reflecting the
pattern observed in Fig. 1: for both sentence types, N400
amplitude is reduced for Predictable items. Of note,
Knowledge Group interacted with Sentence Type (p < .005),
and a three-way interaction was observed between
Knowledge Group, Sentence Type, and Ending Type (p <
.05).
To follow up on the effects of Knowledge Group, Sentence
Type, and Ending Type on N400 amplitude, we examined
Control and HP sentences separately at our centro-parietal
ROI. Within Control sentences, there was an effect of Ending
Type on N400 amplitude (p < .0001) but no main effect of
Knowledge Group or interaction between Knowledge Group
and Ending Type. Conversely, within HP sentences, there
was a main effect of Ending Type (p < .0001), and an
interaction between Knowledge Group and Ending Type (p <
.005). Follow-up t-tests revealed a larger reduction in N400
amplitude for Predictable versus Unpredictable endings for
the High-Knowledge Group compared to the LowKnowledge Group (p < .01), supporting the notion that
specific knowledge at the level of the individual reduces
N400 amplitude (see Fig. 2). Furthermore, the differential
knowledge had its effect primarily for Predictable endings, as
High-Knowledge and Low-Knowledge individuals showed
differences in N400 activity to Predictable endings (p < .05)
but similar N400 activity to Unpredictable endings (p = .630).

1214

To tease apart contributions of (1) knowledge of individual
items and (2) knowledge of the domain (Harry Potter) to
semantic access, we asked participants to read sentences, all
of which were consistent with the world of Harry Potter, and
to respond with judgments of their knowledge along with
their confidence in them. We were particularly interested in
whether domain knowledge might have independent effect
on semantic activation (inferred from N400 amplitude) for (a)
items people say they know, (b) items people say they don’t
know, or (c) both.

Methods

Figure 2. Difference ERPs for Unpredictable minus
Predictable endings from Experiment 1 are plotted for
the High HP Knowledge Group (solid lines) and the Low
HP Knowledge Group (dashed lines) relative to a 200 ms
baseline. Predictability effects for Control sentences
were similar for both groups but only the High HP
Knowledge Group showed sizable Predictability effects
for HP sentences.

Participants 41 right-handed students at UCSD participated
for partial course credit and some monetary compensation.
Sentence Materials Materials consisted of 172 sentence
pairs describing the world of Harry Potter, including the 108
from Experiment 1 plus an additional 64. All sentences ended
in a word consistent with the Harry Potter books (i.e., the
Predictable endings from Experiment 1).

Analysis involving our continuous measure of HP
Knowledge coincided with this pattern of results. We
observed a graded relationship between the N400 effect
(mean amplitude to Unpredictable minus Predictable
endings) and knowledge scores, r = .457, p < .005; this
relationship was driven by the correlation between
knowledge and mean amplitude to Predictable endings (r =
.473, p < .005) whereas no correlation obtained between
knowledge and mean amplitude to Unpredictable endings (r
= .171, p = .293).
Effects of knowledge post-N400 (500-700 ms). In the
omnibus ANOVA, we observed an interaction effect of
Sentence Type and Ending Type (p < .01), which resulted
from a significant difference between Predictable and
Unpredictable endings to Control sentences (p < .0001), with
Unpredictable endings associated with greater positivities,
but only a marginal difference between Predictable and
Unpredictable endings for HP sentences, with the reverse
pattern (p = .08). Apart from effects involving Channel, there
were no other main effects or interactions in this analysis.2

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 demonstrated that specific domain
knowledge influences real-time semantic access, inferred
from N400 predictability effects. This pattern could obtain
for multiple reasons. By definition, experts know more
information, but expert knowledge also may be functionally
organized differently, with greater structure and/or depth than
that of less-knowledgeable individuals (Chi, 2006). We
expect that this organization, in whichever form it may take,
may influence semantic access above and beyond the
successful retrieval of any given known item.
2

More fine-grained analyses of HP sentences, however, do suggest
a relationship between knowledge and late positivities that is
mediated by offline, knowledge-based Cloze measures. For lower-

Experimental procedure Sentence presentation was as in
Experiment 1. After each sentence pair was presented,
participants were first asked to make a non-speeded judgment
about whether they knew the information in the sentences
ahead of time, followed by a judgment of their certainty (we
report only on responses to the first question in this paper).
After clean-up, participants completed 40 multiple-choice
questions about the Harry Potter books (including the 10
questions used in Experiment 1). Raw scores are henceforth
referred to as HP Knowledge. A median split on these scores
was used to determine High- and Low-knowledge groups.
ERP recording and data analysis ERPs were recorded and
processed as in Experiment 1. Because the design of
Experiment 2 involves binning data based on subject
responses, we used mixed-effects models (Baayen et al.,
2008), which allow for the analysis of unbalanced data (e.g.,
Tibon & Levy, 2015). For both N400 and post-N400 time
windows, we start by employing models that include fixed
effects of (1) Judgment of Knowledge (two levels: “Yes,”
“No”) and (2) HP Knowledge (continuous measure) along
with random by-items and by-subjects intercepts. To unpack
interactions, we follow up with similar mixed-effects models
designed to isolate the root(s) of the interactions. These
models were applied to data from our centro-parietal ROI
(see Experiment 1). As in Experiment 1, we examined a
window centered around the N400 (250-500 ms) and a postN400 window (500-750 ms). For illustrative purposes, when
plotting these data, we weight trials equally (rather than
plotting grand averages as is typical, where each subject is
weighted equally).

Cloze (and, by inference, less-frequently-accessed) compared to
higher-Cloze items, post-N400 activity was more positive-going,
but only for high-knowledge individuals.

1215

Figure 3: (A) ERPs from a central-parietal ROI to
sentence-final critical words from Experiment 2 are
plotted for words judged as known (black lines) and
unknown (red lines) relative to a 200 ms baseline.
Shaded regions depict the area between 250 and 500 ms
(N400 time window). Across all participants, words
judged as known led to more positive-going waves
during this time. (B) During the N400 time window, HP
Knowledge influenced mean amplitude only for
Unknown (red), but not known (black) items.

Results
Behavior On average, participants responded that they knew
102 out of 172 items (60%). As expected, high-knowledge
participants reported knowing more items (80%) than lowknowledge participants (38%), with a strong correlation
between HP Knowledge and number of items judged as
known, r = .85, p < .0001.
We trimmed response times three standard deviations
greater than the mean for all responses. Response times for
judgments of knowledge were overall slower for “No”
responses (1015 ms) than “Yes” responses (851 ms), p <
.0001. Moreover, HP knowledge interacted with Judgment of
Knowledge (p < .0001): high-knowledge individuals
responded faster for “Yes” responses (809 ms) than “No”
responses (1193 ms) (p < .0001), but Low-Knowledge
individuals showed only slightly faster RTs for “Yes” (943
ms) than “No” (964 ms) (n.s.). Pair-wise differences between
High- and Low-Knowledge Groups were significant for “No”
responses (p < .005) but not for “Yes” responses. Individuals
therefore responded with similar speed when they judged
items as known, but those with greater HP knowledge took
longer to judge an item as unknown.
ERPs Grand average ERPs to sentence-final words were
computed across all 26 recording sites grouped by
participants’ responses. See Fig. 3 for plots from the centroparietal ROI.
Effects of knowledge during the N400 time window. As
expected, we observed overall more positive-going
waveforms during the N400 time window for highknowledge compared to low-knowledge individuals (p <

.005). In addition, positive Judgments of Knowledge (i.e.,
“Yes” responses) resulted in reduced N400 amplitudes (p <
.0001; see Fig. 3). We also observed an interaction of
Judgment and HP Knowledge (p < .005). Follow-up
comparisons revealed that this interaction was driven by
effects of HP Knowledge on N400 amplitude for “No”
responses (p < .05) but not for “Yes” Responses,
demonstrating that specific domain knowledge has its
primary influence on items which participants say they did
not know (recollect) at the time.
Effects of knowledge post-N400 (500-750 ms). Mean
amplitude during the post-N400 window was influenced both
by HP Knowledge (p < .05) and Judgments of Knowledge (p
< .0001), with the two terms also interacting (p < .0001).
Overall, “Yes” responses yielded more positive-going waves
than “No” responses, and greater HP Knowledge was also
related to more positive-going potentials. Follow-up analyses
revealed that this interaction was driven by an effect of HP
Knowledge on “No” responses (p < .05), with no relationship
between HP Knowledge and positive-going potentials for
“Yes” responses (p = .869). For “No” responses, individuals
with more knowledge had more post-N400 positive-going
activity.

General Discussion
We set out to investigate the relationship between specific
domain knowledge and semantic access during real-time
written sentence processing. Experiment 1 provided a strong
indication that knowing about a domain (in our case, the
narrative world of Harry Potter) influences semantic access,
but only within that domain. As predicted, we observed no
effects of Harry Potter-specific knowledge on processing of
sentences about general topics. However, Harry Potterspecific knowledge did mediate N400 effects for Harry Potter
sentences. We found that the size of the N400 predictability
effect was correlated with HP knowledge score, with the
correlation being driven by a graded relationship between
knowledge and the neural response to predictable words.
In many ERP studies of sentence processing, predictability
is defined using offline Cloze norming measures (that is, how
likely an individual is to provide a word given a sentence
context). It is worth noting that offline Cloze measures for
our Harry Potter sentences provide a different type of metric
than for our Control sentences. That is, predictable endings
for Harry Potter sentences are predictable by virtue of being
factual (within the narrative world); predictable endings for
Control sentences are predictable based on world knowledge,
but have no “correct” ending. Even so, our analyses revealed
no main effect of sentence type (general/control vs. Harry
Potter sentences) in Experiment 1. That is, across the whole
group, we observed similar N400 effects of predictability for
both Control and Harry Potter sentences (see Fig. 1). Our
findings concur with many reports that N400 amplitude is
sensitive to a word’s predictability and/or contextual fit, in
factual and non-factual scenarios (e.g., Hagoort et al., 2004).
Our finding that semantic access (inferred from N400
effects) is driven by knowledge is not surprising. In order to

1216

access information, the information must exist in the first
place. However, there are at least two reasons why HP
knowledge might relate to N400 predictability effects in
Experiment 1: (1) low-knowledge individuals know fewer
facts than high-knowledge individuals on average; and (2)
there are potentially additional contributions of domain
knowledge on semantic processing when individuals know
(or don’t know) items, respectively. In Experiment 2, we
examined these possibilities by asking participants whether
they knew each item (i.e., each Harry Potter fact) ahead of
time. While both high- and low-knowledge groups showed
large differences in N400 activity based on their own (metacognitive) judgments of whether they knew specific items,
high-knowledge (compared to low-knowledge) individuals
showed greater positivities during the N400 window even for
information they reported not knowing at the time.
There are multiple reasons why domain knowledge might
modulate N400 amplitude for items that are not immediately
recognized. We cannot currently rule out the possibility that
high- vs. low-knowledge individuals perceive different task
demands or use different criteria when making judgments.
We believe a more likely explanation is that enhanced
N400 reduction for high- compared to low-knowledge
individuals suggests some level of implicit activation of
information outside of conscious awareness. This activation
may be restricted to a specific word and its semantic features
or it may extend to related words / concepts. The precise
nature of such implicitly activated information, and precisely
how it is modulated by variation in level or amount of
knowledge, have yet to be determined. Some possibilities
include information that is taxonomically / categorically
related to a predictable word (e.g., Federmeier & Kutas,
1999) and information related to the scenario / event being
described (e.g., Metusalem et al., 2012).
As for post-N400 activity, we observed systematic effects
of both HP Knowledge and judgments of knowledge on late
positivities in Experiment 2, with high-knowledge
individuals showing greater positivities than low-knowledge
individuals for items they did not know. One way of
interpreting this interaction is that when high-knowledge
individuals do not know an item, they continue to search for
it (perhaps because they believe they may know, but not
currently be able to retrieve, the knowledge).
Our findings build on work showing that the functional
organization of long-term memory plays an important role in
the real-time construction of meaning (e.g., Federmeier &
Kutas, 1999). We have demonstrated that variability among
individuals in their knowledge of a domain is an important
contributor to real-time access to meaning. More specifically,
our data suggest that the amount and/or organization of
domain knowledge appear to influence access to knowledge
above and beyond explicit knowledge of individual items:
expert-like knowledge organization in a domain may lead to
implicit or partial activation of domain-related information,
even when individuals do not explicitly recall a given piece
of information.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NICHD grant HD22614 to
Marta Kutas and UCSD Kroner Fellowship and FISP grant to
Melissa Troyer. The authors would like to thank Seana
Coulson, Katherine DeLong, Jeff Elman, Vic Ferreira,
Zhuowen Tu, and Thomas Urbach for helpful feedback.

References
Baayen, R.H., Davidson, D.J., & Bates, D.M. (2008). Mixed-effects
modeling with crossed random effects for subjects and items.
Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 390-412.
Brouwer, H., Fitz, H., Hoeks, J. (2012). Getting real about semantic
illusions: Rethinking the functional role of the P600 in language
comprehension. Brain Research, 1446, 127-143.
Chi, M.T.H. (2006) Laboratory methods for assessing experts’ and
novices’ knowledge. In Ericsson et al. (Eds.), The Cambridge
Handbook of Expertise and Expert Performance. Cambridge
University Press.
Federmeier, K.D. & Kutas, M. (1999). A rose by any other name:
Long-term memory structure and sentence processing. Journal of
Memory and Language, 41, 469-495.
Federmeier, K.D., Kutas, M., & Schul, R. (2010). Age-related and
individual differences in the use of prediction during language
comprehension. Brain & Language, 115, 149-161.
Filik, R. & Leuthold, H. (2013). The role of character-based
knowledge in online narrative comprehension: Evidence from eye
movements and ERPs. Brain Research, 1506, 94-104.
Hagoort, P., Hald, L., Bastiaansen, M., Petersson, K.M. (2004).
Integration of word meaning and world knowledge in language
comprehension. Science, 304, 438-441.
Kamide, Y., Altmann, G.T.M., & Haywood, S.L. (2003). The timecourse of prediction in incremental sentence processing:
Evidence from anticipatory eye movements. Journal of Memory
and Language, 49, 133-156.
Kutas, M. & Federmeier, K.D. (2000). Electrophysiology reveals
semantic memory use in language comprehension. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 4(12), 463-470.
Kutas, M. & Hillyard, S.A. (1980). Reading senseless sentences:
Brain potentials reflect semantic incongruity. Science, 207, 203205.
Metusalem, R., Kutas, M., Urbach, T.P., Hare, M., McRae, K., &
Elman, J.L. (2012). Generalized event knowledge activation
during online sentence comprehension. Journal of Memory and
Language, 66(4), 545-567.
Nieuwland, M.S. & Van Berkum, J.J.A. (2006). When peanuts fall
in love: N400 evidence for the power of discourse. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 18(7), 1098-111.
Tanenhaus, M.K., Spivey-Knowlton, M.J., Eberhard, K.M., &
Sedivy, J.C. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic
information in spoken language comprehension. Science, 268,
1632-1634.
Tibon, R. & Levy, D.A. (2015). Striking a balance: analyzing
unbalanced event-related potential data. Frontiers in Psychology,
6, 555.
Van Berkum, J.J.A, van den Brink, D., Tesink, C.M.J.Y., Kos, M.,
& Hagoort, P. (2008). The neural integration of speaker and
message. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20(4), 580-591.
Van Petten, C. & Luka, B.J. (2012). Prediction during language
comprehension: Benefits, costs, and ERP components.
International Journal of Psychophysiology, 83,176-190.

1217

