Language-users choose short words in predictive contexts
in an artificial language task
Jasmeen Kanwal (jasmeen.kanwal@ed.ac.uk), Kenny Smith (kenny.smith@ed.ac.uk),
Jennifer Culbertson (jennifer.culbertson@ed.ac.uk), and Simon Kirby (simon@ling.ed.ac.uk)
Centre for Language Evolution, University of Edinburgh
3 Charles St., Edinburgh, Scotland EH8 9AD
Abstract

Using these concepts, we can apply Zipf’s Principle of
Least Effort to hypothesise that a speaker’s drive to reduce
effort will be directed towards words that are already highly
predictable given the context, i.e. have low information content. Words that are more surprising in a particular context
will be less likely to be reduced, or more likely to be lengthened. The resulting state in which low-information words are
shorter than high-information words, and thus the length of a
word is roughly proportional to the amount of information associated with the word, is consistent with the Uniform Information Density (UID) principle (Jaeger, 2010) or the Smooth
Signal Redundancy (SSR) hypothesis (Aylett & Turk, 2004),
which state that information is distributed roughly evenly
across words in an utterance.

Zipf (1935) observed that word length is inversely proportional
to word frequency in the lexicon. He hypothesised that this
cross-linguistically universal feature was due to the Principle
of Least Effort: language-users align form-meaning mappings
in such a way that the lexicon is optimally coded for efficient
information transfer. However, word frequency is not the only
reliable predictor of word length: Piantadosi, Tily, and Gibson (2011) show that a word’s predictability in context is in
fact more strongly correlated with word length than word frequency. Here, we present an artificial language learning study
aimed at investigating the mechanisms that could give rise to
such a distribution at the level of the lexicon. We find that
participants are more likely to use an ambiguous short form in
predictive contexts, and distinct long forms in surprising contexts, only when they are subject to the competing pressures to
communicate accurately and efficiently. These results support
the hypothesis that language-users are driven by a least-effort
principle to restructure their input in order to align word length
with information content, and this mechanism could therefore
explain the global pattern observed at the level of the lexicon.
Keywords: Information theory; Efficient communication; Artificial language learning; Uniform Information Density

There are many ways to operationalise the information
content of a word. One way is to use the N-gram probability of a word, i.e. its probability conditioned on a window of N preceding or following words. This is the method
used by Piantadosi et al. (2011). Zipf’s word frequency measure is in fact just a limiting case of this N-gram probability,
where N=0. Other measures include syntactic probability, a
word’s probability of appearing in a particular syntactic structure (Jaeger, 2010, e.g.), and givenness, a word’s predictability given the semantic context (Aylett & Turk, 2004).

Introduction
Zipf (1935) observed that word length tends to be inversely
proportional to word frequency in the lexicon. He hypothesised that this widespread cross-linguistic pattern was due
to the Principle of Least Effort: language-users align formmeaning mappings in such a way that effort is minimised
while expressivity is still maintained. However, word frequency is not the only reliable predictor of word length. Using corpora from 11 different languages, Piantadosi et al.
(2011) show that a word’s predictability in context (where
they define context as the two words preceding the target
word) is even more strongly correlated with word length than
frequency is: words that are, on average, more predictable in
context tend to be shorter.
Measuring how predictable or unpredictable a word is in a
particular context gives us a way of defining the information
content of a word. For example, consider the two sentences:

Both corpus studies and controlled behavioural experiments have linked low information content, operationalised
in these different ways, to various types of linguistic reduction. Lieberman (1963); Aylett and Turk (2004); Gahl and
Garnsey (2004); Tily et al. (2009); Kuperman and Bresnan
(2012), and Seyfarth (2014) show that words with low information content are more likely to undergo various types of
phonetic reduction. Bell, Brenier, Gregory, Girand, and Jurafsky (2009) show that each of the four different measures of
information content mentioned above may in fact contribute
separately to the phonetic duration of a word. Fedzechkina,
Jaeger, and Newport (2012) show that case markers are more
likely to be omitted on nouns in more probable syntactic
roles. Jaeger (2010) shows that that-complementisers are
more often dropped when the following word is less surprising in context.

(1) The early bird catches the worm.
(2) Our early bird special today is a baked-apple worm.
In sentence (1), a well-known proverb, the word worm is entirely predicted by the preceding words. The word itself thus
gives us practically no new information, and so it has low information content. In sentence (2), the same word is highly
unlikely given the preceding words, and thus we find it surprising. This element of surprise is associated with high information content.

If predictability in context can lead to phonetic reduction,
as well as deletion of morphemes and entire words, then these
effects might make their way to the overall distribution of
form-meaning mappings in the lexicon. However, there is relatively little work directed at understanding how predictability affects this widely observed pattern at the level of the lex-

643

icon.
One way of investigating the issue is by tracking languageusers’ online choices when producing words that are part of
a ‘clipped pair’, i.e. when both a long form and an abbreviated or ‘clipped’ form exist that have the same or very similar meanings (Mahowald, Fedorenko, Piantadosi, & Gibson,
2013). E.g. in English, info/information is a clipped pair. Mahowald et al. presented participants with sentences containing
a blank and asked them to complete the sentence with either
the long or the clipped form corresponding to the relevant
meaning. They found that participants were more likely to
choose the short form in predictive contexts, which is consistent with the hypothesis that the lexicon-level patterns observed by Piantadosi et al. (2011) may be due in part to a
least-effort mechanism, in which speakers balance communicative efficacy with efficiency.
However, because this study uses English sentence frames
and target words, we cannot rule out potentially confounding contributions from register, prosody, and participants’
learned preferences to their word choice in particular instances. Moreover, we cannot assess whether the effect is
really driven by the competing pressures for communicative
accuracy and efficiency without manipulating the presence or
absence of these different communicative pressures. For instance, in Mahowald et al.’s task, it seems participants clicked
on a word rather than typing it in, and thus there was no difference in effort between choosing the long or short form. In
addition, participants were told to choose a word based on
“which sounded more natural”, rather than being directly engaged in a task requiring successful communication.
Here, we present a new artificial language learning study
investigating the question of whether language-users align
word length with information content when communicating. Our results are consistent with previous findings that
language-users tend to use shorter forms in more predictive
contexts. Furthermore, the behaviour we observe across different experimental conditions supports the hypothesis that
this effect is driven at least in part by a least-effort principle,
in which language-users balance the competing pressures for
communicative accuracy and efficiency to reshape the lexicon
into one where word length is roughly proportional to average
information content.

Mechanical Turk. 108 of these reported themselves as native
English speakers, of which 96 were monolingual. A range of
other languages were represented across the remaining participants. Ages ranged from 18 to 70 (mean=32.9, SD=9.5).

Method

Participants were assigned to one of four conditions, where
we manipulated the presence of pressures to communicate
accurately and quickly in a between-subjects 2x2 design
(Kanwal, Smith, Culbertson, & Kirby, 2017). Each experiment consisted of two phases: training and testing. The training phase was uniform across conditions, while the testing
phase varied by condition.

The Training Language
The study was run online. Participants were trained on two
names for each of two plant-like alien objects, by repeatedly
being shown pictures of the objects labeled with a simple sentence. The sentence consisted of a framing word followed by
the object’s name. There were two possible frames, bix and
gat. Overall there were 64 training trials, with each object
appearing 32 times and each frame appearing 32 times. Crucially, one object appeared seven times more frequently with
the frame bix than gat (28 and 4 times, respectively), while
the other object appeared seven times more frequently with
the frame gat than bix (again, 28 and 4 times, respectively).
This meant that each object appeared in both a predictive context and a surprising context; which frame signified which of
these contexts was flipped between the two objects.
Furthermore, the object name appeared half the time in its
full form, a 7-letter word, and half the time in shortened form,
a 3-letter word derived by clipping the last two syllables off
the long name. These short and long forms were evenly distributed across both predictive and surprising contexts, ensuring that the input language contained no inbuilt bias towards
using one form in any particular context.1 A schematic diagram of the object frequencies and labels is provided in Fig.
1A.
In natural languages, shorter words are subject to greater
confusability for a number of reasons: shorter forms have
less space for signal redundacy and thus are more likely
to be completely lost in noisy signal transmission; and because languages have a finite phoneme inventory, there are
more unique possible long strings than short strings, and thus
word shortening often results in ambiguity. Indeed, shorter
words are more likely to be polysemous and homophonous
(Piantadosi, Tily, & Gibson, 2012). To model this fact in
our miniature lexicon, we designed the names such that the
short name for both objects was identical (zop), while the long
names were unique (zopekil and zopudon).

Procedure

Artificial language learning studies have previously been used
to shed light on the cognitive mechanisms and environmental pressures that shape large-scale linguistic structure. In
this paradigm, participants learn an artificial language, and
then we observe how they reshape their input as they use the
language, in this case to communicate with a partner (e.g.,
Winters, Kirby, & Smith, 2015; Kirby, Tamariz, Cornish, &
Smith, 2015; Fehér, Wonnacott, & Smith, 2016).

1 Which object (the blue fruit or the red stalk) appeared more frequently with which frame, as well as which object was paired with
which long name, were both counterbalanced between participants,
giving a total of 4 possible object-frame-name pairings which a participant might be trained on. This ensured that potential factors such
as sound symbolism, or higher saliency or learnability of any specific object-word pairing, could not systematically bias our results.

Participants
120 participants (53 females, 66 males; one did not report
their gender) were recruited and remunerated via Amazon

644

each trial, the ‘director’ was shown an object on the screen
with a framing word followed by a blank. The director was
instructed to choose a name for the object to complete the
sentence, and once the name was entered, the sentence would
be transmitted to the ‘matcher’. The director could choose
one of two options to complete the sentence: the unique long
name for the object or the (ambiguous) short name. Once the
chosen name was selected by clicking on the appropriately
labeled button, it had to be entered into the blank space by
pressing and holding the mouse as each letter appeared one
after the other at 1200 ms intervals. Only after all the letters
in the name had appeared in the box was the completed sentence transmitted to the matcher. This belaboured method of
production, in which the long name was significantly slower
to produce than the short name, was introduced to model the
difference in effort and speed associated with producing long
versus short utterances.

A

Bix zop.

x 2

Bix zopekil.

x 14
x 14

Bix zopudon.

x 2

Gat zop.

x 2

Gat zop.

Gat zopekil.

x 2

Gat zopudon.

x 14
x 14

Bix zop.

B

C

Once the director completed their description, it was transmitted to the matcher, who was asked to choose which of the
two objects they thought the director was referring to. Both
players were then given feedback as to whether the matcher’s
choice was correct.
The players alternated roles after every trial, with the
matcher becoming the director and the director becoming
the matcher, until both completed 32 director trials and 32
matcher trials. The proportion of times each object appeared
with each frame in each player’s director trials matched those
of the training proportions: one object appeared seven times
more frequently with the frame gat than bix, and the other
appeared seven times more frequently with bix than gat. The
order of each participant’s 32 director trials was randomly
shuffled.

Figure 1: (A) The input frequencies of the objects and framing
sentences presented during training trials in all four experimental
conditions. (B) A sample training trial. (C) A sample director trial
in the Combined condition (top) and a matcher trial followed by
feedback (bottom).

To model the pressures in spoken communication to be
both efficient and accurate, pairs were told at the beginning
that they would be rewarded a bonus payment of $1 if they
were the pair to complete the game in the quickest time with
the highest number of correct match trials. Time was only
counted when the director was entering a name into the blank,
and the total time count was displayed next to the blank during this process, to emphasise the time pressure. Screenshots
of sample director and matcher trials are shown in Fig. 1C.

Training phase On each training trial, an object was presented on screen alone for 700ms. The appropriate sentence
then appeared beneath the object for a further 3000ms, yielding a total trial duration of 3700ms. A blank screen showed
for 500ms between trials. The 64 training trials were presented in a different randomised order for each participant.
Testing phase After the training phase, testing procedures
varied depending on the experimental condition. In the Combined condition, participants were under a pressure to communicate accurately and efficiently, as according to the Principle of Least Effort, it is balancing these competing pressures
that leads language-users to distribute word length inversely
to word predictability. The remaining three conditions removed one or both of these accuracy and time pressures.

In this condition, with pressures to be speedy yet accurate,
we expected participants to converge on an optimal strategy
in which the short name is used for an object when it appears
in its predictive context, and the long name otherwise. In
predictive contexts, the framing word already provides a lot
of information to the matcher about which object is likely
under discussion, and thus participants can minimise effort
by using the short form. Conversely, in surprising contexts,
the full object name is required to ensure disambiguation.

Condition 1: Combined In the testing phase of this condition, participants were paired with a partner to play a communication game, using the method developed for running
two-player online experiments in Kanwal et al. (2017). On

In order to establish a causal link between these purported
mechanisms and the behaviour we observe, we included three
further experimental conditions, described below, for a full
2x2 manipulation of the pressures for accuracy and efficiency.

645

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

b) Condition = Accuracy

10
5

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

c) Condition = Time

d) Condition = Neither

1

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

proportion short name used in surprising contexts

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

a) Condition = Combined

Condition 2: Accuracy In this condition, participants were
paired to play a communication game as described above, but
in the director trials, there was no intermediate step between
the director choosing a name to complete the sentence and
the matcher receiving the sentence; the names were entered
instantaneously, thus removing any difference in effort between producing long or short names. Pairs were told that
the goal of the game was simply to have their partner make as
many correct guesses as possible. No bonus prize was offered
in this condition, as we expected many pairs to hit ceiling as
they did in Kanwal et al. (2017)—however, fewer than expected actually did so here.
In this condition, we predicted that participants would be
more likely to use the long names for both objects across all
contexts, as the long names are less confusable, and without
a pressure to be efficient, there is little reason to shorten.
Condition 3: Time In this condition, communication was
taken out of the game entirely; participants played a oneplayer game consisting of 64 director trials. In each trial,
participants completed the sentence with either the long or
short name for the object shown, but there was no subsequent
communicative task. The name was simply entered as in the
Combined condition, by pressing and holding the mouse in
the blank space, with each letter appearing at 1200 ms intervals, while a timer displayed the total time count. The next
trial began once all the letters had appeared in the box. Participants were told at the beginning of the game that they would
be rewarded a bonus payment of $1 if they were the player
with the shortest total time count.
Here, we expected participants to use the short name for
both objects across all contexts: with no communicative purpose attached to the transmissions, and an incentive to be as
quick as possible, using the short name in every trial is the
best strategy.
Condition 4: Neither The fourth and last condition contained neither a pressure for efficiency nor a pressure for accuracy. As in the Time condition, participants played a oneplayer game with no explicit communicative element. Additionally, there was no time difference associated with transmission; once a label was chosen to complete a sentence, it
was instantaneously recorded and the player advanced to the
next trial. We included this condition to provide a baseline for
participants’ behaviour from which to assess the effects of the
accuracy and time pressures in the other three conditions.
In this condition we expected that participants would either probability-match—i.e. use the long and short forms for
both objects with equal frequency, as in the training trials
(Hudson Kam & Newport, 2005)—or their behaviour would
reveal prior biases language users bring to the task, such as
a preference against using ambiguous forms, as observed in
Kanwal et al. (2017).

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

proportion short name used in predictive contexts

Figure 2: The proportion of trials in which the short name was
used in predictive contexts versus the proportion of trials in which
it was used in surprising contexts. For the Combined and Accuracy
condition, each data point combines a pair of communicating players, representing the sum of their director trial productions. For the
Time and Neither condition, each data point corresponds to an individual player’s productions. The size of the circles is perceptually
scaled (Tanimura et al., 2006) to reflect the number of data points
coinciding at each value. Data from only the second half of testing
trials is shown here, as participants were more likely to have converged on a stable mapping by this time. These results demonstrate
that behaviour consistent with the principles of UID or SSR—using
short forms in predictive contexts and long forms in surprising contexts, generating systems that fall in the bottom right corner of each
graph—only reliably arises in the Combined condition.

predictive versus surprising contexts. Our predictions were
borne out by the results in all four conditions. In the critical Combined condition, in which participants were subject
to the combined pressures for accuracy and efficiency, pairs
of communicating participants produced systems in which the
short name was used in predictive contexts and the long name
in surprising contexts. Crucially, only when both pressures
were present did participants reliably produce systems where
word length was conditioned on context in this way. In the
Accuracy condition, participants tended to use the long name
for both objects regardless of context, and in the Time condition, they used the short name for both objects regardless
of context. In the Neither condition, some participants stuck
with the long name or the short name throughout the trials
regardless of context, as in the Accuracy or Time conditions;
however, most participants probability-matched.
A logistic regression model was fit to the full dataset in R
using the lme4 package, with short name use (as contrasted
with long name use) as the binary dependent variable; context (predictive or not), experimental condition, and their interaction as fixed effects; and by-participant random slopes

Results
Fig. 2 shows the proportion of trials in which the short name
was produced by each participant or pair of participants in

646

ing fixed names for each object, regardless of context. The
results are plotted by condition in the righthand graph of Fig.
3. If participants are using a distinct name for each object,
MIo will be close to 1; if they are using the same name for
both objects, MIo will be close to 0. The former pattern is
what we see in the Accuracy condition: most participants use
the unique long name for each object, regardless of context.
The latter pattern is what we see in the Time condition: most
participants use the ambiguous short form for both objects,
regardless of context.
In the Combined and Neither conditions, MIo hovers
around that of the input language. Based on this graph alone,
participants may be probability matching in both these conditions, or perhaps reliably conditioning their output on other
factors. Looking back at MIc disambiguates: it is significantly higher in the Combined condition than in any other
condition. A linear regression on MIc with condition as predictor variable (fit to the second half of testing trials, as in Fig.
3) yielded a significant negative effect of the Accuracy (β =
−0.081, SE = 0.033, p = 0.016), Time (β = −0.184, SE =
0.041, p < 0.001), and Neither (β = −0.128, SE = 0.041, p =
0.002) conditions, with the Combined condition set as the intercept. This result is consistent with what we saw in Fig. 2:
in the Combined condition, many participants are optimally
conditioning their responses on context, generating systems
that fall in the bottom right corner of the graph; in the other
conditions, almost no data points fall in this region.

Mutual information between
names & objects

0.8
0.6

0.5
0.4

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.1

mutual information (bits)

0.6

1.0

0.7

names & contexts

Combined

Accuracy

Time

Neither

Combined

Accuracy

Time

Neither

condition

Figure 3: This figure shows the extent to which participants’
name choices are conditioned on context (lefthand graph) and object
(righthand graph). The dotted line in the lefthand graph represents
the mutual information (MIc ) associated with the ‘optimal’ language
in least-effort terms—the language in which the short form is used
only in predictive contexts, and the long form only in surprising contexts. MIc =0 for the input language. In the righthand graph, mutual
information (MIo ) can range from 0 (same name fixed for both objects) to 1 (distinct names fixed for each object). MIo =0.5 for the
input language, marked by the dotted line. Data from only the second half of testing trials is shown in this figure, as participants were
more likely to have converged on a stable mapping by this time.

and intercepts for context. The model was sum coded, setting the grand mean as the intercept, to which each level
was then compared. The results yielded a significant positive interaction of context in the critical Combined condition
(β = 0.619, SE = 0.158, p < 0.001), indicating that in this
condition, participants were significantly more likely to use
the short name in predictive contexts. The only other significant effects found were as follows: a positive overall effect in
the Time condition (β = 2.187, SE = 0.292, p < 0.001), indicating that participants were more likely to use the short form
in this condition regardless of context; a negative overall effect in the Accuracy condition (β = −1.470, SE = 0.233, p <
0.001), indicating that participants were less likely to use the
short form in this condition regardless of context; and finally
a negative interaction effect of context in the Accuracy condition (β = −0.490, SE = 0.161, p = 0.002), indicating that in
fact participants were even less likely to use the short form in
the predictive context in this condition.
An analysis of how participants conditioned the variation
in their name usage sheds further light on the differing patterns of behaviour seen across conditions. We calculated the
average mutual information between name produced and context (predictive or not) in each participant’s output language
(MIc ). The more reliably participants are conditioning their
use of the long and short names on context, the higher we
would expect the value of MIc to be. The distributions for all
four conditions are plotted on the lefthand graph of Fig. 3.
We also calculated the average mutual information between name produced and object (the blue fruit or the red
stalk) in each participant’s output language (MIo ). This measure allows us to determine whether some participants are us-

Discussion
There is mounting evidence that utterance length is linked to
information content (Lieberman, 1963; Aylett & Turk, 2004;
Gahl & Garnsey, 2004; Tily et al., 2009; Bell et al., 2009;
Jaeger, 2010; Piantadosi et al., 2011; Kuperman & Bresnan, 2012; Fedzechkina et al., 2012; Seyfarth, 2014). The
explanation put forth in much of this previous work is that
speakers are driven by pressures much like those outlined in
Zipf’s Principle of Least Effort: the competing demands for
accurate and efficient communication lead speakers to converge on an optimal system in which information content
is spread roughly uniformly across the utterance, resulting
in low-information units being shorter than high-information
units. This resultant effect appears to have made its way into
the structure of the lexicon as a whole: shorter words appear on average in more predictive contexts than longer words
(Piantadosi et al., 2011). But is this effect really due to the
proposed mechanism? Can speaker choice lead to the reshaping of a lexicon to align it with the principles of Uniform
Information Density and Smooth Signal Redundancy?
Here, we presented the first study that concretely addresses
these questions. Previous studies either lacked a manipulation of the communicative pressures operating in the task, or
lacked a communicative element entirely. In our study, by
observing participants’ online behaviour in a task in which
the pressures to communicate accurately and efficiently were
manipulated across four experimental conditions, we have

647

shown that participants use shorter words in more predictive contexts only when both competing pressures were acting on them. When these pressures were isolated or removed
entirely, participants failed to reliably condition their word
choices on context.
Furthermore, because our study employed an artificial language learning paradigm, our findings avoid potential confounds from factors such as register, prosody, and participants’ learned preferences in their native or second languages.
Our results are nevertheless consistent with previous findings
that language-users tend to use shorter forms in more predictive contexts when using their native language.
Our results serve as a proof of concept that the lexiconlevel effect observed by Piantadosi et al. (2011) could be
driven at least in part by a least-effort principle in which
language-users balance the competing pressures for communicative accuracy and efficiency to reshape the lexicon into
one where word length is roughly proportional to information content. However, there is a crucial step between what
we have observed here—language-users alternating between
long and short variants for a single meaning depending on
context—and what Piantadosi et al. (2011) observed in the
lexicon of different languages, where most meanings don’t
correspond to both a long and a clipped variant, but rather
map to a single fixed form. For these cases, which make up
the majority of the lexicon, the length of the form is strongly
correlated with the average predictability-in-context of the
meaning, across all its different occurrences. We can hypothesise a link between these two phenomena: as a word appears
in increasingly more predictive contexts, a reduced variant
may come into use. If speakers use the reduced variant in
predictive contexts, then this reduced form will consequently
become much more frequent than the long form, leading to
the long form eventually dying out altogether. This would end
in a scenario where a short word, with no alternative variants
currently in use, appears on average in a high number of predictive contexts, and thus has a low average information content. Though this story sounds reasonable, a precise mechanistic explanation of how this preference for short forms in
more predictive contexts leads to permanent shifts in formmeaning mappings has yet to be thoroughly investigated. We
hope this topic is given more attention in future work.

Academy of Sciences, 109(44), 17897–17902.
Fehér, O., Wonnacott, E., & Smith, K. (2016). Structural
priming in artificial languages and the regularisation of unpredictable variation. Journal of Memory and Language,
91, 158–180.
Gahl, S., & Garnsey, S. M. (2004). Knowledge of grammar,
knowledge of usage: Syntactic probabilities affect pronunciation variation. Language, 748775.
Hudson Kam, C. L., & Newport, E. L. (2005). Regularizing
unpredictable variation: The roles of adult and child learners in language formation and change. Language learning
and development, 1(2), 151–195.
Jaeger, T. F. (2010, August). Redundancy and reduction:
Speakers manage syntactic information density. Cognitive
Psychology, 61(1), 23–62.
Kanwal, J., Smith, K., Culbertson, J., & Kirby, S. (2017).
Zipf’s law of abbreviation and the principle of least effort:
Language users optimise a miniature lexicon for efficient
communication. Cognition. (In press.)
Kirby, S., Tamariz, M., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2015).
Compression and communication in the cultural evolution
of linguistic structure. Cognition, 141, 87–102.
Kuperman, V., & Bresnan, J. (2012). The effects of construction probability on word durations during spontaneous
incremental sentence production. Journal of Memory and
Language, 66(4), 588–611.
Lieberman, P. (1963). Some effects of semantic and grammatical context on the production and perception of speech.
Language and speech, 6(3), 172–187.
Mahowald, K., Fedorenko, E., Piantadosi, S. T., & Gibson,
E. (2013, February). Info/information theory: Speakers
choose shorter words in predictive contexts. Cognition,
126(2), 313–318.
Piantadosi, S. T., Tily, H., & Gibson, E. (2011). Word lengths
are optimized for efficient communication. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 108(9), 3526–3529.
Piantadosi, S. T., Tily, H., & Gibson, E. (2012). The communicative function of ambiguity in language. Cognition,
122(3), 280–291.
Seyfarth, S. (2014). Word informativity influences acoustic duration: Effects of contextual predictability on lexical
representation. Cognition, 133(1), 140–155.
Tanimura, S., Kuroiwa, C., Mizota, T., et al. (2006). Proportional symbol mapping in R. Journal of Statistical Software, 15(i05).
Tily, H., Gahl, S., Arnon, I., Snider, N., Kothari, A., & Bresnan, J. (2009). Syntactic probabilities affect pronunciation
variation in spontaneous speech. Language and Cognition,
1(2), 147–165.
Winters, J., Kirby, S., & Smith, K. (2015). Languages adapt
to their contextual niche. Language and Cognition, 7(3),
415-449.
Zipf, G. K. (1935). The psycho-biology of language (Vol. ix).
Oxford, England: Houghton Mifflin.

References
Aylett, M., & Turk, A. (2004). The smooth signal redundancy
hypothesis: A functional explanation for relationships between redundancy, prosodic prominence, and duration in
spontaneous speech. Language and speech, 47(1), 31–56.
Bell, A., Brenier, J. M., Gregory, M., Girand, C., & Jurafsky,
D. (2009). Predictability effects on durations of content
and function words in conversational english. Journal of
Memory and Language, 60(1), 92–111.
Fedzechkina, M., Jaeger, T. F., & Newport, E. L. (2012, October). Language learners restructure their input to facilitate efficient communication. Proceedings of the National

648

