Leaping across the mental canyon: Analogical retrieval across disparate task
domains
Shir Dekel (sdek7598@uni.sydney.edu.au)
University of Sydney, School of Psychology, Brennan MacCallum Building (A18)
Camperdown, NSW 2006, Australia

Bruce D. Burns (bruce.burns@sydney.edu.au)
University of Sydney, School of Psychology, Brennan MacCallum Building (A18)
Camperdown, NSW 2006, Australia

Micah B. Goldwater (micah.goldwater@sydney.edu.au)
University of Sydney, School of Psychology, Brennan MacCallum Building (A18)
Camperdown, NSW 2006, Australia
Abstract
The present study provides evidence for far analogical
retrieval, i.e., analogical retrieval across disparate task
domains, as a result of analogical comparison. Participants
read source stories, which were then retrieved after a filled
delay through abstract letter-string cues that matched the
relational form of key parts of stories. They then generated
responses to an ambiguous letter-string analogy problem.
Evidence was found for far analogical retrieval of higherorder relations because 1. comparison of letter-string
analogies cued source stories specific to the relations showed
in the letter-strings, and then 2. those same relations formed
the basis for how subjects solved novel letter-string problems.
The experiment offers support for the schema induction
account of analogical retrieval, and suggests that people are
more sensitive to relational structures than was previously
thought.
Keywords: analogy; memory; reasoning; analogical retrieval;
letter-string analogies

Introduction
Analogical retrieval leads to many important insights in
science and design. It appears that these insights often
emerge as a result of analogical retrieval from vastly
different domains to one’s present situation. Despite this,
studies of schema induction in analogical thinking have
primarily focused on the relatively narrow domain of
semantic differences between stimuli, and cross-domain
effects have been rare. The schema induction account of
analogical retrieval (Gentner et al., 2009) suggests that
cross-domain analogical retrieval should be facilitated by a
comparison of analogues, by promoting a structural
alignment of common relations. A more general principle,
or schema, is then assumed to be available as a memory
probe for future mapping in analogous situations. Evidence
for the schema induction account was established through a
comparison of target analogues, i.e., late analogical
abstraction. This effect has been demonstrated in both
studies of cued-retrieval (Gentner et al., 2009) and problem
solving (Kurtz & Loewenstein, 2007).
The effect was demonstrated in the domain of negotiation
with a controlled memory set (Experiment 4; Gentner et al.,

2009). Undergraduates read seven negotiation scenarios,
with only one containing the target negotiation principle.
After 30 minutes of a filled delay, half of the participants
were given two example cases of a certain negotiation
principle and were explicitly asked to compare them, noting
the key parallels. The other half were given the two cases to
read separately. They were subsequently asked to recall a
source case that best matched the two target comparison
cases. Participants that explicitly compared target cases
were significantly more likely to retrieve the source cases
than participants that read the target cases separately. It
appeared the explicit comparison made the abstract schema
directly available as a retrieval cue to the original story.
The main limitation to this literature is that most studies
have only varied what Barnett and Ceci (2002) call the
knowledge domain of the analogues, despite the possibility
for retrieval across different task domains. Inherent to the
schema induction account is the assumption that analogical
comparison highlights relational structure regardless of
surface features. That is, it allows a cross-domain mapping.
However, as information is often relevant across different
tasks, it is important to understand whether and how crosstask retrieval can occur. This is an important hole to fill in
the literature.
In addition to investigating whether we can elicit
remindings across task domains, we can further investigate
whether the cross-task commonalities that can serve as the
basis for analogical remindings are limited to specific levels
of abstraction. That is, the present study investigated
retrieval rooted in common surface features, first-order
relations, and higher-order relations (respectively).
Including these different levels of abstraction as controls for
each other in the analyses ensured a more adequate test of
analogical retrieval. That is, a retrieval based in surface
features across task domains without relational controls is
not very surprising, given people’s sensitivity for retrieval
of surface features (Gentner, Rattermann, & Forbus, 1993).
Further, retrieval of relational content across task domains is
more valid when controlled for by the possibility of a
surface feature retrieval. That is, it is more likely that a
source story was retrieved because of a relational match to

1908

the letter-string cue when a surface feature alternative was
also possible.
The schema induction account assumes that analogical
comparison abstracts one’s stimulus representation, i.e.,
relational commonalities are highlighted, and mismatches of
features are ignored. To further test this account it is
important to examine the representation formed from the
comparison independently from the test of retrieval. Gentner
et al. (Experiment 1; 2009) used a post-retrieval transfer
task to confirm participant representations, but scoring was
based on how well participants’ descriptions matched a
target schema, not directly analyzing the schema used by the
participants. Hofstadter’s (1995) letter-string proportional
analogies could be used as a clearer way of determining the
type and level of representation a person currently has. For
instance, if asked “Suppose the letter-string abc were
changed to abd; how would you change the letter-string
mrrjjj in ‘the same way’?” (Hofstadter, p. 238), one answer
could be mrrkkk, if succession relation is used because k
follows j, just as d follows c. A higher-order response
represents abc as 1-2-3 and abd as 1-2-4, as per their order
in the alphabet. The quantity of different letters in the string
mrrjjj can also be represented numerically as 1-2-3. This
higher-order relational mapping leads to the inference that
the fourth term in the analogy should be a quantity
successor of mrrjjj that can be numerically represented as 12-4, i.e., mrrjjjj.

Present study
The present study extends the late analogical abstraction
effect (Gentner et al., 2009) to investigate far analogical
retrieval, i.e., retrieval across disparate task domains. Letterstring analogies were used as cues to retrieve story
narratives (see Figure 1). This will be referred to as far
analogical retrieval, as analogues are retrieved across task
domains, a significantly more disparate – and conceptually
far – retrieval than in previous studies. Each comparison cue
had one analogous initial source story that matches the
underlying schema. A pilot study (Dekel, 2016) showed that
these source stories could be retrieved by analogous stories,
replicating the late analogical abstraction effect (Gentner et
al.). In the present study, correct source story retrieval after
the letter-string comparison provided evidence for far
analogical retrieval. A subsequent transfer task with a novel
letter-string analogy determined participant schema
representation for each level of abstraction (surface features,
first-order relations, and higher-order relations).
The main hypothesis was that participants that compare
two target letter-string analogies that share a particular
schema would retrieve the source story that emphasizes the
same schema, significantly more than participants
comparing target stories that do not share this schema. For
the transfer task, it was hypothesized that participants will
respond to the transfer task according to their schema
condition (see Figure 4).

Figure 1: Comparison of simplified designs in Gentner et al.
(2009) and the present study. While participants in Gentner
et al. retrieved source stories from a comparison of story
cues, participants in the present study retrieved source
stories from a comparison of letter-string cues.

Method
Participants
One hundred and eighty-one first-year undergraduates
from the University of Sydney subject pool were recruited
online, and were given course credit for their participation.
Participants were randomly allocated to one of three schema
conditions: surface schema, first-order relational schema,
higher-order relational schema. One participant did not
complete the first filler task and another did not complete
the analogy example page (both due to computer error), so
their data was excluded from the analysis of retrieval rates.

Materials
The experiment was completed online and all materials
were webpages coded with HTML and JavaScript.
Source stories The three source stories, shown in Table
1, were designed to differ in semantic content, but be
equivalent in structure and length. Each story presented an
initial conflict, and a subsequent resolution. Critically, the
resolution of each story also provided the information that
made up the target schema for that story, which would then
either match or mismatch with the later letter-string
analogies. The first story schema is simply changing an E to
an F. It is considered a surface story because its similarity to
the later cues is based on an identical change. The second
story schema is succession (of Valerie by Sylvia),
considered to be a first-order relational story because it is
related to the later cues by virtue of one relation
(succession) and no surface features. The third story schema
is the correspondence of quantity to an order (number of
staff to a day’s order in the week), considered to be a
higher-order story because it relies on a mapping of firstorder relations. That is, numerical representation connects
the first-order relational structure of two types of
succession: ordinal succession, as in the order of days in the
week, and quantity succession, as in the number of staff
allocated.

1909

Table 1: Source Stories and Explicit Principles.
Schema
condition
Surface

Story text
John is an owner of a small-town computer company and wanted to
advertise his company to the town. He printed out some flyers with
large font size to put up. However, there was a typographical error in
the flyers, with the title printing out as ‘Elash Computers’ instead of
‘Flash Computers’, which John knew would confuse potential
customers if put up around town. As such, he had to rewrite the
company name for the posters, changing the ‘E’ to an ‘F’, and printing
them again. There was only a typo in the word ‘Elash’, so only the
letter ‘E’ was changed from the letter ‘E’, to the letter ‘F’, correcting
the word ‘Elash’ to ‘Flash’.

Explanation text
Both pairs rely on the same rule:
Change E to F.

First-order
relation

Jerome is an advisor to the King of a large nation and wanted to
confirm the successor to the throne. He thought of Valerie, who was
the king’s eldest daughter. However, the advisor found out that despite
being the next in line to the throne, Valerie had run away to a mountain
town because she did not want to take on the responsibilities associated
with being a Queen. As such, he worked out that Sylvia should be the
next in line to the throne as she is the second-oldest sibling. The order
of succession in the kingdom is found by birth order, so if the first born
child is not able to uphold the throne, then the second born is next in
line.

Both pairs rely on the same rule:
Succession. For example:
Triangle changes to square
because of the number of sides,
and G to H because of
alphabetic order.

Higher-order
relation

Julia is a manager at a local information centre and wanted to staff her
centre efficiently. She usually has about three people working every
day. However, the number of visitors to the centre increases
consistently each day, with almost no visitors on Mondays and peak
number of visitors on Sundays, so most days the centre is either
overstaffed, or understaffed. As such, she decided that she will roster
on an amount of staff that corresponds with the order of that day in the
week. The centre will have one staff member on Monday, being the
first day of the working week, two on Tuesday, and so on, with seven
people working on Sundays.

Both pairs rely on the same rule:
Order corresponds to quantity.
For example: E (fifth in the
alphabet) changing to F (sixth in
the alphabet) = five symbols
(letters or shapes) changing to
six symbols.

Letter-string analogue comparison
Participants
received one of three pairs of proportional letter-string
analogies to compare, as shown in Figure 2. In the figure, all
three pairs are presented together to facilitate comparison of
the differences between each pair. The first pair was
designed to induce the surface schema, the second the firstorder schema, and the third the higher-order schema. The
same basic structure and symbols (letters and shapes) were
used for all three of the comparisons. Below this
comparison, participants read a short explanation of the
target principle, shown in Table 1 and then completed a
short test of the principle.
Procedure. The experiment was run as an online study
through a series of webpages. Participants read three oneparagraph narratives and typed how each story was
resolved. They then completed two minutes of an unusual
uses task (Diamond, 2013) and a page designed to inform
and train participants about the structure and function of
proportional analogies.

Participants then completed the comparison task, as per
their schema condition, and on the subsequent page were
asked to retrieve the source story that matched the
comparison they just did. They then completed two minutes
of a new unusual uses task. Participants then responded to
the letter-string proportional analogy Suppose that the letterstring A B C was changed to A B D; how would you change
the letter-string C S S N N N in the same way? Following
this, participants rated some prototypical responses to the
analogy, and then a subsequent follow-up page asking
participants to indicate the extent to which they used any of
the letter-strings or stories when generating the letter-string
analogies. Figure 3 shows this procedure.

1910

was recoded into a dichotomous variable of those that
retrieved the target schema story and those that did not.

Figure 2: The three pairs of comparison cues. The surface
comparison (a) makes it apparent that the critical change is
that from E to F, regardless of position in the string or
presence of shapes. In the first-order relational schema
comparison (b) the increase in the letters’ alphabetic order
and shape’s number of sides, expresses the concept of
succession. The higher-order relational schema comparison
(c) connects the alphabetic succession of the initial strings to
the ordinal succession of the latter shape or letter strings.
The higher-order relationship numerical representation
connects these two forms of succession.
Figure 3: Experimental procedure.

Results
Far analogical retrieval
A chi-square test was conducted for the cross-tabulation
of retrieval by schema condition (Table 2). The retrieval
variable had four levels: null retrieval, surface story, firstorder story, and higher-order story. Schema condition had
three levels: surface schema, first-order schema condition,
and higher-order schema condition. The overall effect was
significant, c2 (6, N = 179) = 46.55, p < .001, suggesting an
association between people’s schema condition and story
retrieval rates. To investigate the specific effects, the
conditions were collapsed into 2 x 2 tables for each
predicted effect. For each effect, schema condition was
recoded into a dichotomous variable of those in the target
schema condition and those that are not. Retrieval condition

Participants in the surface schema condition retrieved the
surface schema story (86.4%) significantly more than those
not in the surface schema condition (40%), c2 (1, N = 179) =
34.51, p < .001. Those in the first-order schema condition
retrieved the first-order schema story (31.1%) significantly
more than those not in the first-order schema condition
(13.6%), c2 (1, N = 179) = 7.91, p < .001. Those in the
higher-order schema condition retrieved the higher-order
schema story (37.3%) significantly more than those not in
the higher-order schema condition (10.8%), c2 (1, N = 179)
= 17.6, p < .001. The main hypothesis was thus supported
by these results as a comparison of letter-string analogies
facilitated correct retrieval of source stories with the same
underlying schema.

1911

Table 2: Frequency of Story Retrievals by Schema
Condition.

string responses were congruent with one’s schema
condition.

Schema Condition
Story
retrieval
Surface
First-order
Higher-order
Null
Total

Surface
51
5
1
2
59

Firstorder
28
19
12
2
61

Higherorder
20
11
22
6
59

Total
99
35
35
10
179

Transfer response
Responses were coded through the schema they
presumably expressed. As in Burns (1996), letter-string
responses generated by two or fewer participants were
collapsed into the category Other. Figure 4 shows the
structural hierarchy of the three prototypical responses to
the letter-string analogy task. Participant response of
DSSNNN was considered a Surface response, since it only
takes into account the C changing into D. Participant
responses of CSSOOO, CSSNNO, CSTNNO were collapsed
into category First-order, since they all use the first-order
principle of succession. Participant response of CSSNNNN
was considered Higher-order, since it takes into the higherorder correspondence of numerical representation. Table 3
shows the frequencies of these responses for each schema
condition.
A chi-square test was conducted of letter-string response
by schema condition. Letter-string response had four levels:
surface, first-order, higher-order, and other. Schema
condition had three levels: surface schema, first-order
schema condition, and higher-order schema condition. The
overall effect was significant, c2 (6, N = 176.04) = 176.04, p
< .001, suggesting an association between people’s schema
condition and letter-string response rates. To probe the
specific effects, the conditions were collapsed into 2 x 2
tables for each predicted effect. For each effect, schema
condition was recoded into a dichotomous variable of those
in the target schema condition and those that are not. Letterstring response condition was recoded into a dichotomous
variable of those in that generated the target letter-string
response and those that did not.
The surface schema response was generated significantly
more by those in the surface schema condition (70%) than
those not in the surface schema condition (0.03%), c2 (1, N
= 181) = 94.12, p < .001. First-order schema responses were
generated significantly more by those in the first-order
schema condition (82%) than those not in the first-order
schema condition (26.7%), c2 (1, N = 181) = 49.91, p <
.001. The higher-order schema solution was generated
significantly more by those in the higher-order schema
condition (60%) than those not in the higher-order schema
condition (0.006%), c2 (1, N = 181) = 108.16, p < .001. As
per the initial hypothesis, the selective generation of letter-

Figure 4: A representation of three responses to the analogy
ABC:ABD::CSSNNN:?. The surface response (a) considers
the change from C to D, per se, so merely changes the C in
CSSNNN to a D. The first-order relational response (b)
considers the change from C to D as one of ordinal
succession, as per their order in the alphabet. Since C is the
last term in the string, NNN, as the last string of CSSNNN,
is also changed to its successor in the alphabet: OOO. The
higher-order response (c), on the other hand, considers the
entire string and each letter’s position in the alphabet,
representing ABC as 1-2-3 and ABD as 1- 2-4. The change
is still an ordinal succession, as C and D are successors in
the alphabet, but the letters have been represented
numerically. The quantity of different letters in the string
CSSNNN can also be represented numerically as 1-2-3. This
numerical representation allows this first-order relation to
map to the ordinal succession relation of ABC. This higherorder relational mapping leads to the inference that the
fourth term in the analogy should be a quantity successor of
CSSNNN that can be numerically represented as 1-2-4, i.e.,
CSSNNNN.

1912

Table 3: Frequency of Letter-string Responses by Schema
Condition.
Schema Condition
Letter-string
response
Surface
First-order
Higher-order
Other
Total

Surface
42
11
0
7
60

Firstorder
4
50
1
6
61

Higherorder
0
21
36
3
60

Total
48
77
35
21
181

Discussion
Successful cross-domain analogical retrieval is rare.
Despite this, the results of the present study provide
evidence that schema induction can facilitate far analogical
retrieval, i.e., analogical retrieval across disparate task
domains. The effect was found for surface, first-order
relational, and higher-order relational schemas. As well as
providing support for a schema induction account of
analogical retrieval, the results of the present study also
address the three limitations in this literature were identified
above. First, there is now evidence that analogue
comparison can facilitate analogical retrieval across stimuli
that share no surface features, except for the presence of
alphabetic characters. Second, while prior research usually
neglects to consider different levels of abstraction in
analogical retrieval, the present study investigated retrieval
of surface features, first-order relations, and higher-order
relations. Third, the present study used a transfer task to
probe the way participants were representing their schema.
The main limitation of the present study is that the
apparent retrieval effects, might actually be mapping
effects. The combination of a relatively small number of
source stories and short delay might mean that participants
were considering each source story as a potential match to
their comparison cue and then actively deciding on the best
perceived mapping. Future replications of the present study
should therefore include a larger set of source stories and a
longer delay between source story encoding and the
retrieval phase. Further, it is not clear what exact role the
explicit principle played in cuing the source stories. In
general, it seems that explicit principles are not sufficient to
induce a schema, but do seem to facilitate induction. Thus,
future replications should systematically manipulate the
explicit principle and its inclusion with comparison to
determine its role as a retrieval cue for the far analogical
retrieval.
Relational priming is sometimes used to explain
analogical retrieval effects (Holyoak, 2012). It is unlikely to
explain all of the present retrieval results because most
relational priming effects are demonstrated using individual
word pairs of highly familiar relations. There is little
evidence to suggest that a higher-order relation can be
primed in the same way, and the participants in our study
had little to no previous experience with the specific

relations presented to them. Further, pilot data (Dekel, 2016)
shows that changing the explicit principle in the higherorder condition to a more specific form does not
significantly impact retrieval rates. This suggests a lesser
role of explicit principle wording in any potential priming.

References
Barnett, S. M., & Ceci, S. J. (2002). When and where do we
apply what we learn?: A taxonomy for far transfer.
Psychological bulletin, 128(4), 612-637.
Burns, B. D. (1996). Meta-analogical transfer: Transfer
between episodes of analogical reasoning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 22(4), 1032.
Dekel, S. (2016). Leaping across the mental canyon:
Analogical retrieval across disparate task domains. The
University of Sydney.
Diamond, A. (2013). Executive Functions. Annual Review
of Psychology, 64, 135–168.
Holyoak, K. J. (2012). Analogy and Relational Reasoning.
In K. J. Holyoak & R. G. Morrison (Eds.), The Oxford
Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning (pp. 234–259).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Diamond, A. (2013). Executive Functions. Annual review of
psychology, 64, 135-168.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L., & Forbus, K.
D. (2009). Reviving inert knowledge: Analogical
abstraction supports relational retrieval of past events.
Cognitive Science, 33(8), 1343-1382.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M. J., & Forbus, K. D. (1993).
The roles of similarity in transfer: Separating
retrievability from inferential soundness. Cognitive
psychology, 25(4), 524-575.
Hofstadter, D. R. (1995). Fluid concepts and creative
analogies: Computer models of the fundamental
mechanisms of thought. New York: Basic books.
Kurtz, K. J., & Loewenstein, J. (2007). Converging on a
new role for analogy in problem solving and retrieval:
When two problems are better than one. Memory &
Cognition, 35(2), 334-341.

1913

