Learning induced illusions: Statistical learning creates false memories
Yu Luo (yuluo@psych.ubc.ca)
Department of Psychology
University of British Columbia

Jiaying Zhao (jiayingz@psych.ubc.ca)
Department of Psychology
Institute for Resources, Environment and Sustainability
University of British Columbia

false memories of semantically related objects. One pioneer
work by Roediger and McDermott (1995) shows that after
memorizing a list of words (e.g., nurse, sick, medicine, etc.)
that are highly related to a target word that was never present
(e.g., doctor), people falsely remember seeing the target
word, and label it as an “old” word of the list in the
recognition task. This finding was replicated using a visual
paradigm, where participants viewed a stereotypical scene
(e.g., classroom), and falsely recalled and recognized a target
object that was never present (e.g., chalkboard, Miller &
Gazzaniga, 1998). One explanation for this phenomenon is
that seeing one object can automatically activate other
associated objects based on semantic memory (Roediger,
Balota, & Watson, 2001).
Here, we provide a new explanation behind this old
phenomenon which focuses on a simpler mechanism:
learning the co-occurrences of objects can create the false
memories of non-present object when only its partner is
present. We propose that the mere statistical co-occurrence of
two objects can produce false memory, independent of
semantic associations. Thus, the goal of the current study was
to examine whether statistical learning alters the
representations of individual objects.

Abstract
The cognitive system readily extracts regularities in terms of
object co-occurrences over space and time through statistical
learning. However, how does learning such relationships
influence the memory representations of individual objects?
Here we used a false memory paradigm to examine the impact
of statistical learning on memory representations of individual
objects. Observers were exposed to a temporal sequence
(Experiment 1) or spatial arrays (Experiment 2) of objects
which contained object pairs (e.g., A-B). In a subsequent
recognition phase, observers viewed a sequence or an array
containing only one member of the original pair, and judged
whether either the presented object or the missing object in the
original pair was present. We found that statistical learning not
only sharpened the detection of the presented object, but also
induced a false memory of the missing object. This reveals a
novel consequence of statistical learning: learning of
regularities can create illusory memories.
Keywords: Statistical learning; false memory; implicit
learning; regularities;

Introduction
A remarkable ability of the cognitive system is to detect and
learn the relationships among objects in the environment.
Statistical learning is one mechanism that extracts the
statistical relationships between individual objects in terms of
object co-occurrences over space and time (Fiser & Aslin,
2001; Saffran, Aslin, & Newport, 1996). This process occurs
incidentally, without conscious intent or explicit awareness,
produces knowledge about object associations that people are
not explicitly aware of (Turk Browne, Jungé, & Scholl, 2005;
Turk-Browne, Scholl, Chun & Johnson, 2009), and can
operate in multiple sensory modalities and feature
dimensions (Conway & Christiansen, 2005; Fiser & Aslin,
2001; Saffran et al., 1996; Turk-Browne, Isola, Scholl, &
Treat, 2008). In addition, several cognitive consequences of
statistical learning have been identified, such as the
compressing of information (Brady, Konkle, & Alvarez,
2009; Zhao & Yu, 2016), attentional prioritization of cooccurring objects (Yu & Zhao, 2015; Zhao, Al-Aidroos, &
Turk-Browne, 2013; Zhao & Luo, 2017), and enhanced
memory representation (Kim, Lewis-Peacock, Norman, &
Turk-Browne, 2014; Otsuka & Saiki, 2016).
One important but unexplored question is: how does
learning statistical associations influence the representation
of individual objects? Initial evidence comes from studies on

Experiment 1
This experiment examined how statistical learning alters the
representations of individual objects in a temporal context, by
first exposing participants to a sequence of paired objects and
then testing them on whether seeing an individual object in
the pair can produce the false memory of the non-present
object in the pair.

Participants
A total of 120 undergraduates (96 female; mean age=20.6
years, SD=2.8) from University of British Columbia (UBC)
participated in the experiment for course credit. Participants
reported normal or corrected-to-normal visual acuity and
provided informed consent. The protocol was approved by
the UBC Research Ethics Board.

Stimuli
The stimuli consisted of eight real-world objects (Fig.1a)
which were selected from a stimulus set in a previous study

774

(Brady, Konkle, Alvarez, & Oliva, 2008). All objects were
converted to grayscale, and were adjusted to a mean
brightness of 84. Each object subtended 2.8° of visual angle.
The eights objects were randomly assigned into four pairs for
each participant and remained constant throughout the
experiment (Fig.1a). In each pair, the first object was always
followed by the second object. The random assignment of
objects into pairs ensured that there was no systematic
semantic relation between two objects in a pair, but rather the
two objects were associated with co-occurrences. Each pair
was repeated 50 times to form a single continuous temporal
sequence of objects in a pseudorandom order with a
constraint where no single pair could repeat back-to-back.

pair was present in the sequence. The baseline trials measured
the hit rate for the presented object. In the missing trials, each
member of an original pair was missing for once, resulting in
8 trials. In the presented trials, the presented object of an
original pair was tested once, resulting in 8 trials. In the
baseline trials, each member of a pair was tested once,
resulting in 8 trials. The 24 trials were repeated twice,
producing 48 trials in total (order of the trials was
randomized). In the random condition, the trials were the
same, except the objects in the sequence appeared in a
random order, so the sequence contained no pairs. Each
object was presented for 500ms followed by a 500ms ISI.
After the sequence was presented, a 3000ms blank screen
followed. After the blank screen, an object was presented on
the screen as a probe, and participants judged whether the
object was presented in the previous sequence (by pressing
the “1” or “0” key for “yes” or “no”, respectively). The object
remained on the screen until response.

Apparatus
Participants in all experiments were seated 50cm from a
computer monitor (refresh rate=60 Hz). Stimuli were
presented using MATLAB and PsychophysicsToolbox
(http://psychtoolbox.org).

(a) Pairs

Procedure

A - B

The experiment consisted of two conditions. In the structured
condition, the eight objects were grouped into four pairs. In
the random condition, the eight objects appeared in a random
order in the sequence. Participants were randomly assigned
to one of the two conditions (N=60 in each). The experiment
contained three phases: exposure phase, recognition phase,
and test phase. During the exposure phase, one object
appeared at the center of the screen for 500ms followed by a
500ms inter-stimulus interval (ISI) in each trial (Fig.1b).
Participants performed a 1-back task where they judged as
quickly and accurately as possible whether the current object
was the same as or different from the previous object (by
pressing the “/” or “z” key for same or different, respectively,
key assignment counterbalanced). For the 1-back task, each
object had a 20% chance of repeating the previous object,
producing 480 trials in total. This 1-back task served as a
cover task which was irrelevant to learning the object pairs,
in order to conceal the true purpose of the study. This ensured
that learning of the object pairs was incidental. Participants
were not told anything about the object pairs.
After exposure, participants performed a recognition phase
(Fig.1c). In each trial, participants viewed a continuous
sequence of objects first and then judged whether a certain
object was present in the sequence. In the structured
condition, there were three types of trials. The first type was
missing trials: the sequence contained all four pairs, except
for one pair, one member was missing, and observers judged
whether the missing member was present in the sequence.
The missing trials measured the false alarm rate for the
missing object. The second type was presented trials: the
sequence contained all four pairs, except for one pair, one
member was missing, but this time observers judged whether
the presented member was present in the sequence. The
presented trials measured the hit rate for the presented object.
The third type was baseline trials: the sequence contained all
four pairs, and observers judged whether one member in a

C - D

E - F

G - H

(b) Exposure phase: 1-back task over a sequence of pairs
E

-

F

A

-

B

G

-

H

Repeat

C

-

500ms

D

Time

(c) Recognition phase:
Was the object
in the sequence?

Missing trial:
(blank)

500ms

3000ms

Time

Was the object
in the sequence?

Presented trial:
(blank)

500ms

3000ms

Time

Was the object
in the sequence?

Baseline trial:

(blank)

500ms

3000ms Time

(d) Test phase: Which pair looks more familiar?
A - B

A - D

or
Pair

Foil

Figure 1. Experiment 1. (a) Four object pairs (e.g., A-B). (b)
Exposure phase: 1-back task. (c) Recognition phase: missing trials,
presented trials, and baseline trials. (d) Test phase: two-alternative
forced-choice task.

775

These findings suggest that statistical learning not only
sharpens the memory of the object within the pairs, but also
induces the false memory of the missing object.

To examine whether they had successfully learned the
object pairs, participants in the structured condition
completed a surprise two-alternative forced choice test phase
following the recognition phase (Fig.1d). In each trial,
participants viewed two sequences of objects. Each object
appeared for 500ms followed by a 500ms ISI, and each
sequence was separated by a 1000ms pause. Participants
judged whether the first or second sequence looked more
familiar based on what they saw in the exposure phase (by
pressing the “1” or “0” key for “first sequence” or “second
sequence”, respectively). One sequence was a pair (e.g., AB), and the other was a “foil” (e.g., A-D) composed of one
object from an original pair (e.g., A-B), and the other from a
different pair (e.g., C-D), while preserving the temporal
positions in the pairs (Fig. 1d). Each pair was tested against
each foil twice, which resulted in 16 trials in total (4 pairs ×
2 foils × 2 repetitions). Importantly, each pair and foil were
presented the same number of times at test. Thus, to
discriminate the pair from the foil, participants needed to
know which two specific objects followed each other. The
order of the trials was randomized, and whether the pair or
foil appeared first was counterbalanced across trials.
Participants in the random condition was not tested, since
there were no pairs in the sequence.
A debriefing session was conducted at the end of the
experiment, where participants were asked if they had noticed
any objects that appeared one after another. For those who
responded yes, we further asked them to specify which
objects followed each other.

Figure 2: The false alarm (FA) rate and the hit rate in recognition
phase (error bars reflect ±1 SEM; †p<.1, *p<.05, ***p<.001).

To examine the relationship between statistical learning
and recognition performance, we found that there were no
correlations between learning of the pairs at the test phase and
the FA rate or the hit rate. However, in structured condition
there was a weak correlation between the FA rate in the
missing trials and the hit rate in the presented trials. There
was a moderate correlation between the FA rate in the
missing trials and the hit rate in the baseline trials, but no
correlations in random condition (Table 1).

Results and Discussion
At the test phase, pairs were chosen over foils on 60.0%
(SD=19.3%) of the time, which was reliably above chance
(50%) [t(59)=4.01, p<.001, d=0.52]. Thus, learning of the
object pairs was successful. During debriefing, 12
participants reported noticing the pairs, but none could
correctly report which specific objects followed each other.
This suggests that participants had no explicit awareness of
the object pairs.
The false alarm rate (FA) and the hit rate in the recognition
phase were presented in Fig.2 and analyzed with a 2
(condition: structured vs. random; between-subjects) × 3
(trial type: missing vs. presented vs. baseline; withinsubjects) mixed-effects ANOVA.
There was a main effect of condition [F(1,118)=12.38,
p<.001, ηp2=.09] and trial type [F(2,236)=425.06, p<.001,
ηp2=.78], but no reliable interaction between condition and
trial type [F(2,236)=0.73, p=.48, ηp2=.006]. Tukey’s HSD
post-hoc test showed that the FA rate of the missing trials was
reliably higher in structured condition (27.9%) than in
random condition (20.4%), p=.03; the hit rate of the presented
trials was reliably higher in structured condition (72.5%) than
in random condition (62.60%), p<.001; and a marginal
difference in the hit rate of baseline trials between structured
(72.5%) and random condition (65.9%), p=.09.

Table 1: Correlations between learning of the pairs at the
test phase and the false alarm rate or the hit rate
Condition
Structured
(N=60)

Random
(N=60)

Correlation
Learning vs. missing
Learning vs. presented
Learning vs. baseline
Missing vs. presented
Missing vs. baseline

Correlation results
r(58)=-.15, p=.26
r(58)=.21, p=.11
r(58)=-.03, p=.79
r(58)=.28, p=.03
r(58)=.31, p=.02

Presented vs. baseline
Missing vs. presented
Missing vs. baseline
Presented vs. baseline

r(58)=.48, p<.001
r(58)=.17, p=.21
r(58)=.20, p=.12
r(58)=.63, p<.001

Experiment 2
This experiment aimed to generalize the findings in
Experiment 1 from the temporal context to a spatial context.

Participants
A new group of 68 undergraduates (51 female, mean
age=20.2 years, SD=2.4) from UBC participated in the
experiment for course credit.

776

A debriefing session was conducted after test, where
participants were asked if they had noticed any objects that
appeared with one another. For those who responded yes, we
further asked them to specify which objects appeared
adjacent to each other.

Stimuli
The stimuli were identical to those in Experiment 1, except
that in structured condition the four pairs were grouped into
horizontal, vertical, and diagonal spatial configurations
(Fig.3a). Each array contained all four pairs, and was placed
on an invisible 4 × 4 grid (subtending 8.2° × 8.2°) with the
constraint that one pair was adjacent to at least another pair.
This was to prevent participants from learning the pairs based
on spatial segmentation cues other than object cooccurrences. In random condition, the eight objects were
randomly assigned to one of cell on the grid, with the
constraint that each object neighbored at least one other
object. Thus, the only difference between structured and
random condition was the presence or absence of the pairs.

Results and Discussion
At the test phase, pairs were chosen over foils on 52.2%
(SD=10.3%) of the time, which was not reliably above
chance (50%) [t(33)=1.25, p=.22, d=0.21]. This suggests that
participants failed to learn the spatial co-occurrences between
the two objects in the pairs. During debriefing, four
participants reported noticing the pairs, but none could
correctly report which specific objects appeared with each
other. This suggests that participants had no explicit
awareness of the pairs.

Procedure
As in Experiment 1, there were two conditions (i.e.,
structured vs. random, N=34 in each) and three phases (i.e.,
exposure, recognition, and test). In the exposure phase,
participants in both conditions viewed arrays of objects, and
performed a duplicate detection task where they judged as
quickly and accurately as possible whether there were two
identical objects in a single array (by pressing the “/” or “z”
key for yes or no, respectively, key assignment
counterbalanced, Fig. 3b). This duplicate detection task
served as a cover task irrelevant to statistical learning, to
ensure that learning of the object pairs was incidental.
Participants were not told anything about the object pairs.
Each array was presented on the screen for 1000ms followed
by a 1000ms ISI in each trial. There were 480 trials in total,
and 20% of the trials (80 trials) contained a duplicate object
in the array.
The recognition phase was identical to that in Experiment
1, except that objects were presented all at once on the screen.
In each trial, participants viewed an array for 800ms followed
by a 3000ms pause, and judged whether the probe object was
presented in the array. The display time was increased to
800ms, as it required more time for participants to view all
eight objects at once. As before, there were three types of
trials: (1) missing trials, where one member in the pair was
missing, and the missing object was tested; (2) presented
trials, where one member in the pair was missing, but the
presented object in the pair was tested; and (3) baseline trials,
where all pairs were presented, and one object was tested
(Fig. 3c).
After the recognition phase, participants in the structured
condition completed the surprise two-alternative forced
choice test phase to see whether they had successfully learned
the object pairs (Fig. 3d). In each trial, one set of objects was
presented on the left and another on the right side of the
screen for 1000ms. Participants judged whether the left or
right set of objects looked more familiar based on what they
saw in the exposure phase (by pressing the “1” or “0” key for
“left” or “right”, respectively). The foils were created
following the same logic as in Experiment 1. Participants in
the random condition was not tested, since there were no pairs
in the array during exposure.

(a) Pairs
F

G

A - B

H

E

-

-

C
D

(b) Exposure phase: duplicate detection task
duplicated trial

500ms

500ms

500ms

Time

(c) Recognition phase:
Missing trial:

Presented trial:

Was the object
in the array?

800ms

Time

Time

H
E

E

Was the object
in the array?

F

(d) Test phase:
Which pair looks more familiar?

Baseline trial:

-

800ms

Was the object
in the array?

or
Pair
800ms

Foil

Time

Figure 3. Experiment 2: (a) Four pairs in four different spatial
configurations. (b) Exposure phase: duplicate detection task. (c)
Recognition phase: missing trials, presented trials, and baseline
trials. (d) Test phase: two-alternative forced-choice task.

The FA rate and the hit rate in the recognition phase were
analyzed with a 2 (condition: structured vs. random; between-

777

subjects) × 3 (trial type: missing vs. presented vs. baseline;
within-subjects) mixed-effects ANOVA. There was a main
effect of trial type [F(2,132)=137.32, p<.001, ηp2=.68], but no
main effect of condition [F(1,66)=0.004, p=.95, ηp2=.00] and
no significant interaction between condition and trial type
[F(2,132)=0.45, p=.63, ηp2=.007]. Tukey’s HSD post-hoc test
showed that the FA rate of the missing trials was not different
between the structured condition (30.7%) and the random
condition (30.5%), p=.99, the hit rate of the presented trials
was not different between the structured condition (57.5%)
and the random condition (59.4%), p=.99, and no difference
in the hit rate of baseline trials between the structured
(66.7%) and the random conditions (64.3%), p=.97 (Fig. 4).

we separated participants who successfully learned the pairs
(those who chose pairs over foil above chance, N=15), and
those who failed to learn the pairs (those who chose pairs over
foil at or below chance, N=19) in the structured condition.
Among participants who showed learning, pairs were chosen
over foils on 61.2% (SD=6.8%) of the time, which was
reliably above chance (50%) [t(14)=6.44, p<.001, d=1.66].
Only one participant reported noticing the pairs, but could not
correctly report which specific objects appeared with each
other. A 2 (group: learners vs. non-learners; betweensubjects) × 3 (trial type: missing vs. presented vs. baseline;
within-subjects) mixed-effects ANOVA revealed a main
effect of trial type [F(2,64)=68.40, p<.001, ηp2=.68], but no
main effect of group [F(1,32)=1.25, p=.27, ηp2=.04] and no
significant interaction between group and trial type
[F(2,64)=0.42, p=.66, ηp2=.01]. Although the results were not
reliably different between the two groups, the learners
consistently showed numerically greater FA rate and hit rate
than the non-learners (Fig.5), a pattern that was consistent
with the findings in Experiment 1.

Figure 4: The false alarm rate and the hit rate in recognition phase
(error bars reflect ±1 SEM).

We found no correlation between learning of the pairs at
the test phase and the FA rate or the hit rate. But in both the
structured and random condition, there was a correlation
between the FA rate, and the hit rate in the presented trials
and in the baseline trials (Table 2).

Figure 5: The false alarm rate and the hit rate of learners and nonlearners in recognition phase in the structured condition (error bars
reflect ±1 SEM).

Table 2: Correlations between learning of the pairs at the
test phase and the false alarm rate or the hit rate
Condition
Structured
(N=34)

Random
(N=34)

Correlation
Learning vs. missing
Learning vs. presented
Learning vs. baseline
Missing vs. presented
Missing vs. baseline

Correlation results
r(32)=.24, p=.17
r(32)=.22, p=.22
r(32)=.16, p=.35
r(32)=.66, p<.001
r(32)=.57, p<.001

Presented vs. baseline
Missing vs. presented
Missing vs. baseline

r(32)=.40, p=.02
r(32)=.44, p=.009
r(32)=.53, p<.001

Presented vs. baseline

r(32)=.62, p<.001

General Discussion
The goal of this experiment was to examine whether
statistical learning alters the memory representations of
individual objects. We found that after learning the temporal
co-occurrences of objects, participants showed a reliably
higher false alarm rate of seeing a missing object, and a
reliably higher hit rate of seeing a presented object
(Experiment 1). When the objects co-occurred over space,
participants did not successfully express learning of pairs,
and therefore did not show differential false alarm and hit
rates (Experiment 2). However, with a more detailed analysis,
participants who successfully learned the spatial pairs
showed numerically higher false alarm rate of the missing
object and numerically higher hit rate of the presented object
than those who failed to learn the pairs. The current findings
suggest that statistical learning not only sharpens the

The lack of memory difference between the structured
condition and the random condition could be due to the lack
of learning of object pairs in the spatial context.
To further explore whether learning of spatial pairs
changed the representation of individual objects in the pairs,

778

object details. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, USA, 105, 14325-14329.
Conway, C. M., & Christiansen, M. H. (2005). Modality
constrained statistical learning of tactile, visual, and auditory
sequences. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 31, 24-39.
Fiser, J., & Aslin, R. N. (2001). Unsupervised statistical learning
of higher-order spatial structures from visual scenes.
Psychological Science, 12, 499–504.
Kim, G., Lewis-Peacock, J. A., Norman, K. A., & Turk-Browne,
N. B. (2014). Pruning of memories by context-based
prediction error. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 111, 8997-9002.
Miller, M. B., & Gazzaniga, M. S. (1998). Creating false
memories for visual scenes. Neuropsychologia, 36, 513-520.
Otsuka, S., & Saiki, J. (2016). Gift from statistical learning:
Visual statistical learning enhances memory for sequence
elements and impairs memory for items that disrupt
regularities. Cognition, 147, 113-126.
Roediger III, H. L., Balota, D. A., & Watson, J. M. (2001).
Spreading activation and arousal of false memories. The
nature of remembering: Essays in honor of Robert G.
Crowder, 95-115.
Roediger III, H. L., & McDermott, K. (1995). Creating false
memories - remembering words not presented in lists. Journal
of Experimental Psychology-Learning Memory and
Cognition, 21, 803-814.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996). Statistical
learning by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274, 1926-1928.
Turk-Browne, N. B., Isola, P. J., Scholl, B. J., & Treat, T. A.
(2008). Multidimensional visual statistical learning. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 34, 399–407.
Turk-Browne, N. B., Jungé, J. A., & Scholl, B. J. (2005). The
automaticity of visual statistical learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 134, 552–564.
Turk-Browne, N. B., Scholl, B. J., Chun, M. M., & Johnson, M.
K. (2009). Neural evidence of statistical learning: Efficient
detection of visual regularities without awareness. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 21, 1934–1945.
Yu, R., & Zhao, J. (2015). The persistence of attentional bias to
regularities in a changing environment. Attention, Perception,
& Psychophysics, 77, 2217-2228.
Zhao, J., Al-Aidroos, N., & Turk-Browne, N. B. (2013).
Attention is spontaneously biased toward regularities.
Psychological Science, 24, 667–677.
Zhao, J., & Luo, Y. (2017). Statistical regularities guide the
spatial scale of attention. Attention, Perception, &
Psychophysics, 79, 24-30.
Zhao, J., & Yu, R. (2016). Statistical regularities reduce
perceived numerosity. Cognition, 146, 217-222.

detection of the objects within the pairs, but also induces a
false memory of the missing object.
Induced false memory of the missing object can be
explained by the automatic statistical association between the
missing object and the presented object in the pair. Once the
pairs were learned over repeated exposures even implicitly,
one member in the pair could serve as a cue to signal the
presence of its partner (Turk-Browne, et al., 2009). Thus,
participants may have automatically brought the missing
object to mind when seeing its partner in the sequence, thus
false recalling that the missing object was present. This
suggests that the automatic activation of the missing object
was possible by merely co-occurring with its partner
previously.
Alternatively, the two co-occurring objects may be unitized
after learning. Previous studies have demonstrated that
regularities compress information (Brady et al., 2009) and
reduce perceived numerosity of the objects (Zhao & Yu,
2016), which suggests that the co-occurring objects could be
grouped and encoded as one single unit. Seeing a member of
the unit could trigger the illusion that the entire unit was
presented, and therefore inducing the false memory of the
missing partner.
The enhanced hit rate of the presented member in the pair
could be due to the possibility that statistical regularities
automatically draw attention (Zhao et al., 2013). Given that
attention plays an important factor in the recognition task,
participants in the structured condition may have prioritized
processing of the paired objects, and therefore showed a
better hit rate compared to the random condition.
Another account for the enhanced memory is that it may be
easier to memorize the objects that were present in the
sequence, because statistical learning increases the working
memory capacity to encode objects (Brady et al., 2009). The
better memory performance of the paired objects in the
baseline condition was consistent with previous finding that
statistical learning enhances memory of structured objects
(Otsuka & Saiki, 2016).
In conclusion, we discovered a novel consequence of
statistical learning: it not only enhances the detection of the
object within the regularities, but also creates a false memory
of the missing object.

Acknowledgement
This work was supported by NSERC Discovery Grant
(RGPIN-2014-05617 to JZ), the Canada Research Chairs
program (to JZ), the Leaders Opportunity Fund from the
Canadian Foundation for Innovation (F14-05370 to JZ), and
Elizabeth Young Lacey Graduate Scholarship (to YL).

References
Brady, T. F., Konkle, T., & Alvarez, G. A. (2009). Compression
in visual working memory: Using statistical regularities to
form more efficient memory representations. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 138, 487-502.
Brady, T. F., Konkle, T., Alvarez, G. A. and Oliva, A. (2008).
Visual long-term memory has a massive storage capacity for

779

