Looking for the Cat and Seeing the Dog:
Using Visual Search to Study Semantic Knowledge in Children
Catarina Vales (cvales@andrew.cmu.edu)
Layla Unger (lunger@andrew.cmu.edu)
Anna V. Fisher (fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15214 USA

Abstract
Semantic knowledge influences various higher-order
cognitive processes; therefore, it is important to understand
how it changes with development. The Match-to-Sample task
is perhaps the most common paradigm for studying changes
in semantic knowledge over development, yet this paradigm
has a number of limitations. Here we provide initial evidence
validating a Visual Search paradigm as a measure of semantic
knowledge in preschoolers, and discuss the potential of this
paradigm to address the limitations posed by the Match-toSample task to study semantic knowledge development.
Keywords: semantic knowledge; visual attention; visual
search; match-to-sample; language; children.

Introduction
Knowledge about the world supports efficient behavior. For
example, knowing that cats are often playful and have sharp
claws makes one careful when playing with a cat, and
knowing that light bulbs generate light makes one likely to
check the light bulb if a lamp stops working. This
knowledge about objects, facts, and concepts (Clark, 1973)
is thought to be represented in a semantic network that links
entities by multiple meaningful relations (McClelland &
Rogers, 2003). Structured semantic knowledge influences
multiple cognitive processes, including memory, reasoning,
word learning, and visual attention (Bower et al., 1969; Chi
et al., 1981; Moores et al., 2003; Roediger & McDermott,
1995; Xu & Tenenbaum, 2007), and individual differences
in semantic knowledge have been putatively related to the
ability to make inferences about novel instances (Coley, et
al., 2004; Gobbo & Chi, 1986; Fisher, 2015).

Developmental changes in semantic knowledge
As semantic knowledge plays an important role in
supporting efficient behavior, there is a large literature
investigating what aspects of semantic knowledge change
over development to give rise to mature, adult-like behavior.
One of the most widely used tasks to study the development
of semantic knowledge is the Match-to-Sample task; in this
task, participants are shown a target object (e.g. chicken)
and asked to match it with one of two options – often a
thematic match (an item that is likely to co-occur with the
target item, such as pig) and a taxonomic match (an item
that belongs to the same stable category of items that share
intrinsic properties, such as eagle). Research using this task
has documented marked age-related changes starting in the

preschool years in preferences for matching items on the
basis of different types of relations (Smiley & Brown, 1979;
Walsh, et al., 1993). However, the Match-to-Sample task
presents two main limitations to study developmental
changes in semantic knowledge. First, this task cannot be
used with young children who are unable to follow verbal
instructions and indicate their choices. Prior research
examining semantic knowledge development in infants and
toddlers has used other tasks (e.g. Arias-Trejo & Plunkett,
2009; Chow et al., 2017), which may result in confounding
developmental changes and task demands. Second, because
the Match-to-Sample task requires participants to make
explicit judgments about the items, performance in this task
might stem not only from knowledge of semantic
relatedness but also from other deliberative processes.
Indeed, past research with children has shown that
performance in the Match-to-Sample task is modulated by
the wording of instructions (e.g. Waxman & Namy, 1997),
suggesting that interpreting the pragmatics of the task plays
a role in which objects children select. In sum, this task is
not ideally suited to study changes in semantic knowledge.
Priming procedures have been used to bypass the
limitations of the Match-to-Sample task in adults; however,
traditional priming paradigms are difficult to implement
with young children. Although several studies have used
semantic priming paradigms in infants using looking
behavior measures (vs. manual response times) (e.g., AriasTrejo & Plunkett, 2009), paradigms developed for infants
are often not suitable for older children who are not content
to inspect visual displays in the absence of an overt task.
Below we suggest that a measure of visual attention has the
potential to address the limitations outlined above and be
used to study semantic knowledge over the lifespan.

The Visual Search paradigm
Research with adults has used visual attention measures to
study knowledge associated with concepts (e.g. Huettig et
al., 2011). In these studies, participants are cued about an
upcoming target (e.g. by hearing a word or a sentence) and
asked to locate the target in a cluttered display. Participants’
response times to detect the target (Moores et al., 2003) or
their gaze while scanning the array (Huettig & Altmann,
2005; Mirman & Magnuson, 2009) are taken as a proxy for
the co-activation of concepts related to the target.
A Visual Search paradigm has two main advantages for
studying the development of semantic knowledge. First,

1242

visual search tasks have been successfully implemented
across the lifespan (Gerhardstein, & Rovee-Collier, 2002;
Vales & Smith, 2015), in children with developmental
disorders (Kaldy et al., 2011), and with varying degrees of
language knowledge (Vales & Smith, 2017). Thus, a Visual
Search paradigm is well suited to studying developmental
changes in semantic knowledge, reducing differences in task
demands from using different tasks with different
populations. Second, the Visual Search task allows semantic
knowledge to be measured by manipulating the distractors
present in the array; because participants do not make
explicit judgements about these related distractors,
deliberative processes are greatly reduced (see Chun &
Jiang, 1998 for evidence that people are often unaware of
experimental manipulations in the visual array). In sum, the
Visual Search task is a good candidate to address the
limitations of the Match-to-Sample task outlined above.

this is the youngest age group that we can confidently
expect to complete the Match-to-Sample task and thus
provide reliable relatedness judgements.

Methods
We first describe the Match-to-Sample task used to select
pairs of items, and report the items selected. Next, we
describe the Visual Search paradigm used to test the
hypothesis that items judged as more similar in the Matchto-Sample task should also more strongly influence
performance in the Visual Search task.

Stimuli Selection: Match-to-sample task

The current study
In this study, we seek initial evidence that a Visual Search
paradigm can provide estimates of semantic relatedness that
are broadly consistent with the estimates from tasks used in
prior research. If this is the case, then items judged as more
strongly related in a Match-to-Sample task should also more
strongly influence performance in a Visual Search task. To
this end, we used the Match-to-Sample task to select pairs
of target-distractor items. Each potential distractor was
tested against a foil that we identified as more distantly
related to the target. Measuring the rate at which children
chose each distractor versus the foil allowed us to calibrate
two distractors for each target, one strongly- and one
weakly-related. While the Match-to-Sample procedure
suffers from low resolution to detect graded responses, as it
allows only binary judgements on each trial, it should still
provide a coarse measure of semantic relatedness. We then
tested the effect of target-distractor strength in a Visual
Search task by asking children to indicate if a target was
present in an array of distractors. Across trials, we
manipulated the presence of the related distractors;
performance in the critical trials in which a related distractor
was present was compared with performance in baseline
trials in which the related distractors were replaced by items
unrelated to the target object. The degree to which children
performed more poorly in the presence versus absence of a
related distractor was used as the measure of the strength of
the perceived relation. As in previous studies with adults
and infants (e.g. Chow et al., 2017; Moores et al., 2003), we
focused our analyses on target-absent trials, because
participants’ attention to the target on target-present trials
leaves little room for related distractors to influence
performance. Target-present trials were included to ensure
that children were completing the target identification task.
Prior work using the Match-to-Sample task suggests that
children under the age of four are unlikely to consistently
select an item related to the target if the foil is a strong
competitor (e.g. a visually similar item; Godwin & Fisher,
2015). As such, we recruited 4 and 5-year-old children, as

To select pairs of items with varying strength, we conducted
a calibration study with 16 children (Mage=4.9 years,
range=4.0-5.9, 6 females); children were recruited from
local preschools and from a university-affiliated laboratory
school in Pittsburgh, PA and tested in a quiet location.
We selected 10 target objects that were likely to be
recognized by young children from a prior study
investigating the role of semantic relations in a Visual
Search task (Moores et al., 2003). For each target, we
selected four related items to be tested in the Match-toSample task with the goal of selecting two related items
(one strong relation and one weaker relation); the relation
strength between each target and each related item was
tested in the presence of the same foil, judged by the authors
to be a plausible competitor. For example, to test the
strength between cat and the items bear, bird, dog, and
mouse, participants were presented with the following
triads: cat-bear-butterfly, cat-bird-butterfly, cat-dogbutterfly, cat-mouse-butterfly. Two testing sets were created
by randomly selecting two of the four triads for each target.
Each participant completed one of the sets, for a total of 20
test trials; the order of the trials was randomly determined
for each subject, with the constraint that the same target was
not presented on consecutive trials. The target was
displayed at the top center of a computer screen, and
followed by the presentation of the two options (related item
and foil); these were presented on the left and right bottom
of the screen, with side counterbalanced across trials.
To ensure that children understood the task and were not
arbitrarily selecting items, five “catch” trials were randomly
placed amid the test trials. These catch triads were intended
to introduce no conflict and included items not used in the
test trials (e.g. cherries-apple-stapler). On average, children
selected the related object on 95% (SD=0.12) of the catch
trials, suggesting that they understood the task (one
additional child failed to complete at least 3 out of the 5
catch trials correctly and was not included in the sample).
Additionally, because the Match-to-Sample task presented
the same foil for each target (and thus children saw the same
target-X-foil triad more than once), we checked that children
were not learning to reject the foil for each target by
presenting a block of 10 “control” trials after the
experimental trials. In these control triads, the foil used on
the test trials was presented against an item judged to be

1243

unrelated to the target (e.g. cat-butterfly-watch). If children
were learning to reject the foil over the course of the
experimental trials, they should select the non-foil item (the
watch in this example); on the other hand, if children were
responding to each triad by considering how the items are
related, they should select the item that is more strongly
related to the target within each triad, even if previously
they have not selected that item (the butterfly in the example
above). On average, children selected the related item (the
butterfly in this example) on 81% (SD=0.24) of the control
trials; this suggests that children were considering how the
items were related within each trial.

each image was recolored in sepia; recolored images were
rendered in a 200 x 200 pixel area on a white background.
The audio files used to present the spoken names of the
targets were recorded by a female native speaker of English.
Design and Procedure. There were six trial types, resulting
from all combinations of target presence (present/absent)
and related distractor presence (strong present, weak
present, related absent), with equal occurrence of each trial
type. On each trial, children saw four objects, one on each
quadrant of the screen and all equally distant from the center
of the screen. Depending on the trial, the four objects were
combinations of target, related distractor, and random
distractor objects. The order of the test trials was randomly
determined for each child, provided that the same target did
not appear on consecutive trials. Across trials, the target and
related distractors appeared equally often on the left and
right side of the screen. A unique token of each concept was
used on each trial; for example, each trial probing cat used a
different token (see Figure 1 for examples).

For each target, we selected two related items that varied
in the degree of semantic relatedness, a strongly-related
item (selected by most children) and a weakly-related item
(selected at a lower rate, at or above chance). Two targets
items (banana and cow) failed to produce relations that
satisfied these conditions and were not used in the Visual
Search task. Table 1 presents the eight sets of items
consisting of a target, strongly-related item, and weaklyrelated item to be used in the Visual Search task and the
proportion of trials in which each related item was selected
in the Match-to-Sample task. On average, strongly-related
items were selected on 94% (SD=0.09) of the trials and
weakly-related items were selected on 61% (SD=0.10) of
the trials in the Match-to-Sample task, t(14)=6.97, p<0.001.
These sets of items were used to create 16 target-related
match pairs for the Visual Search task.

Figure 1: Tokens used to instantiate the concept “cat”.
Figure 2 shows the temporal order of events on each
trial. A “fixation” slide encouraged the child to rest their
hands on the table before the trial started (Fig. 2a); the
experimenter ensured that the child had their hands down
and was looking at the screen before starting a trial. The
spoken name of the target (Fig. 2b) was then presented and
followed by the search array (Fig. 2c); upon viewing the
search array, children had to indicate if the target was
present or absent by touching one of two buttons.

Table 1: Proportion of trials each related item was
selected in the Match-to-Sample task.
Target
bike
carrots
cat
chair
chicken
drum
foot
lamp

Strongly-related
skateboard 0.86
rabbit
0.78
dog
1.00
table
0.89
turkey
1.00
guitar
1.00
shoe
1.00
flashlight
1.00

Weakly-related
train
0.71
horse 0.58
mouse 0.67
bed
0.57
eagle 0.55
piano 0.57
glove 0.77
candle 0.44

<target name>

(a)
(b)
(c)

Figure 2: Visual Search, trial structure. The target (carrots)
is absent and the strong distractor (rabbit) is present.

Visual search task
Participants. Twenty-four children (Mage=4.8 years,
range=4.0-5.8, 12 females) were recruited from a universityaffiliated laboratory school in Pittsburgh, PA and tested in a
quiet location; these children had not participated in the
calibration study. One additional child was recruited but not
included in the final sample due to computer malfunction.
Children had no known developmental or visual
impairments, and English was their only or main language.
Apparatus and Stimuli. Stimuli were presented on a 15.6"
touchscreen laptop and responses (accuracy and latency)
were recorded using E-Prime (PST, Pittsburgh, PA). To
prevent color information from guiding participants’ search,

Children sat in front of the laptop and were told that the
goal of the game was to look for pictures on the screen.
They were first shown which buttons to touch (“Touch this
button if you see the picture on the screen and this button if
you do not see the picture on the screen”); the location of
the two buttons was counterbalanced across participants.
Children were asked to repeat the instructions (“Can you
show me which button you touch if you do not see the
picture on the screen?”) and all children correctly repeated
the instructions. Next, children completed 4 “warm-up”
trials in which they were familiarized with putting their

1244

Results
To confirm that children were performing the task, we start
by analyzing performance on target present trials. Next, we
focus on target absent trials to test the hypothesis that items
judged as more similar to the target in the Match-to-Sample
task also more strongly influence performance in the Visual
Search task. We used linear mixed models to analyze the
effect of target-distractor relatedness on the time taken to
indicate the target’s absence (RT). Differently from a
traditional analysis of variance, which requires data to be
aggregated and incorrect trials to be excluded, a mixed
model can include all data and take accuracy into account
by modeling the data at the trial level. We included both
subject and target item as random factors, that is, varying
around a group mean; modeling both subject and target item
as random effects is particularly important in experimental
designs in which the two factors are fully crossed (Baayen,
Davidson, & Bates, 2008; Jude, Westfall, & Kenny, 2012).

absence, we implemented a linear mixed model using the
lme4 package (Bates et al., 2015) in the R environment. We
specified accuracy (correct, incorrect) and strength of the
distractors (unrelated, weak, strong) as fixed effects, and
subject and target item as random effects. The RT outcome
variable was log-transformed. Wald F tests and respective
p-values were calculated using Kenward-Roger’s
approximation. The model showed only a significant main
effect of distractor strength, F(2,16.19)=3.64, p<0.05. The
main effect of accuracy [F(1,13.45)=2.40, p=0.14] and the
interaction between accuracy and distractor strength
[F(2,415.42)=0.14, p=0.87] were not significant predictors
of RT. Planned contrasts (adjusted using a Bonferroni
correction) showed that participants were significantly
slower when a strongly-related distractor was present in the
array compared to baseline trials in which no related
distractor was present, F(1, 16.70)=7.64, p=0.003. The
difference between weakly-related distractor trials and
baseline trials, F(1,16.76)=0.60, p=1.00, and the difference
between strongly-related and weakly-related distractors,
F(1,17.03)=2.77, p=0.34, were not significant.
Mean Reaction Time, RT (ms)

hands down during the “fixation” slide, listening to the
audio cue, and touching the appropriate button to indicate
the target’s presence or absence; feedback was provided and
children were reminded of the instructions if necessary.
Children then completed 48 test trials. The experimenter
gave general encouragement throughout the task (e.g. “You
are doing great”) but did not provide explicit feedback. A
short break was introduced every 16 trials during which
children could stamp a progress chart.

Target present trials
Children correctly indicated the target’s presence on 83%
(SD=0.37) of these trials, suggesting they were trying to
locate the target. No main effect of distractor strength on
accuracy was found, F(2,46)=1.78, p=0.18.

Trial Type

Figure 3: Mean RT per trial type in the Visual Search task.
Error bars display standard errors of the mean.

Target absent trials
Children correctly indicated the target’s absence on 91%
(SD=0.28) of these trials. This supports the conclusion from
target present trials that children were searching for the
target. However, there was a main effect of distractor
strength on accuracy, F(2,46)=10.49, p<0.001, as
participants were less accurate when the strongly-related
distractor was present in the array (Macc=0.84, SD=0.36)
than when the weakly-related distractor was present in the
array (Macc=0.95, SD=0.22) or when all items in the array
were unrelated to the target (Macc=0.95, SD=0.21).
Analyzing RT for correct trials only would exclude different
amounts of data from each condition; instead, we include
accuracy as a factor in the analyses below. The same pattern
of results is found when we consider only correct trials.
Figure 3 depicts mean RT across the three types of trials.
Relative to baseline trials (M=3.6s), children took over a
second longer to judge the target’s absence in the presence
of a strongly-related distractor (M=4.7s), but only slightly
longer in the presence of a weakly-related distractor
(M=3.8s). To assess how the strength of the distractors
influenced the ability to correctly indicate the target’s

Target Absent Trials

Discussion
The goal of this experiment was to examine if estimates of
semantic relatedness as measured by a Match-to-Sample
task converged with performance in a Visual Search task.
Specifically, for each target item we selected two related
items that varied in how strongly they were judged to be
related to the target (one strongly-related and one weaklyrelated distractor) in a Match-to-Sample task, and tested the
effect of each type of distractor on children’s ability to
search for that target. Our finding that strongly- but not
weakly-related items influenced children’s ability to
indicate the absence of a target provides initial evidence that
Visual Search task performance is influenced by semantic
relation strength in children. As such, the Visual Search task
is a promising alternative to the Match-to-Sample task,
addressing the limitations of this task as outlined above.

Using Visual Search to study the development of
semantic knowledge
Semantic knowledge exerts a pervasive influence on
cognitive processes. This knowledge about objects, facts,

1245

Difference Scores
(lower = slower relative to baseline)

and concepts deeply influences how people search for
information in the environment (Moores et. al, 2003),
retrieve information from memory (Bower et al., 1969),
make predictions about objects (Coley et al., 2004), or make
sense of events (McNamara & Kintsch, 1996). Despite the
important role that semantic knowledge plays in organizing
efficient behavior, we still have a limited understanding of
how this knowledge is acquired and how its structure
changes with experience. Currently, one obstacle to study
the development of semantic knowledge and how it changes
with experience is the lack of measures that can be used
across the lifespan; as outlined in the Introduction, the most
commonly used measure, the Match-to-Sample task, is not
well-suited to do so. Visual search paradigms may be a
viable alternative as they have been extensively used with
adults to study many facets of knowledge (Huettig et al.,
2005), and some recent work with toddlers shows similar
evidence in younger populations (Chow et al., 2017).
This paradigm also shows promise in capturing individual
variation among children. Figure 4 shows participants RT
(subtracted from baseline trials RT) to indicate the target’s
absence from the visual array when the strongly-related and
the weakly-related distractors were present. Each bar depicts
the relative response time of a single participant, indicating
how much that participant was affected by the presence of
the related distractor. The range of variability suggests that
this task may be a promising tool to study how individual
differences in semantic knowledge contribute to individual
differences in processes theorized to rely on semantic
knowledge (e.g. Fisher, 2015).
Together, the present data suggest that a Visual Search
paradigm both complements the Match-to-Sample paradigm
and potentially addresses many of its limitations. Below we
discuss some of the unresolved questions and important
future directions of this work.
Target Absent /
Strongly-related Distractor

Target Absent /
Weakly-related Distractor

Figure 4: RT difference scores, calculated as: related-absent
trials (i.e. baseline) minus related present trials.

Unresolved questions and future steps
The present study revealed no evidence that the presence of
a weakly-related distractor influenced search performance.
One possibility is that our RT measure was insufficient to
detect subtler effects of semantic relatedness. More finegrained moment-to-moment measures taken while children

are looking for the target may detect these effects. Indeed,
prior research that found graded effects of knowledge
associated with a target concept made use of higher
resolution measures, such as eye-tracking or mouse-tracking
(e.g. Mirman & Magnuson, 2009). Another possibility is
that children’s performance in the Match-to-Sample task is
idiosyncratic, and the findings of our calibration study do
not generalize across children. To address this possibility,
we retested in the Match-to-Sample task all children who
participated in the Visual Search task; the estimates were
comparable across the two samples, lending some
confidence to the estimates from the stimuli selection study.
As this was the first attempt at using the Visual Search
task to measure semantic knowledge in young children, we
were agnostic as to which relations to probe and thus
imposed no constraint when selecting the target-distractor
pairs. In the current set of items, some items are linked by
multiple relations (e.g. chair and table are both furniture
items and often co-occur in the environment, and thus share
two types of relations), while other items share only one
type of relation (e.g. carrots and rabbit). Previous research
using a spatial arrangement task showed that young children
seem to consider items that share multiple relations as being
more strongly related than items that share only one relation
(Unger et al., 2016), and thus it is possible that items that
are related in more than one way more strongly influence
performance in a Visual Search. Future work can more
closely test this prediction by systematically selecting
stimuli that vary in the types of relations depicted.
We also did not control for visual similarity between
targets and distractors. It is well known that visual similarity
influences visual search (e.g. Vales & Smith, 2015); when
selecting the visual tokens, we selected items that were
easily discriminable both within- and between-categories,
but we did not empirically measure visual similarity.
Although it is not trivial to obtain a pure measure of
similarity (see Medin et al., 1993; Chow et al., 2017), some
recent work has tried to address these issues (e.g. De Groot
et al., 2016), and as such it will be important to try to more
systematically measure visual similarity in future studies.

Conclusions
The present study demonstrates the Visual Search paradigm
as a feasible approach to investigate the development of
semantic knowledge. In contrast with paradigms commonly
used in prior research, this paradigm is age-appropriate
across a wide developmental range, and greatly reduces the
influence of deliberative processes on performance. Thus,
the Visual Search task has the potential to shed new light on
the development of semantic knowledge and its role in a
variety of cognitive processes.

Acknowledgments
We thank R. Almasi, K. Boyle, H. Do, S. Jahanian, and A.
Vande Velde for help with stimuli creation, participant
recruitment and testing; and the CMU Children’s School,
Sacred Hearth Elementary School, and Beth Shalom Early

1246

Learning for making this research possible. This research
was supported by the James S. McDonnell Foundation 21st
Century Science Initiative in Understanding Human
Cognition – Scholar Award (220020401) to A.V.F.

References
Arias-Trejo, N., & Plunkett, K. (2009). Lexical–semantic
priming effects during infancy. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences,
364(1536), 3633-3647.
Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Bates, D. M. (2008).
Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random effects for
subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language,
59(4), 390-412.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2015).
Fitting Linear Mixed-Effects Models Using lme4. Journal
of Statistical Software, 67(1), 1-48.
Bower, G. H., Clark, M. C., Lesgold, A. M., & Winzenz, D.
(1969). Hierarchical retrieval schemes in recall of
categorized word lists. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 8(3), 323-343.
Clark, E. V. (1973). What’s in a word? On the child’s
acquisition of semantics in his first language. In T. E.
Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and the acquisition of
language (pp. 65–110). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Chi, M. T., Feltovich, P. J., & Glaser, R. (1981).
Categorization and representation of physics problems by
experts and novices. Cognitive science, 5(2), 121-152.
Chow, J., Davies, A. A., & Plunkett, K. (2017). Spokenword recognition in 2-year-olds: The tug of war between
phonological and semantic activation. Journal of Memory
and Language, 93, 104-134.
Chun, M. M., & Jiang, Y. (1998). Contextual cueing:
Implicit learning and memory of visual context guides
spatial attention. Cognitive psychology, 36(1), 28-71.
Coley, J. D., Hayes, B., Lawson, C. A., & Maloney, M.
(2004). Knowledge, expectations, and inductive reasoning
within conceptual hierarchies. Cognition, 90, 217–253.
De Groot, F., Koelewijn, T., Huettig, F., & Olivers, C. N.
(2016). A stimulus set of words and pictures matched for
visual and semantic similarity. Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 28(1), 1-15.
Fisher, A.V. (2015). Development of inductive
reasoning. Child Development Perspectives, 9(3), 172-177.
Gerhardstein, P., & Rovee-Collier, C. (2002). The
development of visual search in infants and very young
children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
81(2), 194-215.
Gobbo, C., & Chi, M. (1986). How knowledge is structured
and used by expert and novice children. Cognitive
Development, 1(3), 221-237.
Godwin, K. E., & Fisher, A. V. (2015). Inductive
generalization with familiar categories: developmental
changes in children's reliance on perceptual similarity and
kind information. Frontiers in psychology, 6.

Huettig, F., & Altmann, G. T. (2005). Word meaning and
the control of eye fixation: Semantic competitor effects
and the visual world paradigm. Cognition, 96(1), B23-B32.
Huettig, F., Rommers, J., & Meyer, A. S. (2011). Using the
visual world paradigm to study language processing: A
review and critical evaluation. Acta Psychologica, 137(2),
151-171.
Kaldy, Z., Kraper, C., Carter, A. S., & Blaser, E. (2011).
Toddlers with autism spectrum disorder are more
successful at visual search than typically developing
toddlers. Developmental Science, 14(5), 980-988.
McClelland, J. L., & Rogers, T. T. (2003). The parallel
distributed processing approach to semantic cognition.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4, 310–322.
McNamara, D. S., & Kintsch, W. (1996). Learning from
texts: Effects of prior knowledge and text coherence.
Discourse Processes, 22(3), 247-288.
Medin, D.L., Goldstone, R.L., & Gentner, D. (1993).
Respects for similarity. Psychological Review, 100, 254278.
Mirman, D., & Magnuson, J. S. (2009). Dynamics of
activation of semantically similar concepts during spoken
word recognition. Memory & Cognition, 37(7), 1026-1039.
Moores, E., Laiti, L., & Chelazzi, L. (2003). Associative
Knowledge Controls Deployment of Visual Selective
Attention. Nature Neuroscience, 6(2), 182-189.
Roediger, H. L., & McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating false
memories: Remembering words not presented in lists.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 21, 803–814.
Smiley, S. S., & Brown, A. L. (1979). Conceptual
preference for thematic or taxonomic relations: A
nonmonotonic age trend from preschool to old age.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 28, 249–257.
Unger, L., Fisher, A. V., Nugent, R., Ventura, S. L., &
MacLellan, C. J. (2016). Developmental changes in
semantic knowledge organization. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 146, 202-222.
Vales, C., & Smith, L. B. (2015). Words, shape, visual
search and visual working memory in 3-year-old children.
Developmental science, 18(1), 65-79.
Vales, C., & Smith, L. B. (2017). The words they know:
Individual differences in how language affects visual
processing. Talk presented at the Biennial Meeting of the
Society for Research in Child Development. Austin, Texas.
Walsh, M., Richardson, K., & Faulkner, D. (1993).
Perceptual, thematic, and taxonomic relations in children’s
mental representations: Responses to triads. European
Journal of Psychology of Education, 8, 85–102.
Waxman, S. R., & Namy, L. L. (1997). Challenging the
notion of a thematic preference in young children.
Developmental Psychology, 33, 555–567.
Xu, F., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). Word learning as
Bayesian inference. Psychological Review, 114(2), 245.

1247

