Maintenance of Perceptual Information in Speech Perception
Wednesday Bushong (wbushong@ur.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester

T. Florian Jaeger (fjaeger@ur.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester
Abstract

and “pear” gradiently according to voice onset time (VOT),
the cue that distinguishes /b/ and /p/, suggesting that subphonemic information is maintained and used in higher-level
processes (for a review of related work, see Dahan, 2010).
However, there are other possible sources of information
that follow a target segment or word that occur much later
downstream. For example, persevatory co-articulation might
spread information over following syllables (Magen, 1997).
The identity of later segments might also contain information about earlier segements because of phonotactic dependencies within and across syllables. Even context beyond
word boundaries regularly contains information that can help
to resolve uncertainty about the input.
A small literature has investigated the extent to which listeners can maintain subcategorical information at longer distances across the word boundary. In a classic study, Connine,
Blasko, and Hall (1991) tested whether listeners could maintain subcategorical information about a segment 3 syllables or
6-8 syllables downstream. Participants listened to sentences
like “When the ?ent in the fender was well camouflaged, we
sold the car.” and judged whether the word they heard was
tent or dent. The ? represents a sound that varied along VOT,
the primary cue distinguishing between /t/ and /d/. In this
example, the later word fender semantically biases interpretation of the target word to be dent. If listeners can maintain
information about the identity of the ?-segment, they should
integrate the biasing context into their decisions. Connine and
colleagues reported two important findings, both of which
have recently been revisited.
First, participants maintained subcategorical information
about the ?-segment for 3 syllables: responses reflected both
the specific VOT of the segment and the contextual bias. After 6-8 syllables responses reflected only VOT, but not biasing
context. This finding is often interpreted to demonstrate the
limits of subcategorical information maintenance. However,
participants were allowed to respond at any point during the
sentence; in fact, in the 6-8 syllables condition, participants
responded before even hearing biasing context 84% of the
time. This leaves open whether participants could not maintain subcategorical information for longer periods of time, or
chose to respond early for other reasons.
Secondly, Connine and colleagues report that the context
effect was only reliably present at ambiguous VOTs: sounds
that were perceptually unambiguously /t/ or /d/ were not integrated with later context. This has been taken to mean that
even information maintenance of up to 3 syllables is limited to the special case of perceptually highly ambiguous per-

Acoustic and contextual cues to linguistic categories (e.g.,
phonemes or words) tend to be temporally distributed across
the speech signal. Optimal cue integration thus requires maintenance of subcategorical information over time. At the same
time, previous work suggests that finite sensory memory or
processing capacity strongly limits how much subcategorical
information can be maintained (or for how long). We argue that previous work might have over-interpreted the role
of these limitations. In two perception experiments, we find
no limit in the ability to maintain subcategorical information.
We also find that maintenance seems to be the default, neither
limited to perceptually particularly ambiguous signals, nor a
learned strategy specific to our experiment. In contrast, listeners’ decision for how long to delay categorization, we find, is a
function of perceptual ambiguity. It is therefore crucial to distinguish between in-principle abilities (even when they reflect
default processing), and decisions made within the bounds of
those abilities.
Keywords: linguistics; cognitive science; speech recognition;
language comprehension

Introduction
One of the most fundamental problems of auditory processing is the transient nature of the acoustic signal; the systems
underlying speech perception receive large amounts of information every second. The bounds of sensory memories thus
create a pressure to incrementally infer abstract linguistic categories (e.g., phonemes and words) from the auditory signal
before that information becomes unavailable.
However, much of the information relevant to inferring a
particular part of the auditory signal, for example a segment
(phoneme), is not contained on the segment itself. For example, one of the main cues to coda stop voicing is duration
of the previous vowel (Klatt, 1976). Thus, in order to successfully resolve the voicing of a coda stop, listeners must
maintain information about the previous vowel and integrate
it with the evidence they receive later. This is opposed to
a scheme where the listener removes information about the
previous vowel and only maintains some abstract categorical
representation that does not include duration information.
Previous work suggests that listeners can indeed maintain and use subcategorical information at least at short
timescales. In a classic study, Ganong (1980) found that lexical constraints can influence the perception of a word-initial
sound: sounds varying on the /d/-/t/ continuum are perceived
to be more /d/-like when presented before “ash” (dash is a
word while tash is not). More evidence that subcategorical
information is maintained within a word comes from eyetracking studies: McMurray, Tanenhaus, and Aslin (2002)
found that listeners looked to competitor items like “bear”

186

cepts. This second conclusion, too, however, has to be interpreted with caution. Connine and colleagues measured the
context effect in proportion of /t/ vs. /d/ responses. This is
problematic (see also Jaeger, 2008): a context effect that is
identical across all VOTs when measured in log-odds—i.e.,
equally large for perceptually clear and perceptually ambiguous VOTs—will results in smaller or insignificant context
effects for perceptually clear VOTs when measured in proportions. Crucially, there are a priori reasons to believe that
the effect should be constant in log-odds (Bicknell, Jaeger, &
Tanenhaus, 2016). The analysis conducted by Connine and
colleagues thus leaves open whether subcategorical information maintenance is limited to special cases.

Context

Distance

Tent-biasing

Near (3 syllables)

Dent-biasing

Near (3 syllables)

Tent-biasing

Far (6-8 syllables)

Dent-biasing

Far (6-8 syllables)

Sentence
When the [t/d]ent in the
forest was ...
When the [t/d]ent in the
fender was ...
When the [t/d]ent was
noticed in the forest, ...
When the [t/d]ent was
noticed in the fender, ...

Table 1: Example stimuli from the experiment in each biasing
context and distance condition.

Experiment

A recent study, Bicknell et al. (2016), revisited both of
these problems. Bicknell and colleagues replicated Connine
et al. (1991) with one minor change to procedure. Participants
were required to wait until the end of the sentence to respond,
ensuring that they heard the biasing context. Unlike in the
original study, Bicknell et al. (2016) analyzed the log-odds of
responding /t/ vs. /d/ and found that listeners maintained subcategorical information for both the 3 and 6-8 syllable conditions (see also Szostak & Pitt, 2013 for similar results in a
different phonetic contrast). This suggests that there may be
an important distinction between listeners’ ability to maintain subcategorical information and when listeners decide to
respond.

Participants
We recruited a total of 96 participants from Amazon Mechanical Turk (48 for the forced-response group, 48 for the freeresponse group). Participants were awarded $3.00 for their
participation in a 30-minute experiment.

Materials
Materials were identical across the two participant groups and
were modeled on Connine et al. (1991). Table 1 shows example sentences in each context and distance condition. We
manipulated context (tent-biasing vs. dent-biasing), distance
(near, 3 syllables vs. far, 6-8 syllables), and VOT (10, 40, 50,
60, 70, and 85ms). We chose our range of VOTs based on
simulation-based power analyses so as to maximize statistical power to assess the size of the context effect across the
VOT continuum, while also ensuring that there were a range
of perceptually ambiguous and unambiguous sounds (based
on the VOT distributions of our recording speaker). Seven
different sentence frames were constructed. Each participant
heard each sentence frame in each of the context, distance,
and VOT condition combinations, resulting in a total of 168
sentences in the experiment.

The idea of a distinction between in-principle abilities and
the decision process motivates the present experiments. Our
first goal is to replicate the between-experiment comparison
across Bicknell et al. (2016) and Connine et al. (1991) within
the same paradigm. Anticipating our result, we indeed replicate the contrast, showing that it is important to distinguish
between the ability to maintain information and the decision
to provide a categorization response. Given that listeners
sometimes choose to make a response before receiving additional semantic information, we ask whether subcategorical
information maintenance is a default strategy employed by
listeners or is specific to experience in our task. Finally, we
ask what influences the decision process by investigating the
role of perceptual ambiguity on when participants choose to
make a response.

Procedure
Participants were instructed to listen to the sentence and report whether they heard tent or dent. In the forced-response
group, participants were instructed to wait until the end of the
sentence to make a response. In the free-response group, participants were instructed that they could respond whenever
they wish during the sentence after hearing the critical word.

In order to answer these questions, we conducted a webbased experiment that closely followed the paradigm of
Connine et al. (1991) and Bicknell et al. (2016). Betweenparticipants we manipulated only one aspect of the procedure, holding everything else constant. In the forced-response
group of participants, they were required to wait until the
end of the sentence before making a response. In the freeresponse group, they could make a response whenever they
wanted during the sentence. The forced-response group gives
us insight into the ability to maintain subcategorical information. The free-response group allows us to ask what drives
listeners’ decisions to categorize.

Data Exclusions
We excluded participants who showed no main effect of VOT
on their responses from further analysis. That is, these were
participants who did not increase their /t/ responses as VOT
increased, suggesting that they had faulty audio equipment,
did not understand the task, or were otherwise not paying
attention. In the forced-response group, this resulted in the
removal of nine participants (18.75%) from analysis. In the
free-response group, eleven participants (22.92%) were removed. These exclusions hold across all analyses below.

187

0.50
0.25
0.00
20

40

60

1.00

Free-Response Group
(All Trials)
Proportion Responses /t/

Dent
Tent

0.75

Free-Response Group
(Responses After Biasing Context)
Proportion Responses /t/

Proportion Responses /t/

Forced-Response Group
Biasing Context

1.00

0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00

80

20

Voice Onset Time (ms)

40

60

1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00

80

20

Voice Onset Time (ms)

40

60

80

Voice Onset Time (ms)

3
2
1
0
-1
10

40

50

60

70

Voice Onset Time (ms)

85

Free-Response Context Effect
(Responses After Biasing Context)
3
2
1
0
-1
10

40

50

60

70

Voice Onset Time (ms)

85

Context Effect Estimate (log-odds)

Forced-Response Context Effect

Context Effect Estimate (log-odds)

Context Effect Estimate (log-odds)

Figure 1: Proportion /t/ responses by biasing context condition for both groups of participants. Error bars are 95% confidence
intervals over subject means. See text for discussion of subset vs. all trials.
Free-Response Context Effect
(All Trials)
3
2
1
0
-1
10

40

50

60

70

85

Voice Onset Time (ms)

Figure 2: Size of context effect in log-odds space at each VOT for each group as estimated by our simple effects mixed models.
Error bars are 95% confidence intervals.

Analysis 1: Limits of Subcategorical
Information Maintenance

response group, where participants always responded after
hearing the biasing context by design. Second, we also conducted the same analyses using all of the data in the freeresponse group in case these data are more comparable.

Analysis
Analyses 1 and 2 are based on the same mixed-effects regression, analyzing the proportion of /t/ responses as a function
of VOT (a continuous variable), context, distance, trial number, and their interactions. We included random slopes for
context and distance by participants and items (due to data
sparsity and the consistency of the VOT effect across participants and items, we did not use the maximal random effects
structure; see Bates, Kliegl, Vasishth, & Baayen, 2015). Different predictors in this model answer different questions. In
Analysis 1, we focus on the overall effect of context and its
interactions with VOT and distance.
In addition to the model described above, in Analysis 1 we
also fit a second model which assessed the relative magnitudes of the effect of context at each VOT while removing the
potentially problematic assumption that VOTs are related linearly to the log-odds of /t/ responses. This was achieved by
recoding the model so as to assess the simple effects of context at each level of VOT. This analysis does thus not a priori
assume any specific relation between VOTs and /t/ responses.
For each model of the free-response group, we present two
analyses. First, we analyzed only the trials on which participants responded at least 200ms after offset of the biasing
context. This allows a direct comparison with the forced-

Results
Figures 1 and 2 summarize the context effect results of both
groups. We found a main effect of VOT on /t/ responses
(forced-response: βˆ = 0.18, p < 0.001, free-response subset:
βˆ = 0.13, p < 0.001, free-response all trials: βˆ = 0.16, p <
0.001). We also found a context main effect (forced-response:
βˆ = 1.11, p < 0.001, free-response subset: βˆ = 2.08, p <
0.001, free-response all trials: βˆ = 1.62, p < 0.001). In the
forced-response group and the subset of trials in the freeresponse group where participants responded after biasing
context, there was no interaction between context and distance (forced-response: βˆ = −0.09, p = 0.57, free-response:
βˆ = 0.18, p = 0.38). When we analyzed all trials of the freeresponse group, there was a context x distance interaction
such that the context effect was smaller in the far condition
(βˆ = −0.39, p = 0.02).
A simple effects analysis revealed that the effect of context was significantly positive at 50ms, 70ms, and 85ms VOT
ˆ = 0.58 − 1.95, ps < 0.05). In the freein both groups (βs
response group, the context effect was also significant at all
ˆ = 0.93 − 2.23, ps < 0.01, all triother VOTs (subset: βs
ˆ
als: βs = 0.61 − 1.97, ps < 0.05). In the forced-response

188

Proportion Responses /t/

Forced-Response Group
Biasing Context
Dent
Tent

0.6

0.4

Free-Response Group
(Responses After Biasing Context)

Free-Response Group
(All Trials)

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2
0

50

100

150

Trial Number (Binned)

0

50

100

150

Trial Number (Binned)

0

50

100

150

Trial Number (Binned)

Figure 3: Interaction between context effect over trial for both groups of participants.

Analysis 2: Subcategorial Information
Maintenance: Experimental Artifact or Default
Behavior?

group, the context effect was marginal at 40ms and 60ms
ˆ = 0.87, 0.47, ps = 0.06, 0.08), and not significant
VOT (βs
at 10ms VOT (βˆ = −0.42, p = 0.5).

We analyze changes in the effect of context over the course
of the experiment in both groups. If we observe an effect
of context from the very beginning of the experiment, this
suggests that listeners maintain subcategorical information by
default. On the other hand, if we observe no context effect
until later in the experiment, this suggests that listeners have
learned to maintain subcategorical information.

Discussion
Replicating both Connine et al. (1991) and Bicknell et al.
(2016), we found that listeners have the ability to maintain
subcategorical information well beyond the word boundary.
When forced to wait, participants’ responses reflected both
the VOT and the contextual bias even at the longest delay tested (replicating Bicknell et al., 2016; Szostak & Pitt,
2013). Interestingly, the effect of context seemed more or
less constant across the entire range of VOTs tested in both
groups. This is exactly as expected by an ideal observer
that integrates the perceptual signal with context (Bicknell,
Bushong, Tanenhaus, & Jaeger, in preparation). It also suggests that listeners do not necessarily limit the maintenance of
subcategorical information to perceptual inputs that are perfectly ambiguous. Instead, it seems listeners maintain subcategorical information even when the perceptual input is already rather unambiguous1 .

Analysis
We used the same logistic regression model from Analysis 1
and focus on the effects of context, trial, and their interaction.
Trial was coded so that the coefficient estimate for context
reflects the context effect at the very first trial (by subtracting
1).

Results
Figure 3 shows the context effect over trials in both groups
of participants. The context effect was significant from
the very first trial of the experiment (forced-response: βˆ =
1.11, p < 0.001, free-response subset: βˆ = 2.08, p < 0.001,
free-response all trials: βˆ = 1.62, p < 0.001). We found a significant negative interaction between context and trial for both
groups of participants (forced-response: βˆ = −0.004, p <
0.001, free-response subset: βˆ = −0.009, p < 0.001, freereponse all trials: βˆ = −0.004, p < 0.001).

When participants were free to choose when to respond,
however, we found an interaction between context and distance, such that the context effect was smaller at longer
timescales. This would suggest that participants were deciding to respond before hearing biasing context: indeed, the
free-response group responded before biasing context on 32%
of far trials and 0.5% of near trials (a point we return to in
Analysis 3).

Discussion
Particpants in both experiments exhibited clear context effects right from the beginning of the experiment. This suggests that participants have the ability to maintain subcategorical information without requiring extensive exposure to
a particular task. We also found a negative context by trial
interaction, such that the context effect got smaller over the
course of the experiment. This could mean that participants
maintain subcategorical information to a lesser extent as time
goes on (e.g., because of fatigue or boredom with the task).
Alternatively, participants may still be maintaining subcategorical information but may rely less on context during their

Analysis 1 leaves open whether this tendency to maintain
subcategorical information is a strategy participants adopt
specifically for this experiment, rather than reflecting a more
general property of speech perception. Analysis 2 begins to
address this question by investigating the context effect across
trials.

1 We note that analyses in VOT space do not tell us about the
context effect on the basis of individual participants’ subjective perceptual ambiguity, however.

189

Proportion Responses
Before Biasing Context

decision making process, and use VOT more (e.g., because
participants become more certain of the talker-specific VOT
distribution, cf. Kleinschmidt & Jaeger, 2015).

Analysis 3: Strength of Perceptual Evidence
and Decision to Categorize
Although maintenance of subcategorical information seems
to be a default strategy among participants, the context by
distance interaction in the free-response group in Analysis 1
suggests that participants did not necessarily wait for biasing
context to make their responses.
This raises questions about what determines when listeners
provide a categorization response. If listeners have enough
perceptual evidence to confidently make a categorization,
they may tend to respond early rather than waiting for the biasing context that provides additional information about the
identity of the segment (note that this leaves open whether listeners maintain subcategorical information beyond this point;
we return to this below). To answer this question, we analyze
when participants in the free-response group made responses,
and whether this was dependent on the perceptual ambiguity
of the stimulus.

0.20

0.15

0.10
0.1

0.2
0.3
Perceptual Ambiguity
(<- less ambiguous
more ambiguous ->)
Figure 4: Proportion of responses before biasing context by
perceptual ambiguity. Error bars are 95% confidence intervals.

Discussion
We found that participants were more likely to respond before hearing biasing context when the perceptual signal was
less ambiguous, and when biasing context appeared farther
away from the target word. We also found a main effect of
distance: participants were more likely to respond before biasing context when it occurred farther away from the target
word. These results suggest that while listeners have the ability to maintain subcategorical information for unambiguous
stimuli over long distances, when given a choice listeners decide to respond earlier when they have stronger perceptual
evidence for categorization.

Analysis
We used mixed-effects logistic regression to analyze the proportion of responses before biasing context as a function
of perceptual ambiguity and distance. For each trial, we
coded whether the participant responded before or after having heard biasing context (defined as 200ms after biasing
word offset to account for motor planning). To estimate (subjective) perceptual ambiguity, we compute the distance (in
probability space) of each VOT from the maximally unambiguous point based on average response probabilities2 . If
strength of perceptual evidence affects when listeners make a
decision before obtaining more information (provided by the
biasing context), we should see more responses before biasing context for less ambiguous stimuli.

General Discussion
Together, our results suggest that in principle, listeners
can maintain subcategorical information well beyond word
boundaries. Listeners seem to do so by default, and both for
ambiguous and unambiguous percepts. This suggests that the
limits of listeners ability to maintain subcategorical information are less strict than previously assumed (Connine et al.,
1991; Christiansen & Chater, 2016). At the same time, listeners do not wait arbitrarily long for additional informative
context. When given the opportunity, listeners responded on
16% of all trials before additional context could aid recognition. Critically, listeners’ decisions to respond early were not
arbitrary, but rather systematically conditioned on the ambiguity of the perceptual input: listeners were more likely to respond before biasing context when the perceptual signal was
less ambiguous. This strategy seems to vary little across participants.
Three questions stand out to us as requiring further attention. First, importantly, little is known about what kind of
information is being maintained. It is possible that listeners
retain a rich representation of the original percept, some more
abstract representation of their certainty in the identity of the
segment, or something in between.

Results
Figure 4 shows proportion of responses before biasing context by perceptual ambiguity of the stimulus. We found a significant effect of ambiguity (βˆ = −4.06, p = 0.006), such that
participants were less likely to respond before biasing context
when the perceptual stimulus was more ambiguous. We also
found a main effect of distance (βˆ = 6.93, p < 0.001) such
that participants were more likely to respond before biasing
context when it occurred 6-8 syllables away from the target
word than when it occurred 3 syllables away. We additionally found a main effect of VOT such that participants were
less likely to respond before biasing context as VOTs became
longer (βˆ = −0.007, p < 0.001). There were no other main
effects or interactions.
2 This perceptual ambiguity measure can also be computed on a
by-subject basis and does not change the results.

190

Second, it is unclear what becomes of these representations
after listeners make a perceptual decision. It could be the
case that the maintenance process and decision-making process are dependent on or independent of each other. The large
literature on exemplar-based approach to speech perception
suggests that exemplars are stored and used later in speech
perception (Hay & Drager, 2010; Strand & Johnson, 1996;
Goldinger, 1997). The apparent storage of this low-level information in long-term memory is puzzling if there are strict
limitations on the amount of information that can be maintained during speech perception—a paradox that has, to the
best of our knowledge, received surprisingly little attention.
Third, we found evidence that the maintenance of subcategorical information in the present experiments does not seem
to be learned over time in a task-specific manner. It is, however, an open question whether listeners can flexibly adapt the
degree to which (or duration for which) they maintain subcategorical information, depending on their goals or the structure of the current task. Such flexibility would suggest that
listeners’ decisions about at which point to categorize input
might more often be constrained by the goal to quickly infer
the meaning-bearing message, rather than being constrained
by strong limits of perceptual memory. For example, it is
possible that the limits (or lack thereof) of maintenance observed in experiments like ours (and a large body of previous
work; for review, see Dahan, 2010) reflect participants’ beliefs based on previous experience about the expected utility
of delaying categorization. In that case, listeners might adapt
these beliefs after exposure to stimuli that contain or do not
contain helpful contextual information.

Dahan, D. (2010). The time course of interpretation in speech
comprehension. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 19(2), 121–126.
Ganong, W. F. (1980). Phonetic categorization in auditory
word perception. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 6(1), 110.
Goldinger, S. D. (1997). Words and voices: Perception and
production in an episodic lexicon. Talker variability in
speech processing, 33–66.
Hay, J., & Drager, K. (2010). Stuffed toys and speech perception. Linguistics, 48(4), 865–892.
Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Categorical data analysis: Away from
anovas (transformation or not) and towards logit mixed
models. Journal of memory and language, 59(4), 434–
446.
Klatt, D. H. (1976). Linguistic uses of segmental duration in
english: Acoustic and perceptual evidence. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 59(5), 1208–
1221.
Kleinschmidt, D. F., & Jaeger, T. F. (2015). Robust speech
perception: Recognize the familiar, generalize to the
similar, and adapt to the novel. Psychological review,
122(2), 148.
Magen, H. S. (1997). The extent of vowel-to-vowel coarticulation in english. Journal of Phonetics, 25(2), 187–
205.
McMurray, B., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Aslin, R. N. (2002).
Gradient effects of within-category phonetic variation
on lexical access. Cognition, 86(2), B33–B42.
Strand, E. A., & Johnson, K. (1996). Gradient and visual
speaker normalization in the perception of fricatives.
In Konvens (pp. 14–26).
Szostak, C. M., & Pitt, M. A. (2013). The prolonged influence of subsequent context on spoken word recognition. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 75(7),
1533–1546.

Acknowledgments
This work was partially funded by NSF NRT #1449828
(graduate stipend to W.B.) and NSF IIS-1150028 and NIHCD
R01 HD075797 (to T.F.J.). The views expressed here do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation or the National Institutes of Health.

References
Bates, D., Kliegl, R., Vasishth, S., & Baayen, H.
(2015). Parsimonious mixed models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1506.04967.
Bicknell, K., Bushong, W., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Jaeger, T. F.
(in preparation). Listeners can maintain and rationally
update uncertainty about prior words.
Bicknell, K., Jaeger, T. F., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2016). Now
or ... later: Perceptual data is not immediately forgotten during language processing. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 39, 23–24.
Christiansen, M. H., & Chater, N. (2016). The now-or-never
bottleneck: A fundamental constraint on language. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 39, e62.
Connine, C. M., Blasko, D. G., & Hall, M. (1991). Effects
of subsequent sentence context in auditory word recognition: Temporal and linguistic constrainst. Journal of
Memory and Language, 30(2), 234–250.

191

