Measures and mechanisms of common ground: backchannels, conversational
repair, and interactive alignment in free and task-oriented social interactions
Riccardo Fusaroli (fusaroli@cc.au.dk)
Kristian Tylén (kristian@dac.au.dk)
School of Communication and Culture & The Interacting Minds Center
Aarhus University, Jens Chr. Skous Vej 2, 8000 Aarhus, Denmark

Katrine Garly (katrinegarly@hotmail.com)
Jakob Steensig (linjs@cc.au.dk)
School of Communication and Culture, Aarhus University,
Jens Chr. Skous Vej 2, 8000 Aarhus C, Denmark

Morten H. Christiansen (morten@cas.au.dk)
Department of Psychology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853
School of Communication and Culture & The Interacting Minds Center
Aarhus University, Jens Chr. Skous Vej 2, 8000 Aarhus, Denmark

Mark Dingemanse (mark.dingemanse@mpi.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics
PO Box 310 6500 AH Nijmegen The Netherlands
Abstract
A crucial aspect of everyday conversational interactions is our
ability to establish and maintain common ground.
Understanding the relevant mechanisms involved in such
social coordination remains an important challenge for
cognitive science. While common ground is often discussed
in very general terms, different contexts of interaction are
likely to afford different coordination mechanisms. In this
paper, we investigate the presence and relation of three
mechanisms of social coordination – backchannels,
interactive alignment and conversational repair – across free
and task-oriented conversations. We find significant
differences: task-oriented conversations involve higher
presence of repair – restricted offers in particular – and
backchannel, as well as a reduced level of lexical and
syntactic alignment. We find that restricted repair is
associated with lexical alignment and open repair with
backchannels. Our findings highlight the need to explicitly
assess several mechanisms at once and to investigate diverse
social activities to understand their role and relations.
Keywords: Social coordination, common ground;
conversational repair; interactive alignment; backchannel.

Introduction
A key question in cognitive science is how people
coordinate knowledge and behavior in social interaction, a
process sometimes referred to as grounding (Clark &
Brennan, 1991; Dale, Fusaroli, Duran, & Richardson, 2013).
Research over the past decades has highlighted processes
like backchannels, conversational repair, and interactive
alignment, but progress has been hampered by two
challenges. First, these processes are rarely considered
together, limiting our view of possible interrelations.
Second, the study of such processes has been spread across
disciplines and data types, limiting the possibilities for

prediction and generalization (de Ruiter & Albert, 2017).
Here we report on a principled comparison of backchannels,
repair, and interactive alignment in two quite different types
of contexts: free (FC) and task-oriented conversations
(TOC). Engaging in conversation is a collaborative effort
involving timely coordination at many levels. In their
seminal 1991 article, Clark and Brennan (1991) suggest
such coordination to be contingent on common ground,
comprising mutual knowledge, beliefs and assumptions. The
main mechanism for establishment and maintenance of
common ground explored in their work is backchannels
(Yngve, 1970). Backchannels are phatic signals such as
head nods, eye blinks and vocal expressions of the type uhhuh, yeah, and okay (Bangerter & Clark, 2003; Schegloff,
1982). In this study, we are concerned with vocal
backchannels only. Even if such signals are often quite
subtle, research suggests that speakers are very sensitive to
these kinds of cues as ways of providing and monitoring
positive evidence of mutual understanding, and their
interruption can have detrimental effects on communication
(Clark & Krych, 2004).
A related phenomenon is conversational repair. While
backchannels are mostly concerned with positive evidence
of understanding, conversational repair refers to the
interactional practices by which people signal and solve
trouble in conversation (Schegloff, Jefferson, & Sacks,
1977). Here we focus on the most interactive form of repair:
other-initiated repair, a highly frequent conversational
sequence where one participant initiates the repair procedure
by means of a request for clarification like huh? or who?,
and the other completes it. Formats for other-initiated repair
frequently show lexical and syntactic repetition (Jefferson,
1972; Sacks, 1992), with a recent cross-linguistic study of
informal conversation finding that 48% of all repair

2055

initiating turns repeated part or whole of the prior turn
(Dingemanse et al., 2015). Repair initiations can be ordered
along a cline from weak (providing little indication of what
or where the problem is, such as huh?) to strong
(highlighting a specific element of a prior turn for
clarification or confirmation, as in who?). While weak
repair initiation is always possible, and so might be
expected to be a default option, it has been suggested that
the selection of repair formats follows a ‘strongest initiator
rule’ (Clark & Schaefer, 1989), according to which people
select the most specific repair format possible, given
constraints like noise and joint attention.
While backchannels and conversational repair are often
thought to be of a more explicit, inferential character, the
theory of interactive alignment in conversation suggests
common ground to be established through low-level
automatic priming processes (Pickering & Garrod, 2004). It
has been observed across many contexts and studies that
interlocutors engaged in conversation often tend to adapt to
each other’s linguistic behaviors on many levels from
prosody to syntax (Fusaroli & Tylén, 2016). If an
interlocutor, for instance, uses the phrase “I’m sure” to
express confidence, there is an enhanced probability that the
conversational partner will use similar wording later in the
conversation even if other expressions would work just as
well in that context (Fusaroli et al., 2012). Alignment is
thought to percolate between levels of linguistic
representation. Lexical alignment can for instance facilitate
the alignment of other levels (e.g. syntactic choices),
eventually leading to alignment of situation models of the
ongoing activity, that is, common ground (Pickering &
Garrod, 2004). According to Pickering and Garrod, more
explicit negotiation of common ground such as repair and
backchannels are only recruited in cases of communication
problems or misunderstandings. It should be noticed that a
few alternative perspectives have been suggested: Brennan
and Clark (1996) associate alignment with more explicit
negotiations of shared conceptual representations, while
others suggest a context-sensitive mechanism, which
strategically selects for alignment or divergence according
to the functional needs of the ongoing activity (Fusaroli,
Raczaszek-Leonardi, & Tylén, 2014; Healey, Purver, &
Howes, 2014). Common ground is often discussed as a
unified concept foundational to conversation in general.
However, different contexts of conversation are likely to
afford different degrees of explication as well as different
processes and mechanism for the establishment of common
ground. Conversations among pilots and airport control
towers thus require high levels of referential precision
(Prinzo & Britton, 1993), while the average dinner
conversation may be more concerned with maintenance of
social relations (Dunbar, Marriott, & Duncan, 1997), to the
point of ignoring referential misalignments (Galantucci &
Roberts, 2014).
To establish a more refined framework for the
investigation of common ground, we propose an integrative
approach comparing backchannel, alignment and repair

across diverse social activities. In particular, we focus on
free spontaneously occurring interactions – traditionally
favored by conversation analytic approaches – and a welldefined spatial navigation task to be jointly solved through
conversation – traditionally favored by more cognitive and
quantitative approaches. The investigation aims to
determine how common ground is negotiated and
maintained, and whether these processes are modulated by
the social context. Moreover, we will investigate how the
suggested mechanisms of common ground relate to each
other: e.g. if repair and alignment are associated
(Dingemanse et al., 2015), then measures of alignment will
be tapping into both mechanisms.
We predict that (i) the different social contexts involve
distinctive patterns in the dynamics and mechanisms of
common ground, such that they allow an accurate
classification of conversations as free or task-oriented. More
specifically, (ii) baseline frequency of repair, interactive
alignment, and backchannels may be higher in task-oriented
interactions due to requirements for referential precision.
(iii) The quality of the dynamics at work is also predicted to
be different. Particularly, task-oriented conversations, aimed
at coordinative precision and more tightly constrained by
the lab context, will feature more restricted forms of repair.
By contrast, free interactions, which often happen in more
noisy environments and incorporate a wider range of
activities, will involve more open forms of repair. (iv) The
different indices of common ground are not independent
from each other. For instance, we expect repair and
alignment to be related because the repetition of linguistic
forms across speakers is a key formal measure of both. The
latter point underlines the importance of considering
possible relations between repair and alignment when
discussing measures and mechanisms of social coordination.

Methods
Free Social Conversations
We used 18 conversations from the DanTIN corpus
(Steensig et al., 2013), 10 minutes per conversation, for a
total of 4954 speech turns. Data collection was limited to
spontaneous, naturally occurring conversations between
families and friends. Participants often engaged in
additional activities during these conversations (e.g., eating,
or playing games). The average conversation involved 275
speech turns (SD=55 turns), with an average of 58 turns per
interlocutor (SD=52). All conversations were in Danish.
The corpus reflects the diversity of free social interactions,
with seven conversations involving 2 participants, seven
with 3, two with 4, two with 5 participants, and one with 7
participants. We are currently extending this corpus to be
better able to model the effects of number of interlocutors
and participation framework.

Task-oriented Conversations
We used the 44 task-oriented conversations that make up the
DanPass corpus (Grønnum, 2009), totaling 9448 speech

2056

turns. The conversations were aimed at solving the Map
Task (Anderson et al., 1991). The average length of each
conversation was 7.4 minutes (SD=3), with an average 214
turns per conversation (SD=85), and 107 per interlocutor
(SD=42). All conversations were in Danish and involved
only 2 participants in separate booths. We are currently
extending this corpus to include co-present interlocutors.

parts-of-speech in adjacent speech turns uttered by different
interlocutors. To avoid possible lexical alignment confounds
we regressed it out of syntactic alignment as in (Hopkins,
Yuill, & Keller, 2016).

Data Analysis
To assess whether the free social vs. task-oriented nature of
the conversations affected the development and
maintenance of common ground, we employed mixed
effects regression models to predict the presence of
conversational repair (binomial variable), interactive
alignment (continuous variable) and backchannels (binomial
variable) on a turn-by-turn basis. We employed Task
(binomial variable, FC vs. TOC), and Time within
conversation (count variable, quantified as number of turns
from the start) as fixed effects and conversation as random
effects, including a random slope for Time. When the model
did not converge, we removed first the random slope, then
the fixed effect of Time. To determine whether the different
social coordinative mechanisms are related to each other, we
employed two mixed effects regressions. The first predicted
the overall amount of repair initiations in a conversation
(count variable) from the amount of backchannels and
alignment, controlling for the offset of overall amount of
conversational turns. The second predicted the presence of
repair at a turn level (binomial variable) from the presence
of backchannel and the level of alignment of that same turn.
Finally, to establish how distinctive these mechanisms are,
we produced a 5-fold cross-validated predictive regression
assessing whether one could use the presence and amount of
conversational
repair,
interactive
alignment
and
backchannels to identify the nature of the conversation. All
analyses were run using R 3.3.2, RStudio 1.0.136, lme4 1.112, irr 0.84 and tidyverse 1.1.0.

Backchannels
Backchannels were manually coded in 10% of the
transcripts (2 free social and 5 task-oriented conversations).
Based on this, an automatic procedure for coding
backchannels was developed, based on turn length (< 4
words) and presence of the words "ja", "nej", "okay", "nå",
"jo", "mmhm", "jamen", "mmm", and "åh". The system
achieved substantial intercoder agreement with the manual
coding (Kappa=0.62). As we are currently extending and
validating the coding scheme, results based on the current
version of this measure should be treated with caution.

Conversational Repair

A trained analyst identified sequences of other-initiated
repair and classified them according to three crosslinguistically attested format types: open request, which
xical and syntactic
signals
alignment
a problem
and while
frequency
leaving
of repair
open what or where it is;
restricted request, which restricts the problem space by
rpora.
requesting clarification of a specific element of the
problematic turn; and restricted offer, which offers a
candidate perception or understanding for confirmation
(Dingemanse & Enfield, 2015). In addition, 10% of the
transcripts (3 free social and 5 task-oriented conversations)
were analyzed by a second coder. We obtained substantial
intercoder reliability, corresponding to a Kappa of 0.67 for
repairs in general, and 0.79 respectively for open and
restricted repairs (the latter breaking down to 0.4 for
restricted requests and 0.38 for restricted offers).

Results

Interactive Alignment

Backchannels

We calculated lexical and syntactic interactive alignment on
a turn-by-turn basis. Each turn was lemmatized using the
CST lemmatizer for Danish (Jongejan & Haltrup, 2005) and
parts of speech tagged using DKIE (Derczynski, Field, &
Bøgh, 2014). Lexical alignment was calculated as the cosine
similarity between lemmatized words in adjacent speech
turns uttered by different interlocutors. Syntactic alignment
was calculated as the cosine similarity between 2-grams

Backchannels were highly frequent in the corpora (54% of
the speech turns), and more so in TOC (58% of speech
turns), than in FC (48% of speech turns): β = 0.6, SE = 0.04,
p < .001 (see Figure 1). Backchannels also increased over
time (β = 0.07, SE = 0.03, p = .03), but not differently in the
two corpora (β = -0.02, SE = 0.04, p = .57).

2057

Conversational Repair
Conversational repair was highly frequent across both
corpora, in line with previous findings in 12 other languages
(Dingemanse et al., 2015). Repair initiations made up 3% of
speech turns, with an average 45.59 seconds (SD = 54.8)
and 34.03 speech turns (SD = 41.83) between successive
repairs. Task Oriented Conversations showed a higher
frequency of repair (β = 0.4, SE = 0.18, p = .0274) than Free
Conversations, with 31.13 turns (51.13 seconds) between
repair initiations in the former and 39.65 turns (61.3
seconds) between repair initiations in the latter; see Figure
1. Time was not a significant main effect (β = -0.0007, SE =
0.0006, p = .3), nor did it interact with Task (β = 0.0007, SE
= 0.001, p = .6).
Open repair was much more frequent (38.5% of repair) in
free social interactions, than in task oriented interactions
(4% of repair): β = -2.82, SE = 0.39, p < .001. Open repair
tended to decrease in frequency as conversations proceed (β
= -0.005, SE = 0.003, p = .0607), with no interaction with
interaction type (β = 0.007, SE = 0.004, p = .1275).
Restricted request repair was not significantly different
between corpora (FC: 17%, TOC: 22%): β = 0.4, SE = 0.34,
p = .23). There was a marginal tendency for restricted
request repair to increase over time (β = 0.003, SE = 0.0016,
p = .0804), with no interaction with interaction type (β =
0.002, SE = 0.004, p = .5), but the model did not converge
with these factors. Restricted offer repairs were more
frequent in TOC (74% of repair) than in FC (45% of repair):
β = 1.97, SE = 0.48, p < .001. There was no significant main
effect of time (β = 0.003, SE = 0.0024, p = .185), but a
significant interaction with interaction type (β = -0.006, SE
= 0.003, p = .0415) indicating a decrease in the TOC over
time, but not in FC (see Figure 2).

syntactic units); or controlling for increased alignment in
repair turns.

Relations between repair, alignment and
backchannels
The general level of conversational repair in a conversation
was positively associated with the level of backchannel (β =
0.01, SE = 0.003, p < .001) and syntactic alignment (β =
0.44, SE = 0.18, p = .014) and negatively associated with
lexical alignment (β = -0.46, SE = 0.19, p = .014). At a turn
level, conversational repair was associated with increased
lexical alignment (β = 0.98, SE = 0.19, p < .001), a result
driven by the two restricted repair formats. A follow-up
explorative analysis indicates that in TOC, alignment is
indeed much higher for turns containing repair initiations
than for other turns (Lexical: 0.168 vs. 0.102; Syntactic
0.091 vs. 0.048), but not so in FC (Lexical: 0.113 vs. 0.112;
Syntactic: 0.074 vs. 0.087). Interactions between the
different indexes did not significantly improve the
likelihood of the model.

Social coordinative mechanisms as discriminative
patterns
Employing a combination of repair, interactive alignment
and backchannels information, we were able to classify the
transcripts according to their interaction type with an
accuracy of 83.82% (95% CIs: 77.46%–88.97%), a
sensitivity of 84.71% and a specificity of 82.95%, over
chance accuracy of 51.46%. General levels of repair in a
conversation alone gave an accuracy of 61.4% (95% CIs:
53.7%–68.74%). Interactive alignment gave an accuracy of
80.7% (95% CIs: 73.98%-86.33%). Backchannel gave an
accuracy of 63.16% (95% CIs: 55.46%-70.39%).

Discussion

Figure 2: Distribution of repair types in the two corpora.

Interactive alignment
As illustrated by Figure 1, syntactic and lexical alignment is
significantly lower in TOC than FC (lexical: β = -0.14, SE =
0.15, p < .001; syntactic: β = -0.04, SE = 0.009, p < .001).
Alignment significantly decreases over time for lexical (β =
-0.0002, SE = 0.00001, p < .001), but not syntactic (β = 0.00005, SE = 0.00004, p = .8), and the decrease
significantly interacts with Task, being smaller in TOC
(lexical: β = 0.0001, SE = 0.00007, p = .008; syntactic: β =
0.007, SE = 0.00005, p < .001). These patterns hold when
varying distance between speech turns (alignment over
longer stretches of conversation, up to 5 turns of distance);
increasing the unit of analysis (up to 4-grams of lexical or

In this study, we compared different ways in which common
ground may be established and maintained across both taskoriented and free conversations. We predicted that (i) we
would find distinctive patterns of repair, backchannels and
alignment. In particular, (ii) task-oriented conversation
should show higher rates of repair, backchannels and
alignment; (iii) task-oriented conversation should show
lower rates of open requests for clarification; (iv) repair and
alignment should be correlated because of the high
frequency of repetition in restricted repair formats.
We found full support for (i): knowing the amount of
repair, backchannels and alignment present in a
conversation enables accurate (> 80%) discrimination
between task-oriented and free conversations. We also
found partial support for (ii): higher rates of backchannels
and repair in TOC but not alignment; full support for (iii):
lower rates of open requests, making restricted offers the
most frequent in task-oriented interaction; partial support
for (iv): lexical, but not syntactic alignment, is correlated
with repair, an effect driven particularly by restricted repair
formats. As such, our preliminary findings shed new light

2058

on the relations between backchannels, conversational repair
and interactive alignment as measures of social
coordination. If further confirmed with a more controlled
dataset, they might also help clarify the relations between
informal and task-oriented interactions.
Four findings stand out. First, FC and TOC present clear
differences in the mechanisms employed to negotiate and
maintain common ground. As solving the MapTask requires
the construction of a shared representation of the space to
navigate and its landmarks, we observe more explicit
negotiation (repair) and confirmation of common ground. In
line with our previous work, we also find that alignment
seems less crucial in TOC. This could be a consequence of a
division of labor leading to complementary rather than
repeated lexical and syntactic structure among individuals
solving a task (Fusaroli, et al., 2012; Fusaroli & Tylén,
2016). The higher alignment in FC might also indicate the
prevalence of less explicit mechanisms to negotiate
common ground, less likely to lead to face-loss (Bjørndahl,
Fusaroli, Østergaard, & Tylén, 2015; Brown & Levinson,
1978). However, as a previous study reports an opposite
result with TOC showing higher alignment than FC,
ongoing work is implementing more conservative and
comparable techniques, such as the use of surrogate pair
(composed of interlocutors from different conversations)
baselines (Healey, Purver, & Howes, 2010; Hopkins, et al.,
2016). Analogously, further investigation of the temporal
decrease of alignment is warranted.
Second, repair in task-oriented interaction is strongly
skewed towards restricted formats and particularly the
restricted offer format. This provides novel support for the
‘strongest initiator rule’ (Clark & Schaefer 1989), according
to which participants initiate repair using the strongest
repair initiator possible given the circumstances. Prior work
based on informal interaction found that noise and parallel
involvements increased the likelihood of open repair
(Dingemanse & Enfield, 2015; Dingemanse et al., 2015),
essentially by making it comparatively harder to initiate
repair using restricted formats, which require having heard
and understood as least part of the problematic source turn.
Here we replicate this finding in an informal corpus of
Danish interaction, and add a direct comparison with taskoriented interaction. The task-oriented condition takes away
some common causes of perceptual and attentional
difficulties, which should push people towards using more
specific repair formats. This prediction is indeed met: in
task-oriented interaction, the most specific (‘strongest’)
repair initiation format is also the most commonly used.
Third, repair and alignment are intertwined. For instance,
consider the following example, in which the restricted
request consists in the repetition of all the words of the
previous sentence, albeit in a slightly different order:
A: Vi var i Ikea [We were at Ikea]
B: Var I i Ikea, dig og ? [You were at Ikea, you and ?]
A: mmh

While alignment has often been cast as an implicit,
automated background process, and repair as its explicit,
and much rarer, “friend in need,” our parallel investigation
of repair and alignment reveals that widely used formal
measures of alignment also pick up many restricted repair
sequences. This is no surprise —after all, the crucial role of
repetition in repair sequences has long been known— but it
does point to the need for a reappraisal of the relationship
between repair and alignment. Our findings suggest that the
evidential base for a large part of the alignment literature
may include many explicit repair sequences, belying the
common assumption that alignment is an automated, lowlevel process.
Fourth, the combination of backchannels, repair and
alignment allows us to classify interaction type with a high
degree of accuracy. While these results still need to be
generalized to a wider range of social activities and
contexts, they open up new avenues for the possibility of
classifying discourse data and contributing to the growing
field of computer-assisted studies of dialog structure.
Although very encouraging, our findings should be
viewed as preliminary. The two corpora differ in several
aspects: the presence of a task: interlocutors’ physical copresence (in FC but not TOC), number of interlocutors
involved in the conversations (2 in TOC, 2 or more in FC),
and familiarity (possibly higher in FC). All these aspects are
likely to affect conversational dynamics. We are currently
extending the corpora to include full variation along these
dimensions and account for them in the statistical analyses.

Conclusions
A comparative assessment of three mechanisms for the
negotiation of common ground – backchannels,
conversational repair and interactive alignment – highlights
important differences in free and task-oriented
conversations, plausibly related to situational features and
task demands. Our results point to interactions between
these mechanisms, e.g. with restricted repair feeding lexical
alignment, which suggests future research should further
disentangle their reciprocal role. As a theory-driven
quantitative comparative study of conversations, our
approach shows how insights from conversation analysis,
cognitive science and natural language processing can be
combined to contribute to a cumulative science of human
interaction.

Acknowledgments
We thank Amalie Staggemeier for her help with the coding
of the materials, Nina Grønnum for sharing the DanPass
corpus, and Andreas Roepstorff for insightful discussions.
The project was funded through a seed grant from the
Interacting Minds Center, Aarhus University.

References
Anderson, A. H., Bader, M., Bard, E. G., Boyle, E.,
Doherty, G., Garrod, S., . . . Miller, J. (1991). The

2059

HCRC map task corpus. Language and speech,
34(4), 351-366.
Bangerter, A., & Clark, H. H. (2003). Navigating joint
projects with dialogue. Cognitive Science, 27(2),
195-225.
Bjørndahl, J., Fusaroli, R., Østergaard, S., & Tylén, K.
(2015). Agreeing is not enough: The constructive
role of miscommunication. Interaction Studies,
16(3), 495-525.
Brennan, S. E., & Clark, H. H. (1996). Conceptual pacts and
lexical choice in conversation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 22(6), 1482-1493.
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. C. (1978). Universals in
language usage: Politeness phenomena Questions
and politeness: Strategies in social interaction:
Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in
communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine &
S. D. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on Socially
Shared Cognition. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Clark, H. H., & Krych, M. A. (2004). Speaking while
monitoring addressees for understanding. Journal
of memory and language, 50(1), 62-81.
Clark, H. H., & Schaefer, E. F. (1989). Contributing to
discourse. Cognitive Science, 13, 259-294.
Dale, R., Fusaroli, R., Duran, N., & Richardson, D. C.
(2013). The self-organization of human interaction.
Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 59, 43-95.
de Ruiter, J. P., & Albert, S. (2017). An Appeal for a
Methodological Fusion of Conversation Analysis
and Experimental Psychology. Research on
Language and Social Interaction, 50(1), 90-107.
Derczynski, L., Field, C. V., & Bøgh, K. S. (2014). DKIE:
Open Source Information Extraction for Danish.
Paper presented at the EACL.
Dingemanse, M., & Enfield, N. J. (2015). Other-initiated
repair across languages: towards a typology of
conversational structures. Open Linguistics, 1(1),
96-118.
Dingemanse, M., Roberts, S. G., Baranova, J., Blythe, J.,
Drew, P., Floyd, S., . . . Manrique, E. (2015).
Universal
principles
in
the
repair
of
communication problems. PLOS ONE, 10(9),
e0136100.
Dunbar, R. I. M., Marriott, A., & Duncan, N. D. C. (1997).
Human conversational behavior. Human Nature,
8(3), 231-246.
Fusaroli, R., Bahrami, B., Olsen, K., Rees, G., Frith, C. D.,
Roepstorff, A., & Tylén, K. (2012). Coming to
terms: an experimental quantification of the
coordinative benefits of linguistic interaction.
Psychological Science, 23, 931-939.
Fusaroli, R., Raczaszek-Leonardi, J., & Tylén, K. (2014).
Dialog as interpersonal synergy. New Ideas in
Psychology, 32, 147-157.

Fusaroli,

R., & Tylén, K. (2016). Investigating
conversational dynamics: Interactive alignment,
Interpersonal synergy, and collective task
performance. Cognitive Science, 40(1), 145-171.
Galantucci, B., & Roberts, G. (2014). Do we notice when
communication goes awry? an investigation of
people's sensitivity to coherence in spontaneous
conversation. PLOS ONE, 9(7), e103182.
Grønnum, N. (2009). A Danish phonetically annotated
spontaneous speech corpus (DanPASS). Speech
Communication, 51(7), 594-603.
Healey, P., Purver, M., & Howes, C. (2010). Structural
divergence in dialogue. Paper presented at the In
Proceedings of the Conference on Architectures
and Mechanisms for Language Processing.
Healey, P., Purver, M., & Howes, C. (2014). Divergence in
dialogue. Plos One, 9(6).
Hopkins, Z., Yuill, N., & Keller, B. (2016). Children with
autism align syntax in natural conversation.
Applied Psycholinguistics, 37(2), 347–370.
Jefferson, G. (1972). Side sequences. In D. N. Sudnow
(Ed.), Studies in social interaction. New York, NY:
Free Press.
Jongejan, B., & Haltrup, D. (2005). the CST Lemmatiser.
Center for Sprogteknologi, University of
Copenhagen version, 2.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic
psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 27, 169-190.
Prinzo, O. V., & Britton, T. W. (1993). ATC/pilot voice
communications-a survey of the literature: DTIC
Document.
Sacks, H. (1992). Lectures on Conversation, 2 Vols, ed. G.
Jefferson, with introductions by EA Schegloff:
Oxford: Blackwell.
Schegloff, E. A. (1982). Discourse as an interactional
achievement: Some uses of ‘uh huh’and other
things that come between sentences. Analyzing
discourse: Text and talk, 71, 93.
Schegloff, E. A., Jefferson, G., & Sacks, H. (1977). The
preference for self-correction in the organization of
repair in conversation. Language, 361-382.
Steensig, J., Brøcker, K. K., Grønkjær, C., Hamann, M. G.
T., Hansen, R. P., Jørgensen, M., . . . Pedersen, H.
F. (2013). The DanTIN project–creating a platform
for describing the grammar of Danish talk-ininteraction. Paper presented at the New
Perspectives on Speech in Action: Proceedings of
the 2nd SJUSK Conference on Contemporary
Speech Habits, Samfundslitteratur, Frederiksberg.
Yngve, V. H. (1970). On getting a word in edgewise.
Papers from the Sixth Regional Meeting of the
Chicago Linguistic Society, 567-577.

2060

