Modeling scope ambiguity resolution as pragmatic inference:
Formalizing differences in child and adult behavior
K.J. Savinelli, Gregory Scontras, and Lisa Pearl
{ksavinel, g.scontras, lpearl} @uci.edu
University of California, Irvine
Abstract

order of these elements in the utterance (i.e., Every precedes
n’t). In contrast, for the inverse scope interpretation in (1b),
this isomorphism does not hold, with the scope relationship
(i.e., ¬ scopes over ∀) opposite the linear order of the elements in the utterance. Musolino hypothesized that this lack
of isomorphism would make the inverse scope interpretation
more difficult to access. In line with this prediction, Conroy
et al. (2008) found that when adults are time-restricted, they
favor the surface scope interpretation. We thus see a potential
role for processing factors in children’s inability to access the
inverse scope. Perhaps children, with their still-developing
processing abilities, can’t allocate sufficient processing resources to reliably access the inverse scope interpretation.

Investigations of scope ambiguity resolution suggest that child
behavior differs from adult behavior, with children struggling
to access inverse scope interpretations. For example, children
often fail to accept Every horse didn’t succeed to mean not all
the horses succeeded. Current accounts of children’s scope behavior involve both pragmatic and processing factors. Inspired
by these accounts, we use the Rational Speech Act framework
to articulate a formal model that yields a more precise, explanatory, and predictive description of the observed developmental behavior.
Keywords: Rational Speech Act model, pragmatics, processing, language acquisition, ambiguity resolution, scope

Introduction
If someone says “Every horse didn’t jump over the fence,”
do you think any horses made it over the fence? If you
think not, then you’ve interpreted this utterance as something like (1a). In contrast, if you think it’s possible some
horses made it, you’ve interpreted this utterance as something
like (1b). These two different interpretations are possible because the utterance is scopally ambiguous. That is, it contains
two scope operators: a quantifier (every=∀) and a negation
(n’t=¬). Either element can take scope over the other (indicated as >> in (1)), and so yield two different interpretations.
(1)

Every horse didn’t jump over the fence.
a. ∀ >> ¬ (surface scope):
None of the horses jumped over the fence.
b. ¬ >> ∀ (inverse scope):
Not all of the horses jumped over the fence.

While adults can access both interpretations given appropriate context, 5-year-old children typically struggle to obtain
the inverse scope in (1b) (Musolino, 1998; Lidz & Musolino,
2002; Musolino & Lidz, 2006; Musolino, 2006; Viau et al.,
2010; Tieu, 2015). For example, in a context where two out of
three horses did in fact jump over the fence, only the inverse
scope interpretation in (1b) is true. Adults charitably interpret the ambiguous utterance in a way that makes it a true
statement (i.e., with the inverse scope in a two-out-of-three
scenario), but 5-year-olds stick with the surface interpretation
in (1a), which is false. Why does children’s behavior differ
from adults’ in this context?
Previous accounts of children’s scope interpretation behavior have recognized that both processing and pragmatic
factors may contribute to non-adult-like behavior. Musolino
(1998, 2006) observed that the surface scope interpretation in
(1a) may be easier to process because the scope relationship
in the semantics (i.e., ∀ scopes over ¬) aligns with the linear

In addition to this processing factor, Gualmini et al. (2008)
noted that discourse properties, such as what children consider the question under discussion (QUD), may impact their
scope interpretation behavior. Formal theories of pragmatics suggest that all discourse transpires with respect to some
QUD, whether implicit or explicit; utterances in the discourse
need to (at least partially) answer the QUD to be pragmatically felicitous (Roberts, 2012). Gualmini and colleagues
(Hulsey et al., 2004; Gualmini et al., 2008) suggest that children are very sensitive to this requirement. In particular, children may be able to access the inverse scope interpretation but
nonetheless choose the surface scope interpretation because
it better answers the perceived QUD in the contrived experimental setups. So, children’s observed behavior would derive
from a still-developing ability to manage the contextual information available and correctly infer the intended QUD.
Thus, children’s developing processing and pragmatic abilities may both be a source of the observed non-adult-like behavior (Viau et al., 2010), though current experimental studies have struggled to clearly isolate the influence of each type
of factor. To this end, we formally articulate the mechanism of scope ambiguity resolution using the Bayesian Rational Speech Act (RSA) computational modeling framework
(Frank & Goodman, 2012; Goodman & Frank, 2016) in order to identify the separate contributions of processing and
pragmatic factors.
We first summarize key experimental results from the literature on child scope ambiguity resolution, noting three core
variables (one processing, two pragmatic) that affect children’s scope disambiguation behavior. We also highlight the
nature of the task children are being asked to engage in, which
we then formally articulate using an RSA model that specifies
the role of each of these three variables. Our results suggest
that pragmatic factors play a larger role than processing fac-

3064

tors in explaining children’s non-adult-like scope ambiguity
resolution behavior, and the computational modeling framework allows us to understand exactly why that’s so. These
results additionally suggest targeted future behavioral experiments to verify the impact of the specific pragmatic factors
we identify. More generally, our model yields a more precise, explanatory, and predictive description of the observed
developmental scope ambiguity resolution behavior.

and Lidz augmented the basic TVJT to include an additional
contrast condition in which the puppet precedes its negative
scopally-ambiguous utterance with a contrasting affirmative
clause. This additional clause describes a previous successful
story action (i.e., early-success), such as Every horse jumped
over the log, but every horse didn’t jump over the fence. This
early-success contrast manipulation increased children’s willingness to accept the scopally-ambiguous utterance in the
not-all scenario: Children in the baseline condition endorsed
the puppet’s statement just 15% of the time, while children in
the early-success affirmative context condition endorsed the
puppet’s statement 60% of the time. Viau et al. (2010) later
replicated this increase in utterance endorsement using only
an early-success story context. That is, the utterance endorsement rate was maintained by an early-success story context
alone, and children didn’t need an explicit contrast clause in
the test utterance.

Background: Experimental results
Children’s ability to access the inverse scope interpretation
has been shown to be sensitive to manipulations of experimental context. The methodology typically used to assess
children’s scope disambiguation is the Truth Value Judgment
Task (TVJT; Crain & McKee, 1985). In the basic TVJT, children are presented with a background story about the actors—
for example, horses engaging in some activities. After this
background story, children watch as the horses attempt to
complete an action, such as jump over a fence. The critical
not-all result state meant to prompt the inverse scope interpretation is illustrated in Figure 1, where the white horse fails
to jump over the fence.

Notably, the early-success affirmative context manipulation potentially changes several aspects of the experimental
context. First, it can shift participants’ expectations about
successful outcomes in the experimental world. This shift
then potentially increases the salience of a QUD targeting this
success, such as “Did all the horses succeed?” (all?). Recognizing this QUD’s potential significance, Gualmini (2004)
attempted to manipulate the experimental context so it favored the all? QUD. With all? as the salient QUD, children’s endorsement of a scopally-ambiguous utterance that
perfectly answers all? in the critical not-all scenario increased to 90%. Even for a scopally-ambiguous utterance that
does not answer the all? QUD, children’s endorsement rate
was at 50%—markedly higher than the 15% baseline from
the original study by Musolino and Lidz (2006). This finding
highlights that privileging the all? QUD increases children’s
utterance endorsement in these scenarios.

Figure 1: Sample not-all scenario from Musolino and Lidz
(2006): 2 of 3 horses succeed at jumping over the fence.
In this scenario, the surface scope interpretation of the
scopally-ambiguous utterance Every horse didn’t jump over
the fence (i.e., none of the horses jumped over the fence) is
false, and the inverse scope interpretation (i.e., not all of the
horses jumped over the fence) is true. A puppet then says the
scopally-ambiguous utterance, and the child is asked to state
if the puppet is right. That is, the child is asked whether s/he
would endorse the puppet’s utterance as a true description of
the scenario. Typically, children refuse to endorse the puppet’s utterance, saying that the puppet is wrong. This behavior has been interpreted as children failing to access the inverse scope interpretation that would make the utterance true.
Interestingly, various alterations to the TVJT setup have
yielded more adult-like behavior in children, namely greater
rates of endorsing the puppet’s ambiguous utterance in not-all
scenarios. Musolino and Lidz (2006) observed that negation
in an utterance might require certain felicity conditions to be
met. In particular, negated utterances require a preceding affirmative context to contrast with (Wason, 1965). Musolino

A third potential impact of the affirmative context manipulation involves scope access. By altering the experimental
world expectations and/or QUD to increase access to the inverse scope, the inverse scope interpretation may also become
more accessible for later use. Viau et al. (2010) term this
structural priming. Children who are better able to access the
inverse scope are then more likely to endorse the scopallyambiguous utterance in subsequent not-all scenarios. Viau
et al. investigated structural priming explicitly by attempting
to directly alter the accessibility of the inverse scope interpretation. In one modified TVJT, they attempted to prime
the access of the inverse scope interpretation, and in another
modified TVJT, they attempted to directly prime the inverse
scope’s logical structure (e.g., ¬ >> ∀).
The first structural priming manipulation was implemented
via the now-familiar affirmative context (i.e., pragmatic) manipulation. For the first three trials, the prior experimental context indicated successful outcomes and the effect was
that children endorsed the scopally-ambiguous utterance 50%
of the time. Crucially, the subsequent three trials removed
the supportive affirmative context manipulation—yet children

3065

continued to not only endorse the scopally-ambiguous utterance, but to endorse it more than they had before (80%). Viau
et al. (2010) attribute this result to a priming effect of the inverse interpretation from the first three trials. Interestingly,
the increase in utterance endorsement could be due to priming
multiple factors that are products of the affirmative context
manipulation: (i) the expectations about successful outcomes
in the experimental world, (ii) the salience of the all? QUD,
or (iii) the ease of access to the inverse scope interpretation.
The second structural priming manipulation removed the
affirmative context story in the first three trials. In its place,
children were asked whether they would endorse a scopallyunambiguous utterance (e.g., “Not every horse jumped over
the fence”) whose interpretation had logical operators in the
same order as the inverse scope interpretation of the scopallyambiguous utterance (e.g., ¬ >> ∀). Children endorsed
this utterance 80% of the time. In the subsequent three trials, children were asked if they would endorse the scopallyambiguous utterance in the same experimental scenario—and
their endorsement rate remained at 80%. Viau et al. (2010) interpret this effect as priming of the relevant logical form: The
inverse scope was easier to access in the scopally-ambiguous
utterance because it was so recently accessed in the unambiguous utterances. The authors argue that this priming effect
proceeded in the absence of manipulations to the pragmatic
context, yet even here, there may still be pragmatic factors at
work. The unambiguous utterance accomplishes three things:
(i) it provides an instance of the ¬ >> ∀ configuration, (ii) it
provides information about successful outcomes, and (iii) it
suggests the all? QUD, answering it with no. Thus, in this
attempt to prime the inverse logical form, the authors may
have also altered expectations about the pragmatic context of
the experiment, as related to the successful outcomes and relevant QUDs.
These experimental studies highlight at least three core factors (two pragmatic, one processing) that underlie children’s
utterance endorsement behavior in the TVJT: (i) pragmatic:
expectations about the experimental world (e.g., how likely
successful outcomes are), (ii) pragmatic: expectations about
the QUD (e.g., whether all outcomes were successful), and
(iii) processing: the accessibility of the inverse scope (i.e.,
the ease by which the logical form is accessed). These experimental studies have also supported different theoretical proposals for the source of children’s differences. The proposals
split on whether they attribute the differences solely to an inability to manage contextual information (i.e., pragmatic factors; Gualmini, 2008) or whether processing deficits also significantly contribute (i.e., difficulty accessing inverse scope;
Viau et al., 2010). Importantly, it is not obvious from any
of the existing experimental manipulations how to separate
the independent contributions of these components. To capture and independently manipulate the contributions of each
of the pragmatic and processing factors, we formalize their
role in the interpretation of scopally-ambiguous utterances,
using tools from probabilistic modeling.

The model
We model ambiguity resolution within the Bayesian Rational Speech Act (RSA) framework (Goodman & Frank,
2016). This framework views language understanding as
a social reasoning process. A pragmatic listener L1 interprets an utterance by reasoning about a cooperative speaker
S1 who is trying to inform a literal listener L0 about the
world. Our model is a “lifted-variable” extension wherein
the ambiguous utterance’s literal semantics is parameterized
by interpretation-fixing variables (e.g., the relative scope of
the quantificational elements; Lassiter & Goodman, 2013).
Hearing an ambiguous utterance, a pragmatic listener reasons jointly about the true state of the world (e.g., how many
horses jumped over the fence), the scope interpretation that
the speaker had in mind (i.e., surface vs. inverse), as well as
the likely QUD that the utterance addresses (e.g., all?).
To connect our model’s predictions with the available
TVJT data, we follow Degen and Goodman (2014) and
Tessler and Goodman (2016), modeling participants’ TVJT
behavior as the (relative) endorsement of a pragmatic speaker
S2 for an utterance about an observed situation. That is,
we model whether a speaker would endorse the scopallyambiguous utterance as a description of the observed state,
or whether the speaker would prefer to say nothing at all. The
pragmatic speaker S2 makes this decision by reasoning about
the probability that a pragmatic listener L1 (who is reasoning
about a speaker S1 reasoning about a literal listener L0 ) would
arrive at the correct world state after hearing the utterance.
We take world states w ∈ W to correspond to the number of successful outcomes, for example, the horses that
successfully jumped over the fence (W = {0, 1, 2, 3}). We
assume a simple truth-functional semantics where an utterance u denotes a mapping from world states to truth values
(Bool = {true, false}). We parameterize this truth function so that it depends on the scope interpretation i ∈ I =
{inverse, surface}, [[u]]i : W → Bool. We consider two alternative utterances u ∈ U: the null utterance (i.e., saying
nothing at all, and so choosing not to endorse the utterance)
and the scopally ambiguous utterance amb (e.g., “Every horse
didn’t jump over the fence”). So, U = {null, amb}. The utterance semantics appears in (2), where the parameterization
only impacts the truth value for utterance amb (since that’s
when multiple interpretations are available). If inverse is
active, this corresponds to the not all reading, and so is true
as long as not all (i.e., w6=3) outcomes were successful. If
surface is active, this corresponds to the none reading, and
so is only true in world state 0.
(2)

3066

Utterance semantics [[u]]i :
a. [[null]]i = true
b. [[amb]]i = if i = inverse [[inverse]],
else [[surface]]
where:
[[inverse]] = λw. w 6= 3
[[surface]] = λw. w = 0

We consider three QUDs q ∈ Q: (i) “How many horses
made it over?” (how-many?), (ii) “Did all the horses make
it over?” (all?), and (iii) “Did none of the horses make it
over?” (none?). The QUDs serve as projections from the
inferred world state to the relevant dimension of meaning,
q : W → X (Kao, Wu, et al., 2014; Kao, Bergen, & Goodman, 2014). In practice, the QUDs establish partitions on
the possible world states, as shown in (3): how-many? is an
identity function on world states, all? returns true only if
all three outcomes were successful, and none? returns true
only if none of the outcomes were successful.
(3)

QUD semantics [[q]]:
a. [[how-many?]] = λw. w
b. [[all?]] = λw. w = 3
c. [[none?]] = λw. w = 0

The literal listener L0 has prior uncertainty about the true
state, P(w), and updates beliefs about w conditioned on the
the literal semantics. That is, L0 restricts prior beliefs to those
worlds that [[u]]i maps to true. The function δ[[u]]i (w) maps the
Boolean truth value to a probability, 1 or 0.
PL0 (w|u, i) ∝ δ[[u]]i (w) · P(w)
To capture the notion that communication proceeds relative
to a specific QUD q, L0 must infer not only the true world
state w, but also the value of the QUD applied to that world
state, [[q]](w) = x.
PL0 (x|u, i, q) ∝

∑ δx=[[q]](w) · PL0 (w|u, i)
w

The speaker S1 chooses an utterance u in proportion to its
utility in communicating about the true state of the world w
with respect to the QUD q, [[q]](w) = x. Thus, the speaker
maximizes the probability that L0 arrives at the intended x
from u. This selection is implemented via a softmax function
(exp) and free parameter α, which controls how rational the
speaker will be in utterance selection.
PS1 (u|w, i, q) ∝ exp(α · log(L0 (x|u, i, q)))
Utterance interpretation happens at the level of the pragmatic listener L1 , who interprets an utterance u to jointly infer the world state w, the interpretation i, and the QUD q. We
therefore model ambiguity resolution as pragmatic inference
over an under-specified utterance semantics (i.e., the interpretation variable i). To perform this inference, L1 inverts the S1
model by Bayes rule, and so the joint probability of w, i, and
q is proportional to the likelihood of S1 producing utterance
u given world state w, interpretation i, and QUD q, as well as
the priors on w, i, and q.
PL1 (w, i, q|u) ∝ PS1 (u|w, i, q) · P(w) · P(i) · P(q)
To model the utterance endorsement implicit in TVJT, we
need one more level of inference. The pragmatic speaker S2
observes the true world state w and selects u by inverting the

L1 model, thus maximizing the probability that a pragmatic
listener would arrive at w from u by summing over possible
interpretations i and QUDs q that accompany world w.
PS2 (u|w) ∝ exp(log ∑ PL1 (w, i, q|u))
i,q

To generate model predictions, we must fix various model
parameters. The S1 speaker rationality parameter α > 0 is set
to 2.5. The priors P(w) and P(q) correspond to expectations
for the discourse context (i.e., likely world states or QUDs).
In the default case, we set these priors to be uniform over their
possible values: P(w=0) = P(w=1) = P(w=2) = P(w=3) = 14 ;
P(how-many?) = P(all?) = P(none?) = 13 . The interpretation prior P(i) corresponds to how easy it is to access the inverse scope interpretation. Experimental literature on scope
ambiguity resolution suggests that speakers more readily access the surface interpretation (Anderson, 2004; Conroy et al.,
2008). We model this tendency by setting these default values: P(surface)=0.7 and P(inverse)=0.3. Importantly, to
better understand children’s utterance endorsement behavior
with scopally-ambiguous utterances, we can independently
manipulate the values of the priors on W , Q, and I, and observe their impact on utterance endorsement.

Results
To test how pragmatic and processing factors contribute to
non-adult-like utterance endorsement in the TVJT, we systematically manipulate the relevant priors to favor specific
parameter values, shown in Figure 2.
For the world state prior (Figure 2, left), we systematically
favor specific world states by setting their prior probability to
0.9; if a world state is not favored, it receives a prior probability of 0.1/3 = 0.033. Holding the QUD and scope priors at
their default values, we see a marked increase in endorsement
of the ambiguous utterance in the not-all scenario as beliefs
about horse success increase. Utterance endorsement is at
its lowest (0.25) when prior knowledge suggests that horses
are particularly unlikely to succeed at jumping; utterance endorsement is at its highest (i.e., most adult-like: 0.90) when
we believe horses are very likely to succeed.
Just as with the world state prior, we can systematically
manipulate the QUD prior (Figure 2, center). Favored QUDs
receive a prior probability of 0.9; other QUDs receive a prior
probability of 0.05. Holding the other priors at their default
values, we see an increase in utterance endorsement from the
none? (did no horses succeed?; 0.28) to how-many? (how
many horses succeeded?; 0.37) to all? (did all horses succeed?; 0.64) QUDs. The model predicts the most adult-like
behavior when the QUD concerns whether all the horses succeeded.
Finally, for the binary scope prior (Figure 2, right), we systematically manipulate the prior probability of inverse from
0.1 to 0.9. Holding the other priors at their default values,
we see a monotonic increase in utterance endorsement as the
probability of inverse increases. At its most adult-like, the

3067

Figure 2: Model predictions for ambiguous utterance endorsement (e.g., Every horse didn’t jump over the fence) in a not-all
scenario (e.g., two-out-of-three horses jump over the fence). Lower endorsement probability corresponds to less adult-like (i.e.,
more child-like) behavior. For the pragmatic variables (world state, QUD), the favored parameter value receives most of the
prior probability weight (P( f avored) = 0.9). For the processing variable (scope), the prior corresponds to how strongly the
inverse scope is favored.
model predicts an endorsement probability of 0.57 when the
prior probability of inverse is at its highest (0.9)—at its lowest (0.1), endorsement only drops to 0.4.
To summarize, the world state and QUD priors have a more
dramatic impact on utterance endorsement than the scope
prior. There are two main reasons for this. First, for the world
state prior, when expectations favor success (i.e., w = 3), the
ambiguous utterance is maximally informative regardless of
the scope interpretation it receives: amb communicates to a
listener that prior expectations do not hold (i.e., None/Not all
of the horses succeeded goes against the expectation that all
three horses would succeed). So, amb is particularly useful
for communicating about the a priori unlikely not-all world
states that appear in the experimental scenarios. Second, for
the QUD manipulation, when all? is favored, either interpretation of amb fully resolves the QUD: whenever amb is true
(i.e., whether None or Not all the horses succeeded), it is not
the case that all the horses succeeded. A pragmatic speaker
recognizes the utility of amb as an answer to all? in a not-all
world state, irrespective of the intended scope interpretation.

Figure 3: Model predictions for ambiguous utterance endorsement when optimal world state (w = 3) and optimal
QUD (all?) are favored (P( f avored) = .9).
So far, we have considered independent manipulations to
the factors of interest. Figure 3 shows the interaction of all
three factors for utterance endorsement when w = 3 and all?

are favored. Here we see the additive effects of the world state
and QUD priors; together, they lead to near-total endorsement
of the ambiguous utterance. We also see more clearly the relatively small contribution of the scope prior, where changing the prior probability of inverse from 0.1 to 0.9 leads
to just a 0.01 increase in endorsement probability. Thus, we
see how the priors on the pragmatic factors overwhelm the
processing scope prior. When the optimal (i.e., optimal for
endorsement) QUD and world state are favored, even when
inverse is highly inaccessible (i.e., P(inverse) = 0.1), we
still predict massive utterance endorsement (0.99).

Discussion
Our model of ambiguity resolution qualitatively captures the
changes in children’s utterance endorsement from the experimental literature; our results suggest that when it comes to
understanding non-adult-like behavior in the TVJT, there is a
stronger role for the pragmatics of context management (as
realized in priors on world state and QUD) than for grammatical processing (as realized in the prior on scope interpretations), although there is likely a role for both. So, the
observed failure of children to endorse scopally-ambiguous
utterances in not-all scenarios likely stems more from children’s beliefs about the world of the experiment (e.g., whether
horses are a priori likely to succeed) and about the topic of
conversation (e.g., whether the conversational goal is to determine if all the horses succeeded), than their inability to
grammatically derive the inverse scope interpretation in real
time. Indeed, our model predicts the highest rates of utterance endorsement to occur when resolving the scope ambiguity is irrelevant for communicating successfully about the
not-all world—that is, when expectations favor total success
(i.e., w = 3), or when the QUD asks if all? of the horses
succeeded. In either case, both scope interpretations serve to
inform a listener, either that the a priori likely w = 3 isn’t true
or that the answer to the all? QUD is no.
These results also underscore the need for well-defined

3068

mapping hypotheses from observed experimental behavior to
the psychological processes they inform, particularly for the
sophisticated reasoning that occurs in tasks like the TVJT.
In our brief review of the experimental literature, we were
careful to point out alternative interpretations of the various
experimental manipulations and their potential, unintended
pragmatic consequences. At the very least, we hope to have
demonstrated that utterance endorsement is not simple. A
TVJT participant must reason recursively about the potential
informativity of the utterance, attending to knowledge about
the world of the experiment and the likely topic of conversation. That children stumble when attempting to perform these
complex recursive inferences isn’t so surprising. We suggest
that a plausible source of differences in child and adult behavior on the TVJT is children’s inability to successfully manage
pragmatic information. We therefore propose to move the discussion away from the fragility of accessing inverse scope in
children as a grammatical processing deficit and toward the
complexity of behavior that scope interpretations require.
In addition to formalizing the pragmatics of ambiguity resolution in context, our results also motivate future experimental investigations that explicitly measure children’s (and
adults’) expectations about the world and topic of conversation. We saw how past experiments did not completely deconfound the relevant factors. Perhaps the most straightforward
way of testing these factors’ effects is to measure the prior
knowledge that participants bring to bear in the TVJT. These
explicit measurements of pragmatic context can then form the
basis of future modeling studies in this framework that could
quantitatively match the behavioral results.
More generally, our results provide the foundation for more
complete theories of the developmental process underlying
scope ambiguity resolution. Children’s relative lack of experience managing world and conversational knowledge likely
contributes to their sensitivity to the experimental context. In
short, five-year-olds may know the right interpretation, but
they’re still figuring out whether it’s the best answer in the
context of the experimental conversation.

References
Anderson, C. (2004). The structure and real-time comprehension of quantifier scope ambiguity (Unpublished doctoral
dissertation). Northwestern University.
Conroy, A., Fults, S., Musolino, J., & Lidz, J. (2008). Surface
scope as a default: The effect of time in resolving quantifier scope ambiguity. In Poster presented at the 21st cuny
conference on sentence processing, march (Vol. 13).
Crain, S., & McKee, C. (1985). The acquisition of structural
restrictions on anaphora. In Proceedings of nels (Vol. 15,
pp. 94–110).
Degen, J., & Goodman, N. D. (2014). Lost your marbles? the
puzzle of dependent measures in experimental pragmatics.
In Proceedings of the 36th annual conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 397–402).

Frank, M. C., & Goodman, N. D. (2012). Predicting pragmatic reasoning in language games. Science, 336, 998998.
Goodman, N. D., & Frank, M. C. (2016). Pragmatic language interpretation as probabilistic inference. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 20, 818-829.
Gualmini, A. (2004). Some knowledge children don’t lack.
Linguistics, 957–982.
Gualmini, A. (2008). The rise and fall of isomorphism. Lingua, 118(8), 1158–1176.
Gualmini, A., Hulsey, S., Hacquard, V., & Fox, D. (2008).
The question–answer requirement for scope assignment.
Natural language semantics, 16(3), 205–237.
Hulsey, S., Hacquard, V., Fox, D., & Gualmini, A. (2004).
The question-answer requirement and scope assignment.
MIT working papers in Linguistics, 48, 71–90.
Kao, J. T., Bergen, L., & Goodman, N. D. (2014). Formalizing the pragmatics of metaphor understanding. In Proceedings of the 36th annual meeting of the cognitive science
society (pp. 719–724).
Kao, J. T., Wu, J. Y., Bergen, L., & Goodman, N. D. (2014).
Nonliteral understanding of number words. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 111(33), 12002–12007.
Lassiter, D., & Goodman, N. D. (2013). Context, scale structure, and statistics in the interpretation of positive-form adjectives. In Semantics and Linguistic Theory (SALT) 23
(pp. 587–610).
Lidz, J., & Musolino, J. (2002). Children’s command of
quantification. Cognition, 84(2), 113–154.
Musolino, J. (1998). Universal grammar and the acquisition
of semantic knowledge: An experimental investigation into
the acquisition of quantifiernegation interaction in english
(Doctoral dissertation). University of Maryland, College
Park.
Musolino, J. (2006). Structure and meaning in the acquisition of scope. In Semantics in acquisition (pp. 141–166).
Springer.
Musolino, J., & Lidz, J. (2006). Why children aren’t universally successful with quantification. Linguistics, 44, 817852.
Roberts, C. (2012). Information structure in discourse: Towards an integrated formal theory of pragmatics. Semantics
and Pragmatics, 5(6), 1–69.
Tessler, M. H., & Goodman, N. D. (2016). A pragmatic theory of generic language. (http://arxiv.org/abs/1608.02926)
Tieu, L. (2015). Isomorphism for all (but not both): Floating as a means to investigate scope. Language Acquisition(ahead-of-print), 1–16.
Viau, J., Lidz, J., & Musolino, J. (2010). Priming of abstract
logical representations in 4-year-olds. Language Acquisition, 17(1-2), 26–50.
Wason, P. C. (1965). The contexts of plausible denial. Journal of verbal learning and verbal behavior, 4(1), 7–11.

3069

