Modeling Comprehension Processes via Automated Analyses of Dialogism
Mihai Dascalu (mihai.dascalu@cs.pub.ro)
Department of Computer Science, University Politehnica of Bucharest
Bucharest, 060042 Romania

Laura K. Allen (laurakallen@asu.edu)
Danielle S. McNamara (dsmcnama@asu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ, 85287-2111 USA

Stefan Trausan-Matu (stefan.trausan@cs.pub.ro)
Department of Computer Science, University Politehnica of Bucharest
Bucharest, 060042 Romania

Scott A. Crossley (scrossley@gsu.edu)
Department of Applied Linguistics/ESL, Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA, 30303 USA
Abstract
Dialogism provides the grounds for building a comprehensive
model of discourse and it is focused on the multiplicity of
perspectives (i.e., voices). Dialogism can be present in any
type of text, while voices become themes or recurrent topics
emerging from the discourse. In this study, we examine the
extent that differences between self-explanations and thinkalouds can be detected using computational textual indices
derived from dialogism. Students (n = 68) read a text about
natural selection and were instructed to generate selfexplanations or think-alouds. The linguistic features of these
text responses were analyzed using ReaderBench, an
automated text analysis tool. A discriminant function analysis
using these features correctly classified 80.9% of the students’
assigned experimental conditions (self-explanation vs. think
aloud). Our results indicate that self-explanation promotes
text processing that focuses on connected ideas, rather than
separate voices or points of view covering multiple topics.
Keywords: comprehension; discourse analysis; dialogism;
polyphonic model; self-explanation; think-aloud

Introduction
Research on text comprehension suggests that skilled and
less skilled readers differ in the frequency and type of
strategies they employ while processing texts (Millis,
Magliano, & Todaro, 2006; Oakhill & Yuill, 1996). Skilled
readers, for instance, generate more inferences while
reading, which allows them to establish connections
between information in the text and their prior knowledge
(Kintsch, 1998). Although not all readers naturally make
these connections while reading, students can be prompted
to generate inferences through instructions to self-explain
(McNamara, 2004). Self-explanation is a response to text or
discourse that is directed toward oneself, with an explicit
purpose to construct meaning from the text. Explanations
are statements generated aloud, through text, or silently to
oneself, that go beyond the information provided explicitly

in the text to explain the ideas, their relations, and their
underlying meaning.
In the context of text comprehension, self-explanation can
improve readers’ understanding of complex topics
(McNamara, 2004, in press). From the point of view of
theories within the field of text and discourse
comprehension, the benefits of self-explanation have been
attributed to increased bridging and elaborative inferences
(i.e., making connections to prior ideas in the text or to prior
knowledge) and to increased causal inferences (e.g., making
connections to causal events; (Allen, McNamara, &
McCrudden, 2015).
Instructions to self-explain can be contrasted with those to
think-aloud, which ask readers to report whatever thoughts
are available to them while reading a text (e.g., readers
report these thoughts after reading each sentence). Asking a
reader to think-aloud reveals their use of comprehension
strategies, including any inferences they generate while
reading, but does not alter a reader’s natural comprehension
processes (McNamara & Magliano, 2009).
In this study, we compare the comprehension processes
associated with self-explanation and think-aloud from the
lens of dialogism. Dialogism refers to a wider perspective of
dialogue which is assumed to be present within any verbal
or non-verbal language activity. Dialogism originates from
the Russian philosopher and philologist Mikhail Bakhtin
(1981, 1984) who proposed that there is an implicit and
multi-voiced
dialogue
underlying
sense-making,
communication, actions, and interactions (Linell, 2009).
Accordingly, voices represent distinct positions, points of
view, or ideas, that impact the nature and outcome of a
discourse. Multi-voicedness, may drive to polyphony, which
is a central concept within dialogism, and a focus of the
polyphonic model, which is essential to this study (TrausanMatu & Rebedea, 2009).
Dialogue traditionally refers to communication between
two or more individuals. Indeed, within the context of

1884

Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, dialogism has
been considered better suited as a theoretical framework for
multi-party conversations than classic Natural Language
Processing theories that focus on phone-like interactions
between two interlocutors (Trausan-Matu & Rebedea,
2009).
Bakhtin, however, stressed the point that all text is multivocal, wherein our speech (all of our utterances) is filled
with others’ words (Bakhtin, 1986, p. 89). In this view, the
concept of dialogue can be extended to include a wider
variety of language activities. For instance, it may also refer
to an internal dialogue within oneself or a dialogue amongst
inner voices contrasting and debating ideas (Marková,
Linell, Grossen, & Salazar Orvig, 2007, ch. 6).
The polyphonic model is a generalization of Bakhtin’s
ideas in the sense that voices may not be only associated to
an individual person. Voices may also be themes, or
recurrent topics emerging from the discourse. They enter in
inter-animation patterns which generate a polyphonic
weaving characterized by a multitude of voices, each with
its individuality, but which give birth to a coherent whole
(Trausan-Matu & Rebedea, 2009).
In this study, we apply the polyphonic model to analyze
the presence of voices and their interactions within students’
think-alouds and self-explanations. Think-aloud, by
definition, is the externalization of the inner voice of the
student, including voices that correspond to ideas,
justifications, and assumed positions. Expressions of the
text comprehension process by a student, in the form of
think aloud or self-explanation, can be expected to include
positions, reasons, ideas, all which may be viewed as voices.
We have operationalized the polyphonic model within the
ReaderBench framework, which provides automated text
and conversational analysis (Dascalu, 2014; Dascalu,
Dessus, Bianco, Trausan-Matu, & Nardy, 2014; Dascalu,
Trausan-Matu, McNamara, & Dessus, 2015). In
ReaderBench, voices are identified using Natural Language
Processing (NLP). Lexical chains (Galley & McKeown,
2003), or sequences of repeated or related words, are
merged into semantic chains by using relatedness calculated
using Latent Semantic Analysis (Landauer & Dumais, 1997)
and Latent Dirichlet Allocation (Blei, Ng, & Jordan, 2003).
The previous semantic models play an important role in our
polyphonic model as they are used to identify voices
through semantic relatedness, thus highlighting cohesive
contexts.
In addition, polyphonic inter-animation considers
relations between voices, or points of view, along two
dimensions: longitudinal along time, and transversal across
time, using voices’ co-occurrences within and across text
segments (Trausan-Matu, Stahl, & Sarmiento, 2007). The
longitudinal dimension follows the continuation of ideas
throughout the discourse, similar to a voice's individual
melodic line in music. Simultaneously, voices co-occur in a
vertical manner and, as in polyphonic music, this generates
specific discourse contexts consisting of potential
dissonances that need to be solved toward consonances.

This transversal effect, or voice overlap, supports the
integration process that can create both unity across various
themes, as well as differences or variations in points of
view.
Specifically, we examine the extent to which differences
between participants’ expressions of self-explanation and
think-aloud can be detected using the computational text
analyses provided by ReaderBench, and in turn, how this
theoretical perspective informs our understanding of text
and discourse comprehension.

Discourse Analysis within the Polyphonic Model
The polyphonic model can be used to analyze discourse in
both conversations and plain texts (Trausan-Matu &
Rebedea, 2009). Bakhtin (1984) stated that polyphony
occurs in any text, similarly to polyphonic music, composed
under counterpoint rules. That means that there is a
multitude of voices, each with its own individuality, whose
sum comprises a coherent whole: “the voices of others
become woven into what we say, write, and think”
(Koschmann, 1999, p. 308). Meanwhile, the polyphonic
discourse should also bring novelty, voices should interanimate in order to foster creativity. Following this
perspective, the polyphonic approach to discourse analysis
identifies voices in text and then investigates how voices are
woven and how they inter-animate (Trausan-Matu, Stahl, et
al., 2007).
Our automated process of voice identification starts by
building lexical chains that are merged into semantic chains
through semantic relatedness (Dascalu et al., 2015). Lexical
chains can be identified using a disambiguation graph in
which nodes are word instances having assigned their most
probable sense, while weighted edges are semantic distances
from WordNet (Galley & McKeown, 2003). However, this
approach is inherently limited because it only includes
words from the same part of speech. Thus, we have used an
iterative agglomerative hierarchical clustering algorithm that
begins with the identified lexical chains as groups of
clustered words and uses the semantic similarity between
lexical chains as a distance function (Dascalu et al., 2015).
If the semantic relatedness value is greater than an imposed
threshold or if identical lemmas are identified in two word
clusters, the latter are automatically merged.
Voices emerge as central topics of each text and rely on
the occurrences of the underlying cohesive and semantically
related words. The longitudinal dimension of voices
becomes the context in which the voices span throughout
the entire discourse. In contrast, the transversal dimension
highlights different co-occurrence and inter-animation
patterns of voices present within the same textual element,
i.e., sentence or paragraph.
After voices are identified, a cohesion (or utterance)
graph is constructed from the links between utterances
(Dascalu, 2014; Dascalu, Dessus, Trausan-Matu, Bianco, &
Nardy, 2013; Trausan-Matu, Dascalu, & Dessus, 2012;
Trausan-Matu, Rebedea, Dragan, & Alexandru, 2007)
Within the cohesion graph, utterances are the nodes and

1885

links consist of adjacency pairs, repetitions, or lexical and
semantic chains, which are detected using NLP.
As such, voices can be identified as threads in the graphs
(Trausan-Matu, Dascalu, & Rebedea, 2014). Each utterance
has an inner voice that inter-twines with other voices from
the same thread or from different ones, but with less
strength. Any new utterance in a dialogue is expressed as a
voice, including its degree of interconnection with other
utterances, relevance within the discourse, and potential
impact within the overall discussion. Examining different
semantic chains within the same textual fragment (sentences
or paragraphs) reveals the transversal dimension of voice
inter-animation.

Current Study

explanations or think-alouds) following the procedure
described in Allen et al. (2015).
The individual files were then analyzed using
ReaderBench. We calculated 29 voice indices related to:
a) span (distances between word occurrences within the
same semantic chain),
b) recurrence (average and standard deviation in terms of
distance between two consecutive words pertaining to the
same voice, measured in number of in-between words
from the initial text),
c) coverage of these semantic chains (average number of
contained concepts per sentence or paragraph), and
d) information theory entropy (Shannon, 1948) based on the
probability that a voice appears in a given text segment.

This study comprises an analysis of a corpus of selfexplanations and think-alouds previously described in Allen
et al. (2015). University students (n = 68) read a text about
natural selection and were randomly assigned to one of two
conditions related to their reading instructions: selfexplanation (n = 33) and think-aloud (n = 35). Students in
the self-explanation and think-aloud conditions were
prompted to generate typed responses on 16 occasions (i.e.,
on 16 of the 41 sentences). The self-explanation instructions
asked students to explain the information they had just read
to themselves, whereas the think-aloud instructions asked
students to state whatever they were thinking. We
aggregated students’ 16 text responses (their self-

The previous indices relate to the longitudinal dimension
of our analysis, while voice inter-animation relates to the
transversal effect, which is computed in terms of cooccurrence patterns. As operationalization of the transversal
dimension, we rely on: a) counting the number of concepts
pertaining to different voices, but present in the same text
segment, and b) pointwise mutual information (PMI) that
measures the degree of association between voice
distributions (Dascalu et al., 2015). These dialogic indices
provide insights in terms of a text’s overall cohesion, as
voices help build a higher cohesion through lexical and
semantic relatedness.

Self-explanation (SE)

Think-aloud (TA)
The surroundings we cannot to change, but we can our heart to adopt.

In our lives, there are so many types of people around us to our lives
colorful. also, in our daily lives, we meet different people who have
different story to tell. some of them are happy, wealthy. Some of them have
to worry about how to survive in this society. they are components to make
our lives fascinates.

In my mind, the human also as one of the animals in the world, we have
only different from the other animals because we have a thought.

Life around us is fascinating because of the force of nature. those creatures
around us are differently designed. Some of them are capable of seeing
stuffs because they are given an unique thing-eye. that's one of the things to
make them special, to make their lives fancy.
Life fascinates us because we have eyes. And eyes have precise
arrangement so that eyes make us see things. This is also true for other
organs, they are complexly design to make our body function.
Organs are not designed in advance for a specific purpose. organs are
formed by the activities people do in their everyday-lives. organs are
formed for the destination to make people survive, to make people's body
function well. the two animals with cloudy lenses must give their next
generation cloudy lens. and the generation of cloudy lens animal and clear
lens animal will be hard to tell. because the offspring are given clear lens
due to those who gave birth to it. Because a replicator is something that can
make a copy of itself, with most of its traits duplicated in the copy,
including the ability to replicate. The offspring's parents survived and pass
this replicator to it, so that the offspring's eyes are the same as its parent's.

The eyes is difference with the other organs. The animals eyes may be less
important than other organs.
The author cannot to believe that the organs must have been designed in
advance for a specific purpose is right. Used an example to support his ideal.
According to the example, I feel that the offspring has clear lenses and can
see well which is incorrect. in some way, their eyes has different with their
parents' eyes.
That's mean the their another eyes is usedness. the better vision can help
these animals to reproduce and get better generation. It's to point out the
ideal which is the author want to explain.
The living surrounding makes natural selection in order to get better next
generation. that's mean we can change or direct the selection to product.
replicators try to use-up material to find their the great copies and energy to
power replication. the most of the copying is worse that causing less
efficient just the less of the copying is better and useful, back to the
viewpoint. the apparent well engineered body is result by the replicator to
make the natural selection.
Organisms is the standard by the natural selection.

Figure 1. Sample inter-animation of voices within a self-explanation and a think-aloud protocol.

1886

Table 1: MANOVA results.
Index
Average span of lexical chains
Average paragraph voice cooccurrence
Average sentence voice co-occurrence
Standard deviation of paragraph voice
co-occurrences
Average sentence entropy of voices
Average span of voices
Standard deviation of paragraph voice
mutual information (PMI)
Percentage of words that are included in
lexical chains
Standard deviation of distributions per
paragraph
Standard deviation of sentence voice cooccurrences

Self-explanations
M (SD)
2.10 (0.29)
6.00 (2.22)

Think-alouds
M (SD)
1.69 (0.22)
2.99 (1.51)

45.325
43.296

<.001
<.001

Partial Eta
Squared
.407
.396

3.08 (0.81)
2.93 (1.08)

1.84 (0.94)
1.93 (0.97)

33.212
15.984

<.001
<.001

.335
.195

1.32 (0.23)
6.37 (1.64)
0.58 (0.07)

1.14 (0.25)
5.25 (1.41)
0.65 (0.13)

10.202
9.184
5.755

<.01
<.01
<.05

.134
.122
.080

0.10 (0.02)

0.09 (0.03)

5.291

<.05

.074

0.75 (0.04)

0.72 (0.06)

4.994

<.05

.070

1.51 (0.35)

1.39 (0.47)

4.497

<.05

.064

Figure 1 presents an example of inter-animation of voices
within a self-explanation and a think-aloud verbal protocol.
Several threads that can be considered as voices, ranging
from simple word repetitions (i.e., “organs”) to semantically
related concepts (i.e., “eye – lens”, “generation – parent –
offspring”, “copy – replication – duplicate – replication”),
co-appear and inter-animate. Additional voices can be
identified in both texts, but it is important to observe
differences in terms of distributions: denser, more cluttered
and more elaborated voices are present in self-explanations
versus more varied and more spread-out voices in thinkalouds.
In addition, the texts exhibit different discourse structures:
longer, more elaborated and more cohesive paragraphs in
self-explanations versus shorter, more condensed phrases
introducing multiple ideas in think-alouds. These latter
discourse specific traits also directly influence the
distribution of voices within the underlying analysis element
(paragraph or sentence) as the chance of voice cooccurrence inherently increases in longer texts (e.g., selfexplanations).

Results
Statistical analyses were conducted to assess the extent to
which the dialogic indices related to voices and in turn,
accurately classified students based on their experimental
condition. Because ReaderBench reports raw voice counts,
indices were also checked for multicollinearity with text
length. Any index that was highly collinear (r > .90) with
text length was removed. We then conducted a MANOVA
to identify which indices exhibited significant differences
between the self-explanation and think-aloud conditions.
Indices that were highly collinear (r > .90) were flagged,
and the index with the strongest effect size in the
MANOVA was retained while the other indices were
removed (see Table 1).

F

p

Longer spans of both lexical chains and voices, as well as
higher paragraph and sentence voice co-occurrences, are
indicative of longer, more elaborated texts (i.e. selfexplanations). Self-explanations also have higher standard
deviations of co-occurrence patterns at both sentence and
paragraph levels which reflect a greater variety of voices, as
well as a more diverse and unequal overlap of voices.
Higher voice entropy at sentence level and higher standard
deviation of voice distributions at paragraph level also
support the latter finding. Moreover, self-explanations have
a slightly higher coverage of words that are integrated in
longer semantic chains, thus denoting a more connected
discourse. In contrast, think-alouds exhibited a higher
standard deviation of paragraph voice pointwise mutual
information. This was specific to the generation of new
ideas which may or may not be intertwined with other
voices. This result is indicative of a wider spread of synergic
effects - either new, more isolated voices, or ones that interanimate more with the previous voices.
Based on the MANOVA, we selected the four indices
with the strongest effect sizes to enter into a stepwise
discriminant function analysis (DFA): Average span of
lexical chains (SE > TA), Average paragraph voice cooccurrence (SE > TA), Average sentence voice cooccurrence (SE > TA), and Standard deviation of paragraph
voice co-occurrences (SE > TA).
Table 2: DFA results.
Type
Original
Crossvalidated

SE
TA
SE
TA

Predicted Group
Membership
SE
TA
25
8
5
30
25
8
6
29

Note: SE = self-explanation; TA = think-aloud

1887

Total
33
35
33
35

The DFA yielded a significant model, χ2(df = 1,
n = 68) = 34.243, p < .001, correctly allocating 55 (25 + 30)
of the 68 students (accuracy = 80.9%, see Table 2). To test
the stability of our model, we conducted a leave-one-out
cross-validation analysis, which also yielded an accuracy of
79.4%. The measure of agreement between the actual
instructional group and that assigned by our model produced
a weighted Cohen’s Kappa of .616, demonstrating
substantial agreement.

Discussion and Conclusions
In the current study, we examined the differences from a
dialogism perspective between self-explanations and thinkalouds generated in response to a text. In previous research
on this dataset (Allen et al, 2015), we examined the causal
and referential cohesion differences between selfexplanation and think-aloud. The results of the latter study
indicated that causal cohesion, but not referential cohesion
differentiated students who were in the self-explanation and
think-aloud conditions. In the current study, we build on this
prior research by examining how textual indices related to
dialogism relate to students’ processing of text based on
their text reading instructions.
Our results indicate that students who self-explained the
text generated longer voices (lexical or semantic chains with
a higher span) that inter-animate more (higher voice cooccurrences at sentence and paragraph levels). This suggests
that students who were prompted to self-explain responded
to the text by maintaining semantic connections of the
concepts within the text.
We interpret these results to indicate that self-explanation
promotes specific comprehension processes that are
fundamentally different from responses generated during
think-aloud protocols, evidenced by students’ generation of
more conceptually related and cohesive text responses,
rather than multiple, separate “voices” or points of view
covering multiple topics. Previous research indicates that
self-explanation can enhance students’ understanding of
complex concepts; however, it is less clear how these
instructional differences manifest in the linguistic properties
of students’ text responses.
By adopting a Natural Language Processing approach,
this study examines on-line comprehension processes at a
more fine-grained level and also contributes to a better
understanding of how these processes may be automatically
detected via computational linguistic analyses. The
polyphonic model, built on dialogism and integrating
advanced NLP techniques, represented a viable alternative
to analyze students’ discourse and differentiate among
instructional settings.
As a limitation of our approach, voices need to account
for more than word clustering based on distance, lexical and
semantic overlaps which are currently used to operationalize
our polyphonic model. In addition, many voice indices are
multicollinear with text length. We need to develop methods
to normalize raw voice score to help control for text length
constraints. Voices represent a generalization of emerging

topics and should consider the corresponding sentiment
valences in order to create a clearer perspective whether
convergence or dissonances are encountered in the
discourse. In order to address this issue, opinion mining
techniques will be integrated in a follow-up iteration of our
implemented model.
The dialogical framework offers new perspectives in the
context of this study because both self-explanation and
think-aloud be perceived as different kinds of dialogues.
Self-explanations on the one hand include positions,
reasons, ideas, all of which may be viewed as voices while
the overall discourse can be regarded as an ‘internal
dialogue within the self’ (Linell, 2009, ch. 6). On the other
hand, think-alouds are more condensed, centered on
generating new ideas and can also be perceived a ‘dialogue
between ideas’ (Marková et al., 2007, ch. 6), a dialogue in
which the debating voices are ideas. However, in both cases
reflexive and cognitive processes are needed in order for
students to express themselves.
As Linell (2009) stated, dialogues occur ‘in and through
words.’ Certainly, there is more to dialogue and
communication – for example, gestures, facial expressions,
emotions, movement, all play crucial roles in dialogue; but
here, because it is printed text, we can only examine words.
Nonetheless, dialogism is tightly connected to the notion of
sense-making as meaning is constructed by interacting with
others and with the world, as well as with oneself via
internal dialogue. As such, dialogism has a strong
connection to cognition, which is sometimes ignored. Figure
2 represents this viewpoint. Cognition reflects prior and
intrapersonal (individual) information and knowledge about
the world, while meaning is constructed through social
interactions and language within the dialogical context.
Communication, both explicit interpersonal dialogue and
implicit to oneself (i.e., internal dialogue), becomes a
facilitator in terms of interaction, therein generating
meaning in discourse.

Figure 2. Dialogical framing and interdependencies with
core concepts.

Acknowledgments
The work presented in this paper was partially funded by the
University Politehnica of Bucharest through the “Excellence
Research Grants” Program, UPB – GEX Contract number
12/26.09.2016, by the EC H2020 project RAGE (Realising

1888

and Applied Gaming Eco-System) http://www.rageproject
.eu/ Grant agreement No 644187, as well as funding to
Arizona State University (IES 305A130124, IES
R305A120707, NSF 1417997, NSF 1418378, ONR
12249156, ONR N00014140343). Any opinions or
conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not
represent views of the IES, NSF, or ONR.

References
Allen, L. K., McNamara, D. S., & McCrudden, M. T.
(2015). Change your mind: Investigating the effects of
self-explanation in the resolution of misconceptions.
Paper presented at the 37th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society (CogSci 2015), Pasadena, CA.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1981). The dialogic imagination: Four
essays (C. Emerson & M. Holquist, Trans.). Austin and
London: The University of Texas Press.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1984). Problems of Dostoevsky’s poetics
(C. Emerson, Trans. C. Emerson Ed.). Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1986). Speech genres and other late essays
(V. W. McGee, Trans.). Austin: University of Texas.
Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent
Dirichlet Allocation. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 3(4-5), 993–1022.
Dascalu, M. (2014). Analyzing discourse and text
complexity for learning and collaborating, Studies in
Computational Intelligence
(Vol. 534). Cham,
Switzerland: Springer.
Dascalu, M., Dessus, P., Bianco, M., Trausan-Matu, S., &
Nardy, A. (2014). Mining texts, learner productions and
strategies with ReaderBench. In A. Peña-Ayala (Ed.),
Educational Data Mining: Applications and Trends (pp.
335–377). Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Dascalu, M., Dessus, P., Trausan-Matu, S., Bianco, M., &
Nardy, A. (2013). ReaderBench, an environment for
analyzing text complexity and reading strategies. Paper
presented at the 16th Int. Conf. on Artificial Intelligence
in Education (AIED 2013), Memphis, USA.
Dascalu, M., Trausan-Matu, S., McNamara, D. S., &
Dessus, P. (2015). ReaderBench – Automated Evaluation
of Collaboration based on Cohesion and Dialogism.
International
Journal
of
Computer-Supported
Collaborative
Learning,
10(4),
395–423.
doi:10.1007/s11412-015-9226-y
Galley, M., & McKeown, K. (2003). Improving word sense
disambiguation in lexical chaining. Paper presented at the
18th International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (IJCAI’03), Acapulco, Mexico.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for
cognition. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Koschmann, T. (1999). Toward a dialogic theory of
learning: Bakhtin's contribution to understanding
learning in settings of collaboration. Paper presented at
the Int. Conf. on Computer Support for Collaborative
Learning (CSCL'99), Palo Alto.

Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to
Plato's problem: the Latent Semantic Analysis theory of
acquisition, induction and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review, 104(2), 211–240.
Linell, P. (2009). Rethinking language, mind, and world
dialogically: Interactional and contextual theories of
human sense-making. Information Age Publishing:
Charlotte, NC.
Marková, I., Linell, P., Grossen, M., & Salazar Orvig, A.
(2007). Dialogue in focus groups: Exploring socially
shared knowledge. London, UK: Equinox.
McNamara, D. S. (2004). SERT: Self-Explanation Reading
Training. Discourse processes, 38, 1–30.
McNamara, D. S. (in press). Self-explanation and reading
strategy training (SERT) improves low-knowledge
students' science course performance. Discourse
Processes.
McNamara, D. S., & Magliano, J. P. (2009). Selfexplanation and metacognition: The dynamics of reading.
In J. D. Hacker, J. Dunlosky, & A. C. Graesser (Eds.),
Handbook of Metacognition in Education (pp. 60–81).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Millis, K., Magliano, J. P., & Todaro, S. (2006). Measuring
discourse-level processes with verbal protocols and Latent
Semantic Analysis. Scientific Studies of Reading, 10(3),
225–240.
Oakhill, J., & Yuill, N. (1996). Higher order factors in
comprehension disability: Processes and remediation. In
C. Cornaldi & J. Oakhill (Eds.), (pp. 69–72). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Shannon, C. E. (1948). A Mathematical Theory of
Communication. The Bell System Technical Journal, 27,
379–423 & 623–656.
Trausan-Matu, S., Dascalu, M., & Dessus, P. (2012).
Textual complexity and discourse structure in ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning. Paper presented at the
11th Int. Conf. on Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS
2012), Chania, Grece.
Trausan-Matu, S., Dascalu, M., & Rebedea, T. (2014).
PolyCAFe–automatic support for the polyphonic analysis
of CSCL chats. International Journal of ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning, 9(2), 127–156.
doi:10.1007/s11412-014-9190-y
Trausan-Matu, S., & Rebedea, T. (2009). Polyphonic interanimation of voices in VMT. In G. Stahl (Ed.), Studying
Virtual Math Teams (pp. 451–473). Boston, MA:
Springer.
Trausan-Matu, S., Rebedea, T., Dragan, A., & Alexandru,
C. (2007). Visualisation of learners' contributions in chat
conversations. In J. Fong & F. L. Wang (Eds.), Blended
learning (pp. 217–226). Singapour: Pearson/Prentice Hall.
Trausan-Matu, S., Stahl, G., & Sarmiento, J. (2007).
Supporting polyphonic collaborative learning. Indiana
University Press, E-service Journal, 6(1), 58–74.

1889

