Novel Evidence for the Bilingual Advantage: Effects of Language Control on
Executive Function in Balanced and Unbalanced Dual-Language Users
W. Quin Yow (quin@sutd.edu.sg), Adam C. Oei (adam_oei@sutd.edu.sg), & Xiaoqian Li
(xiaoqian_li@mymail.sutd.edu.sg)
Singapore University of Technology and Design, 8 Somapah Road, Singapore 487372, Singapore
Abstract
Bilinguals’ need to monitor and inhibit non-relevant
languages over a relevant one confers advantage in cognitive
control. No studies have demonstrated that the dual-language
control process directly contributes to the bilingual cognitive
advantage. We utilized a novel language control manipulation
paradigm where 83 English-Chinese bilingual adults
completed a reading and comprehension task in either singlelanguage (low-language-control) or dual-language (highlanguage-control) prior to performing nonverbal executive
control tasks (Stroop, task-switching, and n-back). Results
showed that language control had significant effects on
subsequent cognitive performance, depending on whether the
participants were regular dual language users or not. In the
dual-language condition, but not the single-language
condition, participants who used both languages regularly
demonstrated a smaller mixing cost in task-switching and a
greater sensitivity in n-back detection compared to
participants who did not. This suggests that dual language
control utilizes similar resources as executive function and
frequent dual language use enhances this resource.
Keywords: bilingualism; cognitive resources; task mixing;
working memory; adults

Introduction
Research evidence suggests that the ability to speak more
than one language confers an advantage in cognition,
specifically in executive control. Executive control refers to
a set of top-down mental processes such as the ability to
inhibit impulses, monitor and update working memory
representations and task switching (Miyake et al., 2000).
The evidence for the bilingual advantage in executive
control (henceforth bilingual advantage) is robust and is
seen across the lifespan from young children to the elderly
across several executive control tasks (e.g., Bialystok,
Craik, & Luk, 2008; Macnamara & Conway, 2013).
Why would being bilingual have positive consequences to
executive control? The transfer from bilingualism to
enhanced executive control is likely a two-step process.
First, for a bilingual, different languages are activated in
parallel during language processing (e.g., Crinion et al.,
2006). Increased executive control resources are therefore
needed to monitor this parallel activation and prevent crosslinguistic interference. Various executive control processes
are hypothesized to be necessary for language control in
different interactional contexts (Green & Abutalebi, 2013).
For example, a bilingual speaker must maintain a task goal
and inhibit the non-relevant language when speaking in one
language rather than another. These processes are akin to
updating and inhibition components in the Miyake et al.

(2000) model of executive control. The cognitive demands
on such processes are likely to increase in a dual-language
context whereby both languages known to a bilingual are
used and switched within a conversation. Such
codeswitching acts (i.e., switching between languages) add
another dimension of control necessary for disengagement
from a prior language and engagement of the language in
use. Neuroimaging studies have shown overlapping neural
substrates between language control and nonverbal
executive control (e.g., De Baene, Duyck, Brass, &
Carreiras, 2015; Rodríguez-Pujadas et al., 2014).
Second, the control processes associated with language
control in bilingual speakers are hypothesized to adapt to the
demands imposed on them, in turn enhancing domaingeneral cognitive control (e.g., Bialystok & Craik, 2010;
Green & Abutalebi, 2013). Behavioral evidence indicates
that executive control processes implicated in language
control such as updating, interference suppression and
shifting are enhanced in bilinguals (e.g., Morales, Calvo, &
Bialystok, 2013; Wiseheart, Viswanathan, & Bialystok,
2014). Neuroimaging work suggests that bilingual language
control exerts neuroplastic effects both structurally and
functionally in brain areas of importance for executive
control (e.g., Klein, Mok, Chen, & Watkins, 2014).
Bilinguals show reduced activation relative to monolinguals
when performing conflict and inhibitory control tasks in the
anterior cingulate (Rodríguez-Pujadas et al., 2014),
indicating greater neural efficiency. These findings suggest
that bilingual speakers may hold larger cognitive resources
because of the adaptive language control processes.
A more specific account has been put forward recently,
that these general “spill-over” positive effects of
bilingualism in executive control skills may be due to the
dual language switching behavior that bilinguals regularly
engage in, which represents a skillful control of language
use (e.g., Prior & Gollan, 2011; Yim & Bialystok, 2012).
For example, Soveri, Rodriguez-Fornells, and Laine (2011)
found that higher self-reported daily language switching
frequency is associated with reduced task-mixing cost in
adults from 30 to 75 years old. In addition, Yow and Li
(2015) demonstrated that bilinguals who used both
languages regularly have lower Stroop interference effects
and task mixing costs than those who used one language
significantly more than the other language. This bilingual
advantage based on how often a bilingual uses both
languages is also apparent across the lifespan from
childhood to the elderly. Specifically, Thomas-Sunesson,
Hakuta, and Bialystok (2016) showed that the more

1400

balanced Spanish-English bilingual young children were in
their language proficiency between two languages, the
better they performed in working memory and conflict
resolution.
Bilinguals often differ from each other in language
proficiency and usage frequency of each of their languages,
as well as language switching behavior. These differences in
language usage behavior might lead to different neural and
cognitive consequences due to the executive control
processes implicated in language control. However, it is
currently unknown whether active engagement in language
control activities would have a positive or negative impact
on bilingual speakers’ performance in nonverbal tasks
tapping executive control processes. No studies have
experimentally manipulated language control to determine
its effects on executive control. This present study aims to
explore this question and to further understand the
mechanisms underlying the effects of language control on
executive control.
In the current study, we manipulated active engagement
in language control by introducing a novel reading and
comprehension task. In the single-language condition,
participants read articles and answered questions in only
English. In the dual-language condition, participants read
and answered questions intermixed in English and Chinese,
which would induce higher cognitive demands on language
control compared to those in the single-language condition.
Following the reading comprehension task, participants
completed three executive control tasks (i.e., Stroop,
number-letter task-switching, and n-back) to assess different
executive control components (i.e., inhibition, shifting, and
updating, respectively) (e.g., Miyake et al., 2000). If the
engagement in language switching behavior indeed caused a
higher cognitive demand (in the dual-language condition),
then it could be expected that less cognitive resources would
be available for integrating the text information, resulting in
lower performance in the comprehension test. We also
hypothesized that participants’ performance in the
subsequent executive control tasks would be negatively
affected if they were in the dual-language condition, as
cognitive resources would be depleted for these participants
who had to engage in greater language control.
Since previous studies indicate that bilinguals who
regularly use both languages may have a protective
advantage in cognitive control, current participants who are
balanced bilinguals (defined as either a balanced use or a
balanced level of proficiency in two language systems)
would be less likely to be affected by the language control
manipulation than those who are unbalanced bilinguals.

Singapore is a multilingual country with English as the main
official language. The bilingual policy in Singapore
encourages citizens to be proficient in both English and a
mother tongue, which is Chinese for the participants of this
study. All participants provided written informed consent
prior to their participation and received credit points or
reimbursement for their time of participation.

Method

Reading Comprehension Task This task was administered
as a manipulation of language control. Participants were
randomly assigned to a single-language condition (i.e., SL;
n = 38) or a dual-language condition (i.e., DL; n = 45). For
both conditions, participants read four passages pertaining
to current events happening at the authors’ university (two
before executive control tasks and two after).

Participants
Eighty-three undergraduates (56 females, Mage = 22.60, SD
= 1.83, range = 19 - 25) were recruited from the authors’
university. All participants are Chinese Singaporeans and
have been living in Singapore since they were born.

Materials and Measures
Language Background Questionnaire (LBQ) This
questionnaire asked participants to name all the languages
that they know and to provide details about each of the
listed languages (e.g., age of language acquisition, language
proficiency, usage frequency, and language switching
habits). For language proficiency, participants rated their
proficiency in listening, reading, speaking and writing for
each language on a 10-point scale (1 = not proficient to 10 =
very proficient). We defined most and second most
proficient language based on the two languages that have
the highest average rating across these four domains. Usage
frequency for each of the languages was assessed by asking
participants to approximate the percentage they use each
language when communicating with different groups of
people (e.g., family members, colleagues, friends) in
different contexts in a typical week. The usage of all
different languages would add up to 100%. In addition,
participants rated on a 5-point scale (1 = never to 5 =
always) for nine questions relating to how frequent they
switch languages during discourse. A higher score therefore
indicates more frequent language switching.
We followed the procedures in Yow and Li (2015) to
estimate the individual differences in the degree of
bilingualism:
(I) Balanced Proficiency: Most proficient language rating
minus second most proficient language rating; a metric of
balanced bilingualism of relative competency between
participants’ most and second most proficient languages.
(II) Balanced Usage: Frequency of most used language
minus frequency of second most used language; a metric of
balanced bilingualism of relative usage frequency between
participants’ most used and second most used languages.
For both measures, a score closer to 0 indicates more
balance between two languages. Conversely, a higher score
indicates more dominant proficiency or use in one language
over the other. See Table 1 for all key language variables,
including details between the balanced and unbalanced users
related to the current study. Differences between the
balanced and unbalanced users are reported as this is of
interest in the current study.

1401

Table 1: Language background measures.
Language variable
Age of first acquired language
Age second acquired language
Most proficient language proficiency rating
Second most proficient language proficiency rating
Frequency of most used language
Frequency of second most used language
Balanced proficiency (Most proficient minus 2nd most proficient)
Balanced usage (Most used minus 2nd most used)
Language switching

Overall
Mean (SD)
n = 83
2.23 (1.51)
2.79 (1.75)
8.49 (1.29)
6.54 (1.76)
0.76 (0.19)
0.21 (0.17)
1.95 (1.84)
0.55 (0.34)
25.96 (4.26)

Balanced users
Mean (SD)
n = 40
2.35 (1.29)
2.40 (1.26)
8.47 (1.10)
7.36 (1.34)
0.66 (0.93)
0.32 (0.09)
1.11 (1.00)
0.35 (0.17)
26.60 (4.60)

Unbalanced users
Mean (SD)
n = 39*
2.00 (1.69)
3.08 (2.10)
8.47 (1.48)
5.63 (1.80)
0.91 (0.58)
0.09 (0.06)
2.84 (2.16)
0.82 (0.11)
25.11 (3.91)

*Note: Four participants did not provide their usage frequency for their languages. Hence, we were not able to categorize
them as balanced or unbalanced users.
Participants assigned to the SL condition read passages
presented in English only. The English reading passages are
suitable for students in grade 12 (between grade 11 to 13),
based on Flesch-Kincaid readability tests performed online
(https://readability-score.com). The English passages
contained on average 332.75 words (range = 305 to 366
words). In the DL condition, participants were presented
with passages intermixed in English and Chinese. The
passages contained 438.5 words on average (range = 406 to
458 words). Only inter-sentential switches (i.e., switching
from English to Chinese sentence and vice versa) were used
(M = 13.5 switches, range = 11 to 15).
After reading each passage, participants were required to
answer eight questions in oral and then written form. For
each passage, four questions required an oral response and
four required a written response. However, four were filler
questions (two oral and two written) that were not scored.
Participants were given one point for each correctly
answered question (not including the filler questions). A
maximum score a participant can receive is therefore four.
Participants could answer in either English or Chinese for
any of the questions, regardless of whether they are in the
SL or DL condition. The questions were all presented on the
computer screen. The passages remained on screen for the
participants to refer to if needed.
In the SL condition, all questions were posed in English
only. In the DL condition, participants were presented the
questions in English and then Chinese in alternating fashion.
For each of the four questions posed (oral and written), the
answers could only be found in the passage printed in the
opposite language. In other words, for a question posed in
English, its corresponding answer is printed in Chinese in
the passage and vice versa. This therefore necessitated
participants in the DL condition to engage in codeswitching
to answer the questions.
The sum of all correct responses was calculated for each
form of questions (oral or written) and for each two
passages before or after the executive control tasks as DVs

(dependent variables) from this task.
Executive Control Tasks We selected three tasks, colorword Stroop, number-letter switching, and n-back, to
measure executive control components of inhibition,
mental-set shifting, and information updating and
monitoring, respectively (Miyake et al., 2000; see Yow &
Li, 2015 for details about stimuli design and procedure for
each of the tasks).
In the Stroop task, participants were required to indicate
the color that the stimuli were printed in and ignore the
color names. The dependent measure in this task is the
Stroop effect, taken as the difference in response time (RT)
between the incongruent and neutral trials. Greater Stroop
effects reflect the poorer inhibition.
In the letter-number switching task, participants saw
number-letter pairs and either determined if the number was
even or odd or if the letter was a vowel or consonant. The
DVs for this task are switch cost and mixing cost. Switch
cost reflects more transient control processes to updating
goals or task demands, while mixing cost reflects cognitive
control in actively maintaining representations of multiple
task demands.
In the n-back task, participants completed two blocks of
2-back and two blocks of 3-back test trials. The dependent
measures in this task are d’ calculated separately for 2 and
3-back, reflecting detection sensitivity according to the
signal detection theory.

General Procedure
All tasks were administered individually in a quiet room at
the authors’ university. Participants first completed the
LBQ. Participants then performed the two reading
comprehension tasks and subsequently completed three
executive control tasks: Stroop task, task-switching and nback task, programmed in MATLAB (Version 7.10). The
order of the Stroop and task-switching task was
counterbalanced between participants but the n-back task

1402

was always performed last. When all the executive control
tasks were completed, participants completed two other
reading comprehension tasks. Visual stimuli were presented
to participants from about 70cm via a 23-inch monitor with
a refresh rate of about 60Hz. For the executive control tasks,
participants were instructed to respond as quickly and as
accurately as possible. Each experimental session took
about 1.5 to 2 hours.

Results
Prior to data analyses, we screened the data from all
executive control tasks to remove incorrect trials as well as
trials with those RTs shorter than 200ms or longer than
3000ms. These discarded trials amounted to less than 6%
(3% - 5%) of the total number of trials for each task. We
also discarded DVs (Stroop interference RT, switch cost
RT, mixing cost RT, 2-back d’ and 3-back d’) of interest
that were greater or less than 2.5 SDs from the group mean.
These outliers were rare and amounted to about 2% of the
total number of data points. These data trimming procedures
are typical in studies using similar experimental tasks.
We performed a median split on balanced proficiency and
balanced usage to categorize participants into balanced and
unbalanced proficient groups as well as balanced and
unbalanced dual-language users. This is to directly compare
these groups and subsequently perform analyses to
determine the effect of proficiency and usage interactions on
executive control. As participants’ language switching could
potentially confound the relationship between language
usage and proficiency on our executive control measures,
we controlled for its effects by entering language switching
as a covariate in separate analyses of covariance.

Reading Comprehension Performance
We first performed 2 (time: reading comprehension
before and after executive control tasks) x 2 (response type:
oral and written) x 2 (condition: SL and DL) x 2 (balanced
usage: balanced and unbalanced) x 2 (balanced proficiency:
balanced and unbalanced) mixed ANCOVA with language
switching as a covariate to determine whether performance
in the reading comprehension task differed as a function of
time, bilingualism, response type and condition.
Importantly, this also allowed us to perform a manipulation
check to determine if the DL condition was indeed more
cognitively demanding than the SL condition.
There was a Condition effect, F(1, 63) = 21.71, p < .001,
ηp2 = 0.26. This was qualified by a Condition x Balanced
Usage interaction, F(1, 63) = 4.14, p = .05, ηp2 = 0.06.
Specifically, unbalanced language users’ reading
comprehension performance was poorer when required to
codeswitch in the DL condition (M = 11.80) compared to
the SL condition where codeswitching was not required (M
= 13.56), t(36) = 2.34, p = .03. Similarly, balanced users
performed poorer in reading comprehension in the DL (M =
10.22) than in the SL condition (M = 14.12).
There was also a Time effect, F(1, 63) = 8.10, p = .01, ηp2
= 0.11, indicating that participants performed better in the

reading comprehension task following (M = 3.18) the
executive control tasks than before (M = 3.06). This was
however qualified by a Time x Language Switching
interaction. We followed up this significant interaction with
a median split of language switching and compared the
reading comprehension scores for frequent and infrequent
language switchers. While the infrequent language switchers
performed better (M = 6.57) after the executive control tasks
than before (M = 5.87), t(36) = -3.03, p = .01, the frequent
language switchers performed equally well before (M =
6.13) and after (M = 6.16) the executive control tasks, t(37)
= -0.1, p = .93. This suggests infrequent switchers but not
the frequent switchers gained from a prior practice in the
reading comprehension task. No other main effects or
interactions approached or were statistically significant.
Overall, the significant main effect of condition showed
that the dual-language condition was more demanding and
indicated that our manipulation was successful in increasing
executive control load.

Executive Control Performance
Inhibition A 2 (balanced proficiency) x 2 (balanced usage)
x 2 (condition) ANCOVA with language switching as a
covariate to account for unintentional switching in language
use as a potential confound was conducted. Language
switching was not significantly related to Stroop effect (p =
.53). There was a significant Balanced Proficiency x
Condition interaction, F(1,65) = 4.22, p = .04. Follow up
comparisons however showed no significant difference in
Stroop interference effects between the two conditions
amongst balanced proficient bilinguals (p = .095). This was
similar for the unbalanced proficient bilinguals (p = .22). No
other significant effects were found (all ps > .43).
Shifting The switch cost and mixing cost in task-switching
were evaluated in a similar way. There were no significant
main effects or interactions on the switch cost (all ps > .23).
In contrast, for the mixing cost, the Balanced Usage x
Condition interaction was significant, F(1, 67) = 4.87, p =
.03, ηp2 = 0.07 (see Figure 1). In the SL condition, no
significant differences were found between balanced and
unbalanced dual language users in mixing cost (p = .26).
However, in the DL condition, the balanced users had a
significantly smaller mixing cost than the unbalanced users
(p = .04). These results suggest that codeswitching in the
DL condition negatively affected unbalanced participants in
task mixing but not on balanced usage participants.
Updating On the 2-back trials, there was a significant
Balanced Usage x Condition interaction on the sensitivity to
targets, F(1, 67) = 4.48, p = .04, ηp2 = 0.06 (see Figure 2).
Follow up comparisons revealed that although there was no
difference in 2-back d’ between balanced and unbalanced
users in the SL condition (p = .31), 2-back d’ differed
between the two groups in the DL condition (p = .047). This
demonstrated that codeswitching adversely affected

1403

the English condition, balanced dual language users did not differ from their unbalanced
counterparts in mixing cost (p = .26). However, in the codeswitching condition, the balanced

BILINGUAL ADVANTAGE

23

users had a significantly smaller mixing cost that the unbalanced users (p = .04). See figure 1.

This
showed
that codeswitching
affected
unbalanced
participants
in task mixing
language
switching
as a covariatenegatively
was conducted
to examine
the effects
of bilingualism
and but
had
no effect
on balanced
usage participants.
condition
on 2-back
d’. Language
switching was entered as a covariate to account for

unintentional
300 switching in language use as a potential confound. Language switching was not
significantly related to 2-back d’ (p = .91). Only Balanced usage X Condition interaction was
Mixing cost (ms)

statistically
significant, F(1, 67) = 4.48, p = .04, ηp2 = 0.06, while Balanced usage X Balanced
200
proficiency approached but was not statistically significant (p = .07).
Follow
100 up comparisons on the significant balanced usage X condition interaction revealed
that although there was no difference in 2-back d’ between balanced
unbalanced users in the
Balancedand
users
Unbalanced users

English condition
(p = .31), 2-back d’ differed between the two groups in the codeswitching
0
Single-language

Figure
Mixing
cost
for and
balanced
and
unbalanced
usage
updating
(inMixing
2-back)
for the
unbalanced
users,
but had no
effect
on the balanced
users.
See figure
Fig1.
1.
cost
for
balanced
unbalanced
usage
participants
in English
and
participants
in
singleand
DL
conditions.
Error
bars
denote
2.
Codeswitching conditions. Error bars denote 95% confidence intervals.
95% confidence intervals.
BILINGUAL
ADVANTAGE
3.3. 2-back
d'
5

26

A 2 (Balanced proficiency) X 2 (Balanced usage) X 2 (Condition) factorial ANCOVA with
5

4

4

3

2

3-back d'

Discussion

3

2

1

Balanced users
Unbalanced users

1

Balanced users

0
0

Single-language

Dual-language
Condition
Condition

Unbalanced users

Figure 2. Performance in 2-back (d’) by balanced usage and
Fig 2. 2-back d’ for balanced and unbalanced usage participants in English and
condition. Error bars denote 95% confidence intervals.
Codeswitching conditions. Error bars denote 95% confidence intervals.
5

4

3-back d'

This study investigated the effects of language control on
domain-general executive control in bilingual adults who
differed in the degree of bilingualism. By implementing a
novel language control manipulation and adopting an
individual differences approach to study the bilingual
advantage, we found that (1) engaging bilingual speakers in
a dual-language context (involving codeswitching)
increased cognitive load and interfered with information
organization and integration, resulting in poorer
comprehension performance, (2) increased cognitive
demands on language control depleted general executive
control resources and negatively impacted executive control
components such as maintenance of mental representations
and sensitivity to targets, and (3) effects of language control
on executive control were modulated by factors that
influenced the exposure and opportunity for bilingual
speakers to practice language control in daily life.
When required to codeswitch prior to performing
executive control tasks, participants who were balanced dual
language users demonstrated smaller mixing cost and better
target discrimination compared to those unbalanced users.
These results suggest that a more balanced use of two
languages may function as a cognitive reserve that would
mitigate the effects of language control on executive
control, i.e., balanced bilinguals may have larger cognitive
resources for executive control than less balanced
bilinguals. This advantage is likely due to balanced dual
language users having more opportunity to be involved in
interactional contexts where both languages are used with
different speakers, and the constant need to monitor and
control attention to the target language system over the
competing other language, which in turn lead to the
development of larger cognitive resources for adaptive
language control processes.
The interaction effects of balanced usage and language
control condition were significant for only mixing cost and
working memory updating, but not for Stroop interference

Dual-language

Condition
condition (p = .047). This demonstrated that
codeswitching adversely affected working memory

2-back d'

information updating (in 2-back) for the unbalanced users,
but had no effect on the balanced users.
On the 3-back trials, a significant main effect of balanced
usage was evident, F(1, 68) = 6.17, p = .02, ηp2 = 0.08. This
main effect was qualified by a Balanced Usage x Condition
interaction, F(1, 68) = 4.80, p = .03, ηp2 = 0.07. Similar as
the 2-back task, no significant differences in performance
were found between balanced and unbalanced duallanguage users in the SL condition (p = .84). However,
balanced users had significantly higher 3-back d’ scores
compared to unbalanced dual language users in the DL
condition (p = .001). This indicates that balanced dual
language users were less affected by codeswitching than did
their unbalanced counterparts (see Figure 3). Additionally, a
significant balanced proficiency main effect was found for
the 3-back d’ scores, F(1, 68) = 5.72, p = .02, ηp2 = 0.08.
The Balanced Usage x Balanced Proficiency interaction was
also significant, F(1, 68) = 6.91, p = .01, ηp2 = 0.09.

3

2

1

Balanced users
Unbalanced users

0
Single-language

Dual-language

Condition

Figure 3. Performance in 3-back (d’) by balanced usage and
FigureError
4. Working
memory
updating
(3-back
d’) for balanced
and unbalanced dual language
condition
bars
denote
95%
confidence
intervals.
users across both English and Codeswitching conditions. Error bars denote 95% confidence

effect or switch cost, indicating that only some cognitive
control processes were used in the current dual-language
context. This is consistent with the adaptive control
hypothesis proposing that the demand on different control
processes varies as a function of the interactional context.
For instance, it is hypothesized that, for bilingual speakers,
both single-language and dual-language contexts increase
the demands on interference control that was assessed by the
Stroop task in this study. Thus, resources for inhibition may
not be depleted in the dual-language context, even amongst
unbalanced users. Our failure to find bilingual advantages in
switch cost has been documented previously (e.g., Yow &
Li, 2015). Being more balanced in dual language use may
not have conferred an advantage to the transient switching
cost because task switching is also akin to frequent topic
changes during discourse, in which both balanced and
unbalanced users are equally likely to engage in (Wiseheart
et al., 2014). In contrast, mixing cost reflects global

1404

sustained control necessary for maintaining competing
mental representations, which is akin to using different
languages in dual-language contexts. Balanced dual
language users may have developed a larger executive
control resource to hold multiple language rules “on-line”,
preventing resource depletion following our codeswitching
manipulation. Lastly, updating and monitoring is postulated
to be necessary for maintenance of task goals during dual
language discourse. Unbalanced dual language users who
hold smaller working memory resources are therefore more
affected in updating after having to codeswitch. Taken
together, these results indicate that bilingual advantage is
limited to certain but not all components within the Miyake
et al. (2000) model.
One limitation inherent in our study is the use of selfreport for language proficiency. Although this approach is
consistent with many other studies (e.g., Wiseheart et al.,
2014), we acknowledge that using self- report measures may
result in less accurate proficiency ratings than objective
measures. However, given that many participants may know
more than two languages, objective measures of their
language proficiency may not be feasible without
substantially prolonging the experimental session.
In conclusion, we provide novel evidence showing that
language control and executive control depend on shared
resources by experimentally manipulating language control
via codeswitching. Crucially, we provide evidence of the
bilingual advantage in showing that bilinguals who are more
balanced in dual language use have larger working memory
and task mixing resources that buffered against performance
decline following language control. Theoretically, our
results add to the current understanding of the mechanism of
the bilingual advantage in executive control: language and
executive control share similar resources, and this shared
resource can be enhanced by using more than one language
equally frequently.

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank the participants who participated
in the study, and Stephanie Dietz and Tony Lim for their
help in experiment design and data collection. This work
was partially supported by the AcRF (SUTDT12015007)
and DIRP grant (IGDSP1502032) to the first author.
References
Bialystok, E., Craik, F., & Luk, G. (2008). Cognitive control
and lexical access in younger and older bilinguals.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 34(4), 859-873.
Bialystok, E., & Craik, F. I. M. (2010). Cognitive and
linguistic processing in the bilingual mind. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 19(1), 19-23.
Crinion, J., Turner, R., Grogan, A., Hanakawa, T.,
Noppeney, U., Devlin, J. T., . . . Price, C. J. (2006).
Language control in the bilingual brain. Science,
312(5779), 1537-1540.

De Baene, W., Duyck, W., Brass, M., & Carreiras, M.
(2015). Brain circuit for cognitive control is shared by
task and language switching. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 27(9), 1752-1765.
Green, D., & Abutalebi, J. (2013). Language control in
bilinguals: The adaptive control hypothesis. Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 25(5), 515-530.
Klein, D., Mok, K., Chen, J.-K., & Watkins, K. E. (2014).
Age of language learning shapes brain structure: A
cortical thickness study of bilingual and monolingual
individuals. Brain and Language, 131, 20-24.
Macnamara, B., & Conway, A. (2013). Novel evidence in
support of the bilingual advantage: Influences of task
demands and experience on cognitive control and
working memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 21(2),
520-525.
Miyake, A., Friedman, N. P., Emerson, M. J., Witzki, A. H.,
Howerter, A., & Wager, T. D. (2000). The unity and
diversity of executive functions and their contributions to
complex “frontal lobe” tasks: A latent variable analysis.
Cognitive Psychology, 41(1), 49-100.
Morales, J., Calvo, A., & Bialystok, E. (2013). Working
memory development in monolingual and bilingual
children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
114(2), 187-202.
Prior, A., & Gollan, T. H. (2011). Good language-switchers
are good task-switchers: Evidence from Spanish-English
and Mandarin-English bilinguals. Journal of the
International Neuropsychological Society: JINS, 17(4),
682.
Rodríguez-Pujadas, A., Sanjuán, A., Fuentes, P., VenturaCampos, N., Barrós-Loscertales, A., & Ávila, C. (2014).
Differential neural control in early bilinguals and
monolinguals during response inhibition. Brain and
Language, 132, 43-51.
Soveri, A., Rodriguez-Fornells, A., & Laine, M. (2011). Is
there a relationship between language switching and
executive functions in bilingualism? Introducing a within
group analysis approach. Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 183.
doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00183
Thomas-Sunesson, D., Hakuta, K., & Bialystok, E. (2016).
Degree of bilingualism modifies executive control in
Hispanic children in the USA. International Journal of
Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 1-10.
Wiseheart, M., Viswanathan, M., & Bialystok, E. (2014).
Flexibility in task switching by monolinguals and
bilinguals. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 19(1),
1-6.
Yim, O., & Bialystok, E. (2012). Degree of conversational
code-switching enhances verbal task switching in
Cantonese–English bilinguals. Bilingualism: Language
and Cognition, 15(04), 873-883.
Yow, W. Q., & Li, X. (2015). Balanced bilingualism and
early age of second language acquisition as the underlying
mechanisms of a bilingual executive control advantage:
Why variations in bilingual experiences matter. Frontiers
in Psychology, 6, 164. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00164

1405

