Nudging Problematic Smartphone Use to a Lower Level
Lauri Palokangas (Lauri.Palokangas@gmail.com)
Jyrki Suomala (Jyrki.Suomala@Laurea.fi)
Laurea University of Applied Sciences, NeuroLab, Vanha maantie 9
02650 Espoo, FINLAND
creating a habit that is easier to maintain than a medication
that is not based on a routine (Ryan & Wagner, 2003).

Abstract
Smartphone usage has evolved in people’s lives from necessity
to habit and in some cases leading to compulsive use and
addiction. However, only a little research has been performed
on the prevention of Problematic Smartphone Usage (PSU).
Behavioral economics has been applied to investigate how
smartphone users respond to nudges that try to lower their
smartphone usage. Findings revealed that the Total Screen On
Time (SOT) decreased when nudging smartphone users with
information on their usage behaviors. Intermittent glancing, as
well as the median session time increased, and the reduction in
SOT was no longer statistically significant in the observation
period after the nudges were no longer applied, suggesting
relapse in smartphone usage behavior.

Problematic Smartphone Use

Keywords: addiction; behavioral insights; nudge; smartphone

Introduction
Behavioral economics researchers (Kahneman, 2003) have
identified a large number of systematic biases in people's
decision-making and judgements. These biases have been
regarded as evidence that people do not follow principles of
the rationality suggested in neoclassical theory (Samuelson,
1937). Instead, people use a series of heuristics that often lead
to systematic errors (Tversky and Kahneman, 1973). Thus,
the results of the mainstream views in behavioral economics
have a generally low opinion about human rationality.
A new positive approach – nudge – for peoples' decisionmaking have emerged (Thaler and Sunstein, 2008).
According to this approach, people could be helped by a
nudge to make optimal decisions (Thaler and Sunstein,
2008). By planning the environment based on so-called
“choice architects” in order to make people change behavior
to make decision makers better off as judged by themselves
(Thaler & Sunstein 2008). One example of the benefit of the
nudge and choice architecture is to prompt vaccination
receivers to write down the date and time of the appointment
to increase vaccination rate (Milkman et al., 2011).
According to the dualistic model people engage two
systems of thinking. System 1 is an automatic, effortless and
often influenced by habits that cannot be influenced easily,
whereas System 2 is effortful, deliberately controlled and
associated with conscious thinking operations (Kahneman,
2003). The limited capacity of mental effort results to people
preferring the System 1 thinking by applying heuristics. As
an outcome, many decisions are based on beliefs of
probabilities of possible outcomes (Tversky & Kahneman,
1973). Nudges build on the proposition of dualistic system.
By preferring the effortless processing, “choice architects”
can for instance design routinization of medication, thus

The heuristics suggested from the dualistic system can be
theorized to be present in a person’s smartphone usage habits.
The high daily usage of a smartphone in people’s lives have
become significant (Montag et al., 2015b; Kim, 2013;
Oulasvirta et al., 2012; Lin et al., 2015). Even if 82% of the
respondents say that using their phone during the
conversation hurts the setting, 89% of the people have used a
phone themselves during their most recent social gathering
(Rainie & Zickuhr, 2015). People have been shown to
frequently return to their uncompelled behavior even if they
were willing to change their behavior for better (O'Connell,
1996). Smartphone usage can be seen to have evolved into a
habit which can lead to compulsive use and addiction (Lee,
Chang, Lin & Cheng 2014, 373).
Frequent phone use has been connected to the indicators of
certain types of addiction. Some studies (Lin et al., 2015;
Hong et al., 2012; Lin et al., 2014; Leung, 2008) indicate that
the compulsive use of smartphones share the characteristics
of drug and alcohol addiction, and internet dependency.
Moreover, pathological gambling analyses has been used to
classify this type of smartphone addiction (Leung & Liang,
2016).
Using a mobile device frequently and at excess durations
has been shown to lead to various types of symptoms. Using
phones in excessive quantities in personal business situations
has been shown to lower quality outcomes in negotiations and
to give a less trustworthy and less professional impression
(Krishnan et al., 2014). In addition, the increased use of
smartphones has been shown to lead to reduced concentration
levels during school classes and unsafe driving habits (Hong,
Chiu & Huang, 2012). Furthermore, by taking a wireless
device even for a short time can increase anxiety (Cheever,
Rosen, Carrier & Chavez, 2014).
Whereas most of studies have focused frequent phone use
from addiction point of view, it is hard to find studies that
have focused on the prevention of Problematic Smartphone
Use (PSU) on healthy test subjects. In order to help lower the
smartphone use without coercion or policies, it is important
to investigate how PSU can be influenced by using behavior
change interventions.
Behavioral economics can be applied to investigate how
smartphone users respond to nudges (Thaler and Sunstein,
2008) that try to lower their smartphone usage. A concept of
‘nudge’ has been introduced in contrast to policies enforcing
a desired behavior or to introducing significant economic

2852

incentives. Nudges can be used to design an environment that
“alters people’s behavior in a predictable way without
forbidding any options or significantly changing their
economic incentives” (Thaler et al., 2008). Although the
nudge has been applied in many studies and projects (Johnson
& Goldstein, 2003; Shu et al., 2012), it is hard to find research
reports that have focused on applying behavior change
interventions to influence smartphone usage.
The nudges used in this research to influence smartphone
use were designed based on Michie, van Stralen and West’s
(2011)
Capability,
Opportunity-Motivation-Behaviour
(COM-B) framework. According to this framework, behavior
change involves changing one or more of the capability,
opportunity and motivations that relate to the behavior
(Michie, Atkins & West, 2014). Capability refers to
knowledge and skills that influence engaging in the activity,
opportunity refers to everything outside the test subject that
prompts for behavior or makes it possible, and motivation
refers to processes that energize and direct behavior (Michie
et al., 2014). The first nudge used in this study was designed
to influence to the capability component, whereas
Motivational and Goal-Attainment nudges were designed to
influence to the motivational component in the COM-B
framework.
Goal setting combined with a commitment, and feedback
concerning the behavior has been shown to lead to behavior
change. Where providing information has improved
knowledge about the issue, the behavior change has resulted
from tailored information, goal setting and feedback.
Whether the goal has been set by an external party or the
subject themselves, it has not been shown to have influence.
(Abrahamse, Steg, Vlek & Rothengatter, 2007).
The Capability-nudge provided information regarding the
phone use. The nudge was designed to be compatible with
Hansen & Jespersen’s (2013) definition of Transparent type
1 nudge. In this category, the reflective thinking of a subject
is a by-product of the nudge.
Both Motivational-nudge and the Goal-attainment-nudges
added influence to the motivational component by providing
an optional valentic emoticon based on the progress of the
smartphone use. The appearance of the valentic emoticon in
a Goal-attainment nudge was shown if the test subject
attained a self-defined personal goal in reducing smartphone
usage. The valentic emoticon was designed to influence
behavior through reflective thinking and to indicate an
attainment of a desired behavior. These nudges built on
Hansen & Jespersen’s (2013) definition of Transparent type
2 nudge: the emoticon provided feedback to reinforce the
commitment mechanism while the test subject maintained a
complete freedom of choice, both before engaging with the
phone, or after opening the phone and thus becoming subject
to the nudge.
Even though excessive smartphone usage can lead to
compulsive use and addiction (Lee, Chang, Lin & Cheng,
2014), little is known how people can voluntarily lower
smartphone use. Here we use the COM-B behavioral change

framework to study how smartphone usage can be influenced
by nudges.

Method
Participants
Total of 201 users were recruited from social media
(Twitter, Facebook and LinkedIn) to participate in the
research using the following recruitment message: “Are you
hooked to your phone? Do you use it way too much? Find it
out. Participate in a research. Install Deglancer.” The
participants were not assessed or selected based on their
attitudes towards smartphone usage. The participants were
incognito to the researchers throughout the study. The study
was initiated by a test subject when installing the application
onto their Android smartphone from Google Play store. The
users were presented information about the research both
before installing the research application, and when the
research information sheet was made available to them in the
application.
Following the research practices of an earlier research
project (Montag et al., 2015b) the data was filtered to include
only the participants that completed the full five weeks of
research without stopping their phone usage for more than
three consecutive days during the research. After discarding
corrupted research data and ineligible users, 78 users were
included to the data analysis.
Earlier research results (Mueller, van der Heijden, Klein &
Potters, 2011; Altmann & Traxler, 2014) had shown that the
effect of nudges do not significantly correlate with economic
or
socio-demographic
variables.
Therefore,
sociodemographic background variables are not reported.
The ethics committee of the Federation of Universities of
Applied Sciences approved the study.

Procedure
A smartphone application was developed to conduct an
intervention study using three different type of nudges. The
study was constructed for consecutive five stages, each
lasting for 7 days. As soon as the users started the application
for the first time, the study initiated. The application
registered itself to the service hosted in Google cloud
computing infrastructure. In the beginning of the research,
the test subjects responded to the Smartphone Addiction
Inventory (SPAI) questionnaire in the research application,
measuring their attitudes and effects towards smartphone
usage (Lin et al., 2014), however, the SPAI data has not been
analyzed for this paper. The participants used their personal
smartphone for the duration of five weeks during which the
interventions were performed and the research data was
collected.
The first Baseline stage created a personal baseline of
smartphone usage of a participant. During the second,
Capability stage, at every unlock of the smartphone, the user
was presented a nudge including the following information:
the number of minutes that the phone was locked before the
unlock event, the number of unlock events so far during the

2853

ongoing day and the total duration that the screen has been
turned on during the ongoing day. The purpose of this stage
was to test the effect of information to the smartphone use.
During the third, Motivational stage, a user was presented
with a similar nudge to the second stage. Information in the
nudge was preceded with a positively valenced injunctive
emoticon if the smartphone user had lowered the smartphone
usage and therefore the indicator value had improved: if
smartphone was locked for longer than the average sleep time
one week earlier, if the number of unlocks up to the current
hour of the day was less than the number of unlocks up to the
current hour of the day one week earlier, or if the total screen
time up to the current hour of the day was less than up to the
same hour of the day one week earlier. The purpose of this
stage was to test the effect of positively valenced injunctive
emoticon judged by an external authority.
In the beginning of the Goal-attainment stage, the user was
prompted to select a goal for how much he or she wished to
decrease the phone usage this week. If the user did not select
a goal, the application used the default goal of 5 %
improvement to the previous week. Every time the user
unlocked the smartphone, the application calculated if one or
more of the indicators had improved more than the target
percentage compared to the previous week’s information. If
the sleep time was at least 5 % longer than the average sleep
time in the previous week, if the number of unlocks was at
least 5 % less than the number of unlocks up to the same hour
of the day in the previous week, or if the total duration of the
screen time was at least 5 % less than up to the current hour
of the day in the previous week, the indicator was preceded
with the same injunctive emoticon that was used in the
Motivational stage.
As in the Motivational stage, the nudge in the Goalattainment stage built on the motivation component of the
COM-B. However, as the stage included a task to define the
percentage of the desired reduction in smartphone use, the
goal-setting intended to direct attention and effort to reach the
goal defined by the test subject. In order for the test subjects
to easily maintain their state of goal attainment, the test
subjects would have to reflect their phone usage before
engaging with the phone, thus reducing phone usage. The
purpose of this stage was to test the effect of goal-attainment,
and the effect of injunctive emoticon based on a personally
set goal. By prompting the test subject with active decisionmaking regarding the amount to reduce their smartphone use,
it was expected that the test subjects would make effort to
attain the goal that they had specified themselves.
As the study progressed to the fifth week, all notifications
stopped, and application only recorded the user behavior for
one week. In the same way with the first stage of the study,
the fifth stage did not involve a nudge. The purpose of this
stage was to investigate if users relapse to their prior behavior
after the nudges are no longer present.
After full five weeks, the application notified the user that
the study had been completed. However, the user could
continue to use the application, and choose the type of nudge
to present at every unlock. The test subjects had a choice to

continue to use the application, or uninstall the application
from their smartphone.

Data Analysis
A total of 606062 events were collected over the 5-week
study period were tested. These events were converted to
2304 observations, each of them representing one day of one
test subject, equivalent to the definition of per day per user
(pdpu) used in an earlier similar research (Oulasvirta et al.
2012). Five key indicators of smartphone usage were
calculated from the research data: Total Screen On Time per
day (SOT), Median Screen On Time of each session (Session
Time), Total number of phone usage sessions per day
(Unlocks), Number of phone usage sessions equal or shorter
than 30 seconds in duration, over 10 minutes apart from the
previous session (Glances) and Median Screen Off Time
between two sessions (Median SFT). Of the 78 participants
who completed the research, 58 chose to set their own goal in
the goal-setting phase, whereas 20 participants got the default
as a goal.
Time series of each key indicator was processed with
Hilbert-Huang Transform (HHT). In this so-called sifting
process, the time series of each key indicators were broken
into intrinsic mode functions (i.e. IMFs) and by sequentially
de-composing these intrinsic modes from the original signal,
the remaining data represented the trend of the data over the
study period. This analysis was compatible with the method
used by Lin et al. (2015). Inferential statistics were performed
to measure the effect of nudges in Capability, Motivational
and Goal-attainment stages compared to the Baseline and to
the Observation stages. The differences in key indicators
were tested between the stages of the study for each test
subject. The inferential statistic tests were done by
performing independent-samples t-test using different stages
of the study as a grouping variable, and each key indicator as
test variable. Finally, a regression equation was calculated to
predict a key indicator from another key indicator. The
processing of the data was performed with the MatLab
software package and the inferential analysis was performed
with an SPSS statistical software.

Results
There was a significant effect of intervention for SOT
between Baseline and Capability stages. Between these
stages, mean SOT lowered from 3 hours and 40 minutes pdpu
to 3 hours and 14 minutes pdpu. The effect of intervention for
SOT was also significant between the Baseline stage and the
Motivational stage, as well as and between the Baseline and
Goal-attainment stages. In the Motivational stage, SOT
lowered to approximately 3 hours and 10 minutes, and to 3
hours and 13 minutes in the Goal-attainment stage. The
decrease in SOT was not statistically significant when
comparing the first stage to the last week, Observation stage,
of the study. Table 1 below illustrates differences and
statistical significance of SOT by stage.

2854

Table 1: SOT by stage (N=78).
Stages
1 vs. 2
1 vs. 3
1 vs. 4

Difference
-26 minutes
-30 minutes
-27 minutes

Table 3: Median SFT by stage (N=78).

Significance and effect size
t(922) = 2,888, p < .01, d = 0,19
t(925) = 3,356, p < .01, d = 0,22
t(916) = 2,871, p < .01, d = 0,19

Stages
1 vs. 4
1 vs. 5
2 vs. 4
2 vs. 5
3 vs. 4
3 vs. 5

The difference in Session Time was significant between the
Baseline stage and Observation stage. The mean duration of
individual session increased from 51 seconds pdpu to 92
seconds pdpu. The difference was also significant between
Capability and Goal-attainment stages, as well as between
Capability and Observation stages. This difference was also
significant between Motivational and Observation stages.
The mean duration increased from 44 seconds in the
Capability stage to 49 seconds in Motivational, to 63 seconds
in Goal-attainment and finally to 92 seconds in Observation
stage. The changes were not significant between adjacent
stages. Table 2 below illustrates the changes in Session Time
by stage.

Discussion

Table 2: Session Time by stage (N=78).
Stages
1 vs. 5
2 vs. 4
2 vs. 5
3 vs. 5

Difference
41 seconds
5 seconds
19 seconds
33 seconds

Significance and effect size
t(916) = 3,194, p < .01, d = 0,21
t(913) = 2,815, p < .01, d = 0,19
t(920) = 3,194, p < .01, d = 0,21
t(917) = 2,801, p < .01, d = 0,18
t(923) = 2,299, p < .05, d = 0,15
t(920) = 2,491, p < .05, d = 0,16

Significance and effect size
t(913) = -2,466, p < .05, d = -0,16
t(920) = -2,298, p < .05, d = -0,15
t(917) = -2,945, p < .01, d = -0,19
t(920) = -2,674, p < .01, d = -0,18

The difference in Glances was only significant between
Capability and Observation stages, t(917) = -2,006, p < .05.
Mean Glances pdpu increased from 41,24 times in Capability
to 45,55 times in Observation stage.
Simple linear regression was calculated to predict SOT
based on Glances. Poor regression equation was found
(F(1,2274) = 142,124, p < .000) with an R2 of .059. Also,
simple linear regression was calculated to predict Unlocks
based on Glances. A significant regression equation was
found (F(1, 2274) = 10188,592, p < .000) with an R2 of .818.
Median SFT was significantly different between the last
two stages when compared to the first three stages. However,
due to the HHT being used in the pre-processing stage to
address the non-linearity and non-stationarity of the research
data, the comparison of the key indicator values using
original units of measure might not be accurately depicted.
Median SFT values after HHT pre-processing smoothed the
data to a negative range without equivalent real world
phenomenon. The changes in Median SFT can be
characterized so that the difference in Median SFT is not
significantly different between stages 1, 2 and 3, but Median
SFT is markedly higher in stages 1, 2 and 3 compared to
stages 4 and 5. The below Table 3 illustrates the trend of
change in Median SFT by stage.

There was a significant main effect for SOT between the
Baseline stage and all of the three stages with the nudges.
Consistent with COM-B framework (Michie et al., 2011) this
change in SOT could be associated to an individual's aptitude
to change their phone usage. Especially in the Capability
stage the information pertaining to the user’s phone usage
was planned to be consistent with the definition of the type 1
transparent nudge (Hansen & Jespersen, 2013). It can
therefore be suggested that the effect of the nudge was
significant enough to trigger an automatic reflection of
smartphone use.
It is not possible to conclude that one type of nudge has
higher significance to smartphone behavior than the other.
Statistically significant decrease of SOT between the
Baseline stage and both the Capability stage and the
Motivational stage suggests that by using nudges that
increase capability or motivational components can result to
behavior change. However, there was no significant change
in any of the key indicators between the different types of
interventions.
Locke and Latham (2002) have earlier suggested that “the
effects of goal setting are very reliable”. Michie, Atkins and
West (2014) have also reported that the interventions with
“explicit targets and actions plans to feedback” had a higher
impact compared to interventions without targets. According
to Locke and Latham (2002), failures to replicate the effects
of goal settings can be due to many reasons, including for
example the lack of feedback, lack of commitment or failure
to match the goal to the performance measure. It is possible
that the key indicators used in this research do not mediate
smartphone usage behavior. Also, by only providing
positively valenced feedback about the goal attainment but
inhibiting negatively valenced feedback about the failure to
attain a goal could explain why this research could not
successfully replicate the effects of goal setting.
The level of SOT per day (162 minutes) is in line with what
Oulasvirta et al. (2012) reports, but it is only 62,3 percent of
what Lin et al. (2015) reports as a median daily use time. Lin
et al. (2015) report that the recruitment strategy in their study
was “based on the potential higher penetration rate of
smartphone use”. Montag et al. (2015a) have written that
substantial part of the sample in Lin et al.’s (2014) study was
characterized as being smartphone addicted. The difference
in the level of usage compared to Lin et al.'s research results

2855

may suggest that the sample in this research did not include
substantial amount of problematic smartphone users or
smartphone addicts.
There was a significant difference in Session Time between
number of stages as indicated in Table 2. In these
comparisons with Observation stage, the Session Time
increased from the stage under comparison.
The difference in Glances was only significant between the
Capability stage and the Observation stage. Oulasvirta et al.
(2012) define intermittent smartphone use as SIRB, short
duration isolated, reward-based usage sessions. This
definition includes a notion about the type of application: “at
least 50% of the usage session duration is spent interacting
with applications that provide the reward values”. The
definition of Glances is not therefore fully compatible with
the definition of SIRBS.
There was no evidence that nudges can reduce the number
of Glances. Oulasvirta et al. (2012) have suggested earlier
that “checking habits may lead to more use overall”. Poor
regression equation to predict SOT based on Glances did not
support Oulasvirta et al.’s previous findings, however,
significant regression equation to predict Unlocks based on
Glances would suggest that even though changes in Unlocks
were not statistically significant during the research, Unlocks
can be expected to increase after the nudges are no longer in
effect. Oulasvirta et al. (2012) have earlier concluded that the
increased “checking habit” is associated with higher phone
usage overall. Oulasvirta et al. (2012) suggest that short
sessions act as a “gateway” for other content on the device,
and that they can be seen as a proxy for habitual usage.
Median SFT was significantly lower from Motivational
stage onwards compared to the baseline. It was not possible
to find a report that would have included at least descriptive
statistics about the Session Time or Median SFT. In this
research, Session Time was 23 seconds, and Median SFT was
198,50 seconds. Due to the lack of prior reported research
evidence, these numbers provide little basis for inferential or
comparative analysis. Davis (2001) has suggested that
procrastination has a role in both the development and
maintenance of generalized PIU. However, based on the data
from this research it is not evident if a more frequent
engagement with the phone is due to the test subjects putting
off their responsibilities – as Davis suggests - or due to other
reasons.
It can be theorized that the changes in SOT and Median
SFT is due to the test subjects reducing their screen time
overall even if they engaged with their phone more
frequently. In the Goal-attainment stage the nudge was built
on Motivational component in COM-B framework,
proposing that the explicit goal is associated with lower
phone usage. Evidence referred by Klasnja (2009) have
proposed that the automatic goal activation can be triggered
with presentation of salient information. It is possible that the
nudge in the Capability stage had already triggered automatic
goal activation, and the differences in nudges between the
stages were not significant enough to trigger additional ways
of behavior change beyond what was already active from the

Capability stage onwards. This could support an unchanged
amount of glances throughout the experiment, although it
remains unclear what triggered an increase in the mean
Glances in the Observation stage.
Neither Session Time nor the number of unlocks lowered
significantly between the Baseline and Capability stage. One
possibility is that there was a mere-measurement effect from
the beginning of the study and the users made an effort to
generally lower the amount of engagement with the phone
throughout the study by spending less time with the phone at
each unlock. Another possibility is that the users generally
reflected their phone usage and did not unlock the phone as
often as before. In this case, as soon as they would engage
with their phones, they would approximately spend the same
amount of time with their phone, but that would happen less
often. The changes can, however, be so small that it is not
statistically significant for Unlocks or Median SFT. If the
latter assumption was true, it would suggest that automatic
goal may have triggered users to reflect their phone usage
before they engage with their phone. As SOT was
significantly or highly significantly lower in all stages of the
study compared to the Baseline stage, the observation could
be a sign of learning the phone usage behavior resulted by the
interventions.
According to these results, a systematic relapse in behavior
was seen after the interventions were no longer in effect.
Block (2008) has earlier reported that the individuals with
internet addiction are resistant to treatment and tend to
relapse at a high rate. The findings from this research are
compliant with Block’s suggestion, although it is not possible
to associate the findings from this research to a relapse based
on psychiatric reasons.
Even though this research supports both Klasnja et al.’s
(2009) as well as Oulasvirta et al.’s (2012) conclusion that
interventions can help trigger behavior change, this research
does not support the proposition that interventions can help
maintain a behavior change.
This research does not provide evidence that the type of
nudge explains differences in the number of unlocks or
glances per day. It is possible that this is due to the path
dependence between the stages of the research and the lack
of a control group. Even though there was statistically
significant different in the mean Glances between the
Capability and the Observation stage, this finding is not
supported by current literature. More evidence would be
required to prove relapse in smartphone use resulting from
the absence of a nudge, by randomizing the order of stages in
the research and by introducing a control group.
It can be concluded that nudges can help lower key
indicators of smartphone use, however, this might increase
intermittent glancing and result to overall increased usage of
the phone when the interventions are no longer present.

Acknowledgments
Authors want to acknowledge two incognito software
developers that helped develop application to conduct the
research. Authors also want to acknowledge Dr. Sue-Huei

2856

Chen and MD, PhD Yu-Hsuan Lin from the Department of
Psychology in National Taiwan University for their
assistance regarding Hilbert-Huang Transform, and to permit
the use of SPAI questionnaire in the research.

References
Abrahamse, W. , Steg, L. , Vlek, C. , & Rothengatter, T.
2007. The effect of tailored information, goal setting, and
tailored feedback on household energy use, energy-related
behaviors, and behavioral antecedents. Journal of
Environmental Psychology 27(4), 265–276.
Block, J.J. 2008. Issues for DSM-V: Internet Addiction. The
American Journal of Psychiatry 165, 306–207.
Cheever, N.A. , Rosen, L.D. , Carrier, L.M. , & Chavez, A.
2014. Out of sight is not out of mind: The impact of
restricting wireless mobile device use on anxiety levels
among low, moderate and high users. Computers in Human
Behavior 37, 290–297.
Davis, R.A. 2001. A cognitive-behavioral model of
pathological Internet use. Computers in Human Behavior
17, 187–195.
Hansen, P.G. & Jespersen, A. 2013. Nudge and the
Manipulation of Choice. A Framework for the Responsible
Use of Nudge Approach to Behaviour Change in Public
Policy. European Journal of Risk Regulation 2013, 3–28.
Hong, F.-Y. , Chiu, S.-I. , & Huang, D.-H. 2012. A model of
the relationship between psychological characteristics,
mobile phone addiction and use of mobile phones by
Taiwanese university female students. Computers in
Human Behavior 28, 2152–2159.
Johnson, E.J. & Goldstein, D.G. 2003. Do Defaults Save
Lives? Science 302, 1338.
Kahneman, D. 2003. Maps of Bounded Rationality:
Psychology for Behavioral Economics. American
Economic Review 93, 1449–1475.
Kim, B. 2013. Mobile Consumer Behavior: Myths and
Reality. Library Technology Reports 49, 9–14.
Klasnja, P. , Consolvo, S. , McDonald, D.W. , Landay, J.A. ,
& Pratt, W. 2009. Using Mobile & Personal Sensing
Technologies to Support Health Behavior Change in
Everyday Life: Lessons Learned. AMIA Annual
Symposium Proceedings 2009, 338–342.
Krishnan, A. , Kurtzberg, T.R. , & Naquin, C.E. 2014. The
Curse of the Smartphone: Electronic Multitasking in
Negotiations. Negotiation Journal 30.
Lee, Y.-K. , Chang, C.-T. , Lin, Y. , & Cheng, Z.-H. 2014.
The dark side of smartphone usage: Psychological traits,
compulsive behavior and technostress. Computers in
Human Behavior 31, 373–383.
Leung, L. 2008. Linking Psychological Attributes to
Addiction and Improper Use of the Mobile Phone Among
Adolescents in Hong Kong. Journal of Children and Media
2, 93–113.
Leung, L. & Liang, J. 2016. Encyclopedia of Mobile Phone
Behavior. IGI Global.
Lin, Y.-H. , Chang, L.-R. , Lee, Y.-H. , Tseng, H.-W. , Kuo,
T.B.J. , & Chen, S.-H. 2014. Development and Validation

of the Smartphone Addiction Inventory (SPAI). PLoS ONE
9, e98312.
Lin, Y.-H. , Lin, Y.-C. , Lee, Y.-H. , Lin, P.-H. , Lin, S.-H. ,
Chang, L.-R. , Tseng, H.-W. , Yen, L.-Y. , Yang, C.C.H. ,
& Kuo, T.B.J. 2015. Time distortion associated with
smartphone addiction: Identifying smartphone addiction
via a mobile application (App). Journal of Psychiatric
Research 65, 139–145.
Locke, E.A. & Latham, G.P. 2002. Building a practically
useful theory of goal setting and task motivation. A 35-year
odyssey. The American Psychologist 57, 705–717.
Michie, S. , Atkins, L. , & West, L. 2014. The Behaviour
Change Wheel Book - A Guide To Designing Interventions.
Great Britain: Silverback Publishing.
Michie, S. , van Stralen, M.M. , & West, R. 2011. The
behaviour change wheel: A new method for characterising
and designing behaviour change interventions.
Implementation Science 6, 42.
Milkman, K. Beshears, J., Choi, J., Laibson, D., & Madrian,
B. 2011. Using implementation intentions prompts to
enhance influenza vaccination rates. PNAS 108, 1041510420.
Montag, C. , Błaszkiewicz, K. , Lachmann, B. , Sariyska, R.
, Andone, I. , Trendafilov, B. , & Markowetz, A. 2015a.
Recorded Behavior as a Valuable Resource for Diagnostics
in Mobile Phone Addiction: Evidence from
Psychoinformatics. Behavioral Sciences 5, 434–442.
Montag, C. , Błaszkiewicz, K. , Sariyska, R. , Lachmann, B.
, Andone, I. , Trendafilov, B. , Eibes, M. , & Markowetz,
A. 2015b. Smartphone usage in the 21st century: who is
active on WhatsApp? BMC Research Notes 8, 331.
Mueller, W., van der Heijden, E., Klein, T. & Potters, J. 2011.
Nudges and Impatience: Evidence from a Large Scale
Experiment, Vienna Economics Papers, University of
Vienna, Department of Economics.
Oulasvirta, A. , Rattenbury, T. , Ma, L. , & Raita, E. 2012.
Habits make smartphone use more pervasive. Personal and
Ubiquitous Computing 16, 105–114.
Rainie, L. & Zickuhr, K. 2015. Americans’ Views on Mobile
Etiquette. Pew Research Center.
Ryan, G. W., & Wagner, G. J. (2003). Pill taking
“routinization”: a critical factor to understanding episodic
medication adherence. AIDS Care 15, 795-806.
Shu, L.L. , Mazar, N. , Gino, F. , Ariely, D. , & Bazerman,
M.H. 2012. Signing at the beginning makes ethics salient
and decreases dishonest self-reports in comparison to
signing at the end. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 109, 15197–15200.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. 1973. Availability: A Heuristic
for Judging Frequency and Probability. Cognitive
Psychology 5, 207-232.
Thaler, R. & Sunstein, C. 2008. Nudge - Improving Decisions
About Health, Wealth, and Happiness. New Haven &
London: Yale University Press.

2857

