Perceptions of Psychological Momentum in Basketball
Thomas Hilbig1 (thomas.hilbig@student.adelaide.edu.au)
Matthew B. Welsh1,2 (matthew.welsh@adelaide.edu.au)
Paul H. Delfabbro1 (paul.delfabbro@adelaide.edu.au)
1. School of Psychology, 2. Australian School of Petroleum, University of Adelaide, Australia
Abstract
Psychological momentum (PM) and the hot hand are related
concepts describing people’s beliefs regarding streaks of
superior performance. This study examined the susceptibility
of perceptions of PM to changes in the streakiness of
otherwise equivalent series. Fifty-five male participants (31
basketballers and 24 control) completed a ‘hot-cognition’
experiment where they rated individual and team momentum
and assessed the likelihood of a future shot’s success after
watching sequences of basketball shots. The experimental
manipulation of the order of shots strongly affected
participants’ ratings of momentum and, less strongly, the
probability they assigned to the future shot (i.e. the hot hand
effect). Basketballers showed stronger reactions to
manipulations of order than the controls, which could be
attributed to greater investment in the task. The results
demonstrate the importance of distinguishing between PM
and the hot hand and also provide a valuable extension of
prior work showing such effects into more realistic scenarios.
Keywords: hot hand; psychological momentum; basketball.

Introduction
The ‘hot hand’ is regarded as a crucial determinant of
success by coaches (Raab, Gula, & Gigerenzer, 2012), fans
(Markman & Guenther, 2007) and players (Gilovich et al.,
1985) – with players altering the frequency and difficulty of
their shot attempts after making a series of shots in a row.
Early research, however, mostly suggested that the hot
hand in basketball was a ‘fallacy’, finding field and ‘freethrow’ shooting streaks did not significantly deviate from
what was expected by chance (Gilovich, Vallone, &
Tversky, 1985). Conversely, some studies support the hot
hand in intercollegiate (Mace, Lalli, Shea, & Nevin, 1992)
and professional basketballers, but some had issues of
limited sample size and questionable method of analysis.
Failures to detect a hot hand, however, have also been
questioned on several fronts. For example, the complexity
of the basketball environment, wherein the ‘hot’ player may
start to take lower probability shots due to their increased
confidence or the opposing team may pay additional
attention to a ‘hot’ player thereby disguising any effect.
Attempts to counter such objections include analysis of
free-throws (e.g., Gilovich et al., 1985) but others (Koehler
& Conley, 2003) have argued that free throws are not
conducive for a hot hand due to their relatively high
probability of success (~75% for professionals) and the time
lag between free throw attempts for the same individual. In
fact, given the hot hand is considered a temporary
phenomenon (Hamberger & Iso-Ahola, 2004), which breaks

disrupt (Mace et al., 1992), the conditions of ordinary NBA
games – with time outs, substitutions and a single player
rarely making 15 shots in a game - may not be conducive to
its occurrence. This suggests that, if the hot hand exists, its
existence is overgeneralized – that is, occurs less often than
it is perceived to have. Indeed, Koehler and Conley’s (2003)
analysis of the National Basketball Association (NBA)
Long Distance Shootout Contest - in which a shooter is
unguarded but the available time and number of shots is
constrained – failed to detect non-random shooting patterns,
despite commentator’s accounts to the contrary.
However, people have demonstrated an ability to
discriminate between streaky and steady shooters in
basketball shot sequences where statistical tests could not
(Hammack, Cooper, Flach & Houpt, 2017). While observers
have the tendency to be sensitive to runs, this does not
necessarily indicate cognitive error, but perhaps rational
mechanisms for processing complex information. That is,
observers will act as if the hot hand exists and they are
capable of accurately perceiving and harnessing its effects.
Iso-Ahola and Mobily (1980) proposed psychological
momentum (PM) as a construct to account for these
perceptions and subsequent behaviors: “an added or gained
psychological power that changes a person’s view of
him/herself or of others, or others’ views of him/her and
themselves” (p. 392). In competitive scenarios, PM is a
zero-sum game: obtained at the expense of a competitor.
Importantly, PM does not reflect superior performance i.e.
a hot hand, as suggested by Avugos and Bar-Eli (2015), but
rather a psychological phenomenon (Iso-Ahola & Dotson,
2015). The key distinction stems from an individual
experiencing improved neurophysiological performance, as
opposed to just changes in psychological components (e.g.
confidence, internal attributions, perceived superiority over
opponents). For example, an athlete may experience
improved belief in their ability due to previous success, but
not have this result in meaningful changes in skill execution.
Furthermore, it cannot be assumed that improvements to
confidence necessarily result in a greater probability of
subsequent success. As noted above, initial success could
lead to ‘over-confidence’, causing athletes to make riskier
decisions than normal (Jones & Harwood, 2008).
With this in mind it is important to distinguish between
psychological momentum, the perception of hot hand
effects, and actual hot hand effects in experimental tasks.
Examining the thoughts and attitudes of athletes during
live play is, of course, unfeasible. Accordingly, this study
focusses on the perception of PM by spectators and the

2211

implications of this for their predictions/behaviors – that is,
their expectations regarding the effects of such
psychological momentum (e.g., the Hot Hand). Previous
studies examining people’s perceptions about sequences
have presented hypothetical scenarios (e.g. Ayton &
Fischer, 2004), but context is important to making
inferences about sequences (Matthews, 2013) and actual
sporting experiences are thought to be more conducive to
perceptions of PM (Jones & Harwood, 2008). Therefore, the
intent was to maximize participant engagement, without the
difficulties arising from assessing participants during live
play. A 'hot cognition' experiment was, therefore, devised
wherein both basketballers and non-basketballers watched
actual footage of basketball games with varied presentation
of sequences of successful and unsuccessful shots.

Aims and Hypotheses
1. Reordering series of basketball plays with the same
number of successes and failures will alter the psychological
momentum assigned by observers to a featured team/player.
2. This will alter the probability assigned to a future
outcome following the observed sequence (Hot Hand).
3. Basketballers, with greater investment in the game, will
react more strongly to manipulations of momentum.

Method
Participants
Participants were 55 male, English speakers with at least a
basic understanding of basketball rules and terminology,
aged 18-31 (M = 21.4, SD = 3.2) and recruited from three
sources: local basketball clubs (n=22), 1st year Psychology
students (n=7) and the general public (n=26). Participants
were grouped as basketballers (N = 31) or control (N = 24)
by their self-reported frequency of involvement in
basketball. The basketballers were somewhat younger (M =
20.6, SD = 2.6) than the control group (M = 22.4, SD = 3.7).
The psychology students participated for course credit.
Additional participants, recruited via emails to basketball
clubs, flyers posted on the Adelaide University campus and
Facebook advertising, received a $10 gift card for their
participation or chance to win a $50 gift voucher.

Materials
Online Survey
Prepared in SurveyMonkey, the survey asked for
demographic details and required participants to indicate
how often (daily, several days a week, weekly, fortnightly,
monthly and rarely/never) they engaged with various
aspects of basketball: playing, watching or taking an interest
in (e.g., reading about). The survey also included measures
of: representation bias, numerical reasoning, perception of
sequences, susceptibility to outcome bias, risk-attitudes,
impulsivity and hot hand beliefs as described below. These
were included as potential covariates/confounds that might
differ between the groups and thus need to be controlled for:
Representativeness Bias. Four items were used to assess

respondent’s beliefs about sequences in random processes:
Lambos, Delfabbro and Puglies’ (2007) coin toss scenario,
where participants judge which of three series of outcomes
(e.g. HTHTTHTHTHTH) is most likely; and three items
adapted from Ayton and Fischer (2004) asking whether
sequences of 16-digit long binary outcomes with equal hits
and misses but different alternation rates (0.81, 0.31 and
0.19) were generated by random or human processes.
Cognitive Reflection. Frederick’s (2005) 3-item CRT was
used to measure participants’ tendency to override
predictable, but incorrect intuitive responses. Lower CRT
scores indicate greater susceptibility to decision-making
biases (Toplak, West & Stanovich, 2011) and lower
numeracy (e.g., Welsh, Burns & Delfabbro, 2013).
Outcome Bias. Two scenarios described a physician’s
decision to conduct surgery on a suffering patient (based on
Baron & Hershey, 1988). These were near identical but the
first described an 8% chance of death but a good outcome
(successful operation) while the second gave a 2% chance of
death but bad outcome (patient death). Rating the 1st
decision as better therefore displays outcome bias.
Risk Attitude. As belief in a hot hand is greater in those
who regularly gamble and demonstrate a willingness to take
greater risks in these scenarios (Wilke, Scheibehenne,
Gaissmaier, McCanney & Barrett, 2014), the 12-item
gambling Domain-Specific Risk-Attitude Scale (Weber,
Blais, and Betz, 2002) was used to assess risk attitudes
towards: likelihood of gambling; perception of gambling
risk; and expected benefits of gambling.
Impulsivity. The BIS-15 (Spinella, 2007) was used to
assess impulsivity.
Hot Hand Beliefs. A 2-item, self-report measure
developed by Gilovich, Vallone and Tversky (1985), which
assesses a respondent’s endorsement of sequential
dependence among shots in basketball.
Hot Cognition Task
The experimental task was composed of four sequences of
basketball edited from footage of American college
basketball games. The broadcast scoreboard was blurred out
in the video footage to control for outcome bias, and the
audio was removed to prevent crowd and broadcast
commentator reactions influencing participant’s responses.
All the plays within a sequence featured the same player.
Each sequence condition included three made shots (H)
and three missed shots (M) but a different order of shot
outcomes (see Table 1). All were followed by the identified
player being fouled in the process of making another,
successful shot: resulting in a free throw (AND1 outcome),
but the outcome of this was not shown. Given the absence
of audio, the researcher indicated when the identified player
was fouled – signaling the end of the video.
Looking at Table 1, one sees that the conditions convey
varying senses of psychological momentum (PM). The
Positive Recency (PR) and Negative Recency (NR)
conditions have low alternation rates of hits versus missed
shots and, therefore, longer outcome runs. Prior to the

2212

Increasing
Momentum

Table 1: Shot sequence outcomes for experimental
conditions.
Condition
Negative Recency
Alternation
Weak Positive
Positive Recency

Order of Shot sequence
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
H H H M M M H
H M H M H M H
M H M H M H H
M M M H H H H

Note: H = hit, M = miss.

Procedure
Participants completed the survey detailed above prior to
taking part in the experiment – either online or in person.
The experiment was conducted individually for each
participant to avoid confounds arising in groups (e.g. verbal
commentary influencing responses). Participants were
provided information regarding the nature of the experiment
and screened for (basic) understanding of basketball rules
and terminology used for various self-report measures.
The experiment was conducted within-subjects, with
participants shown the four, Hot Cognition Task sequences
(in a randomized order). Following each, participants were
asked 4 questions assessing their beliefs around:
1) a player’s likelihood of making the free throw resulting
from the last play (Free Throw);
2) the player being ‘on a roll’ (Individual Momentum);
3) how difficult his shots were (Difficulty); and
4) the team having momentum (Team Momentum).
Responses were scored on a 5-point Likert scale: 1 (not at
all) to 5 (extremely). These questions - based on a pilot
study and previous qualitative research e.g. Koehler &
Conley (2003) - measure the participant’s perception of
individual and team momentum, and perceived difficulty
due to theorized mediation effects.

Results
The first two Hypotheses were that perceptions of
psychological momentum would vary with the patterns of
hits and misses in the four different conditions. To examine
this, the mean ratings given by participants to each of the
four dependent measures under each of the four conditions
are shown in Figure 1. Looking at this figure, a clear
distinction can be seen between the pattern of results for the
measures of psychological momentum (Individual and
Team Momentum) and the remaining measures – Free
Throw likelihood and Shot Difficulty. Starting with the last
it seems that, as would be hoped, participants’ perceptions
of shot difficulty did not vary across conditions in any
obvious manner. A One-Way RM ANOVA, however,

indicated that the differences across conditions were
significant, F(3,162), p <.001, indicating that Shot Difficulty
needed to be included as a covariate in the analyses
described below. Analysis of the Free Throw ratings look
similar, F(3,162), p <.001, but here Bonferroni post hoc
tests confirmed that two positive conditions (Weak Positive
and Positive Recency) produced significantly higher ratings
than the conditions with more recent negative outcomes.
5

Mean Rating with 95%CI

AND1 outcome, the PR sequence contains a streak of three
hits, while the NR sequence contains a streak of three
misses to convey lower momentum (although weakened by
the need to have the same successful, fouled basket at the
end of the sequence). The two other conditions were
intermediate between these – with greater alternation.

a) Free Throw

5

4

4

3

3

2

5

NR

Alt

WP

PR

c) Team Momentum

2

5

4

4

3

3

2

NR

Alt

WP

PR

b) Indiv. Momentum

2

NR

Alt

WP

PR

d) Shot Difficulty

NR

Alt

WP

PR

Figure 1. Mean ratings of dependent measures by condition.
Note: NR = negative recency; Alt = alternating; WP = weak
positive recency; and PR = positive recency.
By contrast, the measures of individual and team
momentum both show clear, linear trends with participants
giving higher ratings in those conditions with more, recent
positive outcomes. One-way Repeated Measures ANOVAs
confirmed these differences as significant F(3, 162) = 63.4
& 26.7, respectively, p < .001 in both cases and Bonferroni
post hoc tests indicated that all conditions differed
significantly from all others.

Covariates
Correlational and principal component analyses (excluded
for reasons of space) were used to determine which
covariates should be accounted for in comparisons between
basketballers and controls. This indicated only five
variables/factors related significantly to the dependent
measures: 1) Representation bias (coin toss); 2)
Representation bias (high alternation rate); 3) CRT; 4)
Outcome bias; and 5) Outcome perceptions (a factor
composed of beliefs about hot hand and momentum).

Basketballers vs Non-Basketballers
Our third hypothesis was that basketballers, due to their
relative investment in the sport, thus responding to the
experimental manipulations more strongly. That is, that
their ratings would tend to be more extreme than nonbasketballers – lower in the conditions with more negative

2213

outcomes and/or higher in conditions with more positive
outcomes prior to the final observation.
To examine potential differences, the ratings provided by
the two groups for the dependent measures are shown in
Figure 2. Looking at the three subplots of Figure 2, one sees
two distinct patterns. The first is in the Free Throw data
(subplot a), where, in every condition, the basketballers rate
the likelihood of the free throw being successful as higher
than the non-basketballers – reflecting perhaps a better
understanding of the difference in accuracy between field
shooting and free throw shooting.
In subplots b and c, by comparison, we see the pattern
predicted by Hypothesis 3 – with Basketballers’ responses
being more extreme than control subjects – i.e., lower when
there has been a run of missed shots (NR condition) and
higher following a series of successful shots (PR condition).

Mean Rating with 95%CI

5

a. Free Throw

5

4

4

3

3

2

5

NR

Alt

WP

PR

2

b. Indiv. Momentum

NR

Alt

WP

PR

B'baller
Control

3
2

NR

Alt

WP

Table 2: Summary of ANCOVAs for dependent measures

FT
IM
TM

c. Team Momentum

4

(d = 0.14) and Alt (d = 0.20) conditions. There was also a
significant covariate interaction: Condition × Representation
bias (high alternation), F(3, 46) = 2.60, p < .05. This
suggests that Individual Momentum is predicted by
susceptibility to attribute random outcomes to human action.
For Team Momentum, a significant difference was found
between groups (p < .05, 2-tailed), but the main effect of
condition and the Group × Condition interaction just failed
to reach significance (p = .07 and .13, respectively, 2tailed). Given the directionality of our hypotheses, these
near significant results were examined with post hoc
Bonferroni tests, which indicated that Basketballers
perceived less momentum than the control group in the NR
(d = 0.25) and Alternation conditions (d = 0.35), but no
more in the PR (d = 0.11) and WP (d = 0.04) conditions,
which partially support the hypothesis.

PR

Figure 2. Comparisons between Basketballer and Control
subject ratings of dependent measures by condition. Note:
NR = negative recency; Alt = alternating; WP = weak
positive; and PR = positive recency.
Group by Condition Repeated Measures ANCOVAs were
run for each dependent measure, incorporating the
covariates noted above. The results of these are shown in
Table 2. Looking first at the data for Free Throw
probability, one sees that, despite the pattern in Figure 2, the
main effect of Group in the ANCOVA just fails to reach
significance (p = .07, 2-tailed). The effect of condition was
clearly non-significant (p = .84, 2-tailed) and there was no
interaction between the two factors.
For Individual Momentum perceptions, by contrast, a
significant main effect was found for condition (p < .001, 2tailed) but not between groups (p = .67, 2-tailed). However,
in line with our hypothesis, there was a significant Group ×
Condition interaction (p = .03, 2-tailed). Bonferroni post
hoc tests indicated that Basketballers perceived more
individual momentum than the Controls in the PR (d = 0.16)
and WP (d = 0.30) conditions, and perceived less in the NR

Group
Condition
Interaction
2
F
p η2
F
p
F
p
η
η2
3.48 .07 .07 0.29 .84 .01 0.07 .98 .00
0.19 .67 .00 6.89 <.001 .13 3.02 .03 .06
4.12 .05 .08 2.60 .07 .05 2.01 .13 .04

Note: FT = Free throw, IM = Individual momentum, TM =
Team momentum. Greenhouse-Geisser corrections applied.
Degrees of Freedom. Two-tailed p values in all cases.

Discussion
The above results provide support for all three Hypotheses.
There is strong evidence that reordering the same number of
successful and failed basketball plays to produce streaks of
hits and misses affected the participants’ perceptions of
psychological momentum – for both the individual player
and their team (H1). The evidence that this perception of
momentum translates into a belief in a hot hand in the
statistical sense (H2) – that is, altering the probability of a
future shot is, however, weaker. Finally, there are
significant differences between the responses of
basketballers and non-basketballers and clear interaction
effects between group membership and the strength of our
psychological momentum manipulation (H3). These results
are discussed, individually and in greater detail, below.

Perception of Psychological Momentum
As noted above, Hypothesis 1, that perceptions of
psychological momentum (PM) could be influenced by
simple reordering of sets of basketball plays, was supported
by the results. Specifically, participants rated the
momentum of both the individual player and their team as
significantly higher when the plays were ordered so as to
have longer strings of hits at the end.
Parker, Paul & Reinholtz (2016) similarly found that
changes in perceived momentum of a contrived guessing
game were greater as outcomes alternated. While perhaps
not surprising, building upon the findings from hypothetical

2214

manipulations is a valuable extension of such work –
demonstrating that the effect holds in a task more closely
approximating real world situations but which removed a
number of cues for momentum that would exist in realworld situations. For example, the broadcast scoreboard in
the game footage shown to participants was blurred to
control for potential outcome bias and prevent the score
being used as a reference point by participants regarding a
team’s actual momentum. The footage was also played
without sound so as remove the crowd reaction which might
provide another cue to a team’s momentum.
While these were confounds for the present study, their
omission is also expected to have dampened the extent to
which participants identified patterns of team momentum.
That is, in equivalent, real world situations their effects seen
here might well be stronger.

Expectations Regarding the ‘Hot Hand’
Given the clear distinctions drawn by participants between
the momentum of the individual players and their teams
across the different order conditions, the weaker effect of
the experimental manipulation on their predictions of future
success requires some explanation. While there was some
evidence that people who had seen longer sequences of
successful shots tended to rate the probability of the
following free throw succeeding more highly than those
who had seen more failures at the end of the task, this
relationship was weak and non-significant when controlling
for several covariates and did not follow the clearly linear
pattern seen in the perceptions of momentum.
Had no relationship been seen, that could have supported
the notion that PM is just a performance label used to
evaluate whether past performances were successful or not
(Cornelius et al., 1997) with no relevance to the future. The
partial relationship, however, requires more explanation.
A possibility is that the experimental task, which had
participants watch a series of seven field shots but then
asked them to rate the likelihood of a following free throw
being successful acted to limit the perceived transferability
of momentum. That is, not only does the foul and
subsequent free throw provoke a break in play (thereby
potentially ending a hot hand effect, as described in
Hamberger & Iso-Ahola, 2004) but also introduces a change
in the type of task. Participants may have recognized that a
free-throw is a markedly different shot than any field goal
attempt and thus, regarded the player’s shooting form as less
relevant, reducing the strength of any effect.

Group Differences
As predicted in our third hypothesis, basketballers’
responses differed significantly from those of nonbasketballers. The first observation, while not hypothesized,
is that basketballers rated the chance of the free throw being
successful higher in every case than the non-basketballer,
reflecting their superior understanding of the actual success
rates for elite level athletes. Other than this, though, their
pattern of free throw predictions across the four conditions

is near-identical to that of the non-basketballers.
Of course, the fact that results supporting Hypothesis 3
are seen for perceptions of individual and team momentum
– with basketballers being more strongly affected – but this
fails to be converted into greater predicted likelihood of free
throw success could fit with explanation given above
regarding the overall weakness of these results. That is, if
basketballers have a stronger belief in the separation
between field shooting and free throw shooting
performance, that would tend to flatten out their estimates of
free throw likelihood more than is seen in the nonbasketballers – thereby counteracting their stronger
perceptions of momentum.
As to why basketballers showed these stronger effects:
perhaps simple interest in the game increases investment
and thus cues greater attention to the scenario and patterns
within it; or seeing such patterns calls to mind prior
experiences of momentum and, within the experimental
context, basketballers have more than non-basketballers.
Covariates
As a brief note: as ANCOVAs were used to eliminate the
possibility that results might be driven by differences
between the groups. In these analyses, one covariate (a
measure of representativeness bias) was highlighted as
predicting individual momentum ratings: i.e., participants
who attributed random sequences to human agents were
more likely to rate the player as being ‘on a roll’. However,
none of the four measures of representativeness bias
differed significantly between the groups.

Caveats and Future Directions
While providing interesting results and at least some support
for all of our hypotheses, there are a number of limitations
of the study, which could be addressed in future work.
The first is the limited sample size. This resulted from
difficulties in recruiting sufficient basketballers and was
exacerbated by the decision to limit recruitment to males so
as to eliminate the potential for gender moderation effects of
PM (Iso-Ahola & Dotson, 2014). Extending the study to
include women (while taking into account how perceptions
of may PM differ between men and women) and widening
the recruitment (via online participation, for instance) could
address this and assist in determining whether the less
convincing results herein result from insufficient power.
A secondary concern lies in how the experimental
measures were scored - on a 5-point scale from ‘not at all’
to ‘extremely’. The question arising here is whether ‘not at
all’ was regarded as a neutral (e.g., not on a roll) or negative
(e.g., on a losing streak) response by participants. This
should be clarified in future work.
Participants’ responses to the dependent variables may
have been influenced by undertaking several cognitive bias
measures. To avoid this potential confound the hot
cognition experiment could be conducted prior to
completing relevant individual differences measures.
Finally, as noted above, while the use of a free throw as
the shot to be predicted was done purposely – in order to

2215

minimize other contextual factors for the predicted shot (e.g.
in any differences in distance, angle, and opposition actions)
– this may have undermined the transference of perceived
momentum into future outcomes. This could be avoided in a
number of ways – none, however, simple. For example, an
exhaustive pre-test assessment of plays could have experts
rate their equivalency prior to constructing the scenarios.
Alternatively, it might be possible to stage specific plays
– either using real players or within a basketball game, for
example. All of these, however, would require a significant
amount of pilot work prior to any experimentation.

Conclusions
While most research into momentum and the hot hand has
been concerned with directly substantiating or refuting their
existence, the present study aimed, instead, to explore
participant’s beliefs and perceptions regarding these - within
the context of basketball shot sequences. Consistent with
much of literature regarding PM, the ordering of sequential
outcomes affected participant perceptions: positive recency
sequences increased the likelihood that the focal team and
player had momentum; while negative recency sequences
were considered by participants as evidence of the player
and team not being on a roll. These effects were more
strongly reported by basketballers across conditions in the
present study, compared to the control group, suggesting
that domain-specific experience influences the perception of
these patterns. The results also illustrate that further research
is warranted to clarify why differences exist between
participant’s perceptions of momentum and their predictions
of future success (i.e., hot hand beliefs).

Acknowledgements
MBW thanks Santos and Woodside for their support of the
CIBP at the Australian School of Petroleum.

References
Avugos, S., & Bar-Eli, M. (2015). A second thought on the
success-breeds success model: Comment on Iso-Ahola
and Dotson (2014). Review of General Psychology, 19,
106-111.
Ayton, P., & Fischer, I. (2004). The hot hand fallacy and the
gambler’s fallacy: two faces of subjective randomness?
Memory and Cognition, 32, 1369-1378.
Baron, J., & Hershey, J. (1988). Outcome bias in decision
evaluation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
54(4): 569-579.
Cornelius, A., Silva, J. A., Conroy, D. E., & Petersen, G.
(1997). The projected performance model: Relating
cognitive and performance antecedents of psychological
momentum. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 84, 475-485.
Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive reflection and decision
making. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(4), 25-42.
Hamberger, M., & Iso-Ahola, S. (2004). Psychological
momentum and athletic performance: A critical review of
research. Journal of Contemporary Athletics, 1, 207–226.

Hammack, T., Cooper, J., Flach, J. M., & Houpt, J. (2017).
Toward an Ecological Theory of Rationality: Debunking
the Hot Hand “Illusion”. Psychology, 29(1), 35-53.
Iso-Ahola, S., & Dotson, C. (2014). Psychological
momentum: Why success breeds success. Review of
General Psychology, 18, 19–33.
Iso-Ahola, S. E., and Dotson, C. O. (2015). Psychological
momentum—Not a statistical but psychological
phenomenon. Rev. Gen. Psychol. 19, 112–116.
Iso-Ahola, S., & Mobily, K. (1980). Psychological
momentum: A phenomenon and empirical (unobtrusive)
validation of its influence in sport competition.
Psychological Reports, 46, 391–401.
Jones, M. I., & Harwood, C. G. (2008). Psychological
momentum within competitive soccer: Players’
perspectives. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 20,
57-72.
Koehler, J. J., & Conley, C. A. (2003). The ‘‘hot hand’’
myth in professional basketball. Journal of Sport &
Exercise Physiology, 25, 253-259.
Lambos, C., Delfabbro, P., & Puglies, S. (2007). Adolescent
Gambling in South Australia. Adelaide, South Australia:
Department for Education and Children’s Services for the
Independent Gambling Authority of South Australia.
Mace, F., Lalli, J., Shea, M., & Nevin, J. (1992). Behavioral
momentum in college basketball. Journal of Applied
Behavior Analysis, 25, 657–663.
Markman, K., & Guenther, C. (2007). Psychological
momentum: Intuitive physics and naïve beliefs.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 33, 800-812.
Matthews, W. J. (2013). Relatively random: Context effects
on perceived randomness and predicted outcomes.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 39, 1642-1648.
Parker, J. R., Paul, I., & Reinholtz, N. (2016). Perceived
Momentum
Influences
Responsibility
Judgments.
Proceedings of the 38th annual conference cognitive science
society.
Raab, M., Gula, B., & Gigerenzer, G. (2012). The hot hand
exists in volleyball and is used for allocation decisions.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 18, 81–94.
Spinella, M. (2007). Normative data and a short form of the
Barratt Impulsiveness Scale. International Journal of
Neuroscience, 117, 359-368.
Toplak, M. E., West, R. F., & Stanovich, K. E. (2011). The
Cognitive Reflection Test as a predictor of performance
on heuristics and biases tasks. Memory & Cognition, 39,
1275-1289.
Welsh, M., Burns, N., & Delfabbro, P. (2013). The
Cognitive Reflection Test: how much more than
Numerical Ability? Cognitive Science Society (pp. 15871592). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Wilke, A., Scheibehenne, B., Gaissmaier, W., McCanney P.,
& Barrett, H.C. (2014). Illusionary pattern detection in
habitual gamblers. Evolution and Human Behavior,
Volume 35 , Issue 4 , 291 – 297.

2216

