Perceptual contrast and response assimilation in sequential categorization
without feedback
James A. Hampton (hampton@city.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, City, University of London
Northampton Square, London EC1V OHB

Stewart and Brown (2005) proposed that the category
contrast effect could be part of a pair of heuristics in which
the similarity and dissimilarity of a stimulus to the
preceding stimulus is used to inform its categorization. In
their Similarity-Dissimilarity (SD-GCM) adaptation of
Nosofsky’s Generalized Context Model (GCM) (Nosofsky,
1986), they proposed that categorization takes account not
only of similarity to the exemplars of a class, as in the
GCM, but also dissimilarity. Adopting Nosofsky and
Palmeri’s (1997) proposal that recently classified exemplars
will have greater influence on the decision, the SD-GCM
proposes that when a stimulus is very similar to one on the
preceding trial or trials, then it should tend to be put in the
same category, while when it is very dissimilar, it will tend
to be put in the opposite category. The model thus predicts a
contrast effect that increases with the dissimilarity between
neighbouring stimuli in a sequence, and turns into an
assimilation effect as the two become increasingly similar.
Jones, Love and Maddox (2006) describe this prediction in
terms of a generalization curve from one trial to the next
that is positive for similar items (assimilation), but negative
for highly dissimilar items (suppressing categorization, and
thus generating contrast).
Evidence for the SD-GCM was also found in a series of
studies by Hampton, Estes and Simmons (2005). In their
paradigm, pairs of ambiguous stimuli were presented
simultaneously and participants judged whether both, just
one, just the other, or neither were in a category. A strong
contrast effect was observed, seen as a bias to judge that just
one stimulus was in the category, rather than both or neither.
The aim of the current study is to investigate contrast
and assimilation in sequential judgments empirically. To
provide a clear picture of the effect of the previous trial
however, it is important to be able to separate out the effects
of the previous stimulus from the previous feedback
(category membership). Jones et al. (2006) pointed out that
Stewart et al.’s (2002) procedure of providing correct
feedback on every trial means that the two effects are
confounded. To remove this confounding, Jones et al.
introduced probabilistic category feedback, with the
likelihood of a stimulus being categorized in a given
category ranging from 90% to 10% across the range of
stimuli. With this task, it was possible to separate out the
effect of the previous stimulus – which they argued would
be based on perceptual contrast – from the effect of the
previous feedback, which would be a decisional effect. In
their study they found that the previous stimulus produced a
perceptual contrast effect, while the previous feedback
produced assimilation when stimuli were similar, and
contrast when they were very different. The heuristics

Abstract
Sequential categorization of perceptual stimuli typically
shows contrast from one trial to the next. Using familiar
categories of animals and faces, contrast effects were
dissociated from assimilation effects. Two independent main
effects were observed: contrast to the preceding stimulus, and
assimilation to the previous response. It is argued that
contrast and assimilation may reflect different processes in
categorization.
Keywords: categorization, contrast, assimilation

Introduction
Learning to categorize stimuli along a perceptual
dimension (e.g. the pitch of a tone) would appear to require
the establishment of a criterion value against which each
stimulus can be judged. Above the criterion stimuli fall in
one category, and below in the other (Ashby & Gott, 1988).
However Stewart, Brown, and Chater (2002; 2005) argued
that people may be unable to keep a consistent criterion in
mind through the course of a sequence of such decisions. It
is well known from the literature on absolute identification
(where each value on the dimension must be identified
separately) that learning to make such judgments is very
difficult and prone to bias (Garner, 1953; Baird, Green, &
Luce, 1980). In the same way, Stewart et al. (2002) argued,
learning and retaining a given boundary on a perceptual
dimension such as the pitch of a tone, will also be hard.
Instead of making a judgment relative to an absolute value
held in memory, people may instead rely on the difference
between the current stimulus and the previous one. Since in
a categorization task, feedback is normally provided on
every trial, people can use the feedback on the previous
trial, together with the direction and degree of change
between the previous and the current stimulus to arrive at a
reasonably accurate judgment. Stewart et al. referred to this
way of doing the task as a MAC, or Memory and Contrast,
strategy. Such strategies can lead to reasonable accuracy in
the task, without recourse to the representation of absolute
values in memory.
In this and subsequent research (Stewart & Brown,
2004, 2005; Stewart, Brown & Chater, 2005; Stewart &
Morin, 2007), Stewart and colleagues have shown that the
use of MAC strategies produces a category contrast effect
between one trial and the next. If a sequence of ten tone
stimuli is divided into two categories #1 to #5 as “low” and
#6 to #10 as “high”, then a given stimulus next to the
borderline (e.g. #5) will be more likely to be correctly called
“low” if preceded by a clearly high case (e.g. #10) than by a
clearly low case (e.g. #1).

470

proposed by the SDGCM were therefore supported by the
decisional contrast and assimilation observed, while in
addition the effect of one stimulus was shown to lead to
contrast with the next. Looking at the parametric properties
of these two effects, they suggested that Stewart et al.’s
original category contrast effect was probably perceptual in
origin, since the decisional contrast only appeared at
extreme distances.
The present study aimed to extend the method used by
Jones et al. (2006) by differentiating the effects of the
stimulus and the prior category in a simpler way. One
problem with probabilistic category feedback is that
participants may develop higher order models of the task.
For example, if the most typical member of Category A is
actually categorized by feedback as a B on 10% of trials,
(non-modal feedback) the participant may develop a
justified belief that the feedback is erratic and sometimes
gives the wrong answer. They may even believe that the
stimulus-response mapping has changed (Berg, 1948). Nonmodal feedback is thus likely to cause disturbance to the
current response strategy. Indeed, the reported results (Jones
et al., 2006, Figure 5) are consistent with this suggestion.
When the previous trial gave modal (“correct”) feedback,
the response curve rose smoothly with position along the
physical dimension, asymptoting near 0.95 for the last two
or three stimuli. When the previous trial’s feedback was
non-modal however, the data showed a pattern of similarity
based responding, with generalisation of the same category
response to similar stimuli, but also a tendency to reverse
categorization for distant stimuli, thus leading to the
negative generalisation or contrast for large shifts in
stimulus values.
Given the possibility of different interpretations of Jones
et al.’s results, it is therefore important to find other means
of separating the effects of the prior stimulus and feedback
to test the generality and reliability of their result. To do
this, a categorization task was used in which, because the
categories are well known prior to the experiment, no
feedback is needed. Hampton, Estes and Simmons (2005)
used a categorization task in which 7 images were shown
varying along a dimension in which an image of a cat was
morphed into that of a dog (see Figure 1). The task was
simply to categorize the images as cats or not cats. Since
responses to stimuli in the middle of the range will be
probabilistic it is possible to break the data down as a
function not only of the previous stimulus, but also of the
previous response. While this feedback-free procedure has
been used in absolute identification (e.g. Mori & Ward,
1995) it has not been attempted before for categorization.
Based on the results of Jones et al. (2006), assimilation
to the previous response/category was predicted, that is, a
bias to place a stimulus in the same category as the previous
stimulus. Second, this bias should be stronger when the two
stimuli are similar, and may even reverse to a contrast effect
if they are very dissimilar. Third, it was predicted that there
would be a perceptual contrast effect, such that, holding the
previous response constant, then a current stimulus would

be more likely to be placed in the opposite category to the
previous one.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants. Nineteen students from City University
London (10 males) took part in the study.
Materials. Seven images (see Figure 1) were taken from
Hampton et al. (2005, with thanks to Vladimir Sloutsky).
They ranged from a clear picture of a kitten (#1) through to
a clear picture of a puppy (#7), with equal morphed steps in
between. Each image was 200 x 200 pixels, measuring 6.6
cm square on the display screen.

#1

#2

#3
#4
#5
#6
Figure 1: Stimuli used in Expt 1

#7

Apparatus. A Dell PC with a 15-inch CRT was
programmed in Microsoft Visual Basic.
Design. A repeated measures factor of Preceding Stimulus
with 7 levels corresponded to the stimulus (#1 to #7) on the
preceding trial. For analysis, this was converted to a
measure of Relative Distance between the current and
preceding stimulus. A post hoc factor of Response
differentiated trials on the basis of the response given on the
previous trial. The trial sequence provided a balanced
pseudo-random sequence maximizing the number of useful
trials. There were 6 blocks of 42 trials each. The 3 central
images (#s 3, 4, and 5) where responding would not be at
floor or ceiling were taken as “target” stimuli, and evennumbered trials always featured one of these three. Within a
block of 42 trials, each target was preceded on oddnumbered trials by each of the 7 images (including itself and
the other target stimuli), and the transition from one trial to
the next was balanced as in Table 1. Note that there were no
transitions between non-target stimuli. Across blocks, the
full transition matrix had 6 times as many trials in each cell
as in Table 1. Self-terminated breaks occurred after the
second and fourth blocks, and filler trials were introduced at
the beginning of the experiment and after each break to
provide the starting context for the next set of trials.
Procedure. Instructions were displayed below the 7 images
ranked from #1 to #7. A trial began with the display of an
image below which appeared two response boxes labeled
CAT and DOG. The image remained on screen until a
response was made with the mouse. A centrally located
NEXT button then appeared and had to be clicked, to reduce

471

response perseveration due to mouse position. On each trial
the mouse pointer was moved from the same central starting
location. To reduce image persistence, and hence the
possibility of detecting small changes from trial to trial, the
images were displayed alternately to left and right of center.

These points corresponded to the prior stimulus three steps
more dog-like (DOG+3) being called a “cat”, and the prior
stimulus two steps more cat-like (CAT+2) being called a
“dog”.
Figure 2 shows two main effects. First, when the previous
response was “cat” (the top line), the current target stimulus
was more likely to be called “cat” than when the previous
response was “dog” (the lower line). Thus there was an
assimilation to the previous stimulus showing up as a
perseveration of the previous response. Regardless of the
distance on the scale between the current target and the
previous stimulus, there was a bias to repeat the same
response.

Table 1: Transition frequency from one trial to the next
within each of the 6 blocks of 42 trials. The shaded area
shows the critical trials involving a decision about one of
the target borderline images.

Trial
Before
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Sum

1

2

1
1
1

1
1
1

3

3

Stimulus on Current Trial
3
4
5
6
1
1
2
2
2
1
1
10

1
1
2
2
2
1
1
10

1
1
2
2
2
1
1
10

7

1
1
1

1
1
1

3

3

Sum
3
3
10
10
10
3
3
42

Results
Preliminary data processing was required to clarify the
results. First, one participant chose “cat” on only 6 of the
180 target trials, and was excluded. Next, the rate of
responding “cat” to each stimulus was calculated to check
for range effects. The cat/dog boundary was not quite at the
center of the scale, but lay between #3 and #4 on the CAT
side of the center. As a result, almost all responses to #5
were “dog”. Since #5 would therefore show a floor effect,
this stimulus was not used as a target, leaving #3 and #4 as
the target stimuli. The proportion of “cat” responses given
to each of these was calculated as a function of the response
given on the previous trial, and the relative distance of the
previous stimulus from the current target. Two participants
lacked data for just one cell each, and missing values were
replaced with the relevant mean group.
Figure 2 shows the proportion of “cat” responses to the
current target stimulus, averaged over the two target stimuli
#3 and #4. The top line shows trials where the preceding
response was “cat”, and the lower shows trials where it was
“dog”. The horizontal axis shows the relative distance of the
current target from the previous stimulus. Thus CAT+2
represents the case where the preceding trial was 2 steps
more cat-like than the target and DOG+3 shows the case
where the preceding stimulus was 3 steps more dog-like.
TARGET represents the case where the preceding stimulus
was the same as the current target stimulus. Note that no
data are shown for CAT+3 because target #3 could only
have a previous stimulus (#1) two steps more cat-like. In
addition, two other points are missing from the graph
because there were too few data points to estimate the mean.

Figure 2: Categorization probabilities for Experiment 1
Second, the lines rise from left to right, indicating a
contrast from the previous stimulus. As the prior stimulus
became more like a dog (moving from left to right along the
axis) so the probability of the current target being called
“cat” increased in a linear fashion. For example, consider
the lower dotted line in the figure where the previous
response was “dog”; the same target was called “cat” only
20% of the time if following the stimulus CAT+1 – a
stimulus one step more cat-like – but it was called “cat”
over 50% of the time if following stimulus DOG+3 – where
the previous stimulus was 3 steps more like a dog.
The data were submitted to ANOVA with factors of
Previous Response (Cat, Dog), and Relative Distance of
previous stimulus (four levels for which full data were
available: CAT+1, TARGET, DOG+1, DOG+2). Both main
effects were highly significant: Previous Response, F(1,17)
= 76.3, p < .001, and Relative Distance, F(3,51) = 5.36, p <
.005, and there was no interaction (F(3,51) = 1.4, p > .2).
Relative Distance had a significant linear trend (F(1,17) =
14.7, p < .001).
Before discussing the implications of the results, a
replication will be described using the same procedure but a
different set of stimuli.

472

A different method of analysis was therefore used. The
effect of the previous response was calculated for the three
images in the middle of the scale 3-5, where there were
sufficient responses of each type. A 2 (Previous response) x
3 (Previous Image) x 3 (Target face) repeated measures
ANOVA showed a highly significant effect of the Previous
Response, (F(1,22) = 32.3, p < .001.)
To assess the contrast effect, for each participant, target
face, and previous response, the correlation was calculated
between response probability of saying “Eva” and the scale
value of the previous stimulus. For example, for face #4 in
Figure 3, the rate of responding “Eva” was calculated based
on which of the 7 faces had been presented on the previous
trial. A correlation was then calculated to determine whether
the rate was increasing or decreasing as the previous
stimulus changed. Six correlations were calculated for each
participant, based on the 3 target faces (3, 4, 5) and two
previous response possibilities.
Positive correlations indicated a contrast effect. A higher
scale value for the preceding stimulus means it is more like
Victoria, so that a contrast effect would see a higher
probability of saying “Eva” following face #7, than
following face #1. The correlations were transformed to
Fisher Z and t-tests were run across the participants for each
of the 3 targets (3, 4, 5) and 2 previous responses. Eva
responses to Target 3 following an Eva response, and to
Target 5 following a Victoria response both showed a range
effect (the first being towards ceiling and the latter at floor).
For the other four conditions, the average correlation ranged
from .35 (p < .05) to .49 (p < .002) all showing a strong
positive contrast effect of the previous stimulus.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants. Participants were 23 students (3 male) from
City University, London.
Materials. The stimuli used were a set of morphed images
created between two celebrity faces, one of Eva Longoria
and the other of Victoria Beckham (see Figure 3). Pilot
testing established the necessary gradations to achieve a
range of ambiguous images.
Apparatus and Procedure. The same apparatus and
procedure was employed as in Expt 1. In addition, in a first
phase, participants were shown a sheet of images with 18
morphs changing from Eva to Victoria, and were asked to
select the image that they felt was the closest to the 50:50
boundary between the two end images. This image was then
used as the central target (#4) in the sequence for that
participant with stimuli #1 to #7 in equal steps either side.
The same sequence of trials was presented as in Experiment
1, with the question “Is this picture more like Eva or
Victoria?” and a mouse response. Data were scored as the
probability of categorizing the image as Eva.

#1
EVA

#2

#3

#4

#5

#6
#7
VICTORIA

Discussion
This study set out to separate the effects of the preceding
response and stimulus by using a set of images with a vague
borderline region that was wide enough to provide trials
where a given prior stimulus could be categorized either
way.
First, the results clearly demonstrated strong assimilation
to the previous response, in line with the findings of Jones et
al. (2006). For the central stimuli where sufficient responses
of each kind were available, there was a bias of around .20
to .30 in the probability of a given categorization in the
direction of the previous response, regardless of the
previous stimulus. Unlike Jones et al. however there was no
reduction in the response assimilation effect as the stimuli
became more different. There are two likely explanations
for this effect. First, in paradigms where feedback is
provided, people tend to repeat whatever response was
reinforced on the previous trial (Jones & Sieck, 2003),
similar to the situation with probability learning (Edwards,
1961, Jarvik, 1951), and consistent with theories of
conditioning (Rescorla & Wagner, 1972). Even though no
feedback was provided (the participants in the present study
decided for themselves where the boundary lay) they could
nonetheless have treated their previous response as an
anchor on which to base the next. This is what Mori and

Figure 3. Morphed Images of Eva Longoria and Victoria
Beckham From the Range of 18 Morphs in Experiment 2

Results
The mean likelihood of responding “Eva” was calculated
for the three borderline target faces, as a function of the
relative scale position of the previous face, and the response
made to the previous trial. As in Experiment 1, there were
two clear effects on the probability of choosing the “Eva”
response, over and above the effect of the target face itself.
First, the previous response had an assimilation effect –
when the previous response was “Eva” there was an
increase from 0.40 to 0.61 in the probability of the current
response being “Eva” regardless of the target or the previous
stimulus. Second, as in Experiment 1 the effect of the
previous stimulus was to produce a contrasting shift in the
response.
Because the range of borderline faces was narrower than
in Experiment 1, there were insufficient trials in which an
ambiguous target followed another ambiguous face. (These
trials are critical to applying the method of analysis used in
Study 1).

473

Ward (1995) reported for an absolute identification task
when feedback was omitted. A second explanation would be
in terms of instability in the classification criterion adopted
by participants over the course of the experiment leading to
autocorrelation of responses. If the criterion is sometimes
set low, then most stimuli will be “cats”, and if it then drifts
high, they will mostly be “dogs”, yielding a greater
preponderance of repeated category responses than
expected. (Note that this explanation does not work on the
basis of participants having different criteria since response
rates were calculated separately for each participant before
averaging.)
The failure to show a reduction in response assimilation as
the stimuli became less similar may be a function of the
design. Trials focused on given borderline targets, preceded
by different context stimuli. Thus there were no transitions
from one extreme of the scale to the other, which is where
Jones et al. observed the response-based contrast effect.
There was little point in including such trials as almost all
responses to the extreme images were at floor or ceiling. As
described in the introduction it is uncertain whether the
decisional contrast effect reported by Jones et al. (2006) is
genuine evidence for negative generalization of the
previously reinforced category (as they argue). When nonmodal feedback was provided (i.e. “false” feedback)
performance on the next trial was disturbed, and this could
have several alternative explanations. Since the argument
for negative generalization depends on the use of invalid
feedback, it must be treated with caution.
Once the data were analyzed separately depending on both
the stimulus and the response on the previous trial, a
contrast effect was also seen, confirming Jones et al.’s
report of a perceptual contrast effect between neighboring
stimuli, independent of the previous response (or in their
case feedback). Unlike Stewart et al.’s (2002) contrast
effect, the effect here is unlikely to reflect a MAC strategy.
In comparison with previous research using simple tones
or rectangles, participants showed little evidence of noticing
when a stimulus changed from the previous trial, and if so in
what direction. Our procedure of shifting the image left and
right between trials may have made it harder to notice when
a stimulus had changed from trial to trial and in what
direction. For example, if participants had recognized that a
stimulus had been repeated, (the point labeled TARGET in
Figure 2) then one would naturally expect the previous
response to also have been repeated, leading to extreme
response rates of 0 if the previous response was Dog and 1
if the previous response was Cat. The data in Figure 1 show
no evidence for this strategy. Similarly, if people noticed the
direction of change from trial to trial, extreme responding
should have been found when the direction of change was
further towards the category previously chosen (the
Monotonicity Constraint identified by Hampton et al.,
2005). If I have just called something a Cat, and this new
image is even more cat-like, I would not now call it a dog.
In that case, for example, in Figure 1, the rightmost two
points on the top filled line should be at 1, since here the

participant has said that DOG+1 or DOG+2 looks like a cat,
and they are now faced with a more cat-like target. This
type of behavior was not seen in the data. It is striking that
even though participants appeared to make no use of how
the stimuli changed from trial to trial, they were still more
likely to judge the current borderline image as a cat, when
preceded by a more dog-like image, and vice versa,
regardless of how they classified that previous image.
Perceptual contrast effects such as this can be explained as
adaptation level effects (Hampton et al., 2005; Helson,
1964; Treisman & Williams, 1984). Treisman and Williams
proposed a tracking process, whereby category criteria may
adjust themselves towards the average of the current
stimulus environment, to maintain maximum sensitivity to
change, and thus leading to contrast.
The contrast and assimilation effects built in to Stewart
and Brown’s (2005) SD-GCM may therefore be operating at
different levels, something that previous research has not
considered. Contrast – the tendency to see one stimulus as
more likely to be in the category opposite to the preceding
stimulus – comes out as primarily perceptual in the present
experimental set up, showing up regardless of how the
previous stimulus was categorized. The fact that pairs of
trials where a stimulus was repeated showed no increased
tendency to repeat the previous response is clear evidence
that participants were not using a MAC strategy in this case.
Recall that the MAC strategy explains contrast in terms of a
participant judging the sign (and possibly magnitude) of the
change in the stimulus presented from one trial to the next.
A large shift away from the category of the previous
stimulus will give rise to contrast.
Assimilation can also have two sources. According to the
SD-GCM it is the similarity of two sequential stimuli that
leads to perseverance of the response, and hence to
assimilation. If you choose to call one stimulus a cat, and
the next stimulus is hardly any different, then you call the
next stimulus a cat as well. This type of assimilation should
then be sensitive to the distance between the two stimuli.
Only when a pair of stimuli are highly similar should you
get assimilation.
The assimilation observed here was quite different in
character. There was no good evidence in the lines in Figure
1 of the slope flattening out or becoming negative as the
previous stimulus approached the target. The large
assimilation effect was entirely associated with the effect of
the previous response. Having called one stimulus a cat or
dog, there was an inertia in the response, leading to a
constant bias to place the next stimulus in the same
category, regardless of the distance between them.

Acknowledgments
Komal Nanda and Ibhana Islam contributed to Experiments
1 and 2 respectively. The author acknowledges helpful
discussions with Paul Egré and Gregory Murphy, and
express warm thanks to Zachary Estes for detailed
comments on an earlier draft.

474

Stewart, N., & Brown, G. D. A. (2005). Similarity and
dissimilarity as evidence in perceptual categorization.
Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 49, 403-409.
Stewart, N., Brown, G. D. A., & Chater, N. (2002).
Sequence effects in categorization of simple perceptual
stimuli. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 28, 3-11.
Stewart, N., Brown, G. D. A., & Chater, N. (2005).
Absolute
identification
by
relative
judgment.
Psychological Review, 112, 881-911.
Stewart, N., & Morin.C. (2007). Dissimilarity is used as
evidence of category membership in multidimensional
perceptual categorization: A test of the similaritydissimilarity generalized context model. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 60, 1337-1346.
Treisman, M., & Williams, T. C. (1984). A theory of
criterion setting with an application to sequential
dependencies. Psychological Review, 91, 68-111.

References
Ashby, F. G., & Gott, R. E. (1988). Decision rules in the
perception and categorization of multidimensional
stimuli. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 14, 33-53.
Baird, J. C., Green, D. M., & Luce, R. D. (1980). Variability
and sequential effects in cross-modality matching of area
and loudness. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 6, 277-289.
Berg, E. A. (1948). A simple objective technique for
measuring flexibility in thinking. Journal of General
Psychology, 39, 15-22.
Edwards, W. (1961). Probability learning in 1000 trials.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 62, 385-394.
Garner, W. R. (1953). An informational analysis of absolute
judgments of loudness. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 46, 373-380.
Hampton, J. A., Estes, Z., & Simmons, C. L. (2005).
Comparison and contrast in perceptual categorization.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 31, 1459-1476.
Helson, H. (1964). Adaptation-level theory. Oxford, UK:
Harper & Row.
Jarvik, M. E. (1951). Probability learning and a negative
recency effect in the serial anticipation of alternative
symbols. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 41, 291297.
Jones, M., Love, B. C., & Maddox, W. T. (2006). Recency
effects as a window to generalization: Separating
decisional and perceptual sequence effects in category
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 32, 332.
Jones, M., & Sieck, W. R. (2003). Learning myopia: An
adaptive recency effect in category learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 29, 626-640.
Mori, S., & Ward, L. M. (1995). Pure feedback effects in
absolute identification. Attention Perception &
Psychophysics, 57, 1065-1079.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 39-57.
Nosofsky, R. M., & Palmeri, T. J. (1997). An exemplarbased random walk model of speeded classification.
Psychological Review, 104, 266-300.
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A theory of
Pavolvian conditioning: Variations in the effectiveness of
reinforcement and non-reinforcement. In A.H.Black & W.
F. Prokasy (Eds.), Classical conditioning II: Current
research and theory (pp. 64-99). New York: AppletonCentury-Crofts.
Stewart, N., & Brown, G. D. A. (2004). Sequence effects in
the categorization of tones varying in frequency. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 30, 416-430.

475

