1

Picturing time: Children’s preferences for visual representations of events
Katharine A. Tillman​1​, Eren Fukuda​1​, & David Barner​1,2
University of California, San Diego
Departments of Psychology​1​ and Linguistics​2
1​
katillman@ucsd.edu; 2​​ efukuda@ucsd.edu; 3​​ barner@ucsd.edu
Abstract
English-speaking adults recruit a left-to-right “mental
timeline” (MTL) when thinking about time. The origins of the
MTL are debated, with some arguing that it is a cultural
construct and others arguing that it is rooted in innate
associations between time and space. Here we ask whether
preschoolers, with limited experience with cultural practices
thought to shape the MTL, prefer conventional linear
representations of temporal events. English-speaking
preschoolers and adults were told stories and asked to choose
which of two visual representations best illustrated the story.
As expected, adults overwhelmingly preferred images that
were linearly ordered from left-to-right. Five-year-olds also
preferred left-to-right to right-to-left series, but were equally
likely choose left-to-right and top-to-bottom. By contrast,
3-year-olds chose at random, apparently insensitive to the
spatial ordering of event-denoting images. These results
suggest that attention to the ordinal structure of visual
representations of time increases across early childhood, and
that adults’ preference for horizontal space-time mappings
results from increased cultural conditioning.
Keywords: ​time; space; mental timeline; events; abstract
concepts

1. Introduction
Time and space are deeply interwoven in human
experience and culture. For example, diverse societies use
spatial tools to depict, measure, and track time; languages
often use the same words to refer to both time and space
(e.g., ​long and ​short​); and readers repeatedly experience
temporal narratives unfolding in a particular spatial
direction across the page. Behavioral and neuroscientific
studies suggest that adults have implicit linear associations
between specific locations in time and positions in space
(for a review, Bonato et al., 2012). The nature of the
relationship between this “mental timeline” (MTL) and
cultural practices that link time and space is debated. On the
one hand, systematic cross-cultural differences in the
direction of the MTL (e.g., Boroditsky, 2011; Bergen &
Lau, 2012) suggest that it is learned. On the other hand,
evidence of space-time mappings in infants (e.g., de Hevia
et al., 2014; Lourenco & Longo, 2010; Srinivasan & Carey,
2010), and the ubiquity of spatial artifacts and metaphors
across cultures (Haspelmath, 1997) suggest that some form
of MTL may be intrinsic to human cognition. Do cultural
tools linking time and space ​create mental associations
across domains, or do they simply capitalize on a low-level,

biological predisposition to think about time spatially?
Understanding the development of space-time associations
in children who cannot yet read or use spatial artifacts for
time could shed light on this question. Here, we test whether
3- to 5-year-old preschoolers show adult-like preferences for
linear representations of events.
Cross-cultural comparisons involving adults and
school-aged children have revealed reliable differences in
the orientation and direction of ordinal space-time mappings
(e.g., Tversky, Kugelmass, & Winter, 1991). The
left-to-right (LR) mental timeline is robust in speakers of
English and many other languages using an LR orthography,
but speakers of languages that are written from right-to-left
(RL), often construe of time in an RL line (e.g., Ouellet et
al. 2010; Tversky, Kugelmass, & Winter, 1991). Vertical
associations between time and space have also been found
in speakers of Chinese, which can be written top-to-bottom
(TB) and also contains vertical time-space metaphors (e.g.,
Boroditsky, 2011). Many cultural and environmental
sources of the MTL (and the analogous “mental
number-line,” MNL) have been posited. These include:
reading/writing direction, space-time metaphor in language,
exposure to artifacts such as calendars, counting-related
practices, early visual experiences, and simply growing up
in a community with existing space-time associations.
In contrast to purely cultural accounts, some theories
contend that we have an innate predisposition to associate
space and time. One such theory posits that space, time, and
number rely on a single system for magnitude representation
(Walsh, 2003). Consistent with the idea that language and
social cues are not the sole sources of the MTL, infants and
even neonates appear to make implicit associations between
duration and spatial length (e.g., de Hevia et al., 2014;
Srinivasan & Carey, 2010). Going beyond a general
magnitude account, others have argued that the ordinal
structure of the MTL/MNL also has a neurophysiological
and evolutionary basis, and may be LR by default
(Chatterjee, 2001; Rugani et al., 2015).
Importantly, cross-cultural differences in the direction of
the adult MTL indicate that, even if innate ordinal
space-time mappings exist, they can be modulated by
reading-writing behavior or other types of cultural
conditioning. It is therefore difficult to pinpoint the
developmental origins of the MTL, or to disentangle its
potential biological or environmental causes, in adults
populations with many relevant types of cultural knowledge.

1193

2
Here, we explore when and how time-space mappings
develop in a population whose exposure to cultural input is
more limited: children. Because formal instruction in
reading/writing and spatial tools for time often begins in the
early school years, evidence of linear space-time
associations in younger children might suggest these
abilities are not critical to the formation of the MTL. The
purpose of the current study is to test whether preschoolers
already have a preference for visual representations of
events depicted in conventional ordered lines. If so, this
might suggest that the tendency to form mental mappings
between time and space is not entirely culturally
constructed.
Several prior studies argue that directional space-​number
associations are present in preliterate preschoolers (see
Nuerk et al., 2015). For instance, English-speaking
preschoolers spontaneously count objects from LR, while
Hebrew speakers count from RL. Biases on purely spatial
tasks such as line-bisection have also been observed in
preschoolers. These effects are generally stronger in older
children and adults. To the extent that both the MNL and
MTL draw on similar spatial representations, we might
expect to observe similarly early biases toward LR
representations of time in English-speaking preschoolers.
Relatively few studies have investigated space-time
mappings in preschoolers. Timeline tasks indicate that
4-year-olds can place events on an LR line more accurately
than chance, but that this ability improves considerably over
the next 3+ years (e.g., Hudson & Mayhew, 2011; Tillman
et al., 2017). Importantly, tasks in which a single type of
timeline is provided for children to use cannot address
whether they privilege particular spatial orientations or
directions. However, even without a template, a majority of
school-aged children place stickers representing events in
ordered lines with a culture-specific direction (e.g., LR for
English-speakers; Tversky, Kugelmass, & Winter, 1991).
In contrast to older children, preschoolers rarely place
event-denoting stickers in lines spontaneously, and those
who do so show a much more modest, if any, bias toward
LR lines (Tillman, Tulagan, & Barner, 2015). Similarly,
older children, but not preschoolers, produce spatial
representations of single events in which the agent, object,
and
recipient
are
linearly
ordered
in
a
culturally-conventional direction (Dobel, Diesendrunk, &
Bolte, 2007). Together, these studies suggest that the
automatic deployment and the direction-specificity of the
MTL develop slowly in early childhood, and may rely on
literacy and/or formal schooling to become fully engrained.
Critically, tasks like those discussed above either require
children to use sophisticated artifacts or to create visual
representations of time, and therefore may require

significant visuospatial, motor, and working-memory skills.
For instance, the sticker-placement task requires an ability
to use non-iconic stickers symbolically, sufficient motor
control to put them in specific spatial locations, and memory
of what previously-used stickers represent. It is therefore
possible that the difficulty of these tasks could have masked
existing associations between time and space in
preschoolers. To address this concern, the present study
employs a forced-choice task with minimal response
demands to test whether English-speaking preschoolers
prefer conventional linear representations of time.
Preschoolers were told brief stories describing three-step
event sequences, given a choice between two spatial
depictions of each story, and asked which of the two was
better. In Experiment 1, to test whether children have
direction preferences, they chose between (conventional)
LR, RL, TB, and bottom-to-top (BT) representations of
events. In Experiment 2, to test whether children were
sensitive to the ordinality of the images, they chose between
ordered and unordered sequences.

2. Experiment 1
2.1 Methods
2.1.1 Participants​. Participants included 62 3-year-old
children (​M ​age = 3;6), 60 5-year-old children (​M ​age =
5;5), and 85 adult controls. They were pseudo-randomly
assigned to one of 3 conditions: Horizontal (n = 21 3YO; 21
5YO; 29 adults), Vertical (n = 20 3YO; 20 5YO; 29 adults),
and Mixed (n = 21 3YO; 20 5YO; 27 adults). Children were
recruited from museums and daycares in the San Diego, CA,
area, and adults were workers on Amazon Mechanical Turk.
All participants spoke English as their primary language,
and none spoke a secondary language with non-LR
orthography. Adults and parents of children gave informed
consent to participate. Children were awarded a small prize,
and adults were compensated $1. An additional 9 children
were tested but excluded from analysis because either
English was not their primary language (n = 3), they spoke a
second language with a non-LR orthography (n = 2), they
failed to complete the task (n = 2), developmental delay (n =
1), or clerical error (n = 1). Five adults were excluded from
analysis due to speaking a language with non-LR
orthography (n = 2) and lack of attention to the task, as
indexed by failing a “catch” trial (n = 3).
2.1.2 Procedure. ​On each of 8 trials, children heard a story
involving 3 steps (see Table 1). The experimenter placed
two cards on the table in front of the child, and asked:
“Which card shows that story? Which one is ​better​?”

1194

3

After the child pointed to their choice, the cards were
removed, and the next trial began.
Participants in the Horizontal condition always chose
between one card with three pictures depicting the story in
order from left-to-right (LR; see Table 1 and Fig 1A) and
another with the same 3 pictures ordered from right-to-left
(Fig. 1B). Participants in the Vertical condition chose
between cards with images arranged from top-to-bottom
(Fig 1C) vs. bottom-to-top (Fig 1D), and, in the Mixed
condition, between LR and TB lines (Fig. 1A vs. 1C). The
two cards were placed side-by-side in the Vertical and
Mixed conditions, but were positioned one above the other
in the Horizontal condition. Every child heard the Egg story
first. Half the children heard the remaining stories in the
order listed in Table 1, and half heard them in the reverse
order. The positioning of the two cards was counterbalanced
across subjects and items. Adults read the stories on a
computer, and clicked the image they thought was better.
Data analysis was done using R and the​ lme4​ package.

2.2 Results
2.2.1 Horizontal condition. ​Participants in the Horizontal
condition chose between LR and RL sets of images (e.g.,
Fig. 1A vs. 1B). To test for direction preferences, we
calculated the percentage of trials on which each subject
chose the LR card. As expected, virtually all adults (n = 28
of 29) chose the LR card on every trial (Fig 2A). In contrast,
the median percentage of LR choices for 5-year-olds was
lower, at 75%, and these children were less consistent across
trials than were adults (see Fig 2A). The median percentage
of LR picks by 3-year-olds was 50%. Exact Wilcoxon
signed-rank tests confirmed that 3-year-olds’ performance
was consistent with random guessing (V = 24.5, ​p ​= 0.5),
but five-year-olds selected the LR card significantly more
often than chance (V = 126.5, ​p ​= 0.02).

Figure 1: Example picture cards. ​The three images on each
card depict the three stages in the Egg story (see Table 1).
Cards used in Experiment 1: (​A)​ LR, left-to-right, ​(B​) RL,
right-to-left, (​C​) TB, top-to-bottom, and (​D​) BT,
bottom-to-top. Additional cards used in Experiment 2: (​E​)
Scrambled Horizontal and (​F​) Scrambled Vertical.
2.2.2 Vertical condition. Participants in the Vertical
condition chose between TB and BT images (Fig 1C vs.
1D). As shown in Figure 2B, 90% of adults (n = 26 of 29)
chose the TB card on every trial. A subset of 5-year-olds

1195

4
indicate that children have equally strong (or weak)
directional preferences within the horizontal and vertical
axes.

Figure 2: ​Direction and orientation preferences​.
Histograms showing the number of subjects who picked the
more conventional representation of time at each degree of
consistency.
(n = 9 of 20) also showed a strong preference for TB cards,
bringing the group median to 63.5%, significantly higher
than chance (Exact Wilcoxon signed-rank test, V = 111, ​p =
0.02). The median response among 3-year-olds was 50%
TB, consistent with random guessing (Exact Wilcoxon
signed-rank test, V = 54, ​p ​= 0.3).
We next asked whether children’s directional biases were
stronger along one spatial axis than the other. In other
words, did children have a significantly stronger preference
for LR in the Horizontal condition than they had for TB in
the Vertical condition? We used mixed-effects logistic
regression to model the likelihood of a “conventional”
choice (i.e., LR in the Horizontal condition; TB in Vertical)
as a function of Age Group (3-year-olds vs. 5-year-olds) and
Condition (Horizontal vs. Vertical). The model included the
interaction of fixed effects as well as a random effect of
subjects1. ​Examining this model, we found only a main
effect of Age Group (β = 0.65, ​p ​= 0.01; χ2(1) = 10.1, ​p ​=
0.002). The effect of Condition did not reach significance (β
= 0.15, ​p ​= 0.6; χ2(1) = 0.4, ​p ​= 0.5). Thus, the results
1

​The addition of random intercepts and slopes involving Items

(Egg, Rose, etc) did not improve the fit of these models.

2.2.3 Mixed condition. ​Participants in the Mixed condition
chose between (horizontal) LR- and (vertical) TB-ordered
images (Fig. 1A vs. 1C). In contrast to their near-perfect
consistency in the other conditions, only about half the adult
sample (n = 12 of 27) chose the LR card on every trial (n =
12), resulting in a median response of 87.5% LR (Fig. 2C).
In contrast, the median percentages of LR picks for both 3and 5-year-olds were 50%, consistent with random guessing
(Exact Wilcoxon signed rank tests, ​p​’s > 0.05).
Next, we asked whether children’s likelihood of choosing
the LR card was impacted by the orientation of the
comparison set of images, by fitting a mixed-effects logistic
model to data from the Horizontal and Mixed conditions. As
predictors, we entered Age Group and Condition, their
interaction, and a random effect of subjects. ​Examining the
model, we found significant main effects of both Age Group
(β = 0.69, ​p = 0.01; χ2(1) = 9.9, ​p = 0.01) and Condition (β
= -0.51, ​p = 0.02; χ2(1) = 5.1, ​p ​= 0.02), with no interaction.
In other words, when given a choice, children chose LR
more often than RL, but not more often than TB.
Together, the results of Experiment 1 suggest that
directional linear associations of time emerge between 3 and
5 years of age, and that children’s biases ​within ​spatial ​axes
develop earlier than biases ​across​ axes.

3. Experiment 2.
When given choices between two ordinal representations
of a story that had different directions, the majority of
3-year-olds in Experiment 1 did not demonstrate a
preference. One explanation for this behavior is that, for
3-year-olds, all ordered series of images are equally
compelling illustrations of stories. An alternative
explanation is that 3-year-olds simply did not attend to the
relative ordering of the images on the cards. Experiment 2
tests this hypothesis.
Rather than choosing between two ordered sets varying in
direction, children in Experiment 2 chose between one
ordered set (either LR or TB) and one ​unordered set with
the same orientation (horizontal or vertical). If children are
sensitive to the ordinal relations among images, we would
expect them to choose cards showing ordered temporal
sequences (e.g., caterpillar-cocoon-butterfly) more often
than cards showing scrambled sequences (e.g.,
caterpillar-butterfly-cocoon). On the other hand, if
3-year-olds do not attend to the order of the pictures (in
relation to the order of events in the story), we would expect
the same pattern of results found in Experiment 1.

3.1 Methods.
3.1.1 Participants. ​Thirty-eight 3-year-olds (​M ​age = 3;7)
were recruited from daycares and museums in the Comox

1196

5
valley, BC, and San Diego, CA, areas. Nineteen were
assigned to the Scrambled Horizontal condition and 19 to
the Scrambled Vertical condition. An additional 4 children
were excluded because English was not their primary
language (n = 1), they spoke a second language with a
non-LR orthography (n = 2), and experimenter error (n = 1).
3.1.2 Materials and procedures ​were identical to those
used in the Horizontal and Vertical conditions of
Experiment 1, except that each RL card was replaced with a
Scrambled Horizontal card (Fig. 1E), and each BT card was
replaced with a Scrambled Vertical card (Fig. 1F).

3.2 Results and Discussion.
3.2.1 Horizontal Scrambled condition. Figure 3A plots the
distribution of children who chose the ordered (LR) card
with each level of consistency across trials. The median
percentage of LR choices was 50%, again consistent with
random guessing (Exact Wilcoxon signed-rank test, V =
52.5, ​p​ = 0.3).

Figure 3. ​Spatial ordinality preferences. Histograms
showing the number of 3-year-olds who picked the ordinal
representation of time over an unordered one, at each degree
of consistency.
To compare 3-year-olds’ performance on the Horizontal
Scrambled (Exp. 2) and unscrambled Horizontal (Exp. 1)
conditions, we used a mixed-effects logistic model
predicting the likelihood of an LR choice as a function of
Condition (Horizontal vs. Horizontal Scrambled), with a
random effect of subjects. ​The Condition factor did not
improve the fit of the model over a null model (β = 0.23, ​p ​=
0.3; χ2(1) = 1.0, ​p ​= 0.3). Children were no better at
choosing the LR card over an unordered sequence than they
were at choosing LR over RL or TB in Experiment 1.
3.2.2 Vertical Scrambled condition. ​Results from the
Vertical Scrambled condition are shown in Fig 3B. As in the
Horizontal Scrambled condition, most 3-year-olds picked
the TB card on 50% of trials, consistent with chance (Exact
Wilcoxon signed-rank test, V = 44, ​p = 0.4) and the addition
of Condition (Vertical vs. Vertical Scrambled) as a factor
did not significantly improve the fit of a model predicting
children’s likelihood of choosing the TB card (β = 0.36, ​p ​=
0.1; χ2(1) = 2.5, ​p ​= 0.1).

Together, the results of Experiment 2 suggest that
3-year-olds are insensitive to the ordinal relationships
among images depicting temporal events.

4. General Discussion
We explored the development of mental associations
between time and space, by asking whether preschoolers
prefer visual representations of events that have a
conventional linear structure (i.e., left-to-right for English
speakers). Consistent with conventions in their culture, we
found that 5-year-olds prefered depictions of events ordered
from left-to-right to those ordered right-to-left. Furthermore,
even though vertical artifacts for time are rare in their
culture, 5-year-olds prefered top-to-bottom representations
of events to bottom-to-top ones. However, unlike adults,
5-year-olds showed no preference for horizontal (LR) over
vertical (TB) depictions of events. Furthermore, younger
preschoolers, 3-year-olds, not only appeared to lack
direction or orientation preferences for ordered sequences,
but also did not prefer ordered sets of pictures to unordered
ones. Together, these findings suggest that children may not
initially attend to the ordinal structure of event-depicting
images, and that the “mental timeline” is constructed
gradually in early childhood.
A substantial body of cross-cultural evidence indicates
that the direction of mature linear mappings between time
and space varies according to factors such as writing
direction (e.g., Ouellet et al., 2015). A smaller number of
studies indicate that these differences may emerge in
childhood (Dobel, Diesendrunk, & Bolte, 2007; Tillman,
Tulagan, & Barner, 2015; Tversky et al., 1991). The present
study adds to this existing literature, by providing new
evidence that cultural factors shape the direction of the
mental timeline during childhood. Specifically, we found
that preliterate 3-year-olds did not privilege conventional
LR representations of time, and that LR biases appeared
around age 5, when literacy often begins to emerge2. Going
beyond prior work, the current study also suggests that
preliterate 3-year-olds may not map sequential temporal
events to ordinal lines at all, ​regardless of the direction of
those lines. If so, this suggests that both the directionality
and the ordinal structure of the “mental timeline” are
constructed during childhood, in response to increased
environmental input.
The task used here was designed to give children more
scaffolding for the formation of space-time mappings than
previous studies have provided, while also making fewer
response demands. In contrast to the classic
sticker-placement task (Tversky, Kugelmass, & Winter,
1991), for example, the present task did not require children
to produce a spatial representation, or to recruit an implicit
mental timeline “from scratch.” Our task provided both the
2

While we did not assess children’s emergent literacy skills
here, ongoing studies are employing parent surveys to do so.

1197

6
temporal stimulus (a verbal story) and the spatial stimulus
(images in lines) to be associated. The child simply needed
to compare the two alternative mappings afforded by the
two cards, and to pick the best match of temporal structure
to spatial structure. However, given that 3-year-olds’
performance in both experiments did not differ from chance,
we cannot rule out the possibility that their failure stemmed
from some less theoretically interesting incomprehension of
the task. For example, it is possible that these children may
have failed to recognize the images, or to remember the
ordering of the three parts of the story. We are currently
conducting a new experiment to test these possibilities.
Our findings are inconsistent with theories suggesting the
LR direction of the MTL is a biological default that must be
over-ridden to achieve an RL or TB mental timeline
(Chatterjee, 2001; Rugani, 2015). Our findings also suggest
that perceptual mappings between duration and length
observed in infants cannot account for the ordinal MTL
observed in adults and older children, in which positions in
space (e.g., on the left) represent locations in time (e.g., in
the past, see Winter, Marghetis, & Matlock, 2015, for
discussion). Several studies indicate that, if presented with a
stimulus that is spatially “long” (e.g., a visual line) and
temporally “long” (e.g., an auditory tone), prelinguistic
infants associate these two dimensions automatically, and
can detect mismatches between duration and length (de
Hevia et al, 2014; Srinivasan and Carey). In contrast,
preschoolers in the present study did not appear to align
3-part temporal sequences and analogous 3-part spatial
representations. It is therefore possible that space-time
associations in infancy apply only to temporal properties of
single events, not to event sequences.
Our findings in 5-year-olds may also provide a hint into
the process by which linear space-time mappings are
shaped. In particular, we observed a developmental
trajectory in which within-axis direction preferences (LR >
RL; TB > BT) emerged prior to a preference for one axis
over the other. Can a literacy-based theory of
MTL-acquisition account for this? In considering this
question, it is interesting to note that English orthography
has ​both a horizontal and a vertical component, with text
progressing rightward across lines and downward through
the page. Indeed, the vertical component of text may be
more salient in children’s books, which have fewer words
per line than books for adults. Additional research will be
needed to directly test whether children with more print
exposure are more likely to make linear mappings between
time and space —
​ ​ whether horizontal, vertical, or both.

References
Bergen, B. K., & Lau, T. T. C. (2012). Writing direction
affects how people map space onto time. Frontiers in
psychology, 3.

Bonato, M., Zorzi, M., & Umiltà, C. (2012). When time is
space: evidence for a mental timeline. Neuroscience &
Biobehavioral Reviews, 36(10), 2257-2273.
Boroditsky, L. (2011). How languages construct time. In
Dehaene & Brannon (Eds.), Space, time and number in
the brain: Searching for the foundations of mathematical
thought. 978-0-12-385948-8. Elsevier
Chatterjee, A. (2001). Language and space: Some
interactions. Trends in cognitive sciences, 5(2), 55-61.
de Hevia, M. D., Izard, V., Coubart, A., Spelke, E. S., &
Streri, A. (2014). Representations of space, time, and
number in neonates. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 111(13), 4809-4813.
Dobel, C., Diesendruck, G., & Bölte, J. (2007). How writing
system and age influence spatial representations of actions
a developmental, cross-linguistic study. Psychological
Science, 18(6), 487-491.
Haspelmath, M. (1997). From space to time: Temporal
adverbials in the world's languages. Lincom Europa.
Hudson, J. A., & Mayhew, E. M. (2011). Children's
temporal judgments for autobiographical past and future
events. Cognitive Development, 26(4), 331-342.
Nuerk, H. C., Patro, K., Cress, U., Schild, U., Friedrich, C.
K., & Göbel, S. M. (2015). How space-number
associations may be created in preliterate children: six
distinct mechanisms. Frontiers in psychology, 6, 215.
Ouellet, M., Santiago, J., Israeli, Z., & Gabay, S. (2015). Is
the future the right time?. Experimental psychology.
Rugani, R., Vallortigara, G., Priftis, K., & Regolin, L.
(2015). Number-space mapping in the newborn chick
resembles humans’ mental number line. Science,
347(6221), 534-536.
Srinivasan, M., & Carey, S. (2010). The long and the short
of it: on the nature and origin of functional overlap
between representations of space and time. Cognition,
116(2), 217-241.
Tillman, K. A., Marghetis, T, Barner, D., & Srinivasan, M.
(2017). Today is tomorrow’s yesterday: Children’s
acquisition of deictic time words. Cognitive Psychology,
92, 87-100.
Tillman, K., Tulagan, N., & Barner, D. (2015). Building the
mental timeline: Spatial representations of time in
preschoolers. Proc. CogSci.
Tversky, B., Kugelmass, S., & Winter, A. (1991).
Cross-cultural and developmental trends in graphic
productions. Cognitive Psychology, 23(4), 515-557.
Walsh, V. (2003). A theory of magnitude: common cortical
metrics of time, space and quantity. Trends in cognitive
sciences, 7(11), 483-488.
Winter, B., Marghetis, T., & Matlock, T. (2015). Of
magnitudes and metaphors: Explaining cognitive
interactions between space, time, and number. ​Cortex​, ​64​,
209-224.

1198

