Pragmatics Influence Children’s Use of Majority Information
Theresa Pham (theresa.pham@mail.utoronto.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3G3 Canada

Jane C. Hu (janehu@uw.edu)
The Institute for Learning & Brain Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-7988 USA

Daphna Buchsbaum (buchsbaum@psych.utoronto.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3G3 Canada
Abstract
Do children always conform to a majority’s testimony, or do
the pragmatics of that testimony matter? We investigate
children’s reasoning about mapping a novel word to a referent
in an object-labeling task. Across four conditions, we
modified the testimony in an object-labeling task, to account
for pragmatic principles, so that the majority does and does
not provide an explicit opinion about the alternative object
chosen by the minority. Four- and 5-year-olds were given a
choice between an object endorsed by a three-person
majority, or one endorsed by a single minority informant. In
the unendorsed condition, informants explicitly unendorsed
the unchosen object. In the nothing condition, informants said
nothing about the unchosen object. In the ignorance
condition, informants explicitly expressed uncertainty about
the unchosen object, and in the hidden condition, the chosen
object was the only one present at the time of the
endorsement. Children were most likely to endorse the
majority object in the unendorsed condition, in which the
majority explicitly stated that the label applied to only one
referent, whereas in the hidden condition, where only one
object at a time was present in the discourse, children chose
objects endorsed by the majority and the minority equally,
with the other two conditions intermediate. This suggests that
children might not simply have a conformity bias; rather, they
are sensitive to the majority’s implied intentions when
learning from testimony.
Keywords:social learning; social cognition; consensus;
testimony; causal reasoning; pragmatics

Introduction
Learning from others is especially important for young
children who are growing up in a complex social world. One
way children gain knowledge from others is by learning
from testimony. In particular, there is a growing body of
literature showing that, similar to adults, children seem to be
influenced by the opinions and behavior of a majority group
(e.g., Bernard, Proust, & Clément, 2015; Burdett et al.,
2016; for a recent review see Huan, van Leeuwen, &
Edelson, 2013). For example, children recognize and trust a
consensus during word learning. Corriveau, Fusaro & Harris
(2009) found that 3- and 4-year-old children view a
consensus as a reliable source of information when learning
novel object labels. Children were more likely to prefer
novel labels that were endorsed by the majority, and to
selectively trust individuals who were previously part of the
majority in a subsequent task. Bernard et al. (2015) found
that slightly older children (4- and 5-year-olds) also

exhibited a consensus effect, even after the majority was
shown to give unreliable testimony about object labels.
Children are also more likely to copy the majority’s
behavior (Haun, Rekers, & Tomasello, 2012) and action
sequences (Herrmann et al., 2013). As well, children seem
to overconform in many situations; majority influence
trumps direct source knowledge (Hu et al., 2015), and
sometimes even children’s own knowledge (Corriveau &
Harris, 2010), or the knowledge of competent individuals
(Burdett et al., 2016).
On the other hand, we also know from previous work that
children are rational learners; they selectively learn from
other people’s testimony and evaluate the information they
receive (for a review, see Mills, 2013; Sobel & Kushnir,
2013; Koenig & Sabbagh, 2013), suggesting that they might
not indiscriminately endorse majority opinions. While
having a majority bias in word learning is sensible due to
the shared, conventional nature of word meanings, in a less
socially constructed domain, such as causal learning,
children may be less influenced by the majority group (Hu,
Buchsbaum, Griffiths & Xu, 2013). Similarly, children are
less willing to agree with the majority’s action when
learning about tools if the majority endorses a function that
is considered inefficient or implausible (Schillaci &
Kelemen, 2013). Additionally, children selectively learn
from informants who display other indicators of reliable
knowledge, including a history of providing accurate
information (e.g., Pasquini et al., 2007), performing actions
successfully (e.g., Wilks, Collier-Baker, & Nielson, 2014),
having expertise in the field (Burdett et al., 2016), and
having privileged knowledge (Einav, 2014).
Taken together, the current literature about majority
influence in children’s social learning suggests that children
are rational learners, but that the role of consensus widely
impacts their reasoning and social learning more generally.
Why then do children conform or not conform to the
majority? The mechanism that underlies majority influence
is still unclear. A bias to copy the majority simply because it
is the majority can often be an effective social learning
strategy (Laland, 2004; Perreault, Moya, & Boyd, 2012)
Conforming to the majority is a simple strategy that is often
sensible and an indication of reliability (Corriveau et al.,
2009). Alternatively, children might not only be attending to
the number of informants, but also use pragmatic inferences
for learning.

2894

how pragmatics can influence the strength of the majority
influence in children. We examined 4- and 5-year old
children’s preference for the majority in an object labeling
task. Specifically, we compared children’s tendency to
conform when the majority does and does not provide an
explicit opinion about the minority’s choice.

Pragmatic knowledge versus consensus
Figure 1. The arrow indicates the toy labeled by an
informant as the referent of a novel word. The goal of the
participant is to infer whether a novel word (e.g., “modi”)
means the blue toy, the purple toy, or both.
This second line of reasoning is consistent with the
literature on using pragmatic cues to guide learning. Grice
(1975) proposed that participants in conversation obey the
maxims of cooperative communication—be truthful,
informative, relevant, and clear. Specifically, the Maxim of
Quantity (be informative) and the Maxim of Relevance (be
relevant) are both crucial for motivating our hypothesis. To
be informative means to give as much information as
needed, and no more. To be relevant means to say things
that is pertinent to the given context. Children might assume
informants are being informative and relevant with their
testimony, influencing what they learn.
Frank and Goodman (2014) showed that during word
learning, children are indeed sensitive to speakers’
communicative intentions, leading children to make
inferences that go beyond explicit testimony. This suggests
that children can make use of pragmatic principles in word
learning inferences. For instance, Figure 1 illustrates a task
similar to Frank and Goodman (2014). If the speaker only
calls the toy on the right (marked by the arrow) “a modi,”
children can infer that ‘modi’ means the blue toy, and not
the purple toy, for example, by assuming that speakers are
using language relevantly and informatively.
However, in previous testimony research, the majority’s
opinion of the minority choice has been left ambiguous, and
children’s pragmatic reasoning abilities were not
considered. For example, when the majority suggest that
object X is the referent of a novel label or suggest using
strategy X (e.g., Corriveau et al., 2009; Haun et al., 2012),
this could pragmatically imply that object Y was not a
referent or that they should not use strategy Y, otherwise the
speaker would have referred to this option as well, in order
to be informative (Frank & Goodman, 2014). Pragmatic
inferences may help children reason: “If the majority
labeled object X as a modi and did not comment on object
Y, they must believe that only object X is the modi. If the
majority wanted me to know that object Y is also a modi,
then they would have told me, because they had the
opportunity to speak about object Y.” Accordingly, the
language used could imply that the options are mutually
exclusive and only one object is a modi, for example,
providing additional evidence against the minority opinion.
Given children’s sensitivity to pragmatically implied
information, we conducted the present study to investigate

In the present study, we investigate children’s reasoning
about the mapping of a novel word to a referent in an
object-labeling task, when presented with a three-person
majority and a conflicting minority informant. There were
four testimony conditions—the unendorsed condition, the
nothing condition, the ignorance condition, and the hidden
condition—that varied in the informativeness of the
testimony and the relevance of the object(s) present in the
situation. In the most explicit case, the unendorsed
condition, the majority endorsed one object and unendorsed
the other object, while the minority informant provided the
opposite testimony. Here, children learn from declarative
testimony that makes the extent of the novel label explicit,
and no pragmatic inference is needed. We hypothesize that,
since the testimony in this condition explicitly states that the
labels are mutually exclusive, the testimony provided by the
majority group will outweigh the evidence provided by just
one minority informant, and children will be more likely to
endorse the majority testimony.
In the nothing condition, the informants endorsed one
object and said nothing about the other. This condition was
intended to replicate previous work, in which the
informants’ knowledge or belief about the unchosen object
was left ambiguous. We predict that children will favour the
majority endorsement, because, as in our example (Figure
1), they will make a pragmatic inference that the speakers
are using language informatively, and so the majority must
believe that the novel label does not apply to the unchosen
object, otherwise they would have referred to the unchosen
object using the label as well. Therefore, similar to the
unendorsed condition, children in the nothing condition will
infer that the labels are mutually exclusive. However, we
predict that they will endorse the majority less often than in
the unendorsed condition since there is additional ambiguity
than when the majority explicitly states their opinion.
In the ignorance condition, the informants endorse one
object but express uncertainty in their beliefs about the
unchosen object. Since the majority provides information
with low certainty about the extension of the novel label,
their testimony should carry less weight in determining
whether the unchosen object can also be referred to using
the novel label. Further, the informants’ uncertainty
suggests that the label may not be mutually exclusive, and
could apply to both objects. Thus, children should be less
likely to endorse the majority’s testimony, compared to the
unendorsed and nothing conditions.
Finally, the language used in the testimony for the hidden
condition was exactly the same as in the nothing condition,
but only one object—the endorsed toy—was present. The

2895

hidden condition relies on the pragmatic understanding that
the speaker is being informative and relevant in their
testimony, and is therefore only speaking about object that
is present in the discourse context. The result is that, if
children make this pragmatic inference—speakers cannot
comment on objects that they and their communicative
partners do not see—then in the hidden testimony, the
majority provides no or the least amount of evidence against
the minority’s choice. On the other hand, if children are not
sensitive to the pragmatics of the testimony, then the results
for the hidden condition should be the same as the nothing
condition, with children endorsing the majority’s choice.
Whereas the current literature supports children’s
conformity bias as a learning strategy, a pragmatic
explanation would suggest that children do not
indiscriminately conform to the majority. The overarching
aim is to show that children are sensitive to pragmatic
principles even if they have a general tendency to trust the
majority. That is, the extent of children’s conformity
depends on the pragmatics of the testimony. Specifically, as
the majority’s testimony becomes more explicit in their
negative judgment of the minority’s opinion, children will
be more likely to adopt the majority’s endorsement over the
option endorsed by the minority informant. Thus, we predict
that the tendency to endorse the majority will decrease over
the conditions: unendorsed condition (most majority
endorsement); then, nothing condition; then, ignorance
condition; and finally, the hidden condition should exhibit
the least majority bias. Alternatively, if children do exhibit a
global conformity bias, then they should indiscriminately
endorse the majority’s opinion regardless of the testimony.

Methods
Participants. Participants were 112 preschoolers, 49
females and 63 males (mean age = 4 years 8 months; range
= 47 – 71 months). An additional 23 were excluded from the
study because of experimenter error (9), participant
distraction (9), failure to make a choice (2), and failure to
remember object label (3). Participants were recruited from
the University of Toronto database or from public
neighbourhood parks and museums.
Participants were randomly assigned among the four

between-subject conditions: the unendorsed condition (n =
28, M= 59 months, range = 50 – 71 months, 32% female),
the nothing condition (n = 25, M= 57 months, range = 48 –
71 months, 40% female), the ignorance condition (n = 31,
M= 58 months, range = 47 – 71 months, 52% female), and
the hidden condition (n = 28, M= 56 months, range = 48 –
67 months, 50% female).
Materials and Procedure. Children were tested
individually. In all conditions, each participant participated
in two test trials, a modi trial and a dax trial. Each trial
featured two novel objects for a total of four unique objects
of differing shape and colour in order to reduce extension.
The trial presented first was counterbalanced across
participants. The object pairs and side on which each object
was presented were held fixed but the object chosen by the
majority and minority was counterbalanced.
To begin each condition, children sat at a table across
from the experimenter. The experimenter introduced
children to two novel objects and explained that they were
unknowledgeable about the labels of the objects. The
experimenter suggested that the participant watch a film to
learn about the objects’ label. Participants then watched a
pre-recorded film of four female informants evaluating the
objects on a 13” laptop screen.
A film consisted of four video clips, each featuring a
female informant sitting by herself at a table with the same
novel objects. Informants wore different colour shirts. In the
first three clips, the three-person majority each endorsed one
object with the novel label, and in the final clip the one
minority informant endorsed the other object with the same
novel label, repeated three times so that the frequency with
which each participant heard the label used to refer to each
object was equal. Each clip concluded with the informant
picking up the toy they had endorsed. The identity of the
minority informant was counterbalanced across participants.
Figure 2 displays schema for the videos shown.
In the unendorsed condition, each majority informant
endorsed one object while explicitly unendorsing the other
object by saying, “That’s a modi (pointing to target toy);
that’s not a modi (pointing to other toy).” In the ignorance
condition, each majority informant endorsed one object
while expressing uncertainty about the other object by
saying, “That’s a modi (pointing to target toy); I don’t know

(i)

(ii)
Figure 2. Schema of the videos seen by children. (i) Stimuli placement for the Unendorsed, Ignorance and Nothing
condition. Testimony from the Nothing condition. (ii) Stimulus placement and testimony from the Hidden condition.

2896

if that’s a modi (pointing to other toy).” In the nothing
condition, the majority informants endorsed one object and
did not comment on the other object by saying, “That’s a
modi (pointing to target toy).” In the hidden condition the
informant sat at the table with only one object and evaluated
that object by saying, “That’s a modi (pointing to target
toy).” In all conditions the minority informant endorsed the
other object with the same novel label three times. For
instance, in the unendorsed condition the minority informant
said “That’s a modi (pointing to other toy); that’s not a modi
(pointing to target toy). Look at that modi (pointing to other
toy); that’s not a modi (pointing to target toy). It’s a pretty
cool modi (pointing to other toy); that’s not a modi
(pointing to target toy)”. The minority scripts in the other
conditions followed in the same manner.
Once the film ended, the screen turned black and the
objects were brought back. The experimenter then asked the
participant to identify the referent of the novel label by
asking, e.g., “Can you show me a modi?” Participants’ first
gestural or vocal response was recorded.

Results
Table 1: Participant scores by condition
Condition
(1) Unendorsed
(2) Nothing
(3) Ignorance
(4) Hidden

Score
0
0
3
4
6

1
4
9
8
12

2
24
13
19
10

Children chose the majority’s referent to the novel object
significantly more often than chance in the unendorsed t(27)
= 11.15, d = 4.29, p < .0001); nothing (t(24) = 3.09, d= 1.26,
p < 0.01); and ignorance conditions (t(30) = 3.72, d = 1.36,
p < 0.001). In contrast, in the hidden condition, participants
were not more likely to adopt the majority’s opinion than
the minority’s (t(27) = 1.11, d = 0.39, p = 0.24).
We also found a significant effect of condition on
children’s tendency to choose the majority object, onefactor ANOVA F(3,108) = 5.3, MSE = 2.39, p < 0.01.
Planned two-sample t-tests for independent samples
demonstrated that the unendorsed condition was
significantly different compared to all the other conditions:
unendorsed vs. nothing: t(51) = -2.45, d = 0.67, p < 0.01;
unendorsed vs ignorance: t(57) = -2.19, d = 0.58, p < 0.05;
and, unendorsed vs. hidden: t(54) = 4.31, d = 1.15, p <
0.0001. Similarly, children’s performance in the hidden
condition was significantly different from the ignorance
condition, t(57) = 1.92, d = 0.50, p < 0.05; and, marginally
different from the nothing condition, t(51) = 1.61, d = 0.44,
p = 0.06. There was no significant difference in children’s
performance in the nothing condition compared to the
ignorance condition, t(54) = -0.23, d = 0.06, p = 0.41.
Follow-up polynomial contrasts indicate asignificant
linear trend, F(1, 108) = 13.67, p < 0.001, partial η² = 0.11.
The linear trend suggests that deference to majority
decreases across ordered conditions: unendorsed (M = 1.82,
SD = 0.074), nothing (M = 1.44, SD = 0.711), ignorance (M
= 1.48, SD = 0.724), and hidden (M = 1.11, SD = .079).

Discussion

***
--- Chance
**

***

Figure 3. Average number of responses (+/- 1 s.e.)
endorsing the majority object. There was a significant effect
of condition. Children chose the majority’s object most
often in the unendorsed condition, and least often in the
hidden condition. ** p < 0.01 *** p < 0.001.
Participants were assigned a score (0, 1, or 2) based on the
number of trials in which they endorsed the majority
informants’ testimony (see Table 1).1 Children’s mean
responses for all conditions are shown in Figure 3. For all
conditions, chance level was a mean score of 1.
1Analysis using a mixed logistic regression model—structuring
outcomes as binary responses—did not change our findings

To be rational yet efficient social learners, it would be
beneficial for children to learn through explicit instruction
as well as pragmatic inferences. This study provides the first
empirical evidence that children consider pragmatic
inferences when learning from testimony provided by a
majority and minority group. We examined the effects of
the pragmatic cues in informants’ testimony on children’s
tendency to defer to the majority. Our study found that
although children tend to be influenced by the majority, they
also weigh informants’ opinions using pragmatic cues to
assess the meaning of their testimony. By assuming that
informants are being cooperative in their communicative
intent (e.g., Maxim of Quantity; Maxim of Relevance),
children are evaluating the pragmatic implications of the
language used and making inferences that go beyond the
literal meaning of the testimony.
We found that when learning from explicit, declarative
testimony, as was the case in the unendorsed condition, 4and 5- year old children were significantly more likely to
endorse the majority object—their tendency to endorse the
majority option was almost at ceiling. In this condition, the
informants’ opinions about both of the novel objects were
made explicit in thelanguage of the testimony. They
endorsed one object using the novel label (e.g., modi) and
provided additional evidence that the unchosen object was
not a modi. In this case, following the majority is a sensible

2897

strategy since the explicit endorsement of only one object
by three people might outweigh the evidence provided by
just one minority informant.
There was also a consensus effect in both the nothing
condition—replicating the findings in previous work (e.g.,
Corriveau et al., 2009)—and the ignorance condition. And
yet, in these conditions the majority bias was significantly
less than in the unendorsed condition, suggesting that
children are aware of the additional ambiguity in these
conditions. By contrast, children did not exhibit a majority
bias in the hidden condition. The crucial difference between
these conditions is the pragmatic inferences made, given the
ambiguity of the learning situation.
When the speaker’s testimony is ambiguous, as in the
nothing condition, children might rely on pragmatic cues to
infer the speaker’s intent. According to the pragmatic
account, a crucial step in the inferential process is the
assumption that the speaker, in this case, the informants, is
being cooperative with their utterance, and has the goal of
being informative. Accordingly, if the speaker had wanted
to label both objects then they had the ability to do so, as in
the unendorsed and ignorance conditions. The fact that the
informants only ever labeled one object in the nothing
condition led children to infer that the novel label is only
applicable to one object in the given situation, leading to the
conclusion that the unchosen object is not a referent of the
novel label. However, in the hidden condition, only one
object was present, invoking a different pragmatic inference
than in the nothing condition—the inference that speakers
are only discussing objects relevant to the current situation.
Consequently, even though the testimony in these two
conditions was identical, children’s inferences differed.
Children in the hidden condition were no more likely to
endorse the majority’s testimony than the minority’s. This
suggests that children’s inferences from consensus are
influenced by their sensitivity to pragmatic cues embedded
in the testimony.
A somewhat unexpected finding was that children were
also more likely to choose the majority’s object in the
ignorance condition. In the ignorance condition, we
intended for the uncertainty about the extension of the
object label to come from the uncertainty in the speaker's
knowledge. Since informants expressed low certainty in
their testimony, there should be less evidence against the
unchosen object being e.g., a modi, and by association,
against the minority. However, children might instead have
interpreted the statement of ignorance as a comment about
the object rather than about the informants’ knowledge.
Children might have inferred that the majority was certain
about one object having many features of e.g., a modi, but
was uncertain about the other object due to its ambiguous or
hard to categorize appearance. Future work should
disambiguate the type of uncertainty being conveyed.
Together, the results go beyond asking whether or not
children have a conformity bias, and explore children’s
sensitivity to pragmatically implied information. Children’s
tendency to conform might not simply be driven by a ‘copy-

the-majority’ strategy (Laland, 2004), since they did not
conform to the majority equally across conditions. Instead,
the extent to which children prefer members of the majority
as informants might vary with the pragmatics of the
language used in the testimony. Children may not be
overestimating the value of the majority’s opinions
compared to the minority’s testimony. Instead, children are
sensitive to the language used by informants, and hence, are
selective about situations in which they should go with the
consensus view. This finding is consistent with previous
work suggesting that children are ableto make sophisticated
inferences about implicit, intended meaning in speakers’
utterances (e.g., Frank & Goodman, 2014).
An interesting question is whether our results are specific
to the use of an object-labeling task. For instance, children
may be more likely to conform to a majority in a labeling
task because the meanings of words are socially determined
(Hu et al., 2013). In addition, labels may have stronger
implications due to other constraints on word learning, such
as mutual exclusivity—each object has only one category
label (Markman, 1989), and the shape bias—differently
shaped objects usually have different category labels
(Landau, Smith & Jones, 1988). For example, if an
informant labels Object 1 as a modi, this strongly implies
that Object 2, which is very differently shaped, is not a
modi. This would provide additional evidence against the
minority, by suggesting that both objects cannot be modis.
In our experiment, we were able to modify the testimony
so that the strength of the implications regarding the novel
label for the object(s) varied by condition. However, if
children were exclusively following these types of language
learning constraints, they should have assigned a novel label
to only one object in all conditions. On the contrary,
children’s performance followed a linear trend and did not
favour the majority label in the hidden condition.
However, future work should examine children’s
endorsements of majority and minority information in other
domains such as causal learning (e.g., Hu et al., 2013).
Causal tasks do not rely on the conventions and social
construction that make learning labels special. Since causal
actions on objects might not be mutually exclusive by
nature—one causal action does not necessarily imply that
the other actions are ineffective—future work can directly
examine how making actions appear mutually exclusive
using pragmatic principles can affect children’s reasoning.
We would be interested in children’s reliance on consensus
during a causal task, and in turn, how they are making
pragmatic inferences about the efficacy of each action.
One further question concerns the operationalization of
consensus and the presentation of a majority group versus
the minority informant. In this paper, we presented the
informants individually, and in a sequential manner with the
majority group first, similar to previous work by Haun et al.
(2012) and Burdett et al. (2016), and importantly, this was
held constant across all of the conditions. However, in both
Bernard et al. (2015) and Corriveau et al. (2009), the
majority and minority informants were all presented

2898

together, and at the same time rather than one after another.
It is possible that this difference in the format of majority
presentation might change the pragmatics of the situations,
for example if children believe that the dissenter in a
simultaneous presentation is attempting to correct the
majority’s misinformation. Future work could compare
simultaneous and sequential presentation of the informants
to see how this changes children’s inferences.
Finally, it is difficult to quantify our predictions without
formalizing our assumptions. A Bayesian model could
produce quantitative predictions regarding the ordering of
our conditions, and the magnitude of the differences
between them. This type of model could examine how a
rational learner would balance a majority opinion against
the pragmatic implications of their testimony, without a
conformity bias, and test those predictions against children’s
behaviour, building on previous models of learning from
testimony (e.g., Buchsbaum et al., 2012) and of making
pragmatic inferences (e.g., Frank & Goodman, 2014).
In sum, this research sheds light on how pragmatic
principles can inform children’s learning from conflicting
majority and minority groups. In conditions where the
testimony explicitly stated, or pragmatically implied, that
the labels were mutually exclusive, children were more
likely to adopt the majority’s label than the minority’s label.
However, when the testimony had weaker implications
about the labels of the novel objects, children were not more
likely to rely on the consensus view. This suggests that
children might not simply have a conformity bias. Instead,
children can make sophisticated inferences that go beyond
the literal meaning of the testimony. By doing so, they
consider both the explicit statements made by informants, as
well as the pragmatic inferences implied by the majority
opinion in their learning from the social world.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful for all the families for their participation, and to
the Computational Cognitive Development lab for their help with
data collection. We would especially like to thank Pingki
Mazmunder for help with data collection and analysis.This work
was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada, the Canada Foundation for Innovation, and the
Connaught Fund.
References
Bernard, S., Proust, J., & Clément, F. (2015). Four‐ to six‐year‐old
children's sensitivity to reliability versus consensus in the
endorsement of object labels. Child Development, 86, 11121124.
Buchsbaum, D., Bridgers, S., Whalen, A., Seiver, E., Griffiths, T.
L., & Gopnik, A. (2012). Do I know that you know what you
know? Modeling testimony in causal inference. Proceedings of
the 34th annual conference of the cognitive science society (pp.
156-161). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Burdett, E. R. R., Lucas, A. J., Buchsbaum, D., McGuigan, N.,
Wood, L. A., & Whiten, A. (2016). Do children copy an expert
or a majority? Examining selective learning in instrumental and
normative Contexts. PLoS One, 11, e0164698.

Corriveau, K. H., Fusaro, M., & Harris, P. L. (2009). Going with
the flow: preschoolers prefer nondissenters as informants.
Psychological Science, 20, 372-377.
Corriveau, K.H. & Harris, P.L. (2010). Preschoolers (sometimes)
defer to the majority when making simple perceptual judgments.
Developmental Psychology, 26, 437-445
Einav, S. (2014). Does the majority always know best? Young
children's flexible trust in majority opinion. PloS one, 9,
e104585.
Frank, M. C., & Goodman, N. D. (2014). Inferring word meanings
by assuming that speakers are informative. Cognitive
Psychology, 75, 80-96.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J.
Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics (Vol. 3). New York, NY:
Academic Press.
Herrmann, P. A., Legare, C. H., Harris, P. L., Whitehouse, H.
(2013). Stick to the script: The effect of witnessing multiple
actors on children’s imitation. Cognition, 129, 536-543.
Hu, J. C., Buchsbaum, D., Griffiths T. L., & Xu F. (2013). When
does the majority rule? Preschoolers trust in majority informants
varies by domain. Proceedings of the 35th annual conference
cognitive science society (pp. 2584-2589), Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Hu, J. C., Whalen, A., Buchsbaum, D., Griffiths, T. L., & Xu, F.
(2015). Can children balance the size of a majority with the
quality of their information? Proceedings of the 37th annual
conference cognitive science society (pp. 956-961), Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Haun, D. B. M, van Leeuwen, E. J. C., &Edelson, M. G. (2013).
Majority influence in children and other animals. Developmental
Cognitive Neuroscience, 3, 61-71.
Haun, D. B. M., Rekers, Y., &Tomasello, M. (2012). Majoritybiased transmission in chimpanzees and human children, but not
orangutans. Current Biology, 22, 727-731.
Koenig, M. A. &Sabbagh, M. A. (2013). Selective social learning:
New perspectives on learning from others. Developmental
Psychology, 49, 399-403.
Laland, K. N. (2004). Social learning strategies. Learning and
Behavior,32, 4-14.
Landau, B., Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S. (1988). The importance of
shape in early lexical learning. Cognitive Development, 3, 299321.
Markman, E. M. (1989). Categorization and naming in children:
Programs of induction. MIT Press.
Mills, C. M. (2013). Knowing when to doubt: Developing a critical
stance when learning from others. Developmental Psychology,
49, 404-418._
Pasquini, E. S., Corriveau, K. H., Koenig, M., & Harris, P. L.
(2007). Preschoolers monitor the relative accuracy of
informants. Developmental Psychology, 43, 1216-1226.
Perreault, C., Moya, C., & Boyd, R. (2012). A Bayesian approach
to the evolution of social learning. Evolution and Human
Behavior, 33(5), 449–459
Schillaci, R. S., &Kelemen, D. (2014). Children's conformity when
acquiring novel conventions: The case of artifacts. Journal of
Cognition and Development, 15, 569-583.
Sobel, D. M., &Kushnir, T. (2013). Knowledge matters: How
children evaluate the reliability of testimony as a process of
rational inference. Psychological Review, 120, 779-797.
Wilks, M., Collier-Baker, E., & Nielson, M. (2014). Preschool
children favor copying a successful individual over an
unsuccessful group. Developmental Science, 18, 1014-1024.

2899

