Pseudoneglect and development: Age-related spatial bias in bisection and drawing
Yordanka Zafirova, Asenia Giagtzidou, Dara Vassileva, Elena Andonova
(jovasileva@abv.bg, nia.giagtz@gmail.com, daravassileva@gmail.com, eandonova@nbu.bg)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia, 1618, Bulgaria

Abstract
The numerous studies on pseudoneglect have generated
inconsistent results and disagreement concerning the
underlying mechanisms. Most research supports the
hypothesis that hemispheric lateralization is the main reason
for the persistent leftward bias in spatial tasks. Findings on
the influence of reading direction, handedness and participant
age are largely contradictory. As a result of brain maturation
adults usually perform with significant leftward bias.
However, both hemispheric activation and scanning habits
exert an influence on space representation, which varies
across age groups. Preschoolers, middle school children and
adults were tested on the line and word bisection tasks and on
house-person-tree drawing tasks. The analysis of their
performance produced results consistent with an explanatory
account that the direction of the spatial bias shifts leftwards in
the course of development.
Keywords: pseudoneglect, line bisection, age differences,
house-person-tree drawing task

Introduction
Cognitive processes have their limitations that may lead to
distortion in perception or judgment. Different biases arise
when cognitive resources are challenged, but are also
partially rooted in the cultural context and can be learned
implicitly, including our ability to navigate through space
and construct adequate spatial representations of the close
environment. The temporal and spatial structure of the
viewing behavior is independent from the goal of the task
and is attributed to the horizontal asymmetries of the visual
and attentional systems.
The
hemispatial
neglect
syndrome
is
a
neuropsychological disorder where patients have difficulties
processing stimuli from the contralesional hemispace. The
condition is generally due to impairment of the ability to
direct attention and movement, although it might as well be
attributed to the inability to form spatial representations
(Bisiach, 1996). Patients with left visuospatial neglect bisect
horizontally presented lines to the right of their objective
center. In contrast, neurologically normal people usually
perform the task with significant leftward bias. This
exploratory inclination to look slightly to the left of the
center of the presented stimuli is known in the literature as
pseudoneglect (Bowers & Heilman, 1980).
Pseudoneglect is typically interpreted in terms of the
hemispheric lateralization of the brain and has two
complementary components – visual and motor. The visual
component incorporates the scanning habits and the
attentional and perceptual effects, while the motor

component refers to the overdriven movements, like
directional hypometria, perceptual motor activation and
cueing (Macdonald-Nethercott, Kinnear, & Venneri, 2000).
In one of the first studies on pseudoneglect leftward errors
were made only in the paper-and-pencil version of the line
bisection task and not in the computer version of the task
(Luh, 1995). This result supports the contribution of the
above mentioned motor factor to the leftward spatial bias.
Both hemispheres are engaged in directing attention to the
contralateral space, but as the right hemisphere is generally
more active during spatial tasks this could lead to
subsequent enhanced attendance to the left visual
hemispace. This was demonstrated in a cancellation task
designed to deliberately activate the left or the right
hemisphere (Vingiano, 1991). A more recent fMRI study
also showed increased activation in the right intra-parietal
sulcus and lateral peristriate cortex during judgment and
performance of line bisection tasks (Cicek, Deouell, &
Knight, 2009).
In a series of eye-tracking experiments on viewing
behavior in exploring complex scenes participants
demonstrated a marked initial leftward bias that was
independent of the category of the presented images
(Ossandon, Onat, & Konig, 2014). It is generally accepted
that people tend to scan the visual field in the direction that
they read. Opposite reading habits give rise to opposite
spatial bias when performing the line bisection task – leftto-right readers bisect the lines to the left of their veridical
center, while right-to-left readers deviate to the right
(Chokron & Imbert, 1993). In a similar study the line
bisection performance of adults, 8-year-olds and
preschoolers coming from cultures with opposite reading
habits was compared and differences were found in all
groups (Chokron & De Agostini, 1995). Usually the
developmental shift in the observed bias in line bisection is
from right to left, as demonstrated in an experiment with 4-5
and 10-12 years old children (Dellatolas, Coutin, & De
Agostini, 1996).
There is evidence that with the maturation of the corpus
callosum during puberty, spatial processing shifts from the
contralateral to the right hemisphere. Right-handed
prepuberty children showed rightward bias in line bisection
tasks when using their right hand and a leftward bias with
their left hand. The adult and puberty groups bisected the
lines to the left with both hands (Hausmann, Waldie, &
Corballis, 2003). Another study also showed that learned
directionality and movement preferences have little
influence on placement of single object on a page. Both

3633

French and Moroccan dextral children manifested similar
leftward bias in a draw-a-tree task, supporting the advantage
of brain lateralization over learned cultural habits, including
reading direction (Picard & Zarhbouch, 2014).
Both neglect and pseudoneglect, despite the difference in
the underlying neurological mechanisms, have similar
behavioral manifestation and are assessed with the same
tasks, such as line and word bisection, drawing or bisecting
a simple figure and exploration of complex scenes.
Basically, both lines and words are bisected to the left of
their objective center by adults, in accordance with the
hemispheric activation hypothesis and the reading direction
hypothesis. However, the effect is more pronounced in word
bisection showing that an additional mechanism might be
involved. In a series of experiments with lines and
orthographic strings (words, pseudowords, symbols), lines
were bisected always to the left, while words yielded a
different result depending on their length – short ones (3-4
letters) were bisected with a general right-side bias
(Arduino, Previtali, & Girelli, 2010).
As the beginning of the word is more informative than its
end, oculomotor behavior shows that attention is usually
directed to the left of the word center, while trying to access
the mental lexicon in establishing a matching cohort.
According to the Attentional scaling hypothesis, proposed
by Fischer (1996), orthographic strings are processed
differently than other symbolic or pictorial material. Word
bisection is biased toward the beginning of the horizontally
presented words, depends on their length and the ease of
lexical access - Hebrew-American bilinguals showed a
greater leftward bias in their second language (English) than
native English readers (Fischer, 1996). Both English and
Hebrew readers showed greater leftward bias for words and
pseudowords than for lines (greatest for low-frequency
words), and people with developmental dyslexia deviated
more to the left than controls (Gabay, Gabay, Henik, Schiff,
& Behrmann, 2015). Interestingly, dyslexic children have
been reported to show inversed pseudoneglect in line
bisection tasks, shifting their subjective center to the right of
the veridical one (Michel, Bidot, Bonnetblanc, & Quercia,
2011).
There are numerous studies on pseudoneglect with
inconsistent results as well as disagreement concerning the
underlying mechanisms. The goal of the current study was
to combine explicit and implicit measures to dissociate the
attentional component in spatial processing. We tested three
age groups – preschoolers, sixth-graders and adults on line
and word bisection tasks and draw-a-house-person-tree
tasks. In accordance with previous studies, we used paperand-pencil tasks and only long and low-frequency words.
As different spatial tasks supposedly tap into different
aspects of spatial awareness, we compared performance on
active (implicit) and passive (explicit) spatial tasks across
three developmental stages with different reading expertise
(see Barrett, Kim, Crucian, & Heilman, 2002 for a
discussion on the difference of implicit and explicit tasks).
Both the hemispheric activation and the directionality

hypotheses predict that right-handed preschool children
would exhibit a right spatial bias in all tasks, because of the
prevalence of the motor component in spatial judgments and
their inability to read. Sixth-graders should have mixed
results due to already established reading habits but
incomplete brain lateralization. Adults were expected to
have a strong leftward bias, especially in the word bisection
tasks, in accordance with the Attentional scaling hypothesis.

Method
In order to address the research questions above, we carried
out an experimental study protocol consisting of a series of
five tasks used in previous research on pseudoneglect in
three population age groups – preschool children, middle
school children, and young adults. The experimental tasks
were line bisection, word bisection, and drawing a house, a
person, and a tree on a blank sheet of paper in landscape
orientation. The dependent variable was the degree of lateral
(left or right) spatial bias in participants’ performance.
Participants were asked to perform two passive (line and
word bisection) and three active spatial tasks (drawing a
simple figure). Line bisection is the most widely used and
rigid measure for neglect in clinical settings, and for
pseudoneglect in neurologically normal people, and is more
connected to attention. The word bisection task is thought to
activate semantic processing together with the spatial
representations. Drawing reflects higher order cognitive
functions – instead of passive judgment, it involves the
ability to plan and execute a simple task in peripersonal
space. We hypothesized that with age the direction of the
bias should shift from right to left, and this would be
reflected in the performance of the middle school group.

Participants
60 Bulgarian speaking participants (22 men) took part in the
study. The preschool group consisted of 19 children (8
boys), with a mean age of 4 years and 4 months (M = 53.37,
SD = 3.47, range 49-59, calculated in months). The middle
school group consisted of 20 children (4 boys), with a mean
age of 148 months (12 years and 3 months), SD =3.65 and
range 139-154 months. The adults were 21 (10 men), with a
mean age of 28 years, SD = 11.02 and range 18-51 years.
All adults gave their written informed consent before the
study. Informed written consent for the children was given
by their parents.
All participants underwent assessment for handedness,
given that some studies report a significant influence of
handedness on bisection and drawing tasks (e.g. Jewell &
McCourt, 2000; Picard & Zarhbouch, 2014). Only righthanded participants’ data were considered further. From the
analyses were excluded data from two preschoolers who
used predominantly their left hand in the drawing tasks (in
accordance with Kastner-Koller, Deimann, and Bruckner,
2007), two participants from the 12-year-old group who
self-reported as left-handed; three adult participants who
self-reported as ambidextrous but reported predominant use
of their left hand on the handedness questionnaire.

3634

Thus, statistical analyses were performed on the data
from 17 preschool children (7 boys), 18 middle-schoolers (4
boys) and 18 adults (9 men). The mean age of the adult and
middle school groups remained the same, and a t-test
showed no significant difference between the age of the
recruited and the analyzed groups of preschoolers (p =
.890). None of the preschool children had reading or writing
habits.

Stimuli
Two types of stimuli were used in the study – five straight
horizontal lines and ten words, presented on two separate
sheets of paper A4 format, portrait orientation. The lines and
the words were printed in advance, while the drawing tasks
were executed on blank sheets of paper format A4 with
landscape orientation. The lines had a mean length of 10.9
cm (SD = 2.2), and were positioned to the left or to the right
side of the sheet, in a way that no two lines was exactly
below each other. Only very long and low frequency words
were chosen for the task. The mean length of the words in
characters was 13.4 (SD = 2.1), or 3.9 cm (SD = 0.7) and
their mean objective frequency was 0.19 (SD = 0.23, range
0.00-0.59). Objective frequency data for the Bulgarian
words (Simov, Osenova, Kolkovska, Balabanova, &
Doikoff, 2004) was converted into frequency score per
million and 10-base logarithm of the score was taken with
one added to the score per million to avoid the undefined
Lg(0). The words had an odd number of characters in order
to avoid an overlap between their orthographic and physical
center. For the same reason a handwriting script and not
block letters, was used. The words were written in Segoe
Script, bold, font size 13, again on different positions to the
left or to the right of the A4 sheet.

Results
The performance on the active and passive tasks was
measured with two different types of indices. For the
analyses of the line and word bisection data, a Percent
deviation score was calculated as the difference between the
left bisected part and the true half, divided by the true half
and multiplied by 100 ((left bisected-half)/half*100) (see
Fujii, Fukatsu, Yamadori, & Kimura, 1995; Failla,
Sheppard, & Bradshaw, 2003).
Also, a novel drawing bias index was developed that took
into account both the size of the drawing and its deviation
from the center. First, the distance between the two outmost
points on the lateral axis of the drawing was divided by two.
The distance from this central point C1 to the outer points
was taken as the drawing`s radius R. Each Bias index was
calculated as the proportion of the shortest distance (⊥) from
C1 to the sheet’s midline C2 (±⊥C1C2, negative values coded
left), and the absolute sum of ±⊥C1C2 and R.
⊥

This calculation yielded values between -1 and +1, with
zero for the centrally positioned objects. For both measures
negative values indicated left bias and positive values
indicated right bias.
Preschool children
The data of 17 four-year old children from the preschool age
group were subjected to analyses of Bias for each of the five
tasks. Table 2 shows the means, standard deviations, and
range of values for Line Bisection and Word Bisection Bias.

Table 1: Means and SDs (in parentheses) of the line and
word length in centimeters; word length in number of
characters and their objective frequency (Simov et al., 2004)

Words
Lines

Length in cm
3.9 (0.7)
10.9 (2.2)

Length in characters
13.4 (2.1)

Table 2: Means, standard deviations, and range for
Deviation Percent Score (Line/Word Bisection) in 4 year
olds.

Frequency
0.19 (0.23)

Experimental
Task (Bias)
Line Bisection
Word Bisection

M

SD

Min

Max

6.88
6.05

11.84
9.47

-12.83
-16.20

30.20
22.18

Note: Negative values correspond to a Left side preference.

Procedure
All participants had to perform line and word bisection, and
also draw a house, a person and a tree on three separate
sheets of paper. The order of the line and word bisection
tasks and the drawing tasks was counterbalanced for the
adults and the middle-schoolers. Preschoolers performed the
tasks in random order. The sheets of paper were placed one
by one in front of the participants and taken away after the
execution of each task. Participants were asked to cross the
middle of the lines and words as fast and as accurately as
possible, and to draw a house, a person and a tree, on their
own terms. For the 4-year-olds the instructions were more
detailed, as the experimenter had to be sure that they
understood the task well.

In the Line Bisection Task, children’s choices were
significantly biased towards the right-hand side of the lines,
as seen in the percent deviation score, M = 6.88, SD =
11.84, t(16) = 2.40, p = .03. Children’s performance in the
Word Bisection Task was similarly biased rightwards, M =
6.05, SD = 9.47, t(16) = 2.63, p = .02.
The drawing placement choices of the preschool children
were analyzed in terms of the House bias index, Person bias
index, and Tree bias index, respectively.
One-sample t-tests evaluated whether children’s drawings
were positioned with significant lateral bias. Table 3 shows
the means, standard deviations, and range for each drawing
task.

3635

Table 3: Means, standard deviations, and range for the
drawing tasks bias indices in preschool children.
Experimental
Task: Bias Indices
Draw a House
Draw a Person
Draw a Tree

M

SD

Min

Max

.24
-.01
.11

.54
.56
.49

-.83
-.82
-.73

.90
.93
.71

Adult group
The data of 18 adult participants were analyzed for Bias.
Table 6 shows the means, standard deviations, and range for
the Line Bisection and Word Bisection Bias measures.
Table 6: Means, standard deviations, and range for
Deviation Percent Score (Line/Word Bisection) in adults.
Experimental
Task (Bias)
Line Bisection
Word Bisection

Note: Negative values correspond to a Left side preference.

There was no lateral bias in the Draw-a-house task, M = .24,
SD = .54, t(16) = 1.79, p = .09, the Draw-a-person Task, M =
-.01, SD = .56, t(16) = .11, p > .1, or the Draw-a-tree Task, M
= .11, SD = .49, t(16) = .96, p > .1. In neither of the three
object drawing tasks did children’s object placements
deviate reliably from the sheet’s midline.
Middle school children
The data of 18 twelve-year olds from the middle school age
group were analyzed for Bias for each of the five tasks.
Table 4 shows the means, standard deviations, and range for
the Line Bisection and Word Bisection Bias measures.

M

SD

Min

Max

.22
-.97

4.94
9.71

-9.69
-26.09

9.25
12.31

SD

Min

Max

-1.21
-.83

5.49
3.21

-13.10
-8.45

7.25
4.78

Note: Negative values correspond to a Left side preference.

In neither task, did adults’ performance show any lateral
bias, p’s > .1.
The drawing choices of the adults were analyzed in terms
of the House, Person, and Tree bias indices. Table 7 shows
the means, standard deviations, and range for each object
drawing task.
Table 7: Means, standard deviations, and range for the
Draw-a-House, Draw-a-Person, and Draw-a-Tree indices, in
the adult group.

Table 4: Means, standard deviations, and range for
Deviation Percent Score (Line/Word Bisection) in the
middle school group.
Experimental
Task (Bias)
Line Bisection
Word Bisection

M

Experimental
Task: Bias Indices
Draw a House
Draw a Person
Draw a Tree

M

SD

Min

Max

-.27
-.45
-.25

.26
.22
.21

-.72
-.77
-.58

.25
.03
.13

Note: Negative values correspond to a Left side preference.

Note: Negative values correspond to a Left side preference.

In both bisection tasks, twelve-year olds’ choices were not
reliably biased to one of the sides, all p’s > .1.
The drawing choices of the 12-year olds were analyzed in
a similar way to the data of the preschool children. Onesample t-tests yielded a reliable lateral bias for the Person
and Tree Bias index measures. Table 5 shows the means,
standard deviations, and range for each drawing task.
Table 5: Means, standard deviations, and range for the
drawing tasks bias indices in 12-year old children.
Experimental
Task: Bias Indices
Draw a House
Draw a Person
Draw a Tree

M

SD

Min

Max

-.06
-.40
-.13

.17
.14
.15

-.39
-.60
-.41

.21
-.13
.15

Note: Negative values correspond to a Left side preference.

The analyses revealed no lateral bias in the Draw-a-house
task, p > .1, but we found a reliable Left bias in the Draw-aperson and Draw-a-tree tasks, t(17) = 11.87, p < .001, and t(17)
= 3.59, p = .002, respectively.

In all three object drawing tasks, adults exhibited a reliable
Left bias: in the Draw-a-house task, M = -.27, SD = .26, t(17)
= 4.23, p = .001, in the Draw-a-person Task, M = -.45, SD =
.22, t(17) = 8.79, p < .001, and in the Draw-a-tree Task, M = .25, SD = .21, t(17) = 5.07, p < .001.
In summary, we found a reliable Right bias in preschool
children’s performance on the two bisection tasks, and a
reliable Left bias in adults’ performance on the drawing
tasks. Twelve-year olds had no lateral bias on the bisection
tasks, and a reliable Left bias on two of the three drawing
tasks. In addition, in order to evaluate whether their
performance differed from each of the other age groups we
analyzed their performance measures in combination with
the other groups in separate multiple analyses of variance on
the bisection tasks and on the drawing tasks. A MANOVA
revealed a significant main effect of age group in line and
word bisection (F(4,98) = 3.75, p = .007; ƞ2p = .133). A
post-hoc analysis (Scheffé) revealed that the difference was
between the adults and the preschoolers (p = .016 for the
line bisection task; and p = .05 for the word bisection task).
No difference was found between the performance of the
middle school children and either of the other two groups
(Figure 1).

3636

Figure 1. Percent deviation line and word scores as a
function of age group. Positive values indicate deviation to
the right and negative values indicate deviation to the left.
Error bars denote .95 confidence intervals. * p < .05.
A MANOVA showed a significant main effect of age
group in the drawing tasks (F(6,96) = 4.73, p < .001; ƞ2p =
.228). Post-hoc analysis (Scheffé) revealed that the adults
and the preschoolers performed differently in all drawing
tasks – in the draw-a-house task (p = .001), in the draw-atree task (p = .006) and in the draw a person task (p = .003).
Middle school children differed from preschoolers only in
the draw-a-person task (p = .01). Again, no difference was
found between the performance of the middle school
children and the adults (Figure 2).

Figure 2. Drawing bias index as a function of age group.
Positive values indicate deviation to the right and negative
values indicate deviation to the left. Error bars denote .95
confidence intervals. *** p < .001; ** p = <.01; * p < .05.

Discussion
The present study showed spatial bias in different
cognitive spatial tasks across three age groups. Interestingly,
the direction of the demonstrated bias depended
significantly on the nature of the tasks. In the passive tasks
(line and word bisection), results showed bias only for the

preschool group, and in the active (drawing) tasks - only for
the middle school children and the adults. This suggests that
implicit and explicit tasks might reflect different types of
spatial processing. Furthermore, with development the
direction of the bias was indeed shifted from right to left,
but also across the tasks. Generally, all participants deviated
more to the left in the implicit tasks. One explanation would
be that the explicit instruction in the bisection task made
participants more attentive, resulting in overdriven
movements for the preschoolers because of the pervasive
motor component. Another speculation would be that a
certain familiarity effect could enhance the ability to form
object representations in the peripersonal space, resulting in
difference in performance.
Preschoolers exhibited significant rightward bias in the
line and word bisection tasks, consistent with reports of
previous studies (Dellatolas et al., 1996; Dobler, Manly,
Atkinson, Wilson, Ioannou, & Robertson, 2001). As
reported by Dellatolas et al. (1996), when four-year-old
children use their right hand, a low degree of hemispheric
interaction due to callosal immaturity may be the reason
which leads to enhanced left hemisphere involvement, shift
of attention to the right side and rightwards overestimation.
The 12-year-old middle school children were not reliably
biased in the bisection tasks. As reported by Hausmann et
al. (2003), there is a robust developmental step to the adult
pattern of pseudoneglect between the ages of 10-12 and 1315. In their study, a group of 10-12 year old children
demonstrated a symmetrical neglect for the line bisection
task, whereas their eldest group (13-15 year olds) showed a
leftwards bias. As proposed by Hausmann et al. (2003), this
developmental step can be attributed both to corpus
callosum maturation and hormonal change during puberty.
Furthermore, for the adult group, the line and word
bisection task showed no significant bias although the
overall mean scores indicated a leftward directionality.
In order to assess the leftward bias we used implicit
measures of visual-spatial computation as in the person-treehouse drawing task (Barrett et al., 2002). As expected, the
adult group demonstrated a leftward bias for all three types
of object drawings, similar to the results in the study of
Barret et al. (2002). The middle-schoolers` drawings also
showed a leftward bias though to a smaller degree. This
leftward bias is consistent with previous studies using the
draw-a-person task (Heller, 1991) and the draw-a-tree task
(Picard & Zarhbouch, 2014) and indicates that at this age
the right hemisphere asymmetric activation is evident and
reading habits affect spatial attention.
Notably, Barrett et al. (2002) reported that reading habits
(left to right or right to left) could not reverse the leftward
bias in the house-tree-person drawings of adults. In our
study we found that preschoolers exhibited no lateral bias
and tended to place their drawings in the middle of the page.
Thus, when reading habits are not established and there is
no imbalanced left hemispheric activation, children’s
perceptual right space is not attenuated.

3637

Conclusion
The present study used both implicit and explicit tasks in
three age groups with different reading skills. Age had
significant effect in all tasks, but results depended on the
nature of the tasks. Adults differed from preschoolers in all
tasks. Middle school children performed like the adults, and
differed from the preschoolers in only one of the implicit
tasks. These results are consistent with previous studies
stressing the importance of corpus callosum maturation in
the the asymmetric activation of the right hemisphere, as
well as the importance of the reading habits.
Unlike previous research, we did not find significant
spatial bias for the adults and the middle school children in
the explicit tasks. One explanation might be the enhanced
executive control over motor performance. This would
mean that when attention is engaged, pseudoneglect might
be attenuated with maturation. However, due to the small
sample sizes, not definite conclusion can be made.
Notably, in the present study was used a novel index to
assess the spatial bias in the drawings` placement, taking
into account not only the deviation of the drawing but its
size. That is why it is difficult to compare our results with
earlier results. Subsequent studies are planned with 7-8 year
old children and illiterate adults in order to examine further
the influence of brain maturation and scanning habits on the
spatial representation of the immediate surroundings.

References
Arduino, L. S., Previtali, P., & Girelli, L. (2010). The centre
is not in the middle: Evidence from line and word
bisection. Neuropsychologia, 48(7), 2140-2146.
Barrett, A. M., Kim, M., Crucian, G. P., & Heilman, K. M.
(2002). Spatial bias: Effects of reading direction on
Korean subjects. Neuropsychologia, 40, 1003-1012.
Bradshaw, J. L., Spataro, J. A., Harris, M., Nettleton, N. C.,
& Bradsaw, J. (1988). Crossing the midline by four to
eight year old children. Neuropsychologia, 26, 221–235.
Bowers, D., & Heilman, K. M. (1980). Pseudoneglect:
effects of hemispace on a tactile line bisection task.
Neuropsychologia, 18(4), 491-498.
Chokron, S., & De Agostini, M. (1995). Reading habits and
line bisection: A developmental approach. Cognitive
Brain Research, 3(1), 51-58.
Chokron, S., & Imbert, M. (1993). Influence of reading
habits on line bisection. Cognitive Brain Research, 1(4),
219-222.
Cicek, M., Deouell, L. Y., & Knight, R. T. (2009). Brain
activity during landmark and line bisection tasks.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 3, 1-8.
Dellatolas, G., Coutin, T., & De Agostini, M. (1996).
Bisection and perception of horizontal lines in normal
children. Cortex, 32(4), 705-715.
Dobler, V., Manly, T., Atkinson, J., Wilson, B. A., Ioannou,
K., & Robertson, I. H. (2001). Interaction of hand use and
spatial selective attention in children. Neuropsychologia,
39, 1055– 1064.

Failla, C. V., Sheppard, D. M., & Bradshaw, J. L. (2003).
Age and responding-hand related changes in performance
of neurologically normal subjects on the line-bisection
and chimeric-faces tasks. Brain and Cognition, 52(3),
353-363.
Fischer, M. H. (1996). Bisection performance indicates
spatial word representation. Cognitive Brain Research,
4(3), 163-170.
Fujii, T., Fukatsu, R., Yamadori, A., & Kimura, I. (1995).
Effect of age on the line bisection test. Journal of Clinical
and Experimental Neuropsychology, 17(6), 941-944.
Gabay, Y., Gabay, S., Henik, A., Schiff, R., & Behrmann,
M. (2015). Word and line bisection in typical and
impaired readers and a cross-language comparison. Brain
and Language, 150, 143-152.
Hausmann, M., Waldie, K. E., & Corballis, M. C. (2003).
Developmental changes in line bisection: A result of
callosal maturation?. Neuropsychology, 17(1), 155-160.
Heller, W. (1991). Hemispatial biases in children on the
Draw-A-Person Test. Developmental Neuropsychology, 7,
151-160.
Jewell, G., & McCourt, M. E. (2000). Pseudoneglect: a
review and meta-analysis of performance factors in line
bisection tasks. Neuropsychologia, 38(1), 93-110.
Kastner-Koller, U., Deimann, P., & Bruckner, J. (2007).
Assessing handedness in pre-schoolers: Construction and
initial validation of a hand preference test for 4-6-yearolds. Psychology Science, 49(3), 239-254.
Luh, K. E. (1995). Line bisection and perceptual
asymmetries in normal individuals: What you see is not
what you get. Neuropsychology, 9(4), 435-448.
Macdonald-Nethercott, E. M., Kinnear, P. R., & Venneri, A.
(2000). Bisection of shapes and lines: analysis of the
visual and motor aspects of pseudoneglect. Perceptual
and Motor Skills, 91(1), 217-226.
Michel, C., Bidot, S., Bonnetblanc, F., & Quercia, P.
(2011). Left minineglect or inverse pseudoneglect in
children with dyslexia?. Neuroreport, 22(2), 93-96.
Ossandon, J. P., Onat, S., & Konig, P. (2014). Spatial biases
in viewing behavior. Journal of Vision, 14(2), 20-20.
doi:10.1167/14.2.20
Picard, D., & Zarhbouch, B. (2014). Leftward spatial bias in
children's drawing placement: Hemispheric activation
versus directional hypotheses. Laterality: Asymmetries of
Body. Brain and Cognition, 19(1), 96-112.
Simov, K., Osenova, P., Kolkovska, S., Balabanova, E.,
Doikoff, D. (2004). A language resources infrastructure
for Bulgarian. Proceedings of Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference (pp.1685-1688). Lisbon, Portugal
(http://www.bultreebank.org/papers/BulgarianL
RI316.pdf).
Vingiano, W. (1991). Pseudoneglect on a cancellation task.
International Journal of Neuroscience, 58(1-2), 63-67.

3638

