Re-representation in comparison and similarity
Samuel Day (days@susqu.edu)
Jennifer Asmuth (asmuth@susqu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Susquehanna University
514 University Ave., Selinsgrove, PA 17870 USA

mapped to one another if they are semantically identical. Another
constraint, the principle of one-to-one correspondence, states that
each element in one representation may be mapped to no more
than one element in the other. Additionally, if relations in two
representations correspond to one another, those relations’
arguments must also correspond (the principle of parallel
connectivity).
In the example cases above, the ESCAPED_FROM relations
in the two representations would be placed in correspondence,
which is allowed because they are identical. In order to maintain
parallel connectivity, the arguments of those relations would then
be mapped in a role-consistent way, despite their surface
differences: Nicole would correspond with the python (they are
both “escapers”), and her bad relationship would correspond
with the snake’s cage (as the confining environments).
Structure mapping theory has been a very successful model for
understanding a wide range of cognitive phenomena, including
similarity, analogy, classification and knowledge transfer (see
Markman & Gentner, 2001). However, in the basic form
described above, it would quickly run into significant problems
in the real world. For example, as noted, SMT asserts that
relations may only be mapped to one another if they are
semantically identical. However, it is not difficult to find cases
that are perceived as analogically similar despite having nonidentical relations. For example, people can easily recognize the
structural similarity between Bill drove to the store and Bill
jogged to the store, even though their relations do not perfectly
match (Gentner & Kurtz, 2006). Or consider the sentences John
is taller than George and Martha is shorter than Mary. Despite
the conspicuous appropriate mapping (John and Mary are both
taller), strict enforcement of the identity requirement would lead
to a failed match, since TALLER_THAN and
SHORTER_THAN are clearly not the same.
Fortunately, researchers have proposed a way around this
problem. Specifically, it is theorized that representations may
undergo a process of re-representation, in which structural and
conceptual changes occur in order to enable potential relational
matches (see Falkenhainer, Forbus & Gentner, 1989; Holyoak,
Novick & Melz, 1994; Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996; Kurtz, 2005).
A variety of methods for re-representation have been proposed.
For example, a cognitive system may store information about the
similarity of different relations (e.g., knowing that drive is
relatively similar to jog; Holyoak & Thagard, 1989), or may
initiate a search for common superordinate relations (e.g., both
drive and jog are examples of move; Falkenhainer, et al., 1989).
Another approach is to decompose a relation into its component
structure (e.g., Gentner, 1983; Gentner & Kurtz, 2006). For
example, buying a book and taking a book do not initially

Abstract
Re-representation is a crucial component of structure mapping
theory, allowing individuals to notice structural commonalities
between situations that do not initially have identical relational
representations. Despite its theoretical importance, however, this
concept has been the subject of very little empirical work. In two
experiments, we find that a case’s participation in one comparison
systematically changes its perceived similarity to new cases, in a
pattern consistent with re-representation. Additional work rules out
alternative explanations based on relational priming.
Keywords: analogy; re-representation; similarity

Introduction
Consider how similar you find the following events:
 Nicole finally got out of the bad relationship that had
prevented her from pursuing her own interests.
 As the zoo keeper was busy cleaning its habitat, the Burmese
python was able to escape its open cage.
If you are like the participants in our research, you were
probably willing to call these events fairly similar, at least after a
little bit of consideration. In a very literal sense, these cases differ
in significant ways—in their settings, their characters, their
implications, even in the species of their protagonists. At a more
abstract level, however, they share important structural features.
Specifically, both situations describe characters who are able to
escape from a confining environment.
The dominant model for understanding structured
comparisons such as these is Gentner’s (1983, 1989) structure
mapping theory (SMT). According to this model, individual
cases involve hierarchically-structured mental representations of
labeled relations, each of which may take other relations or
entities as arguments. For example, the common relational
structure in the sentences above might be conveyed through a
proposition
such
as:
ESCAPED_FROM(ESCAPER,
CONFINING_ENVIRONMENT). In this formulation, ESCAPED_FROM is a relation: it describes a relationship between
multiple entities, and is therefore represented as a predicate that
takes multiple distinct arguments. These arguments represent the
assignment of entities to the relation’s roles.
Comparison, according to SMT, involves a process of
mapping in order to establish a structural alignment between the
representations. The goal of this process is to define
correspondences between the representations while following
certain important rules and constraints. For example, although
two corresponding objects may be quite dissimilar (e.g., Nicole
and the python), relations in two representations will only be

277

contain a match, but their relations can be decomposed into
representations such as:

what would happen if a participant then compared one of those
cases to a new situation, as in:

 BUY(book)  CAUSE(PAY_FOR(book), OBTAIN(book))

 As the zoo keeper was busy cleaning its habitat, the Burmese
python was able to escape its open cage.

 TAKE(book)  CAUSE(PICK_UP(book), OBTAIN(book))

 Nicole finally got out of the bad relationship that had
prevented her from pursuing her own interests.

which would reveal an identically-matching predicate: OBTAIN.
Despite the importance of re-representation to the overall
theory of structure mapping, however, it has been the subject of
very little empirical work. The primary experimental research
directly addressing the issue comes from Gentner and Kurtz
(2006). Participants in their studies were willing to call two
sentences analogous when the verbs were nearly synonymous
(Fred reclined on the couch and Carl lay on the couch) or
semantically “near” to one another (Fred reclined on the couch
and Carl sat on the couch), but not when they were semantically
“distant” in meaning (Fred reclined on the couch and Carl
sneezed on the couch). Interestingly, response times were
significantly longer when judging the “near” verbs than the
synonyms. This finding is interpreted as evidence for rerepresentation, which would have required additional processing
in order to determine a match. The authors also reported a
tendency for participants to use new language (terms not present
in either sentence) in their later justifications for their similarity
ratings, consistent with a change in how those cases were
represented. They acknowledged, however, that this might have
reflected processes occurring during the justification task itself
rather than the initial comparison.
In our studies, we use similarity ratings to assess potential rerepresentation. Similarity is a fundamental psychological process
thought to play a role in everything from stimulus generalization
in classical conditioning (Pavlov, 1927; Shepard, 1987) to
categorization (e.g., Smith & Medin, 1981), retrieval (e.g.,
Hintzman, 1984), inference (e.g., Osherson, et al., 1990) and
problem solving (e.g., Ross, 1987). Similarity ratings have also
been used successfully in prior research as a measurement of
representational change (e.g., Boroditsky, 2007; Goldstone,
Lippa & Shiffrin, 2001). In the present experiments, we examine
whether participation in one comparison can alter a case’s mental
representation in a way that changes its perceived similarity to
new cases.
For example, consider the similarity between these cases:

Now the relational structure of the first sentence, established
during the prior comparison, would be incompatible with that of
the second, because the RELEASE relation is not identical with
the ESCAPE relation. (Of course, this depends on some
assumptions about participants’ mental representations, but ones
that are borne out by our data—see General Discussion.) At this
point, it is possible that the participant might devote the
additional processing effort required to change the
representational structure yet again, in search of potential shared
relations. However, in most real-world experiences—as in most
experimental settings—we believe that individuals will tend to
exert a more modest level of processing, in this case typically
relying on the representation that has already been created. If so,
they would determine that the two cases in the second
comparison are simply not very similar to one another.
In these two experiments, we examine whether similarity
ratings are reliably higher when one of the compared cases has
recently participated in another comparison that involves the
same shared relational structure, relative to recent comparisons
involving a different structure. For control purposes, the relevant
test comparisons were always the same across participants—only
the preceding comparison varied between conditions. In
Experiment 1, we establish this basic effect, while Experiment 2
both replicates this finding and rules out alternative explanations
based on relational priming.

Experiment 1
Participants Thirty participants were recruited through
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk in return for $1.00 payment.
Materials and Design The study was computer-based, and was
administered online. After reading the instructions, each
participant read 18 sentence pairs, presented on-screen one at a
time. Participants were asked to rate the similarity of each pair by
clicking on a horizontal 15-point scale. Above the scale was a
prompt, “How similar are these situations?”, and the scale’s
endpoints were labeled Very dissimilar and Very similar. The
entire task took approximately five minutes to complete.
We developed six Standard sentences, each of which could
reasonably be construed according to two different relational
structures, which we will refer to as Structure A and Structure B
(see Figure 1 for a visual depiction of the overall design). For
example, the sentence about the python and the zoo keeper
described in the Introduction could be represented as an example
of “being able to escape from a confining environment,” or as an
example of “inadvertently releasing something dangerous.” Each
of these Standards was involved in two consecutive
comparisons.

 While testing a network security system, the computer scientist
inadvertently released a destructive virus onto the internet.
 As the zoo keeper was busy cleaning its habitat, the Burmese
python was able to escape its open cage.
Participants in our studies were able to recognize important
structural commonalities between the described events, and
responded with fairly high similarity ratings. In this case, the two
situations are similar because they both describe someone
inadvertently releasing something dangerous. According to
SMT, this perceived similarity would require them to establish a
common relational representation for the overlap between the
cases, such as re-representing both in terms like:
RELEASE(AGENT, RELEASED_ENTITY). But consider

278

“Same” condition
Base comparison:

“Different” condition

• Sentence reflecting Relation A
• Standard sentence

OR

• Sentence reflecting Relation B
• Standard sentence

• Standard sentence
• New sentence reflecting Relation A

Test comparison:

Figure 1: Design of Base-Test comparison pairs in Experiment 1.
We will refer to the first of these comparisons for each
Standard as the Base comparison. The other sentence in the Base
comparison varied between participants: approximately half of
the participants compared the Standard to an unambiguous
example of Structure A, while the remainder compared the
Standard to an example of Structure B. The subsequent trial was
the Test comparison. The sentences in this comparison were the
same for all participants: the Standard was compared to a new
example of Structure A. Ratings from the six Test comparisons
(one for each Standard) provided the relevant measurement in
our experiment. While the sentences in the Test comparisons
were identical for all participants, they were classified as either
Same trials or Different trials, according to whether the preceding
Base comparison involved the same relational structure
(Structure A) or a different structure (Structure B). Our primary
question within this experiment is whether similarity ratings on
Same trials would be significantly greater than those on Different
trials, consistent with re-representation of the Standard.
In sum, the relevant stimuli included six relevant items sets,
each containing one Standard sentence, two analogous examples
of Structure A (one for potential use in the Base comparison and
one for the second Test comparison), and one example of
Structure B (for potential use in the Base comparison).

Each participant completed three Same trials and three
Different trials. The condition (Same vs. Different) of each of the
six Test trials was assigned randomly for each participant. The
presentation order of the six comparison pairs also varied
randomly between participants. Additionally, participants
completed six filler comparisons—one at the beginning of the
task, and one following each of the Test trials except the last—
for a total of 18 comparisons.
Results and Discussion A paired-samples t-test revealed a
significant difference between conditions (see Figure 2; t(29) =
4.99, p < .001, d = 1.17), with Same trials (M = 9.59, SD = 2.41)
receiving considerably higher similarity ratings than Different
trials (M = 6.40, SD = 2.99). To ensure that these effects were not
driven by a small subset of the materials, we also analyzed the
data across items. Similarity ratings for all of the six items were
higher during Same trials than Different trials, and there was a
significant difference between the ratings at the item level (t(5) =
4.13, p = .009, d = 2.23). Because the sentences in these Test
trials were identical for all participants, these systematic
differences must reflect the influence of the Base comparisons
that preceded them, the sole variation between conditions.
The observed pattern is consistent with a process of rerepresentation. According to this explanation, the structure and
content of the mental representation of the Standard sentence was
altered during the Base comparison in order to maximize its
similarity to its paired sentence. When the resulting
representational structure was also a good match for the sentence
in the subsequent Test trial, a straightforward mapping would
have been possible and comparison would proceed smoothly.
However, when the initial re-representation left the Standard
with a structure that mismatched the paired sentence in the Test
trial, the perceived similarity between the sentences would be
poor unless the participant devoted the additional processing
effort necessary to alter the Standard yet again.

***

Experiment 2
Changes in perceived similarity represent a straightforward,
low-level means of assessing participants’ mental
representations. However, while our data is consistent with the
proposed explanation of re-representation, there is a salient
alternative explanation that must also be considered. Our

Figure 2: Results from Experiment 1

279

matches between relationships that are similar but not identical—
and this ability depends upon the process of re-representation:
structural and/or conceptual changes in one or both of the mental
representations. An explanation based on relational priming
would not require any changes in the representation of the
Standard itself, and therefore would provide no evidence that rerepresentation was occurring. In order to draw any meaningful
support for our hypotheses, we therefore need to either rule out a
priming explanation, or to demonstrate that re-representation is
exerting an influence over and above that of simple priming. In
Experiment 2, we add a control condition in order to assess the
independent contributions of re-representation.

approach suggests that the changes in similarity ratings were the
result of persisting changes in the mental representations of the
Standard sentences themselves. However, our data could also be
explained by the activation of more abstract representations that
are external to the individual sentences, through a process of
relational priming.
Consider the example stimuli discussed in the Introduction,
with Nicole escaping from her bad relationship, and the python
escaping from its enclosure at the zoo. In the course of
comparing these situations, participants may be activating an
abstract representation of the relation ESCAPED_FROM. In
fact, there is considerable empirical evidence that comparison
can promote the generation or activation of abstract knowledge
structures (e.g., Catrambone & Holyoak, 1989; Gentner,
Loewenstein & Thompson, 2003; Gick & Holyoak, 1983). If so,
that representation could presumably still be active and
influential during the subsequent Test comparison. As such, it
would be in a position to alter the perceived similarity in that trial
in at least two different ways. First, it could serve to influence
and bias the interpretations of each of the comparison sentences
independently. For example, prior research has shown that when
individuals are primed with traits such as brave and adventurous,
they tend to develop more positive impressions of a character
who attempts dangerous, exciting tasks, relative to participants
who were primed with traits such as reckless and foolish
(Higgins et. al, 1977). In other words, the mental availability of a
concept appears to bias people’s interpretation of novel,
ambiguous stimuli. In our example case, priming of a general
relational concept such as escape could be biasing participants to
interpret subsequent sentences as examples of that schema.
At the same time, priming of the ESCAPED_FROM relation
could be influencing participants’ assessments of the relationship
between the sentences in the Test trial. A large body of literature
has shown that individuals give higher ratings on a variety of
measures to a stimulus when it is processed more fluently (e.g.,
Mandler, Nakamura & Van Zandt, 1987; Whittlesea, 1993). This
fluency may be the result of a variety of factors, including
physical properties of the stimulus itself, but it is most commonly
associated with prior exposure to a stimulus. In our study, all
participants might have been able to recognize the relevant
relationship between the sentences in the Test trials. However, if
that particular relationship was already primed and strongly
available, the commonalities might have become easier to
process, and this ease of processing may in turn have led to a
heightened sense of relevance or meaning. If so, prior research
suggests that this sense of fluency (or disfluency, in the Different
trials) could have influenced participants’ similarity ratings in a
pattern similar to that observed in our data. Some prior research
is consistent with the idea that relational priming may influence
comprehension and interpretation (e.g., Estes, 2003; Estes &
Jones, 2006).
In some ways, the distinction between an explanation based on
re-representation and an explanation based on relational priming
is subtle. At a theoretical level, however, this distinction is
crucial. As discussed, structure mapping theory is a highly
influential model that has had a great deal of explanatory success.
However, its viability depends upon its ability to accommodate

Participants Sixty participants were recruited through
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk in return for $1.00 payment.
Materials and Design Experiment 2 included two betweenparticipants conditions. In the Repeated Standard condition (n =
30), the materials and procedure were identical to those used in
Experiment 1. The Relational Priming condition (n = 30), which
served as a control, was identical to the Repeated Standard
condition with the exception that each of the Standard sentences
was compared only once, during the Test trial, rather than in two
consecutive trials (the Base and the Test). During the Base trials,
participants in this condition were presented with two sentences
that were each an example of one of the two relevant relational
structures. That is, each participant compared either two
examples of Structure A or two examples of Structure B.
For instance, two consecutive trials in the Relational Priming
condition might include the following two comparisons:
 When the instructor turned around to write something on the
board, Eric slipped out of the boring lecture.
 The rabbit had been cornered by a fox for several minutes, but
finally lunged through the weeds and got away safely.
 As the zoo keeper was busy cleaning its habitat, the Burmese
python was able to escape its open cage.
 Nicole finally got out of the bad relationship that had
prevented her from pursuing her own interests.
Unlike Experiment 1, and unlike the Repeated Standard
condition in this experiment, participants in this condition did not
see the Standard sentence (about the python at the zoo) until the
Test comparison. There was therefore no opportunity for prior
re-representation of that situation. There was, however, still an
opportunity for relational priming. The two sentences in the Base
trial are each unambiguous examples of escape, and that is the
most salient commonality between them. According to a priming
explanation for our data, that relation would have been
highlighted and made more accessible during the Base trial, and
would therefore be in a position to influence subsequent
comparisons.
If the differences in Experiment 1 were solely the result of
relational priming, we would expect no differences between the
Repeated Standard and Relational Priming conditions, because
the priming effects should be equivalent. If, on the other hand, re-

280

representation is influencing perceived similarity, effects should
be greater for participants in the Repeated Standard condition.

Most important for our theoretical interests, a 2 (Repeated
Standard vs. Relational Priming) × 2 (Same vs. Different trials)
ANOVA showed a significant interaction between participant
condition and item condition (F(1, 58) = 8.16, p = .006, η²p =
.12). This interaction reflected the fact that the advantage of
Same over Different trials was significantly greater in the
Repeated Standard condition (mean difference = 3.81, SD =
3.84) than the Relational Priming condition (mean difference =
1.36, SD = 2.03). This advantage was seen for all six items sets
individually, and confirmed by an interaction in an analysis
across items (F(1, 10) = 4.08, p = .021, η²p = .43).
(To ensure that the materials were equally apt in both
conditions, we confirmed that ratings for the Base comparisons
did not differ between conditions (t(59) = 1.22, p = .23). In fact,
there was a small numerical advantage for the Relational Priming
condition: M = 10.23, SD = 1.52, vs. M = 9.74, SD = 1.55.)

Results and Discussion There were three primary goals in
Experiment 2. First, it gave us an opportunity to attempt a
replication of the findings from Experiment 1, which is important
given the novelty of those results. Second, it allowed us to assess
whether relational priming may exert an influence in simple
consecutive similarity judgments. This is an interesting question
in its own right, as we will explore in the General Discussion.
Finally, and most importantly, this experiment allowed us to
compare the two between-participants conditions, one of which
provided the opportunity for re-representation and one of which
did not. Because the two conditions should have been equivalent
in terms of potential relational priming, any observed advantages
for the Repeated Standard condition would provide strong
evidence that re-representation had taken place.
We again found an overall advantage for ratings on the Same
trials (M = 8.81, SD = 2.49) relative to the Different trials (M =
6.47, SD = 2.36; F(1, 58) = 46.17, p < .001, η²p = .44). However,
because this includes both of the between-participants conditions,
we performed a separate analysis of the Repeated Standard
condition (which was identical to Experiment 1) to determine
whether the basic pattern from the first study had been replicated.
This revealed a pattern of results very similar to Experiment 1
(see Figure 3). Similarity ratings for the Same trials (M = 8.89,
SD = 2.48) were significantly higher than those for Different
trials (M = 5.66, SD = 2.46; t(29) = 5.72, p < .001, d = 1.31),
replicating our initial finding. This pattern also held in a separate
analysis across items (t(5) = 7.16, p = .001, d = 1.94).
Next, we examined whether relational priming might have had
an influence on participants’ ratings. In a separate analysis of the
Relational Priming condition, Same trials (M = 8.63, SD = 2.53)
received higher similarity ratings on average than Different trials
(M = 7.28, SD = 1.98), across participants (t(29) = 3.67, p = .001,
d = 0.59) and items (t(5) = 3.00, p = .03, d = 1.00), suggesting
that relational priming was indeed having a measurable effect.

General Discussion
The results of these two studies are informative in several
ways. First and foremost, they provide important evidence for a
process of re-representation during comparison. As the dominant
model of analogy and structured comparison, structure mapping
theory has been used to explore and explain a wide variety of
cognitive phenomena. However, its ability to scale up to even
very basic real-world situations depends on its ability to flexibly
find connections between related but non-identical structures.
Re-representation has historically been cited as the underlying
explanation for this ability. Despite its theoretical importance,
however, direct evidence for re-representation has remained
scarce. In our studies, comparing a standard case to one situation
systematically changed its perceived similarity to new cases. The
pattern of these changes indicates that the representational
structure and content of the original standard had been altered in
a way that made it more compatible with its compared
situation—in other words, it had been re-represented. This effect
held even when controlling for potential relational priming
effects. By adding support to this critical but under-explored
area, our results are able to further bolster the viability of
structure mapping theory in general.
Although it was not our primary research focus, another
informative contribution of these studies is that Experiment 2
demonstrates a novel form of relational priming. The idea of
relational priming—that processing a particular semantic relation
in one situation may make it easier to process in the future—
seems reasonable, and perhaps even obvious given what we
know about priming in other contexts. However, finding
evidence to support this phenomenon has not always been
straightforward. In one of the earliest experimental attempts,
Spellman and colleagues (2001) found no indication of relational
priming between word pairs in a lexical decision task, even when
participants were explicitly told to focus on the relationships
between the presented words. Only when individuals were told
to notice that consecutive trials might involve the same
relationship was a modest effect observed. Subsequent research
has been more successful in finding examples of relational
priming, through the use of more tightly controlled stimuli and
by having participants engage in tasks that more naturally

***
***

***

Figure 3: Results from Experiment 2

281

Gentner, D. (1989). The mechanisms of analogical learning. In S.
Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and analogical
reasoning (pp. 199-241). London: Cambridge University
Press. (Reprinted in Knowledge acquisition and learning,
1993, 673-694).
Gentner, D., & Kurtz, K. J. (2006). Relations, objects, and the
composition of analogies. Cognitive Science, 30(4), 609-642.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., & Thompson, L. (2003). Learning
and transfer: A general role for analogical encoding. Journal
of Educational Psychology, 95(2), 393.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction and
analogical transfer. Cognitive psychology, 15(1), 1-38.
Goldstone, R. L., Lippa, Y., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2001). Altering
object representations through category learning. Cognition,
78(1), 27-43.
Higgins, E. T., Rholes, W. S., & Jones, C. R. (1977). Category
accessibility and impression formation. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 13(2), 141-154.
Hintzman, D. L. (1984). MINERVA 2: A simulation model of
human memory. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, &
Computers, 16(2), 96-101.
Holyoak, K. J., Novick, L. R., & Melz, E. R. (1994). Component
processes in analogical transfer: Mapping, pattern completion,
and adaptation. In K. J. Holyoak & J. A. Barnden (Eds.),
Advances in connectionist and neural computation theory,
Vol. 2: Analogical connections. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical mapping by
constraint satisfaction. Cognitive science, 13(3), 295-355.
Kotovsky, L., & Gentner, D. (1996). Comparison and
categorization in the development of relational similarity.
Child Development, 67, 2797-2822.
Kurtz, K. J. (2005). Re-representation in comparison: Building
an empirical case. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical
Artificial Intelligence, 17(4), 447-459.
Mandler, G., Nakamura, Y., & Van Zandt, B. J. (1987).
Nonspecific effects of exposure on stimuli that cannot be
recognized. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 13(4), 646.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (2001). Thinking. Annual
Review of Psychology, 52(1), 223-247.
Osherson, D. N., Smith, E. E., Wilkie, O., Lopez, A., & Shafir,
E. (1990). Category-based induction. Psychological review,
97(2), 185.
Pavlov, I.P. (1927). Conditioned Reflexes: An Investigation of the
Physiological Activity of the Cerebral Cortex. London: Oxford
University Press.
Ross, B. H. (1987). This is like that: The use of earlier problems
and the separation of similarity effects. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
13(4), 629.
Shepard, R. N. (1987). Toward a universal law of generalization
for psychological science. Science, 237, 1317--1323.
Smith, E. E., & Medin, D. L. (1981). Categories and concepts (p.
89). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Whittlesea, B. W. (1993). Illusions of familiarity. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
19(6), 1235.

involved the activation of relations, such as the interpretation of
two-word phrases (e.g., Bendig & Holyoak, 2009; Estes, 2003;
Estes & Jones, 2006; Gagné, 2001). However, our control
condition in Experiment 2 is the first example to our knowledge
that demonstrates relational priming through changes in
perceived similarity, and the first to find large effects with such
naturalistic stimuli.
Finally, our experiments introduce a novel method for
assessing mental representation more generally. As with most
studies of this type, the stimuli for the present experiments were
coded by the authors largely as a function of our intuitions about
the semantics of the situations involved. However, as history has
repeatedly shown, researcher intuitions can often be wrong.
Furthermore, intuitions can vary markedly between individuals.
Consider the following two situations: (1) X was victorious over
Y, and (2) Y was defeated by X. In our stimuli, we assumed that
these reflected two distinct representational structures. Another
researcher, however, might reasonably argue that they are simply
two different ways of expressing the same underlying
proposition. Our experimental method provides a direct way to
address this issue. In our studies, comparing a sentence to a clear
example of the DEFEAT structure made it subsequently seem
significantly less similar to an unambiguous example of
VICTORY. In this case, the intuition that these reflect distinct
mental representations appears to have been correct, although
until that point it was an open empirical question. Examination of
the similarity changes resulting from re-representation offers us
an intriguing tool for exploring and answering questions about
the semantics of mental relations, and therefore provides a
potential window into a variety of important mental processes.

References
Bendig, B. W., & Holyoak, K. J. (2009). Relational priming of
analogical reasoning. In New Frontiers in analogy research:
Proceedings of the second international conference on
analogy (pp. 30-36).
Boroditsky, L. (2007). Comparison and the development of
knowledge. Cognition, 102(1), 118-128.
Catrambone, R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1989). Overcoming
contextual limitations on problem-solving transfer. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
15(6), 1147.
Estes, Z. (2003). Attributive and relational processes in nominal
combination. Journal of Memory and Language, 48(2), 304319.
Estes, Z., & Jones, L. L. (2006). Priming via relational similarity:
A copper horse is faster when seen through a glass eye.
Journal of Memory and Language, 55(1), 89-101.
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1989). The
structure-mapping engine: Algorithm and examples. Artificial
intelligence, 41(1), 1-63.
Gagné, C. L. (2001). Relation and lexical priming during the
interpretation of noun–noun combinations. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
27(1), 236.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure‐mapping: A theoretical framework
for analogy. Cognitive science, 7(2), 155-170.

282

