Recruitment of the motor system in the perception of handwritten and
typed characters
Chelsea L. Gordon (cgordon7@ucmerced.edu)
University of California at Merced, Department of Cognitive Science,
5200 North Lake Road, Merced, CA, 95343

Ramesh Balasubramaniam (ramesh@ucmerced.edu)
University of California at Merced, Department of Cognitive Science,
5200 North Lake Road, Merced, CA, 95343
Abstract
Many different functional roles have been ascribed to the
motor system due to its prevalent recruitment in perceptual
and cognitive tasks other than motor production. We discuss
findings that suggest the motor system might take on multiple
roles that vary with context and the brain networks involved.
Using single-pulse TMS, we measured the corticospinal
excitability of the FDI muscle in primary motor cortex as
participants viewed words that were either typed or
handwritten. We observed consistent facilitation of
corticospinal excitability during reading of handwritten text.
Although we observed facilitation in corticospinal excitability
during the presentation of typed text, this effect decreased
with repetitive presentations of stimuli. We suggest that the
facilitation during presentation of typed words is a case of
action simulation, and that the diminishing facilitation in the
case of typed stimuli is representative of sensory prediction
by the motor system. These findings suggest that we should
consider multiple roles for motor recruitment during the
observation of visual stimuli, taking context into
consideration.
Keywords: Action observation, motor involvement in
reading, sensorimotor prediction.

Introduction
The motor system is involved in a large number of cognitive
and perceptual domains, including action observation,
perception of object affordances, speech perception,
language and metaphor, and social cognition. There are
many theories aimed at explaining this widespread use of the
motor system. We will introduce some of these theories here
and work supporting each of them. Then we provide an
alternative hypothesis: that there is no one particular role for
the motor system in perception and cognition, but that it
plays many roles decided, in part, by situational context.
Outside of its role in moving the body, the most common
and widely posited role of the motor system is in
observation-execution mapping. A network which includes
several motor regions of the brain is responsible for mapping
observed actions onto one’s own motor system, which is said
to underlie action understanding. The neurological
underpinnings of this system rely on particular neurons in
motor cortex, called mirror neurons, that fire during both
observation and performance of a motor act in macaque
monkeys and in humans. (Rizzolatti et al. 1988, di Pellegrino

et al., 1992; Gallese et al., 1996; Mukamel et al., 2010).
Umiltà et al. (2001) found that some subset of mirror
neurons fire during the final part of an observed action, even
if that final part of the action is occluded from view,
suggesting that mirror neurons code the goal-related
execution of an action. This also suggests that mirror
neurons respond to action-related situations where
determining the actor and situation involves more inference,
suggesting a role in deeper understanding of action. Kohler
and colleagues (2002), recording from single neurons in
monkey premotor cortex, found that some of the same
neurons that fire during observed action will also fire when
monkeys are only hearing the auditory information from the
action (i.e., the cracking of a peanut). Again, this involves
inference to the presence of the actor without visual
recognition.
Motor activation during action observation is also called
motor resonance (Iacoboni, 1999), due to its timedependent and effector-specific nature. It is said that the
motor system of the observer “resonates” with that of the
actor, allowing the observer to use their own body to
understand the action being performed. Gangitano,
Mottaghy, and Pascual-Leone (2001) applied transcranial
magnetic stimulation (TMS) to record motor-evoked
potentials (MEPs) from the first dorsal interosseus (FDI)
muscle on the right hand during the observation of a cyclic
hand movement. They found that at the time when the FDI
muscle of the observed hand was most contracted, MEPs in
the observer were highest, and when the muscle was least
contracted, MEPs were lowest. Thus, the motor resonance
occurring in the observer is timelocked with specific
muscle activity in the observed agent.
A related theory of motor system involvement is that of
overt action simulation (Barsalou, 2009; Gallese and
Lakoff, 2005). This is related to the above mentioned
position and not mutually exclusive, as observationexecution matching could involve low-level simulation of
an actor. Simulation theories, however, posit explicit
ongoing simulation underlying perceptual and cognitive
processes as a sort of online enactment, particularly for
understanding semantics of action language. In other
words, linguistic phrases such as “the boy caught the ball”
are understood by low level simulation of the action in the
1

2120

sentence. Numerous studies have shown that action
language activates the motor system.
In an fMRI experiment, Hauk, Johnsrude, and
Pulvermuller (2004) found that when participants read
action words related to the arm, leg, or face, the
corresponding regions of the motor somatotopy were active.
Oliveri et al. (2004), using single pulse TMS, found that
motor cortex activation increased for both action nouns and
action verbs when compared to activation during non-action
words. Candidi and colleagues (2010) found that verbs
conjugated in the future tense induce higher corticospinal
excitability than verbs conjugated in the past. Finally, Yang
and Shu (2016) performed a meta-analysis on a large
number of fMRI experiments where subjects were listening
to literal action sentences, fictive motion sentences,
metaphorical action sentences, and idioms, and found
increased activation in motor regions during metaphorical
action sentences. This activation is thought to contribute to
understanding and mapping metaphors onto their concrete
reference. Simulation theories are often associated with
embodied cognition, proposing that we use our brains and
bodies to ground conceptual and abstract content in
sensorimotor systems.
The third theory we discuss is sensory prediction. In this
case what is being coded for in the motor system is
sensorimotor prediction, or continuous online prediction of
the very next state of the stimulus. A predictive role for the
motor system is suggested in Clark’s (2015) theory of
“embodied prediction”, in which motor activation during
action observation would entail prediction of the upcoming
sensory signal based on the current sensory information. In
this case, motor cortex would be active during the
observation of a grasping action, because the observer’s
brain would be actively predicting the very next movement
via motor regions. Thus, a predictive role can account for the
findings from the action-observation network literature.
Wilson and Knoblich (2005) outline a version of the
perceptual prediction role of motor areas that uses what they
call perceptual emulators. An emulator is a mental
simulation that models the external world. The emulator
continues updating the model online, and the output from
this emulator can be compared to the actual state of the
external world to verify that expectations are being met.
Emulators running in the motor system would internalize a
model of the biomechanics of the human body, allowing
observers to model the movements of an observed agent as
they unfold in time. Importantly, these emulators are running
one step ahead of sensory input, predicting the upcoming
external state before it happens and then comparing real to
modeled state afterward.
If the motor system uses these emulators, it should also be
able to model predictable sensory information that isn’t
human-made, such as rhythmic waves or the bouncing of a
ball, by internalizing a model for the observed system.
Supporting research comes from Schubotz (2007), whose
work suggests that even observation of movements coming

from non-animate entities recruits the motor system. In a
number of fMRI experiments, they find that particular types
of perceptual prediction tasks involving such things as pitch
identification, spatial or object-related identification tasks
activates premotor areas in a somatotopic way, similar to
effector-related observation/execution tasks. For instance,
object-related tasks recruited regions of premotor cortex that
share activation in hand-related execution and observation
tasks. As there isn’t a common repertoire to humans and
rolling waves, these findings could not be explained under
the motor resonance account.
We propose that the role of the motor system varies
depending on context. For instance, during the perception of
action language, the motor system might serve to provide the
motor component of covert simulation that occurs in the
embodied processing of language. During the observation of
very well practiced movements by an outside actor, the
motor system may serve the purpose of driving motor
resonance in the observer to quickly map the actions to the
observer’s body and understand the action. Finally, during
perceptual processing of non-human movements, the motor
system might serve to assist in perceptual processing by way
of predictive emulator models.
One potential way of differentiating between prediction
and simulation is by observing how the modulation of the
motor system changes over repetitive viewing of stimuli. If
the observer is simulating the observed action, then we
should see a steady facilitation of MEPs across repetitions of
a stimulus, indicating simulation at each occurrence. If
motor system facilitation is due to predictive processes,
however, might expect a different pattern of modulation.
Because less error correction takes place as a stimulus
becomes more predictable, we can predict that the neural
populations underlying the predictive processes will be less
active for more predictable sensory stimuli. Thus, we should
see a decrease in corticospinal excitability over multiple
repetitions of a stimulus, as it becomes more predictable and
leads to lower error correction..
In this experiment we look at corticospinal excitability
using single-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS)
during the perception of written language to examine the
extent of motor involvement in a few variations of the
stimuli. Subjects viewed videos of words being written out
with a stylus and of words being typed letter by letter.
Previous analyses in our lab have shown that observation of
handwriting leads to motor simulation, while observation of
typed words does not. We proposed that this is because
while it is apparent that the handwritten text are human
created, this is less apparent for text created on a keyboard.
We repeat all stimuli four times over the course of the
experiment. We predicted that MEPs in the handwritten
stimuli trials would show an even facilitation across all
presentations of the stimuli, because simulation should be
consistent no matter how predictable it is. We hypothesized
that the MEPs in the typed stimuli trials would show initial
facilitation, which would lessen as the stimuli are repeated
2

2121

and there is less prediction error. This would be expected
because the first presentations of the stimuli, appearing letter
by letter, should be difficult to predict, resulting in a large
error in perceptual prediction. As stimuli are presented more
often, perceptual prediction should become easier and less
effort required on the part of error correction.

Methods
Participants:
Twenty-four right-handed normal participants (8 males, 16
females, mean age ~ 19.5) were recruited in this study
through UC Merced’s SONA research system. All
participants passed a safety screen and gave written,
informed consent. The experimental procedure was
approved by the UC Merced Institutional Review Board.
Participants received 2 research credits that can be used for
credit in some undergraduate courses.

TMS and EMG recording:
Corticospinal excitability was measured by the amplitude of
motor evoked potentials (MEPs) recorded using
electromyography (EMG) on the first dorsal interosseus
(FDI) muscle of the right hand. Two small adhesive
electrodes (1cm^2) were placed over the belly of the
recorded muscle and a ground electrode was placed over a
bone on the participant’s elbow. A bandpass filter (50
Hz1,000 Hz) was applied to the EMG signal, which was
digitized at 1,000 Hz for offline analysis. MEPs were
elicited by applying single-pulse TMS to the FDI region of
the left motor cortex. Pulses were delivered using a Magstim
Rapid² with an attached 70-mm figure-of-eight coil
positioned over the optimal scalp location with the handle
pointing backward at 45 degrees from the midline. The
procedure was as follows. Subjects were fitted with a swim
cap that was covered by a grid of dots placed 1 cm² apart.
Optimal scalp position was determined by moving the coil
by one centimeter intervals until the location eliciting the
best MEPs was identified. This location was marked on the
swim cap worn by the participant. Resting motor threshold
was determined as the percent of machine output that
produced 5 out of 10 MEPs of at least 50 µV peak-topeak
amplitude. The stimulation intensity during the experiment
was set to 120% of a participant’s resting motor threshold.
The coil was held steady at the optimal position throughout
the experiment. Subjects were instructed to keep their head
still and remain relaxed for the duration of the experiment.

Experimental paradigm:
The visual stimuli consisted of videos of either handwritten
or typed words or nonwords appearing letter by letter at a
variable typing speed averaging 3-4 letters per second.
Words were chosen that did not relate to any actions or
manipulable objects, to ensure that our measurement would
not be influenced by the effects of semantic processing of

action. We also included 10 baseline trials, which consisted
of a single black box for the same duration as the stimuli.
We chose to randomize the baseline trials in with the rest of
the trials so that the baseline measure would not be biased
by a lack of attention that can occur when baseline measures
are all recorded pre-experiment. Stimuli included ten
linguistic stimuli, which appeared four times in each of the
conditions. This resulted in 80 stimuli trials and 10 baseline
trials, or a total of 90 trials. Eight seconds passed in between
individual trials, and the total experiment length was
approximately 12 minutes. We chose to apply stimulation
two seconds into the ongoing video, so that as the stimuli
were repeated, they were more highly predictable (by the
presence of the first few letters) by the time stimulation
occurred. Because TMS stimulation would occur two
seconds into the video, we ensured that the typed stimuli
would display one of the following letters at that time [N, H,
U, M, J, I], so that if subjects were simulating the typing in
proper typing position, FDI would be the simulated muscle.
The stimuli appeared on a computer screen in front of the
participants. Participants were instructed to attend to the
stimuli on the screen and were given notice when the
experiment was one-third and two-thirds of the way finished
to prevent loss of attention.
TMS pulses were delivered 2 seconds after video onset.
The interval between trials was 8 seconds, to avoid any
cumulative effects of single-pulse TMS. After the
experiment, subjects were asked whether they were able to
stay attentive during the length of the experiment.
Participants who said they were not were excluded from
analyses (5 subjects).

Figure 1: Examples of stimuli used in the experiment.
Handwritten stimuli are on the left and typed stimuli on the
right. In the experiment, participants saw the stimuli appear
as a video as they were written or typed.

Results
The average raw MEP amplitude for handwritten stimuli
was 1.126 mV, with a standard deviation of 1,303. The
average for typed words was 1098 mV, with a standard
deviation of 1.295. Because of the large variations between
participants, raw MEP amplitude values were z-scored to
allow inter-individual comparisons. The resulting z-scores
indicate the distance (in standard deviations) that a particular
MEP score is from the mean. Figure 2 shows the average zscore in each condition. The average z-score for handwritten
stimuli was .1, while that for typed stimuli was -.06.
A two-way repeated-measures analysis of variance
(ANOVA) was computed on the standardized MEPs to test
3

2122

for significant effects. The considered factors were condition
(handwritten or typed) by order (nth time that a stimulus
appeared). We observed a significant main effect for
condition, with handwritten stimuli producing greater
facilitation of MEP amplitude with respect to typed stimuli,
F(1,23) = 7.62, p < .01. We also observed a significant
interaction effect of condition by order of presentation,
F(3,184) = 3.77, p = .05. In particular, there was a consistent
facilitation in MEPs in the handwritten stimuli regardless of
how many times the stimulus has been presented. In the
typed stimulus condition, however, there was an initial
facilitation in the MEP amplitude that decreased with each
repetition of the stimuli. This pattern of results confirms our
hypothesis of typed stimuli showing an initial facilitation of
corticospinal excitability, followed by a decrease in that
facilitation. This also confirms our hypothesis that the
handwritten words would induce consistent facilitation of
corticospinal excitability.
A linear regression of presentation number on baseline
zscore was performed in order to evaluate whether the
baseline MEPs changed with multiple presentations of the
stimuli. The regression came out non-significant (t = -1.1, p
> .3). This indicates that overall MEP amplitudes are not
varying as a function of time or number of repetitions to
stimuli.

Figure 2: Standardized (Z-scored) MEP amplitudes for each
condition. X-axis shows presentation number (nth time a
stimulus was presented). Motor evoked potentials in the
handwritten condition show consistent facilitation, while
those in the typed condition show initial facilitation that
decreases with presentation number.

Discussion
In this experiment we observed a differential pattern of
motor facilitation dependent on word reading condition. In
particular, the observation of actively handwritten words
produced a persistent facilitation in MEP amplitudes. This is
consistent with the action observation research, where

subjects view actions produced by others over multiple trials
and produce consistent MEP facilitation. When subjects are
exposed to actively typed words, however, the pattern of
MEP facilitation changes, with repetitive exposure to the
stimulus resulting in a decrease in observed corticospinal
excitability. In previous work, we hypothesized that typed
stimuli might not show simulation because of two reasons.
Either the act of typing has weak or no sensorimotor
association, or the discrete nature of typed words does not
invoke simulation the same as the continuous strokes of
handwriting.
Evidently the motor system is doing something different
from motor simulation during the observation of words that
are actively typed. One potential hypothesis is that
corticospinal excitability in the typed condition is influenced
by attentiveness. As subjects are repeatedly exposed to
words, they might lose interest and thus exhibit lower
attention. We included in the experiment a baseline measure
appearing randomly throughout, consisting of a solid black
box that appears instead of the language stimuli. There were
10 baseline trials used. If corticospinal excitability was
picking up on a measure of attention, we should see a
predictable decreasing trend in MEP amplitudes across
repetitions of the baseline trials as well. No such decreasing
trend was observed over the repeated baseline trials. Though
we cannot rule out the possibility entirely, this does suggest
that there is something happening for the typed stimuli other
than decreased attentiveness.
We suggest that the decrease in excitability across
repetitions of stimuli is due to sensory prediction by the
motor system. When the stimuli are less predictable (i.e., the
first presentations), the sensory prediction error is large,
resulting in higher motor activation. As the stimuli are
repeated and become more predictable, the sensory
prediction error becomes lower and we observe less
corticospinal excitability in the motor system. This account
is consistent with Schubotz’s (2007) findings of motor
activation during serial prediction tasks and Wilson and
Knoblich’s (2005) emulator account.
If our theoretical formulation is correct, this implies that
the study of motor involvement in perception and cognition
should take into account that the motor system is playing
multiple processing roles that are network and
contextdependent. The action observation based recruitment
of the motor system is well established. Strong evidence
suggests that this is due to motor resonance that is both
effectorspecific and time-dependent. We contend that the
role of motor cortex in action-observation is for low-level
activation of one’s own motor repertoire. Under our account,
motor activation during perceptual processing of nonhuman-created stimuli, reported by Schubotz and colleagues,
is not at odds with the resonance account of action
observation. The particular information processing role of
motor regions does not need to be identical across contexts.
The functional network underlying action observation
includes bilateral mid-temporal gyrus (MTG) and left
4

2123

inferior parietal lobule as well as left premotor cortex.
(Gazzola, Aziz-Zadeh, & Keysers, 2006). Other brain
regions active during figurative language include the left and
right inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), bilateral medial frontal
gyri (medFG), left temporal lobe, and amygdala. (Bohrn,
Altmann, & Jacobs, 2012). The function of motor activation
in each of these different networks can be defined by its
connections and interactions, allowing a motor predictive
system or motor simulation system when appropriate.
How would this region have multiple functional roles?
Evidence from single-unit recording of neurons in premotor
areas suggests that there is a wide variety of neurons that
respond to different contexts. For example, during the
discovery of mirror neurons, many types of such neurons
were identified (Di Pellegrino et al., 1992). Some of these
are called “strictly congruent” mirror neurons, which
respond to action observation and action execution only to
the same exact movement. More common were “broadly
congruent” mirror neurons, which respond to action
observation and action execution during similar types of
movements, encompassing a broader response range. We
postulate that the first type is responsible for driving motor
resonance-related activation, while the latter type could
potentially underlie the sort of sensory prediction we discuss.
Finally, a third type of neuron they observed was called a
“canonical neuron”, which respond to the observation of
manipulable objects. Perhaps these neurons could play a role
in mental simulation, or affordance processing. These
examples are all speculative and not grounded by any
evidence in the present work, but they aim to push intuitions
toward a fresh perspective. Future work using single-neuron
recording would be needed to directly test such hypotheses.
At a brain region level, however, we can learn more by
observing how activation in local regions changes with
repetition of sensory stimuli or changes in stimuli.
Future research that we are currently engaged aims to
explore how sensorimotor contingencies are learned by
training participants on novel sensory to motor mappings.
We will then use these controlled artificial mappings to
explore sequential prediction and/or simulation using the
motor system.

References
Barsalou, L. W. (2009). Simulation, situated
conceptualization, and prediction. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological
Sciences, 364(1521), 1281-1289.
Bohrn, I. C., Altmann, U., & Jacobs, A. M. (2012). Looking
at the brains behind figurative language—A quantitative
meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies on metaphor,
idiom, and irony processing. Neuropsychologia, 50(11),
2669-2683.
Candidi, M., Leone-Fernandez, B., Barber, H. A., Carreiras,
M., & Aglioti, S. M. (2010). Hands on the future:

facilitation of cortico-spinal hand-representation when
reading the future tense of hand-related action verbs.
European Journal of Neuroscience, 32(4), 677-683.
Di Pellegrino, G., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., &
Rizzolatti, G. (1992). Understanding motor events: a
neurophysiological study. Experimental Brain
Research, 91(1), 176-180.
Gallese, V., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., & Rizzolatti, G. (1996).
Action recognition in the premotor cortex. Brain, 119(2),
593-609.
Gallese, V., & Lakoff, G. (2005). The brain's concepts: The
role of the sensory-motor system in conceptual
knowledge. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 22(3-4), 455479.
Gangitano, M., Mottaghy, F. M., & Pascual-Leone, A.
(2001). Phase-specific modulation of cortical motor
output during movement observation. Neuroreport, 12(7),
1489-1492.
Gazzola, V., Aziz-Zadeh, L., & Keysers, C. (2006).
Empathy and the somatotopic auditory mirror system in
humans. Current Biology, 16(18), 1824-1829.
Hauk, O., Johnsrude, I., & Pulvermüller, F. (2004).
Somatotopic representation of action words in human motor
and premotor cortex. Neuron, 41(2), 301-307. Iacoboni, M.,
Woods, R. P., Brass, M., Bekkering, H., Mazziotta, J. C., &
Rizzolatti, G. (1999). Cortical mechanisms of human
imitation. Science, 286(5449), 2526-2528.
Kohler, E., Keysers, C., Umilta, M. A., Fogassi, L., Gallese,
V., & Rizzolatti, G. (2002). Hearing sounds,
understanding actions: action representation in mirror
neurons. Science, 297(5582), 846-848.
Mukamel, R., Ekstrom, A. D., Kaplan, J., Iacoboni, M., &
Fried, I. (2010). Single-neuron responses in humans
during execution and observation of actions. Current
Biology, 20(8), 750-756.
Oliveri, M., Finocchiaro, C., Shapiro, K., Gangitano, M.,
Caramazza, A., & Pascual-Leone, A. (2004). All talk and
no action: a transcranial magnetic stimulation study of
motor cortex activation during action word production.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 16(3), 374-381.
Rizzolatti, G., Camarda, R., Fogassi, L., Gentilucci, M.,
Luppino, G., & Matelli, M. (1988). Functional
organization of inferior area 6 in the macaque monkey.
Experimental Brain Research, 71(3), 491-507.
Umilta, M. A., Kohler, E., Gallese, V., Fogassi, L., Fadiga,
L., Keysers, C., & Rizzolatti, G. (2001). I know what you
are doing: A neurophysiological study. Neuron, 31(1),
155-165.

5

2124

