Right hemisphere lateralization and holistic processing do not always go together:
An ERP investigation of a training study
Ricky Van-yip Tso (rvytso@eduhk.hk)
1. Department of Psychology; and 2. Psychological Assessment and Clinical Research Unit, Centre for Psychological Health;
The Education University of Hong Kong, 10 Lo Ping Road, Tai Po, New Territories, Hong Kong

Hangyu Chen (ariachan@connect.hku.hk), Yui Andrew Yeung (andrewy@connect.hku.hk)
Terry Kit-fong Au (terryau@hku.hk), & Janet Hui-wen Hsiao (jhsiao@hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, The Jockey Club Tower, Centennial Campus,
The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong
Abstract
Holistic processing (HP) and right-hemispheric lateralization
both mark expertise in visual object recognition such as face
and sub-ordinate object perception. However, counterexamples have been found recently: Experiences of selective
attention to parts such as writing experiences in Chinese
characters reduced HP while increased right hemisphere
lateralization. We investigated the association between HP
and brain activities measured by event-related potentials
(ERP) in participants trained to recognize artificially-created
scripts using either whole-word or grapheme-to-phoneme
approaches. Stronger N170 activities were found in both
hemispheres in both training approaches. Though the type of
training approaches induced opposite directions in
correlations between HP and the ERP signals in the right
hemisphere: In the whole-word condition, the HP effect
increased with stronger right-hemispheric N170 activities;
while the direction of this correlation was reversed in the
grapheme-to-phoneme condition. This demonstrates that HP
and right hemispheric lateralization are separate processes
that are associated with different perceptual mechanisms.
Keywords: holistic processing, hemisphere lateralization,
ERP, EEG, perceptual expertise

Introduction
Holistic processing and right hemisphere
lateralization
Holistic processing (HP) has consistently been reported to
be a perceptual marker of visual expertise in face and
subordinate-level visual object recognition (Bukach et al.,
2006; c.f. Mckone, Kanwisher, & Duchaine, 2007). For
example, Gauthier, Williams, Tarr, and Tanaka (1998)
trained participants to recognize “Greebles”—novel
artificial objects—and found a positive relationship between
HP and performance in within-category object recognition.
Similarly, when participants were trained to individualize
“Ziggerins” (an artificial object type), they showed an
increase in HP (Wong, Palmeri, & Gauthier, 2009).
HP in face perception can be demonstrated with the
composite face illusion induced by the composite paradigm:
Two identical top halves of two faces are more likely judged
as different when the two bottom-half faces are from
different faces, (see Rossion, 2013, for a review). The
composite illusion suggests that all facial parts are
obligatorily attended to, which results in the failure of
selectively attention to parts (Richler, Wong, & Gauthier,

2011). This paradigm demonstrates one of the three types of
configural processing according to Maurer et al. (2002).
Hemispheric asymmetry may be another expertise marker
for object recognition. Neuroimaging studies generally
showed stronger activation in the right occipitotemporal
area for face recognition (Rossion, Hanseeuw, & Dricot,
2012). Complementing this finding, Gauthier and Tarr
(2002) found that as participants were trained to recognize
individual Greebles, increase in HP was correlated with
activation changes in the right occipitotemporal regions.
Because of the concurrence of robust HP in face and
objection recognition with stronger right-hemisphere (RH)
activations, HP is suggested to be a property of RH visual
processing (Ramon & Rossion, 2012). It is also consistent
with the holistic-analytic dichotomy proposed in the
hemispheric asymmetry literature (Cooper & Wojan, 2000).
However, recent studies suggest that HP and RH
lateralization do not necessarily go together. For example, in
Chinese character perception, Hsiao and Cottrell (2009)
found that while expert readers showed a reduced HP as
compared with novice readers, the left-side bias effect,
which is suggested to be an indication of RH lateralization,
was shown only in experts1. Tso et al. (2014) reported an
inverted U-shape development pattern in HP of Chinese
characters: as compared with novices, Chinese readers with
limited writing experiences showed increased HP, whereas
Chinese readers skilled in writing Chinese characters
showed reduced. This result suggests that HP is modulated
by sensorimotor experiences while RH lateralization is not.

Theories and model of hemispheric processing
The RH has long been suggested to preferentially execute
whole-based/configural/coarse/global processing while partbased/analytic/fine/local processing is more involved in the
left hemisphere (LH) (e.g., Sergent, 1982). Ivry and
Robertson (1998) proposed the Double Filtering by
Frequency (DFF) theory, which suggests that visual
information is processed in the brain by frequency-based
1
Left-side bias in face perception refers to the phenomenon that
people often judge chimeric faces formed by two left halves of the
original face to be more similar to the original face than those
formed with two right halves (Brady, Campbell, & Flaherty, 2005).
This effect was also observed in Chinese literates viewing mirrorsymmetric Chinese characters (Hsiao & Cottrell, 2009).

3386

representations at two stages: at the first stage, attention
processes select a task-relevant frequency range; at the
second stage, high spatial frequency (HSF) information is
amplified in the LH while low spatial frequency (LSF)
information is amplified in the RH. The DFF theory is able
to account for hemispheric asymmetry in processing local
(HSF) and global (LSF) information. For example, using
Navon’s hierarchical patterns (1977; Fig. 1), Sergent (1982)
found a left-visual field (LVF)/RH advantage in judgements
made based on global information and a right-visual field
(RVF)/LH advantage in judgements made based on local
information. Similarly, a LVF/RH advantage was found in
identifying LSF gratings while a RVF/LH advantage for
HSF gratings (e.g., Christman, Kitterie, & Hellige, 1991).
These results suggest that the LH is more tuned to
processing local/HSF information while the RH more tuned
to processing global/LSF information.

Fig. 1. Hierarchical letter patterns. The pattern on the
left shows the global form ‘L’ consisting of local
elements ‘H’. The one on the right shows the global
form ‘H’ and local elements ‘L’.
In visual word recognition, a stronger LH lateralization is
typically observed for alphabetic than logographic scripts.
Hsiao and Lam (2014) showed that this effect could be
accounted for by a computational implementation of the
DFF theory: the decomposition of words into graphemes for
grapheme-phoneme mapping requires more HSF/LH
processing than logographic reading. Hsiao and Cheung
(2011) and Hsiao and Galmar (2016) examined the
relationship between HP and RH lateralization in visual
recognition using the same model (with triangular symbols
consisting of 3 English letters and faces respectively). They
found a positive correlation between HP and RH
lateralization when the recognition task relied purely on the
distanced between features (i.e., the second order
relationship, a type of configural processing; Maurer et al.,
2002), while this correlation became negative when the
recognition task relied purely on the identity/features of
local components. These results suggest that HP and RH
lateralization are separate processes modulated by different
recognition requirements. Since the recognition of words in
alphabetic languages relies more on the identity of local
components for grapheme-phoneme conversion than that in
logographic languages, it is possible that alphabetic and
logographic reading will result in different relationships
between HP and RH lateralization.

ERP component N170
In EEG studies, the ERP component N170, peaking between
150 and 200 ms after the onset of visual stimulus
presentation, was found to be associated with perceptual

expertise effects (e.g. ,Maurer, Zevin, & McClandiliss,
2008). Consistent with neuroimaging and behavioural
research on hemispheric asymmetry in visual object
recognition, EEG/ERP studies also showed reliable
hemispheric asymmetries of visual expertise effects in
N170, such as a larger N170 response in the RH for faces
(e.g., Scott & Nelson, 2007), and a larger N170 response in
the LH for words (e.g. Maurer, Brandeis, & McCandliss,
2005). Thus, the N170 responses towards visual stimuli,
which are suggested to reflect occipito-temporal activities in
visual object recognition, can be considered an
electrophysiological indication of hemispheric asymmetry
in visual object processing (e.g., Maurer et al., 2008).

The present study
Here we aim to examine how different visual object
recognition requirements modulate the relationship between
HP and RH lateralization. We specifically contrast the
difference between visual word recognition in alphabetic
and logographic languages, the two major types of scripts
currently in use. To do this, we trained participants to
recognize artificially-created characters and examined the
perceptual and electrophysiological changes. Participants
learned to recognize the same set of characters under which
the decoding method was manipulated to be using either
whole-word (logographic) or grapheme-to-phoneme
(alphabetic) approaches. Any difference in the perceptual or
hemispheric lateralization changes occurring after the
training should mainly come from the difference in the
decoding methods (logographic vs. alphabetic). According
to the previous studies (e.g., Hsiao & Galmar, 2016), the
requirement of grapheme-phoneme conversion in learning
to read the characters alphabetically may induce a negative
correlation between HP and RH lateralization, whereas a
positive correlation may be observed when learning to read
the same characters logographically. This is the first training
study to investigate HP and its association with hemispheric
lateralization of reading alphabetic and logographic scripts.

Methods
Participants
54 college students aged 18 to 26 with no prior knowledge
to Korean Hanguls were recruited: 18 of which spoke
English as a native language and 34 were Cantonese-English
bilinguals who spoke Cantonese as a native language. 25 of
them were females. They were right-handed according to the
Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (Oldfield, 1971) with
normal or corrected to normal vision. Half of them were
randomly assigned to the logographic condition while half
of them were assigned to the alphabetic condition, with
native language and gender matched between the conditions.

Materials
A total of 30 artificial components were created to make 80
Artificial Korean-like Characters (AKC). The AKCs were
of a top-bottom configuration with two top components and
one bottom component in each character—this arrangement

3387

simulated the top-heavy configuration of faces as well as a
structure of Chinese characters. In the Alphabetic condition,
each component in an AKC corresponded to a phoneme.
Each AKC mapped onto a syllable with its combination of
components following a consonant-vowel-consonant (CVC)
phonological rule. In the Logographic condition, each AKC
was randomly assigned a syllable pronunciation that
appeared in the Alphabetic condition (Fig. 2).
a
b
Fig. 2. Examples of (a) AKC components and (b) an AKC

Training Phrase
Each participant learned all 80 AKCs during 3 learning
sessions in 3 consecutive days. Each learning session
consisted of two blocks with 40 AKCs learned in each
block. Two learning blocks in each learning session allowed
participants to be exposed to all 80 AKCs per day. In the
Logographic condition, each AKC was shown as a whole
character for four times in each trial, accompanied by its
pronunciation read by a female voice in each display. Each
of the first three displays lasted for 500 ms, with the fourth
display stayed on the screen for the participants to
familiarize with for 5 seconds. In the Alphabetic condition,
each AKC was also shown as a whole character for four
times in each trial. A different component was highlighted
in each of the first 3 displays, accompanied by the
pronunciation of the component’s phoneme read in a female
voice in each display, for 500ms. The last display of the
AKC was accompanied by the pronunciation of the whole
AKC and stayed on the screen for 5 seconds.
To monitor and encourage learning progress, after each
learning session, participants completed a forced-choice
quiz. In each trial, two AKCs were displayed on the screen
accompanied by a syllable sound. Participants chose the
AKC that matched the sound by pressing the corresponding
buttons on a response box. There were a total number of 160
trials with each AKC-sound pair appearing twice. A
feedback on the correctness with the accumulated
percentage of correct responses was given immediately at
the end of each trial. At the end of the last training session,
participants in both the Alphabetic and Logographic
condition developed over 80% accuracy in the quiz.

Post-test and Pretest
Participants performed a complete composite task and a
sequential matching task with EEG recording with AKC
stimuli once before and once after the training
Complete Composite Task. We employed the complete
composite paradigm to examine HP of AKCs, adopting the
procedures from Hsiao and Cottrell (2009). Eighty pairs of
AKCs taught in the training were selected. 20 pairs were
presented in each of the four conditions: same-congruent,
different-congruent, same-incongruent, and differentincongruent trials (Fig. 3a). In the congruent trials, the

attended halves and the irrelevant halves led to the same
response (i.e. both the attended part and the irrelevant part
were the same or different). In the incongruent trials, the
attended halves and the irrelevant halves led to different
responses: In same incongruent trials, the attended halves
were the same while the irrelevant halves were different;
whereas in different incongruent trials, the attended halves
were different while the irrelevant halves were the same2.
Each trial started with a fixation cross for 1000 ms,
followed by a cue indicating the part that participants should
attend to (either top or bottom) for 1000 ms. A pair of
AKCs–one above and the other one below the initial
fixation respectively, about five degrees of visual angel
away from each other–appeared for 500ms, followed by a
mask. Participants were instructed to judge whether the
attended halves of the two AKCs were the same or not as
quickly and as accurately as possible by pressing the
corresponding buttons on the response box (Fig. 3).
Accuracy of each trial was recorded.

Fig. 3. (a) Illustration of stimulus pairs in the complete
composite paradigm; the attended components are
circled in red. (b) Trial sequences, the red line shows
the splitting point between top and bottom halves.
Each AKC was approximately 1.5 cm x 1.5 cm in size on
the screen, spanned about 1.6 degree of visual angle at a
viewing distance of 55 cm. The participants’ discrimination
sensitivity A’ was measured as:

where H and F are the hit and false alarm rate respectively.
We used A' to measure sensitivity due to its bias-free
nonparametric property, as d' may be affected by response
biases when normality and equal standard deviations are not
assumed (Stanislaw & Todorov, 1999). We measured
Holistic A' as a normalized measure of HP that takes into
consideration the individual baseline performance
differences (Singer & Sheinberg, 2006): the greater the
magnitude, the stronger the degree of holistic processing.

2
The part-whole paradigm (Tanaka & Farah, 1993) can also
demonstrate HP (Maurer et al., 2002). However, it involves
memory performance heavily (Piepers & Robbins, 2012). As the
focus of this study is to examine perceptual effects, the complete
composite paradigm was used to minimize memory demands and
response biases (Richler, Cheung, & Gauthier, 2011).

3388

EEG recording and analysis A sequential matching task
was used to measure ERPs in response to the presentation of
AKCs. The task consisted of 240 trials, separated into 6
blocks. Each trial started with a central fixation for 500 ms,
followed by an AKC appearing at the screen center for 150
ms. The screen then turned blank for 1000 ms. A second
character then appeared at the center and remained until
participants made a response judging whether the two
characters were the same or different. Each character
subtended a visual angle of around 1.7 degree. Participants
were instructed not to blink during a trial until they saw the
letter ‘B’ on the screen. These trials were conducted using
E-prime v2.0 (Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA).
EEGs were recorded using a 64-channel ANT system
(Electro-cap International). EEG activities were sampled at
512 Hz. The data analysis was performed using EEGLAB
(Delarme & Makeig, 2004) and ERPLAB (Lopez-Calderon
& Luck, 2014). Only trials with correct responses were
included in the EEG analysis. Bin-based epochs were
extracted from -200 ms to 800 ms of the stimulus onset. The
time window 140 to 200 ms (170±30 ms) was chosen based
on the grand average data of the participants in the
Alphabetic and Logographic training conditions for
identifying N170 peak amplitudes. PO7 electrode in the LH
and its symmetrical electrode PO8 in the RH were selected
for analysis as these electrodes were where the peak
amplitude was found within the selected time window (see
Hsiao et al., 2007 Yoncheva et al., 2010).

Left vs Right x Condition: Alphabetic vs. Logographic). A
significant main effect of time was observed, F(1, 53)=
7.457, p = .009, ηp 2 = .123, showing that N170 amplitude
was increased after training. There was a marginal main
effect of hemisphere, F(1, 53) = 3.064, p = .086, ηp 2 = .055,
and a marginal effect of condition, F(1, 53) = 3.678, p =
.061, ηp 2 = .065. No significant interaction effect was
observed.

Fig. 5. N170 responses (µV) in (a) PO7 (left
hemisphere) and (b) PO8 (right hemisphere) in the
pretest and post-test, averaged across all participants.

Pearson’s correlation and moderation analysis

Results
Holistic processing (HP)
Repeated-measures ANOVA was used to investigate HP
effects (time: Pretest vs. Post-test x condition: alphabetic vs.
logographic). For Holistic A', there was a marginal effect of
time, F(1, 47) = 2.868, p = .097, ηp 2 = .057: HP decreased as
the result of training. There was no main effect of condition
or an interaction between time and condition.3 (Fig. 4).

Correlation analyses between Holistic A' and N170
amplitude at PO7 (LH) and PO8 (RH) were performed
separately for the Alphabetic and Logographic conditions to
examine the relationship between HP and RH lateralization.
In the Alphabetic condition, Holistic A' in the post-test was
correlated positively with the N170 amplitude at PO8 (RH)
in the post-test, r2 = .435, p < 0.05, as well as the N170
amplitude change between the pretest and the post-test at
PO8, r2 = .506, p < 0.05. In contrast, these correlations were
negative in the logographic condition, r2 = -.483, p < 0.05,
and, r2 = -.409, p < 0.05, respectively. See Fig. 6

Fig. 6. The correlation between Holistic A’ and
PO8 N170 Amplitude (µV).
Fig. 4. Holistic A’ in the pretest and post-test in the
Alphabetic and Logographic conditions

EEG neural correlates
Mixed ANOVA was used for analyzing N170 peak
amplitude data (Time: Pretest vs. Post-test x Hemisphere:
3
Hsiao and Cottrell (2009) showed that when character halves
were misaligned, the HP effect of Chinese characters disappeared,
suggesting that the effect reflected the inability to selectively
attend to aligned character halves rather than inhibition control.

To further understand the differences in the direction of
the correlations between Holistic A' and N170 amplitude at
PO8 in the post-test, a moderation analysis was conducted.
In the first step, training condition (Logographic vs.
Alphabetic) and N170 amplitude at PO8 were entered in the
regression analysis. In the second step, the interaction term
between training condition (Logographic vs. Alphabetic)
and N170 amplitude at PO8 was entered, and it explained a
significant increase in variance in Holistic A', ΔR2 = 0.203,
F(1,48) = 11.593, p = .001. Thus, training condition
significantly moderated the correlations between Holistic A'

3389

and N170 amplitude at PO8 in the post-test: While a more
negative/larger N170 amplitude at PO8 correlated with a
weaker HP effect in the alphabetic condition, a more
negative/larger N170 amplitude at PO8 correlated with a
stronger HP effect in the logographic condition (Fig. 5).
This suggests a stronger N170 activity correlated with a
weaker HP effect in the alphabetic condition, while it is vice
versa in the logographic condition in the RH. However, we
did not find significant correlations between HP and N170
at PO7 in either condition.

Discussions
In the current study, we aimed to examine how learning to
read words alphabetically or logographically modulates the
relationship between holistic processing (HP) and right
hemisphere (RH) lateralization in the perception of visual
words. Previous computational modeling studies have
suggested that in visual object recognition, when the
recognition task relies purely on the distances among local
components (second order relationships, a type of configural
processing; Maurer et al., 2002), there was a positive
correlation between HP and RH lateralization. In contrast,
when the recognition task relies purely on the identity of
local components, this correlation becomes negative (Hsiao
& Cheung, 2011; Hsiao & Galmar, 2016). This result is
consistent with the face recognition and perceptual expertise
literature, which typically shows an increase in HP
coincided with RH lateralization, especially when the task
involved processing of configural information (e.g.,
Gauthier & Tarr, 2002; Ramon & Rossion, 2012). It is also
consistent with the literature on expert Chinese character
processing: decreased HP due to writing experience, which
required selective attention to local components, was
correlated with increased left side bias/RH processing (Tso
et al., 2014). Here we tested this modeling prediction
through a training study, in which we measured changes in
HP and ERP N170 amplitude as the result of learning to
read artificial Korean-like characters (AKCs) either
alphabetically or logographically.
Our study revealed that training to read AKCs in either
the Alphabetic or the Logographic conditions increased
N170 amplitude in both hemispheres at electrodes PO8 and
PO7. This result is consistent with the perceptual expertise
literature, which typically showed an increased N170
amplitude as the result of the expertise (e.g. Maurer et al.,
2008; Tanaka & Curren, 2001).
More importantly, in the post-test, we found that the HP
effect of AKCs correlated with N170 amplitude in the RH
differently between the 2 conditions: while the correlation
analysis showed the stronger the HP effect, the more
negative the N170 amplitude at PO8 in the Logographic
condition, the direction of this correlation was reversed in
the Alphabetic condition. It seems that different learning
approaches to recognizing a written script moderates the
direction of the correlation between HP and neural activities
in the right occipital temporal regions. This effect is
consistent with the modeling data based on the DFF theory

(Hsiao & Galmar, 2016; Hsiao & Cheung, 2011). In the
Logographic condition, participants may have used a wholeword recognition approach, which led to increased HP, as
well as a higher sensitivity to the distances the components,
a type of configural processing (Maurer et al., 2002). This
type of configural processing has been shown to involve RH
lateralization (Scott & Nelson, 2006). Thus, in this
condition, RH lateralization and holistic processing are
positively correlated with each other. In contrast, in the
Alphabetic condition, the requirement of graphemephoneme conversion during learning may have encouraged
local featural/high spatial frequency processing for
identifying local component, which is typically leftlateralized (Ivry & Robertson, 1998). In addition to
identifying local components, word recognition in the
Alphabetic condition also required recognizing components
in a particular sequence/configuration, or more specifically,
the first order relationship among features (Maurer et al.,
2002). This processing may require integration of
information among components, leading to increase in HP.
Thus, in the Alphabetic condition, HP was negatively
correlated with RH lateralization, since the increase in HP
due to the use of configural information for relative
positions of components (i.e., the first order relationship
among features) may coincide with decreased reliance on
RH global processing. Future work will examine these
possibilities.
Consistent with the modeling data, the current results
suggest that HP (as measured in the composite paradigm)
and RH lateralization do not always go together in visual
object recognition. It depends on the requirements of the
recognition task. Consistent with this finding, in an fMRI
study, Harris and Aquirre (2010) showed that neurons in the
right occipito-temporal region (fusiform face area, FFA)
could flexibly represented two facial features either
conjointly (suggesting HP) or separately, depending on the
recognition task requirements. Note however that our
current results regarding the relationship between HP and
RH lateralization is limited to the HP as measured in the
composite paradigm. In the literature, HP effects have been
demonstrated using different paradigms, such as the partwhole task (Farah, Wilson, Drain, & Tanaka, 1998) in
addition to the composite paradigm. HP effects
demonstrated using different paradigms likely involve
different underlying mechanisms (Richler et al., 2012).
Future work will examine whether similar relationships
between HP and RH lateralization can also be observed
using other HP paradigms.
In conclusion, this is the first training study to report on
the changes in both HP and hemispheric lateralization in
learning to read an artificial script under different decoding
methods (i.e., logographic vs. alphabetic). Different learning
approaches induced opposite directions of correlations
between HP and RH activities: Learning a script
alphabetically induced a negative correlation between HP
and RH lateralization, while that induced by learning a
logographic script was positive. It seems that HP and RH

3390

lateralization do not always go together, depending on the
decoding strategy in visual object recognition, or more
specifically, the type of configural information used in the
recognition processes.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the Research Grant Council of Hong
Kong (HKU 745210H & HKU 758412H to J. Hsiao). We
are also grateful to Remy Schmitz, Joey Ma, Micaela Tang,
Sam Choi, Connie Chu, Jocelyn Kwok and Wendy Zhang
for their input in the experiment preparation. This study has
also appeared in the PhD thesis of the first author.

References
Bukach, C. M., Gauthier, I., & Tarr, J. M. (2006). Beyond
faces and modularity: The power of an expertise
framework. TICS, 10, 156-166.
Brady, N., Campbell, M., & Flaherty, M. (2005). Perceptual
asymmetries are preserved in memory for highly familiar
faces of self and friend. Brain Cog, 58, 334-342.
Christman, S., Kitterle, F. L., Hellige, J. (1991).
Hemispheric asymmetry in the processing of absolute
versus relative spatial frequency. Brain Cog, 16, 62-73.
Cooper E. E., Wojan T. J. (2000). Differences in the coding
of spatial relations in face identification and basic-level
object recognition. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem.
Cogn. 26, 470–488.
Gauthier, I., & Tarr, M. J. (2002). Unraveling mechanisms
for expert object recognition: bridging brain activity and
behavior. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 28, 431.
Gauthier, I., Williams, P., Tarr, M. J., & Tanaka, J. (1998).
Training "Greeble" experts: Aframework for studying
expert object recognition processes. Vision Research, 38,
Harris, A., & Aguirre, G. K. (2010). Neural tuning for face
wholes and parts in human fusiform gyrus revealed by
FMRI adaptation. J. Neurophysiol., 104(1), 336.
Hsiao, J. H., & Cheung, K. C. F. (2011). Computational
exploration of the relationship between holistic processing
and right hemisphere lateralization in featural and
configural recognition tasks. Paper presented at
CogSci2011.
Hsiao, J. H., & Cottrell, G. (2009). Not all visual expertise
in holistic, but it may be leftist: The case of Chinese
character recognition. Psychol Sci, 20, 455-463.
Hsiao, J. H., & Galmar, B. (2016). Holistic processing as
measured in the composite task does not always go with
right hemisphere processing in face perception.
Neurocomputing, 182, 165-177.
Hsiao, J. H., & Lam, S. M. (2013). The modulation of visual
and task characteristics of a writing system on
hemispheric lateralization in visual word recognition - A
computational exploration. Cognitive Sci, 37, 861-890.
Ivry, R. B., & Robertson, L. C. (1998). The Two Sides of
Perception. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Maurer, D., Le Grand, R., & Mondloch, C. (2002). The
many faces of configural processing. TICS, 6, 255-260.

Maurer, U., Brandeis, D., & McCandliss, B. (2005). Fast,
visual specialization for reading in English revealed by
the topography of the N170 ERP response. Behavioral &
Brain Functions, 1, 13.
Maurer, U., Zevin, J.D., McCandliss, B.D. (2008) Leftlateralized N170 effects of visual expertise in reading:
evidence from Japanese syllabic and logographic scripts.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20, 1878–1891.
McKone, E., Kanwisher, N., & Duchaine, B. C. (2007). Can
generic expertise explain special processing for faces?
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11, 8-15.
Oldfield, R. C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of
handedness:
the
Edinburgh
inventory. Neuropsychologia, 9, 97-113.
Ramon, M. & Rossion, B. (2012). Hemisphere-dependent
holistic processing of familiar faces. Brain Cog, 78, 7-13.
Richler, J. J., Cheung, O. S., & Gauthier, I. (2011). Beliefs
alter holistic face processing ... if response bias is not
taken into account. Journal of Vision, 11, 1–13.
Richler, J. J., Palmeri, T. J., & Gauthier, I. (2012).
Meanings, mechanisms, and measures of holistic
processing. Frontiers in psychology, 3:553.
Richler, J. J., Wong, Y. K., & Gauthier, I. (2011).
Perceptual expertise as a shift from strategic interference
to automatic holistic processing. Curr Dir Psychol Sci,
20(2), 129-134.
Rossion, B., Hanseeuw, B., & Dricot, L. (2012). Defining
face perception areas in the human brain: A large scale
factorial fMRI face localizer analysis. Brain and
Cognition 79(2), 138–157.
Scott, S. L., & Nelson, C. A. (2006). Featural and configural
face processing in adults and infants: A behavioral and
electrophysiological investigation. Perception, 35, 11071128.
Sergent, J. (1982). The Cerebral Balance of Power:
Confrontation or Cooperation? J Exp Psychol Human, 8,
253-272.
Singer, J.M., & Sheinberg, D.L. (2006). Holistic processing
unites face parts across time. Vision Res, 46, 1838–1847.
Stanislaw, H., & Todorov, N. (1999). Calculation of signal
detection theory measures. Behav Res Meth Ins C, 31,
137-149.
Tanaka, J. W., & Curran, T. (2001). A neural basis for
expert object recognition. Psychol Sci, 12, 43– 47.
Tanaka, J. W., & Farah, M. J. (1993). Parts and wholes in
face recognition. Q J Exp Psychol, 46A, 225–245.
Tso, R. V. Y., Au, T. K., & Hsiao, J. H. (2014). Perceptual
expertise: Can sensorimotor experience change holistic
processing and left side bias? Psychol Sci, 25, 1757-1767.
Wong, A. C., Palmeri, T. J., & Gauthier, I. (2009).
Conditions for face-like expertise with objects: Becoming
a ziggerin expert-but which type? Psychol Sci, 20, 11081117.
Yoncheva, Y.N. , Blau, V.C, Maurer, U. & McCandliss,
B.D. (2010), Attentional Focus During Learning Impacts
N170 ERP Responses to an Artificial Script.
Developmental Neuropsychology, 35, 423-445.

3391

