Rise and fall of conflicting intuitions during reasoning
Bence Bago (bencebago@ed-alumni.net)
Paris Descartes University – Sorbonne Paris Cité
LaPsyDE (CNRS unit 8240)

Wim De Neys (wim.de-neys@parisdescartes.fr)
Paris Descartes University – Sorbonne Paris Cité
LaPsyDE (CNRS unit 8240)

will more likely come from the largest group, one should
favor the conclusion that Jo is a woman. However, the
majority of people tend to err on this problem by going with
the presented stereotype (which cues that Jo is a man). Dual
process theories provide an explanation for general thinking
bias on problems such as the base rate task. They
distinguish two types of processing, Type 1 and Type 2.
One should note that there are many dual process theories,
but in this study, we will focus on the most influential dual
process theory, the default-interventionist theory. Type 1
processes (also referred to as intuitive processes) are
thought to be completely autonomous, while Type 2
processes (also referred to as analytic processes) are more
controlled. Type 1 processing generates responses cued by
stereotypes or common beliefs; relying on this intuitive,
initial response is what makes people biased in such
situations. After Type 1 processing produced a response, in
some cases, Type 2 processing gets engaged; this type of
processing has the ability to override and correct the
response generated by Type 1 processing. In general, it is
assumed that Type 2 processing has the ability to generate
responses based on logic or probabilities, while Type 1
processing has not been considered to be able to handle
information such as logical properties of the task, or
probabilities (Kahneman, 2011; Stanovich & Evans, 2013).
However, recently, conflict detection studies (De Neys,
2012, 2014) indicated that the assumption that Type 1
processing is not able to handle probabilistic or logical
information might not hold. These studies showed that even
biased reasoners were able to detect the conflict between
intuitive “heuristic” cues (e.g., stereotypes) and “normative”
logical and probabilistic principles (e.g., base rate
probabilities). These studies usually contrast conflict and
no-conflict reasoning problems. In conflict problems,
heuristic processing and normative principles cue different
responses as in the base rate problem above. In a no-conflict
problem normative principles and heuristic processing cues
the same response; for example, imagine that the abovepresented base rate problem would state that there are 900
men and 100 women. In this case, both the stereotype and

Abstract
Recent dual process models proposed that the strength of
competing intuitions determines reasoning performance. A
key challenge at this point is to search for boundary
conditions; identify cases in which the strength of different
intuitions will be weaker/stronger. Therefore, we ran two
studies with the two-response paradigm in which people are
asked to give two answers to a given reasoning problem. We
adopted base-rate problems in which base rate and stereotypic
information can cue conflicting intuitions. By manipulating
the information presentation order, we aimed to manipulate
their saliency; and by that, indirectly the activation strength of
the intuitions. Contrary to our expectation, we observed that
the order manipulation had opposite effects in the initial and
final response stages. We explain these results by taking into
account that the strength of intuitions is not constant but
changes over time; they have a peak, a growth, and a decay
rate.
Keywords: reasoning; conflict detection; hybrid dual process
model

Introduction
Decades of research in thinking and reasoning has
revealed that people are usually subject to errors. Consider
for example the following situation:
“There is a party with 1000 people. Jo is a randomly
chosen participant from the party. We know that Jo is 23
years old and is finishing a degree in engineering. On
Friday nights, Jo likes to go out cruising with friends while
listening to loud music and drinking beer. We also know
that 900 people attending the party are women. What is
most likely: Is Jo a man or a woman?”
This is a so-called base rate problem. Based on the
“normative”1 principle that a randomly drawn individual
1
Note that we will be using the label “normative”, ‘‘correct”, or
‘‘logical” response as a handy shortcut to refer to ‘‘the response
that has traditionally been considered as correct or normative
according to standard logic or probability theory”. The
appropriateness of these traditional norms has sometimes been
questioned in the reasoning ﬁeld (e.g.,see Stanovich & West, 2000,
for a review). Under this interpretation, the heuristic response
should not be labeled as ‘‘incorrect” or ‘‘biased”. For the sake of

simplicity, we stick to the traditional labeling. In the same vein, we
use the term ‘‘logical” as a general header to refer both to standard
logic and probability theory.

87

base rate probabilities would cue the same response (that Jo
is a man). In conflict problems, studies showed that even
incorrect reasoners (compared to correct reasoners in noconflict problems) showed elevated response times,
decreased post-decision confidence, and higher activation in
brain areas mediating conflict detection across a range of
tasks (for review see De Neys, 2012).
These results made some authors suggest that there occurs
some kind of elementary processing of logical/probabilistic
information even during Type 1 processing. De Neys (2012)
argues that conflict detection happens as a result of two
conflicting Type 1 outputs, generated by two kinds of
intuitions. He argues that one of these intuitions is based on
stereotypes or common beliefs (heuristic intuition) the other
one is based on logico-mathematical principles (logical
intuition).
Recently, Bago and De Neys (2017a) went a step further
and argued that people are not just able to detect the conflict
intuitively but some of them are able to give the logically
correct response intuitively. Our so-called hybrid dual
process model argues that the two different intuitions differ
in activation strength (or “salience”), and the actual intuitive
response that the person provides will be the one which
gained more strength. The relative difference between the
strength of the heuristic and logical intuitions defines how
pronounced the conflict is; the smaller the relative
difference, the more pronounced the conflict will be; the
larger the relative difference, the less pronounced it will be.
A key question at this point is to search for boundary
conditions; identify cases in which the strength of different
intuitions will be more or less pronounced. One way to do
so is to manipulate the presentation order of base rate
information and stereotypes. Let us explain why. In a
previous study, Pennycook, Fugelsang, and Koehler (2015)
argued that a “given piece of information is at its most
salient just prior to judgement” (Pennycook et al., 2015, p.
57). Pennycook et al. (2015) further argued that this would
mean that base rate information is most salient if presented
right before the decision was made (after the stereotypical
description had been presented). The authors observed that
presenting the base rate information at the end of the
problem indeed boosted participants’ accuracy compared to
the condition when it was presented first. To help us explain
these results, one could operationalize saliency as the
strength of a given intuitive response. Hence, whatever
information was presented later, would be the more salient,
therefore the intuition cued by this piece of information
would be the stronger one.
In this study, we wanted to test the robustness of these
findings – will we get the same effects after purely intuitive
Type 1 processing? Thus, to test this question, one needs to
use a research design which is able to separately measure
intuitive Type 1 responses from analytic Type 2 responses.
For this reason, we used the two response paradigm
(Thompson, Prowse Turner, & Pennycook, 2011). In the
two response paradigm, participants are presented with the
same item twice. First, they are asked to give a very quick

intuitive, initial response. Then, the same task is presented
again and now they can take as much time as they want
before providing their final response. One also needs to be
sure that the initial response is truly intuitive; we achieved
this by applying a strict response deadline (3 seconds) and a
secondary task that burdens reasoner’s (executive) cognitive
capacity during the initial response. With these
manipulations we can experimentally knock out Type 2
processing during the initial responding (Bago & De Neys,
2017a).
Our hypothesis was that if presentation order indeed
affects the strength of an intuition, we should observe the
same effect after purely intuitive processing as has been
observed previously after deliberative thinking. That is, if
base rates are presented last, the strength of the base rate
intuition should be higher, and therefore more correct
responses should be observed both at the initial and final
response stages.

Study 1
Method
Participants
In total, 149 participants took part in the experiment (86
female, M = 39.3 year, SD =12.7 year). Participants were
recruited online, via Crowdflower, and received $0.25 for
their participation. Subjects were randomly assigned to one
of the two conditions. Note that data in the S-BR condition
were taken from the study of Bago & De Neys, (2017b). A
total of 44.5% of participants reported having high school as
highest completed educational level, while 52.1% reported
that they have a post-secondary educational degree (3.4%
reported less than high school).

Materials
Reasoning task. Participants solved a total of eight baserate problems. All problems were taken from Pennycook,
Cheyne, Barr, Koehler, and Fugelsang (2014). Participants
always received a description of the composition of a
sample (e.g., “This study contained I.T engineers and
professional boxers”), base rate information (e.g., “There
were 995 engineers and 5 professional boxers”) and a
description that was designed to cue a stereotypical
association (e.g. “This person is strong”). Participants’ task
was to indicate to which group the person most likely
belonged.
The problem presentation format we used in this research
was based on Pennycook et al.'s (2014) rapid-response
paradigm. In this paradigm, the base rates and descriptive
information are presented serially and the amount of text
that is presented on screen is minimized. Pennycook et al.
introduced the paradigm to minimize the influence of
reading times and get a purer and less noisy measure of
reasoning time per se. Participants received 3 pieces of
information in a given trial. First, the names of the two

88

groups in the sample (e.g., “This study contains clowns and
accountants”). This sentence stayed on the screen and was
always presented first. Participants were presented with
stereotypical descriptive information (e.g., Person ‘L’ is
funny) as well. The descriptive information specified a
neutral name (‘Person L’) and a single word personality trait
(e.g., “strong” or “funny”) that was designed to trigger the
stereotypical association. Participants also received the base
rate probabilities. In this experiment, we manipulated the
presentation order of the base rate probabilities and
stereotypes. So, for one group the base rates were presented
first (BR-S), for the other group, the base rates were
presented last, after the stereotype (S-BR). Presentation
order was manipulated between-subject. The following
illustrates the full problem format in the S-BR condition:

Hence, if we burden participants’ cognitive resources with a
secondary load task while they are solving the reasoning
problems, we reduce the possibility that they can engage in
Type 2 thinking (De Neys, 2006).
In every trial, after the fixation cross disappeared,
participants were shown a matrix in which 4 dots were
presented in a complex interspersed pattern in a 3 x 3 grid
for 2000 ms. Participants were instructed to memorize the
pattern. Previous studies established that this demanding
secondary task successfully burdens executive resources
during reasoning (De Neys, 2006). After the matrix
disappeared, the reasoning problem was presented as
described above and participants had to give their first
response. Then participants were shown four matrices with
different dot patterns and they had to select the correct, tobe-memorized matrix. Participants were given feedback as
to whether they recalled the correct matrix or not.
Subsequently, the problem was presented again and
participants selected their final response and response
confidence. Hence, no load was imposed during the second,
final response stage. All trials on which an incorrect matrix
was selected (9.5 % of trials) were removed from the
analysis.
Response deadline. In order to minimize the possibility of
Type 2 engagement during the initial response, we used a
strict response deadline (3000 milliseconds), based on a
reading pre-test (see Bago & De Neys, 2017a). 1000 ms
before the deadline, the background turned yellow to alert
the participants to the approaching deadline. If participants
did not select an answer within 3000 ms they got feedback
to remind them that they had not answered within the
deadline and they were told to make sure to respond faster
on subsequent trials. Obviously, there was no response
deadline on the final response, but only on the initial
response. All trials where participants did not manage to
provide a response were excluded from the analysis (8.7%
of trials).
Procedure. The experiment was run online. People were
clearly instructed that we were interested in their first, initial
response to the problem. Instructions stressed that it was
important to give the initial response as fast as possible and
that participants could afterwards take additional time to
reflect on their answer. After the instructions, participants
were presented with practice problems to familiarize them
with the procedure. At the end of the experiment,
demographic questions were collected.

This study contains clowns and accountants.
Person 'L' is funny.
There are 995 clowns and 5 accountants.
Is Person 'L' more likely to be:
o A clown
o An accountant
Half of the presented problems were conflict items and
the other half were no-conflict items. In no-conflict items,
the base rate probabilities and the stereotypic information
cued the same response. In conflict items, the stereotypic
information and the base rate probabilities cued different
responses. Three kinds of base rates were used: 997/3,
996/4, 995/5.
Each problem started with the presentation of a fixation
cross for 1000 ms. After the fixation cross disappeared, the
sentence which specified the two groups appeared for 2000
ms. Then the first information appeared, for another 2000
ms, while the first sentence remained on the screen. Finally,
the last information appeared together with the question and
two response alternatives. Note that we presented the last
information and question together (rather than presenting
the last information for 2000 ms first) to minimize the
possibility that some participants would start solving the
problem during the presentation of the last part of the
problem. Once all the parts were presented, participants
were able to select their answer by clicking on it. The
position of the correct answer alternative (i.e., first or
second response option) was randomly determined for each
item. The eight items were presented in random order.
Confidence in the correctness of the response was
recorded after the initial and the final response stages by
asking participants to indicate their confidence level on a
scale ranging from 0% to 100%.
Cognitive load task. We used a concurrent load task - the
dot memorization task - to burden participants’ executive
cognitive resources while they were solving the reasoning
tasks. The idea behind the load manipulation is
straightforward. One of the defining features of Type 2
processing is that it requires executive (working memory)
resources (e.g., Evans & Stanovich,2013; Kahneman, 2011).

Results
Our main interest concerns the response accuracy
analysis. Table 1 gives an overview of the findings. As one
can see, we replicated the findings of Pennycook et al.
(2015) at the final response stage for the conflict problems:
Final accuracies on conflict problems are higher (41.6%)
when the base rates are presented last vs. first (24.3%).
However, contrary to our expectations, we do not observe
the same effect at the initial response stage; there is even a
trend towards fewer correct responses in the “base rates

89

last” S-BR condition (29.7%) vs BR-S (31.8%) condition.
Indeed, the final conflict response accuracies in the S-BR
condition were higher than the initial conflict response
accuracies, whereas the reverse trend can be observed in the
BR-S condition. In other words, the condition with the
highest final accuracy (S-BR) was the one with the lowest
initial accuracy, while the condition with the lowest final
accuracy (BR-S) was the one with the highest initial
accuracy.
Finally, as expected, note that accuracies on the noconflict problems were always very high. Not surprisingly,
in the absence of conflict, both the stereotype and base-rates
can cue the correct response whatever order the information
is presented in.

conditions, the most frequent categories were the “00” and
“11” cases. In line with previous observations (Bago & De
Neys, 2017a; Thompson et al., 2011) people rarely changed
their initial response (i.e., taken together the “10” and “01”
cases account for 16%-18% of the trials). Interestingly, the
direction in which people changed also tended to be
reversed; in the S-BR condition most people who did
change, changed from an incorrect to correct response (i.e.,
“01” category, 14.9% vs “10” category, 3%). However, in
the BR-S condition most people who changed their initial
response, changed it to an incorrect response (i.e., “10”
category dominates with 12.1% vs 4.6% for the “01”
category). Hence, this fits with the overall trend towards the
higher likelihood of an initial incorrect and final correct
response when the base rates are presented last. A Chisquare test of independence revealed that the distribution of
the direction of change categories in the two order
conditions significantly differed from each other χ2 (3) =
27.56, p < 0.0001.

Table 1. Percentage of correct initial and final responses for
conflict and no-conflict items in both order conditions.
Response
Conflict
No-conflict

Initial
Final
Initial
Final

S-BR
29.7%
41.6%
93.4%
93.7%

Order
BR-S
31.8%
24.3%
90.1%
91.4%

Discussion
Contrary to our expectations, we did not observe the
expected accuracy effect at the initial response stage; we
only observed it in the final response stage. However, we
wanted to be sure that the findings were robust before
drawing any conclusions. Note that Pennycook et al. (2015)
already observed that their order findings were robust
against manipulations of the extremity of the base rates.
That is, they found the same order effect on (final)
accuracies when they used so-called “moderate” base rates
(e.g., base rate probabilities of 700 men and 300 women)
instead of the “extreme” base rates (e.g., e.g. base rate
probabilities of 995 men and 5 women) that were adopted in
our (and their) Study 1. In Study 2 we therefore also
adopted the moderate base-rates and examined whether the
unexpected reversal of the order effect on initial, intuitive
responses would still be observed.

Note. S-BR = base rates last/ BR-S = base rates first.

We used mixed effect logistic regression (logit) models to
analyze the data and entered accuracy as a dependent
variable. The order manipulation (S-BR/BR-S), response
number (initial/final response), and their interaction were
entered as predictors into the model. We also accounted for
the random effect (random intercept) of subjects. We
concentrated our analysis on the critical conflict problems.
Only the interaction improved model fit significantly χ2 (5)
= 20.18, p < 0.0001, b = 1.94, but not the main effect of
order χ2 (3) = 0.19, p = 0.66 or response number χ2 (4) =
0.38, p = 0.54. These results confirm our visual inspection
that order affects initial and final accuracies differently.
Table 2. Frequency of each direction of change category
(number of trials) for conflict items in both conditions.

Study 2

Direction of change

Method

11
00
10
01

S-BR
26.7% (54)
55.4% (112)
3% (6)
14.9% (30)

Order
BR-S
19.7% (47)
63.6% (152)
12.1% (29)
4.6% (11)

Participants
In total, 162 participants took part in the experiment (98
female, M = 40.2 year, SD =14.6 year). Participants were
recruited online, via Crowdflower, and received $0.25 for
their participation. Subjects were randomly assigned to one
of the two conditions. Note that data in the S-BR condition
were taken from the study of Bago and De Neys (2017b). A
total of 46.3% of participants reported having high school as
highest completed educational level, while 52.5% reported
that they have a post-secondary educational degree (1.3%
reported less than high school).

Note. S-BR = base rates last/ BR-S = base rates first.

For completeness, one could also test the direction of
change in every trial (Bago & De Neys, 2017a).
Specifically, people can give correct or incorrect responses
on both response stages; this means that one could give two
correct (“11”), two incorrect (“00”), an initial correct but
final incorrect (“10”), or an initial incorrect but final correct
(“01”) response. The results of the direction of change
analysis are summarized in Table 2. In both order

90

Table 4. Frequency of each direction of change category
(number of trials) for conflict items in both order conditions.

Materials
Reasoning task. The identical experimental design was
used as in Study 1. The only difference is that we used
moderate base rates instead of extreme ones, namely
700/300, 710/290 and 720/280. In 16.7% of the trials
participants did not provide the correct response for the dot
matrix task, and in 10.5% of the trials, participants did not
manage to produce an initial response within the deadline.
These trials were excluded from further analysis. Overall,
24.6% of the trials were excluded and 977 were analyzed.

Direction of change
11
00
10
01

S-BR
14.2% (32)
74.8% (169)
2.2% (5)
8.8% (20)

Order
BR-S
8.2% (21)
76.7% (197)
10.1% (26)
5.5% (13)

Note. S-BR = base rates last/ BR-S = base rates first

Results and discussion

General Discussion

Table 3 summarizes the accuracy results. As the table
indicates, no-conflict response accuracies are again very
high overall and we also replicated the conflict problem
pattern we observed in Study 1: As Pennycook et al. (2015)
found, presenting the base rates last led to increased
accuracy on the final response. However, as in Study 1, the
opposite trend was observed in the initial response. We also
observe again that there were more initial than final
incorrect response in the BR-S condition, whereas the
opposite trend is observed in the S-BR condition. Statistical
analysis on the conflict problems confirmed our visual
inspection; neither presentation order χ2 (3) = 0.04, p = 0.84,
nor response number improved model fit significantly, χ2 (4)
= 0.05, p = 0.83, only their interaction did χ2 (5) = 9.73, p =
0.0018, b = 1.4.

In this paper, we tested whether manipulating the
presentation order of the base rates and stereotypes had the
same effect after purely intuitive processing (i.e., initial
response) as had been observed previously after deliberative
thinking (i.e., final response). In two studies, we replicated
the findings of Pennycook et al. (2015) at the final response
stage: Final accuracies on conflict problems were higher
when the base rates were presented last. However, contrary
to our expectations, in both studies this effect consistently
reversed at the initial response stage. Why is this the case?
We believe that these results draw attention to a simple but
somewhat neglected issue in reasoning models, namely that
intuitive responses are not generated instantly at full
strength.
The hybrid dual process model that we presented in the
introduction (e.g., Bago & De Neys, 2017a) argues that
reasoning performance in the initial response stage is
determined by the strength of different intuitions, for
example. The implicit assumption here is that the strength of
these intuitions is “instant” and “constant”. That is, the idea
is that the intuition is readily generated with full force and
maintains this strength level.
However, upon some further reflection, this assumption
might be quite naïve. It is reasonable to assume that even a
quickly generated intuition needs some time to reach its
peak. Keeping this feature in mind might suffice to explain
the current findings. Have a look at Figure 1. In this
illustration, the strength of two intuitions (I1, I2) change over
time – they have a peak, a growth and a decay rate. The yaxis represents the strength, the x-axis represents time,
while T1 and T2 represent the time of initial and final
response, respectively.
I1 and I2 will start gaining strength when the relevant cue
is presented (in the S-BR condition I1 is the heuristic
intuition cued by the presentation of the stereotype, and I2 is
the logical intuition cued by the base rate information). So,
in the S-BR condition, the stereotype is presented first.
When the stereotype is presented, the intuition (I1) cued by
it starts gaining strength. Subsequently, the presentation of
the base rate information cues the logical intuition (I2) and
its strength will also start rising. Both intuitions grow until
they reach their peak. At T1, I1 has already reached its peak,
and is stronger than I2 (which has not reached its peak yet);
as a result, I1 will be the initial response. But after T1, the

Table 3. Percentage of correct initial and final responses for
conflict and no-conflict items in both order conditions.
Response
Conflict
No-conflict

Initial
Final
Initial
Final

S-BR
16.4%
23%
90.9%
90%

Order
BR-S
18.3%
13.2%
90.9%
92.5%

Note. S-BR = base rates last/ BR-S = base rates first

Table 4 summarizes the results of the direction of change
results for conflict items. Here too we observe the same
trend as in Study 1. Among the few people who changed
their response, the direction in which they changed are
reversed as a function of presentation order; in the S-BR
condition most people who did change, changed from an
incorrect to correct response. But in the BR-S condition,
more people changed to an incorrect response. A Chisquare test of independence revealed that the distribution of
the direction of change categories in the two order
conditions significantly differed from each other χ2 (3) =
18.22, p = 0.0004.

91

strength of I1 starts decaying, while the strength of I2 is still
increasing, and it reaches its peak at T2. At T2, I2 will be the
stronger intuition, so people will more likely pick I2 as their
final response. Hence, the mere growth and decay of an
intuition – or it’s “rise and fall” as we labelled it in the title implies that (ceteris paribus) the most recently cued
intuition will be weaker earlier on in the reasoning process
(e.g., initial response stage) and dominate later in the
reasoning process (e.g., final response).
Clearly, we have presented and illustrated the most
generic and general case in which two intuitions have the
same peak level, growth, and decay rate. Obviously, these
features might vary. One intuition might have a higher peak
than the other, or a faster/slower growth/decay than the
other. In addition, we believe that deliberation might also
modulate the strength level. For example, one can imagine
that one functional consequence of deliberation might be to
boost or sustain the peak activation level of one intuition
and decrease activation of the other. These more specific
features have to be tested and validated in future studies.
For example, one could try to test the role of deliberation by
examining the impact of cognitive load on the presentation
order findings in the second response stage. However, in all
these more specific cases the general principle holds that we
have to keep in mind that intuitions are not necessarily
generated instantly but “rise and fall”; we need to consider
their growth and decay. We believe this should motivate
further research in the area by trying to determine what the
growth and decay functions look like exactly.

(DIAGNOR, ANR-16-CE28-0010-01) from the Agence
National de la Recherche.

References
Bago, B., & De Neys, W. (2017a). Fast logic?: Examining
the time course assumption of dual process theory.
Cognition, 158, 90–109.
Bago, B., & De Neys, W. (2017b). Examining the hybrid
dual process model. Manuscript in preparation.
De Neys, W. (2006). Automatic–heuristic and executive–
analytic processing during reasoning: Chronometric and
dual-task considerations. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 59(6), 1070–1100.
De Neys, W. (2012). Bias and conflict a case for logical
intuitions. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(1),
28–38.
De Neys, W. (2014). Conflict detection, dual processes, and
logical intuitions: Some clarifications. Thinking &
Reasoning, 20(2), 169–187.
De Neys, W., & Schaeken, W. (2007). When people are
more logical under cognitive load. Experimental
Psychology (formerly Zeitschrift Für Experimentelle
Psychologie), 54(2), 128–133.
Evans, J. S. B., & Stanovich, K. E. (2013). Dual-process
theories of higher cognition advancing the debate.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 8(3), 223–241.
Franssens, S., & De Neys, W. (2009). The effortless nature
of conflict detection during thinking. Thinking &
Reasoning, 15(2), 105–128.
Pennycook, G., Cheyne, J. A., Barr, N., Koehler, D. J., &
Fugelsang, J. A. (2014). Cognitive style and religiosity:
The role of conflict detection. Memory & Cognition,
42(1), 1–10.
Pennycook, G., Fugelsang, J. A., & Koehler, D. J. (2015).
What makes us think? A three-stage dual-process model
of analytic engagement. Cognitive Psychology, 80, 34–72.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual
differences in reasoning: Implications for the rationality
debate. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23(5), 645–665.
Thompson, V. A., Prowse Turner, J. A., & Pennycook, G.
(2011). Intuition, reason, and metacognition. Cognitive
Psychology, 63(3), 107–140.

Figure 1. Illustration of how the strength of intuitions might
change over time. The y-axis represents the activation strength
while the x-axis represents time. I1 and I2 represent the two cued
intuitions. Note that in the BR-S condition I1 is the logical intuition
cued by the base rate probabilities, while I2 is the heuristic intuition
cued by the stereotypes. Consequently, in the S-BR condition, I1 is
the heuristic and I2 is the logical intuition. T1 and T2 represent the
time of initial and final response, respectively.

Acknowledgement
Bence Bago was supported by a doctoral fellowship from
Ecole des Neurosciences de Paris Ile-de-France. This
research was also supported by a research grant

92

