Risky Decision Making for Medications: Age and Social Influence Effects
Amy W. Chong (amywlchong@gatech.edu)
School of Psychology, Georgia Institute of Technology
654 Cherry Street NW, Atlanta, GA 30332-0170 USA

Michael T. Bixter (mbixter3@gatech.edu)
School of Psychology, Georgia Institute of Technology
654 Cherry Street NW, Atlanta, GA 30332-0170 USA

Wendy A. Rogers (wendyr@illinois.edu)
Department of Kinesiology and Community Health, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
1206 South Fourth Street, Champaign, IL 61820 USA

Abstract

Individuals often discuss their health care decisions with
family members, friends, or physicians. Despite the plentiful
literature on shared decision making between patients and
physicians, the emphasis is rarely on how a collaborative
experience would affect subsequent health-related behavior
of individuals. The lack of research on this area demands
attention because it is common for individuals to make a
number of choices on their own after their discussion with
other people. There is evidence that family and friends
influence the health-related attitudes and beliefs of patients,
particularly those who are less educated and non -white
(Thompson, 2013). Therefore, research should consider how
discussions about health care decisions take place within
patients’ social networks and how to improve the resulting
decisional outcomes. One of the most common health care
decisions facing patients is medication risk taking.

Prior studies on older adults’ risk taking have paid little
attention to the healthcare domain or social influences on
decision making. This study examined age-related differences
in medication risk taking and the effects of a collaborative
decision-making experience on individuals’ tendency to take
risks. We recruited 24 younger (mean age = 19.50, SD = 1.41)
and 24 older adults (mean age = 70.54, SD = 2.30), and asked
them to choose between hypothetical medications that
differed in probabilities and outcomes of treatment success.
To investigate the effects of risk-neutral versus riskadvantageous trials, participants chose between a risky option
and a sure option that had equal expected values (risk-neutral)
or between a risky option and a sure option that had a lower
expected value (risk-advantageous). Participants completed
the decision task first individually (the pre-collaboration
phase), then in dyads (the collaboration phase), and once
again individually (the post-collaboration phase). During the
pre-collaboration phase older adults showed a smaller
increase in risk-taking tendency in response to riskadvantageous trials compared to younger adults. The pre-and
post-collaboration data showed that older adults’ risk
preferences converged towards their partner’s preference to a
greater extent following collaboration relative to younger
adults. These findings highlight the importance of designing
decision aids to encourage older adults to take risks when risk
taking is beneficial, and considering how social processes
influence patients’ medication decisions.

Age-related Differences in Risk Taking
Risk-Neutral Decisions

Keywords: risky decision making, health, aging, social
influence

When choosing between options in health care, the degree
of risk involved is an important consideration that younger
and older individuals must make. For example, an
individual may have to choose between painkillers that have
different probabilities of treatment success. A National
Health Interview Survey in 2012 showed that 86% of US
older adults aged 65 or older have at least one chronic
condition, and 61% have at least two chronic conditions,
compared to 27% and 7% of US adults aged 18 to 44
(Ward, Schiller, & Goodman, 2014). As older adults are
more likely to have multiple chronic conditions, they may
need to make more medical choices involving risks.

Most studies on aging and risk taking asked participants to
make risk-neutral choices, which involve a risky option and
a sure option that have equal expected values. The expected
value of an option is calculated by multiplying outcomes by
their respective probabilities, and taking the sum of the
products (Bernoulli, 1954). A higher expected value
represents a higher average value in the long run assuming
the same option is chosen repeatedly.
A recent meta-analysis of these studies found that older
adults were more risk averse than younger adults in making
positively framed decisions (Best & Charness, 2015).
Positively framed decisions refer to choices in which
positive aspects of the scenarios are highlighted using
wordings such as “keep” and “save”. This finding can be
explained by fuzzy-trace theory.
Fuzzy-trace theory postulates that people simultaneously
store and access two types of representations (Reyna &
Brainerd, 2011). A verbatim representation reflects the
precise information. In contrast, a gist representation
captures the subjective interpretation of information based
on emotion, experience, level of development, and is vague

1770

and qualitative. In the context of the Asian disease problem
(Tversky & Kahneman, 1981), a gist representation of a sure
option of “saving 200 people” would be “saving some
people” whereas a gist representation of a risky option of “a
one-third probability of saving 600 people and a two-thirds
probability of saving no people” would be “some
probability of saving some people and some probability of
saving no people.” Hence, fuzzy-trace theory suggests that
people would choose the sure option when they represent
the positively framed situation at the gist level. Older adults
are more likely than younger adults to rely on gist
processing because they may have learned that it is a more
effective means of making decisions (Peters, Hess, Västfjäll,
& Auman, 2007). In addition, gist processing is relatively
well preserved with normal aging although verbatim
processing declines as people age (Reyna & Brainerd,
2011). Older adults’ decisions are more gist-based, which
may account for their tendency to be more risk averse in the
positive frame.
The meta-analysis revealed that the presence of the age
effect depended on the amount and the scenario type (Best
& Charness, 2015). That is, the age effect was found in
small-amount financial and large-amount mortality
scenarios, but not in large-amount financial and smallamount mortality scenarios. Younger and older adults’
levels of risk taking depended on the scenario. Owing to the
primary use of either financial risk seeking scenarios or the
Asian disease problem in the aging literature, past findings
on age-related differences in risk taking may not generalize
to medication decision making.

traditional care model, which depicts patients as passive
followers of the orders set by physicians. However, a new
collaborative care model is replacing the traditional model
(Mitzner, McBride, Barg-Walkow, & Rogers, 2013). In the
collaborative model, patients and physicians share the
primary caregiving responsibility and make decisions
together. Hence, investigating collaborative decision making
and how it influences decision makers’ subsequent decisions
would help people make better use of others’ opinions.
Collaborative decision making has been studied in social
psychology. Group decision-making phenomena that have
been observed include group polarization and group
convergence. The former occurs when the decisions made
by groups are more extreme than the initial position of its
members (Sunstein, 2002). Group convergence was found
in Bixter, Trimber, and Luhmann’s (2017) study that
focused on intertemporal monetary preferences. Individuals’
post-collaboration decisions converged towards their
respective group decisions. The social comparison process
was proposed to explain the findings. Participants might
have changed their preferences in accordance with their
group members’ preferences because they viewed others’
behavior as a source of information about normatively
appropriate behavior. Using a risky decision task, another
study demonstrated a similar behavioral change (Suzuki,
Jensen, Bossaerts, O’Doherty, 2016). Participants’ risk
preferences shifted towards the observed person’s
preferences. Research is needed to better understand
whether a group polarization or group convergence effect
would be present in medication risky decision-making
scenarios.

Risk-Advantageous Decisions
Studies have also explored younger and older adults’ risk
taking tendencies in situations where risk seeking is
advantageous and disadvantageous. From an economic
perspective, an option with a higher expected value is better
than an option with a lower expected value. Analyzing trials
on which the expected value of the risky option was more
favorable than that of the sure option, older adults were
shown to be more risk averse than people of age 5 to 64
(Weller, Levin, & Denburg, 2011). That is, older adults
were less risk taking than younger adults when risk taking
was beneficial. However, that study used very broad age
ranges.
Based on Peters et al. (2007), and Reyna and Brainerd
(2011), older adults have an increased tendency to use gist
processing relative to younger adults. Thus, they may be
less sensitive to the expected values of the sure and risky
options and more likely to stick to their preferred options on
risk-neutral trials than younger adults.

Collaborative Decision Making
If we consider how common it is for people to exchange
views with others in everyday situations of making health
care decisions, it is necessary to understand medical
decision making in a collaborative context. Collaboration in
patient-physician relationships is not emphasized in the

Age Differences in Susceptibility to Social Effects
Given evidence suggesting age-related differences in
decision making between younger and older adults, it is
reasonable to ask whether younger and older adults’
experience of making decisions in a group would influence
their individual decisions
differently. Age-related
differences in the tendency to be influenced by others have
been investigated for young age groups. In Gardner and
Steinberg’s (2005) study, participants made riskier decisions
and exhibited more risky behavior when in peer groups, and
the influence of peers on risky decision making and risk
taking was stronger among adolescents and youths than
adults. However, no research has assessed age-related
differences between younger adults and older adults.
One finding which suggested that older adults might be
more prone to social influence than younger adults in
making decisions is the age-related difference in perceived
decision-making competence. Older adults rated themselves
as less competent decision makers than did younger adults
(Bruine de Bruin, Parker, & Fischhoff, 2012). Despite older
adults’ accumulation of experience, they may have rated
their decision-making competence based on perceived
declines in their fluid cognitive abilities. Owing to their
lower perceived competence, older adults might change
their decisions more easily when different views are

1771

presented. This prediction is supported by the finding that
participants who lacked confidence in their answers to
health knowledge questions were significantly more likely
than those who were confident to change their answer after
receiving online social feedback (Lau & Coiera, 2008).
Furthermore, previous research has demonstrated that higher
uncertainty strengthened social effects on memory reports
(Walther et al., 2002). If older adults are less confident and
thus more uncertain about their decisions, they might be
more susceptible to social influence.

involving some of these variables are not included in this
paper. Table 1 provides descriptive data.
Table 1: Younger and older adults’ scores on health and
cognitive measures.

Health a

Younger
Adults
M
SD
4.05
.54

Older Adults

tvalue

M
3.79

SD
.60

1.59

10.55
72.45

7.04
45.83

3.29
13.84

5.10***
7.51***

Overview of Study
Although older adults often have multiple medical
conditions and need to make health care choices involving
risks, past research has not assessed age-related differences
in risk taking for medication decision tasks. The goal of the
current study was to study age differences in medication risk
taking when risk taking was advantageous or neutral.
Younger and older adults were asked to make choices
between medications that involved varying probabilities and
outcomes of treatment success. On risk-neutral trials, they
chose between options that were equally favorable. On riskadvantageous trials, they chose between options that favored
risk taking. To investigate the effect of collaboration on
subsequent individual decisions, they were asked to
complete the decision task first independently, then in
dyads, and finally independently. Hypotheses were:
H1: older adults are less risk taking than younger adults.
H2: people are more risk taking on risk-advantageous
trials than on risk-neutral trials.
H3: there is an age by trial type interaction such that older
adults show a smaller increase in risk taking when risk
taking is beneficial.
H4: older adults, compared to younger adults, are more
likely to be influenced by others.

Method
Participants
Participants were 24 English speaking younger adults (14
females) between the ages of 18 and 23 (M = 19.50, SD =
1.41) and 24 English speaking older adults (14 females)
between the ages of 67 and 74 (M = 70.54, SD = 2.30).
Participants in each age group formed 12 age-group
matched dyads. All participants had at least 20/50 visual
acuity for near vision (corrected or uncorrected) to ensure
that they could see the stimuli. The majority of older adults
were highly educated, with 83% reporting having some
college or higher. Other descriptive variables were
demographics and health, numeracy (Lipkus, Samsa, &
Rimer, 2001), personality (Gosling, Rentfrow, & Swann,
2003), social intelligence (Silvera, Martinussen, & Dahl,
2001), perceived decision-making competence (Greene,
Hibbard & Tusler, 2005), processing speed (Wechsler,
1997), verbal working memory span (Wechsler, 1997), and
verbal ability (Shipley, 1986). Due to limited space, results

Numeracy b
Processing
speed c

.67
9.63

Verbal
8.86
2.30
7.63
2.50
1.75
working
memory d
Verbal
32.08
3.28
32.96
4.85
-.726
ability e
aSelf-reported health (1=poor, 5=excellent); b Numeracy
(number of correct items from 0 to 11 on the numeracy
scale); cProcessing speed (number of correct items on the
digit-symbol substitution task from 0 to 100); d Verbal
working memory (number of correct items from 0 to 14 on
the digits backward task); eVerbal ability (number of correct
items from 0 to 40 on the Shipley institute of living scale);
***p<.001.

Materials
The experiment had three phases : pre-collaboration,
collaboration, and post-collaboration. Participants made
decisions independently in the pre- and post- collaboration
phases, but in dyads in the collaboration phase.
Participants were asked to choose a medication for a
family member who is the same age as them. We asked
them to give advice to a family member rather than choose
one for themselves because this was more ecologically valid
with respect to the collaboration phase in which they have to
interact with each other and reach a consensus. Every trial
of the decision task consisted of a choice between two
medications which had different probabilities and outcomes
of treatment success. The sure option had 100% chance of
some treatment success whereas the risky option had a
variable outcome of treatment success.
There were two trial types, 20 risk-neutral trials and 20
risk-advantageous trials in each phase. On risk-neutral trials,
the medications had equivalent expected values. On riskadvantageous trials, the medication with a sure outcome had
a lower expected value than the medication with a variable
outcome. Figures 1 and 2 show an example of each trial
type. For both trial types, the risk magnitudes were 20%,
40%, 60%, and 80% on different trials and the number of
days of sickness were 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60 on different
trials. Within each phase of the experiment, the decision
trials were presented in a randomized order to minimize

1772

order effects. The percentage of time that participants chose
the riskier option indicated their level of risk taking.

Results
Individual Medication Risk Taking
First, individual risk taking data in the pre-collaboration
phase were analyzed. Mixed-design ANOVA was
conducted with age as the between-participants variable,
and trial type as the within-participants variable.
As expected, older and young adults were significantly
more risk taking on risk-advantageous trials (M = .77, SD =
.26) than on risk-neutral trials (M = .41, SD = .32), F(1, 46)
= 82.66, p < .001, ηp 2 = .64. Overall, older adults (M = .58,
SD = .30) were not significantly less risk taking than
younger adults (M = .60, SD = .18), F(1, 46) = .024, p =
0.877, ηp 2 = .001. However, there was an age by trial type
interaction such that older adults showed a smaller increase
in risk taking in response to risk-advantageous trials than
did younger adults, F(1, 46) = 8.52, p < .01, ηp 2 = .16.
Figure 3 shows the results.

Figure 1: An example of a risk-neutral trial.

Figure 2: An example of a risk-advantageous trial.

Design
Age was a grouping variable. Trial type and decisionmaking phase were the independent variables. Level of risk
taking and difference in risk taking between dyad members
were the dependent variables.

Procedure
Before the experiment, participants received a consent form
explaining the research study. After consent, they completed
a questionnaire regarding demographics and health, and four
ability tests. After that, participants were given both oral and
written instructions about the decision task. Collaboration
with other participants was not mentioned at this stage. The
first phase of the experiment was the pre-collaboration
phase. Participants made medication decisions involving
risks individually. When the pre-collaboration phase was
completed, participants moved on to the collaboration
phase. They were notified that each of them would have to
collaborate with another participant to give one answer as a
group. The process of collaborative decision making was
videotaped (with permission from the participants) for
analysis in a separate study. When the collaboration phase
was completed, participants entered the post-collaboration
phase. Once again, they made similar decisions individually.
After all decision trials were completed, participants filled
out the self-report items, followed by other questionnaires,
and then they were debriefed.
It took younger adults approximately one hour and older
adults approximately two hours to complete the entire
experiment.

Figure 3: Younger and older adults’ level of risk taking on
risk-neutral and risk-advantageous trials (error bars
represent the standard error).

Social Influence Effects
Risk taking data in the pre- and post-collaboration phases
were compared. Mixed-design ANOVA was conducted with
age as between- and phase as within-participants variable.
The absolute difference between dyad members’ level of
risk taking was the dependent variable.
The difference in risk taking between dyad members was
smaller in the post-collaboration phase (M = .20, SD = .19)
than in the pre-collaboration phase (M = .33, SD = .22), F(1,
22) = 7.80, p < .05, ηp 2 = .26. The overall within-dyad
difference in risk taking was not significantly different
between younger (M = .22, SD = .12) and older adults (M =
.31, SD = .16), F(1, 22) = 2.54, p = 0.125, ηp 2 = .10. By
contrast, the age by phase interaction was significant, F(1,
22) = 10.41, p < .01, ηp 2 = .32. Older adults’ risk
preferences converged towards their partner’s preferences to
a greater extent following collaboration relative to younger
adults’. Figure 4 shows the results.

1773

Figure 4: Younger and older adults’ within-dyad difference
in risk taking in pre- and post- collaboration phases (error
bars represent the standard error).

Discussion
Findings from the present study provide insights into
younger and older adults’ individual risky decision making
for medications, and the effects of collaborating with a
partner on subsequent risk-taking tendency. Confirming our
expectation, younger and older adults took more risks when
risk taking was beneficial than when risk taking and risk
aversion were equally favorable. However, this effect of
trial type differed between the two age groups such that the
increase in risk taking among older adults was smaller than
the increase in risk taking among younger adults when the
risky option was favored. Regarding social influence effects,
dyad members’ risk-taking tendency was more similar to
each other’s after the collaborative decision-making
experience compared to their initial difference. Older adults
demonstrated a convergence effect, whereas the younger
adults did not.

Theoretical Implications
The present study adds to the literature in that it investigated
age differences in risk taking in the medical domain, which
has heretofore been understudied. Based on fuzzy-trace
theory, when people represent positively framed scenarios at
the gist level, they tend to be risk averse. Therefore, we
predicted that older adults would be less likely to take risks
than younger adults when choosing between medications
that had different probabilities and outcomes of treatment
success, consistent with the recent meta-analytic findings on
age differences in the risky-choice framing effect (Best &
Charness, 2015). In our study, which focused on decision
making in the medical domain, older adults were not
significantly less risk taking than younger adults in making
medication decisions. Because prior research mainly
focused on financial and mortality domains, the pattern of
finding in the present study could be additional evidence
that age differences in risk preferences are context
dependent (Best & Charness, 2015).

Additionally, an interaction was found in the present
study between age and trial type. Younger adults exhibited
a substantially larger increase in risk taking than did older
adults when comparing risk-advantageous trials with riskneutral trials. This finding is consistent with our expectation
that younger adults are more sensitive to the expected values
of options. When presented with a risky option and a sure
option with a lower expected value, younger adults were
more likely to choose the risky option that maximized their
expected value gain in terms of the number of days
protected from sickness. Relative to younger adults, older
adults showed a more similar risk-taking tendency on riskneutral and risk-advantageous trials, suggesting that they
were not as sensitive as younger adults to the expected
values of options. This is consistent with the idea that older
adults are more likely to use gist processing whereas
younger adults are more likely to use verbatim processing in
making medication risky decisions.
The present study demonstrated that people’s medical ris k
taking propensities were prone to social influence effects. In
addition, it explored the effects of collaborative decision making on subsequent individual decisions in two different
age groups. Consistent with prior studies on intertemporal
choices (Bixter et al., 2017) and financial risky decisions
(Suzuki et al., 2016), we found a group convergence effect
following collaboration in older adults’ medication risky
decisions. Importantly, older adults’ convergence effect was
larger than younger adults’. This might reflect their greater
tendency to conform to others. Older adults might change
their decisions more easily when different views are
presented because of their lower perceived decision-making
competence (Bruine de Bruin et al., 2012). However, it
could also be due to the greater initial difference within
older dyads observed in the present sample. Future research
should attempt to better understand age differences in social
influence effects in risky decision-making contexts.

Limitations and Future Directions
Several limitations have to be noted. The decision task may
not resemble an everyday medical context and thus makes
the results less generalizable to ecological settings. Asking
participants to make third-person medication decisions
might introduce bias. Moreover, people might perceive
avoiding sickness as categorically different than shortening
the duration of sickness. Additionally, numeracy differed
between the age groups, and could be an alternative
explanation for the individual risk taking and social
influence findings. Future research should address these
issues.

Practical Implications
Findings from the current study offer some insights into
how age and collaboration influence medication risk taking.
Examining age differences in medical risk seeking would
enable us to devise appropriate decision aids for people of
different ages. In particular, it is important to encourage
older adults to take risks when risk taking is beneficial.

1774

Examining age differences in choice shift due to social
influence would inform the public how social interactions
alter patients’ subsequent decisions as a function of their
age. Current findings suggest that other people might be
able to play a significant role in influencing older patients
and helping them make improved decisions.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by a pilot grant from the
National Institutes of Health (National Institute on Aging)
Grant P01 AG17211 under the auspices of the Center for
Research and Education on Aging and Technology
Enhancement (CREATE; www.create-center.org), and by
the Ruth L. Kirschstein National Research Service Award
(NRSA) Institutional Research Training Grant from the
National Institutes of Health (National Institute on Aging)
Grant 2T32AG000175-26A1.

References
Bernoulli, D. (1954). Exposition of a new theory on the
measurement of risk. Econometrica: Journal of the
Econometric Society, 23-36.
Best, R., & Charness, N. (2015). Age differences in the
effect of framing on risky choice: A metaanalysis. Psychology and Aging, 30(3), 688-698.
Bixter, M. T., Trimber, E. M., & Luhmann, C. C. (2017).
Are intertemporal preferences contagious? Evidence from
collaborative decision making. Memory & Cognition.
Bruine de Bruin, W., Parker, A. M., & Fischhoff, B. (2012).
Explaining
adult
age-related
differences
in
decision‐making competence. Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, 25(4), 352-360.
Gardner, M., & Steinberg, L. (2005). Peer influence on risk
taking, risk preference, and risky decision making in
adolescence
and
adulthood:
an
experimental
study. Developmental Psychology, 41(4), 625.
Gosling, S. D., Rentfrow, P. J., & Swann, W. B. (2003). A
very brief measure of the Big-Five personality
domains. Journal of Research in Personality, 37(6), 504528.
Greene, J., Hibbard, J. H., & Tusler, M. (2005). How much
do health literacy and patient activation contribute to
older adults' ability to manage their health? (pp. 200505). Washington, DC: AARP Public Policy Institute.
Lau, A. Y., & Coiera, E. W. (2008). Impact of web
searching and social feedback on consumer decision
making: a prospective online experiment. Journal of
Medical Internet Research, 10(1).
Lipkus, I. M., Samsa, G., & Rimer, B. K. (2001). General
performance on a numeracy scale among highly educated
samples. Medical Decision Making,21(1), 37-44.
Mitzner, T. L., McBride, S. E., Barg-Walkow, L. H., &
Rogers, W. A. (2013). Self-management of wellness and
illness in an aging population. Reviews of Human Factors
and Ergonomics, 8(1), 277-333.
Peters, E., Hess, T. M., Västfjäll, D., & Auman, C. (2007).
Adult age differences in dual information processes:

Implications for the role of affective and deliberative
processes in older adults' decision making. Perspectives
on Psychological Science, 2(1), 1-23.
Reyna, V. F., & Brainerd, C. J. (2011). Dual processes in
decision making and developmental neuroscience: A
fuzzy-trace model. Developmental Review, 31(2), 180206.
Shipley, W. C. (1986). Shipley Institute of Living Scale. Los
Angeles: Western Psychological Services.
Silvera, D., Martinussen, M., & Dahl, T. I. (2001). The
Tromsø Social Intelligence Scale, a self‐report measure of
social
intelligence. Scandinavian
Journal
of
Psychology, 42(4), 313-319.
Sunstein,
C.
R. (2002). The law of group
polarization. Journal of Political Philosophy, 10(2), 175195.
Suzuki, S., Jensen, E. L., Bossaerts, P., & O’Doherty, J. P.
(2016). Behavioral contagion during learning about
another agent’s risk-preferences acts on the neural
representation of decision-risk. PNAS, 113(14), 37553760.
Thompson, V. L. S. (2013). Making decisions in a complex
information environment: evidential preference and
information we trust. BMC Medical Informatics and
Decision Making, 13(Suppl 3), S7.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of
decisions
and
the
psychology
of
choice. Science, 211(4481), 453-458.
Walther, E., Bless, H., Strack, F., Rackstraw, P., Wagner,
D., & Werth, L. (2002). Conformity effects in memory as
a
function
of
group
size,
dissenters
and
uncertainty. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 16(7), 793810.
Ward, B.W., Schiller, J.S., & Goodman, R.A. (2014).
Multiple chronic conditions among US adults: a 2012
update. Prev
Chronic
Dis,
11,
130389.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.5888/pcd11.130389
Wechsler, D. (1997). WAIS-III: Administration and scoring
manual: Wechsler adult intelligence scale. Psychological
Corporation.
Weller, J. A., Levin, I. P., & Denburg, N. L. (2011).
Trajectory of risky decision making for potential gains
and losses from ages 5 to 85. Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, 24(4), 331-344.

1775

