Risk, Cognitive Control, and Adolescence: Challenging the Dual Systems Model
Joanna Fryt (jfryt@up.krakow.pl)
Tomasz Smolen (tsmolen@up.krakow.pl)
Karolina Czernecka (czernecka.karolina@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Pedagogical University of Krakow
ul. Podchorazych 2, Krakow, Poland

Amelia La Torre (amelia.latorre@gmail.com)
Monika Szczygieł (szczygiel89@gmail.com)
Institute of Psychology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow
ul. Ingardena 6, Krakow, Poland

Abstract
According to the dual systems model, adolescence is a period
of imbalance between cognitive and motivational systems that
results in increased tendency towards risk. In the study, we
investigated the effects of rewards on risk-taking and
cognitive control in 90 adolescents (13-16) and 96 adults (1835). Our results challenge the assumptions of the model as we
observed that rewards lead adolescents to more conservative
decisions in one of the risk tasks used in the study. We also
observed that in cognitive control tasks, rewards influenced
reaction latencies, but not the efficiency of control processes.
Keywords: risk taking strategy, cognitive control, sensitivity
to rewards, dual systems model

Introduction
As a developmental period, adolescence is commonly
characterized by risk-taking, sensation seeking, impulsivity
and the importance of peers. Such characteristics clearly
serve an adaptive function during the transition to
adulthood, fostering tendencies towards independence,
novel experiences and social networks (Spear, 2000). At the
same time, they expose adolescents to the negative
consequences of their actions, with typical examples being
reckless driving, experimenting with psychoactive
substances or unprotected sex. In our study, we investigated
adolescent sensitivity to rewards and its consequences for
risk-taking and cognitive control.

The Dual Systems Model
The dual systems model by Steinberg (2008) is one of the
most influential propositions attempting to explain
adolescent behavior that is well established in cognitive and
neurodevelopmental research (Defoe, Dubas, Figner, & van
Aken, 2015; Geier, 2013). According to the model,
adolescence can be characterized by a functional imbalance
between the hyperactive motivational system, responsible
for increased sensitivity to rewards, and the still maturing
cognitive control system, responsible for reaction inhibition
and effective management of information. In both human
and animal adolescents, greater sensitivity towards pleasure,
positive feedback and rewarding effects of social
interactions are observed (Somerville & Casey, 2010; Spear,

2011). In humans, it has been established that early (11-13
years old) and middle adolescence (14-16 years old) are the
periods of highest sensitivity to rewards. The presence of
salient incentives coupled with the immaturity of control
processes is believed to result in increased tendency towards
risk.
Risk-taking, defined as a propensity towards actions ―with
the highest outcome variability‖ (Defoe et. al., 2015), is the
most studied consequence of adolescent sensitivity to
rewards. More precisely, risk-taking is a preference for
actions leading to a big gain of low probability over actions
leading to a small gain of high probability. According to the
dual systems model, adolescents take more risks in the
presence of salient incentives and when they are
emotionally aroused. Studies focusing on age differences in
risk-taking show that adolescents do manifest stronger
tendency towards risk than adults, but only under specific
task demands or in specific social contexts. A meta-analysis
by Defoe et al. (2015) revealed that in studies using
probabilistic gambling tasks (e.g. Iowa Gambling Task,
Columbia Card Task, Balloon Analogue Risk Task), these
specific task demands include primarily immediate outcome
feedback, i.e. participants are informed of their gains and
losses immediately after each decision. In studies using fastpaced driving tasks (e.g. Stoplight Task, driving simulators),
it is usually the presence of a peer observer that encourages
adolescents to take risks (e.g. Chein, Albert, O’Brien,
Uckert, & Steinberg, 2011; Cascio et al., 2015). It seems
unclear whether these two types of risk task measure one or
more types of risky behavior. The use of probabilistic
gambling tasks allow a better understanding of economic
risk preference. In fast-paced driving tasks, the risk is more
impulsive and more similar to everyday situations.
Beyond the risk context, the assumptions of the dual
systems model are tested in a rewarded vs. neutral
antisaccade paradigm. Interestingly, some results show that
cognitive control is enhanced in adolescents, but not in
adults, where it is financially rewarded (Geier, Terwilliger,
Teslovich, Velanova, & Luna, 2010; Padmanabhan, Geier,
Ordaz, Teslovich, & Luna, 2011). Such an effect does not
correspond to the implication of the model that adolescent
risk-taking stems from weaknesses of control processes.
Rather, it indicates that adolescent sensitivity to rewards can

2037

in fact be adaptive and promote cognitive efficiency.
Unfortunately, the effect seems to be difficult to replicate.
Subsequent studies show individual differences such as
increase, decrease or no change in cognitive control in
adolescent response to rewards (Geier & Luna, 2012;
Paulsen, Hallquist, Geier, & Luna, 2015). One study using
the Continuous Performance Test showed a similar increase
of performance in children, adolescent and adults in the
rewarded condition (Strang & Pollack, 2014).

The Challenges for the Dual Systems Model
Despite the fact that the dual systems model does not
specify whether tendency towards risk is adaptive or
maladaptive (Strang, Chein, & Steinberg, 2013; Shulman et
al., 2016), it is criticized mainly for its generality and the
fact that it adopts a deficit perspective on adolescence
(Pfeifer & Allen, 2012; Telzer, 2016). Actually, results from
many studies contribute to the image of adolescence as the
period of greatest lability, vulnerability to social evaluation,
and decision making which may be suboptimal or even lifethreatening. However, a high propensity towards risk may
not be the domain of all but the most susceptible adolescents
(Bjork & Pardini, 2015). An interesting new development
for the model might be offered by research demonstrating
that adolescent sensitivity to rewards can lead not only to
risk-taking, but can also be channeled towards safe (Cascio
et al, 2015; Telzer, Ichien, & Qu, 2015) or prosocial
behavior (Telzer, Fuligni, Lieberman, & Galvan, 2013;
2014).
The conceptualization of adolescent risk-taking within the
model and beyond it remains, however, the most intriguing
issue. Are adolescents impulsive risk-takers, who, due to the
immaturities of their control processes, cannot override
risky tendencies in the presence of salient incentives
(Willoughby, Good, Adachi, Hamza, & Tavernier, 2013)?
Or is risk-taking rather a decision strategy adopted
whenever it seems profitable? When we view risk-taking as
a strategy, we can also see adolescents as having more
control over their behavior than is assumed in the model.
Decision strategies can vary depending on the task and the
type of risky behavior (e.g. economic risk, driving risk).
Adolescent sensitivity to rewards (e.g. financial rewards,
immediate outcome feedback) can be similar or different in
various risk tasks. Nevertheless, it seems to be associated
with emotional arousal. Finally, an issue worth examining is
whether cognitive control in adolescents is indeed weaker
than in adults and more sensitive to rewards.

Hypotheses
To sum up, we expected that adolescents would be more
sensitive to rewards than adults and that the difference in
sensitivity would manifest in more efficient cognitive
control and a higher tendency towards risk when
performance is rewarded. Also, as the dual systems model
does not provide a direct link between the presence of
reward and its possible effect on risk-taking and cognitive

control, we hypothesized that the effect may be mediated by
the most obvious variable: emotional arousal.
Taking into consideration all of the above, we can
formulate the following predictions.
Risk (1) When rewarded according to their performance,
people will manifest more risk-taking compared to a noreward condition.
Cognitive control (2) When rewarded, people will exhibit
more efficient cognitive control.
Developmental changes (3) The simple effects expected in
hypotheses (1) and (2) will be larger for adolescents than for
adults.
Arousal (4) People will report higher arousal when
rewarded according to their performance, compared to a noreward condition. (5) The arousal level will be a substantial
mediator between the type of condition, risk level and
cognitive control efficiency.

Procedure
The one hundred and eighty six subjects (81 men) were
recruited either via parent-teacher conferences in local
schools (adolescents) or online advertisements (adults) from
two groups: adolescents (N = 90, mean age = 13.82, SD =
0.89, range = [13, 16]), and adults (N = 96, mean age =
25.04, SD = 4.03, range = [18, 35]). Parental consent was
obtained for all under age participants. The study was
conducted in schools (adolescents) and the university
psychological laboratory (adults). Participants were
informed that the anonymized data would be used only for
the scientific purposes of the study and that they could ask
questions, withdraw their participation at any moment, and
receive performance feedback after the study was
completed.
The session lasted for about 90 minutes and consisted of
two conditions, with a fifteen-minute break in between: (a) a
set of tasks with rewards depending on the performance and
(b) a set of tasks without any rewards. In each condition,
participants performed four tasks, each preceded by a
training session. Two tasks were cognitive control tasks
(Stroop task, Antisaccade task), while the other two
measured the tendency to take risks (Spaceride task and
Stock Market task). The order of conditions and of the tasks
within sets were randomized. In the middle of each
condition (after performing two computer tasks),
participants were asked to complete the SUPIN arousal
scale. Therefore, each person performed four computer tasks
and the SUPIN scale twice, once in a rewarded and once in
an unrewarded condition.
Participants were paid for their attendance with vouchers
(to a clothing store, a bookstore, or a movie theatre). The
value of the vouchers depended on performance in each task
in the rewarded condition and varied from $5 to $15 (mean
$10, equivalents in PLN).

The Tasks
The tasks were selected so as to measure different aspects of
risk-taking and cognitive control. In contrast to the Stock

2038

Market task, which investigates the tendency to make risky
decisions based mostly on deliberative thinking, the
Spaceride task was designed to detect the tendency to take
risk in emotionally stimulating conditions. As two aspects
of cognitive control, interference inhibition and response
inhibition were measured separately by the Stroop task and
the Antisaccade task. The SUPIN Scale was introduced to
control the level of positive and negative affect during each
research condition, as a possible moderator of task results.
Stock Market The task resembles a financial game in
which participants use virtual currency to buy shares in two
fictitious companies. In each turn of the game it was
possible to buy a number of shares of one or two companies
or no shares at all. The only restriction was the amount of
money the participant had at a given moment, which was
shown on the right side of the screen. The participant had 60
seconds to take a single decision, and 20 decisions to make
during the game, which was also displayed on the screen.
During the game the participant could see the history of
changes of the prices of each companies’ shares displayed
on a chart. After each decision they also saw a table
showing the current values of stocks and how much money
they had earned or lost so far. The price changes were
probabilistic (independent and normally distributed). The
expected gain (mean price change) from investing in any of
the companies was the same; however, the variance of the
price changes was small for one company (safe) and large
for the other (risky). The difference between the companies
was revealed to participants at the beginning of the task.
Spaceride The task fulfilled a function similar to the
―Stoplight‖ task (Chein et al., 2011), in which participants
in a car-driving context had to quickly decide whether or not
to take a risk to reach their destination as quickly as
possible. The Spaceride task has the form of a game in
which the participant controls a spaceship seen from above.
The task was to fly as quickly as possible to the end of the
cosmic route. There were a number of danger zones where
there was a risk of collision with asteroid. Those zones were
marked by a sound signal, a light on a radar, and the
appearance of distant asteroids in the background. A cloud
of fog also sometimes appeared and covered the spaceship
and its surroundings, making it impossible to see asteroids
approaching. In each danger zone, the participant had to
decide whether to slow down and avoid a collision or speed
ahead, risking a collision with an asteroid. A collision
would immobilize the spaceship for longer than it would
take to fly through a danger zone.
Stroop task The task (Stroop, 1935) was used to evaluate
participants’ ability to inhibit interference. In each trial of
the task, one of four words (―red‖, ―brown‖, ―blue‖ or
―green‖) appeared on the screen displayed in one of the four
colors (also red, brown, blue, or green). In congruent trials
(50% of trials), the color was the same as the meaning of the
word (e.g. the word ―brown‖ written in brown), while in
incongruent trails the word was written in one of the other
three colors (e.g. the word ―red‖ written in blue, meaning
interference was present). The participants had to press one

of four keys corresponding to the displayed color of the
word as quickly as possible and ignore the meaning of the
word. To motivate the participants for a better response, a
status bar visible on the top of the screen was additionally
introduced. After every response the bar changed color to
green when the response was correct, or to red when it was
wrong. The faster the response, the shorter the bar, so the
participant could see the accuracy and speed of every
reaction during the game.
Antisaccade task The task (Unsworth, Schrock, & Engle,
2004) served as a measure of response inhibition. The
participant had to inhibit the tendency to look at a sudden
presentation of a peripheral lure stimulus and instead look at
its mirror location in order to perceive the target stimulus
(arrow) and correctly react to it (press one of three keys
depending on the direction of the arrow). Feedback was
additionally introduced in the present task to inform
participants of their accuracy. The feedback took the form
of a screen-wide rectangle displayed in green (in the case of
a correct response) or red (when the reaction was wrong).
Modified SUPIN Scale The scale (Brzozowski, 2010) was
derived from Watson & Clark’s Positive and Negative
Affect Schedule. Both positive and negative affect were
measured, forming two subscales of the questionnaire. The
scale consisted of 20 adjectives describing various
emotions. Participants indicated on a five-point Likert scale
(from 1 – ―very slightly or not at all‖ to 5 – ―extremely‖)
how well each adjective described their current state. On the
basis of the results of our preliminary study, we altered
seven items of the scale to achieve better psychometric
characteristics. The modified version of the scale was used
in the present study.

Results
Statistics and data analysis One person did not finish the
whole set of tasks, while 60 had their results removed for
one task due to low accuracy (in the Antisaccade task) or
outlying value; however, their remaining results were still
used in the analysis.
A generalized linear mixed model using binomial
distribution was fit to the Antisaccade task. The
―Mediation‖ package in R was used for mediation analysis.
Multi-factor analysis of variance with repeated measures
was applied in all other analyses.
Condition (rewarded or not rewarded), group (adolescents
or adults), and interaction between condition and age group
were independent variables. The condition factor was
applied within subjects while the age group was applied
between subjects. We also controlled for position in series
(first or second) and performance in analysis concerning
risk tasks. Dependent variables (DV) were: number of
correct responses in the Antisaccade task; Stroop effect in
the Stroop task; proportion of high risk stocks in all stocks
purchased (risk measure), and number of stocks purchased
(alternative DV) in the Stock Market task; duration of
pressing the break button (risk measure) and duration of
pressing the break or accelerate button (alternative DV) in

2039

the Spaceride task. Alternative DV in the Spaceride task
was logarithmized due to its skewness (γ 1 =2.17 before and
0.29 after transformation). The performance measure in the
Stock Market task was the amount of ―money‖ in the last
trial, and in the Spaceride task it was the negative time of
the journey. DV in the Antisaccade task was accuracy, and
in the Stroop task it was Stroop effect. We also examined
reaction latencies in Antisaccade and Stroop tasks.
Cognitive control There was neither an effect of condition
nor an interaction between condition and age group in the
Antisaccade task (β = 0.027, p = .47; and β = -0.03, p = .56
respectively, deviance = 1695.8) and the Stroop task
(F[1,136] = 0.2, p = .66; and F[1,136] = 1.75, p = .19,
respectively, η2 = .037). However, there was a significant
difference between adolescents and adults in reaction
latencies in the Antisaccade task (734 ms for adolescents
and 695 ms for adults, F[1,164] = 10,84, p = .001) and a
nearly significant difference between conditions (707 ms for
not rewarded and 719 ms for rewarded, F[1,152] = 3.58, p =
.06, η2 = .19). There also was a significant difference
between the rewarded and unrewarded condition in reaction
latencies in the Stroop task (936 ms for unrewarded and 906
ms for rewarded, F[1,136] = 101.97, p < .001, η2 = .12).
Risk The performance in the Stock Market task did not
depend on condition (F[1,180] = 0.1, p = .75), age group
(F[1,182] = 0.59, p = .44), nor interaction between these
two factors (F[1,180] = 1.65, p = .2, η2 = .032). Neither did
the performance in the Spaceride task depend on any of
these predictors (F[1,182] = 0.13, p = .72; F[1,183] = 2.52,
p = .11; F[1,182] = 1.24, p = .27, respectively, η2 = .051).
There also was neither effect of condition (F[1,182] =
0.81, p = .37), age group (F[1,183] = 0.87, p = . 35), nor
interaction between condition and age group on risk
(F[1,182] = 0.008, p = .93, η2 = .0078) in the Stock market
task or (F[1,182] = 0.028, p = .88; F[1,183] = 1.57, p = .21;
and F[1,182] = 0.26, p = .61, respectively, η2 = .01) in the
Spaceride task.
However, there was a significant effect of condition (242
for the unrewarded condition and 223 for the rewarded
condition, F[1,181] = 8.96, p = .0031) and age group (200
for adolescents and 262 for adults, F[1,182] = 18.65, p <
.001) and a nearly significant effect of interaction between
condition and age group (F[1,181] = 3.43, p = .065, η2 =
.35) when alternative DV was used in the Stock Market task
(see Figure 1), as well as an effect of interaction between
condition and age group in the Spaceride task (F[1,182] =
4.75, p = .031). The effect of condition or age group in the
latter task was not significant (F[1,182] = 1.08, p = .3;
F[1,183] = 0.44, p = .14, respectively, η2 = .019, see Figure
2).
Arousal The arousal differed significantly depending on
condition (2.34 for not rewarded condition and 2.5 for
rewarded condition, F[1, 180] = 43, p < .001, η2 = .034), but
it was not a mediator between condition and alternative DV
in the Stock Market task (proportion mediated = -.06, 95%
CI = [-.44, .25], p = .63).

2040

Figure 1: Quantity of stock purchased in the Stock
Market task (alternative DV) in unrewarded and rewarded
condition for adolescents and adults. Error bars indicate
95% confidence intervals.

Figure 2: Logarithm of total time for which the accelerate
or break buttons were pressed in the Spaceride task
(alternative DV) in unrewarded and rewarded conditions
for adolescents and adults. Error bars indicate 95%
confidence intervals.

Discussion
The first important observation made in the present study is
that participants were sensitive to rewards in risk tasks, but
this sensitivity leads adolescents and young adults to
different decision strategies, depending on the context of the
task. Adolescent decisions, however, cannot be interpreted
as an increase in tendency towards risk, which challenges
the assumption of the dual systems model (Geier, 2013). In
the Stock Market task we observed that adolescents
generally purchased less stocks than adults and the number
of purchased stocks decreased even more in the rewarded
condition (Fig. 1). In the Spaceride task there were no
differences between adolescents and adults in time taken to
press the break or accelerate button in danger zones in the
no-reward condition. However, in the rewarded condition
adolescents pressed the brake and accelerator buttons more
than adults, making the difference between the groups
significant (Fig. 2). It is interesting why the presence of
rewards led adolescents to purchase less stocks in the
market and steer the spaceship more boldly through danger
zones. Possibly, when they had the opportunity to earn real
money, participants chose a strategy that leads, as they
believe, to better performance in the task. If purchasing
stocks in the market is generally perceived as leading to
both big gains and big losses—the option with ―the highest
outcome variability‖ as Defoe et al. (2015) define risk—
then purchasing less stocks when real money is earned can
be interpreted as a strategy that protects participants from
loss. Otherwise, flying more boldly through danger zones
cannot be seen as a strategy preventing collisions. It should
be noted that while in the Stoplight task (Chein et al., 2011)
participants decide whether to stop at a yellow light or drive
through the crossroads, in the Spaceride task it is possible to
brake and accelerate through the entire length of danger
zones. Flying more boldly (such as the ―speed-brake-speed‖
strategy) in dangerous areas is related to maintaining high
speed and attempting to slow down just before asteroids.
Less bold flying is slower, but makes attempts to avoid
collision more effective. Summing up these results, it
appears that adolescents made more conservative decisions
than adults in one of the tasks and more risky decisions in
the other. The context of tasks is therefore a variable that
determines whether adolescents manifest risk-taking or riskaversion. We can speculate that more conservative decisions
could be caused by a lack of familiarity with the contexts in
which risk can occur (e.g. economic risk).
According to our hypothesis, participants reported higher
emotional arousal in the rewarded condition. Such results
suggest that the presence of a salient incentive leads to a
greater motivational effort that manifests itself in higher
reported arousal. We failed, however, to show that arousal
mediates the relation between the presence of reward and
risk-taking (or other decision strategy). As adolescents are
viewed as impulsive risk-takers (Willoughby et al., 2013),
the dual systems model predicts that high arousal in the
rewarded condition enhances risk-taking because highly
aroused adolescents cannot override risky tendencies. In our

study, however, participants seemed to be able to make
decisions irrespective of their arousal and did not allow it to
negatively influence their performance. It might be the case
that arousal leads to impulsive decision-making only in
specific circumstances. For example, high arousal may
trigger risk-taking only in individuals in a negative
emotional state (such as anxiety) or under high cognitive
load (see, e.g., Zangeneh, Blaszczynski & Turner, 2008). If
the participants were in optimal emotional and cognitive
state, reward-related arousal alone might not have been
sufficient to cause a break-down in control processes and an
increase in risk-taking. It is also possible that rewarding
participants resulted in a higher but still optimal level of
arousal, increasing not risk-taking, but effort. These
explanations remain speculative and need further studies,
but it seems that the dual systems model may oversimplify
the proposed link between arousal and risk-taking.
Interesting results that challenge the dual systems model
assumptions were also observed for the cognitive control
measures. Firstly, adolescents were less accurate and slower
in the Antisaccade task, while no differences between
adolescents and adults were observed in the Stroop task.
Thus, the antisaccade task seems to be more difficult for
adolescents, a result which is consistent with previous
studies (Geier & Luna, 2012; Paulsen et al., 2015) showing
that performance in the Antisaccade task improves with age.
Secondly, we found that reward had no effect on both the
accuracy in the Antisaccade task and the Stroop effect.
However, in the rewarded condition participants exhibited
longer latencies in the Antisaccade task and shorter latencies
in the Stroop task. These results are not surprising given the
fact that participants were informed that they were being
rewarded for accuracy in the first task and for response
speed in the second. The intriguing issue here is why the
presence of rewards influenced not the measures of
cognitive control efficiency (reaction inhibition and
interference control), but reaction latencies in the tasks. It is
possible that rewards enhance not a measured skill (i.e.
control processes) that might be difficult to improve, but the
motivational effort to do well in the task. Such an
interpretation seems to be consistent with the effects of
reward observed in the risk tasks, where again not the
performance (e.g. money earned in the Stock Market,
driving time in the Spaceride), but the decision strategies
(e.g. purchasing more or less stocks, driving more or less
dynamically) were enhanced. Additionally, we failed to
observe interaction between age, condition and cognitive
control efficiency, which is contrary to the dual systems
model and consistent with the behavioral results of Paulsen
et al. (2015). The effects of reward on reaction latencies in
both tasks were similar in adolescents and adults.
To conclude, the results obtained in the study challenge
the assumptions of the dual systems model about the
universality of adolescent risk-taking. Risk-taking as a
consequence of the weakness of control processes and
sensitivity to incentives possibly manifests itself in certain
circumstances. In our study, adolescents made decisions

2041

which cannot be considered unequivocally risky or
impulsive, despite the rewards. Further studies should help
determine more precisely what set of circumstances triggers
different behavioral responses in the presence of incentives
and thus contribute to the development of the model.

Acknowledgments
This work was sponsored by The National Science Centre
(NCN) of Poland (grant 2015/18/E/HS6/00152).

References
Bjork, J. M., Pardini, D. A. (2015). Who are those ―risktaking
adolescents‖?
Individual
differences
in
neurodevelopmental research. Developmental Cognitive
Neuroscience, 11, 56-64.
Brzozowski, P. (2010). Skala Uczuć Pozytywnych i
Negatywnych (SUPIN). Polska adaptacja skali PANAS
Dawida Watsona i Lee Anny Clark. Podręcznik.
Warszawa: Pracownia Testów Psychologicznych.
Cascio, C. N., Carp, J., O’Donnel, M. B., Tinney, F. J.,
Bingham, C. R., Shope, J. T., Ouimet, M. C., Pradhan, A.
K., Simons-Morton, B. G., Falk, E. B. (2015). Buffering
social influence: neural correlates of response inhibition
predict driving safety in the presence of a peer. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 27(1), 83-95.
Chein, J., Albert, D., O’Brien, L., Uckert, K., Steinberg, L.
(2011). Peers increase adolescent risk-taking by
enhancing activity in brain’s reward circuitry.
Developmental Science, 14(2), F1-F10.
Defoe, I. N., Dubas, J. S., Figner, B., van Aken, M. A.
(2015). A meta-analysis on age-differences in risky
decision-making: Adolescents versus children and adults.
Psychological Bulletin, 141(1), 48-84.
Geier, C. F. (2013). Adolescent cognitive control and
reward processing: implications for risk taking and
substance use. Hormones and Behavior, 46, 333-342.
Geier, C. F., Luna, B. (2012). Developmental effects of
incentives on cognitive control. Child Development,
83(4), 1262-1274.
Geier, C.. F., Terwilliger, R., Teslovich, T., Velanova, K.,
Luna B. (2010). Immaturities in reward processing and its
influence on inhibitory control in adolescence. Cerebral
Cortex, 20, 1613-1629.
Padmanabhan, A., Geier, C. F., Ordaz, S. J., Teslovich, T.,
Luna, B. (2011). Developmental changes in brain function
underlying the influence of reward processing on
inhibitory
control.
Developmental
Cognitive
Neuroscience, 1(4), 517-529.
Paulsen, D. J., Hallquist, M. N., Geier, C. F., Luna, B.
(2015). Effects of incentives, age, and behavior on brain
activation during inhibitory control: A longitudinal fMRI
study. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 11, 105115.
Pfeifer, J. H., Allen, N. B. (2012). Arrested development?
Reconsidering dual-systems models of brain function in
adolescence and disorders. Trends in Cognitive Science,
16, 322–329.

Shulman, E. P., Smith, A. R., Silva, K., Icenogle, G., Duell,
N., Chein, J., Steinberg, L. (2016). The dual systems
model:
Review, reappraisal and reaffirmation.
Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 17, 103-117.
Somerville, L. H., Casey, B. J. (2010). Developmental
neurobiology of cognitive control and motivational
systems. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 20, 2, 236241.
Spear, L. P. (2000). The adolescent brain and age-related
behavioural
manifestations.
Neuroscience
and
Biobehavioral Reviews, 24(4), 417-463.
Spear, L. P. (2011). Rewards, aversions and affect in
adolescence: emerging convergences across laboratory
animal and human data. Developmental Cognitive
Neuroscience, 1(4), 390-403.
Steinberg, L. (2008). A social neuroscience perspective on
adolescent risk taking. Developmental Review, 28, 78106.
Strang, N. M., Chein, J. M., Steinberg, L. (2013). The value
of the dual systems model on adolescent risk-taking.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7:223, 1-4.
Strang, N. M., Pollak, S. D. (2014). Developmental
continuity in reward-related enhancement of cognitive
control. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 10, 3443.
Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal
reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18, 643662.
Telzer, E. H. (2016). Dopaminergic reward sensitivity can
promote adolescent health: A new perspective on the
mechanism of ventral striatum activation. Developmental
Cognitive Neuroscience, 17, 57-67.
Telzer, E. H., Fuligni, A. J., Lieberman, M. D., Galvan, A.
(2013). Ventral striatum activation to prosocial rewards
predicts longitudinal declines in adolescent risk taking.
Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 3, 45-52.
Telzer, E. H., Fuligni, A. J., Lieberman, M. D., Galvan, A.
(2014). Neural sensitivity to eudaimonic and hedonic
rewards differentially predict adolescent depressive
symptoms over time. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
111, 6600-6605.
Telzer, E. H., Ichien, N. T., Qu, Y. (2015). Mothers know
best: redirecting adolescent reward sensitivity toward safe
behavior during risk taking. Social Cognitive and
Affective Neuroscience, 10(10), 1383-1391.
Unsworth, N., Schrock, J. C., & Engle, R. W. (2004).
Working memory capacity and the antisaccade task:
Individual differences in voluntary saccade control.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 30, 1302-1321.
Willoughby, T., Good, M., Adachi, P. J. C., Hamza, C.,
Tavernier, R. (2013). Examining the link between
adolescent brain development and risk-taking from a
social-developmental perspective. Brain and Cognition,
83, 315-324.
Zangeneh, M., Blaszczynski, A., Turner, N. (2008) (Eds). In
the pursuit of winning: problem gambling theory,
research and treatment. New York: Springer.

2042

