Sampling frames, Bayesian inference and inductive reasoning
Brett K. Hayes (b.hayes@unsw.edu.au)
Stephanie Banner (steph22banner@gmail.com)
Daniel J. Navarro (d.navarro@unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales
Sydney, 2052, Australia
Abstract

Shafto & Bonawitz, 2015). This account is supported by
empirical work showing that many inductive phenomena
(e.g., premise non-monotonicity, integration of positive and
negative evidence) depend on the assumption of a helpful
teacher (Ransom et al., 2016; Voorspoels, Navarro, Perfors,
Ransom, & Storms, 2015).
A second kind of sensitivity arises from the so-called
“strong versus weak” sampling distinction. Under strong
sampling, the learner observes a set of exemplars (e.g.,
premise categories) that are constrained to possess property
p. Under weak sampling, no such constraint exists. Early
work highlighted the fact that even this simple constraint can
produce substantial changes to how a Bayesian reasoner
make inferences (Tenenbaum & Griffiths, 2001), but many
applications of the strong/weak distinction have tended to
conflate it with helpful/random sampling (e.g., Xu &
Tenenbaum, 2007), and those that do not have found mixed
evidence (e.g., Navarro, Dry & Lee, 2012). Although there
are good reasons to expect helpfully sampled evidence to be
similar to strongly-sampled evidence (e.g., Ransom et al.,
2016), it is not obvious whether (or when) people are
sensitive to sampling assumptions if no helpful teacher is
available. Perhaps people are capable of taking a hint from a
helpful teacher, but otherwise are largely insensitive to
sampling assumptions. Given other evidence that people
struggle with conditional probability (e.g, Fiedler, 2012) this
is not an implausible idea.

We outline and test a Bayesian model of the effects of evidence
sampling on property induction. Our model assumes that
people are sensitive to the effects of different sampling frames
applied to sampled evidence. Two studies tested the model by
comparing property generalization following exposure to
samples selected because they belong to the same taxonomic
category or because they share a salient property. Both studies
found that category-based sampling led to broader
generalization than property-based sampling. In line with
model predictions, these differences were attenuated when a
mixture of positive and negative evidence was presented
(Experiment 1) and when category-property relations were
probabilistic rather than deterministic (Experiment 2).
Keywords: Inductive reasoning; Sampling; Hypothesis
testing; Bayesian models; Categorization

Introduction
Inductive reasoning – the ability to make plausible guesses
given inconclusive evidence – is one of the central topics in
cognitive science. Much of the traditional work on the topic
has emphasized the importance of similarity between premise
and conclusion categories (see Hayes & Heit, 2013, for a
review). While undoubtedly useful, the similarity-based
approach overlooks a crucial component of induction:
people’s inductive inferences are strongly influenced by their
beliefs about how the evidence was sampled (e.g., Xu &
Tenenbaum, 2007). This phenomenon is referred to as
sensitivity to sampling, and there is considerable evidence
that human reasoners show exactly this sensitivity.
One form of sampling sensitivity occurs when an argument
assembled by a knowledgeable and helpful teacher is
evaluated quite differently than a set of random facts, even if
– by chance – the random process happens to have sampled
the same set of facts. In the reasoning literature, this was first
discussed by Medin, Coley, Storms and Hayes (2003) in their
relevance theory of induction. They suggested that reasoners
often make the pragmatic assumption that premise categories
are selected to highlight a salient relation, which is then used
to guide inference. For example, on learning that zebras and
skunks share a novel property, people may infer that the
property involves “having stripes” and generalize
accordingly. More recently, the formal foundations for
pragmatic inference have been established using Bayesian
pedagogical sampling models, that model human inductive
reasoning by assuming that helpful teachers select
informative evidence (Voorspoels, Navarro, Perfors,
Ransom, & Storms, 2015; Ransom, Perfors & Navarro, 2016;

How sampling frames shape induction
In this paper, we approach the problem from a different
perspective, and consider other ways in which data can be
sampled in a constrained way. The statistics literature, for
instance, emphasizes the importance of a sampling frame
(Jessen, 1978): when designing a survey, the researcher may
not be able to sample uniformly at random from the entire
population of interest, but is instead forced to sample from a
restricted subset. When interpreting such data, those
properties of the observed data that are attributable to the
sampling frame do not require theoretical explanation, as they
are deemed an artifact of the sampling process.
The effect of a sampling frame can be substantial. Imagine
that you want to learn what plants make you sneeze. The
potential search space is large so we apply a sampling frame
– we first test a particular category of plant (e.g., sunflowers)
– and find that most sunflowers cause us to sneeze. In this
situation, the fact that we have never sneezed at a daisy is

488

Plausible: SP+ allowed
by hypothesis
P+

P-

P+
L

L

S

S

S

P-

P+
L

L

S

S

S

P-

P+

P-

P+

P-

P+

P-

P-

L

P+

P+

P-

L

P+

the same data to lead to different generalizations (cf. Hsu,
Horng, Griffiths, & Chater, 2016).
There is evidence that people are sensitive to the sampling
frame. Lawson and Kalish (2009) presented participants with
samples of animals (small birds) that shared a novel property
(“has plaxium blood”) and manipulated the way exemplars
were sampled. In the “category sampling” condition they
were told that items were sampled from a taxonomic category
(i.e., the frame selects small birds). In the “property
sampling” condition people were told that exemplars with
plaxium blood were selected. People in the property sampling
condition were less likely to generalize the property to other
animals. Lawson and Kalish (2009) noted that this result was
inconsistent with similarity-based accounts of induction, but
they did not explain why the differences occurred.
As it happens, this pattern of results is exactly what one
would expect from a probabilistic reasoner who is sensitive
to the sampling frame. Later we present a formal model, but
the qualitative intuition is simple. Suppose the learner has
observed small birds (S) with plaxium blood (P+), and is
trying to determine whether large birds (L) also possess
plaxium blood. Subject to the constraint that large and small
birds both exist, there are six hypotheses consistent with the
observations, as shown in Figure 1, and three that are not.
Now consider the plausibility of these six hypotheses under
different sampling frames, illustrated by the red rectangles in
Figures 2. In category sampling, it is plausible to assume that
if any small birds did not have plaxium blood, the SP- case
would have been observed. The lack of such observations
strengthens three hypotheses and weakens three others.
Notably, two remaining hypotheses allow large birds to have
plaxium blood (LP+). By contrast, in property sampling it is
reasonable to assume that if any large birds had plaxium
blood we should have seen the LP+ case. The fact that they
were not leaves only two viable hypotheses, both of which
restrict property P to the target category. Accordingly,
generalization is more restricted under property sampling.

Implausible: SP+ not
allowed by hypothesis

P-

L

L

L

S

S

S

Figure 1. Schematic of the hypothesis space about the
distribution of property P+ and its absence (P-). Dark
quadrants show the hypothesized extension of P across
the target category (S) and non-targets (L). Dots
represent observation of a sample of small birds that has
the property SP+. For a hypothesis to be plausible it
must allow the SP+ case to exist.
irrelevant: it can be attributed to the sampling frame. In this
context, absence of evidence is not evidence of absence.
Now consider the effect of shifting the sampling frame.
Suppose instances are selected because they share the
property of interest (e.g., they give positive result on an
allergy test). If most of this sample was sunflowers then the
absence of daisies might be seen as inductively informative:
it suggests that the allergic reaction is limited to the observed
category. Despite the fact that neither scenario involves a
helpful teacher, the mere presence of a sampling frame allows

Property sampling: frame selects P+

Category sampling: frame selects S
P+ PPlausible: SP+ is the only L
case consistent with the
S
hypothesis and the frame

P+ P-

P+ P-

L

L

L

L

L

S

S

S

S

S

P+ PImplausible: there is no
L
explanation for the
absence of non SP+ cases S

P+ P-

P+ P-

P+ P-

P+ P-

P+ P-

P+ P-

P+ P-

P+ P-

L

L

L

L

L

S

S

S

S

S

Implausible

Plausible

Figure 2. The effect of sampling frame. When the data consist solely of small birds with plaxium (SP+), plausible hypotheses
are those for which only SP+ is allowed by the sampling frame and the hypothesis. Consequently, LP+ is less plausible
under property sampling and the learner does not generalize beyond the observed SP+ case.

489

Property Generalization Score

Experiment 1
Our experimental work replicates the findings of Lawson and
Kalish (2009), and extends them in a way that tests our
“sampling frames” explanation. In the first experiment, we
considered the impact of explicit negative evidence. If a
learner encounters non-target category members that lack
property P, the differences between the two sampling
conditions should attenuate. Explicit negative evidence
should have a large effect in the category sampling condition,
but only a modest effect under property sampling. We expect
this difference because property sampling already provides
implicit negative evidence, so the added value of the explicit
negative evidence is diminished.
Experiment 1 tested these predictions by presenting
participants with identical evidence samples obtained via
category or property sampling. Half the participants received
positive evidence about members of a target category, as per
Lawson and Kalish (2009), and half received additional
negative evidence about non-target category members. All
participants were then asked to judge whether the novel
property generalized to other categories.

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Test phase categories
Category Sampling, Positive Evidence Only
Property Sampling, Positive Evidence Only
Category Sampling, Positive + Negative Evidence
Property Sampling, Positive + Negative Evidence

Method
Participants. 92 UNSW students (63 female), participated
for course credit or payment. The mean age was 20.9 years.
Design and Procedure. The experiment used a 2 x 2 between
subjects design with equal numbers in each condition.
The procedure for the positive evidence only groups was
patterned after Lawson and Kalish (2009). Participants were
told they were investigating the properties of animals on a
novel island. In the category sampling condition, participants
were told that only small birds were sampled from the island.
In the property sampling conditions, they were told that only
animals with plaxium blood were sampled from the island.
Exemplars were revealed as follows: on each of 20 trials,
participants could click on one of a large number of on-screen
boxes to see an exemplar (each depicted by a unique picture
of a small bird), and to learn if the animal had plaxium blood.
In the positive evidence condition, all 20 exemplars sampled
had plaxium blood.
For the positive+negative evidence groups the procedure
was identical, except that there were five trials at the end in
which “new” samples from the island were presented. Each
of these revealed a single instance from other animal
categories (crow, seagull, eagle, squirrel, frog) that did not
have plaxium blood. These five trials were always presented,
in random order, at the end of sampling phase.
After the learning phase, all participants proceeded to a
generalization test. On each of six trials, participants were
shown a picture of an animal and asked to estimate the
number of such animals from a sample of ten that would have
plaxium blood (0-10). The test categories included a member
of the same target category that was presented during
sampling (a novel picture of a sparrow) and five categories
that varied in similarity to the target (pigeon, owl, ostrich,
mouse, lizard). Test item order was randomized.

Figure 3: Experiment 1. Test phase generalization in each
experimental condition.

Results and Discussion
Generalization scores (out of 10) for all conditions are
shown in Figure 3. Visual inspection suggests that the
positive-only condition people generalized more narrowly
under property sampling (black squares) than under category
sampling (black circles). Moreover, this difference is less
pronounced when explicit negative evidence is provided (in
grey).
More formally, a mixed effects ANOVA revealed that
people were less willing to generalize as similarity decreased
(left to right in Figure 3; linear trend contrast: F(1,84) =
420.07, p<.001). Generalization to non-target categories was
greater following category than property sampling, F(1,84) =
12.36, p =.001, and when only positive evidence was
encountered during sampling, F(1,84) = 39.54, p<.001. The
critical finding, however is the interaction: the difference in
generalization between category and property sampling was
larger in the positive evidence only condition than in the
positive + negative condition, F(1,84) = 5.81, p =.02.
These results are exactly what we expected: despite the fact
that participants in the category and property sampling
groups saw exactly the same information, generalization of
the novel property was narrower following property
sampling. This replicates the main finding of Lawson and
Kalish (2009), showing that people’s inductive inferences are
sensitive to the sampling frame. Moreover, the data supported
a novel prediction of our sampling explanation: presentation
of negative evidence had greater impact on generalization
following category sampling than property sampling.

490

Property Generalization Score

Experiment 2
In the next experiment we consider a second manipulation
that should – according to the sampling account – attenuate
the difference between category and property sampling:
ambiguous evidence. In Experiment 1, every member of the
target category had the novel property. In Experiment 2, we
considered cases where some of the evidence is ambiguous,
by including some observations where the plaxium status of
the entity was unknown. The qualitative intuition here is that
this should introduce uncertainty about the distribution of the
property within the target category. Accordingly, the
evidentiary value of the data should decrease, leading to a less
pronounced difference between the two sampling conditions.

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Method
Participants. 80 UNSW students (76 female), participated
for course credit or payment. The mean age was 19.4 years.
Design & procedure. The experiment used a 2 x 2 between
subjects design, with equal numbers in each condition. The
procedure for the deterministic evidence conditions was
identical to the positive evidence only conditions in
Experiment 1. The procedure for the probabilistic evidence
conditions was similar, except that during the sampling phase
participants saw an additional five category or property
sampling trials. On these trials, additional small birds were
presented whose blood type was unknown due to a “machine
error”. These trials were randomly interspersed with the other
trials. The generalization test was the same as Experiment 1.

Test phase categories
Category Sampling,
Property Sampling,
Category Sampling,
Property Sampling,

Deterministic Evidence
Deterministic Evidence
Probabilistic Evidence
Probabilistic Evidence

Figure 4: Experiment 2. Test phase generalization in each
experimental condition.
A Bayesian analysis of the inductive problem proceeds as
follows. The test categories consist of items that belong to
different taxonomic classes (birds, mammals, reptiles) and
vary in size (small, medium, large, and huge). Given this, we
define a hypothesis space H by combining these two
characteristics. A hypothesis h is admissible if it includes
only a single taxonomic class (e.g., birds only) or allows all
animals to possess plaxium. Similarly, it is admissible if it
specifies a “connected” region on the size dimension (e.g.,
small-or-medium is allowed, but small-or-huge is not). For
simplicity, the Bayesian model assigns equal prior
probability P(h) to all hypotheses, with one exception: to
account for the fact that people are less willing to generalize
across taxonomic classes than across animal sizes,
hypotheses that allows all animals to have plaxium blood are
only 1/5 as plausible as hypotheses restricted to a single class.
When presented with a set of observations x, the learner
updates the prior distribution to a posterior via Bayes’ rule:

Results and Discussion
Generalization scores are shown in Figure 4. As in
Experiment 1, generalization of the novel property decreased
as similarity to the target category decreased (linear trend
contrast: F(1,76) = 117.94, p<.001. Overall, generalization to
non-target categories was greater following category than
property sampling, F(1,76) = 8.88, p=.004. Notably, there
was a significant interaction between sampling condition and
evidence certainty, F(1,76) = 5.25, p =.03. Figure 4 shows
that the differences in generalization between category and
property sampling were relatively large when the evidence
was deterministic, but decreased when the observed evidence
was probabilistic.
The results for the deterministic evidence condition
replicate the earlier finding that property sampling leads to
narrower generalization than category sampling. Consistent
with the predictions of our model, the difference between
sampling conditions was reduced when the relationship
between the target property and category was probabilistic.

P (h|x, f ) = P

Bayesian reasoning with sampling frames

P (x|h, f )P (h)
0
0
h0 2H P (x|h , f )P (h )

In this expression, the likelihood term P(x|h,f) describes the
probability of observing the data x if hypothesis h is true and
the sampling frame f applies. When determining the
probability that a test item y possesses plaxium blood, a
Bayesian learner aggregates the posterior probability
assigned to those hypotheses h that assign the test item y to
the consequential set:

The sampling explanation outlined at the start of the paper
provides an intuitive explanation of our results: in this section
we provide a more formal account, introducing an inductive
reasoning model that accommodates the effect of the
sampling frame within the Bayesian framework introduced
by Tenenbaum and Griffiths (2001).

491

Baseline

Baseline + Negative Data

Baseline + Ambiguous Data

Generalisation

1.00
0.75

Sampling
Category

0.50

Property
0.25

Lizard

Mouse

Ostrich

Owl

Pigeon

Sparrow

Lizard

Mouse

Ostrich

Owl

Pigeon

Sparrow

Lizard

Mouse

Ostrich

Owl

Pigeon

Sparrow

0.00

Test

Figure 5. Inductive inferences made by the Bayesian model plotted as a function of test category, sampling condition and
evidence type. See main text for details.

P (y 2 c|x, f ) =

X

with 20 plaxium positive small birds, setting q = 0.6. As one
might expect, the Bayesian model generalizes more narrowly
under property sampling.
In Experiment 1, we found that the difference between the
two sampling schemes attenuated when participants were
presented with plaxium negative observations from nontarget categories, and generalizations narrowed in general. As
shown in the middle panel of Figure 5, this is exactly what
the Bayesian model does. Regardless of sampling scheme,
the negative evidence serves to decrease the plausibility of
larger hypotheses (as they are now somewhat inconsistent
with the new data), but this has a much smaller effect in the
property sampling condition simply by virtue of the fact that
these hypotheses were already judged to be somewhat
implausible. Accordingly, the Bayesian model produces
narrower generalizations and the difference between the two
conditions becomes smaller.
In Experiment 2, participants were presented with
additional “ambiguous” observations (small birds that may or
may not have been plaxium positive). This manipulation is
expected to cause people to suspect a noisier relationship
between the category and the observed plaxium status, which
we operationalize by setting a lower value for q. When we set
q = .55, we obtain the generalization gradients shown in the
right panel of Figure 5. As expected, the Bayesian model
produces an attenuated effect of sampling.

P (h|x, f )

h|y2h

The critical feature of this model is the fact that the
likelihood term P(x|h,f) is sensitive to the sampling frame.
Under category sampling, the fact that all observations
happen to be small birds is of no evidentiary value: the
sampling frame f only admits small birds, and no explanation
for this is required. In this sampling regime, a good
hypothesis is required to explain the fact that all observations
are plaxium positive. If we assume a noisy relationship,
where q >.5 denotes the probability that an animal that falls
within the relevant category possesses plaxium blood, then
the likelihood becomes:
⇢
✓
if x 2 h
P (x|h, f ) =
1 ✓ otherwise
Under property sampling, this pattern is reversed: the
sampling frame admits only plaxium positive observations,
and no explanation for this is required. Instead, the data x that
the learner must explain is the fact that all the animals are
small birds. Again assuming a noisy relationship,
⇢
✓/|h|
if x 2 h
P (x|h, f ) =
(1 ✓)/|h| otherwise
In this expression, the normalizing term |h| denotes the “size”
of the hypothesis. For a hypothesis that predicts m species to
be plaxium positive and n species to be plaxium negative,

|h| = ✓m + (1

General Discussion
Traditionally, models of property induction (e.g., Osherson et
al., 1990) have focused on the similarity between the
categories known to possess a property and other categories
to which the property might be generalized. Although
category similarity is undoubtedly an important component
of induction, the current work highlights the additional
impact of beliefs about how observed data is sampled. In both
experiments, identical sets of observations led to very
different patterns of generalization depending on beliefs
about how the observations were selected. In the positive
evidence condition in Experiment 1 and the corresponding

✓)n

Formal details notwithstanding, the main point of these
equations is to highlight the fact that the different sampling
frames involved ensures that property sampling imposes a
size principle (Tenenbaum & Griffiths 2001) and category
sampling does not. When a size principle applies, Bayesian
learners will tend to assign more belief to smaller hypotheses,
and as a consequence will generalize narrowly. This is
illustrated in the top panel of Figure 5 which plots the
generalizations made by the Bayesian model when presented

492

deterministic condition in Experiment 2, evidence sampling
based on shared category membership led to broader
generalization of the target property than evidence sampling
based on a shared property.
This result shows that people are sensitive to the effects of
particular constraints or sampling frames that are imposed on
the observations. In category-based sampling, the absence of
observations of members of other categories that share a
target property is not necessarily seen as evidence of absence.
In property-based sampling, the absence of such observations
can be seen as evidence that the property does not project
beyond the target category. This phenomenon is naturally
accommodated by a Bayesian inductive reasoning model.
Moreover, this theoretical perspective allowed us to generate
two novel predictions. The effect of sampling frame
attenuates when explicit negative evidence is added or when
ambiguity is introduced to the sample. Both of these effects
are captured by the Bayesian model.
Our Bayesian approach suggests additional factors that
should moderate the impact of sampling frames. For
example, differences in generalization patterns between types
of sampling is likely to depend on beliefs about category base
rates. In property sampling for example, if members of both
the target category (e.g., small birds) and non-target
categories (e.g., various types of large birds) are believed to
be relatively common, then the fact that the sample of animals
with plaxium blood contains no large birds is highly
informative. In contrast, if large birds were uncommon, then
the absence of large birds with plaxium blood does not
license strong conclusions about property generalization.
Previous work (Ransom et al., 2015; Shafto & Bonawitz,
2015) has shown that inductive inferences are sensitive to
intentional factors associated with sample selection (e.g.,
whether the observations were chosen by a helpful agent to
illustrate the breadth of a hypothesis). The current work,
together with that of Lawson and Kalish (2009), highlights
the importance of a novel factor in induction, namely
sensitivity to different types of conditionalization or filtering
of the evidence samples on which inferences are based. While
this is a new finding in the domain of induction, it bears some
resemblance to results observed in probability judgment tasks
(see Fielder, 2012 for a review). Fiedler, Brinkman, Betsch
and Wild (2000) for example, presented different groups with
different types of conditionalized samples. One group saw
instances of women who had received a positive breast scan
result, and learned whether each woman had breast cancer.
Another group saw instances of women with breast cancer
and learned whether they had received a positive breast scan.
As in the current work, people were sensitive to these
different types of sample conditionalization, with the two
groups generating very different estimates of the probability
that a woman with a positive scan had cancer. In the Fiedler,
et al. (2000) study however, the different types of
conditionalization led to differences in the characteristics of
the instances observed in each sample. The current work goes
further, by showing that very different patterns of inference

emerge when identical evidence samples are selected via
different types of sampling frames.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Australian Research Council
Discovery Grant DP150101094 to the first author. We thank
Jeremy Ngo and Minoli Jinasena for assistance in running the
experiments.

References
Fiedler, K., Brinkmann, B., Betsch, T., & Wild, B. (2000). A
sampling approach to biases in conditional probability
judgments: Beyond base rate neglect and statistical
format.
Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology:
General, 129, 399-418.
Fiedler, K. (2012). Meta-cognitive myopia and the dilemmas
of inductive-statistical inference. In B. H. Ross (Ed.), The
Psychology of Learning and Motivation (Volume 57, pp.
1-55). Cambridge, MA: Academic Press
Hayes, B. K., & Heit, E. (2013). Induction. In D. Reisberg
(Ed.) Oxford Handbook of Cognitive Psychology. Oxford
University Press, New York, USA.
Hsu, A. S., Horng, A., Griffiths, T. L., & Chater, N. (2016),
When absence of evidence is evidence of absence: Rational
inferences from absent data. Cognitive Science, 1-13.
Jessen, R. J. (1978). Statistical survey techniques. New York:
Wiley.
Lawson, C. & Kalish, C. (2009). Sample selection and
inductive generalization. Memory & Cognition, 37, 596607.
Medin, D., Coley, J., Storms, G., & Hayes, B. (2003). A
relevance theory of induction. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 10, 517-532.
Navarro, D., Dry, M. & Lee, M. (2012). Sampling
assumptions in inductive generalization. Cognitive
Science, 36(2), 187-223.
Osherson, D., Smith, E., Wilkie, O., López, A., & Shafir, E.
(1990).
Category-based
induction.
Psychological
Review, 97, 185-200.
Ransom, K., Perfors, A., & Navarro, D. (2016). Leaping to
conclusions: Why premise relevance affects argument
strength. Cognitive Science, 40, 1775-1796.
Shafto, P., & Bonawitz, E. (2015). Choice from intentionally
selected options. In B. H. Ross (Ed.). The Psychology of
Learning and Motivation (Volume 63, pp. 115-139).
Cambridge, MA: Academic Press
Tenenbaum J. & Griffiths T. (2001). Generalization,
similarity and Bayesian inference. Behavior & Brain
Sciences, 24, 629-640.
Voorspoels, W., Navarro, D., Perfors, A., Ransom, K., &
Storms, G. (2015). How do people learn from negative
evidence? Non-monotonic generalizations and sampling
assumptions
in
inductive
reasoning.
Cognitive
Psychology, 81, 1-25.
Xu, F., & Tenenbaum, J. (2007). Sensitivity to sampling in
Bayesian word learning. Developmental Science, 10, 288297.

493

