Simultaneous acquisition of vocabulary and grammar
in an artificial language learning task
Neil Walker (n.walker@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Linguistics and English Language
Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4YL, UK

Christine Schoetensack (s1649700@sms.ed.ac.uk)
School of Philosophy, Psychology and Language Sciences
Edinburgh University, Dugald Stewart Building, 3 Charles Street, Edinburgh, EH8 9AD

Padraic Monaghan (p.monaghan@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology
Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4YF, UK

Patrick Rebuschat (p.rebuschat@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Linguistics and English Language
Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4YL, UK
Abstract
Learning syntax requires determining relations between the
grammatical categories of words in the language, but learning
those categories requires understanding the role of words in
the syntax. In this study, we examined how this chicken and
egg problem is resolved by learners of an artificial language
comprising nouns, verbs, adjectives and case markers
following syntactic rules. We found that the language could
be
acquired
through
cross-situational
statistical
correspondences with complex scenes and without explicit
feedback, and that knowledge was maintained after 24 hours.
Results also showed that verbs and word order were the first
to be acquired, followed by nouns, adjectives and finally case
markers. Interdependencies in learning were found for word
order and verbs, and also for nouns, adjectives and case
markers. Grammar and vocabulary can be acquired
simultaneously, but with distinctive patterns of acquisition –
grammar and the role of verbs first, then the vocabulary of
other lexical categories.
Keywords: language acquisition; grammar; vocabulary;
artificial language learning; statistical learning.

Introduction
The early stages of language learning involve a great deal of
ambiguity as learners must make sense of the stream of
input they hear by noticing words boundaries, decoding the
meanings of words, identifying lexical categories and
understanding the relations between categories defined by
the syntax. How this is achieved and the order in which
vocabulary and grammatical knowledge is acquired has
been a critical question in the cognitive sciences (Marcus,
1996).

Cross-situational learning
Recent research has shown that it is possible for children
and adults to learn vocabulary within basic categories of
words when they are presented across numerous ambiguous
learning situations without any feedback, a mechanism

known as cross-situational learning. Smith and Yu (2008)
showed that 12 to 14-month old infants could learn the
meanings of novel nouns by keeping track of cross-trial
statistics. Scott and Fisher (2012) also demonstrated that it
is possible for 2.5 year-old toddlers to learn novel verbs,
utilising syntactic cues, knowledge of nouns and other
situational referents. Monaghan et al. (2015) found that
nouns and verbs could be learned simultaneously without
any syntactic cues, although nouns were learned slightly
more quickly. They suggested that this prioritisation of
nouns could be explained by the greater saliency and
stability of object versus action referents.
However, these studies on the cross-situational learning of
nouns and verbs are a substantial abstraction from the
complexity of natural language acquisition. In child-directed
speech, children are generally exposed to multi-word
utterances containing many word categories (Mintz, 2006).
With every new word category or syntactic phrase added,
the number of possible referents for any given word
increases, making the tracking of statistical probabilities
more complex.
On the other hand, with greater complexity comes greater
interdependency between content words, function words and
word order. And so conversely, this extra complexity may
also provide additional cues from which to constrain
learning. Monaghan and Mattock (2012), for example,
found that function words could aid the learning of nouns in
a cross-situational learning paradigm.
A key question is, therefore, how learners can break into
this complex stream, given the difficulty of attempting to
acquire the syntax to indicate the role of grammatical
categories, and learning the vocabulary to populate those
categories. This chicken and egg problem has proven
difficult to resolve, and has led to proposals either for
independence of learning grammar and vocabulary (e.g.,
Marcus, 1996), or their inter-relatedness (Bates &
Goodman, 1997). Under these latter accounts, learning a

1307

few words can give rise to syntactic bootstrapping
(Gleitman, 1990), which can then be used to promote further
vocabulary acquisition, predicting correlations in children’s
performance for vocabulary and grammatical processing
tasks. However, evidence from actual language learning
tasks in which both vocabulary and grammar must be
acquired has not been extensively explored. Many previous
studies of artificial language learning have trained
participants on vocabulary before testing them on a
language structure.
In the current study, we investigated whether it is possible
to learn more complex artificial languages that combine
content words, function words and syntactic structures
under cross-situational learning conditions without any
feedback.

The acquisition order of linguistic categories
The second question this study addressed was that of
acquisition order: When are nouns, verbs, adjectives, case
markers, and syntactic constraints on word order acquired
and are some aspects learned before others? The vast
majority of studies into early childhood language learning
support Gentner’s (1982) claim that across all languages
children learn nouns before verbs and adjectives (e.g,
Bornstein et al., 2004). One reason might be that predicates
are more semantically complex as they modify and depend
on nouns (Dixon, 1982), whether that be adjectives (the
black dog) or verbs (the cat pounced on the mouse).
Therefore, in order to learn the verb or adjective, learners
need to also encode information about the noun (Gleitman et
al., 2005).
However, there is some evidence that in languages such
as Korean and Japanese, where the verb is found in a
highly-salient sentence-final position and subjects and
objects are often left out of utterances by caregivers, verbs
may be learned earlier than in SVO languages such as
English (Choi & Gopnik, 1995). There is, however, a lack
of consensus as to whether verbs in these languages are
learned at the same time as nouns (see Bornstein et al.,
2004).
Regarding adjectives, Booth and Waxman (2003)
demonstrated that 14-month-old children could extract the
meaning from nouns but not adjectives when presented with
basic syntactic and visual frames. In a large corpus-based
study, Behrens (2006) found that German children aged 1
year 11 months produced more verbs than adjectives.
Finally, case markers which indicate the agent and patient
of a sentence have been shown to be understood by children
as young as two years old (Göksun et al., 2008). However,
in this and other studies, a small vocabulary of nouns and
verbs had been acquired before comprehension of case
markers was demonstrated.
The participants in the current study were adults who
have already mastered their first language, and so it is
arguable that the acquisition order observed in child
language development may not apply to these learners. An
alternative strand of research comes from first exposure

studies of adults learning a second language (L2; for an
overview, see Indefrey & Gullberg, 2010). In a study into
the initial stages of learning an L2 by adults in a classroom
setting, Shoemaker and Rast (2013) found that it was the
words in sentence-initial and sentence-final positions that
were most easily recognised in a stream of speech. They
argued that this was due to not only silence bordering the
initial and final words, but that working memory is less
burdened for the final word of the utterance.
Another factor that influences whether a word can be
picked out of a stream of speech is the number of syllables it
contains (Gullberg et al., 2012). With many function words
monosyllabic, this could render them less easily noticed
than highly salient content words, despite the frequency
with which they occur in utterances.
Overall, if the learning of nouns and verbs follows the
findings of child language research, then we can expect
nouns to be learned before verbs. Alternatively, if sentence
position is a more important factor, we could expect verbs,
which in our current study occupy the sentence-final
position, to be learned before nouns, which are mostly in
medial position. We then predict that adjectives will be
learned next, followed by case markers, although given the
short duration of the learning paradigm, it is possible that
the latter may not be learned at all (e.g., DeKeyser, 2005).

The learning mechanisms of vocabulary and syntax
A final aim of this study was to investigate how the
different types of language structure cohere. Is the meaning
of vocabulary items (nouns, verbs, adjectives) learned in the
same way as grammatical items (word order, case markers)
or do they depend on different mechanisms? Research from
models of learning data (Frost & Monaghan, 2016),
neuropsychology patient studies (Alario & Cohen, 2004),
theoretical models (Bock & Levelt, 1994), and memory
models (Ullman, 2004) treat vocabulary and syntax as
distinct. If this were the case, we might expect word order
and case markers to be interdependent, with nouns, verbs
and adjectives also grouped together. Alternatively, if
syntax and vocabulary share the same learning mechanism,
as is postulated in single-system models (MacWhinney,
1987), we might expect to see no interdependency of word
order and case markers. Instead, as word order is determined
by the position of the verb, it is possible that learning which
word is the verb and the word order will be linked.

Method
Participants
Sixty-four native speakers of English (47 women) were
randomly assigned to two conditions (massed vs distributed,
each n = 32) which varied in terms of whether there were
pauses between blocks of training on an artificial language
learning task. Participants were students or graduates of
universities in the North West of England. The mean age
was 26.0 years (SD = 7.1). None of the participants had
previously studied any verb-final languages. Participants in

1308

the massed group received 20 GBP and participants in the
distributed group received 28 GBP. The difference was due
to the extra time involved in the distributed condition.

utterances in each block were SOV, the other half OSV. In
the distractor scene, no actions were the same and the aliens
and their colours were randomly selected. The locations of
the target scene were counterbalanced.
For testing, each type of information in the language was
assessed by presenting an utterance and varying the target
and distractor scenes by one piece of information: For
testing nouns, target and distractor scenes were identical
except for one of the aliens; for testing verbs, only the
scenes’ actions differed; for testing adjectives, one of the
colours of an alien was changed; and for testing marker
words, the two scenes depicted the same aliens performing
the same actions but with opposite agent-patient assignment.
Testing trials were intermingled with every third training
block. The purpose of this was to make it less likely that
participants would know they were being tested. For testing
word order, grammatical and ungrammatical sentences were
presented: Half the trials followed the licensed SOV or OSV
order in sentences that had not been presented in the crosssituational learning trials, whereas the other half contained
syntactic violations (*VSO, *VOS, *OVS, *SVO).

Figure 1: Screenshot of the cross-situational learning task.
Participants see two dynamic scenes and hear a sentence and
decide which scene the sentence refers to.

Materials
A novel artificial language was created for this
experiment. The lexicon consists of 16 pseudowords, taken
from Monaghan and Mattock (2012). Fourteen bisyllabic
pseudowords were content words: Eight nouns, four verbs,
and two adjectives. Two monosyllabic pseudowords served
as function words that reliably indicated if the preceding
noun referred to the subject or the object of the sentence.
The words were recorded by a female native speaker of
British English who was instructed to produce the words in
a monotone.
In terms of syntax, the artificial language was based on
Japanese. Sentences could either be SOV or OSV, i.e. verbs
had to be placed in final position but the order of subject
and object noun phrases (NPs) was free. NPs had to contain
a noun as its head and a post-nominal case marker that
indicated if the preceding noun was the agent or the patient
of the action. Adjectives were optional and only occurred in
half the NPs. Adjectives occurred pre-nominally.
Eight alien cartoon characters served as referents for the
language (see Figure 1). The aliens could either appear in
red or blue and were depicted performing one of four
actions (hiding, jumping, lifting, pushing) in dynamic
scenes generated by E-Prime (version 2.0). Figure 1 shows a
sample screen shot, containing the target scene and a
distractor scene. Each noun referred to one alien, the
adjectives referred to the colours of aliens, and the verbs
referred to the actions. Word-referent mappings were
randomly generated for each participant to control for
preferences in associating certain sounds to objects, motions
or colours.
For training, there were 12 blocks of 16 trials each. In
each trial, two scenes were presented and an artificial
language sentence played. The sentence described only one
of the scenes and the participants had to match the sentence
to the correct scene. Within each block, each alien and
action occurred an equal number of times; half the

Procedure
Participants were trained and tested on the artificial
language on two days. Participants first completed 16
training and testing blocks. Twenty-four hours later, they
returned to the lab to complete a delayed post-test. There
were eight pure training blocks, four mixed training and
testing blocks, and four grammaticality judgment test (GJT)
blocks. In the cross-situational learning task, participants
were instructed to observe the two scenes on the screen and
listen to the sentence played over headphones. Their task
was to decide, as quickly and accurately as possible, which
scene the sentence referred to. Participants received no
feedback regarding the accuracy of their choice. For the
word order trials, participants were told that they would see
only one scene and hear a sentence spoken by another alien
from a very different planet who was also learning the new
language. Their task was to listen carefully and decide if the
sentence sounded “good” or “funny”.
Presentation order of trials within each block was
randomized but all participants completed blocks in the
same sequence. There were two training blocks, then one
mixed training and vocabulary testing block, then a word
order test block. This sequence was then repeated four
times.
The massed group completed the first 16 blocks
consecutively while the distributed group had three 20minute breaks after every four blocks, in which they
watched a natural history documentary on mute. Training
and testing on day 1 took between 70 and 90 minutes for the
massed group and between 130 and 150 minutes for the
distributed group. The delayed test on day 2 comprised a
final block of vocabulary testing trials and then a block of
word order testing, and five cognitive tests (not reported
here), and lasted approximately 90 minutes.

1309

Results
Performance on training trials
We first performed a mixed analysis of variance on
accuracy within each block, with training block as within
subjects factor and the two training conditions (massed and
distributed) as between subjects factor. There was a
significant main effect for block, using the GreenhouseGeisser correction, F(4.55, 282) = 42.0, p <.001, ηp2 = .40.
This indicates that subjects improved with more training.
However, there was no significant main effect for group, nor
was there a significant interaction between time and group,
both F < 1. We therefore pooled the data from the two
training conditions for the remaining analyses.
In order to ascertain when learning had taken place during
the training blocks, a one-sample t-test was conducted to
compare the mean scores for each block to a chance score of
.5. Participants performed significantly above chance from
block two (M = .57, SD = .18) onwards, 95% CI [.028 to
.12], t(63) = 3.27, p = .002. In other words, 32 trials of
exposure (without feedback) were enough to lead to abovechance performance in the cross-situational learning task.

Performance on test trials
In order to determine performance for each type of
information in the language, we performed one sample ttests to establish the first test block at which accuracy was
above chance (at .5). We then carried out a series of
repeated measures ANOVAs in order to determine the
effects of test block on the scores for word order, nouns,
verbs, adjectives and markers. Finally, we conducted further
repeated measures ANOVAs for test blocks 4 (immediate
post-test) and 5 (delayed post-test) for each word type and
word order to assess the role of the 24-hour delay. The
results are displayed in Figure 2 and Table 1 and Table 2.
Table 1: Summary of repeated measures ANOVA over
test blocks 1 to 4 showing effect for block.
Test
Word order
Noun
Verb
Adjective
Case marker

F
7.82
14.5
2.46
2.76
.63

p
<.001
<.001
.064
.043
.60

hp2
11
.19
.038
.043
.010

Table 2: Summary of repeated measures ANOVA over
blocks 4 to delayed test block 5 showing effect for block.
Test
Word order
Noun
Verb
Adjective
Case marker

F
.025
2.90
4.61
2.50
2.63

P
.88
.59
.036
.12
.11

hp2
.00
.005
.069
.040
.041

Verbs

Nouns

Markers

Word order

Adjectives

Proportion correct

0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
Test 1

Test 2

Test 3

Test 4 Delayed
Test 5

Figure 2: Proportion of correct trials across the five test
blocks. Test blocks 1 to 4 were completed on day 1. Test
block 5 was administered with a 24-hr delay.
Participants performed significantly above chance from
test block 1 onwards for both the word order tests, (M = .76,
SD = .19), 95% CI [.22 to .31], t(63) = 10.9, p = < .001 and
also verb tests, (M = .70, SD = .25, 95% CI [.13 to .26],
t(63) = 6.16, p < .001). For noun tests, participants
performed significantly better than chance from test block 2
onwards, (M = .60, SD = .19, 95% CI [.052 to .15], t(63) =
4.16, p < .001). Adjective test results were significantly
above chance from test block 4 onwards, (M = .64, SD =
.27), 95% CI [.076 to .21], t(63) = 4.22, p < .001). Finally,
case markers only reached significantly above chance on
test block 5, (M = .54, SD = .16), 95% CI [.001 to .079],
t(63) = 2.06, p = .043.

Determining relations between learning different
information types
In order to determine the factors driving performance in
the task – whether learning was independent or
interdependent for different types of information, we
conducted a principal components analysis on test
performance for the final test block for word order, nouns,
verbs, adjectives, and marker words. There were two
components with eigenvalues greater than 1, and the
loadings of the individual tests on these components, with
varimax rotation, showed a simple solution (i.e., each test
loaded > 0.4 on only one component). The components and
their loadings are shown in Table 3.
The first component related to learning nouns, adjectives,
and marker words, and the second component related to
learning word order and verbs. This indicated that
performance across the five information types was
effectively explained by two aspects of the data: The first
relates to learning the vocabulary items of nouns and

1310

generalization of grammatical rules (Walker & Stickgold,
2010). The case marker results also raise another important
methodological consideration. Without the delayed test, we
Test
First component Second component would have underestimated the amount of learning that had
taken place and would have concluded that case markers
Noun
.104
.778
had
not been learned at all. Whereas, with the delayed test,
Adjective
.034
.769
there
is evidence, albeit a small effect, that learning of case
Marker words
.081
.604
markers
does in fact take place. It is recommended,
Verb
.322
.718
therefore,
that future studies into cross-situational learning
Word order
-.090
.873
include delayed post-tests to show that learning is robust
and to catch any learning effects brought on through
adjectives and how the marker words affected the role of the
consolidation.
adjective-noun phrases, and the second indicated a close
relation between learning the identities of verbs and learning
Order of acquisition
that the word order of sentences was verb-final.
Although learners were exposed to both vocabulary and
syntax simultaneously, they performed above chance on
Discussion
different aspects of the language at distinct stages: First,
In this study we investigated whether adult learners could
verbs and word order were acquired, then nouns, then
acquire the syntax and vocabulary of a novel language by
adjectives, and finally case markers (see Figure 2). It is
keeping track of cross-trial statistics, without feedback and
interesting to note that verbs were learned before nouns in
without any explicit instruction about the structure of the
this artificial language and thus differed from the majority
language or its vocabulary. We also provided a delayed
of first language acquisition studies. One possible reason for
post-test after 24 hours to determine whether any acquired
this is the saliency of the final-position verb compared to the
knowledge had been maintained. Furthermore, we examined
mostly
medial-position nouns (Shoemaker & Rast, 2013).
the order of acquisition and investigated how learning of
Another
possibility is that adult learners already possess
syntax and of vocabulary cohered.
syntactic and lexical knowledge of word categories in their
L1 and so can transfer them to their L2. This would then
Simultaneous learning of words and syntax
allow the learner to concentrate on deciding which words
Our results indicated that adult learners can rapidly
map onto the different lexical categories, rather than also
acquire both syntax and vocabulary of the language
working out the lexical categories as infants do.
simultaneously. Previous cross-situational learning studies
only investigated nouns (Smith & Yu, 2008) or verbs (Scott
The coherence of vocabulary and syntax
& Fisher, 2012) or nouns and verbs simultaneously
Regarding the coherence of learning of syntax and
(Monaghan et al., 2015). Our results extend these findings
vocabulary,
we found that acquisition of word order and
to demonstrate that it is possible for adults to acquire a
verb
learning
were interdependent. Upon learning that the
wider range of information, including adjectives and case
final
word
in
the
sentence was a verb, participants were able
markers. We cannot rule out, however, that this occurred
to
gain
an
understanding
of the basic word order of the
because of the nature of the lexical test design, in which the
sentence.
It
is
conceivable
that
such an understanding could
two scenes presented differed only in terms of the lexical
be
gained
by
breaking
into
the
stream of input through any
item being tested, artificially making these word categories
word
category,
with
the
greater
salience
of verbs due to final
more salient. It also remains to be seen whether children can
utterance
position
promoting
this
acquisition.
In addition,
also learn such a complex system via cross-situational
we
found
that
nouns,
adjectives
and
case
markers
were also
learning, and this is an important question that we are
interdependent
but
acquired
somewhat
independently
of
currently addressing. The results also show that the learning
verbs
and
word
order.
This
result
supports
an
emergentist
effects can be retained overnight. This is an important
view that syntactic knowledge associated with case markers
methodological observation as the majority of studies in
develops only after a core vocabulary of content words has
statistical learning do not have a delayed post-test, which
been learned (Bannard et al., 2009).
means that it is unclear whether the learning is robust. By
These results demonstrate that the chicken and egg
including a 24-hr delayed post-test, we show that learning is
problem
of acquiring grammar and vocabulary can be
indeed robust and that this applies to words and syntax.
resolved
by the learner through using cross-situational
For the case markers, it was only after 24 hours that test
statistics
with
events in the environment. An alternative
scores were significantly above chance. This corresponds
explanation
is
that
once verbs are learned, this knowledge is
with Grey, Williams and Rebuschat’s (2015) study that
then
bootstrapped
to
aid the acquisition of the other lexical
found no learning effect for Japanese morphology on an
categories.
The
patterns
of results we found for this verbimmediate post-test, but a significant effect after a two-week
final
language
in
our
experimental
paradigm did not neatly
delay. These findings suggest that consolidation may be
correspond
with
a
distinction
between
grammar and
valuable, particularly for the function words’ role in the
vocabulary
learning
(e.g.,
Ullman,
2004),
with
word order
language. Indeed, there is evidence that sleep aids in the
Table 3: Loadings of the five delayed tests on the two
principal components.

1311

being related to verb acquisition, and case marking being
related to noun and adjective learning. Complex interactions
between grammatical categories and grammar do not appear
to lend themselves to a neat distinction in acquisition of
these sources of linguistic knowledge.

References
Alario, F., & Cohen, L. (2004). Closed-class words in
sentence production: Evidence from a modality-specific
dissociation. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 21(8), 787-819.
Bannard, C., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M. (2009). Modeling
children's early grammatical knowledge. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 106(41), 17284-17289.
Bates, E., & Goodman, J. (1997). On the inseparability of
grammar and the lexicon: Evidence from acquisition,
aphasia, and real-time processing. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 12, 507–584.
Behrens, H. (2006). The input–output relationship in first
language
acquisition. Language
and
Cognitive
Processes, 21(1-3), 2-24.
Bock, K., & Levelt, W. (1994). Language production:
Grammatical encoding. Handbook of psycholinguistics,
ed. by Morton Ann Gernsbacher, 945-84.
Booth, A. E., & Waxman, S. R. (2009). A horse of a
different color: Specifying with precision infants’
mappings of novel nouns and adjectives. Child
Development, 80(1), 15-22.
Bornstein, M. H., Cote, L. R., Maital, S., Painter, K., Park,
S., Pascual, L., & Vyt, A. (2004). Cross‐Linguistic
analysis of vocabulary in young children: Spanish, Dutch,
French, Hebrew, Italian, Korean, and American English.
Child Development, 75(4), 1115-1139.
Choi, S., & Gopnik, A. (1995). Early acquisition of verbs in
Korean: A cross-linguistic study. Journal of child
language, 22(03), 497-529.
DeKeyser, R. M. (2005). What makes learning
second‐language grammar difficult? A review of issues.
Language Learning, 55(S1), 1-25.
Dixon, R. M. (1982). Where have all the adjectives gone?:
and other essays in semantics and syntax (Vol. 107).
Walter de Gruyter.
Frost, R. L., & Monaghan, P. (2016). Simultaneous
segmentation and generalisation of non-adjacent
dependencies from continuous speech. Cognition, 147,
70-74.
Gentner, D. (1982). Why nouns are learned before verbs:
Linguistic relativity versus natural partitioning. Technical
report no. 257.
Gleitman, L. (1990). The structural sources of verb
meanings. Language Acquisition, 1(1), 3-55.
Gleitman, L. R., Cassidy, K., Nappa, R., Papafragou, A., &
Trueswell, J. C. (2005). Hard words. Language Learning
and Development, 1(1), 23-64.
Göksun, T., Küntay, A. C., & Naigles, L. R. (2008). Turkish
children use morphosyntactic bootstrapping in
interpreting
verb
meaning. Journal
of
Child
Language, 35(02), 291-323.

Grey, S., Williams, J. N., & Rebuschat, P. (2015).
Individual differences in incidental language learning:
Phonological working memory, learning styles, and
personality. Learning and Individual Differences, 38, 4453.
Gullberg, M., Roberts, L., & Dimroth, C. (2012). What
word-level knowledge can adult learners acquire after
minimal exposure to a new language? International
Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching,
50(4), pp. 239-276
Indefrey, P., & Gullberg, M. (2010). The earliest stages of
language learning: Introduction. Language Learning,
60(s2), 1-4.
MacWhinney, B. (1987). The competition model.
Mechanisms of Language Acquisition, 249-308.
Marcus, G. (1996). Why do children say “breaked”?
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 5, 81–85.
Mintz, T. H. (2006). Finding the verbs: Distributional cues
to categories available to young learners. Action Meets
Word: How Children Learn Verbs, 31-63.
Monaghan, P., & Mattock, K. (2012). Integrating
constraints for learning word–referent mappings.
Cognition, 123(1), 133-143.
Monaghan, P., Mattock, K., Davies, R. A., & Smith, A. C.
(2015). Gavagai is as gavagai does: Learning nouns and
verbs from Cross‐Situational statistics. Cognitive Science,
39(5), 1099-1112.
Scott, R. M., & Fisher, C. (2012). 2.5-year-olds use crosssituational consistency to learn verbs under referential
uncertainty. Cognition, 122(2), 163-180.
Shoemaker, E., & Rast, R. (2013). Extracting words from
the speech stream at first exposure. Second Language
Research, 29(2), 165-183.
Smith, L., & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics.
Cognition, 106(3), 1558-1568.
Ullman, M. T. (2004). Contributions of memory circuits to
language: The declarative/procedural model. Cognition,
92(1), 231-270.
Walker, M. P., & Stickgold, R. (2010). Overnight alchemy:
sleep-dependent memory evolution. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 11(3), 218-218.

1312

