Spatial Cognition and Science: The Role of Intrinsic and Extrinsic Spatial Skills
from Seven to Eleven Years
Alex Hodgkiss (alex.hodgkiss.14@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology and Human Development, UCL Institute of Education, 25 Woburn Square
London WC1H 0AA, UK

Katie A. Gilligan (katie.gilligan.15@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology and Human Development, UCL Institute of Education, 25 Woburn Square
London WC1H 0AA, UK

Michael S. C. Thomas (m.thomas@bbk.ac.uk)
Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck College, Malet Street, London, WC1E 7HX

Andrew K. Tolmie (a.tolmie@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology and Human Development, UCL Institute of Education, 25 Woburn Square
London WC1H 0AA, UK

Emily K. Farran (e.farran@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology and Human Development, UCL Institute of Education, 25 Woburn Square
London WC1H 0AA, UK

Abstract

spatial ability and science learning in younger children has
been largely neglected. This is important to address, given
that early science learning involves specific areas of
conceptual understanding, and because knowledge of how
spatial ability and science relates in younger children has
implications for early intervention. The focus of this study
was therefore to investigate the relationship between a range
of spatial skills and primary-school aged children’s
scientific knowledge, skills and understanding.

The current study investigated the relationship between
children’s spatial ability and their scientific knowledge, skills and
understanding. Children aged 7-11 years (N=123) completed a
battery of five spatial tasks, based on a model of spatial ability in
which skills fall along two dimensions: intrinsic-extrinsic; staticdynamic. Participants also answered science questions from
standardised assessments, grouped into conceptual topic areas.
Spatial scaling (extrinsic static spatial ability) and mental folding
(intrinsic dynamic spatial ability) each emerged as predictors of
total science scores, with mental folding accounting for more
variance than spatial scaling. Mental folding predicted both
physics and biology scores, whereas spatial scaling accounted for
additional variance only in biology scores. The embedded
figures task (intrinsic static spatial ability) predicted chemistry
scores. The pattern was consistent across the age range. These
findings provide novel evidence for the differential role of
distinct aspects of spatial ability in relation to children’s science
performance.

Spatial ability
Spatial ability, which relates to “the location of objects,
their shapes, their relation to each other, and the paths they
take as they move” (Newcombe, 2010, p30), has long been
recognised as an ability at least partly independent of
general intelligence, reasoning and verbal ability (Hegarty,
2014). As well as being apparently distinct from other
cognitive abilities, spatial thought itself is generally
conceptualised in a multidimensional fashion, consisting of
several separate but correlated skills. Two categories of
multidimensional models have emerged: ones based in the
psychometric tradition (e.g. Carroll, 1993) and other more
recent, theoretically driven models (e.g, Uttal et al., 2013).
Psychometric analyses of spatial ability have often
resulted in inconsistent findings, with the number of
identified factors ranging between two and twelve (Hoffler,
2010). Uttal et al. (2013) argue that some of the
inconsistencies result from factor analysis models not being
theory-driven. In contrast, Uttal et al.’s (2013) model is
based on top-down, theory driven understanding of spatial
skills, and draws upon developments in cognitive
neuroscience. They propose that spatial skills can be

Keywords: spatial ability; science; STEM; children.

Introduction
Large-scale longitudinal studies spanning the past 50
years provide convincing evidence that spatial ability in
adolescence predicts later science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) achievement; both in academic
and career outcomes (Wai, Lubinski & Benbow, 2009). As
well as often cited examples of scientific discoveries
resulting from creative spatial thought, a growing body of
research with adults and adolescents highlights a link
between spatial ability and scientific reasoning (e.g,
Kozhenikov & Thornton, 2006). However, with a few
exceptions (e.g Tracy, 1990), the relationship between

538

Tracy, 1990). Tracy (1990) assessed science performance in
a sample of 10- and 11-year-old students who were split into
high and low spatial ability. The study revealed that the high
spatial ability group outperformed the low spatial ability
group. However, this study did not include any measure of
IQ or other cognitive factors, and thus did not discount
general ability as an alternative explanation. It also used a
composite spatial measure.
One unpublished study that compared the role of different
intrinsic–dynamic spatial ability measures on scientific
understanding in children, and controlled for verbal ability,
found that mental folding, but not mental rotation, predicted
five-year-olds’ performance in a task involving
understanding of force and motion. However, this was still
limited to intrinsic-dynamic skills (Harris, 2014).
There is also some mixed evidence to suggest that spatial
skills may be more important during the early stages of
science learning, rather than later stages (Hambrick et al.,
2012). During initial learning a learner may use spatial
processing to establish mental maps and models or to
problem solve (Mix et al., 2016). With experience, domainspecific knowledge may become more important. Such a
hypothesis is supported in the science literature by the
finding that visuospatial working memory is less predictive
of 14-year-old versus 11-year-old students’ science
performance (Jarvis & Gathercole, 2003), and that mental
folding ability predicted children’s but not adults’
understanding of forces in the previously described study by
Harris (2014). The relationship between spatial thinking and
science performance, and how this varies between the ages
of 7 and 11, has hitherto remained unclear.

categorised along two dimensions: static-dynamic and
intrinsic-extrinsic. Intrinsic spatial abilities and extrinsic
spatial abilities broadly map onto a within-object and
between-object
classification,
respectively.
Intrinsic/extrinsic skills can be further categorised as either
static or dynamic abilities; dynamic abilities include
transformation or movement, whilst static skills do not.
Intrinsic-static skills involve the processing of objects or
shapes without further transformation or movement of parts
of the object or shape. Tasks that measure this skill often
require this processing to occur amidst distracting
background information. For example, in disembedding
tasks, participants search for a specified 2D shape in a larger
distracting image. Intrinsic-dynamic skills involve the
processing, and manipulation or transformation of objects or
shapes. 2D and 3D mental rotation fit into this category.
Extrinsic-static skills require the processing and
encoding of the spatial relations between objects or
configurations of objects, without further manipulation or
transformation of these relations. The extrinsic-static
category includes the ability to find corresponding locations
between shapes of equal proportion but differing sizes (e.g.
scaling and map use). Extrinsic-dynamic skills involve the
apprehension, processing and manipulation of more than
one object, or the relationship between objects and frames
of reference. Spatial perspective taking, in which a
participant visualises what an object would look like from a
different viewpoint, is an extrinsic-dynamic skill because it
involves the manipulation of the relationship between an
object and another frame of reference/viewpoint.

Spatial ability and science
Spatial skills support understanding and learning of
conceptual areas that are very spatial in nature (e.g,
astronomy) yet even apparently non-spatial topics are often
represented in a spatial format.
Most prior research with adults point to visualisation
skills as being related to science learning: the ability to
mentally transform spatial information about single objects,
assessed through intrinsic-dynamic skills such as mental
rotation and mental folding. For example, studies report a
link between intrinsic-dynamic spatial skills and conceptual
understanding in aspects of biology (e.g. Garg, Norman,
Spero & Mashewari, 1999), chemistry (e.g. Stull, Hegarty,
Dixon & Stieff, 2012) and physics (e.g., Kozhenikov &
Thornton, 2006). In Stull et al. (2012), for instance, 3D
visualisation positively correlated with undergraduate
students’ ability to translate between different diagrammatic
representations of chemical structures.
Other spatial skills within Uttal et al.’s (2013) model may
play a role in science learning. However, this relationship
has been largely neglected to date; the role of extrinsic-static
skills such as scaling, for example, has yet to be addressed.

Current Study

Spatial ability and science in development

The initial sample consisted of 127 participants who were
recruited from a large, ethnically diverse London primary
school. Three pupils did not go on to complete the study

Although prior research indicates that spatial ability predicts
aspects of science learning in older populations, little
research has been conducted with younger children.
Research that has done so, has either focused on visualspatial working memory only, used a composite of spatial
ability measures, or has focused only on single object-based
manipulation (intrinsic-dynamic spatial skills). Furthermore,
no research to date has used and compared a cross-sectional
sample to determine if this relationship varies across
development.
The aim of the current study was to examine the
relationship between 7 and 11-year-olds’ performance in a
range of spatial ability measures, based on the Uttal et al.
(2013) model, and their performance in a science
assessment covering aspects of biology, chemistry and
physics.

Methods
Participants

Research relating spatial ability and science learning in
younger children is sparse (e.g. Jarvis & Gathercole, 2003;

539

because they were unsuitable for the study due to having a
special educational need or an insufficient level of English.
Due to missing data, four further participants (one
participant per year group) did not have a full set of scores.
Three of those participants were missing data from one task
only, and so their missing scores were estimated by
calculating the mean for their respective year group. The
fourth participant, who was missing several variables, was
excluded from the analysis. Thus, four participants were
excluded in total. The final sample consisted of 123
participants in UK Years 3-6: Year 3 (N=32, mean (s.d.)
age=8.0 (0.28) years), Year 4 (N=31, mean (s.d.) age=9.0
(0.32) years), Year 5(N= 31, mean (s.d.) age=10.0 (0.33)
years), Year 6 (N= 30, mean (s.d.) age=11.0 (0.30) years).
Parental consent was obtained for all participants.

image constructed of colourful geometric shapes and asked
to locate either a simple house or tent shape ‘hidden’ within
the image. Children were shown the house or tent shape as a
cardboard form; it was kept by the child for the first three
trials of each block and hidden thereafter. For the first part
of the test (11 items) children located a triangular tent shape
within each image, the simpler of the two shapes, and for
the other half of the test (14 items) children located a house
shape. Children were given a score of 1 for correctly
locating the shape hidden within the figure. Accuracy and
response times were recorded using a laptop computer.
Extrinsic-Static Spatial: Scaling
Our novel spatial scaling task was based on a similar task by
Frick and Newcombe (2012). Children were required to find
equivalent corresponding locations on two grids, when one
was varied in size relative to the other by a predetermined
scale factor (see Figure 1). The task was presented to
children as a game which involved pirates’ treasure maps.
Treasure maps were printed on yellow paper and mounted in
a large ring bound pad. Each page contained one yellow
map with a grid printed in black. Nine (out of 18) items
contained grids which separated the map into 6 x 6 sections,
whereas the other nine items contained grids which
separated the map into 10 x 10 sections. For each trial, one
target section of the printed grid map was coloured in black
(the treasure); the target section varied across trials.
Participants were also presented with four maps on a touch
screen computer, which each had one black square coloured.
One computer map contained a black square at a location
which corresponded to the printed map; the locations of the
black squares on the other three incorrect computer options
were systematically chosen. The larger printed maps were
either unscaled (1:1), or scaled to either 1:4 or 1:8, relative
to the maps on the computer screen. Participants first
completed two practice items after which they completed
the main 18 trials of the test. Six items were presented at
each scale factor.

Measures
Intrinsic-Dynamic Spatial: Mental Rotation
In this mental rotation task (based on Broadbent, Farran &
Tolmie, 2014), children were shown two upright cartoon
monkeys, above a horizontal line, on a computer screen, and
one monkey below a line which was rotated by varying
degrees (0°, 45°, 90°, 135°, 180°). One monkey above the
horizontal line had a blue left hand and a red right hand, and
the other monkey had the reverse pattern and was a mirror
image of the other. Children were asked which of the two
monkeys at the top of the screen matched the monkey at the
bottom of the screen, which had been rotated. This task
began with six practice items, in which the monkey below
was not rotated (0o trials) and then progressed to 36
experimental trials (4 x 0o trials, 8 x 45o trials, 8 x 90 o trials,
8 x 135 o trials and 8 x180 o trials).
Intrinsic-Dynamic Spatial: Mental Folding
This mental folding task (Harris et al., 2013) required
children to imagine folds made to a piece of paper, without
physical representation of the folding action itself (see
Figure 1). Children were shown a shape at the top of a
computer screen which contained a dotted line and an
arrow. The dotted line represented the imaginary fold line
and the arrow indicated where the paper should be folded to.
Beneath this item on the screen, children were shown four
images of how the item at the top might look after being
folded at the dotted lines, only one of which was correct.
Children first completed two practice items. Answers to
practice questions were checked by the researcher, and if a
child had an incorrect answer, they were given one further
attempt of that trial. The experimental trials then began,
where children had 14 novel items to work through. The test
progressed automatically as the child clicked one of the four
images at the bottom of the screen. Accuracy and response
time were recorded.

Extrinsic-Dynamic Spatial: Perspective Taking Task
This task was identical to one developed by Frick et al.
(2014) which involved spatial perspective taking in which
children were required to visualise what photographs would
look like when taken from cameras placed at different
positions and angles relative to their viewpoint. The child
first completed four practice questions involving actual Play
Mobil characters, and then one practice question on a
computer, which showed a character taking a photograph of
two shapes from the same perspective as the child. The
child selected the correct option, of four, from below the
main image, which showed what the photograph would look
like by pressing a touch screen computer. If a child made an
error on the practice items, they were given a second
attempt. On passing the practice questions, the task
continued with the experimental items, where they again
chose the correct image out of four options. These varied
per the number of objects in the layout (one, two or three)

Intrinsic-Static Spatial: Embedded Figures Task
The Children’s Embedded Figures Task (CEFT: Witkin et
al., 1971) consists of complex figures in which a simple
form is embedded (see Figure 1). Children were shown an

540

and the angular difference between the photographer’s and
the child’s perspective (0o, 90o or 180o).

Procedure
All children first completed the two paper-based science
assessments, in two sessions administered by the researcher
in class groups, within the child’s own classroom. Spatial
ability was then assessed within two separate sessions.
Children were first tested in a computer-based group session
of no more than 10 children where they completed the
mental folding task and the monkey mental rotation task, in
a counterbalanced order. The BPVS, CEFT, spatial
perspective taking task and scaling task were then
completed in an individual testing session with the
researcher, which lasted approximately 30 minutes per
child. The order of testing in the individual sessions was
also counterbalanced to control for fatigue and order effects.

Science Assessment
The science assessment consisted of two paper-based tests,
which children completed in class groups in two separate
sessions under the supervision of the researcher. The
assessment was curriculum-based and all questions were
taken from an online database of past science UK
standardised test questions (“Test Base”, 2017, January 31st)
designed to assess the science curriculum in this age range.
The test included approximately equal amounts of biology,
chemistry and physics content from a selection of topics
appropriate to this curriculum stage.
Each paper had a total possible score of 50 marks leading
to a total science mark of 100. The assessment included
questions which varied in difficulty, which again mapped
onto curriculum descriptors. Paper one contained questions
of low to medium cognitive demand, and paper two
contained questions of high cognitive demand. Questions
focused on one conceptual sub-topic, e.g., magnetism or
changing state. Questions were further sub-divided into
items that were either: factual/recall items (e.g. label a
diagram; recall a function); problem solving items, which
drew on conceptual knowledge; or items that were in the
context of hypothetical experiments, thus drawing on
procedural skills.

Results
A series of multiple regression analyses were conducted to
determine the amount of variance in science scores that was
accounted for by each of the spatial ability measures. There
were no significant gender differences (p>.05 for all);
therefore, participants were treated as one group in the
subsequent regression analysis. A separate analysis was run
for total science score and for each area of science (physics,
biology, chemistry). In each of the models, the covariates
(age, BPVS raw score) were added first (steps 1-2). All
spatial measures were subsequently entered in a single
block, using forward step-wise entry, to determine the best
model of spatial ability predictors. Beta values refer to the
final model with all variables entered.
Entered in the first step of each model, age in months
significantly predicted each science total. Age was most
strongly predictive of physics sub-score, with this initial
step accounting for 27% of the variance, ∆F(1,121) = 45.52,
p < .001. Age accounted for 21% of the variance in total
score, ∆F(1,121) = 31.27, p < .001, 13% of the chemistry
scores, ∆F(1,121) = 17.75, p < .001 and 8% of biology
scores, ∆F(1,121) = 11.03, p < .001. In the final overall
models, after additional variables were entered, age
remained as a significant predictor of total score (ß = .122, t
= 2.03, p = .044) and physics score (ß = .320, t = 4.24, p <
.001), but not biology score (ß = .010, t = .10, p = .916) or
chemistry score (ß = .102, t =1.23, p = .223).
BPVS raw score was entered in the second step of each
model and was a significant predictor. BPVS scores were
most strongly predictive of total science score, accounting
for an additional 37.6% of the score variance, ∆F(1,120) =
106.16, p < .001, 25% of the biology scores, ∆F(1,120) =
46, p < .001, 21% of the chemistry scores, ∆F(1,120) =
36.93, p < .001 and 15% of the physics scores ∆F(1,120) =
29.78, p < .001. In the final model, BPVS scores remained
significant predictors of total science score (ß = .567, t =
8.9, p < .001), biology score (ß = .443, t = 5.38, p < .001),
chemistry score (ß = .485, t = 5.93, p < .001) and physics
score (ß = .375, t = 4.85, p < .001).
The step-wise analysis of spatial measures to predict total
science score resulted in mental folding being entered in

Figure 1: significant spatial predictors (left to right): mental
folding task, spatial scaling task (1:8, 6x6 trial), embedded
figures task (locate a triangular ‘tent’ trial).
Control Variables
The British Picture Vocabulary Scale-III (BPVS-III; Dunn,
Dunn, Styles, & Sewell, 2009) was included as a measure of
verbal ability.

541

step three and spatial scaling being entered in step four of
the regression model. Mental folding accounted for an
additional 6% of the variance in total science score, above
the previously entered covariates ∆F(1,119) = 20.62, p <
.001, ß = .211, t=3.54, p = <.005. The scaling task
accounted for an additional 2% of the variance in total
science scores, ∆F(1,118) = 6.8, p < .010, ß = .162, t = 2.60,
p = .010).
Step-wise entry of spatial measures predicting biology
scores retained mental folding and the scaling task only, in
steps three and four. Mental folding accounted for an
additional 6% of the variance in biology scores, ∆F(1,119)
= 11.65, p < .001, ß = .195, t = 2.52, p = .013). Spatial
scaling accounted for an additional 3% of the variance in
biology scores, above the previously entered covariates
∆F(1,118) = 5.50, p < .021, ß = .190, t = 2.34, p = .021).
Only the mental folding task was retained as predictor of
the physics score (ß = .198, t = 2.8, p = .006) following
step-wise analysis, and was entered in step three of the
model. It accounted for an additional 4% of the variance in
physics scores ∆F(1,119) = 7.82, p = .006).
The CEFT was the only emerging predictor of chemistry
scores (ß = .173, t = 2.27, p = .025). It accounted for an
additional 3% of the variance in chemistry scores ∆F(1,119)
= 5.130, p = .025). Any remaining spatial tasks not reported
did not significantly predict any additional unique variance
in science ability beyond those spatial measures included in
the above models (p > .05 for all).
To determine if age interacted with any of the spatial
ability measures, a further four models were constructed in
which the covariates were again entered in step 1, followed
by the spatial ability measures found to be significant for
that science measure, followed by interaction terms (age in
months*spatial measure). No significant interactions with
age were found (p > .05 for all).

questions on topics such as magnetism, forces and motion,
which required visualisation of how objects move and
interact; this suggests that children who are more skilled at
visualising paper folds are also better at predicting the
direction of various types of forces acting on objects.
The role of mental folding in relation to biology scores is
less likely to be directly related to the visualisation skill, as
in physics, discussed above. One possibility is that the
ability to flexibly maintain and manipulate spatial
information, as measured through the folding task, may also
be related to mental model construction and use. The mental
models children possess for the conceptual topics within
biology may be spatially-based. For example, when
recalling the function of roots, children may recall a spatial
mental model of a plant, which is integrated with
verbal/propositional information.
Although mental rotation falls into the same category
(Uttal et al., 2013) as mental folding (which was a strong
predictor), mental rotation accuracy did not feature in any of
the final regression models. The two measures correlated
only moderately (r = .294). This may be because there are
differences between folding and rotation, despite them both
being intrinsic/dynamic measures. For example, rotation is a
rigid, intrinsic transformation and folding is a non-rigid,
intrinsic transformation (Atit, Shipley & Tikoff, 2013).
Further research is needed to investigate this distinction.
Spatial scaling, an extrinsic/static skill, also emerged as a
predictor of total science scores, although it contributed less
to this model than folding because it was significant only for
biology questions. One interpretation of the role of scaling
is that it predicted performance because children who
perform well on this task are also more able to determine
the correspondence between representations of scientific
concepts at different scales. Children may, for example, in
the classroom, need to determine the correspondence
between: an actual plant; scaled-up versions of plant
diagrams on an interactive whiteboard; or scaled-down,
abstract printed diagrams.
The CEFT, an intrinsic-static spatial skill, was a
significant predictor of chemistry scores, but did not feature
in the other final regression models. Intrinsic-static spatial
skills relate to the processing of objects without further
transformation: the arrangements of parts of the object (subparts) as well as the size and orientation objects. This could
relate to chemistry items including diagrams which require
inspection and discrimination between sub-parts of objects
(e.g, 3 beakers with ice cubes, which either have 1, 2 or 3
layers of insulation).
An analysis of age-based interactions revealed that the
relationships described were steady across development. We
had predicted that spatial skills would contribute more to
science performance for younger children, than older
children, based on prior research (e.g., Hambrick et al.,
2012), which would suggest that as domain-specific
knowledge increases, spatial abilities play less of a role in
science. It may be that, although older children are more
experienced in science, the knowledge they have available

Discussion
This study revealed that spatial ability predicted children’s
performance in a curriculum-based science assessment. That
is, after controlling for age, gender and verbal ability, spatial
ability accounted for 8% additional variance in total science
scores. This builds upon longitudinal research linking
spatial ability to STEM outcomes in adults (Wai et al.,
2009) as well as correlational research that has associated
spatial ability with various aspects of science learning in
adults (e.g., Kozhevnikov et al., 2006). It also expands upon
the existing findings from child data (Tracy, 1990; Harris,
2014) by investigating a broader range of spatial measures
and science topic areas and, also, comparing a wider age
range of children within one study.
Mental folding, an intrinsic-dynamic spatial skill,
accounted for the most variance in total overall science
scores, relative to the other spatial tasks. This is likely to be
due to it being a predictor of both physics and biology
topics, whereas spatial scaling was not. It is likely that the
relationship with physics scores is driven, in part, by

542

for immediate recall may be restricted to topics that they are
currently covering.
One limitation of the study was that we only included the
BPVS as a control for general level of ability. One might
argue that the spatial tasks are also capturing a more general
problem solving ability. However, the differential role of
various spatial skills revealed in the analyses demonstrate
that spatial ability is having an impact on science
performance versus it being a general problem solving
ability proxy. However, further research should include
other measures of general cognitive ability. Second, the
nature of the questions, drawn from standardised
assessments, meant that it is difficult to determine if the
relationships
observed
relate
to
scientific
knowledge/understanding, or application of knowledge in
scientific problem solving. Further studies are planned to
systematically include a range of question types for
comparison across categories of items.
In summary, the current study provides evidence for a
distinctive role for mental folding (intrinsic-dynamic spatial
ability), spatial scaling (extrinsic-static spatial ability) and
the CEFT (intrinsic-static spatial ability) in children’s
science learning. The findings have implications for how we
can move forward to support children in the science
classroom through spatial training and interventions.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by an Economic and Social
Research Council PhD studentship awarded to the first
author.

References
Atit, K., Shipley, T. F., & Tikoff, B. (2013). Twisting
space: are rigid and non-rigid mental transformations
separate spatial skills? Cognitive processing, 14(2),
163-173.
Carroll, J. B. (1993). Human cognitive abilities: A survey
of factor-analytic studies. Cambridge: University Press.
Broadbent, H. J., Farran, E. K., & Tolmie, A. (2014). Objectbased mental rotation and visual perspective-taking in
typical development and Williams Syndrome.
Developmental Neuropsychology, 39(3), 205-225.
Dunn, L. M., Dunn, D. M., Styles, B., & Sewell, J. (2009).
The British Picture Vocabulary Scale - 3rd Edition.
London: GL Assessment.
Frick, A., Möhring, W., & Newcombe, N. S. (2014).
Picturing perspectives: development of perspectivetaking abilities in 4-to 8-year-olds. Frontiers in
Psychology, 5, 386.
Frick, A., & Newcombe, N. S. (2012). Getting the big
picture: Development of spatial scaling abilities.
Cognitive Development, 27(3), 270-282
Garg, A., Norman, G. R., Spero, L., & Maheshwari, P.
(1999). Do virtual computer models hinder anatomy
learning? Academic Medicine, 74(10), S87-89.

543

Hambrick, D. Z., Libarkin, J. C., Petcovic, H. L., Baker, K.
M., Elkins, J., Callahan, C. N., LaDue, N. D. (2012). A
test of the circumvention-of-limits hypothesis in
scientific problem solving: The case of geological
bedrock mapping. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 141(3), 397.
Harris, J. (2014). Where will it go? Concepts of motion in
complex events. (Unpublished doctoral thesis). Temple
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Harris, J., Newcombe, N. S., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (2013). A
new twist on studying the development of dynamic
spatial transformations: Mental paper folding in young
children. Mind, Brain, and Education, 7(1), 49-55.
Hegarty, M. (2014). Spatial thinking in undergraduate
science education. Spatial Cognition & Computation,
14(2), 142-167.
Höffler, T. N. (2010). Spatial ability: Its influence on
learning with visualizations—a meta-analytic review.
Educational Psychology Review, 22(3), 245-269.
Jarvis, H. L., & Gathercole, E. E. (2003). Verbal and nonverbal memory and achievements on national curriculum
tests at 11 and 14 years of age. Educational and Child
Psychology, 20(3), 123-140.
Kozhevnikov, M., & Thornton, R. (2006). Real-time data
display, spatial visualization ability, and learning force
and motion concepts. Journal of Science Education and
Technology, 15(1), 111-132.
Mix, K. S., Levine, S. C., Cheng, Y. L., Young, C.,
Hambrick, D. Z., Ping, R., & Konstantopoulos, S.
(2016). Separate but correlated: The latent structure of
space and mathematics across development. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 145, 1206-1227.
Newcombe, N. S. (2010). Picture this: increasing math and
science learning by improving spatial thinking. American
Educator, 34(2), 29.
Stull, A. T., Hegarty, M., Dixon, B., & Stieff, M. (2012).
Representational translation with concrete models in
organic chemistry. Cognition and Instruction, 30(4), 404434.
Test Base. (2016, January 31st). Retrieved from
http://www.testbase.co.uk/sec/index.php.
Tracy, D. M. (1990). Toy-playing behavior, sex-role
orientation, spatial ability, and science achievement.
Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 27(7), 637-649.
Uttal, D. H., Meadow, N. G., Tipton, E., Hand, L. L., Alden,
A. R., Warren, C., & Newcombe, N. S. (2013). The
malleability of spatial skills: A meta-analysis of training
studies. Psychological Bulletin, 139(2), 352.
Wai, J., Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. P. (2009). Spatial
Ability for STEM Domains: Aligning Over 50 Years of
Cumulative Psychological Knowledge Solidifies Its
Importance. Journal of Educational Psychology, 101,
817-835.
Witkin, H. A. (1971). Children's Embedded Figures Test,
Consulting Psychologists Press, Palo Alto, CA.

