Supporting Low-Performing Students by Manipulating Self-efficacy in Digital
Tutees
Betty Tärning (betty.tarning@lucs.lu.se)
Lund University Cognitive Science, Lund University, 222 22 Lund, Sweden

Magnus Haake (magnus.haake@lucs.lu.se)
Lund University Cognitive Science, Lund University, 222 22 Lund, Sweden

Agneta Gulz (agneta.gulz@lucs.lu.se)
Lund University Cognitive Science, Lund University, 222 22 Lund, Sweden

Abstract

learn in order to teach their digital tutee than to learn for
themselves (Chase et al., 2009). In effect, students attribute
mental states and responsibility to the digital tutee as if it
were a social agent (Chase et al., 2009; Lindström et al.,
2011). They see the agent as a socio-cognitive actor that can
learn (respond to being taught by them) and that can be
ascribed traits such as ‘brave’, ‘slow’, ‘smart’, ‘forgetful’
etc.

Educational software based on teachable agents has
repeatedly proven to have positive effects on students’
learning outcomes. The strongest effects have been shown for
low-performers. A number of mechanisms have been
proposed to explore this outcome, in particular mechanisms
that involve attributions of social agency to teachable agents.
Our study examined whether an expression of high versus
low self-efficacy in a teachable agent would affect lowperforming students with respect to their learning outcomes
and with respect to a potential change in their own selfefficacy. The learning domain was mathematics, specifically
the base-ten system. Results were that the learning outcomes
of low-performers who taught a low self-efficacy agent were
significantly better than the learning outcomes of lowperformers who taught a high self-efficacy agent. There were
no effects from the manipulation of self-efficacy expressed by
the teachable agent on changes of the low-performing
students’ own self-efficacy.
Keywords: social agency; educational software; teachable
agent; math self-efficacy; math performance

TA-systems and Low-Performing Students

Introduction
A teachable agent (TA) is a graphical computer character in
a tutee role. The basic idea is that the student instructs and
guides the TA (Brophy, Biswas, Katzlberger, Bransford, &
Schwartz, 1999). In essence, TA-based educational software
implements the pedagogical approach learning by teaching,
(Bargh & Schul, 1980).
To date a set of TA-based learning games targeting the
STEM areas have been developed and evaluated, and
repeatedly proven to have positive effects on students’
learning outcomes. Some studies have compared effects of
TA-based software with ordinary teaching (regular
classroom practice) (Pareto, Haake, Lindström, Sjödén, &
Gulz, 2012; Chin, Dohmen, & Schwartz, 2013). Others have
compared educational software versions with and without a
teachable agent included (Chase, Chin, Oppezzo, &
Schwartz, 2009; Pareto, Schwartz, & Svensson, 2009).
An observation from several of the studies is how readily
the metaphor of the computer figure as a tutee (digital tutee)
is accepted by students. They express engagement for the
task of teaching the character, although it is in fact nothing
but a computer artifact (Chase et al., 2009; Lindström, Gulz,
Haake, & Sjödén, 2011.) They also make more effort to

Several studies show that the students who benefit most by
educational software with teachable agents – whether
compared to equivalent software without TA or compared to
ordinary classroom teaching – are the low-performing
students. When comparing eleven year olds who used an
educational game in biology with or without TA, the former
spent more time on learning activities and also learned
more, with the effects most pronounced for lower
performing students (Chase et al., 2009). In a study by
Sjödén and Gulz (2015), 9-10 year-olds used a TA-based
educational math game in school over a period of eight
weeks. Thereafter, the students were divided into two
groups, matched according to their pretest scores, and
randomly assigned to a post-test with or without the TA
present (the TA did not act in order to influence the test but
was merely present). Results showed that low-performers
(according to the pretest) improved significantly more than
high-performers but only when tested with the TA. Pareto et
al. (2009), likewise found a considerably stronger
improvement for low ability students than for high ability
students when they used a math game with a TA feature
compared to the math game without the TA.

Mechanisms in TA-Systems that may Support
Low-Performing Students
A number of explanations for the pedagogical power of TAbased games have been proposed, including some that also
provide possible rationales for why the effect is often larger
for low-performers.
First, in a TA-based game, the student is positioned as the
one that is most able, the one who can teach someone else
that knows less. This experience – being someone who is

1169

capable, who knows more than someone else – can
potentially affect a student’s view on her own competence
in a positive way. This will likely benefit low-performers
more than high-performers, since the latter are more likely
to already have experienced the role of ‘teaching someone
else’ and ‘knowing more’. High-performers are more likely
than low-performers to spontaneously take a teacher role (or
be assigned this role in class). Acting teacher can potentially
strengthen the student’s belief in her own capability in the
domain in question, and this may in turn have effects on
performance.
Second, a teachable agent can be a model of learning
behaviors (Blair, Schwartz, Biswas, & Leelawong, 2007). A
TA is often designed to model fruitful and productive
student behaviors, such as being curious, asking questions,
reasoning, being explicit about parts of ‘knowledge’. It is,
however, more likely that high-performing students already
have such behaviors on their repertoire compared to lowperforming students, and that the latter therefore are more
helped by being inspired by productive learning behavior in
a TA.
Thirdly and crucially a TA is teachable. More specifically
a TA models someone who from the beginning has little or
no knowledge but learns incrementally or step-by-step. In
other words, a teachable agent (re)presents or models an
incrementalist theory of competence in contrast to an entity
theory of competence according to which some individuals
are held to be gifted and others non-gifted. This latter view
is quite common among students (Dweck, 2006).
Specifically it holds in the domain of mathematics, where it
has also been shown that teachers to a larger extent than for
other subjects used terms such as ‘talented’ and ‘not
talented’ (Rattan, Good, & Dweck, 2012). In principle both
high- and low-performing students can have an entity view
of competence, and potentially benefit from viewing
competence (in this study competence in math) as
something that can be changed with effort. However, it is
more likely that low-achievers with an entity view of
competence are trapped in a circle, where they don’t think
they are talented and see no meaning in making an effort;
therefore make little effort; therefore don’t achieve and thus
confirm they are not talented. In other words, they create a
self-fulfilling prophecy.
Fourthly, Chase et al. (2009), propose a mechanism
named ego-protective buffer. In TA-system it is the TA that
is tested for its knowledge. When the TA fails at a test, the
failure or non-success does not come as close onto the
student as when she takes a test herself. Even if students are
aware that the TA’s knowledge reflects how the TA has
been taught by themselves, the responsibility for failing is
not only theirs. Instead of bearing the full burden of a
failure, the responsibility of failure can be shared between
the TA and student. Even though this may benefit highperformers as well, low-performers are more used at failing
at school and thus the ego-protective buffer mechanism may

explain why in particular low-achieving students perform
better when working with a TA.
In sum, there is a set of proposed mechanisms that may
explain why low-performers benefit more than highperformers from using teachable agents. All mechanisms
involve the tendency of students to attribute social
characteristics and agency to the agent, and interact
intellectually and socially with it. For instance, to view the
TA as someone that it is possible to share a failure with; to
view the TA as someone who can accomplish a task (or
not), as someone whose knowledge is different from mine
and that I can influence by teaching it; to view that TA as
someone that can learn – and as learner be slow, quick,
smart, forgetful, etc.
In view of the above, we found it plausible that students
would also tend to attribute high or low self-efficacy to an
agent, if designed in an adequate manner. Spelled out, they
would tend to attribute to an agent high or low belief in its
own capability to learn and be successful – in our case with
respect to math and base ten problems. The present study
thus approaches the trait of self-efficacy, which to our
knowledge has not been studied before in teachable agents.

Does TA Self-Efficacy Matter for Student Progress
Having an ability to learn, i.e. being teachable, is the very
essence of a digital tutee or teachable agent. However,
whether other kinds of properties are attributed to a TA
depends in the first place on how the TA is designed and
implemented, and also on the student interacting with the
TA. For instance, depending on how it is implemented, a
TA can be (perceived as) a quick learner or a learner that
needs many rehearsals. A TA can be (perceived as) more or
less challenging or questioning (Kirkegaard, 2016).
In our study the TA was designed to express either high
or low belief in its own capacity to learn and perform in a
math game. We will soon present our predictions but first
discuss the phenomenon of self-efficacy in real human
students. For human learners we know that there is a
relation between self-efficacy and actual performance
(Bandura, 1997) in that self-efficacy predicts subsequent
performance. Low self-efficacy predicts low performance,
and high self-efficacy predicts high performance. Proposed
mechanisms are that student’s self-efficacy influences how
much effort she puts into a task, her tendency to persist, how
high she sets her aspirations and her tendency to persevere
when being challenged by the task. Individuals with high
self-efficacy often achieve more in intellectual terms
(Bandura, 1997). Importantly, however, the relations are
correlational and on a group level. There are no causal or
absolute relations between individual’s self-efficacy and her
performance; students may over-estimate as well as underestimate their own capacity.
We now return to self-efficacy in teachable agents. The
central research question in the present study was whether a
teachable agent expressing low or high self-efficacy,

1170

respectively, would have different impact on lowperforming students in terms of their learning and progress.
In addition we explored whether there would be any effects
on students’ own self-efficacy in either of the conditions.

Research Questions and Predictions
Research Question 1 (RQ1) Will learning and progress
differ between low-performing students who teach a TA
expressing low self-efficacy (lowSE-TA) and lowperforming students who teach a TA expressing high selfefficacy (highSE-TA)?
As a basis for our predictions we used two different
theories: (i) role-modeling theory by Bandura (1977) and
(ii) the theory of the TA protégée effect by Chase et al.
(2009). This resulted in two alternative predictions that
point in opposite directions. As such this is not surprising
since the predictions are generated from theories not related
to one another.
The first, alternative, prediction in line with Bandura´s
idea of role modeling focuses on teachable agents as
behavioral models, as discussed in the introduction. A
highSE-TA models a learner with a strong belief in her own
abilities to learn, a willingness to persist and not give up,
etc. Together with the TA:s incremental progression (given
that it is reasonably taught by the student) this is likely to be
a positive model for low-performers, that often themselves
have low self-efficacy. Thus we predict that low-performers
will make larger progress if they teach a highSE-TA than if
they teach a lowSE-TA.
The second, alternative, prediction is based on the
protégée-effect mentioned above: in general, students seem
to take responsibility for a TA and make an effort to teach it.
Now, a lowSE-TA expresses uncertainty in its own
capacity, and seems in considerable need for support and
engagement from the teacher (i.e. student), whereas a
highSE-TA expresses confidence in its own capability to
learn and manage and seems in less need for help from the
teacher. Therefore low-performers may be more motivated
to take responsibility and make an effort to teach a lowSETA compared to a highSE-TA. Consequently they will also
themselves make more progress. Thus we predict that lowperformers will make larger progress if they teach a lowSETA than if they teach a highSE-TA.
There is also third possible result, namely that whether
the TA expresses low or high self-efficacy will not matter
for low-performers progress.
Research Question 2 (RQ2) Will a potential change in selfefficacy in low-performing students differ between those
students who teach a TA expressing low self-efficacy and
those who teach a TA expressing high self-efficacy?
If the TA functions as a behavioral model with respect to
self-efficacy, low-performers are more likely to increase
their own self-efficacy if they teach a highSE-TA than if

they teach a lowSE-TA. The reason is that they may be
inspired to model the TA along the line “If this character,
my digital tutee, believes strongly in its capability, why
shouldn’t its teacher, that is me, do so too?”
From the protégée effect no straightforward prediction
can be derived on potential self-efficacy change in students,
depending on TA self-efficacy. As discussed under RQ1, if
the protégée effect is at work, participants will put
particularly large effort into teaching a lowSE-TA, since
such a TA signals a greater need of help and support than a
highSE-TA that signals that can learn on its own. But
whether students that take more responsibility and make a
larger effort to teach their TA also change their belief in
their own capacity to learn is not obvious. On the one hand,
an interplay between performance and self-efficacy is likely
but such influences may take time.
Again there is a third possible result, namely that whether
the TA expresses low or high self-efficacy does not matter
with respect to low-performers potential self-efficacy
change.
To sum up, the present study made use of a learning game
in math including a TA, where we manipulated the TA:s
expressed belief in its own capability to perform and learn
math as expected in the game. Our two research questions
were: RQ1: Would the manipulation of TA self-efficacy
have an effect on low-performing students’ progress in the
game (i.e. their learning math)? RQ2: Would the
manipulation of TA self-efficacy have an effect on potential
change in self-efficacy in the low-performing students?

Method
Participants
Participants were 166 students (83 girls and 83 boys) aged
10-11 years from 4 schools and 9 classes in Southern
Sweden from areas with relatively low socio-economic
status and school performance below average. Students
were randomly assigned one of the conditions: teaching a
digital tutee that expressed high self-efficacy (highSE-TA)
or teaching a digital tutee that expressed low self-efficacy
(lowSE-TA). Out of the initial set of participants, 24 were
excluded due to missing data points or low attendance.
Next, out of the 142 remaining students, the 62 students
who performed below the median on a math performance
test were selected for further analysis. The math test was
based on a representative part of the national tests in
mathematics and consisted of 21 problems relating to place
value. Thus, in the final data set, there were 28 students in
the lowSE-TA condition and 34 in the highSE-TA
condition.

The Educational Game
The TA math game, developed by Lena Pareto (Pareto,
2014), targets basic arithmetic skills related to the place
value system, where the student teaches a digital tutee

1171

named Lo, so that Lo can compete against other students’
digital tutees or against a computer actor in different digital
board games. Lo’s knowledge – based on the system’s
knowledge domain (Pareto, 2014) – develops entirely on the
basis of what the student teaches her (and if taught wrong,
Lo will learn wrong).
A central part of the student’s teaching consists of
answering questions from the digital tutee about the math
content, specifically regarding place value, via multiplechoice for answering (see figure 1). The other main
interaction between student and digital tutee takes place via
a free text chat (Silvervarg & Jönsson, 2011). This is also
where Lo, the TA, expresses her self-efficacy (see figure 1).

things about how to play the game.” (expressing high selfefficacy), and “I am not sure I can learn these things.”
(expressing low self-efficacy).
The chat always ended with a sentence from Lo regarding
her thoughts about the upcoming round, for example: “I
have a feeling that the next round will go really well. Let’s
play!” (expressing high self-efficacy) or “It doesn’t seem
like I understand much really, but let’s play another round.”
(expressing low self-efficacy).
Lo’s utterances had previously been evaluated with regard
to whether they sounded as uttered by someone who was
confident, not confident, or neither nor in her ability to learn
and perform. The evaluators were 22 fourth graders from a
school not participating in the study. The evaluation resulted
in the removal of a few sentences and slight modifications
of others, resulting in a set of 136 sentences, 68 reflecting a
digital tutee with high self-efficacy and 68 reflecting a
digital tutee with low self-efficacy.
In addition the manipulation – low and high self-efficacy
in the TA – was validated within the present study by
participating students. At the end of the last study session
they were asked to evaluate Lo’s belief in her/his own
capability to play the math game on a Likert scale. A MannWhitney test showed a significant difference (Z = -4.85, p <
.001, r = .39) between the low SE-TA and the high SE-TA,
confirming that the manipulation had intended effects on the
perception of the TAs self-efficacy.

Figure 1: The math game with multiple choice conversation
and ‘free text chat’ conversation (overlay).

Procedure

Self-Efficacy in the Teachable Agent
High or low self-efficacy in or study was defined as high or
low belief in ones capability to make progress and perform
well in the math game. In turn, this requires making
adequate moves and answering questions regarding the
place value system correctly. The definition can be
compared to a more general definition of self-efficacy in
mathematics as the belief in ones capability to successfully
learn mathematics (Bandura, 1997).
After each round of the game where Lo (the TA) has been
active – observing and posing questions to the student or
being guided by student – the chat conversation starts. The
chat begins with Lo commenting on the previous round
saying for example: “Awesome! We won! I have a good grip
now of tens and hundreds and all that you teach me.”
(reflecting high self-efficacy), “Oh I won, did I? Nice. But I
feel very uncertain about how to play well.” (reflecting low
self-efficacy).
The chat conversation also contains other comments and
reflections from Lo on her own learning, for instance: “I´m
learning the rules in the math game slowly. I´m not a very
brilliant student.” (reflecting low self-efficacy), “It’s going
to get better and better. I have so quickly learned so many

All study sessions took place in ordinary classrooms and
lasted about 30 minutes. At the pre-test session, students
completed a math pre-test targeting the place value system,
and a pre-questionnaire targeting their self-efficacy in math
with respect to the place value system. The students’ math
pre-test scores were used to identify the target group for this
study’s research questions, i.e. low-performers (in math).
Thereafter students participated during seven gameplaying sessions, once a week. At the post-session, students
again filled out the questionnaire targeting their self-efficacy
in math and the place value system and were debriefed
about the two different types of digital tutees and the
purpose of the study.

Measurements
Performance During Game Play Students’ performance
while teaching the digital tutee is a reflection on how well
they perform themselves. In line with this we calculated a
performance score for each student on the basis of the datalogging. Through the game the digital tutee poses questions
to the student that concerns the conceptual model and
principles of the place value system. For instance: “How
many orange square boxes are there in the 2 yellow square
boxes on the game board?” and “How many red square
boxes are needed to fill a yellow square box?” The tutee

1172

posed three such questions during each game session, and
the student had to choose one out of four alternative answers
(one correct, two incorrect and the alternative “I don’t
know.”). The performance score was calculated as the
percentage of correct answers minus the percentage of
incorrect answers. Additionally, a study by Pareto (2014)
showed that in-game performance in this math game
correlated with standard paper-and-pencil tests on the placevalue system.
Self-Efficacy Change To measure this we used a selfefficacy pre- and post-questionnaire based on Bandura,
Barbaranelli, Caprara, and Pastorelli (1996); for this study
translated into Swedish
The seven items targeted the students’ self-efficacy with
regard to the place value system and the question “How
good are you at solving this type of task?” Item one to five
regarded calculation tasks such as “1136 + 346”, and item
six and seven targeted place value concepts, such as:
“Which digit has the highest place value in the number
6275?” All items were graded in five steps from “Not good
at all” to “Very good at”.

Results
Statistical analyses were conducted in R v3.2.4 (R Core
Team, 2016). Of the 142 participants with complete data,
the 62 performing below the median on the pre-test in math
were included in the analysis.

Effects TA Self-Efficacy on Low-Performing
Students’ Performance During Game Play
An unmatched two sample t-test showed a significant
difference (t(60) = 3.40, p = .0012, Cohen’s d = 0.87) of TA
self-efficacy on student performance with the students in the
lowSE-TA condition (M = 54.8, SD = 13.7) outperforming
the students in the highSE-TA condition (M = 43.7, SD =
12.0).

Effects of TA Self-Efficacy on Low-Performing
Students’ Self-Efficacy Change
An unmatched two sample t-test showed no significant
difference (t(60) = 0.35, p = .73) of TA self-efficacy on
student self-efficacy change between the students in the
lowSE-TA condition (M = 1.18, SD = 3.81) and the students
in the highSE-TA condition (M = 1.53, SD = 4.00).

Discussion
Teaching a lowSE-TA compared to teaching a highSE-TA
made the participants perform significantly better, as
measured by their in-game performance scores. But the two
conditions did not differ with respect to whether the
participants changed their own self-efficacy. Changes were
small and did not differ between the conditions.
These results contribute to our knowledge about
mechanisms in a TA-based educational game with respect to

why low-performers tend to benefit more than highperformers from these games. First, we showed that a
manipulation of expressed self-efficacy in a TA can
influence performance for low-performers: a TA that
expressed low self-efficacy was more beneficial than a TA
that expressed high self-efficacy. The effect as such,
regardless of direction, confirms that at least some of the
pedagogical power in a TA-based game derives from
attributions of social agency to TA:s, in this case attributing
to the TA a weak or strong belief in its own capability.
Consequently this is one of the traits that a TA designer
ought to be aware of; a trait that can explain why lowperformers benefit more than high-performers from TAbased games.
With respect to student performance, we based our
predictions on two different theoretical models: role
modeling according to which a highSE-TA should have the
most positive influence on the performance of lowperformers, and the protégée effect according to which a
lowSE-TA should have the most positive influence on the
low-performers performance. The latter theory was
supported and can be further elaborated on by means of the
results of our study. According to the protégée-effect
students tend to make more effort and take more
responsibility for the task of teaching a TA than for the task
of learning for themselves (Chase et al., 2009). In our study
the outcome was better when low-performers taught a
lowSE-TA compared to a highSE-TA. It is near at hand
that they made an even larger effort and took even more
responsibility for a TA with low self-efficacy since this TA
expresses a low trust in her own ability to learn, and likely
comes across as someone who is more in need of help than a
TA with high self-efficacy. A highSE-TA, on the other
hand, indicates that s/he is capable to learn and perform, and
is in less need of help.
The lacking effect on students self-efficacy change,
depending on high or low self-efficacy in the TA, means
that the role-modeling hypothesis proposed above was not
supported. Students were not inspired by a highSE-TA as a
model to increase their own self-efficacy. Neither did
teaching a lowSE-TA lead to an increase in the students’
self-efficacy. However, it did lead to an increase in their
performance, and we can thus conclude that the increased
performance was not caused by an increased self-efficacy, at
least not as measured in our study. It should also be pointed
out that an increase in self-efficacy is not always desirable,
in particular not for students who overestimate their
capabilities. At the same time, given the interactions
between self-efficacy and performance, it is often a good
thing when students with low self-efficacy in a domain gain
more confidence in their abilities to make progress. What is
desirable in general is that as many students as possible
have an incrementalist rather than an entity view of
intellectual capabilities – something that the use of TA-

1173

based educational games may contribute to (Chase et al.,
2009).

Limitations of the Study and Future Research
The study should be seen as a first examination about how
the manipulation of self-efficacy in a digital tutee can
influence student performance. Some limitations should be
kept in mind when interpreting the results. One is that there
was no group of students who taught a digital tutee that
expressed a neutral mode of self-efficacy. In future research
such a condition should be included. Furthermore, rather
than aiming to be conclusive, the present study opens up for
associated studies. For instance, one relevant question is
whether the results will replicate or not with other age
groups than 10-11 year olds. Another interesting line of
research could be to explore a TA with adaptive selfefficacy that reflects the rate at which it actually learns,
which in turn reflects the proficiency of the student that is
teaching it.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded in part by Marcus and Amalia
Wallenberg Foundation and the research environment
Cognition, Communication and Learning. The authors thank
all students and teachers who participated in the study.

References
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-Efficacy: The exercise of control.
New York, NY: W.H. Freeman.
Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Bandura, A., Barbaranelli, C., Caprara, G. V., & Pastorelli,
C. (1996). Multifaceted impact of self-efficacy beliefs on
academic functioning. Child Development, 67(3), 1206–
1222.
Bargh, J. A., & Schul, Y. (1980). On the cognitive benefits
of teaching. Journal of Educational Psychology, 72(5),
593–604.
Blair, K., Schwartz, D., Biswas, G., & Leelawong, K.
(2007). Pedagogical agents for learning by teaching:
Teachable agents. Educational Technology, 47(1), 56–61.
Brophy, S., Biswas, G., Katzlberger, T., Bransford, J., &
Schwartz, D. (1999). Teachable agents: Combining
insights from learning theory and computer science. In
S.P. Lajoie & M. Vivet (Eds.), Frontiers in Artificial
Intelligence and Applications, Vol 50. Proc. of AIED
1999. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: IOS Press.
Chase, C., Chin, D., Oppezzo, M., & Schwartz, D. (2009).
Teachable agents and the protégé effect: Increasing the
effort towards learning. Journal of Science Education and
Technology, 18, 334–352.

Chin, D. B., Dohmen, I. M., & Schwartz, D. L. (2013).
Young children can learn scientific reasoning with
teachable agents. IEEE Transactions on Learning
Technologies, 6(3), 248–257.
Dweck, C. (2006). Mindset: The new psychology of success.
Random House.
Kirkegaard, C. (2016). Adding challenge to a teachable
agent in a virtual learning environment. Licentiate Thesis
in Cognitive Science, Linköping University. Linköping,
Sweden: Linköping University Electronic Press.
Lindström, P., Gulz, A., Haake, M., & Sjödén, B. (2011).
Matching and mismatching between the pedagogical
design principles of a maths game and the actual practices
of play. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 27, 90–
102.
Pareto, L. (2014). A teachable agent game engaging primary
school children to learn arithmetic concepts and
reasoning. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence
in Education, 24(3), 251–283.
Pareto, L., Schwartz, D. L., & Svensson, L. (2009, July).
Learning by guiding a teachable agent to play an
educational game. In V. Dimitrova, R. Mizoguchi, B. du
Boulay, A. C. Graesser (Eds.), Frontiers in Artificial
Intelligence and Applications, Vol 200. Proc. of AIED
2009 (pp. 662–664). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: IOS
Press.
Pareto, L., Haake, M., Lindström, P., Sjödén, B., & Gulz, A.
(2012). A teachable agent based game affording
collaboration and competition – Evaluating math
comprehension and motivation. Educational Technology
Research and Development, 60, 723–751.
Rattan, A., Good, C., & Dweck, C. (2012). “It's ok – Not
everyone can be good at math”: Instructors with an entity
theory comfort (and demotivate) students. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 48(3), 731–737.
Silvervarg, A., & Jönsson, A. (2011). Subjective and
Objective Evaluation of Conversational Agents. In
Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Knowledge and
Reasoning in Practical Dialogue Systems (pp. 65–72).
Barcelona, Spain.
Sjödén, B., & Gulz, A. (2015). From Learning Companions
to Testing Companions. In C. Conati, N. Heffernan, A.
Mitrovic, & M.F. Verdejo (Eds.), LNAI/LNCS: Vol. 9112.
Proc. of AIED 2015 (pp. 459–469). Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany: Springer-Verlag.
R Core Team (2016). R: A language and environment for
statistical computing [Software]. R Foundation for
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. Available from
http://www.R-project.org/.

1174

