Synchronization Assessment for Collective Behavior
Maurici A. López-Felip (maurici.lopez_felip@uconn.edu)

Center for the Ecological Study of Perception and Action
Department of Psychological Sciences, 406 Babbidge Road, Unit 1020
Storrs, CT 06269, USA
Tehran J. Davis (tehran.davis@uconn.edu)

Center for the Ecological Study of Perception and Action
Department of Psychological Sciences, 406 Babbidge Road, Unit 1020
Storrs, CT 06269, USA
Till D. Frank (till.frank@uconn.edu)

Center for the Ecological Study of Perception and Action
Department of Psychological Sciences, 406 Babbidge Road, Unit 1020
Storrs, CT 06269, USA
Abstract

emergent behavior are still in an early stage of development
(Araujo, Silva & Ramos, 2014), while many attempts to
measure team work have typically focused on measuring
outcome performance rather than team dynamics. However,
recent attempts to study the dynamics of multi-agent activity
have benefitted from concepts and tools from Dynamical
Systems Theory (DST) (e.g., Duarte, Araújo, Correia,
Davids, Marques, & Richardson, 2013). While DST provides
suitable techniques for modeling living systems, it makes no
direct claims about their status nor provides a theoretical
basis for understanding goal directed behavior. Amongst the
broad range of DST tools, one of the most common
approaches used by students of perception, action and
cognition is the study of synchronization.

Team cognition can be defined as the ability that humans have
to coordinate with others through a complex environment.
Sports offer exquisite examples of this dynamic interplay
requiring decision making and other perceptual-cognitive
skills to adjust individual decisions to the team selforganization and vice-versa. Considering players of a team as
periodic phase oscillators, synchrony analyses can be used to
model the coordination of a team. Nonetheless, a main
limitation of current models is that collective behavior is
context independent. In other words, players of a team can be
highly synchronized without this corresponding to a
meaningful coordination dynamics relevant to the context of
the game. Considering these issues, the aim of this study was
to develop a method of analysis sensitive to the context for
evidence-based measures of team cognition.

Measuring Synchronization

Keywords: Team Cognition; Synchronization; Ecological
Dynamics;

Measures of synchrony are used for describing phenomena
that obey recurrent, dynamical laws; and have been applied
for a wide range of phenomena coming from substantially
different fields of study as natural sciences, engineering or
even social life (Pikovsky, Rosenblum & Kurths, 2001).
Whereas in physical, nonliving systems synchrony is often
mediated via mechanical coupling (e.g., Huygens famous
observations regarding the synchronization of two clock
pendulums, (1673/1986), psychological and social systems
often synchronize via informational (e.g., visual) coupling
(Schmidt, Carello & Turvey, 1990). Although most research
on the synchrony and coupling between actors has focused on
dyads, a recently developed method, cluster phase analysis
(CPA, Frank & Richardson, 2010), has been used to extend
synchrony measures to groups larger than two people. CPA
has been used, for example, to assess the degree to which a
group of people successfully synchronized their intentional,
oscillatory rhythmic movements with rocking chairs; with
synchrony measured using an adaptation of the Kuramoto

Introduction
Central to the definition of a team are the interactions
amongst its components (McNeese, Cooke, Fedel & Gray,
2016). When players cooperate together as a team, the
resulting collective behaviors rarely are expressed in terms of
the simple summation of the individuals’ activities. That is,
the team’s activity emerges from the coordination of actions
and often nonlinear interactions of its players. For example,
to be successful in European football (soccer), players must
coordinate their actions with others across many different
spatial and temporal scales. While recent research has
focused on elucidating the mechanisms that facilitate such
large-scale coordination, the identification of the
fundamental, self-organizing principles that underlie team
dynamics remains an unresolved matter (see e.g., Memmert,
Lemmink & Sampaio, 2016; Folgado, Duarte, Fernandes &
Sampaio, 2014). Indeed, techniques to measure collective

706

order parameter (aka cluster amplitude, 𝑟 where high
synchronization = 1). Similar methods have been used to
characterize teams’ phase synchrony in football (see e.g.,
Duarte et al., 2013; Duarte, Travassos, Araujo & Richardson,
2014). Here, separate measures of team synchrony are
derived using players’ displacements along either the
latitudinal or longitudinal axis, where a common result is that
synchrony is higher in longitudinal displacements than in
lateral displacements (Duarte, et al., 2013). Using this
method, researchers have also noted that the observed degree
of synchrony was not subject to possession of the ball (see
e.g., Pinto, 2014; Duarte, et al. 2013), presumably one of the
key factors of team organization during the match. However,
it may be argued that the technical aspects of this
methodological approach do not consider relevant contextual
features of the game that are key to self-organizing principles
in team sports. This lack of situational context is a
consequence of 1) the behavioral variable submitted to the
model and 2) the constraints that presents the mathematical
model. Behavior is measured in a time-series of
displacements along one dimension; however, the Kuramoto
model requires phase angles as its input. To overcome this
incompatibility, the displacement time-series are transformed
to instantaneous phase angles by using the Hilbert Transform
(see Pikovsky, et al. 2001 for details). However, this method
is limited in that high synchrony can be a consequence of the
players simply being very close to each other within that onedimensional space (e.g., x-dimension), whereas, conversely
if players are far apart within that dimension, synchrony
would be low.
Considering these issues (technical and contextual) we
aimed to further extend the use of CPA by using insights from
a recently developed framework that applies the ecologicaldynamics approach to perception and action in football
(López-Felip, 2014). Our model parameters were defined by
two situational variables of the game: such as players’
orientation-to and distance-from the goal of interest (i.e. the
goal being actively attacked by the offense and defended by
the defense). Our main hypothesis was that when accounting
for these two contextual variables, team synchrony would be
dependent on ball possession. This result would suggest the
need for further exploring context dependent analyses for
evidence-based measures of team cognition.

Instruments
Player position data were collected via GPS (sampling rate of
15 Hz) for an entire half of forty-five minutes plus extra time.
These GPS monitors could reliably capture positional raw
data (2D) based on the latitude and longitude positions of all
players throughout the match.

Procedures
The positional raw data were subsequently matched to
corresponding events throughout the competition (captured
via video). This allowed us to asses when during each timeseries a team was in possession of the ball (i.e. attacking role),
as well as identify any prolonged periods of stoppage
(e.g., from injury assistance, goals, etc.) to remove from
analysis. The criteria for determining ball possession was
based on Reis, Duarte, Araújo, Folgado, & Frias (2013).

Data Analysis
Starting with the positional raw data, exocentric coordinates
were used to define the state space in which trajectories of
players were captured. Then, the goals were represented as
specific variables of this state space to create a new variable,
angle of the direction to the goal (θ( ):
(Eq. 1)
θ( = tan-.

/0123 -/432567 8
90123 -9432567 8

This measure provided a metric of each player’s orientation
with respect to the goal. Relative angles were submitted to
CPA, creating a time-series of Kuramoto parameter values
describing each team’s synchrony at every time step.
(Eq. 2)
𝑟 𝑡;

1
=
𝑛

F

exp (𝑖𝜃D 𝑡; )
DG.

To account for the distance of a team to the goal of interest,
each team’s center of mass was assessed at each time step.
Distance of the center of mass (dCOM) was measured as the
mean longitudinal position of all team members over time.

Method
Participants

𝐶𝑂𝑀 =

Twenty-two male elite football players from two European
clubs played a friendly game during the pre-season 20162017. Participants ranged in age from 17 years to 34 years
(average 26.5 ±0.4 years). At the time of data collection,
neither of the teams had initiated their regular competitions,
however, the away team was a member of what is typically
considered to be a superior league. The entire first half of the
match was registered with no injuries or substitutions.

1
𝑁

(Eq. 3)

F

𝑥MNOPQR
MNOPQRG.

To simplify our analysis, dCOM values were categorized into
four quadrants each spanning 25 m; where Q1 contained
distances closest to the goal of interest and Q4 contained
distances furthest away (see Figure 1).

707

Overall, synchrony increased as the teams moved farther
from the goal of interest. At the same time differences in
synchrony depending on the team’s role became more
pronounced as the teams moved closer to the goal of interest.
A similar pattern of effects [role: F(1, 15488) = 31, p < .001;
quadrant: F(3, 15488) = 6484, p < .001; role × quadrant: F(3,
15488) = 622, p < .001] was observed for the home team
(note that the dCOM of the home team never entered Q1 when
attacking or Q4 when defending; likely due to the away teams
dominance of the match).

Figure 1: Black disc represents the attacking team and black
triangles represent the defending team. Dashed lines
represent each player’s goal angle. Vertical black lines
divide the field in 4 equidistant quadrants. Q1 is the
quadrant closest to the active goal and Q4 the furthest.
Then, x-y axes represent the longitude and latitude
coordinates from where positional raw data were collected.
Then, provided our research question, we assessed changes
in each team’s synchrony as 1) a function of ball possession
(whether teams were attacking or defending) and 2) the
distance between the team’s center of mass to the goal of
interest, dCOM. To do so, each point in the time series of
Kuramoto parameter values was independently evaluated as
a function of the corresponding dCOM quadrant. The resulting
mean values for each quadrant were submitted to further
analysis, resulting in values reported in Figure 2.

Figure 2: Mean synchrony of each team based on field
location and role.

Discussion
The purpose of this study was to develop a method of
analyzing team coordination that is sensitive to the context in
which team actions unfold over the course of a game. It was
hypothesized that by using a measure of phase synchrony
sensitive to the contextual circumstances of ball possession,
synchrony of a team would change. To test this, two variables
that were relevant to the context of the game such as
footballer’s angle relative to the direction of the active goal
and COM of each team on the field were used.
With respect to the experimental hypothesis, a linear
effects mixed model showed that team synchrony is
dependent on team role and distance from the active goal.
Significant effects were found for role and quadrant, qualified
by a role × quadrant interaction in both teams.
Measures of team synchrony showed higher mean values
when a team was in defense. These data suggest that
individuals tend to coordinate their movements together
relative to the goal more in those instances in which they are
defending, than the ones in which they are attacking. At the
same time, lower synchrony values were found in those
instances in which a team was closer to the opponent’s goal.
This is not surprising for the attacking team, because
behavior of a football team when attacking is to spread out
and create as many open spaces as possible to the opponent
team. Interestingly, the team in defense showed also low
values of synchronization in Q1. One possibility is that this

Results
As determined using the cluster amplitude analysis the
overall degree of synchronization of teams were between
0.55 and 0.99. When phase synchrony was assessed for each
team as a function of the playing role in the game (i.e.,
attacking or defending) and the dCOM to the goal of interest,
synchronization differed. Figure 2 shows how the mean
tendency of synchrony varies as a context of where and when
a team is attacking or defending. That is, mean synchrony
decays as teams’ dCOM approaches Q1.
Table 1: Mean synchrony of each team as a function of
playing role and dCOM.
Team
Home
Away
Home
Away
Home
Away
Home
Away

Quadrants
Q1
Q1
Q2
Q2
Q3
Q3
Q4
Q4

𝑟 = Attacking
𝑁𝐴
0.84
0.92
0.93
0.97
0.97
0.99
0.99

𝑟 = Defending
0.86
0.89
0.95
0.97
0.98
0.98
𝑁𝐴
0.99

708

may be due to the driving-driver effect (Step & Turvey,
2010). According to this, the team in defense would try to
anticipate the actions of the team in possession of the ball,
reflected in the drop of mean synchrony of the defense team
in Q1. This conjecture remains an open question.
Although these data showed differences of synchrony in
terms of ball possession, the levels of whole team synchrony
were, overall, high. All the mean values of cluster amplitude
for the angle to the direction of the active goal ranged
between 0.84 and 0.99. These values are similar to those
found in football (Duarte et al., 2013) or in intentional
oscillatory rhythmic movements of rocking chairs (Frank &
Richardson, 2010).

modeling football team behavior as a dynamical system. Our
finding suggest that appropriately modeling team behavior
must take into account variables that capture the meaningful
current state of affairs of the game—such as players’
orientation and location relative to key points of interest.
Future research in this domain should seek to identify and
incorporate additional, meaningful aspects (e.g., tactics) to
addressing team coordination.
More broadly, these findings may be understood in the
claim that efforts to model living systems and their actions
should account for context. Understanding the functional,
context dependent relationship that exists between organismenvironment and situation could serve to guide and constrain
future dynamical analyses and mathematical modeling of
team systems (Turvey, 1992; Turvey & Shaw, 1995).

Implications for Measuring Synchronization
Based on the approach of previous studies, the present work
assessed synchrony by means of an adaptation of the
Kuramoto Order Parameter. As explained in the introduction
section, when using time-series of displacements in the x, y
or z axes to assess synchronization, there is the need to
calculate the instantaneous phase angle of the time-series
(usually done by the Hilbert Transform). By following these
steps, synchrony may remain high and unchanged due to the
limitations of the methodology as explained earlier in the
introduction.
Hence, the present work, approaches the assessment of
synchrony via an alternative methodology. First, we
considered that we could explore the possibility of using an
angle that was not limited to a one-dimensional plane. Simply
because representing dynamics of collective behavior at one
dimension did not seem to lead us to our purposes (i.e.,
provide contextual meaning to assessments of collective
behavior). Second, based on previous research,
displacements from a time-series have not been able to
discriminate between synchrony levels and ball possession
during the game. Thus, our approach attempted to link a
behavioral variable to the final target that a team aims (i.e.,
scoring a goal). For example, in models of steering and
obstacle avoidance (see e.g., Fajen & Warren, 2003; Warren,
2006), one of the variables taken in their assessments is the
relative angle of the performer’s position relative to the goal
or obstacle. Here, using a similar variable and clustering the
angle of each player relative to the active goal, allowed us to
model team dynamics at a 2-dimensional plane and do it
relative to the final purpose of the game.
Taking this approach to using the Kuramoto, is not a final
model. This is just a preliminary step towards developing a
more robust model of synchronization in collective behavior
that aims to be sensitive to the context in which team activity
occurs.

References
Araujo, D., Silva, P., & Ramos, J. P. (2014). Affordancebased decisions guide team synergies during match
performance. Research in Physical Education, Sport and
Health, 19–26.
Duarte, R., Araújo, D., Correia, V., Davids, K., Marques, P.,
& Richardson, M. J. (2013). Competing together:
Assessing the dynamics of team-team and player-team
synchrony in professional association football. Human
Movement Science, 32, 555–566.
Duarte, Travassos, Araujo & Richardson (2014). The
influence of manipulating the defensive playing method
on collective synchrony of football teams. In Proceedings
of the IX World Congress on Performance Analysis of
Sport, Publisher: Routledge, (Eds.), D. Peters, & P.
O’Donoughue
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.humov.2013.01.011
Fajen, B. R., & Warren, W. H. (2003). Behavioral dynamics
of steering, obstacle avoidance, and route selection.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 29, 343–362.
http://doi.org/10.1037/0096-1523.29.2.343
Folgado, H., Duarte, R., Fernandes, O., & Sampaio, J.
(2014). Competing with Lower Level Opponents
Decreases Intra-Team Movement Synchronization and
Time-Motion Demands during Pre-Season Soccer
Matches. PLOS ONE, 9, e97145–9.
http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0097145
Frank, T. D., & Richardson, M. J. (2010). On a test statistic
for the Kuramoto order parameter of synchronization: An
illustration for group synchronization during rocking
chairs. Physica D, 239, 2084–2092.
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.physd.2010.07.015
Huygens, C. (1673). Horologium Oscillatorium. Apud F.
Muguet, Paris, France,. English translation: The
Pendulum Clock, Iowa State University Press, Ames,
1986.
López-Felip, M. A. (2014). A scale to measure the
complexity and perceptual-cognitive skills in soccer. MSc
Thesis, Southern Illinois University.

Conclusions
This study investigated the degree to which ball possession
impacts team synchrony as a function of the team’s dCOM.
López-Felip and Porter (2015) argued that both variables
were proposed as proper parameters to include when

709

López-Felip, & M.A., Porter, J. (2015). An assessment of
complexity and perceptual-cognitive skills in soccer. In
Favero, T., Drust, B., and Dawson, B. (Eds.),
International Research in Science and Soccer II. New
York, NY: Taylor & Francis Group.
McNeese, N., Cooke, N.J., Fedele, M., & Gray, R. (2016).
Perspectives on Team Cognition and Team Sports. In
Raab, M. Wylleman, P., Seiler, R., Elbe, A.M., and
Hatzigeordiadis, A. (Eds.), Sports and Exercise
Psychology Research: From Theory to Practice. American
Press.
Memmert, D., Lemmink, K. A. P. M., & Sampaio, J. (2016).
Current Approaches to Tactical Performance Analyses in
Soccer Using Position Data. Sports Medicine, 47, 1–10.
http://doi.org/10.1007/s40279-016-0562-5
Mohammed, S., Ferzandi, L., & Hamilton, K. (2010).
Metaphor no more: a 15-year review of the team mental
model construct. Journal of Management, 36(4), 876–
910.
Pikovsky, A., Rosenblum, M., & Kurths, J. (2001).
Synchronization: A Universal Concept in Nonlinear
Sciences. Cambridge University Press
Pinto, C. (2014). The emergence of team synchronization
during the soccer match: understanding the influence of
the level of opposition, game phase and field zone.
Dissertação de Mestrado. Universidade de Lisboa.
Faculdade de Motricidade humana.
Reis, M., Duarte, R., Araújo, D., Folgado, H., & Frias, T.
(2013). Spatial interaction tendencies of football players
captured by Voronoi diagrams. Proceedings of the
Mathematical Methods in Engineering International
Conference. (pp. 279-287). Porto: Instituto Superior de
Engenharia do Porto.
Silva, P., Garganta, J., Araujo, D., Davids, K., & Aguiar, P.
(2013). Shared knowledge of shared affordances? Insights
from an ecological dynamics approach to team cognition
in sports. Sports Medicine, 43, 765–772.
Schmidt, R.C., Carello, C. & Turvey, M.T. (1990). Phase
Transitions and Critical Fluctuations in the Visual
Coordination of Rhythmic Movements Between People.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 16, 227-247.
Step, N. & Turvey, M.T. (2010). On strong Anticipation.
Cognitive Systems Research, 11, 148-164.
Turvey, M. T. (1992). Affordances and prospective control:
An outline of the ontology. Ecological Psychology, 4,
173-187.
Turvey, M. T., & Shaw., R. E. (1995). Toward an ecological
physics and a physical psychology. In R. L. Solso, & D.
W. Massaro (Eds.), The Science of the Mind: 2001 and
Beyond. New York: Oxford University Press.
Warren WH. (2006). The dynamics of perception and
action. Psychological Review, 13, 358–389

710

