The Role of Imagination in Exemplar Generation:
The Effects of Conflict and Explanation
Tammy M. Dennis (tdennis@student.unimelb.edu.au)
Daniel R. Little (daniel.little@unimelb.edu .au)
Melbourne School of Psychological Sciences,
The University of Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia

Ward (1994) asked participants to draw an animal from
another planet. Most responses contained features typical of
Earth animals, (e.g., bilateral symmetry). Hence, knowledge
from existing concepts was projected onto the generated
exemplars. Evidence for the constraining effect of prior
knowledge also comes from the study of cognitive biases in
innovation. For instance, functional fixedness (Duncker,
1945) refers to a tendency to focus on an object’s most
common use. By contrast, McCaffrey & Krishnamurty
(2014) argue that more novel ideas are generated when
attention shifts to less frequently noticed attributes of a
problem (or in our case, of the stimulus).
In the present study, we attempt to limit reliance on prior
knowledge by using sets of abstract stimuli drawn from a
continuous multidimensional space. The use of abstract
stimuli should increase the reliance on identification of
similarity between stimulus features (Tversky, 1977). For
example, new exemplars generated to belong to a presented
category (see Figure 1) should tend to be similar on features
such as color and shape. If only perceptual features are
accessible, participants would be prone to adopt feature
matching strategies such as replication (e.g., copying one
figure directly) or averaging (e.g., generating the mean of the
presented examples; see Figure 1). Hence, although the use
of abstract stimuli may lessen reliance on prior knowledge,
the use of feature matching strategies will likely be enhanced.
The extent to which participants merely replicate or copy
one of the presented category members may also depend on
whether participants adopt a strong sampling assumption
(i.e., that the category members were deliberately chosen as
positive examples; perhaps as the only members of that
category; Navarro, Dry & Lee, 2012). Under a weak
sampling assumption, participants may view the presented

Abstract
Structured imagination refers to reliance upon prior knowledge
when generating novel examples of a provided category. Yet
studies supporting this tenet use experimental designs where
the stimuli themselves cue exemplars based on culturally
relevant items. The present study combined exemplar
generation with abstract stimuli as a means of attenuating
instructional bias. Participants were shown a group of abstract
shapes identified as a single category and instructed to generate
another member of this category. We additionally examined
whether the introduction of a cognitive conflict (by including
an anomalous category member) and self-explanation during
generation affected the level of imaginative responses.
Contrary to expectations, the presentation of a conflicting
category member did not result in more imaginative responses
when compared to more homogenous stimuli sets. However, a
significantly greater degree of imaginative responses was
observed from participants who were required to explain their
thinking prior to and whilst constructing their exemplars.
Keywords: imagination; exemplar generation; cognitive
conflict; self-explanation; reflective abstraction.

[Ramanujan’s equations] must be true because no one
would have the imagination to invent them.
G. H. Hardy

Introduction
How does imagination impact the generation of novel ideas?
Theories of structured imagination assert that the generation
of ideas, concepts, and objects depends on and is constrained
by prior knowledge (Ward, Patterson & Sifonis, 2004). Prior
knowledge limits the set of features, dimensions, relations,
functions, and so on under consideration. However, support
for this position comes from experimental paradigms where
instructions reference prior concept knowledge or examples
that cue prior knowledge. Consequently, the influence of
prior knowledge on the role of imagination in, for instance,
an exemplar generation paradigm remains somewhat unclear.
The exemplar generation paradigm requires participants
to generate new category members that could plausibly
belong to some presented set (e.g. Jern & Kemp, 2013; Ward,
1994). The paradigm anticipates that imagination behaves
like other cognitive processes in requiring reasoning about
the rules (or other requirements) for category membership.
The empirical evidence supporting the role of prior
knowledge has countered romantic views that imagination
stems from some unique unobservable process. For example,

Figure 1. Examples of sets of abstract stimuli varying in
perceptual features; shape, color and feature matching
response strategies. Left: replication response strategy. Right:
averaging response strategy. The conflict item is the blue
category member. The online version is in color.

289

Figure 3. Example of a Single Trial. A) presented category
examples, B) black box for drawing generated exemplar, C)
color bar and saturation and brightness cube. The online
version is in color.

Figure 2. Examples of Stimulus Variability and
Dimensionality for each instruction condition. Baseline
condition: top panel. Conflict and self-explanation condition:
bottom panel. The online version is in color.

category (Williams & Lombrozo, 2010). Self-explanation,
has a direct influence on how objects are mentally
represented and understood. Verbalisation of thought
processes during an activity can enable access to cognitive
processes which are not directly observable (e.g. Ericsson &
Simon, 1980). Self-explanation can also override the
influence of similarity, facilitate generalisation, and promote
the integration of novel information with existing knowledge
(Lombrozo, 2006). Similar to its influence on intelligence
observed in educational psychology models which aim to
accelerate cognitive development (Adey, 1992), selfexplanation, therefore, affords a means of engaging
imagination in order to resolve conflict.

category as being sampled with no restrictions; hence, the
presented objects may have implicit or hidden dimensionality
with unknown support (i.e., the range of values that exist for
a dimension). Our first goal was to examine how variability
in the presented set affected the novelty of the generated
exemplars.
Ward and Sifonis (1997) varied instructions across three
experimental conditions: participants were told to generate
(1) an alien animal, (2) an animal wildly different from Earth
animals, or (3) a living thing. The second condition produced
more unusual creatures than the first condition; while
diversity was largest in the third group where many responses
did not adhere to standard animal features. The authors’
suggested that this was encouraged through ambiguity in the
instructions and by participants describing their creature prior
to drawing it. A second goal of the present study was to
examine whether self-explanation leads to more imaginative
exemplars.
The present study aimed to examine the effects of: (i)
variability of the presented category, (ii) inclusion of a
conflict item, and (iii) prospective explanation and thinking
aloud on exemplar generation. We compared a baseline
condition to a condition which contained an anomalous
exemplar and to a further condition which additionally
required participants to engage in self-explanation during the
generation process. Cognitive conflict is recognized as a
reliable method for promoting the search for new knowledge
(e.g. Limon, 2001). For example, a study conducted by Kang,
Scharmann and Noh (2004) found conflict recognition
promoted the invention of alternative concepts and
explanations to account for the disparity caused by a
conflicting stimulus. Consequently, presentation of a
conflicting item may act to stimulate imagination,
highlighting potential options for a new category member.
For instance, an anomalous category member could highlight
new dimensions from which an exemplar could be sampled.
If the underlying category rules are unclear, selfexplanation may allow for exploration of alternative
hypotheses through which to understand the presented

Method
Participants
Participants were 129 University of Melbourne students who
received course credit for participation. Of the participants,
16 were excluded as a result of missing data, leaving a total
of 113 (91 females, M = 19.9, 3.11). Participants were
randomly assigned to one of three conditions; baseline (n =
35), conflict (n = 43) or self-explanation (n = 35).

Stimuli
The stimuli were “blob-shaped” radial frequency curves,
which varied in shape and color. Four shapes were presented,
and participants were asked to generate a new member of the
same category by drawing a shape using the mouse and
selecting a color. In the baseline condition, the shape of the
objects could vary with color identical across all of the
category members; the color of the objects could vary with
shape fixed, or both shape and color could vary (see Figure
2). The shape was determined by convolving three sine waves
of different angles; two degrees, four degrees, and a third
angle randomly generated from a normal distribution with a
mean of zero and a standard deviation of 10 (low), 12.5
(medium), or 15 (high)1.
The color was determined by selecting a starting hue from
a set of fully saturated and fully bright hue values between

1

The amplitude of the sine waves was .5, .5, and a third amplitude
sampled from a normal distribution with a mean of zero and a
standard deviation .1(low), .2 (medium), or 3 (high).

290

Figure 4. Coding Response Strategies. Exemplars in the black boxes are participant examples of generated responses to
presented stimuli. The online version is in color.
zero and 255. These values were converted to RGB values
using a look-up table. If color varied, then the hue was
adjusted by a normally distributed random adjustment with a
mean of zero and standard deviation of 20 (low), 40
(medium), or 60 (high)2.
In the conflict and self-explanation conditions, three of
the items had low levels of variability (as in the baseline
condition), and one study item varied markedly from the
other three items on shape, color, or on both dimensions (see
Figure 2). The levels of conflict variation were determined in
the same way as the baseline condition but with much larger
standard deviations.

matched the presented category exemplars, we developed
two measures: (1) The first method used translation, rigid
shape rotation, and scaling to find the maximum proportion
of overlap between the generated object and each presented
exemplar. This measure ranged from 0 and 1, with 1
indicating perfect overlap. The shape similarity scores were
approximately normally distributed with a mean of .61 (sd =
0.13). (2) The second method extracted the color of the
generated object and computed the Delta E color difference
between the drawing and each of the presented examplars
(Wyszeck & Stiles, 1982). These scores were positively
skewed with a lower bound at 0 (perfect color match). We log
transformed these scores and adjusted the range to 0 and 1,
and finally subtracted the scores from 1 so that 1 indicated a
perfect color match. The final score was the minimum score
across all four presented category members. The color
similarity scores had a mean of .18 (sd = .07).

Procedure
Participants completed 27 trials. Each trial consisted of
presentation of four items displayed on a computer monitor,
with instructions indicating that the four items all belonged
to a single category. Participants were instructed to use the
computer mouse to draw another member of this category in
the provided box and to select its color. Colors were selected
by choosing a hue from a color bar and then adjusting the
saturation and brightness by selecting from the shading box
(see Figure 3).
In the baseline and conflict conditions, after completion of
all trials, participants were instructed to provide a
retrospective explanation for each trial. For the selfexplanation condition, participants were asked to provide a
prospective explanation and then to think aloud whilst
drawing their exemplar. Prospective and retrospective
verbalizations were recorded on a digital recorder.

Expert Coding Note that our shape overlap similarity
measure does not really capture the extent of creativity in the
generated exemplars; nor does it capture other potentially
interesting patterns of exemplar generation. To capture these
patterns, we had two experts (one was the first author)
classify each drawing into whether the generated object
replicated one of the presented exemplars, whether the
generated object appeared to be an average of the presented
exemplars, or whether the generated object exhibited
imaginative characteristics. This latter rating category was
further broken down into cases which used the perceptual
features of the presented shapes (termed explicitly
imaginative; i.e., imaginative responses which utilized
variations in blob-shape or color; e.g., a butterfly which is
blob-shaped) or whether the generated exemplar drew on
implicit characteristics (we term this rating category

Shape and Color Similarity Scoring To provide an
objective measure of how closely the generated objects
2

Brightness and saturation were adjusted by a similar adjustment
with a standard deviation of 15 (low), 25 (medium), or 35 (high).

All values were selected based on pretesting to ensure perceptibly
low, medium, and high levels of variation.

291

implicitly imaginative; i.e., response which utilize features
other than blob-shape or color; e.g., a drawing of a space ship
- which may have been justified as necessary to interact with

could vary). Variability refers to the level of variability
applied to the dimensions which were not fixed in the
presented set. We examined only the baseline condition
because variability in the conflict and explanation conditions
was instantiated via the anomalous items and is not
comparable.
Figure 5 shows that there was little effect of
dimensionality or variability on the shape similarity scores.
On the other hand, the color similarity scores systematically
decreased with increasing variability whenever color varied
in the presented set. That is, whenever the presented category
exemplars varied in color, people generated colors which
were more dissimilar (to the presented colors) than when
color was fixed or of lower variability.
A two-way Dimensionality x Variability ANOVA
confirmed these results. The largest F-ratio for the shape
scores was the effect of variability, F(2, 882) = 1.45, p = .23.
For the color scores, there was a main effect of
dimensionality, F(2, 882) = 151.33, p < .001, a main effect of
variability, F(2, 882) = 27.35, p < .001, and an interaction,
F(4, 882) = 11.06, p < .001.

Figure 5. Average shape similarity (top panel) and color
similarity (bottom panel) as a function of dimensionality
and variability in the baseline condition.
the alien shapes that had been presented as part of the
category). There was an 86% agreement between our expert
raters; disagreements were then clarified between raters by
drawing on the recordings generated by participants. Figure
4 shows exemplars representative of each response strategy.

Results

Figure 6. Average shape similarity (top panel) and color
similarity (bottom panel) scores in the baseline, conflict and
explanation conditions. Error bars are +/- 1 standard error.

What is the effect of variability in the presented
category on the generated exemplars?
We first examined the effects of dimensionality and
variability within the baseline condition on both shape and
color similarity. Dimensionality refers to what aspects of the
presented category exemplars varied within the presented set
(e.g., shape could vary with color fixed across all four
category members, color could vary with shape fixed, or both

Does conflict or explanation lead to less similar
generated exemplars?
Automated Scores We compared the average shape and
color scores for each participant across the baseline, conflict,
and explanation conditions. There was a general decreasing
trend across these conditions for both shape and color

292

similarity (see Figure 6). Both effects were significant using
a one-way ANOVA: (Shape: F(2, 110) = 3.2, p = .044; Color:
F(2, 110) = 64.05, p < .001).

of possible shapes was unbounded. The use of a mouse
instead of a stylus may have restricted the shapes that were
generated; we leave this as a goal for future experiments.
We next showed that including an anomalous exemplar
and allowing self-explanation, led to responses which were
less similar to the presented category members. Our rating
analyses clearly showed that in all conditions, replication was
the most utilized strategy. Examination of the drawings
revealed that most subjects drew blob like objects and that
typically these blobs looked primarily like one of the
presented objects. The predominant application of replication
strategies in all conditions in this study may have been
anticipated through our use of abstract stimuli. The use of
abstract stimuli promoted the predilection toward perceptual
features of the presented stimuli (Tversky, 1977), and the
absence of feedback on task performance made category
comprehension more ambiguous. Consequently, a replication
strategy represented the simplest approach to meet task
parameters, whilst requiring the least amount of cognitive
effort. This result may also indicate that participants adopted
a strong sampling assumption (Navarro et al., 2012) and
simply sampled from the presented set.
Despite stimuli having no direct links to prior conceptual
knowledge, some responses drew on knowledge external to
the perceptual features of the manufactured categories. This
was more prevalent when participants were encouraged to
self-explain. This implies that the method of instruction,
along with the method of response, plays an active role in
both understanding category membership and the subsequent
exemplar generation process.
Presentation of a conflicting category member did not
result in more or less imaginative exemplars. The implication
is that the conflict item proved difficult to assimilate,
resulting in replication being favoured as a strategy. The
importance of delivering a conflict at the appropriate level so
as to sustain interest has been demonstrated in previous
research in learning. As noted by Limon (2001), the
presentation of contradictory data can only result in a
meaningful conflict if it presents a challenge to existing held
beliefs. If the basis of the conflict is not understood, it fails to
engage the person, and therefore the conflict may be ignored
or explained away (Adey, 1992). Our results suggests that
conflicting items which maintain the same explicit
dimensional structure might limit the recruitment of
imagination. We leave it for future research to examine
conflicts which signal the implicit dimensionality of the
concept.
On the other hand, prospective self-explanation promoted
greater use of imaginative strategies. This indicates that
cognitive interaction via self-explanation can foster
imaginative responses to category conflicts. It appears that
self-explanation provided a mechanism for reflective
abstraction of the conflict (Adey et al, 2007), and encouraged
imagination to resolve the problem. In line with studies into
the influence of self-explanation in dealing with anomalous
data (e.g., Williams, Lombrozo, & Rehder, 2011), selfexplanation encourages the greater use of imaginative

Expert Ratings The proportion of each drawing type is
shown in Figure 7. It is immediately obvious that the main
strategy for exemplar generation was to simply replicate one
of the presented category members. While all conditions
showed some evidence of generating imaginative exemplars,
the level of implicitly imaginative exemplars appears to be
higher (with a co-occurring decrease in replication) in the
explanation condition. This was confirmed by a significant
chi-squared test for independence across all three groups, Χ 2
(6) = 63.46, p < .001, and for the baseline vs explanation
comparison, Χ2 (3) = 49.11, p < .001, the conflict vs
explanation comparison, Χ2 (3) = 34.59, p < .001, but not the
baseline vs conflict comparison, Χ2 (3) = 3.02, p = .15.

Figure 7. Expert rating proportions for the shape of the
generated objects for each strategy type: replication,
averaging, explicit imaginative, and implicit imaginative.

Discussion
This experiment examined the effects of stimulus variability,
which included adding a conflict item to the presented
category set, as well as the impact of prospective selfexplanation and thinking aloud on exemplar generation.
We first showed that variability on a color dimension
leads to more novel generation of values for that color
dimension. We did not find an effect of variability on shape.
There are a few potential explanations for this difference
between shape and color similarity.
For one, our
operationalization of shape similarity as overlap did not
adequately capture the more creative responses that were
identified by our raters (see Figure 4, for examples). Second,
color was easier to generate in our experiment than shape.
Shape had to be hand-drawn but color could be selected from
a color palatte. Hence, a third difference was that the range of
color options was presented to the participant, but the range

293

strategies in response to a category conflict. It is the
combination of both a conflict and a mechanism to explore
the reasons behind the conflict which increases the use of
imagination.
A limitation of the current study is that it failed to address
whether self-explanation increases the likelihood of
imaginative responses without the involvement of a conflict
category member. It remains unclear whether highly
imaginative responses would have arisen if a more complete
range of feature variation had not been revealed by the
conflict item. Therefore, repeating the current study allowing
explanation in the baseline condition would facilitate a better
understanding of the importance of self-explanation in
promoting imaginative responses. Future studies should also
explore the role of self-explanation in the use of replication.
When a conflict category member was presented amongst
similar stimuli, participants following a replication strategy
either chose to replicate one of the three similar items or the
minority conflict item. Understanding the patterns which
underlies this decision making is important, as it represents
the starting point for imaginative responses.
The motivation for the present study was to better
understand the role of imagination in exemplar generation.
To address the gap in the literature about the impact of
instructions on structured imagination, abstract stimuli were
used as a means of reducing access to prior knowledge when
generating exemplars. Although participants favoured a
strategy which leveraged perceptual features, the current
study provides evidence of imaginative responses leveraging
implicitly related prior knowledge. In addition, selfexplanation was shown to be an effective mechanism in
generating imaginative exemplars in the presence of category
conflict. This experiment confirms that self-explanation
makes structured imagination more flexible when interacting
with unexpected categorisation tasks, and represents the
starting point for greater exploration into how imagination
responds to cognitive challenges.
It is worthwhile to consider how one might develop a
computational model of exemplar generation. Clearly an
essential mechanism is the ability to retrieve instances or
features from members of stored categories and then to
combine these retrieved features. This type of mechanism is
reminiscent of the echo content mechanisms in Minerva
(Hintzman, 1984). Our results suggest a mix of strategies
which direct retrieval of one of the presented category
members being the most common. The fact that replication is
increased in the conflict condition suggests a role for
selective attention in determining retrieval. However, in
some cases, there appears to be probabilistic sampling not
only of the physically presented shape and color dimensions,
but also of dimensions which are implicit to the presented
category and likely more conceptual than physical (see
Figure 4). McCaffrey & Krishnamurty (2014) propose a
taxonomy of different feature types that ranges from physical
features such as size, shape, mass, weight, to the
identification of object parts, to the types of functions or uses
an object has, its super- and subordinate categories,

associated concepts, aesthetic values, and causal relations. In
this taxonomy, only certain types of features (or dimensions)
are immediately available to sensory perception. Selfexplanation seems to result in an increased probability of
sampling from more implicit dimensions.

Acknowledgments
DL was supported by an ARC Discovery Project grant:
DP160102360. We also thank Grace Kilmer for help with
rating the responses.

References
Adey, P. (1992). The CASE results: implications for science
teaching. International Journal of Science Education, 14,
137-146.
Adey, P., Csapo, B., Demetriou, A., Hautamaki, J., & Shayer, M.
(2007). Can we be intelligent about intelligence?: Why
education needs the concept of plastic general ability.
Educational Research Review, 2, 75-97.
Duncker, K. (1945). On problem-solving. Psych Monographs, 270,
58, i-113.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1980). Verbal reports as data.
Psych Review, 215-251.
Hintzman, D. L. (1984). MINERVA 2: A simulation model of
human memory. Behav Research Methods, 16, 96-101.
Jern, A. & Kemp, C. (2013). A probabilistic account of exemplar
and category generation. Cog Psych, 66, 85-125.
Kang, S., Scharmann, L. C., & Noh, T. (2004). Re-examining the
role of cognitive conflict in science concept learning.
Research in Science Education, 34, 71-96.
Limon, M. (2001). On the cognitive conflict as an instructional
strategy for conceptual change: A critical appraisal.
Learning and instruction, 11, 357-380.
Lombrozo, T. (2006). The structure and function of explanations.
Trends in cognitive sciences, 10, 464-470.
McCaffrey, T. & Krishnamurty, S. (2014). The obscure features
hypothesis in design innovation. International Journal of
Design Creativity and Innovation, 3, 1-28.
Navarro, D. J., Dry, M. J. & Lee, M. D. (2012). Sampling
assumptions in inductive generalization. Cognitive
Science, 36, 187-223.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of Similarity. Psychological Review,
84, 327-352.
Ward, T. (1994). Structured Imagination: The role of category
structure in exemplar generation. Cognitive Psychology,
27, 1-40.
Ward, T. B., & Sifonis, C. M. (1997). Task demands and generative
Thinking: What changes and what remains the same? The
Journal of Creative Behaviour, 31, 245-259.
Ward, T., Patterson, M. J., & Sifonis, C. M. (2004). The role of
specificity and abstraction in idea generation. Cognitive
Research Journal, 16, 1-9.
Williams, J. J., & Lombrozo, T. (2010). The role of explanation in
discovery and generalisation: Evidence from category
learning. Cognitive Science, 34, 776-806.
Williams, J. J., Lombrozo, T., & Redher, B. (2011). Explaining
drives the discovery of real and illusory patterns.
Proceedings of the 33rd annual conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1352-1357)
Wyszecki, G., & Stiles, W. S. (1982). Color science (Vol. 8). New
York: Wiley.

294

