The impact of descriptions and incentives on the simultaneous underweighting and
overestimation of rare events
Garston Liang (garston.liang@unsw.edu.au),
Emmanouil Konstantinidis (em.konstantinidis@gmail.com), Aba Szollosi (aba.szollosi@gmail.com)
Christopher Donkin (christopher.donkin@gmail.com), & Ben R. Newell (ben.newell@unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, UNSW, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
Abstract
We replicate and extend work demonstrating that choice and
probability estimation can be dissociated through the coexistence
of contradictory reactions to rare events. In the context of
experience-based risky choice, we find the simultaneous
underweighting of rare events in choice and their overestimation
in probability judgement. This tendency persisted in the presence
of accurate descriptions of rare event occurrence (Experiment 1),
but was attenuated by incentivizing accurate probability
estimates (Experiment 2). The implications of these results for
popular models of risky choice are briefly discussed.
Keywords: Decisions from experience; probability estimation;
risky choice; underweighting.

Introduction
Decision-making research often uses a description format to
present risk information. In the experimental context of
monetary gambles, participants are (usually) presented with
two options. One option is deemed “safe” as it provides a sure
payoff (e.g., a loss of $3 with certainty), while the other option
(e.g., a loss of $4 with 0.8 probability; no loss otherwise) is
deemed “risky” as it bears the risk of a rare event (i.e., the 0.2
probability of no loss). In the description format, the
participant is explicitly given this risk information and makes a
single choice between the two options. For the aforementioned
gamble, Kahneman and Tversky (1979) found that participants
preferred the risky option. This has been explained by
assuming that participants choose as though they subjectively
overweight the probability of the rare event. When the same
gamble is presented in the gain domain, participants prefer the
safe option ($3 with certainty), consistent with the explanation
of overweighting the 20% chance of receiving nothing.
In experience-based tasks, participants are presented with the
same two choices without the aid of written descriptions. In
order to learn about the outcome distributions, participants
must repeatedly choose between the two options and observe
the outcomes over successive rounds of choices. When risk
information is presented in this format, choice preferences are
consistent with underweighting the rare event. That is,
participants prefer the safe option in the above example
because the probability of the rare event (0.2 probability of no
loss) is subjectively underweighted.

Probability judgement and underweighting
Fox and Hadar (2006) first proposed that erroneous probability
judgements could be responsible for underweighting in
experience-based choice. If participants judged the probability

736

of the rare event to be lower than the objective probability, then
underweighting in choice would reflect this erroneous
judgement. To examine this judgement error hypothesis, a
number of studies have asked participants to estimate the
probability of the rare event at the end of the experiment (e.g.,
Hau, Plesak, Kiefer, & Hertwig, 2008). Using this retrospective
method, studies have generally found probability estimates of
the rare event to be accurate.
However, retrospective probes of this nature can create
disparities between the information used during the task and
judgements formed at the end of the task. Camilleri and Newell
(2009) found that retrospectively generated probability
estimates failed to predict participant choices during the
experiment. One remedy for this is to prompt judgement probes
throughout the task. In studies assessing awareness, Newell and
Shanks (2014) suggested that assessments should be made as
immediately as possible as to avoid forgetting and interference
from other cognitive processes. This immediacy criterion can
be applied to probability judgements as the large number of
trials in experience-based tasks (e.g., 50 trials in Hau et al.,
2008) may exacerbate any differences between retrospectively
and immediately generated judgements.

The Coexistence Hypothesis
Barron and Yechiam (2009) used a novel trial-by-trial design
to examine probability judgements in an experience-based task.
In their Experiment 1, participants were repeatedly presented
with a choice between a safe option (-3 points with certainty)
and a risky option (-20 points with 15% probability; 0 points
otherwise). Note that the expected value of both options was
equal so a preference for the risky option would be indicative
of underweighting the rare event. After an initial phase of
choices alone, participants were prompted to estimate the
probability of the rare event for the next trial following each
choice.
Barron and Yechiam (2009) found that while participants
preferred the risky option in their choices, consistent with
underweighting the rare event, they overestimated the
probability of the rare event (i.e., the probability of the -20
outcome). This inconsistency occurred at the individual level
such that the majority of the participants (15/24)
simultaneously
demonstrated
underweighting
and
overestimation of the rare event; a result that was named the
coexistence hypothesis.
Barron and Yechiam (2009) also found evidence of opposing
recency effects on choices and probability estimates. Following
the observation of a rare event, participants were less likely to

select the risky option. In these same trials though, probability
estimates of the rare event were lower, demonstrating a
reasoning process akin to the gambler’s fallacy. This
paradoxical result was called the contingent recency effect.
The coexistence hypothesis and the contingent recency
effect are problematic for traditional decision models, such as
the Two-Stage Choice Model (Fox & Tversky, 1998), because
they present a dissociation between probability judgements and
behavior. Most decision models like the Two-Stage model
predict that choices can be mapped onto subjective
representations of probability following a transformation
according to the weighting function of Prospect Theory
(Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). This makes the coexistence
hypothesis an interesting anomaly given that overestimation is
inconsistent with underweighting in choices.

Descriptions in decisions from experience
The existing literature separately compares decisions from
experience to decisions from description. However, everyday
decision making often utilizes a combination of both
information sources (e.g., a doctor informed by both her
clinical experience and empirical findings).
The limited number of studies examining decisions from
experience in the presence of descriptions have produced
inconsistent results. While some have found that the presence
of descriptions influence choice in decisions from experience
(Jessup, Bishara, & Busemeyer, 2008) others have contended
that the descriptions are neglected (Lejarraga & Gonzalez,
2011). Aiming to resolve these contradictory accounts, WeissCohen et al. (2016) found that participants predominantly
relied upon experience to inform their choices but could be
influenced by descriptions that provided novel information.
This dovetails with the recent finding that the additional
presence of descriptive summaries increased underweighting
behavior in experience based tasks (Yechiam, Rakow, &
Newell, 2015).
Taken together, these studies demonstrate that descriptions
that explicitly provide probability information can influence
choice in an experience-based task. However, less is known
about how participants represent probability information when
both sources of information are available. Given that risky
choices are informed by probability judgements when each
information source is presented separately, it is important to
examine how individuals reconcile probability information in
the presence of both descriptions and experience.
Experiment 1 examined the relationship between probability
judgement and risky choice. We presented descriptions in an
experience-based task that prompted trial by trial probability
estimates similar to Barron and Yechiam (2009). We expected
that participants given experience alone would show behavior
consistent with the coexistence hypothesis (underweighting in
choice and overestimation in judgement). Given that the
descriptions explicitly stated the veridically experienced rate of
rare events, we expected participants given description and
experience to accurately estimate the rare event. However, as
experience is primarily relied upon to inform choice patterns,
we expected underweighting in choice would still emerge.

737

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Eighty undergraduate students (Mage = 18.90
years; SD = 1.66, 53 females, 1 other) from UNSW
participated in exchange for course credit, and an incentive
payment contingent on the participant’s choices during the task
(M = $3.21 AUD, SD = 0.18).
Materials Participants were presented with two options
associated with either a safe (S) or risky (R) distribution as
follows:
Safe (S): -3 points with certainty
Risky (R): -20 points with probability 0.15; 0 points
otherwise
The expected values were matched, and so a preference for the
risky option would be indicative of underweighting. The risky
distribution used random sequences of 120 outcomes, of which
exactly 15% (18 outcomes) were rare events. Each sequence
was presented to one participant in each condition.
Design Experiment 1 used a between-subjects design with 2
risk information conditions (n = 40). The descriptionexperience (DE) condition completed the repeated choice task
with descriptions that stated the outcome distribution of each
option. For example, the description for the risky option read
“15% chance of -20; 85% chance of 0”. These descriptions
remained visible for the duration of the experiment. The
experience-only condition (E) completed the task without
descriptions 1.
Procedure Participants were randomly assigned to the E or DE
condition and presented with instructions on a computer
screen. Participants were told their show-up payment of $5.00
AUD had been converted into 1000 points and that their task
was to retain as many points as possible. They were prompted
to make a choice between the S and R options on the screen
(the locations of which were counterbalanced). Following each
choice, full feedback for both the selected and forgone option
was provided, which remained visible until participants
proceeded to the next trial.
After 40 choice-only trials, participants completed an
additional probability estimation task following each choice.
Specifically, they were asked “What is the probability that –20
will appear in the next round?”, and inputted an integer
between 0-100 representing a percentage. Feedback for the
current trial remained visible during the estimation task. This
choice-then-estimation pattern was repeated for the remaining
80 trials after which the participants were debriefed and paid
according to the rate of 2 points = $0.01.

Results
Coexistence
Hypothesis
We
found
evidence
of
underweighting in choice in both the DE and E conditions.
1A third condition with misleading descriptions called the
conflicting descriptions experience condition has not been included
here as it was not relevant to our current investigation.

Figure 1. Risky choice and probability estimates data in Experiment 1. Error bars represent ± 1 SEM.
(A) Mean PR rates (left) and probability estimates (right) by block of 10 trials.
(B) PR rates as a function of preceding trial outcome.
(C) Violin plots of the mean probability estimates in each condition as a function of preceding trial outcome.
Overall, participants preferred the risky option as indicated by
mean PR rates (the proportion of risky choices per block) being
significantly greater than 0.5 in E condition, M = 0.70, t(39) =
6.50, p < .001, and the DE condition, M = 0.71, t(39) = 6.79, p
< .001. As the expected values of the options were equal, this
preference for the risky option (i.e., PR rates > 0.5)
demonstrates that participants underweighted the rare event
(Figure 1A, left panel).
We examined for differences between the conditions using a
2 x 12 mixed ANOVA with condition as the between factor
and block (of 10 trials) as the within factor 2. The main effect of
condition was not significant, F(1,78) = .42, p = .84. This
result indicates that we failed to find a significant difference in
PR-rates between the experience-only condition and experience
with explicitly stated descriptions.
Given that probability information was explicitly available,
we expected that participants would accurately estimate the
rare event. However, we found evidence of overestimation.
Mean probability estimates were significantly greater than the
objective probability of 0.15 in the E condition, M = 0.30, t(39)
= 6.64, p < .001, and the DE condition, M = 0.28, t(39) = 5.65,
p < .001. The effect of condition was non-significant, F(1,78) =
.22, p = .64 (Figure 1A right panel).
Taken together, these results show the coexistence of
inconsistent reactions to rare events in choice and probability
judgement even in the presence of accurate descriptive
information. Whilst underweighting suggests the rare event had
less subjective impact than warranted on choices,
overestimation suggests oversensitivity to the rare events’
appearance. Moreover, the majority of participants (27/40 in
2 In cases where the sphericity assumption has been violated, the
Greenhouse-Geisser correction to df has been used.

738

the E condition, 28/40 in the DE condition) exhibited this
inconsistent pattern.
Contingent Recency Effect We separated participant
responses into trials following a rare event (-20 outcome) and
trials following a common event (0 outcome). This allowed us
to assess for the impact of the most recently observed outcome,
using a 2 x 2 mixed ANOVA with the outcome of the
preceding trial as the within factor and condition as the
between factor for both choices and probability estimates.
For choices, we found a significant interaction effect, F(1,
78) = 4.41, p = .04 (Figure 1B). This was qualified by a simple
effects analysis which revealed a significant effect of preceding
trial outcome for the E condition, F(1,39) = 8.25, p = .01, with
a non-significant effect for the DE condition, F(1, 39) = .10, p
= .76. This result shows that in the E condition people were
less likely to select the risky option after observing a rare event
compared to the common event (PR|-20 = .60 and PR|0 = .72),
whereas in the DE condition this effect was not significant
(PR|-20 = .70 and PR|0 = .71).
For probability estimates (PE), we found a significant effect
of preceding trial outcome, F(1,78) = 22.98, p < .001 (Figure
1C). Averaged over conditions, participants estimated the
probability of rare event to be lower following a rare event
compared to following a common event (PE|-20 = .20 and PE|0
= .30). This is evidence of negative recency, which suggests
that participants believed the chances of rare events in
succession were unlikely. The effect of condition was not
significant, F(1, 78) = 1.00, p = 0.32.
Taken together, these two results demonstrate an inconsistent
reaction to the appearance of the rare event at least in the E
condition. On the trials following a rare event, participants
were less likely to select the risky option. However,

participants simultaneously estimated the rare event to be less
likely to occur. This contradictory pattern demonstrates a
dissociation between choices and probability estimates, which
replicates and extends the pattern observed by Barron and
Yechiam (2009). (Note however, that Figure 1C shows
different bimodalities in responding – a pattern that awaits
further examination).

Experiment 2
The novel contribution of Experiment 1 is evidence of
overestimation even in the presence of descriptions that
explicitly state the probability of rare events. This suggests that
overestimation emerges from factors related to experience.
Experiment 2 examined two hypotheses about the emergence
of overestimation in experience-based choice. The first is that
overestimation of the rare event is due to the anticipation of the
loss of points. In Experiment 1, participants were incentivized
on the outcomes of their choices and so each observation of the
rare event was paired with a tangible loss of their incentive
payment. This aversive experience may have led participants to
overweigh rare events in memory. If this is the case then
accuracy might improve if probability estimation was
decoupled from experiencing the consequential outcome.
The second hypothesis is that overestimation arises from
psychophysical limitations with probability processing. The
suggestion here is that although individuals may be proficient
in tracking the frequency of events (e.g., Hasher & Zacks,
1979), they may have difficulties in expressing this information
as probabilities (cf. Gigerenzer & Hoffrage, 1995). This
explanation would predict that overestimation is not affected
by consequential outcomes but arises due to an inherent
incapability of accurately estimating probabilities. Therefore,
even if risky choices were divorced from any loss of points,
overestimation would still occur.
We tested these hypotheses by separating consequential
choices from probability estimation using different incentive
schemes. Specifically, participants were incentivized on i)
choices only, ii) only the accuracy of probability estimates, or
iii) both choices and the accuracy of probability estimates.

Method
Participants In Experiment 2, 132 students (Mage= 19.52
years; SD = 1.64, 100 females) participated in exchange for
course credit, and a performance-based incentive payment.
Materials As in Experiment 1.
Design Experiment 2 used a between subjects design with 3
groups (n = 44) differing in incentive structure.
The choice-incentive group was incentivized on the
outcomes of their choices, replicating the E condition from
Experiment 1. The probability-incentive condition was
incentivized on the accuracy of their probability estimates. In
this condition, participants did not choose between the options
but instead pressed a separate button that revealed the
outcomes from both options simultaneously. The outcomes
were financially inconsequential and their task was to track the

739

outcomes in order to accurately estimate the rare event.
Accuracy was calculated as the percentage point deviation
from the experienced probability of rare events on each trial.
These deviations were tallied at the end of the experiment
rather than during the experiment. This was done to avoid
giving any feedback about the accuracy of the estimates which
could have influenced responses during the probability
estimation task. In the dual-incentive condition, participants
were incentivized on both the outcomes of their choices and the
accuracy of their probability estimates.
Procedure Participants were provided with instructions on a
screen that explained the incentive scheme and the objectives
of their respective conditions. Across conditions, participants
were given a $5.00 show-up payment from which an amount
would be deducted contingent on their performance in the task.
In the initial stage, participants in the choice-incentive and
dual-incentive conditions made repeated choices while those in
the probability-incentive condition tracked the outcomes of
both options. After 40 trials, all participants also completed the
probability estimation task on each trial. Participants were then
debriefed and paid accordingly. Choice incentive participants
converted their remaining points at a rate of 2 points = $0.01
(M = $3.19, SD = .19). Probability-incentive participants were
penalized 0.05 cents per percentage point deviation (M =
$4.44, SD = .31). For the dual-incentive participants, their
show-up payment was divided in half with each half paid
according to different incentive structures. The “choice” half of
the payment was calculated by converting their remaining
points at a rate of 1 point = 0.5 cents. The “probability
estimate” half was penalized at 0.025 cents per percentage
point deviation.

Results
Coexistence hypothesis PR-rates were again significantly
greater than .5 in the choice-incentive condition, M = .72, t(43)
= 7.28, p < 0.001, and the dual incentive condition, M = .76,
t(43) = 12.98, p < 0.001 (Figure 2A, left panel). This suggests
participants underweighted the rare event in their choices. A
mixed 2 x 12 ANOVA, with condition as the between and
block as the within factor, found that the effect of condition
was not significant, F(1, 86) = 1.46, p = .23.
Participants overestimated the rare event in the choiceincentive, M = 0.33, t(43) = 8.99, p < .001, and dual-incentive
conditions, M = 0.26, t(43) = 4.50, p < .001, shown by mean
probability estimates significantly greater than the objective
probability of 0.15 (Figure 2A, right panel). By comparison,
mean estimates in the probability-incentive condition did not
differ significantly from the objective probability of 0.15, M =
0.16, t(43) = 1.09, p = .28). Using a 3 x 12 mixed ANOVA, we
found a significant main effect of condition, F(2, 129) = 17.51,
p < 0.001. Post-hoc Scheffé comparisons showed that all
groups significantly differed from each other. The interaction
effect was not significant, F (10.85, 699.63) = 1.14, p = .33.
In summary, mean probability estimates were highest in the
choice-incentive
condition
where
participants
were
incentivized for the outcomes of their choices alone. However,

Figure 2. Risky choice and probability estimate data in Experiment 2. Error bars represent ± 1 SEM.
(A) PR rates (left) and probability estimates (right) by block of 10 trials.
(B) PR rates as a function of preceding trial outcome.
(C) Violin plots of the mean probability estimates in each condition as a function of preceding trial outcome.
if participants were additionally incentivized for accuracy as in
the dual-incentive condition, estimate accuracy was improved.
Mean probability estimates were most accurate when
consequential outcomes were removed all together.
Taken together, these results replicate the coexistence
hypothesis of underweighting in choice and overestimation in
probability judgement. We found that 34/44 participants in the
choice-incentive condition, and 26/44 participants in the dualincentive condition demonstrated this pattern of responding.
Contingent Recency Effects A 2 x 2 mixed ANOVA found a
significant effect of preceding trial outcome for risky choices
(Figure 2B). This showed that averaged over conditions, PRrates were lower following a rare outcome than following a
common outcome (PR|-20 = .66 and PR|0 = .76), F(1, 86) =
18.91, p < .001.
The mean probability estimates contingent on the preceding
trial outcome are presented in Figure 2C. We used a 3 x 2
mixed ANOVA with preceding trial outcome as the within
factor to examine for recency effects. A significant effect of
preceding trial outcome was found, F(1, 129) = 4.42, p = .04,
which was qualified by a significant interaction between
condition and preceding trial outcome, F (2, 129) = 5.34, p =
.01. Simple effects analysis revealed probability estimates in
the choice-incentive condition were lower after observing a
rare outcome than after observing a common event (PE|-20 =
.25 and PE|0 = .34), F (1,129) = 13.33, p < 0.001.
By comparison, the effect of preceding trial outcome was not
observed in the probability-incentive condition (PE|-20 = .18
and PE|0 = .16), F (1,129) = 0.90, p = 0.35, or the dualincentive condition (PE|-20 = .23 and PE|0 = 0.25), F (1,129) =

740

0.88, p = 0.35. Taken together, the negative recency effect of
preceding trial outcome was only found when participants were
not incentivized to estimate accurately. (Note again however,
that Figure 2C shows bimodality in responding – clustered
around 50 and 0 – a pattern that awaits further examination).

General Discussion
Across two experiments, we found the coexistence of
underweighting in choice and overestimation in probability
judgements at the individual level. Furthermore, inconsistency
is evident in the trials immediately following rare events.
Experiment 1 replicated the coexistence hypothesis in the
presence of accurate descriptions. We failed to find a
difference in choices and probability estimates between
participants that received descriptions and those that did not.
Experiment 2 used incentive schemes to show that
overestimation emerges in the presence of consequential
outcomes. We postulate that attention to the probabilities
attenuated the degree of overestimation.
The results of our experiment suggest consequential
outcomes biased attention away from probability tracking.
Kahneman (1973) defined attention as a limited resource that is
allocated according to the demands of the task. Overestimation
may have occurred in anticipation of the loss of points
associated with the rare event, driving attention towards the
outcomes themselves. With respect to the dual-incentive
condition, the presence of consequential outcomes in the
choice task meant fewer attentional resources could be
allocated to probability tracking. This competition for
attentional resources between the two tasks would explain why

the degree of overestimation was attenuated, but still remained
in the presence of consequential outcomes.
Our overestimation results are incompatible with the
judgement error hypothesis (Fox & Hadar, 2006). Therefore,
the coexistence of overestimation and underweighting suggests
that probability judgement and choice may reflect separate
cognitive processes. The distinction between choice and
judgement resembles the comparison between online and
memory-based strategies. Hastie and Park (1986) distinguished
between two types of strategies based on how information is
processed to form a judgement. Online strategies involve stepby-step information processing whereby a judgement is
continually updated with new information. By comparison a
memory-based strategy involves a discrete instance in which
all relevant information is recalled from memory to form a
judgement (Haberstroh & Betsch, 2002).
We propose that the choice process resembles an online
strategy that involves continually updating a small mental
sample of outcomes with recently observed outcomes. This is
compatible with the explanation that underweighting emerges
from small mental samples of outcomes (i.e., calculating the
expected value of the last 5 observed outcomes, cf. Erev &
Roth, 2014). Concurrently, probability judgements resemble a
memory-based strategy where aversive rare events are
overweighted in memory, resulting in overestimation (e.g.,
Tversky & Kahneman, 1973).
Separate processes for choice and judgement would be
consistent with our findings of the contingent recency effects.
In trials following the rare event, participants were less likely
to choose the risky outcome yet, they paradoxically estimated a
lower probability of the occurrence of the rare event. An online
strategy for choices would involve a trial-by-trial updating
process that incorporates each newly observed outcome into
the decision process. Whilst the risky option usually provided
the more attractive outcome (i.e., no loss of points), the
occasional appearance of the rare event meant that the small
sample from the risky option was momentarily less attractive
than the safe option. This explains the reduced tendency to
select the risky option after observing a rare event. In these
very trials, a memory-based strategy that employs the
gambler’s fallacy would explain the lower probability
estimates. Given a rare event on the preceding trial,
participants may have reasoned that “lightning does not strike
twice”. Therefore, the gambler’s fallacy may have served as a
memory heuristic to simplify the more cognitively demanding
memory-based estimation process.
In summary, we have shown the impact of descriptions and
incentives on the simultaneous overestimation and
underweighting of rare events.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Australian Research Council
(DP140101145; DP160101186).

References
Barron, G., & Yechiam, E. (2009). The coexistence of
overestimation and underweighting of rare events and the

741

contingent recency effect. Judgment and Decision Making, 4,
447-460.
Camilleri, A. R., & Newell, B. R. (2009). The role of
representation in experience-based choice. Judgment and
Decision Making, 4, 518-529.
Erev, I., & Roth, A. E. (2014). Maximization, learning, and
economic behavior. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 111,10818-10825.
Fox, C. R., & Hadar, L. (2006). "Decisions from experience" =
sampling error + prospect theory: Reconsidering Hertwig,
Barron, Weber & Erev (2004). Judgment and Decision
Making, 1, 159-161.
Fox, C. R., & Tversky, A. (1998). A belief-based account of
decision under uncertainty. Management Science, 44, 879895.
Gigerenzer, G., & Hoffrage, U. (1995). How to improve
Bayesian reasoning without instruction: Frequency
formats. Psychological Review, 102, 684-704.
Haberstroh, S., & Betsch, T. (2002). Online strategies versus
memory-based strategies in frequency estimation. ETC.
Frequency Processing and Cognition, 205-220.
Hasher, L., & Zacks, R. T. (1979). Automatic and effortful
processes in memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 108, 356-388.
Hastie, R., & Park, B. (1986). The relationship between
memory and judgment depends on whether the judgment
task is memory-based or on-line. Psychological Review, 93,
258-268.
Hau, R., Pleskac, T. J., Kiefer, J., & Hertwig, R. (2008). The
description–experience gap in risky choice: The role of
sample size and experienced probabilities. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 21, 493-518.
Jessup, R. K., Bishara, A. J., & Busemeyer, J. R. (2008).
Feedback produces divergence from prospect theory in
descriptive choice. Psychological Science, 19, 1015-1022.
Kahneman, D. (1973). Attention and Effort. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An
analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 263-291.
Lejarraga, T., & Gonzalez, C. (2011). Effects of feedback and
complexity on repeated decisions from description.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
116, 286-295
Newell, B.R. & Shanks, D.R. (2014). Unconscious influences
on decision making: A critical review. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 37, 1-63
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A heuristic
for judging frequency and probability. Cognitive
Psychology, 5, 207-232.
Weiss-Cohen, L., Konstantinidis, E., Speekenbrink, M., &
Harvey, N. (2016). Incorporating conflicting descriptions
into decisions from experience. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 135, 55-69.
Yechiam, E., Rakow, T., & Newell, B. R. (2015).
Super‐underweighting of rare events with repeated
descriptive summaries. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 28, 67-75.

