The Influence of Prosody and Case Marking on Thematic Role Assignment in
Ambiguous Action Scenes: Adults versus Children
Julia Marina Kröger (jkroeger@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de)
Bielefeld University, Department of Linguistics, Germany
Katja Münster (katja.muenster@hu-berlin.de)
Pia Knoeferle (pia.knoeferle@hu-berlin.de)
Humboldt University Berlin, Department of German Language and Linguistics, Germany

Abstract
In two visual word eye tracking studies, we investigated the
influence of prosody and case marking on children’s and
adults’ thematic role assignment. We assigned an SVO/
OVS-biasing (vs. neutral) prosodic contour to
unambiguously case marked German subject-verb-object
(SVO) and object-verb-subject (OVS) sentences
respectively. Scenes depicted ambiguous action events
(e.g., donkey-paints->elephant-paints->cheetah) but case
marking and prosody could, in principle, disambiguate. In
adults, case marking but not prosody rapidly guided
thematic role assignment. Children did not rely on case
marking but exploited the biasing prosody to enhance their
agent-first interpretation of the sentences. These results
suggest that in scenes depicting fully ambiguous role
relations, children’s understanding of case marking at the
age of five is not yet robust enough to enable thematic role
assignment. Prosody did not overwrite the SVO preference,
it rather enhanced it.
Keywords: Visual World Paradigm, eye movements;
prosody; action scenes; age differences; language
processing; thematic role assignment; case marking.

Introduction
In rich contexts, listeners can rapidly exploit a range of
different cues (e.g., prosody, non-linguistic information,
case marking) during language comprehension. Such cues
can, for instance, help them to efficiently identify the
thematic roles of a sentence. Thematic roles distinguish
the role an argument carries with regards to the predicate
of the sentence (Carnie, 2002). Although children rapidly
acquire language during the first years of their life, a full
command of their native language takes, not surprisingly,
time to develop. One aspect that is particularly
challenging is the correct assignment of thematic roles. In
German, for example, a transitive sentence typically
includes a subject, a verb, and an object but speakers can
arrange these constituents in more than one way, yielding,
among others, subject-verb-object (SVO) or object-verbsubject (OVS) orders. To determine who is doing what to
whom, comprehenders can rely on the case-marked
determiners of the sentential noun phrases. Accusative
case marks a sentence-initial noun phrase as the object
(patient), and nominative case marks it as the subject
(agent) of the sentence. But case marking can be

ambiguous in German (feminine and neuter nouns have
the same form in the nominative / subject and the
accusative / object case), resulting in temporary ambiguity
as to who-does-what-to-whom. The resolution of this
ambiguity can be difficult for children, not only because
of their strong SVO word order bias. The following
section describes a range of studies on how adults rapidly
exploit visual, case, and prosodic cues for thematic role
assignment while children sometimes struggle to exploit
these cues.

Visual Information
In rich contexts, non-linguistic information like the visual
referential context, contrast between objects, depicted
actions, or events can all rapidly influence the
interpretation, syntactic structuring, and thematic role
assignment of spoken utterances (e.g., Chambers,
Magnuson, & Tanenhaus, 2004; Knoeferle, Crocker,
Sheepers & Pickering, 2005; Sedivy et al., 1999;
Tanenhaus et al., 1995). Tanenhaus and colleagues (1995)
found that adults use referential context to disambiguate
sentences (e.g., Put the apple on the towel in the box).
The visual display contained either one or two referents
(one referent: an apple on a towel, two referents: one
apple on a towel and another apple on a napkin).
Participants’
gaze
pattern
suggested
structural
disambiguation in that they interpreted the towel as a
destination (VP-analysis) for the apple in the one-referent
context and as the location of the apple (NP modifier
analysis) in the two-referent context (see Sedivy et al.,
1999 for related effects of contrastive adjectives in
establishing reference to objects).
Event relations depicted in the visual context can help
listeners with anticipating thematic role relations. In
Knoeferle et al. (2005), participants listened to locally
ambiguous German SVO and OVS sentences (transl: ‘the
princess (agent/patient) washes/paints apparently the
pirate (patient)/ the fencer (agent)’). The sentences did not
provide information about who is the agent or the patient
prior to disambiguation by case marking on the
determiner of the second noun phrase. Scenes depicted
the princess in both an agent and a patient role (the fencer
was acting upon the princess while the princess was
acting upon a pirate). During the verb (‘washes / paints’),
participants successfully anticipated the patient or the

2463

agent role filler respectively in SVO and OVS sentences.
Thus, the depicted event information resolved the
ambiguity in the linguistic input.
Children, much like the adults, can rapidly exploit
depicted actions to correctly identify thematic roles in
German SVO and OVS sentences. Shortly after the verb
had identified the action (and its associated role relations),
the children anticipated the patient (vs. agent) in the scene
for SVO sentences (Zhang & Knoeferle, 2012) and the
depicted agent (vs. patient) for OVS sentences (Münster,
2016; Zhang & Knoeferle, 2012). However, children,
unlike adults, did not exploit a referential context for
disambiguating a VP-/NP-attachment ambiguity. When
hearing Put the frog on the napkin… they interpreted the
napkin as the frog’s destination in both the one- and the
two-referent context even though the latter biased towards
a location interpretation (Trueswell et al., 1999).
However, in the absence of real-time measures these
results do not provide insight into children’s online
sentence processing.

Case Marking
When it comes to linguistic information, case marking is
believed to be a very strong cue for thematic role
assignment with adult participants (e.g., Matzke, Mai,
Nager, Rösseler & Münte, 2002). However, studies in
five-year old children report conflicting results. Dittmar et
al., (2008), found that five-year-olds struggled to exploit
case marking for thematic role assignment. The results of
an act-out task revealed that children relied on (SVO)
word order instead of case marking for interpreting
ambiguous and unambiguous German SVO and OVS
sentences. They interpreted the first noun phrase as the
subject/agent even if it was case-marked as the
object/patient of the sentence (agent-first/SVO bias).
However, more recent evidence suggests that children at
the age of four to five can rely on case marking for
correct thematic role assignment in unambiguous German
SVO and OVS sentences (e.g., Özge et al., 2015).
In Özge et al., (2015), information from the visual
display likely supported the interpretation of the linguistic
input. The scenes were created on the basis of world
knowledge about who is the most likely agent and the
most likely patient (typically the fox eats the hare and the
hare eats the cabbage). The scenes thus showed animals (a
hare, a fox, and a cabbage) between which stereotypical
role relations exist, but they did not disambiguate whodoes-what-to-whom (case marking did).
Even clearer effects of the visual context emerged in
Zhang et al. (2012) and Münster (2016). Here, depicted
actions (e.g., a bear painting a worm) disambiguated the
role relations (only one animal performed the action
mentioned in the linguistic input) but scenes did not
depict stereotypical role relations; when the actions were
absent, unambiguous case marking alone (i.e., in the
absence of stereotypical role relations between bear and
worm) was insufficient to disambiguate the role relations.
Thus, the visual context seems to matter. By contrast, the
effects of case marking alone on children’s thematic role

assignment (i.e., when scenes do not support thematic role
assignment through either stereotypical world knowledge
associated with the characters or disambiguating action
depictions) remain unclear.

Prosody
Supra-sentential information can also be useful for
establishing a link between the linguistic input and the
visual world. Among others, prosody assigns focus to
sentence constituents (e.g., via accentuation). Prosody can
moreover rapidly disambiguate syntactic structure. In a
visual world eye tracking study, participants rapidly
exploited prosody to identify grammatical functions when
the scene depicted role fillers such as a cat, a bird, and a
dog, for which world knowledge implicated stereotypical
thematic relations (e.g., cats chase birds and dogs chase
cats, Weber et al, 2006). But the scenes did not otherwise
disambiguate the upcoming thematic role relations.
Feminine case marking (identical in nominative and
accusative case) on the determiner of the first noun phrase
created locally structurally ambiguous sentences: Die
Katze (amb.) jagt womöglich den Vogel (acc/obj)/der
Hund (nom/subj)– ‘The cat (amb.) chases possibly the
bird (obj/patient)/the dog (subj/agent)’. Biasing prosodic
contours prompted listeners to make more anticipatory
eye movements towards the agent (vs. patient) in the
scene for ambiguous OVS sentences and towards the
patient (vs. agent) in the scene for ambiguous SVO
sentences. Prosody was the only information available for
the correct anticipation of thematic roles prior to the
disambiguating case marking on the second noun phrase;
but at the same time, world knowledge associated with the
scene may have provided a supportive background.
Children also exploited prosody for thematic role
assignment (Grünloh et al., 2011). Two short videos
showed thematic role relations in two orders, permitting a
direct contrast of agent-patient and patient-agent events.
However, prosodic effects (of an accentuated first noun
phrase in OVS sentences) emerged only when case
marking was also present. When case marking was absent
(ambiguous OVS sentences) children relied on their
(SVO) word order bias instead of prosody and thus
interpreted the OVS sentences as agent-first sentences.

The Present Research
This paper investigates the effects of prosody (biasing
towards either the SVO or the OVS order as in Weber et
al., 2006 vs. neutral) and case marking (SVO vs. OVS) in
ambiguous action scenes. The actions were depicted but
did not give away the specific role relations of the
sentences (two characters performed identical actions and
could both function as possible agents of the verb, Fig. 1,
the elephant; the donkey, see Table 1 for sentences). Our
scenes did not include stereotypical knowledge about who
does what to whom. If a supportive context is necessary
for children to exploit case marking, then we should see
no effects of case marking on thematic role assignment in
the present study (i.e., no anticipation of the agent / the

2464

donkey in OVS but of the patient, the cheetah, in SVO
and OVS sentences, Table 1 and Fig. 1, portraying an
SVO bias). This prediction is based on the literature that
revealed conflicting results regarding children’s reliance
on case marking (Dittmar et al., 2008; Özge et al., 2015).
Alternatively, seeing event relations depicted could be
helpful even if the characters perform identical actions
(i.e., seeing a donkey as the patient in a painting event
might help to integrate object case marking). If so, we
should see effects of case marking.
If prosodic effects do not depend on a supportive scene
context, then we should see effects of prosody on
children’s thematic role assignment and anticipation of
role fillers in the scene. Alternatively, we may observe the
effects of an SVO bias (more looks to the patient / the
cheetah during the verb) independent of case marking and
prosody in children.
Adults can rapidly use case marking for thematic role
assignment (Matzke et al., 2002) and should thus
anticipate the correct patient / agent depending on case
marking. Prosody should also influence the timing and
amount of anticipatory eye movements towards the target
role filler during the time course of the sentence.
Participants further responded post-trial to questions
about who-does-what-to-whom. Adults should answer
these questions correctly in almost all cases since case
marking was unambiguous (further effects of prosody
may or may not emerge). For children, case-marking may
affect the accuracy (reduced for OVS sentences). We also
expected more correct responses for sentences assigned a
biasing (vs. neutral) prosodic contour if children benefit
from prosody for thematic role assignment.

Experiments
Participants. 24 five-year old children (age range 4.5 to
5.10 years) and 24 young adult (mean age=25.5)
monolingual (i.e., no acquisition of a second language
before the age of 6) native speakers of German
participated in this study. Children came from different
kindergartens in the area of Bielefeld and the experiment
was conducted at the kindergartens. Each child received a
toy for participation. Young adults were students from
Bielefeld University and were paid to participate.
Participants had normal or corrected vision and hearing
and all gave informed consent. The Bielefeld University
ethics committee approved the experiments.
Materials. A linguistically trained female native speaker
of German recorded 24 unambiguous transitive German
subject-verb-object (SVO) and 24 unambiguous transitive
German object-verb-subject (OVS) sentences. She was
instructed to use the prosodic structure displayed in Table
1 for each sentence structure respectively. The sentences
were all unambiguously case marked on the first noun
phrase of the sentence. We emulated the prosodic
contours reported by Weber et al. (2006) and these were
either present or sentence intonation was even. In SVO
sentences the main stress was on the verb (L*+H accent
on NP1, H* accent on the verb) and in OVS sentences on
the first noun phrase (L+H* accent on NP1; Table 1).

Table 1. Overview of experimental conditions (ag=agent,
pat=patient, subj=subject, obj=object).
Sentence
Structure

Prosodic
Structure

SVO

L*+H (NP1),
H* (verb)
SVO

neutral

OVS

L+H* (NP1)
OVS

neutral

Example
Der Elefant (subj/ag)
zeichnet sogleich den
Gepard (obj/pat).
The elephant (subj/ag)
draws immediately the
cheetah obj/pat).
Der Elefant (subj/ag)
zeichnet sogleich den
Gepard (obj/pat).
The elephant (subj/ag)
draws immediately the
cheetah obj/pat).
Den Elefanten (obj/pat)
zeichnet sogleich der
Esel (subj/ag).
The elephant (obj/pat)
draws immediately the
cheetah (subj/ag).
Den Elefanten (obj/pat)
zeichnet sogleich der
Esel (subj/ag).
The elephant (obj/pat)
draws immediately the
cheetah (subj/ag).

For each of the 24 SVO and OVS sentences we created
scenes depicting three clipart animal characters (Fig.1).
The direction in which these characters were looking was
the same for all three of them, either left or right. The
middle character and one of the adjacent characters were
depicted as performing the same action (e.g., for the verb
‘draw’, zeichnen, the two characters were depicted as
holding a pencil on a canvas). The third character did not
perform an action. Thus, the actions provided a context
but did not permit comprehenders to unambiguously
identify the correct thematic role relations upon hearing
the verb.
The middle character was always role ambiguous
because it could be the agent or the patient of the scene.
We dub the other character depicted as performing an
action the `true agent’ of the scene and the character not
performing an action the ‘true patient’ of the scene. Each
animal character filled both roles (that of a true agent and
a true patient). The cheetah, for instance, is the true
patient in the image shown in Figure 1. In a
counterbalancing scene, the cheetah is the true agent. The
elephant is depicted as drawing in the example scene (true
agent); in a counterbalancing scene, the elephant is the
true patient. Across all lists, each scene occurred once in
each condition with all characters facing right and once

2465

with all characters facing left. We added 8 fillers to the
experiments. The number of filler was kept constant for
the two experiments to maximize similarity in the
materials across age groups. Post experiment
questionnaires revealed no recognition of the
experimental goal. After each trial participants were asked
a comprehension question which was either presented in
active or in passive voice (e.g., Who paints here? Or who
is being painted here?). Prior to the actual experiment
three practice trials familiarised the participants with the
scenes and the task. The design of these items was
identical to the experimental items. The sentences were
structured either in SVO or OVS order and prosody was
either biasing or neutral. All scenes were pre-tested with
20 five-year old children and the results confirmed that all
depicted characters were correctly identified. Out of the
24 different depicted actions, only one was not correctly
identified and was exchanged.

true agent

ambiguous

true patient

Figure 1. Example picture of a scene.
Procedure. Participants’ eye movements were monitored
with an Eyelink 1000 eye tracker with a sampling rate of
500 Hz Monocular, and an average accuracy of 0.5° in the
remote setup. Images were presented on a Dell laptop
with a screen resolution of 1920x1080. Before starting the
experiment, the experimenter manually calibrated the eye
tracker using a five-dot calibration scheme. For each trial,
the scene was presented for 2000 ms, followed by the
auditory sentence. 1500 ms after sentence offset the
question followed (Fig. 2). A drift correct point separated
the trials to ensure calibration of the eye tracker and the
same starting point for each trial. Participants first saw the
practice trials. Next, the experimenter re-calibrated before
starting the experiment. Each testing session lasted
approximately 20 minutes.
Analysis. We defined two word regions for the analysis:
verb and adverb (beginning of verb onset to adverb onset
for the verb and beginning of adverb onset to NP2 onset
for the adverb). These two regions were defined on the
basis of the prosodic structure of the sentences. We
focused on the verb region because this is where the
prosodic structures can be distinguished. Whenever there
is a main stress on the first noun phrase, the verb
experiences a fall in stress. Otherwise the main stress is
on the verb. We were further interested in the adverb
region to examine post-verbal eye movements.

Visual input: 2000ms

Auditory Input + 500ms

Comprehension Question

Figure 2. Example for the time course of an experimental
trial.
In the scenes, we defined two role fillers (the donkey, the
true agent; the cheetah, the true patient) as areas of
interest. The middle role filler was always mentioned at
the beginning of each sentence and was thus not used for
the analysis of anticipatory eye movements. We computed
mean log-ratios of looks towards the agent and the patient
of the scene (see Arai, van Gompel & Sheepers, 2007;
Carminati & Knoeferle, 2013). Log-ratios are a relative
measure that represents the looks towards one character
over the other. On the basis of these mean log-ratios we
conducted an Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) following a
2 (word order) x 2 (prosody) design by subject and by
item for all word regions of the sentence (NP1, verb,
adverb, NP2). All positive numbers in the log-ratios
represent a preference of looking at the agent (vs. patient)
in the scene and all negative numbers a preference
towards the patient (vs. agent) in the scene. The postsentence questions show the number of correctly
answered questions. We calculated percentages of correct
answers of all possible answers and analysed the accuracy
data using generalised linear mixed effects models (Bates,
Mächler, &Walker, 2015).
Eye movement results. The data for both age groups
showed no significant effects of prosody in the verb and
adverb regions (Figs 3 and 4). For the adults (only), the
analyses revealed a main effect of word order for the verb
and adverb (Fig. 3: adverb). The adults were more likely
to inspect the patient (vs. agent) in SVO sentences
(negative numbers) and the agent (vs. patient) in OVS
sentences (positive numbers) during the adverb region
(word order effect: p <.001).
The child data showed more looks towards the patient
(vs. agent) in all four conditions (intercept p<.05). The
preference to inspect the patient over the agent is only
slightly higher in the biasing compared to the neutral
prosody conditions (Fig. 4).
Accuracy Results. Adult’s post-sentence answers
revealed a high percentage of correct answers (99%), with
no difference between the conditions (Fig. 5). The child
data revealed an overall accuracy of 71%. The analyses
revealed no clear difference between the two prosodic

2466

mean log-ratio of looks

conditions but a main effect of word order (p<.001, Fig.
6).
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
-2

Adults: Adverb Region
SVO_biasing
prosody
SVO_neutral
prosody
OVS_biasing
prosody
OVS_neutral
prosody

mean log-ratio of looks

Figure 3. Mean log-ratio of looks of agent over patient
during the adverb region per condition in adults (Analysis
by subjects).

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
-2

Children: Adverb Region

SVO_biasing
prosody
SVO_neutral
prosody
OVS_biasing
prosody
OVS_neutral
prosody

Figure 4. Mean log-ratio of looks (agent over patient)
during the adverb region per condition in children
(Analysis by subjects).

Correct answers in %

Adults: Correct Post-Sentence Answers
100
80
60
40
20
0

SVO_biasing
prosody
SVO_neutral
prosody
OVS_biasing
prosody
OVS_neutral
prosody

Figure 5. Accuracy results: percentage of correct postsentence answers per condition in adults.

Correct answers in %

Children: Correct Post-Sentence Answers
100
80
60
40
20
0

SVO_biasing
prosody
SVO_neutral
prosody
OVS_biasing
prosody
OVS_neutral
prosody

Figure 6. Accuracy results: percentage of correct postsentence answers per condition in children.

Discussion
We investigated children’s and adults’ thematic role
assignment in unambiguously case marked German SVO
and OVS sentences using scenes in which two role fillers
performed identical actions. Thus, as participants heard
the verb, it was unclear which of two events (one
depicting the NP1 referent as the agent, the other
depicting him as a patient) to rely on for anticipating
upcoming role fillers. In brief, the scene did not
disambiguate the thematic roles relations. But case
marking and prosodic cues could, in principle, permit
anticipatory thematic role assignment. We recorded
participants’ eye movements to the agent and patient in
the scene while they inspected scenes and listened to
related German SVO and OVS sentences (Table 1).
Previous research has reported effects of prosody on
thematic role assignment in German children and adults
(Grünloh et al., 2011; Weber at al., 2006). Unlike these
previous findings, our results revealed no significant
effect of prosody. Previous research further revealed that
adults rapidly use case marking for thematic role
assignment (Matzke et al., 2002). Results for children
were, however, contradictory (Dittmar et al., 2008;
Münster, 2016; Özge et al., 2016; Zhang & Knoeferle,
2012). In line with previous findings, the adults in our
study exploited case marking for real-time thematic role
assignment. They directed more anticipatory looks
towards the true patient (vs. agent) in SVO sentences and
towards the true agent (vs. patient) in OVS sentences.
Children, by contrast, did not exploit case marking for
such visual anticipation. In both SVO and OVS sentences,
they directed more anticipatory looks towards the true
patient during the adverb. They thus seem to have
interpreted OVS sentences as agent-first sentences,
disregarding the unambiguous object case marking on the
sentence-initial noun phrase.
In adults, the null effect of prosody might be explained
by the fact that morpho-syntactic (case) information has
stronger links to thematic role assignment than suprasentential information. Similar arguments have been made
for prosodic marking and object color contrast (Sedivy et
al., 1999). Sedivy et al. argued that color contrast effects
enable a strongly contrastive interpretation already,
eliminating further contrastive intonation effects. A
similar argument might hold for case marking and
prosody. Case marking in adults fully disambiguated
thematic role assignment and prosody had no additional
beneficial effects. Relatedly, adults in Grünloh et al.
(2011, Exp. 1) failed to exploit prosody but used case
marking for thematic role assignment.
Concerning the children, our prosody results differed
from those by Grünloh and colleagues (2011) who
reported that a contrastive OVS-biasing intonation in
unambiguous
sentences
facilitated
children’s
identification of patient-agent events. One reason for this
might be that we used different scenes. In our study,
participants saw one ambiguous scene that included both
possible interpretations (e.g., true patient <-action
ambiguous <-action true agent). In Grünloh and

2467

colleagues (2011), by contrast, children selected one
event picture from two adjacent ones (in which agent and
patient roles appeared in reversed order, agent-patient vs.
patient-agent). This direct contrast may have facilitated
identifying the correct event by means of prosody (and
case marking). In addition, in our scenes participants –
including children – inspected the NP1 referent when it
was named. The verb then linked to a matching action of
that referent and likely reaffirmed this was the correct
agent. It is possible that the verb-action match and
additional posture of the NP1 referent (facing the true
patient), may have led children in particular to interpret an
L+H* accent on NP1 as highlighting the NP1 as the agent
rather than as the patient, even if case-marking indicated
it was the object and patient.
In previous studies on children’s use of case marking
(Münster 2016; Özge et al., 2015; Zhang & Knoeferle
2012), visual information likely provided a supportive
background for exploiting case marking. Unlike prior
research, our scenes did not constrain thematic role
relations by means of stereotypical knowledge (Özge et
al., 2016) or action depictions that – once the verb became
available – permitted children to distinguish SVO and
OVS sentences (Münster, 2016; Zhang & Knoeferle,
2012). One of the reasons for why children in our study
did not use case marking in real time might thus be the
lack of supportive contextual information.
Children’s comprehension mechanisms develop
throughout the first years of their life. They learn from
their immediate environment and from observing who
interacts with whom. Perhaps they need an unambiguous
visual background to exploit case for syntactic
structuring. Without that, they fail to correctly interpret
more demanding OVS sentences and fall back on default
structures (e.g., SVO). Further research could examine
when children start to abstract away from the visual
display and begin to use case marking in an adult-like
manner for syntactic structuring.

Acknowledgements
This research was funded by the Cognitive Interaction
Technology Excellence Center (277, DFG) and by the
Project “FoTeRo” in the Focus center XPrag (DFG).

References
Altmann, G. T. M., & Mirković, J. (2009). Incrementality
and Prediction in Human Sentence Processing.
Cognitive Science, 33(4), 583–609.
Arai, M., Van Gompel, R. P. G., & Scheepers, C. (2007).
Priming ditransitive structures in comprehension.
Cognitive Psychology, 54, 218-250.
Bates, D., Mächler, M., Bolker, B. & Walker, S. (2015).
Fitting Linear Mixed-Effects Models Using lme4.
Journal of Statistics Software, 67 (1), 1-48.
Carminati, M. N., & Knoeferle, P. (2013). Effects of
speaker emotional facial expression and listener age on
incremental sentence processing. PloS one, 8(9),
e72559.

Carnie, A. (2002). Syntax: A Generative Introduction.
Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers.
Chambers, C. G., Tanenhaus, M. K. & Magnuson, J. S.
(2004). Actions and Affordances in Syntactic
Ambiguity Resolution. JEP:LMC, 30(3), 687-696.
Dittmar, M., Abbot-Smith, K., Lieven, E., & Tomasello,
M. (2008). German children's comprehension of word
order and case marking in causative sentences. Child
Development, 79(4), 1152–1167.
Grünloh, T., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M. (2011). German
children use prosody to identify participant roles in
transitive sentences. Cognitive Linguistics, 22, 393-419.
Kamide, Y., Altmann, G. T. M., & Haywood, S. L.
(2003b). The time-course of prediction in incremental
sentence processing: Evidence from anticipatory eye
movements. JML, 49(1), 133–156.
Knoeferle, P., Crocker, M. W., Scheepers, C., &
Pickering, M. J. (2005). The influence of the immediate
visual context on incremental thematic role-assignment.
Cognition, 95, 95-127.
Matzke, M., Mai, H., Nager, W., Rösseler, J., & Münte,
T. (2002). The costs of freedom: an ERP-study of noncanonical sentences. Clinical Neuropsychology, 113,
844–852.
Meroni, L. & Crain, S. (2011). How Children Avoid
Kindergarden-paths. In Edward Gibson and Neal
Pearlmutter (Eds.), The processing and acquisition of
reference. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Münster, K. (2016). Effects of Emotional Facial
Expressions and Depicted Actions on Situated
Language Processing across the Lifespan. Doctoral
Thesis. Bielefeld University.
Özge, D., Kornfilt J., Münster, K., Knoeferle, P., Küntay,
A., & Snedeker, J. (2016). Predictive Use of German
Case Markers in German Children. Proceedings of the
40th Annual Boston University Conference on
Language Development (pp. 291-303). Somerville,
MA.
Sedivy, J.C., Tanenhaus, M.K., Chambers, C.G., &
Carlson, G.N. (1999). Achieving incremental semantic
interpretation through contextual representation.
Cognition, 71, 109-148.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., Eberhard, K.
M., Sedivy, J. C. (1995). Integration of visual and
linguistic
information
in
spoken
language
comprehension. Science, 268(5217), 1632-1634.
Trueswell, J., Sekerina, I., Hill, N. & Logrip, M. (1999).
The kindergarten-path effect: Studying on-line sentence
processing in young children. Cognition, 73, 89-134.
Weber, A., Grice, M., & Crocker, M. W. (2006). The role
of prosody in the interpretation of structural
ambiguities. Cognition, 99, B63-B72.
Zhang, L., & Knoeferle, P. (2012). Visual Context Effects
on Thematic Role Assignment in Children versus
Adults. In Proceedings of the 34th Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2593–2598). Boston,
USA

2468

