The Redundancy Effect in Human Causal Learning: Evidence Against a
Comparator Theory Explanation
Tara Zaksaite (gintare.zaksaite@plymouth.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Plymouth University, Plymouth, UK

Peter M. Jones (peter.m.jones@plymouth.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Plymouth University, Plymouth, UK

Abstract
The blocking effect, canonical in the study of associative
learning, is often explained as a failure of the blocked cue to
become associated with the outcome. However, this
perspective fails to explain recent findings that suggest
learning about a blocked cue is superior to a different type of
redundant cue. We report an experiment designed to test the
proposal that blocking is not a failure of association, but a
performance effect arising from a comparator process
(Denniston, Savastano, & Miller, 2001). Participants received
A+ AX+ BY+ CY- training containing a blocked cue X and
another redundant cue Y, before rating outcome expectancies
for individual cues. These ratings were inconsistent with the
association-failure view. After subsequent A- Y+ training,
participants rated cues again. Ratings in the second test were
inconsistent with the comparator theory. Our data suggest that
neither perspective is likely to provide a complete account of
causal learning.
Keywords: associative learning; comparator
redundancy effect; blocking; cue competition

theory;

Introduction
In a typical causal learning task, participants are required to
learn which cues cause an outcome. Many such tasks
involve presentation of more than one cue on each trial, and
this typically results in cue competition. That is, learning
about a cue is dependent to some extent on accompanying
cues. Probably the best-known example of cue competition
is blocking (e.g. Dickinson, Shanks, & Evenden, 1984). In a
blocking task, participants receive trials on which cue A is
paired with an outcome (denoted A+) and trials on which A
is presented alongside a second cue, X, and paired with the
outcome (AX+). Blocking is said to have occurred if
learning about X is restricted by the presence of A, relative
to a control condition in which A+ trials are omitted.
Learning about X is therefore influenced by the presence
and associative history of A. This finding is analogous to
classic demonstrations of blocking in nonhuman animals
(e.g. Kamin, 1969).
Following the discovery of cue competition effects,
Rescorla and Wagner (1972) outlined an elegant and muchcited model according to which an outcome will only
support learning if it is surprising. Surprise is equivalent to
prediction error, or the discrepancy between the outcome
that is expected and the outcome that occurs. When an
unexpected outcome occurs, the resulting prediction error
enables the formation of an association between any cues

present and the outcome. Critically however, outcome
expectancy is based on all the cues that are present rather
than individual cues. To illustrate this, consider the blocking
effect. On AX+ trials, expectancy of the outcome is based
on the extent to which it is predicted by both A and X.
Because A is established as a predictor of the outcome on
A+ trials, the outcome is expected on AX+ trials and little
learning can take place. Learning about X is therefore
‘blocked’ by the presence of A. If A were not separately
paired with the outcome, blocking would not occur.
Informally, we can say that X is blocked because it is
informationally redundant; it indicates no change in the
outcome that is predicted by A. According to the RescorlaWagner model, this is operationalized as a failure by X to
become associated with the outcome.
This description of blocking as a failure of association
formation has been called into question by a recent result
comparing learning about a blocked cue with another kind
of redundant cue. Uengoer, Lotz, and Pearce (2013)
compared learning about the blocked cue X with cue Y from
a BY+ CY- discrimination. Here, the outcome was predicted
by B and its absence was predicted by C. We refer to the
common cue, Y, as an uncorrelated cue because it is paired
with both the presence and the absence of the outcome.
Uengoer et al. gave participants A+ AX+ BY+ CY- training,
followed by test trials on which they were asked to rate
outcome expectancy for each cue. The Rescorla-Wagner
(1972) model predicts that learning about X should be
blocked by A, as described above. The prediction for Y is
perhaps more complex, but the model predicts that the
strength of the association between Y and the outcome will
increase overall during training. This results from the use of
a combined prediction error in determining learning, as
follows: On BY+ trials, the associations between B and Y
and the outcome should strengthen. On CY- trials, the
association between Y and the outcome should lead to
expectation of the outcome, and its non-occurrence will in
turn lead to decreases in the extent to which both C and Y
predict the outcome. As a consequence, C should be
established as an inhibitor of the outcome. This will enable
Y to maintain its association with the outcome to some
extent. Informally, we can say that Y could be a cause of the
outcome if its absence on CY- trials is explained by the
preventative status of C. The Rescorla-Wagner model, then,
predicts that Y will become better associated with the
outcome than will X. Contrary to this prediction, Uengoer et

3640

al.’s participants rated X as a more likely cause of the
outcome than Y. This finding is known as the redundancy
effect (for corresponding results using rats and pigeons, see
Jones & Pearce, 2015; Pearce, Dopson, Haselgrove, &
Esber, 2012).

Comparator theory
While the redundancy effect is not predicted by the
Rescorla-Wagner (1972) model, it perhaps makes intuitive
sense because X is consistently paired with the outcome. Y,
on the other hand, is paired with the outcome only
intermittently. Ignoring any effect of cue competition, we
might expect X to become better associated with the
outcome than Y. Accordingly, Uengoer et al. (2013)
considered whether their results might be better accounted
for by supposing that blocking occurs not because X fails to
become associated with the outcome, but because of an
additional process that acts during the test. According to
comparator theory (Denniston, Savastano, & Miller, 2001),
association formation is non-competitive and driven by an
individual prediction error for each cue. Cue competition is
then accounted for by a comparator process that operates at
test to influence performance. This process compares the
associative status of the target cue with that of any cues that
have previously been presented alongside the target. This
results in a decrease if companion cues have a strong
association with the outcome, and an increase if the
association is weak. In the case of X, outcome expectancy
will be reduced because A is strongly associated with the
outcome, and blocking will occur. This model also predicts
the redundancy effect, because association formation is
governed by each cue’s relationship with the outcome. X
should be better associated with the outcome than Y,
because Y is only followed by the outcome on 50% of trials.
The comparator theory therefore seems like a promising
candidate for explaining both blocking and the redundancy
effect.
However, two attempts have been made to test this
account and both have cast doubt on its validity. Jones and
Pearce (2015) conducted an experiment in which rats were
given A+ AX+ BY+ CY- training, where each cue was an
auditory or visual stimulus and the outcome was the
delivery of a sucrose solution. Rats were subsequently
tested in extinction with B, X, and Y. A larger response was
elicited by X than Y, demonstrating the redundancy effect.
Responding was also higher for B than for X. Jones and
Pearce suggested that this was important, because it allowed
a further test of the comparator theory. According to this
theory, because B and X were both consistently paired with
the outcome, they should have become associated with the
outcome to the same extent. The larger response for B than
for X at test must therefore have been the result of the
comparator process. Because B had been presented
alongside Y, which was only weakly associated with the
outcome, the response to B was left largely intact. For X,
however, the response was moderated because X had been
trained alongside A, which was strongly associated with the

outcome. To test this account, rats were given A- Y+
training. Following this, they were again tested with B and
X. The comparator theory now predicts greater responding
for X than for B, but the results closely resembled those
from the first test. B elicited more responding than X
despite revaluation of the comparator cues A and Y,
apparently in contradiction of the theory. An objection may
be raised, however, because of the nature of the outcome
used in this experiment. Miller and Matute (1996) suggested
that, once a target cue becomes associated with an outcome
of motivational significance, the target cue itself acquires
motivational significance. As a result, attempts to deflate
responding to the target cue by further conditioning of an
associate cue may be unsuccessful. In the experiment
reported by Jones and Pearce, the appetitive outcome is
likely to have had substantial motivational significance. It is
therefore possible that responding to B was unaffected by
Y+ training, not because the comparator theory is incorrect
but because the manner in which it was tested was
inadequate. Urushihara and Miller (2010) noted that such
revaluation effects are difficult to observe in nonhuman
animals because of the use of motivationally significant
outcomes, but occur frequently in human causal learning.
There also exists a test of whether the comparator theory
can account for the redundancy effect in humans, reported
by Uengoer et al. (2013). Since blocking is dependent on a
comparison between X and A, it follows that revaluation of
A should increase outcome expectancy for X. In one
experiment, following initial A+ AX+ BY+ CY- training
and subsequent individual cue testing, participants were
given A- training and a further test. They found that
outcome expectancy for X was equivalent for the two tests,
contrary to the predictions of the comparator theory. This
conclusion should be treated with caution, however. The
crucial comparison is between outcome expectancy for X
during the first and second tests. This means that the results
are likely to have been contaminated to some extent by
order effects. In the present paper, we report an experiment
intended to provide a fairer test of the comparator theory.
The experiment is conceptually similar to the Jones and
Pearce experiment, except that it used human participants
and a causal learning task. It therefore combines the better
aspects of the existing evaluations of the comparator theory
described above, while eliminating the shortcomings. The
use of human participants should provide ideal conditions
for observing revaluation effects and, because the adequacy
of the comparator theory can be assessed by comparing B
and X in the same test, the confounding effect of order
present in the Uengoer et al. experiment is avoided.

A test of the comparator theory
The design of this experiment is summarized in Table 1.
Stage 1 of the experiment was designed to establish the
causal status of B, X, and Y. Each participant received four
types of trial: A+, AX+, BY+, and CY-. Following Uengoer
et al. (2013), training was embedded in a variant of the
classic allergist task (Aitken, Larkin, & Dickinson, 2000).

3641

On each trial, participants were shown one or two food
pictures and asked to predict whether they would lead to
stomach ache in a fictional patient, Mr. X. After participants
made their predictions, they received feedback on whether
stomachache did (+) or did not (-) occur. After the
completion of Stage 1, a test stage was administered in
which participants were shown the five individual food cues
and asked to rate the likelihood of stomach ache for each
food using a rating scale. These ratings served as the
measure of outcome expectancy for each cue. We expected
these ratings to resemble those obtained by Uengoer et al.
That is, we expected ratings to be higher for X than for Y
(the redundancy effect) and to be higher for B than for X.
We also expected ratings to be high for A and low for Y.
After this test, participants received further training in Stage
2. This training was designed to revalue A and Y, and
consisted of A- and Y+ trials. Following this training,
outcome expectancies were again measured in the same way
as in the earlier test. If the comparator theory (Denniston,
Savastano, & Miller, 2001) is correct, ratings for X should
be higher than ratings for B in this test. Alternatively, if the
outcome expectancy for B was higher than for X at Test 1
because of a difference in the strength of associations
formed between these cues and the outcome during Stage 1,
then ratings should still be higher for B than for X at Test 2.
Table 1: The design of the experiment.
Stage 1
A+
AX+
BY+
CY8 blocks

Test 1
A
B
C
X
Y
2 blocks

Stage 2
AY+

8 blocks

Test 2
A
B
C
X
Y
2 blocks

Method
Participants The participants were 50 Plymouth University
undergraduate students studying Psychology. They received
course credit for their participation in this experiment. They
were aged 18-53 years (M=21.86, SD=7.1) and five were
male.
Materials The experiment was run using computers
attached to 22-inch monitors with a 1920 x 1080 resolution.
The experiment was designed, cues presented and responses
recorded, using E-prime 2.0 software (Psychology Software
Tools, PA, US).
The cues were five images of foods on a white
background, each measuring 300 x 300 pixels. The foods
were: apple, cherry, grape, lemon and strawberry. Foods
were randomly assigned to serve as each cue (A, B, C, X,
Y) for each participant. Outcomes were stomach ache,
signified by text and a sad face on a red background, and no
stomachache, indicated by text and a happy face on a green

background. Cues and outcomes were presented on a black
background with white text. Participants responded using
the mouse.
Procedure Each participant was initially asked to read onscreen instructions that were identical to those used by
Uengoer et al. (2013). In the first stage of the experiment
participants were presented with eight blocks of trials. Each
of the four trial types (A+, AX+, BY+, CY-) were presented
once per block, and were randomized within each block.
Each trial started with the presentation of either one or two
images of foods, below the phrase “The patient ate the
following food(s):” The sentence “Which reaction do you
expect?” was presented below the images. Participants
responded by clicking one of two response buttons placed at
the bottom of the screen. The left-hand button was labelled
“No stomach ache”, and the right-hand button was labelled
“Stomach ache”. As soon as the participant responded, the
response buttons and the sentence above them were replaced
by a statement and image showing the outcome of the trial.
When the outcome was stomach ache, the statement was
“The patient has stomach ache” and the picture of a sad face
was shown. When the outcome was no stomach ache, the
statement was “The patient has no stomach ache”, and the
picture of a happy face was shown. This feedback display
remained on the screen for 3 s and was then followed by the
next trial.
After the completion of Stage 1, Test 1 began. Here the
participants were instructed to judge the probability with
which specific foods will cause stomach ache in the absence
of feedback. On each trial a single food was presented on
the screen below the sentence “What is the probability that
the food causes stomach ache?” Participants responded by
clicking on an 11-point rating scale ranging from 0
(Certainly not) to 10 (Very certain). After participants chose
a rating for each food, a blank screen was shown for 1 s.
Each food that appeared in Stage 1 was presented twice,
with the order of trials randomly determined for each
participant. For each participant, the average of the two
outcome expectancy ratings was calculated and used in
subsequent analyses.
Participants then received further training in Stage 2.
Training consisted of eight blocks of two trial types (A-,
Y+) appearing once per block in a random order. The
procedure for this stage was otherwise identical to Stage 1.
Test 2 then measured final outcome expectancies, using the
same procedure as Test 1.

Results
We applied an inclusion criterion of 60% correct predictions
in Stage 1, commonly used in similar work (e. g. Le Pelley
& McLaren, 2003). Four participants failed to meet this, and
are excluded from all subsequent analyses. The remaining
46 participants learned readily, and made 98% correct
responses during the final block of trials of Stage 1. These
participants also made correct predictions on 98% of trials

3642

during the final block of Stage 2. Our analyses here focus on
the critical test data.
Mean ratings from Tests 1 and 2 are shown in Figure 1.
The pattern of results in Test 1 closely resembles those
obtained by Uengoer et al. (2013), with higher ratings for X
than for Y, and higher ratings for B than for X. For the
comparator theory, the crucial comparison is between B and
X at Test 2. As for Test 1, ratings for B were higher than for
X. A two-way ANOVA with test and cue variables was
conducted. This revealed a significant effect of test, F(1, 45)
= 6.59, p = .014, ηp2 = .128, a significant effect of cue, F(4,
180) = 80.76, p < .001, ηp2 = .642, and a significant
interaction, F(4, 180) = 207.85, p < .001, ηp2 = .822. To
explore this interaction, simple effects analyses were used to
compare ratings from Tests 1 and 2 for each cue. Ratings
differed between tests for A, F(1, 45) = 431.15, p < .001, ηp2
= .905, for B, F(1, 45) = 29.30, p < .001, ηp2 = .394, for C,
F(1, 45) = 23.28, p < .001, ηp2 = .341, and for Y, F(1, 45) =
359.38, p < .001, ηp2 = .889. Ratings for X did not differ
between tests, F < 1.
Separate analyses were conducted to test the most
informative comparisons. Firstly, in order to check that the
redundancy effect was obtained, we used a within-subjects
t-test to compare ratings for X and Y at Test 1. Ratings for
X were significantly higher than for Y, t(45) = 7.58, p <
.001. Secondly, to confirm that the revaluation of A and Y
was successful, we conducted a two-way ANOVA
comparing ratings for A and Y in the two tests. We found an
effect of cue, F(1, 45) = 6.37, p = .0151, ηp2 = .124, an
effect of test, F(1, 45) = 5.12, p = .029, ηp2 = .102, and
importantly, a significant interaction, F(1, 45) = 559.83, p <
.001, ηp2 = .926. Exploring this interaction, we found that
ratings for A were higher than for Y at Test 1, F(1, 45) =
559.62, p < .001, ηp2 = .926, but that ratings were higher for
Y than for A at Test 2, F(1, 45) = 112.41, p < .001, ηp2 =
.714. The revaluation of A and Y was therefore successful.
Thirdly, to test the predictions of the comparator theory, we
conducted a similar two-way ANOVA to compare ratings
for B and X at Test 1 and Test 2. We found an effect of cue,
F(1, 45) = 46.82, p < .001, ηp2 = .510, an effect of test, F(1,
45) = 21.40, p < .001, ηp2 = .322, and a significant
interaction, F(1, 45) = 18.81, p < .001, ηp2 = .295. Exploring
the interaction, we found that ratings for B were higher than
for X at both Test 1, F(1, 45) = 62.86, p < .001, ηp2 = .583,
and Test 2, F(1, 45) = 16.52, p < .001, ηp2 = .268. This
disconfirms the predictions of the comparator theory. If
outcome expectancies for B and X were determined by a
combination of direct associations with the outcome and
comparison with Y and A respectively, then ratings for X
should have been higher than for B at Test 2. One notable
feature of the data that might suggest some role for a
comparator process is the change in ratings for B between
the two tests. Participants rated B as a less likely cause of
the outcome after Y+ training than they did before, which is
consistent with the comparator theory. However, an
opposite effect was observed for C. Ratings for C were
higher at Test 2 than at Test 1, which is the opposite change

to that predicted by the comparator theory. It therefore
seems likely that these changes are not the result of a
comparator process, but rather a general decrease in
certainty at Test 2. Since A and Y had been revalued in
Stage 2, some participants may have assumed that
associations learned during Stage 1 were no longer reliable.

Figure 1: Mean ratings for Test 1 and Test 2, for each cue.
Error bars show the standard error of the mean.

Discussion
The experiment reported here was designed to test an
explanation of the redundancy effect based on the
comparator theory (Denniston, Savastano, & Miller, 2001).
Following A+ AX+ BY+ CY- training, participants were
asked to rate the probability of the outcome occurring for
each individual cue in Test 1. Ratings were higher for X
than for Y; we therefore replicated the redundancy effect
(Uengoer et al., 2013). This finding is consistent with the
comparator theory, which states that the strength of the
association formed between a cue and an outcome is
determined by an individual (i.e. non-competitive)
prediction error. Since X was consistently paired with the
outcome and Y was not, it follows that X should have
become better associated with the outcome than Y.
Participants also gave higher ratings for B than for X during
Test 1. Again, this is consistent with the comparator theory.
Although the theory predicts that each of these cues will
have become associated with the outcome to the same
extent, it also states that outcome expectancies should have
been moderated by the comparator process at test.
Specifically, outcome expectancy for X should have been
reduced because it had been trained alongside A, which was
strongly associated with the outcome. Any reduction in
outcome expectancy for B should have been smaller,
because it had been trained alongside Y, which was only
weakly associated with the outcome. However, the
comparator theory is not consistent with the results of Test

3643

2. Following Stage-2 A- Y+ training, participants again
rated the probability of the outcome occurring for each cue.
Ratings for B were again higher than for X. The comparator
theory, however, predicts the opposite pattern of results.
This is because, although the associations with the outcome
should have remained unchanged for both B and X, the
associative status of their comparator cues had changed. We
therefore conclude that the comparator theory cannot
account for our results. Of course, this conclusion relies on
the assumption that Stage-2 training was successful in
revaluation of A and Y. This is apparent in the higher
ratings given for Y than for A at Test 2.
Our results are also difficult to reconcile with the model
of learning proposed by Rescorla and Wagner (1972).
Because it describes learning as being the result of a
combined prediction error, X should have failed to become
associated with the outcome and should have been rated as a
less likely cause of the outcome than Y at Test 1. In other
words, the Rescorla-Wagner model fails to account for the
redundancy effect because it incorrectly predicts that
learning about the blocked cue will be prevented. However,
Vogel and Wagner (2017) have suggested a way in which
the prediction of blocking can be modified to accommodate
the redundancy effect. Their modification is based on the
assumption that each cue shares some common features,
denoted K. The training given in Stage 1 here could
therefore be re-described as AK+ AXK+ BYK+ CYK-. K
should become associated with the outcome, with two
consequences that are relevant for interpreting the
redundancy effect. Firstly, because K is present on CYKtrials, overexpectation of the outcome is increased and the
weakening of the association between Y and the outcome on
these trials is more substantial than when K is omitted.
Secondly, When XK is presented at test, outcome
expectancy is boosted by K; the model can therefore predict
greater outcome expectancy for XK as a result of including
the common features. Combination of these two changes
allows the model to predict the redundancy effect. This
version of the model also makes an interesting prediction
regarding the effect of adding further trial types to Stage-1
training. Because the extent to which K becomes associated
with the outcome is critical, adding extra trials on which the
outcome does not occur (e.g. DK-) should reduce the
influence of common features and eliminate the redundancy
effect. This prediction remains untested. If it is correct, it
would lend support to an account that provides a way to
reconcile the Rescorla-Wagner model with the redundancy
effect.
Another possibility is that learning is governed by quite
different rules. Not all models of learning make such strong
predictions about the restriction of learning about blocked
cues. Pearce’s (1987, 1994) configural model, for instance,
predicts substantial outcome expectancy for blocked cues.
According to this model, participants learn about configural
representations that include all cues present on a given trial,
rather than each cue entering into its own association with
the outcome. In the case of blocking, participants would

come to associate A with the outcome on A+ trials, and to
associate AX with the outcome on AX+ trials. Outcome
expectancy for X alone would then be determined by
generalization from AX, based on their similarity. Outcome
expectancy for X would therefore be weaker than for AX,
but considerably stronger than it would have been without
any training. However, Pearce at al. (2012) note that the
theory is unable to predict the redundancy effect because it
predicts that outcome expectancy for Y will be higher still.
As with the Rescorla-Wagner (1972) model, it is possible
that some modification of the configural model would alter
this prediction, but it is not clear at present what that
modification might be.
Whether cues are learned about individually or as
configurations, the redundancy effect might be
accommodated if we suppose that the amount of attention
paid to blocked and uncorrelated cues changes during
training. For instance, it is commonly assumed (Le Pelley,
2004; Mackintosh, 1975) that cues are processed to the
extent that they have predictive value. Since blocked and
uncorrelated cues are both redundant, we might expect the
amount of attention they are paid to be reduced. In order to
explain the redundancy effect, however, we need to propose
that this reduction in attention differs in magnitude for
blocked and uncorrelated cues. If we suppose that
participants learn quickly that Y is irrelevant during BY+
CY- training, then we might expect substantial decreases in
the amount of attention paid to Y and a weak association
between Y and the outcome as a result. Attention to X, on
the other hand, might be maintained for longer, allowing a
stronger association to form between X and the outcome. In
an attempt to evaluate this claim empirically, Jones and
Zaksaite (2017) monitored participants’ eye gaze during A+
AX+ BY+ CY- training. The duration of eye gaze for each
cue has been used extensively as a measure of overt
attention in learning tasks (e.g. Beesley & Le Pelley, 2011).
Jones and Zaksaite found that participants spent more time
looking at Y than at X, but that this was likely to have been
a consequence of differing trial durations. When X and Y
were presented on the screen together in a subsequent stage
of training, gaze was equivalent for each. This experiment
therefore failed to provide any evidence that the amount of
attention paid to blocked and uncorrelated cues differs.
In addition to associative accounts of blocking, others
(e.g. Lovibond, Been, Mitchell, Bouton, & Frohardt, 2003)
have argued that blocking is the result of inferential
reasoning. According to this view, blocking occurs because
participants do not have independent evidence that the
blocked cue causes the outcome (i.e. training trials on which
X is presented without A). However, since participants also
lack evidence that the blocked cue does not cause the
outcome, they should be uncertain about the causal status of
X and blocking should be relatively weak. This uncertainty
might be enhanced because the magnitude of the outcome is
fixed, meaning that compound presentation of two causal
cues would lead to the same outcome as either cue alone.
Lovibond et al. provided support for this position by

3644

showing that blocking is enhanced when the magnitude of
the outcome varies in accordance with the number of causes
present, allowing participants to infer that the blocked cue is
not a cause of the outcome. In light of this account, we
should consider whether the intermediate ratings for X in
the present experiment were the result of an intermediate
level of learning, or of uncertainty about its causal status.
An unpublished experiment from our laboratory suggests
that this might be a promising approach. In addition to
rating the probability of the outcome for each cue,
participants rated their confidence in these judgments.
Confidence ratings were lower for blocked than for
uncorrelated cues, suggesting that the redundancy effect
might be due at least in part to uncertainty about X.

Conclusion
We have considered theories that account for learning by
using individual and combined prediction errors. While
combined prediction error models (e.g. Rescorla & Wagner,
1972) are difficult to reconcile with the redundancy effect,
individual prediction error does not result in cue
competition effects such as blocking, unless an additional
process is invoked. We tested a theory that includes such a
process (Denniston, Savastano, & Miller, 2001), but found
that it was not consistent with the results of Test 2. We
suggest two lines of future enquiry. Firstly, data should be
collected that evaluate the predictions arising from Vogel
and Wagner’s (2017) addition of common features to
simulations of the Rescorla-Wagner model. While the cues
used in the present experiment are likely to have shared
some common features, we cannot currently evaluate the
claim that learning about these features enables the
redundancy effect to occur. Secondly, since neither
combined nor individual prediction errors seem capable of
producing our results, attempts should be made to evaluate
some combination of the two. In particular, any models
containing both kinds of prediction error should be tested
against the idea that cue competition occurs because of
inferential reasoning processes.

References
Aitken, M. R. F., Larkin, M. J. W., & Dickinson, A. (2000).
Super-learning of causal judgements. Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 53B, 59-81.
Beesley, T., & Le Pelley, M. E. (2011). The influence of
blocking on overt attention and associability in human
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal
Behavior Processes, 37, 114-120.
Denniston, J. C., Savastano, H, I., & Miller, R. R. (2001).
The extended comparator hypothesis: Learning by
contiguity, responding by relative strength. In R. R.
Mowrer & S. B. Klein (Eds.), Handbook of contemporary
learning theories. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Dickinson, A., Shanks, D., & Evenden, J. (1984).
Judgement of act-outcome contingency: The role of
selective attribution. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 36A, 29-50.

Jones, P. M., & Pearce, J. M. (2015). The fate of redundant
cues: Further analysis of the redundancy effect. Learning
and Behavior, 43, 72-82.
Jones, P. M., & Zaksaite, T. (2017). The redundancy effect
in human causal learning: no evidence for changes in
selective attention. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Kamin, L. J. (1969). Selective attention and conditioning. In
N. J. Mackintosh & W. K. Honig (Eds.), Fundamental
issues in associative learning. Halifax, Nova Scotia:
Dalhousie University Press.
Le Pelley, M. E. (2004). The role of associative history in
models of associative learning: a selective review and a
hybrid model. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 57B, 193-243.
Le Pelley, M. E., & McLaren, I. P. L. (2003). Learned
associability and associative change in human causal
learning. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
56B, 68-79.
Lovibond, P. E., Been, S. L., Mitchell, C. J., Bouton, M. E.,
& Frohardt, R. (2003). Forward and backward blocking of
causal judgment is enhanced by additivity of effect
magnitude. Memory and Cognition, 31, 133-142.
Mackintosh, N. J. (1975). A theory of attention: Variations
in the associability of stimuli with reinforcement.
Psychological Review, 82, 276-298.
Miller, R. R., & Matute, H. (1996). Biological significance
in forward and backward blocking: Resolution of a
discrepancy between animal conditioning and human
causal judgement. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 125, 370-386.
Pearce, J. M. (1987). A model for stimulus generalization in
Pavlovian conditioning. Psychological Review, 94, 61-73.
Pearce, J. M. (1994). Similarity and discrimination: a
selective review and a connectionist model. Psychological
Review, 101, 587-607.
Pearce, J. M., Dopson, J. C., Haselgrove, M., & Esber, G. R.
(2012). The fate of redundant cues during blocking and a
simple
discrimination. Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 38, 167-179.
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A theory of
Pavlovian conditioning: Variations in the effectiveness of
reinforcement and nonreinforcement. In A. H. Black &
W. F. Prokasy (Eds.), Classical conditioning II: Current
theory and research. New York, NY: Appleton-CenturyCrofts.
Uengoer, M., Lotz, A., & Pearce, J. M. (2013). The fate of
redundant cues in human predictive learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes,
39, 323-333.
Urishihara, K., & Miller, R. R. (2010). Backward blocking
in first-order conditioning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Animal Learning and Cognition, 36, 281295.
Vogel, E. H., & Wagner, A. R. (2017). A theoretical note on
the interpretation of the “redundancy effect” in
associative learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Animal Learning and Cognition, 43, 119-125.

3645

