The effects of gesture restriction on spatial language in young and elderly adults
Demet Özer (dozer@ku.edu.tr)
Merve Tansan (mtansan@ku.edu.tr)
Ege Ekin Özer (ekinozer@ku.edu.tr)
Department of Psychology, Koç University
Rumelifeneri Yolu Sariyer 34450, Istanbul – TURKEY

Katsiaryna Malykhina (kat.malykhina@gmail.com)
Anjan Chatterjee (anjan@mail.med.upenn.edu)
Department of Neurology, Pennsylvania Hospital, 330 South 9 th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19107 USA

Tilbe Göksun (tgoksun@ku.edu.tr)
Department of Psychology, Koç University
Rumelifeneri Yolu Sariyer 34450, Istanbul – TURKEY

Abstract

might be helpful for speakers describing spatial-motor
events (Church & Goldin-Meadow, 1986). The current
study investigates the role of gesturing on the use of spatial
language in a spatial task in young and elderly adults. We
examined the relation between gesture and speech to
address two questions: (1) How does people’s use of spatial
language change when they are restricted from using
gestures in a spatial task? (2) How does aging influence the
link between gesture production and spatial language use?

There is contradictory evidence on whether speech production
gets impaired or enhanced when people are restrained from
gesturing. There is also very little research on how this effect
can change with aging. The present study sought evidence for
these by asking young and elderly adults to describe two
different routes on a map in spontaneous speech and when
gestures were prohibited. We found that elderly adults
produced more spatial language when they were restricted to
use gestures compared to their spontaneous speech, whereas
young adults produced comparable levels of spatial language
in both conditions. Young and elderly adults used comparable
levels of gestures in their spontaneous route descriptions. Yet,
only young adults’ gesture use correlated positively with their
spatial language production. Thus, the results of gesture
prohibition on speech production are different for young and
elderly adults.

How does gesture
production?

Keywords: gesture restriction; speech production; aging;
spatial language

Introduction
People produce spontaneous gestures as they speak.
Gestures improve communication as listeners understand a
spoken message better when it is accompanied by a visible
gesture (Hostetter, 2011). This enhanced communication
might arise because gestures provide an image that is
particularly informative about the spatial or motor aspects of
the message that are not easily encoded in speech. That is,
gestures, especially the ones accompanying spatial or motor
information, improve communication (Alibali, 2005). Apart
from the effects on the listener, gestures also benefit
speakers. Gestures can directly convey imagistic
components of thought due to the isomorphism between
spatial-motor images and representational gestures. This

restriction

affect

speech

There are multiple accounts suggesting that gesturing
benefits speakers as they speak (e.g., Kita, 2000; Krauss,
Chen, & Gottesman, 2000; Melinger & Levelt, 2004).
However, these accounts differ in the proposed mechanism
for this benefit in speech. The Information Packaging
Hypothesis (Kita, 2000) states that gestures help speakers to
organize and package visual-spatial information into the
linear and segmented units of language. Forming an image
of the referent by gesturing might induce attention on the
specific properties of that image, thus, helping speakers to
break their rich spatial representations into units that are
codable in speech. According to this model, when people
are restricted from gesturing while talking about spatial
information, people have difficulty in organizing their rich
spatial-motor ideas into the units of language. As a result,
they produce less spatial information in their speech
compared to the cases in which they can spontaneously
produce gestures. Indeed, Rimé and colleagues (1984) found
that when people are restricted from gesturing, their speech
contained less vivid descriptions. In line with the
Information Packaging Hypothesis, when producing motor
descriptions (e.g. how to tie a shoe), people who were free

1471

to produce gestures used more semantically rich verbs
referring to key elements in motoric descriptions (Hostetter,
Alibali, & Kita, 2007).

compensating each other. Thus, speech can be enhanced in
the absence of gesture use.

How does aging affect gesture production?
Another account, the Lexical Access Hypothesis, suggests
that gestures might facilitate speech to retrieve words
especially when expressing spatial information (Hadar &
Butterworth, 1997; Krauss, Chen, & Gottesman, 2000). One
prediction of this account is that if speakers are restricted
from gesturing, they will have problems in retrieving the
correct words particularly when they describe spatial-motor
events. Thus, in line with Information Packaging
Hypothesis, this account argues that speech will be impaired
in the absence of gesture use. Many studies support this
account (Krauss, 1998; Rauscher, Krauss, & Chen, 1996).
For example, Hostetter, Alibali, and Kita (2007) found that
speakers who were restricted from gesturing started their
speech with more connectors such as “and” compared to
speakers who were free to use gestures when describing
motoric events. The disfluencies observed in the absence of
gesture is more evident in spatial contents. When restricted
from gesturing, speakers were found to be speaking slower
when talking about spatial information compared to the nonspatial aspects of a cartoon (Krauss, 1998). Also, speakers
produced higher proportion of filled pauses (e.g. um, uh)
when they could not gesture, indicating that they had
difficulty in accessing the lexical items.
Another account suggests that speakers use gestures to
supplement and/or complement their speech (Melinger &
Levelt, 2004). It is easier to convey the imagistic properties
of spatial-motor events with gestures in a more global
manner compared to speech (see also Kita, 2000). Yet,
according to this account, speakers use speech and gesture
concurrently; but if a gesture expresses necessary
information, then, that information can be omitted in speech.
For instance, Melinger and Levelt (2004) found that
speakers who produced iconic gestures representing the
spatial relations omitted the required spatial information
from their speech more compared to speakers who did not
gesture. Also, when restricted from gesturing, speakers used
more spatial language when describing the spatial relations
between objects (Graham & Heywood, 1975).
Although all three accounts state that gesturing not only
benefit communication of the listener but also of the
speaker, they diverge on the mechanism of this benefit.
They also propose different predictions on how speech will
be affected in the absence of gesture use. The Information
Packaging Hypothesis and the Lexical Access Hypothesis
predict that speech will be impaired when speakers are
restricted from gesturing, whereas the third account by
Melinger and Levelt (2004) suggests that speech and gesture
work as two different channels of expression, mutually

Although the effect of aging on communication has been
studied considerably in the literature, the impact of aging on
gesture use has received less attention. Studies investigating
the effects of aging on gesture show that production (Cohen
& Borsoi, 1996), imitation (Dimeck, Roy, & Hall, 1998),
and comprehension (e.g., Cocks, Morgan, & Kita, 2000) of
gestures are all impaired by aging.
Aging can either affect cognition globally or increase
problems in specific components of the cognitive system,
such as working memory and spatial integration in visual
processing (Andersen & Ni, 2008; Copeland & Radvansky,
2007). People with poor visual-spatial working memory and
spatial transformation ability used more representational
gestures (Chu, Foulkes, Meyer, & Kita, 2014). Thus, it is
possible that elderly people use fewer representational
gestures in spontaneous speech due to problems in their
working memory system. Cohen and Borsoi (1996) found
that in an object description task, elderly adults produced
fewer descriptive (i.e., representational) gestures compared
to young adults; however, the use of non-descriptive (i.e.,
beat) gestures did not differ between young and elderly
adults. These findings were interpreted as a specific
consequence of reduced use of visual imagery in elderly
people. No difference in the description quality of speech
was found as a function of age. This study, in contrary to the
Information Packaging Hypothesis (Kita, 2000), suggests
that the less frequent use of gestures did not impair speech
in elderly. Feyereisen and Harvard (1999) also investigated
the production of representational and beat gestures in
different description contents varying the likelihood of
generating mental images. Elderly adults used fewer
representational gestures when they talked about
visuospatial content generating more mental imagery,
whereas the use of beats for low mental imagery events was
comparable between young and elderly.
The findings on the gesture use of elderly adults are not
conclusive. Although elderly adults less frequently use
representational gestures in spontaneous speech in spatial
contents, the effects of gesture restriction on their speech is
unknown. To our knowledge, no study has investigated how
the effects of gesture restriction on speech, particularly
spatial information, differ between young and elderly adults.

The Present Study
The purpose of the present study is to further understand the
effects of gesture restriction on speech production as a
function of aging. We asked young and elderly adults to

1472

describe two different routes on a directional map task
without mentioning gesture use (i.e., spontaneous gesture
production) and by prohibiting them from gesturing.
First, in line with the previous studies (e.g., Feyereisen &
Harvard, 1999; Cohen & Borsoi, 1996), we expect that
elderly adults would use fewer gestures compared to young
adults when spontaneously describing the routes on the
map. If gestures facilitate speech production by either
helping speakers to organize and package visual-spatial
information into units of speech (as suggested by the
Information Packaging Hypothesis) or helping them to
retrieve words (as suggested by the Lexical Access
Hypothesis), then we would expect that young and elderly
adults should use more spatial language in the gesture
unrestricted condition compared to the gesture restricted
condition. However, when we consider the already sparse
use of gestures in elderly, we might also observe no
difference between spatial language use in spontaneous
speech and gesture restricted conditions in elderly adults. If,
on the other hand, gesture helps speakers by easily
conveying information that is not necessarily available in
speech (Melinger & Levelt, 2014), then, young adults
should use more spatial language when restricted from
gesturing compared to spontaneous speech. However, if
elderly adults use fewer gestures compared to young adults,
then elderly adults would use more spatial language in
spontaneous speech compared to young ones and use
comparable levels of spatial language across spontaneous
speech and gesture restriction conditions.

Method

map. Two routes (Route 1 vs. Route 2) were created. Route
1 was from a landmark at the bottom left to another
landmark at the top right. Route 2 was the other diagonal
route; from a landmark at the top right to another landmark
at the bottom left. The map was present throughout the
session and the experimenter held the map for the
participant to describe the routes.

Figure 1: San Diego Zoo Map

In the first condition (spontaneous gesture condition; SG),
participants were asked to describe the path they would take
to go from one pink-circled landmark to another. In this
condition, they were given no specific information about the
use of speech or gesture. In the second condition (gesture
restricted condition; GR), however, they were asked to sit
on their hands and explain how they would continue from a
different marked landmark to another just with speech.
Participants always completed the SG condition first and
GR condition second not to make them aware of the gesture
use in the SG condition. However, the order of routes
(Route 1 vs. Route 2) on the map was counterbalanced
across different conditions. Sessions were videotaped for
further coding.

Coding

Participants
Twenty young (Mage = 20.3, SD = 2.18, range: 18-22, 9
females) and 19 elderly (Mage = 62, SD = 7.17, range: 52-78,
15 females) adults agreed to participate in the experiment in
exchange for course credit or $10 for an hour. All
participants were right-handed and native English-speakers.
Before the sessions, they were provided with a written,
informed consent in accordance with the policies of the
University of Pennsylvania’s Institutional Review Board.

Stimuli and Procedure
Participants were asked to describe two different routes
(Route 1 vs. Route 2) on a San Diego Zoo Map in two
different counterbalanced conditions in a quiet room with an
individual setting (see Figure 1). All participants were
seated on an armless chair to promote gesturing. The map
was printed on an A1 size cartoon (594 x 841 mm) so that
the routes were visible to the participants. The large and
unnecessary identification signs were erased and targets
were circled in pink to make finding them easier on the

Speech. Participants’ speech was transcribed verbatim in
both conditions by a native English speaker. For each
condition, we first calculated the number of utterances
coded as the units of speech bounded by silence. Next, we
coded three different spatial information in speech: (1)
direction describing the course of movement in relation to
other objects (e.g., down, south), (2) street names (e.g.,
Hippo trail or Parkway), and (3) landmarks (e.g.,
restaurant). Participants’ frequency of using each spatial
information in speech was calculated. We also calculated a
composite speech score that was the sum of all spatial
information in speech.
Gesture. Participants’ use of spontaneous co-speech
gestures was coded in SG condition. A change in the path of
hand movement determined a new gesture. We coded three
different gestures: (1) pointing (e.g., pointing at a landmark
on the map), (2) tracing (e.g., continuously moving the
finger or hand on the map to show the route), and (3) iconic
(e.g., moving the hand off the map to represent a direction).

1473

We also calculated a composite gesture score that was the
total of all 3 specific gesture types. Both speech and gesture
were coded by the first author.

Results
Young and elderly adults did not differ in the total number
of utterances in SG (F (1, 37) = .77, p  .05) and GR (F (1,
37) = .04, p .05) conditions, and the total trial duration it
took to describe the routes in SG (F (1, 37) = .30, p  .05)
and GR (F (1, 37) = 2.99, p  .05) conditions. There was
also no gender difference in the total number of utterances
in SG (F (1, 37) = .57, p  .05) and GR (F (1, 37) = 1.13, p
 .05) and, the total trial duration in SG (F (1, 37) = .19, p 
.05) and GR (F (1,37) = .31, p  .05) conditions. Thus, we
merged gender for further analyses.
To see if the order of the routes (Route 1 first vs. Route 2
first) influenced the number of utterances used and the
duration of describing the routes, we conducted 2 separate
mixed ANOVA with total number of utterances (SG vs. GR
conditions) and total trial duration (SG vs. GR conditions)
as within subject variables and the order of routes (R1 first
vs. R2 first) as the between subject variable. There was an
interaction between the number of utterances and the order
of the routes, and between the trial duration and the order of
the routes, F (1, 37) = 7.59, p < .01 and F (1, 37) = 6.69, p <
.02, respectively. Participants produced more utterances and
spent more time in GR (M = 10.25 and M = 78.35 seconds,
respectively) compared to SG (M = 6.35 and M = 39.80
seconds, respectively) only when they completed the second
route (R2) in GR condition. Thus, for further analyses, we
used normalized scores, obtained by the total number of
utterances (i.e. raw scores) divided by the number of
utterances for each subject in the respective condition. For
the next analyses, we used Bonferroni adjusted alpha levels
in pairwise comparisons for multiple hypotheses testing and
applied Greenhouse-Geisser correction when sphericity
assumption was violated (see Tables 1 and 2 for the mean
raw scores)

of spatial information between young (M = 2.58) and elderly
(M = 2.62) participants in GR condition. In addition, elderly
adults used more spatial information in GR compared to SG,
whereas young participants produced comparable spatial
information in speech in SG and GR conditions (see also
Table 1 for raw scores). Thus, even though young adults
used similar spatial information in both conditions, when
gesture use was restricted, elderly adults’ use of spatial
information increased.
To see if specific spatial information used in speech (street
name, landmark or direction) in SG to GR conditions
differed between groups, we conducted a 2×2×3 mixed
ANOVA with group (young and elderly adults) as the
between subject variable and condition (SG and GR) and
specific spatial information (street name, landmark, and
direction) as within subject variables. There was a main
effect of condition, F (1, 37) = 27.68, p < .001 and an
interaction of condition by group, F (1, 37) = 7.07, p < .02.
As reported earlier, elderly, on average, used more spatial
information in GR compared to SG conditions, whereas
young produced comparable levels of spatial information in
SG and GR conditions. There was also a main effect of the
specific type of spatial information, F (2, 74) = 16.35, p <
.001. Regardless of the condition, all participants used more
direction information (M = .99) compared to street name (M
= .60) and landmark (M = .61) information in speech. No
other interactions among spatial information, group, or
condition were found, ps  .05.
Table 1: Mean raw speech scores for each condition (SG and GR)
and group. The values in parentheses are standard errors of mean.

Number of Utterances
Composite Speech
Score
Direction in speech
Landmark in speech

Speech Analyses
First, we conducted a mixed ANOVA with composite
speech score (SG vs. GR conditions) as within subject
variable and group (young vs. elderly) as the between
subject variable to see if total spatial information used in
speech from SG to GR conditions differed between young
and elderly. There was a main effect of the condition on the
composite speech scores, F (1, 37) = 27.68, p < .001.
However, this main effect was qualified by interaction, F (1,
37) = 7.07, p < .05. Young participants (M = 2.18) used
more spatial information compared to elderly (M = 1.42) in
SG condition. However, no difference was found for the use

Street Name in speech

Young
SG
GR
9.6
9
(2.2)
(1.5)
18.0
21.1
(3.5)
(2.6)

Elderly
SG
GR
7.3
9.5
(1.4)
(1.7)
11.6
21.4
(2.9)
(2.6)

8.3
(1.9)
5
(1.3)
4.7
(0.6)

5.6
(1.2)
3.5
(1.1)
2.4
(0.8)

9.3
(1.5)
6.5
(1.0)
5.2
(0.5)

9.3
(1.4)
7.0
(1.2)
5.2
(0.6)

Gesture Analyses
There was no difference in the total number of gestures
produced by young and elderly participants, F (1, 39) =
1.15, p  .05. We conducted a mixed ANOVA with
different gesture types (pointing, iconic and tracing) as the
within subject variable and group (elderly vs. young) as the
between subject variable. There was a main effect of gesture

1474

type, F (1.20, 44.34) = 46.59, p < .001. There was also a
marginally significant interaction between gesture type and
group, F (1.20, 44.34) = 3.79, p = .051. Both young and
elderly adults used more tracing gestures (M = .80 and M =
1.23, respectively) compared to pointing (M = .29 and M=
.16, respectively) and iconic gestures (M = .06 and M = .06,
respectively). However, the difference between pointing and
iconic gestures was only significant for young adults, Mdiff =
.23, p < .01. Elderly adults produced comparable number of
pointing and iconic gestures, Mdiff = .10, p > .05.
Table 2: Mean raw gesture scores. The values in parentheses are
standard errors of mean.

Young

Elderly

8.4
(1.6)
2.5
(0.6)
4.9
(0.9)
1
(0.5)

7.3
(1.2)
1.2
(0.3)
5.9
(1.0)
0.2
(0.2)

Composite Gesture Score
Pointing Gestures
Tracing Gestures
Dynamic Gestures

Gesture & Speech Analyses
Young adults’ total number of gestures and spatial language
positively correlated in both SG (r = .54, p < .05) and GR (r
= .70, p < .01) conditions. There was also a positive
correlation for spatial language use in SG and GR
conditions (r = .58, p < .01) in young adults. The total
number of gestures did not correlate with spatial language
use in SG (r = -.42, p > .05) and GR (r = .01, p > .05)
conditions in elderly adults. Moreover, the spatial language
use in SG and GR conditions did not correlate in elderly
adults as well, r = .08, p > .05.

Discussion
This is one of the first studies investigating how the effects
of gesture restriction on speech production differ with aging.
We asked whether gesture prohibition impair or enhance
spatial speech production of young and elderly adults. Our
results showed that the effects of gesture restriction on the
production of spatial language differed between young and
elderly. Even though elderly and young adults produced
comparable number of gestures in spontaneous speech
condition, gesture restriction increased the use of spatial
information in speech only for elderly adults. Overall,
younger individuals produced more spatial language and the
use of gestures correlated with their use of spatial
information.
In the first task when people were allowed to gesture,
young and elderly individuals produced similar number of

gestures. This result contradicts with the previous findings
that showed evidence for decreased amount of gestures in
elderly adults (Cohen & Borsoi, 1996; Feyereisen &
Harvard, 1999). However, the majority of the gestures used
by young and elderly adults in our study were nonrepresentational (e.g. tracing and pointing gestures). Since
the map was present throughout the experiment, this might
trigger the frequent use of pointing to the map (i.e. pointing
gestures) or continuously moving finger on map to trace the
route (i.e. tracing gestures). When people are asked to talk
about an object from memory, they use more
representational gestures compared to a condition where the
object of interest is present when they talk about it (Wesp et
al., 2001). Thus, the sparse use of iconic gestures might lead
us not to find any difference between young and elderly
adults in the use of representational gestures.
Our results showed that elderly adults used more spatial
language when they were restricted from gesturing
compared to spontaneous speech, whereas young adults
produced comparable levels of spatial language in both
conditions. The higher use of spatial language when gesture
use was restricted in elderly adults is compatible with the
account suggesting that gestures are used to supplement
and/or complement the speech. That is, when gestures
convey the imagistic properties of spatial events, this
information can be omitted from speech (Melinger &
Levelt, 2004; Graham & Heywood, 1975). Our results,
however, did not find support for the Information Packaging
Hypothesis (Kita, 2000) or the Lexical Retrieval Hypothesis
(Hadar & Butterworth, 1997; Krauss, Chen, & Gottesman,
2000). On the other hand, our findings from young adults
did not support any of accounts regarding the relation
between speech production and gesture restriction. For
young adults, gesture restriction did not affect their spatial
speech production. However, we found that the gesture and
speech production were positively correlated in young
adults. Thus, young adults, who produced more gestures
(possibly high in spatial skills) could use more spatial
information overall.
Why does gesture restriction influence only elderly
adults’ speech? We cannot answer this question with
certainty, but state some possible explanations. First,
people’s general verbal skills could be related to their
gesture use. Hostetter and Alibali (2007) found that people
with low verbal skills produced gestures to facilitate their
speech, yet people with high verbal skills only
supplemented their speech with gestures. Thus, elderly
individuals who had high verbal skills could produce more
spatial information in a gesture prohibited context. This
does not necessarily explain the difference between young
and elderly adults, which require future studies to find

1475

answers. Second, not only verbal abilities, but also spatial
skills (e.g., Chu & Kita, 2011; Chu et al., 2014) or working
memory and spatial integration in visual processing
(Andersen & Ni, 2008; Copeland & Radvansky, 2007)
could play a role in how people benefit from gestures.
Increased problems in working memory and visual-spatial
problems might particularly be a problem in the elderly
group. Again, we did not examine the participants’ spatial
skills or working memory in the current study, hence we
cannot make a conclusion regarding this issue. Future
studies should investigate skill differences between these
age groups to draw stronger conclusions. Also, the
composition of our two different age groups in terms of sex
might create a problem in the interpretation of findings.
Finally, even though we told everyone not to gesture, it is
possible that some people might have moved other body
areas such as lips, eyes or parts of the body (Rimé et al.,
1984).
Taken together, the present study provided new evidence
for the role of gesture restriction on spatial language use
from young and elderly adults. Surprisingly, we did not find
detrimental effects of gesture prohibition on spatial
language use in either groups. On the contrary, elderly
people benefited from not using gestures. These findings
suggest that gestures might serve different purposes for
young and elderly people in the context of spatial language
use.

References
Alibali, M. W. (2005). Gesture in spatial cognition:
Expressing, communicating, and thinking about spatial
information. Spatial Cognition and Computation, 5(4),
307-331.
Andersen, G. J., & Ni, R. (2008). Aging and visual
processing: Declines in spatial not temporal
integration. Vision Research, 48(1), 109-118.
Chu, M., & Kita, S. (2011). The nature of gestures'
beneficial role in spatial problem solving. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 140(1), 102-116.
Chu, M., Meyer, A., Foulkes, L., & Kita, S. (2014).
Individual differences in frequency and saliency of
speech-accompanying gestures: the role of cognitive
abilities and empathy. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 143(2), 694-709.
Church, R. B., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (1986). The mismatch
between gesture and speech as an index of transitional
knowledge. Cognition, 23(1), 43-71.
Cocks, N., Morgan, G., & Kita, S. (2011). Iconic gesture
and speech integration in younger and older
adults. Gesture, 11(1), 24-39.
Cohen, R. L., & Borsoi, D. (1996). The role of gestures in
description-communication: A cross-sectional study of
aging. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 20(1), 45-63.

Copeland, D. E., & Radvansky, G. A. (2007). Aging and
integrating spatial mental models. Psychology and
Aging, 22(3), 569-579.
Dimeck, P. T., Roy, E. A., & Hall, C. R. (1998). Aging and
working memory in gesture imitation. Brain and
Cognition, 37(1), 124-127.
Feyereisen, P., & Havard, I. (1999). Mental imagery and
production of hand gestures while speaking in younger
and older adults. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 23(2),
153-171.
Graham, J. A., & Heywood, S. (1975). The effects of
elimination of hand gestures and of verbal codability on
speech performance. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 5(2), 189-195.
Hadar, U., & Butterworth, B. (1997). Iconic gestures,
imagery, and word retrieval in speech. Semiotica, 115(12), 147-172.
Hostetter, A. B., & Alibali, M. W. (2007). Raise your hand
if you’re spatial: Relations between verbal and spatial
skills and gesture production. Gesture, 7(1), 73-95.
Hostetter, A. B., Alibali, M. W., & Kita, S. (2007). Does
sitting on your hands make you bite your tongue? The
effects of gesture prohibition on speech during motor
descriptions. In D.S. McNamara & J. G. Trafton (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 29th Annual Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 1097-1102). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Hostetter, A. B. (2011). When do gestures communicate? A
meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 137(2), 297-315.
Kita, S. (2000). How representational gestures help
speaking. In D. McNeill (Ed.), Language and gesture (pp.
162-185). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Krauss, R. M. (1998). Why do we gesture when we
speak? Current Directions in Psychological Science, 7(2),
54-54.
Krauss, R. M., Chen, Y., & Gottesman, R. F. (2000).
Lexical gestures and lexical access: a process model. In
D. McNeill (Ed.), Language and gesture (pp. 261-284).
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Melinger, A., & Levelt, W. J. (2004). Gesture and the
communicative intention of the speaker. Gesture, 4(2),
119-141.
Rauscher, F. H., Krauss, R. M., & Chen, Y. (1996). Gesture,
speech, and lexical access: The role of lexical movements
in speech production. Psychological Science, 7(4), 226231.
Rimé, B., Schiaratura, L., Hupert, M., & Ghysselinckx, A.
(1984). Effects of relative immobilization on the
speaker’s nonverbal behavior and on the dialogue
imagery level. Motivation and Emotion, 8, 311-325.
Wesp, R., Hesse, J., Keutmann, D. (2001). Gestures
maintain spatial imagery. The American Journal of
Psychology, 114(4), 591-600.

1476

