The nature of quantities influences the representation of arithmetic problems:
evidence from drawings and solving procedures in children and adults
Hippolyte Gros (hippolyte.gros@cri-paris.org) (1, 2, 3)
(1) Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité,
12 Rue de l’École de Médecine, 75006 Paris, France.

Jean-Pierre Thibaut (jean-pierre.thibaut@u-bourgogne.fr)
(2) LEAD-CNRS, UMR 5022, UB, Université de Bourgogne Franche-Comté,
Pôle AAFE – Esplanade Erasme, 21065 Dijon. France.

Emmanuel Sander (emmanuel.sander@univ-paris8.fr)
(3) Paragraphe Lab, EA 349, Université Paris 8,
2 Rue de la Liberté, 93526 Saint-Denis Cedex 02, France.
result shows that two problems which share the same schema
can lead to different performances.
A contrasting approach comes from Johnson-Laird’s
(1983) theory of mental models. It posits that, during reading,
a mental representation is constructed in working memory,
and that its structure is analogous to that of the situation
depicted in the problem statement (Reusser, 1990). This
representation depicts the meaningful relations between the
elements of the problem. The idea of a problem-specific
representation, integrating conceptual information from the
problem statement, can account for the interpretative effects
described in the literature. De Corte, Verschaffel and De Win
(1985) showed that rewording a problem statement by
making the semantic relations more salient facilitates the
solving process. Similarly, introducing daily-life situations in
the cover stories of word problems contributes to better
performance (Stern & Lehrndorfer, 1992; Vlahović-Štetić,
1999). The use of specific words or sentences can modify the
representation constructed by the solvers (Cummins, Kintsch,
Reusser & Weimer, 1988). In a study challenging the
predictions of mental model and schema views, Thevenot,
Devidal, Barrouillet and Fayol (2007) showed that placing
the question at the beginning instead of at the end of a
problem statement provided more benefit to the less
experienced solvers. This result supported the mental model
theory, whereas the schema theory would have predicted the
reverse pattern.

Abstract
When solving arithmetic problems, semantic factors influence
the representations built (Gamo, Sander & Richard, 2010). In
order to specify such interpretative processes, we created
structurally isomorphic word problems that could be solved
with two distinct algorithms. We tested whether a distinction
between cardinal and ordinal quantities would lead solvers, due
to their daily-life knowledge, to build different representations,
influencing their strategies as well as the nature of their
drawings. We compared 5th grade children and adults in order
to assess the validity of this hypothesis with participants of
varying arithmetic proficiency. The results confirmed that the
distinction between cardinal and ordinal situations led to
different solving strategies and to different drawings among
both age groups. This study supports the ontological distinction
of cardinal versus ordinal quantities and calls for the
consideration of the role of daily-life semantics when
accounting for arithmetic problem solving processes.
Keywords: arithmetic problem solving; interpreted
structure; semantic encoding; strategy choice.

Introduction
What are the steps taken from reading an arithmetic word
problem to implementing a set of mathematical operations,
and how can they be studied? It is well established, since
Riley, Greeno and Heller (1983) proposed their typology of
additive word problems, that different problem statements
lead to different performances. Yet, the reasoning processes
and representations accounting for such differences remains
controversial.
The schema theory (Kintsch & Greeno, 1985) proposes
that solving a word problem requires to select and to
instantiate a schema fitting the problem at hand. For example,
any comparison problem will require to retrieve the
corresponding schema and to implement it with the available
values (Riley et al., 1983). However, it has been argued that
this approach underestimates interpretative effects. For
instance, Hudson (1983) showed that young children had
much more trouble solving a problem stating “there are 5
birds and 3 worms, how many more birds is there than
worms?” than they had solving a problem in which the
question was “how many birds won’t get a worm?”. This

Semantic determinants of problem solving
The semantic determinants of a solvers’ mental
representations are an important issue. Bassok, Wu and
Olseth (1995) showed that the semantic relations which
connect a problem’s entities influence analogical transfer.
They contrasted problems where objects were given to people
(OP) and problems were people were assigned to objects
(PO). They found that, since in real life objects are usually
given to people rather than people being assigned to objects,
OP training examples led to better performance with OP
transfer problems than PO training examples did with PO
transfer problems.

439

Along this line, Bassok, Chase and Martin (1998) asked
participants to create addition or division problems involving
specific sets of objects that were provided. They showed that
when the objects shared a functionally asymmetric semantic
relation (e.g. apples and baskets evoke the contain relation),
participants tended to create division problems, whereas they
created addition problems when using functionally
symmetric sets of objects (such as oranges and apples, that
belong to the same superordinate fruit category). These biases
are not driven by arithmetic properties but rather by the world
semantics. Bassok (2001) developed the semantic alignment
framework proposing that solvers abstract an interpreted
structure that depends on their world knowledge about the
entities described in the problem statement. This interpreted
structure integrates the structural role of the entities
mentioned in the problem, and can thus lead to an appropriate
use of abstract formal knowledge when the relations it
describes are semantically aligned with the mathematical
relations of the problem (Bassok et al., 1998; Bassok, 2001).
Both behavioral (Bassok, Pedigo & Oskarsson, 2008) and
physiological (Guthormsen et al., 2015) measures confirmed
that problem solving is easier when daily-life knowledge
(world semantics) and knowledge about mathematical
concepts (mathematical semantics) are aligned with each
other.

between problem representations and drawings of the
situations (Barrios & Martinez, 2014; Edens & Potter, 2007).
Drawings are thus an accurate way to gather information
regarding the solvers representations.

Encoding ordinal and cardinal quantities
In the following experiment, we will capitalize on problems
that can be solved with two different strategies. Previous
studies have suggested that an ontological distinction can be
drawn between two types of situations involving numerical
values: cardinal situations, consisting of sets of unordered
elements, and ordinal situations, where units are
endogenously ordered and can be represented along an axis,
such as a timeline (Gamo et al., 2010; Hakem et al., 2005;
Sander & Richard, 2005). When solving an arithmetic word
problem, the authors posited that solvers abstract an
interpreted structure that is aligned with either a cardinal or
an ordinal representation.
These two types of representations elicit different solving
strategies: in ordinal representations, subtractions are seen as
calculations performed on a one-dimensional ordered scale,
whereas in cardinal representations they are encoded as a
difference between a whole and a component part (Hakem et
al., 2005). Thus, according to Gamo et al.’s hypothesis, a
subtraction could either be perceived as a comparison or as a
complementation, depending on the situation described in the
problem statement. The paradigm developed by Hakem et al.
consisted in problems that admitted two distinct solving
strategies implementable for both cardinal (number of
people) and ordinal (duration) quantities. Problem statements
1 and 2 below embody this distinction between cardinal
problems and ordinal problems:
- Problem 1: “There are 5 people in the Richard family.
When the Richards go on holiday with the Roberts, they make
a total of 14 people at the hotel. The Roberts are joined on
holiday by the Dumas family. In the Dumas family, there are
3 people less than in the Richard family. The Roberts are
going on holiday with the Dumas. How many will they be at
the hotel?”
- Problem 2: “Antoine took painting classes for 5 years, and
stopped at the age of 14. Jean started at the same age as
Antoine, and went to classes 3 years less than him. How old
was Jean when he stopped attending painting classes?”

Investigating participants’ representations
The semantic alignment framework predicts that
representations abstracted from problem statements influence
the solver’s solving strategies. Yet, the key semantic
dimensions influencing the representations and explaining
the lack of transfer remain to be elucidated in order to
promote methods to help students overcome the
incompatibilities posed by a problem.
In this regard, problems with multiple solving strategies are
of particular interest to study representations, since the
selection of one strategy over another is informative about the
representation constructed by the solvers (De Corte,
Verschaffel & De Win, 1985). For instance, Thevenot and
Oakhill (2005) worked on a multiple-step problem solving
task in which the cognitive load was manipulated through
values size (large or small). They showed that depending on
the size of the values, participants used different solving
algorithms. The issue of the semantic determinants of
problem representations can be tackled by using such a
paradigm in which different solving strategies are available,
and the solver’s ability to pick and use one informs us about
the abstracted interpreted structures (Hakem, Sander, Labat
& Richard, 2005). For example, Coquin-Viennot & Moreau
(2003) showed that the presence of a grouping element in a
problem statement (such as flowers presented within a
bouquet instead of separately) could incite participants to use
a factorizing rather than a development algorithm.
Another way to study the participants’ mental
representations is the use of drawings. Vosniadou and Brewer
(1992) elicited drawings from 3rd and 5th grade children so as
to study the development of their representations of the earth.
As for problem solving, studies have highlighted the link

Figure 1: Structure of the problems. This structure can
depict both problems and is compatible with both strategies.

440

Present study
Problems 1 and 2 are isomorphs sharing the same deep
structure (Figure 1), and can both be solved using either of
two strategies: either a 3-step complementation strategy (14 –
5 = 9; 5 – 3 = 2; 9 + 2 = 11) or a 1-step matching strategy
(14 – 3 = 11). Yet, the authors hypothesized that (i) because
the quantities used are different, the interpreted structures are
too, each problem statement consequently favoring the use of
one strategy over the other; and that (ii) the unequal
distribution of strategies used may be accounted for by the
nature of the abstracted representations: problem 1 encoded
as a cardinal problem (Figure 2) and problem 2 encoded as
an ordinal problem (Figure 3).

Our study builds on the work of Hakem et al. (2005) in order
to highlight the role of general semantic features on the
representations abstracted by the solvers and on the
implemented solving strategies. We aimed at providing
converging measures of the impact of the cardinal/ordinal
distinction on the solvers’ ability to solve the problems, and
to provide the first empirical test of these effects on children
and adults simultaneously. To this end, 5th graders as well as
adults were asked to perform two tasks: solving problems
involving different types of cardinal and ordinal variables
using as few operations as possible, and making a drawing
for each problem.
The goal of the experiment was twofold: first, we intended
to confirm with both age groups the validity of the ordinal
versus cardinal distinction with new material including new
types of quantities and using systematically controlled
problem statements. This was intended to show that strong
semantic effects affect both younger and older – more
proficient – participants in arithmetic problem solving.
Second, we wanted to show that those effects originate in the
representations abstracted from the problems, and translate
into the algorithms implemented by the solvers. We predicted
that within each group, the mean percentage of the 1-step
matching strategy would be significantly lower on cardinal
problems than on ordinal problems, despite the adults
achieving a globally higher solving performance than the
children. Also, we predicted that for each age group the
drawings would reveal a higher ordinal versus cardinal ratio
of distinctive features for ordinal than for cardinal problems.

Figure 2: Cardinal representation of problem 1. This
interpreted structure fosters the calculation of the
intersection (part 2) between whole 1 and whole 2, thus
favoring the 3-step complementation strategy.

Experiment
Participants
We recruited samples from two populations for this study: a
group of 59 children in 5th grade (27 females, M = 11.00
years, SD = 0.36), and a group of 52 adults (36 females, M =
26.86 years, SD = 9.72). All participants were recruited from
the Paris region and spoke French fluently. None had
previously participated in any similar experiment.

Figure 3: Ordinal representation of problem 2. This
interpreted structure puts forward the fact that the difference
between whole 1 and whole 2 is equal to the difference
between part 1 and part 3. The shorter 1-step comparison
algorithm thus becomes available to solve the problem.

Materials and procedure
Each participant was presented with a set of 12 problems, 6
using ordinal values (duration, height or number of floors),
and 6 using cardinal values (number of elements, price or
weight), according to Hakem et al.’s definition. We
considered duration, height and number of floors as ordinal
values because their ordinal component is salient in daily life,
putting emphasis on successorship relation and on
comparison. Similarly, number of elements, price and weight
were used as cardinal values because the world semantics
attached to such quantities evoke the unordered grouping of
elements assigned to values and the partition of a whole into
its component parts.
All the problems had the same number of sentences. The
numerical values were provided in the same order and both
numerical values and problem order were randomized
between participants. The problems were printed on 13-page

In accordance with the authors’ hypothesis, the participants
who were asked to solve the problems using as few
operations as possible found the 1-step matching strategy on
problem 1 in less than 5% of the cases. On the other hand,
problem 2 led to the use of the 1-step matching strategy in
over 60% of the cases, suggesting that comparisons are
indeed made salient in ordinal representations. Hakem et al.’s
(2005) study of the solving strategies showed that the two
types of problems were underlain by different
representations. Yet, the claim that ordinal and cardinal
quantities evoke the corresponding ordinal and cardinal
representations warrants further empirical support.

441

booklets with the instructions detailed on the first page. The
participants were asked (1) to solve the problems using as few
arithmetic operations as possible, (2) to write down every
operation they made, even those they solved using mental
calculation, and (3) to make a drawing for each problem
statement that could help someone else understand and solve
the problem. Each page was divided into four parts: problem
statement, ‘draft’ area, ‘response’ area and ‘drawing’ area.
The booklets and instructions were strictly identical for both
age groups.

Each drawing, including those of failed problems, was scored
by two independent raters who were not familiar with the
theories at play and ignored the hypotheses being tested.
They were asked to rate the drawings according to the 8 items
scale resulting from the aggregation of Figures 4.a and 4.b.
After an initial rating phase, the percent agreement between
the two raters was of 91.87%. An inter-rater reliability
analysis using Cohen’s Kappa statistic showed substantial
agreement between raters. (κ = 0.61, SE = 0.14), according to
Landis & Koch’s typology (1977). After discussion, the
raters reached 100% agreement. For each drawing, a score
was then calculated by subtracting the number of cardinal
items to the number of ordinal items, thus creating a scale
ranging from −4 (the most cardinal) to +4 (the most ordinal).

Coding
The successful strategies were categorized either as correct
1-step matching strategy, or as correct 3-step
complementation strategy. A problem was considered correct
when the expected result was obtained and accompanied by
calculations1. Regarding the drawings, we designed an 8-item
rating scale evaluating to what extent the drawings possessed
ordinal versus cardinal characteristics. The scale included 4
cardinal items (Figure 4.a) and 4 ordinal items (Figure 4.b).
The items were chosen so that they would either depict
unordered elements being grouped in sets, or ordered
elements being described as positions on an axis and
compared along this axis.

Results
Our first hypothesis was that problems with ordinal quantities
should facilitate the use of the matching 1-step strategy
compared to problems with cardinal quantities.

a

b
Figure 5: Children’s and adults’ mean rate of use of the two
solving algorithms depending on the type of quantity used.
Figure 5 details the participants’ use of each strategy
depending on the type of quantity featured in the problems.
A paired t-test revealed that the mean rate of use of the 1-step
matching strategy was higher on ordinal (M = 0.39, SD =
0.31) than on cardinal (M = 0.08, SD = 0.17) problems
(t(58) = 8.36, p < 0.001). The same analyses were performed
for the adults and showed that the mean rate of use of the 1step matching strategy was also higher on ordinal (M = 0.457,
SD = 0.33) than on cardinal (M = 0.253, SD = 0.35) problems
(t(51) = 4.99, p < 0.001). This confirmed that the choice of a
solving algorithm is influenced by the cardinal versus ordinal
nature of the quantities, and that this effect is robust among

Figure 4: Coding grids for cardinal (a) and
ordinal (b) features.
1 When a calculation error resulted in a difference of +1 or −1
compared to the correct value, problems were still considered
correctly solved.

442

adults. Additionally, the 1-step algorithm was significantly
less used by children than by adults on cardinal (t(109) =
3.48, p < 0.001, unpaired t-test) but not ordinal (t(109) = 1.10,
p = 0.27, unpaired t-test) problems, meaning that children had
significantly more difficulty than adults using the 1-step
strategy on cardinal, but not on ordinal problems.
To test our second hypothesis, we focused on the drawings
made by the participants. Figure 6 details the rating of the
drawings depending on the type of quantity used in the
problems. The drawing score was significantly lower for
drawings depicting problems with cardinal quantities (M = –
0.55, SD = 0.78) than for those describing problems with
ordinal quantities (M = 0.06, SD = 0.87, t(58) = 5.61, p <
0.001, paired t-test), indicating that problems using ordinal
quantities led young participants to draw ordinal features
(axes, intervals, etc.) at a higher ratio over cardinal features
(sets, groups of elements, etc.) compared to the ordinal
problems.

Discussion
The fact that the cardinal versus ordinal distinction in
problem statements influenced both children’s and adults’
solving strategies confirmed the robustness of these
interpretative effects, even with experienced solvers who
should not meet any difficulty in solving such simple
problems. Indeed, children performed about half as well as
adults, yet the distinction between cardinal and ordinal
problems remains significant in both populations.
Additionally, adults’ performances were significantly higher
on cardinal, but not on ordinal problems, indicating that when
semantically congruent with the 1-step strategy, world
semantics help children achieve adult-like performance on
the task.
The elicited drawings provided an empirical confirmation
of the importance of the ordinal versus cardinal distinction in
both populations. The fact that children produced drawings
that had significantly fewer ordinal or cardinal features on
ordinal or cardinal problems, respectively, may be attributed
to a global lack of details in their drawings, which
nevertheless did not prevent a significant distinction between
cardinal and ordinal drawings to be revealed among children.
Additionally, children may have more difficulties to produce
a graphic implementation of ordinal situations, which would
explain their poor ordinal score (0.06) for ordinal problems.
This calls for further research on the topic.
Overall, the results of both the drawing and the solving
tasks show that the participants’ semantic knowledge about
the quantities used in the problems (i.e. their experience with
counting the number of apples in a bag, adding the price of
every item on a bucket list, calculating the arrival time of
their train or using the elevator) influence the encoding of
arithmetic word problems. The distinction introduced
between ordinal and cardinal problem statements was
reflected in the representations constructed (as shown by the
drawings made by the participants) and led solvers to use
different solving algorithms, even when asked specifically to
use the shorter strategy they could find. Furthermore, the fact
that those effects could be highlighted both with young pupils
and adults indicates the robustness of such encoding
constraints. The ontological distinction hypothesized
between ordinal and cardinal representations was thus
confirmed on two complementary tasks.
The use of a double measure of the influence of the solvers’
world knowledge allowed us to gather converging clues
shedding light both into the abstracted representations and
into the subsequently implemented algorithms. By focusing
on the role of semantic properties on the initial encoding of a
problem, we hope to gain a finer understanding of arithmetic
problem solving in its whole, and to pave the way for
accounting for the interactions between world semantics,
mathematical semantics and algorithms. Understanding the
determinants of problem representations is a crucial step to
identify the potential pitfalls and dead ends born from
semantic incongruence (Gros, Sander & Thibaut, 2016) as
well as to help develop analogical transfer between
isomorphic problems by promoting semantic recoding among

Figure 6: Children’s and adults’ mean drawing score
depending on the type of quantity used in the problems.
Vertical bars denote 0.95-confidence intervals.
Similarly, among adult participants, problems with cardinal
quantities (M = –1.48, SD = 0.79) led to a significantly lower
drawing score than problems with ordinal quantities (M =
0.89, SD = 0.86, t(51) = 12.44, p < 0.001, paired t-test). In
sum, the presence of ordinal (resp. cardinal) quantities seems
to result in representations featuring a higher number of
ordinal (resp. cardinal) features, in both children and adults.
Of note, drawing score was significantly higher among
children than among adults on cardinal problems (t(109) =
6.24, p < 0.001, unpaired t-test) but significantly lower
among children than among adults on ordinal problems
(t(109) = 5.00, p < 0.001, unpaired t-test); in other words,
children included significantly less cardinal features than
adults while representing cardinal problems, and
significantly less ordinal features than adults when
representing ordinal problems.

443

the learners (Gamo, Sander & Richard, 2010; Gros, Thibaut
& Sander, 2015). Doubtlessly, the educational opportunities
resulting from a better understanding of the conditions
necessary for semantic recoding and analogical transfer
between problems are promising.

Hakem K., Sander E., Labat J-M., DIANE : a diagnosis
system for arithmetical problem solving, Proceedings of
international Conference on Artificial Intelligence in
Education (AIED2005), 258-265(2005).
Hudson, T. (1983). Correspondences and Numerical
Differences between Disjoint Sets. Child Development,
Vol. 54, No. 1, 84-90.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models: Towards a
cognitive science of language, inference, and
consciousness (No. 6). Harvard University Press.
Kintsch, W., & Greeno, J. G. (1985). Understanding and
solving
word
arithmetic
problems. Psychological
review, 92(1), 109.
Landis, J. R., & Koch, G. G. (1977). The measurement of
observer agreement for categorical data. Biometrics, 159174.
Reusser, K. (1990). From text to situation to equation:
Cognitive simulation of understanding and solving
mathematical word problems. In H. Mandl, E. De Corte, N.
Bennett, & H.F. Friedrich (Eds.), Learning and instruction:
European research in an international context. Volume 2.2:
Analysis of complex skills and complex knowledge
domains. Oxford, England: Pergamon.
Riley, M. S., Greeno, J. G., & Heller, J. 1.(1983).
Development of children's problem-solving ability in
arithmetic. The development of mathematical thinking,
153-196.
Sander, E., & Richard, J. F. (2005). Analogy and transfer:
encoding the problem at the right level of abstraction.
In Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, Stresa, Italy.
Stern, E., & Lehrndorfer, A. (1992). The role of situational
context
in
solving
word
problems. Cognitive
Development, 7(2), 259-268.
Vlahović-Štetić, V. (1999). Word-problem solving as a
function of problem type, situational context and
drawing. Studia Psychologica, 41(1), 49-62.
Thevenot, C., Devidal, M., Barrouillet, P., & Fayol, M.
(2007). Why does placing the question before an arithmetic
word problem improve performance? A situation model
account. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 60(1), 43-56.
Thevenot, C., & Oakhill, J. (2005). The strategic use of
alternative representations in arithmetic word problem
solving. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology Section A, 58(7), 1311-1323.
Vosniadou, S., & Brewer, W. F. (1992). Mental models of the
earth:
A
study
of
conceptual
change
in
childhood. Cognitive psychology, 24(4), 535-585.

References
Barrios, F. M. G., & Martínez, E. C. (2014). Diagrams
produced by secondary students in multiplicative
comparison word problems. Journal of Mathematics and
System Science, 4(2), 83.
Bassok, M. (2001). Semantic alignments in mathematical
word problems. In Gentner, Holyoak and Kokinov (eds.)
The analogical mind: Perspectives from cognitive science,
(pp.401-433). Cambridge, Ma: MIT Press
Bassok, M, Chase, V. M, & Martin, S. A. (1998). Adding
apples and oranges: Alignment of semantic and formal
knowledge. Cognitive Psychology, 35, 99-134
Bassok, M., Pedigo, S. F., & Oskarsson, A. T. (2008).
Priming addition facts with semantic relations. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 34(2), 343.
Bassok, M., Wu, L., & Olseth, L. K. (1995). Judging a book
by its cover: interpretative effects of content on problemsolving transfer. Memory and Cognition, 23, 354 e 367.
Coquin-Viennot, D., & Moreau, S. (2003). Highlighting the
role of episodic model in the solving of arithmetical
problems. European Journal of Psychology and Education,
18, 267-279.
Cummins, D. D., Kintsch, W., Reusser, K., & Weimer, R.
(1988). The role of understanding in solving word
problems. Cognitive psychology, 20(4), 405-438.
De Corte, E., Verschaffel, L., & De Win, L. (1985). Inﬂuence
of rewording verbal problems on children’s problem
representations and solution. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 77, 460-470.
Edens, K., & Potter, E. (2007). The relationship of drawing
and mathematical problem solving: Draw for math
tasks. Studies in Art Education, 48(3), 282-298.
Gamo, S., Sander, E., & Richard, J.-F. (2010). Transfer of
strategy use by semantic recoding in arithmetic problem
solving. Learning and Instruction, 20(5), 400–410.
Gros, H., Sander, E., & Thibaut, J.-P. (2016), "This problem
has no solution" : when closing one of two doors results in
failure to access any., 38th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society, Philadelphia, USA, 10-13 August 2016.
Gros, H., Thibaut, J.-P., & Sander, E. (2015), Robustness of
semantic encoding effects in a transfer task for multiple
strategies arithmetic problems, 37th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society, Pasadena, USA, 22-25 July
2015.
Guthormsen, A. M., Fisher, K. J., Bassok, M., Osterhout, L.,
DeWolf, M., & Holyoak, K. J. (2015). Conceptual
integration of arithmetic operations with real-world
knowledge:
Evidence
from
event-related
potentials. Cognitive science.

444

