The role of prior knowledge and expertise on choice of referring expression
Alyssa Ibarra (aibarra@ur.rochester.edu)
Departments of Brain & Cognitive Sciences and Linguistics, 363 Meliora Hall, Box 270268
Rochester, NY 14627

Jeffrey Runner (jeffrey.runner@rochester.edu)
Departments of Linguistics and Brain & Cognitive Sciences, Box 270096
Rochester, NY 14627

Michael K. Tanenhaus (mtanenha@ur.rochester.edu)
Departments of Brain & Cognitive Sciences and Linguistics, 363 Meliora Hall, Box 270268
Rochester, NY 14627
Abstract
Referential success depends on choice of referring expression.
The choice of referring expression will depend on contextual
factors as well as factors related to speaker and addressee
knowledge. A shared-learning paradigm was used in which
partners learned names of objects together and separately before
a referential task. Items differed on commonality, with some
independently rated as more common and some as more rare.
Speakers were less likely to use names versus other forms when
items were rare than common (p<0.001) and less likely to use
names when items were new than learned together (p<0.001).
Asymmetry effects showed that speakers were more likely to
use a name when the addressee was deemed more
knowledgeable in post-test ratings (p<0.01). Together, we take
this to show speakers choose to use a name versus a description
based on the likelihood that their interlocutor will know the
name. Factors affecting the likelihood include prior knowledge
of what a typical addressee will know and shared experience,
which includes inferring an interlocutor’s expertise, as
dynamically updated during a dialog.
Keywords: interactive conversation; referring expressions;
common ground; expertise, belief updating

Introduction
In interactive conversation, the likelihood of a speaker’s
referential success depends on choice of referring expression.
A speaker’s choice to refer to a picture as, say, a “dog”
versus a “Bernese Mountain dog” or “the large black dog
with a white chest and tan marking”, depends on factors
relevant to the context, the speaker, and the addressee. If, for
example, the referential domain includes multiple dogs, a
more specific label will be needed to pick out a unique
object; whereas a domain with a single dog and several cats
is likely to elicit the basic label “dog”. A speaker’s
knowledge, or lack of knowledge, of dog breeds will restrict
the name alternatives the speaker will have readily available,
as will the speaker’s assessment of the addressee’s
knowledge—e.g., if the speaker is aware that the addressee
does not know a breed of dog, the speaker may choose to
describe the dog rather than use the name of the breed.
Speakers readily distinguish between differences in
knowledge when they learn novel names for novel objects
with a partner (Wu & Keysar, 2007; Heller et al. 2012;

Gorman et al., 2013). In this shared-learning paradigm,
participants learn some novel names together (shared names)
and then one participant, who is subsequently the director in
a referential task, learns additional names alone (privileged
names). This creates a situation of knowledge asymmetry that
the speaker may use to inform choice of referring form in the
referential task. Speakers indeed track shared experience
when the objects are novel, i.e., when they have not seen the
objects prior to the experiment. They use more names than
descriptions for those objects that have been learned together.
(Wu & Keysar, 2007); and rarely use the name-alone form
for privileged names (Heller et al. 2012; Gorman et al.,
2013).
In related work, Gegg-Harrison (2016, also see GeggHarrison & Tanenhaus, 2016) embedded name learning in
the context of a toy world. In a role-playing game, certain
levels were always encountered before others. The
participant’s choices made regions of the world and the
information contained there inaccessible. Therefore, a
participant who displayed knowledge of a particular name
would implicate that she would know some names but not
others. The participant then interacted with a game expert in
several tasks that involved characters from the toy world.
Interactions with the expert showed that the participant
modified her name use and assessment of what the speaker
knew based on the expert’s use of names.
In most conversations, especially with a relatively
unfamiliar addressee, a speaker will not have direct, shared
experience. If we assume that speakers choose to use a name
because it is the least resource demanding, shortest, and
richest referring expression, then a rational speaker would
take into account the likelihood that the addressee would
know the name. That likelihood would be based on both the
likelihood that any addressee would know that name
(baseline likelihood) and evidence specific to that addressee,
much of which is gleaned from the ongoing conversation.
To lay the groundwork for explicitly evaluating the
likelihood hypothesis, we modify the shared-learning
paradigm by using pictures of real entities that vary in
baseline likelihood and by having the learning be interactive,
which allows the director to have assessed the expertise of
the matcher. We hypothesize that name use will be affected

2249

by both baseline likelihood and shared experience, including
inferred level of expertise, with larger effects of shared
learning for less commonly known (rare) names and lower
name usage for matchers who are judged to have lower
expertise, especially for rare names, even when they have
been learned together. If we can establish that the paradigm is
sensitive to expertise, then this allows for more targeted
questions about the factors, including prosody and choice of
lexical expressions, that interlocutors use to signal and infer
which names are likely to be know to each other.
Using novel names and novel objects is well-suited for
asking basic questions about whether speakers can form
item-specific memories of shared experience that can be used
as a basis for common ground. However, limitation of using
novel objects and novel names is that it abstracts away from
two important characteristics that influence choice of
referential forms. The first is the speakers’ prior beliefs about
how likely any interlocutor is to know a name. For example,
any speaker of English can assume that her interlocutor will
know the general category of dogs and its base-level name.
The second is that it doesn’t capture the dynamic aspect of
interactive conversation. A speaker is unlikely to know the
full extent of her addressee’s knowledge about a topic prior
to an interaction. Rather she may draw inferences based on
what her interlocutor reveals during the interaction. For
example, if a speaker learns that his interlocutor is a gourmet
cook, he can assume that she will know the names for even
relatively rare kitchen utensils. This assumption is possible
even without direct evidence of knowledge of particular
names by attributing to that interlocutor knowledge that is
likely known by most gourmet cooks.
The present study extends the shared-learning paradigm in
two important ways. First, we use real objects drawn from
categories, in particular dog breeds and kitchen utensils, in
which there are commonly known names (e.g., “tongs”) and
less common (rare) names (e.g., “mandoline”). We normed
items as common or rare to the average person but chose
categories that might differ in expertise given broad
designations of communities (i.e., cooks and dog lovers).
Second we modify the shared-learning paradigm to create
conditions where participants have the opportunity to assess
each other’s expertise in a domain. This will allow one to
tease apart whether assessment of addressee knowledge is
acquired throughout the interaction by cues separately from
the shared experience of learning names together.
Specifically, we ask whether the evidence that shared
learning of novel objects informs referential choice can be
interpreted as a part of a larger likelihood computation that
also incorporates common knowledge, shared experience and
inferred expertise. It could be the case that shared experience
effects seen with novel objects can be attributed to the
triggering of episodic traces, such that when a speaker
chooses to refer to an object, the memory of having learned it
with a specific addressee is activated, which in turn informs
referential choice (Horton & Gerrig, 2005). The low-level
trace is enough to explain the shared learning effects. A
speaker, however, may come into the experiment with a prior

belief about a partner’s likely knowledge that gets updated as
more evidence is presented. Thus, when the partners learn
novel names together, the speaker updates the belief that the
addressee knows the name, having learned it together. In the
paradigm with novel objects, this belief is likely binary: they
either learn it together in the experimental context or not. The
present study, however, in its incorporation of real-world
objects, creates a situation in which interlocutors not only
may have different prior beliefs about the addressee’s
knowledge at the beginning of the experiment but may also
dynamically update those beliefs throughout the interaction.
The assessment of a partner’s knowledge via shared
experience as well as its updating, of course, also involves
memory processes. However, it is not clear how memory
traces with a specific partner could account for how beliefs of
the overall commonality of an object interact with that shared
experience. Furthermore, as the interaction unfolds, it is not
clear whether further updating of this belief occurs given
evidence from the interaction. An episodic trace would not
predict its effect on referential choice for new items, for
example. If episodic traces are driving the effects of shared
learning, then speakers will be equally sensitive to the shared
experience of learning names in the context of the
experiment. However, if commonality and inferred expertise
combine with shared experience to determine the overall
likelihood of an addressee knowing a name, then one cannot
only appeal to episodic-based explanations.
The present study concerns itself with the following
questions: 1) Does the commonality of an object impact the
effect of shared learning with a partner? 2) Do interlocutors
dynamically update their beliefs about their partner’s
expertise in a subject? If so, does this expertise interact with
commonality and shared learning to inform the speaker’s
choice of referring form?
We predict that if items are more likely to be known prior
to the experiment, shared experience in the experiment is less
likely to affect choice of referring expression. Conversely, if
rare items are similar to novel items in past studies (i.e.,
associated with low or no prior knowledge), then the shared
experience effects are likely to be strongest in this group.
Furthermore, if expertise is inferred throughout the
interaction, then the effects of commonality and/or shared
experience, if any, should differ according to whether the
addressee is deemed to be knowledgeable in the domain or
not. Finally, although the effects of shared experience will be
smaller for common names, we should still see some effects;
this would suggest that shared experience enters into
likelihood calculations, even for commonly known names.

Methods
The experiment consisted of three parts: a learning phase, in
which the participants learned the name of items in two
categories--dog breeds & kitchen utensils; a test phase, in
which one participant directs the other to pick out a target
item in a referential task; and a post-test, in which
participants rate their partner’s, and their own, knowledge of

2250

The Learning Phase

the items as well as identify the context of learning. See
Figure 1 for an illustration of these three parts.

Figure 1: Experimental procedure consisting of the Learning
phase (i.e., Training), the Test phase, and Post-test phase.

Norming
The items used in this experiment were normed and rated as
either common or rare from two categories on which people
often differ in expertise (dog breeds and kitchen utensils).
See Figure 2 for sample stimuli of kitchen utensils. The
norming procedure consisted of a presentation of 8 images
(4 dog breeds, 4 kitchen items, with 2 common and 2 rare of
each category). Each image was presented one at a time and
participants were tasked to 1) label the image, 2) provide a
confidence rating for that label, and 3) indicate how likely it
is that the average person would know the label.
There were 80 unique images normed, separated into 10
lists of 8 items. 600 total participants were tested (roughly
60 people per list) with an average of 58.8 data points per
item, due to some blank responses for single items.
Of the 80 unique items normed, we chose 36 experimental
items: 12 for shared learning; 12 for director-alone learning;
and 12 new items to be tested but not trained on. Half of all
items (n=18) were dogs and the other half (n=18) were
kitchen items. Within each of these categories, half (n=9)
were rare, and half (n=9) were common.
We chose the items by first sorting by largest sample. For
common items, we then took the items with the highest
average rating (i.e., the knowledge rating for the “average
person”) with the highest accuracy of labeling (above 70%
accuracy). For rare items, we took the items with the lowest
average rating (i.e., the knowledge rating for the “average
person”) with the highest accuracy (above 10% accuracy). A
minimum of 10% accuracy was implemented in order to
remove items that had a name that was incorrect but
confidently rated (e.g., “Greyhound” was a highly repeated
label for an Azawakh, resulting in 0% accuracy).
Rare Kitchen
Mandoline

Common Kitchen
Tongs

Figure 2: Sample stimuli of rare and common kitchen
utensils.

The learning phase allowed participants to observe each
other’s expertise. We manipulated whether names were
shared or privileged by dividing the phase into shared
learning among the two partners and director-alone learning.
This allowed us to observe how a speaker combines shared
experience with general likelihood of knowing a name and
modulates choice of referring expression by perceived
differences in expertise.
At the beginning of the learning phase, participants sit
together at a table with the experimenter standing in front of
them. Based on seating arrangement, each participant is
assigned as either the Director or the Matcher.
For the shared-learning portion of the learning phase, the
experimenter explains to the participants that they will be
learning names of items together and that the images will be
of different dogs and different kitchen items which they
may or may not be familiar with. The experimenter then
presents a flashcard with an individual image one at a time.
After presenting the image, participants discuss with one
another whether they know the name of the image. If they
know it, they say the name aloud. After given some time to
guess, the experimenter states the correct name of the item.
This procedure is done for 12 items, presented in three
blocks of four items. After each block, the items are
repeated once more before moving to the next block. After
all three blocks, the participants go through the whole stack.
For the second half of the learning phase (Director-alone
learning), the Matcher sits at a computer in the same room
and is instructed to wear headphones playing instrumental
music while engaging in a game of Solitaire. During this
time, the experimenter presents the Director with 12
additional images. The procedure is as above, with three
blocks of four items. Thus, together with the shared learning
portion, a total of 24 items were presented in the learning
phase, holding out the last 12 items for the test phase.
Both portions of the learning phase (shared and Directoralone) are recorded and transcribed.

The Test Phase
Following the learning phase, the participants began the test
phase, which was a referential task in which the Director
verbally leads the Matcher to pick out a target item from an
array. The test phase created a situation for the Director to
refer to the items of varying commonality and ground status
that were introduced in the learning phase in a controlled
referential task.
Both Matcher and Director sat at their own computer
facing one another. The Director was shown one image on
the screen, which could be an image that was learned
together with the Matcher, learned alone, or never presented
during the learning phase. The Matcher, on the other hand,
was presented with three images. All three images were of
the same category (i.e, all dogs or all kitchen items), and they
are of same commonality (i.e., all rare or all common). The
difference among the images is in their ground status (i.e.,
one is shared, one is learned by Director alone, and one is

2251

new to both participants). The Director was instructed to
identify the image on her screen with explicit instruction that
there is no restriction on language (i.e., she can name or
describe as needed), and the Matcher was tasked to click on
the target image. The Matcher was also allowed to ask
questions and interact freely with the Director as needed.
This procedure was followed for 24 test items: 8 Shared,
8 Alone, and 8 New targets. Half the targets in each ground
status (n=4) are dog breeds; half (n=4) are kitchen items.
Furthermore, half the dog items (n=2) are rare; the other
half (n=2) are common; half the kitchen items (n=2) are
rare; the other half (n=2) are common.
Each trial was recorded and the form of referring
expression was coded as either Name Alone, Description,
Name + Description, or Description + Name.
The data below are from 24 pairs of participants.

The Post-test
After the test phase, both participants individually took a
post-test. Participants were asked to rate their partner’s
knowledge of each domain (dog breeds/kitchen utensils), as
well as rate their own knowledge in the domain. Next,
participants were shown a single item and were asked to type
in the label for the item, if known, and rate their confidence
in their label. They were also asked to rate their confidence
that their partner would know the label for that object. This
procedure was repeated for all test items as well as new
items. These measures of confidence were implemented to
measure general expertise as well as presumed relative
expertise between the two participants (i.e., whether the
Director was more knowledgeable than the Matcher, or vice
versa) in order to assess knowledge asymmetry.
Lastly, they were asked to identify the context of learning
the item: learned with partner, alone (applicable for director
only), learned prior to the experiment, or never learned. The
items tested varied in context of learning; they could be an
item from shared learning, Director-alone learning, or New
items. This measure was used to observe whether participants
were tracking context of learning by specific item.

Name ~ Asymmetry + Ground
* Commonality + (1|Pair)
AsymmetryM+
AsymmetrySAME
CommonalityRare
GroundShared
GroundNew
GroundPriv:CommonalityRare
GroundNew:CommonalityRare

β
0.73
-0.22
-3.36
1.13
-1.53
-0.47
0.67

Std
Error
0.29
0.33
0.43
0.69
0.42
0.76
0.56

P-value
<0.01
0.49
<0.001
0.10
<0.001
0.53
0.23

Table 1: GLM model ouput
Does the commonality of an object impact the effect of
shared learning with a partner?
A main effect of Commonality demonstrates less name use
for Rare than Common names (p<0.001). In regard to
Ground status, speakers are less likely to use a Name when
the item is New than when Shared (p<0.001), but for learned
names, the main effect of Ground was not significant.
Figure 3 shows Name use by the speaker across
Commonality and Ground. The main effect of commonality
can be seen by the larger proportion of name use in the right
three columns of the graph (Fig 3). Although there was no
effect of Ground Status across learned items, when looking at
Rare items in comparison to Common items, one can see that
differences in name use across Ground status conditions are
more apparent for Rare than Common objects, similar to
results in past work with novel objects. Indeed, in separate
models, effects of Ground were significant for Rare items,
such that names are used less for privileged items than for
shared items. Common objects show the same pattern but to
a much lesser extent. Thus, the speaker is less likely to use
names when referring to rare objects than common ones and
this preference is further reduced if the rare objects are
privileged or new.

Results
We focus on speakers’ Name-Alone use. We fit a GLM
model predicting Name use against a single category
combining other forms. Fixed effects were Commonality
(Rare/Common), Ground Status (Privileged/Shared/New),
and Knowledge Asymmetry (More/Less knowledgeable
Matcher, as determined by post-test ratings) with Pair as a
random effect (Table 1). Below we address our particular
predictions.
Figure 3: Overall use of names by the Director across
Ground Status (Shared, Privileged, New) and Commonality
(Common, Rare) conditions.

2252

Does inferred expertise inform the speaker’s choice of
referring form?
A main effect of Asymmetry showed that speakers were
more likely to use a Name when the Director presumes the
Matcher to be more knowledgeable than herself (p<0.01)
Figure 4 shows Expertise effects across Ground Status and
Commonality conditions. The main effect is shown by an
overall larger proportion of name use when the Matcher is
deemed more knowledgeable than the speaker (M+) than
when the Matcher is deemed less knowledgeable (M-). These
effects are carried most strongly in two conditions: for Rare
objects that are learned together (Shared), and for Common
objects that are New (not learned at all in experiment).

Figure 4: Proportion of Names when Matcher deemed more
(M+) or less (M-) knowledgeable than the Director.
Data gathered from the post-test, in which participants
had to identify the context in which a particular item was
learned (e.g., alone, shared, or neither) revealed high
accuracy for tracking ground status (Table 2). This measure
was recorded to assess memory of ground status across the
course of the experiment. Table 2 shows highest accuracy of
context identification for Rare Shared items and lowest
accuracy for Common Shared, but this is not significantly
different across the categories.
Context Identification Accuracy (Post-Test)
Common
Rare

Alone

86.1%

Shared

85.4%

Alone

86.1%

Shared

91.7%

Table 2: Post-test accuracy

Discussion
Speakers’ choice of names is strongly affected by the prior
likelihood that an interlocutor will know a name. When items
are more common, shared learning has weaker effects on

name use than when an object is rare. As in previous studies
with novel objects, common ground effects are more
apparent for less commonly known items. This is taken to
show that a speaker’s reliance on shared learning as a means
to assess partner knowledge is reduced when the objects are
likely to be commonly known. This provides evidence that
the basis of common ground in an interaction relies on
assessments of prior knowledge as well as shared experience.
The strongest version of the memory-based account would
expect ground effects regardless of commonality, as long as
partners have shared experience. However, our post-test data
show that speakers are highly accurate in identifying the
context of learning, suggesting that they are not less sure
about whether a name was shared but they are using that
information in combination of other information: i.e, prior
knowledge.
Furthermore, we see general expertise effects, such that
name use is increased when the addressee is deemed to be
more knowledgeable than the speaker. This provides
evidence of dynamic updating of knowledge assessments.
Future directions would include a more controlled way of
assessing when exactly expertise judgments as this might
help in teasing apart whether this is confined to the learning
phase, or whether participants indeed continue to update
beliefs throughout the test phase. However, even with
assessments taken post test, we see expertise effects driven
from interaction.
Having established expertise effects using this paradigm,
we are currently carrying out follow-up work that uses the
paradigm to explore further questions. For instance in an
ongoing experiment we ask whether expertise assessments
derived from the interaction are more strongly weighted than
expertise assessments derived from top-down knowledge
(e.g., telling the speaker his partner is an expert). Our current
study asks this very question by having a director complete
the collaborative task in the test phase without any prior
interaction with her partner and given only top-down
information about the partner’s status as an expert in the
domain.
Another avenue of research study explores the signals in
the interaction that contribute to the assessments of expertise.
Specifically, we are testing normed markers of uncertainty
modeled on the types of utterances we observed during the
learning phase. A confederate matcher will, in the learning
phase, reveal her expertise through use of these uncertainty
cues. If naïve directors attribute expertise to their partner as a
function of these cues, it will be an important step in further
understanding the particular components of an interaction
that inform beliefs of partner knowledge.
Overall, the contribution of the current study is in
embedding the previous evidence on shared experience into a
larger computation of the likelihood of addressee knowledge.
The effect of commonality on choice of referring expression
may not be surprising on its own but together with evidence
of inferences of expertise throughout the interaction, one can
get a better understanding of how speakers may be
combining these different sources of information to compute

2253

this likelihood. Future studies will examine the factors that
shift around the likelihood rather than to only appeal to lowlevel processes (i.e., memory traces) that contribute to the
individual factors. We then can evaluate quantitative models
to compare likelihood models that combine multiple cues
with other classes of models.
Lastly, this study explores expertise in domains given
interactions about particular items. We argue that the
generalization of presumed expertise to a larger domain
given updated beliefs about particular objects is tied to
beliefs about groups of people and the presumed knowledge
of particular communities. For example, dog kennel owners
are likely to be presumed to know a lot of about dog breeds
and not so much about cat breeds. However, if the relevant
community were veterinarians, a member of that community
might be presumed to know about both dog breeds and cat
breeds. We argue that assessments about expertise are
necessarily tied to the community applied, and this constraint
is utilized by speakers to narrow in on the dimensions that are
relevant for both generalization to new interlocutors and
generalization to new items in a given domain.

Discourse Processes, 20(1), 1-35.
Wu, S., & Keysar, B. (2007). The effect of information
overlap on communication effectiveness. Cognitive
Science, 31, 1-13.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the members of the KurTan lab meeting
and the Experimental Semantics and Pragmatics (ESP)
reading group who provided helpful input towards the design
and implementation of this study. We especially want to
acknowledge Whitney Gegg-Harrison. Her thesis work first
explored many of the questions we are pursuing in this line of
research. Whitney also provided valuable advice on the
current project. This work was supported by NIH grant HD
27206 to MKT.

References
Clark, H. H., and Marshall, C. (1981). “Definite reference
and mutual knowledge,” in Elements of Discourse
Understanding, eds A. K. Joshi, B. L. Webber, and I. A.
Sag (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press), 10–
63.
Gegg-Harrison, W. (2014). Knowledge and naming in
interactive
conversation
(Doctoral
dissertation,
University
of
Rochester).
Retrieved
from
http://hdl.handle.net/1802/28853.
Gegg-Harrison, W.M. & Tanenhaus, M.K. (2016). What’s
in a name?
Interlocutors dynamically update
expectations about shared names. Frontiers in
Psychology.7, Paper 212.
Gorman, K. S., Gegg-Harrison, W. M., Marshall, C. R., &
Tanenhaus, M. K. (2013). What’s learned together stays
together: speakers’ choice of referring expression reflects
shared experience. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 39(3), 843-854.
Heller, D., Gorman, K. S., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2012). To
name or to describe: shared knowledge affects referential
form. Topics in Cognitive Science, 4, 290-305..
Horton, W., & Gerrig, R. (2005). Conversational common
ground and memory processes in language production.

2254

