The paradox of relational development is not universal:
Abstract reasoning develops differently across cultures
Alexandra Carstensen (a.carstensen@let.ru.nl)
Centre for Language Studies, Erasmusplein 1, Radboud University
6525 HT, Nijmegen, NL

Caren M. Walker (carenwalker@ucsd.edu)
Department of Psychology, 9500 Gilman Drive, UC San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA
Abstract
Recent studies demonstrate a puzzling decline in relational
reasoning during development. Specifically, 3-year-olds fail
in a relational match-to-sample (RMTS) task, while younger
children (18-30 months) succeed (Walker, Bridgers, &
Gopnik, 2016). Hoyos, Shao, and Gentner (2016) propose that
older children fail because of a bias toward individual object
properties induced by “avid noun learning.” If this is the case,
children learning a language with a stronger emphasis on
verbs, like Mandarin Chinese, may show an attenuated
decline in relational reasoning. We first test this possibility by
reproducing the causal RMTS task in China, and find that
Mandarin-speaking 3-year-olds outperform their Englishspeaking peers in the U.S. In a second experiment, we show
that Mandarin speakers exhibit a corresponding bias toward
relational solutions while English speakers prefer objectbased solutions in an ambiguous context. We discuss possible
mechanisms through which language and culture may
promote (or hinder) the early development of relational
reasoning.
Keywords: cognitive development, causal learning, relational
reasoning, overhypotheses, language, culture.

The puzzling decline of relational reasoning
Relational reasoning is often cited as a defining feature of
human cognition (e.g., Gentner, 2003), and a source of the
differences between the abilities of humans and other
primates (Penn, Holyoak, & Povinelli, 2008). The ability to
recognize relational similarities appears surprisingly early in
human development: 7- and 9-month-old infants distinguish
the abstract relations “same” and “different,” looking longer
at novel pairs of objects that differ from a habituated
relation (Ferry, Hespos, & Gentner, 2015; Tyrrell, Stauffer,
& Snowman, 1991).
Toddlers (18-30 months) can also employ these concepts
to infer abstract causal properties in a relational match-tosample task (Walker & Gopnik, 2014). In this task, children
observe as four pairs of blocks are placed on a toy that plays
music when “activated.” Two of the pairs contain identical
blocks (“same”) and the other two pairs contain mismatched
blocks (“different”). For toddlers in the same condition, the
toy activates and plays music only when the “same” pairs
are placed on top, while those in the different condition
observe the opposite pattern. When shown novel pairs of
“same” or “different” blocks and asked to choose which pair

would activate the toy, toddlers succeed in picking the pair
that is relationally consistent with their training.
However, this early success in relational reasoning is
quickly followed by a puzzling decline: 3-year-olds (36-48
months) fail to select the relational solution in precisely the
same task (Walker, Bridgers, & Gopnik, 2016). Similar
difficulties have also been observed in a variety of relational
reasoning tasks (e.g., Christie & Gentner, 2007; 2010; 2014;
Gentner, 1988; 2010; Hoyos, Shao, & Gentner, 2016). By 4
years of age (52-60 months), children once again succeed in
a standard RMTS task (Christie & Gentner, 2014), but
continue to neglect relational similarities in other contexts
even at 5-6 years of age (e.g., Gentner, 1988). This pattern
of early success, decline, and reemergence suggests that the
development of relational reasoning may follow a U-shaped
trajectory, rather than a continuous process of gradual
improvement, as previously suggested (e.g., Gentner &
Medina, 1998). What causes this curious dip in children’s
relational reasoning?
One possibility is that preschoolers retain an early
competence to reason about relations, but that this
competence is overshadowed by a failure to attend to
relational structure. In particular, Walker et al. (2016)
suggest that 3-year-olds neglect relational information as a
result of a learned bias to attend to individual object kinds
and their properties. This claim is consistent with a large
literature demonstrating that preschool-aged children attend
to objects and attributes, and proposals that children must
overcome an “entity-based view” in order to effectively
process relations (Christie & Gentner, 2010; also, e.g.,
Christie & Gentner, 2007; 2014; Gentner, 1988; Gentner &
Rattermann, 1991; Hall & Waxman, 1993).
Several proposals link this well-documented object bias to
language development, which has been shown to both foster
and impair relational reasoning (e.g., Christie & Gentner,
2014; Hoyos, Shao, & Gentner, 2016). These seemingly
incongruous findings have led some to regard the
contradictory effects of language on relational thinking as a
developmental paradox (Hoyos, Shao, & Gentner, 2016).

Noun learning and relational development
In a recent paper, Hoyos, Shao, and Gentner (2016) suggest
that the decline of relational reasoning may stem from an
object bias induced by language learning. They reason that

1721

“avid noun-learning” in early childhood likely leads to a
“captivation with objects,” which in turn helps children to
learn additional nouns. In support of this view, they provide
evidence that an experimentally induced noun bias interferes
with relational reasoning. In this experiment, they replicate
a previously published finding (Christie & Gentner, 2014)
that 4-year-olds succeed on a standard RMTS task in a
baseline condition, but show that priming nouns in a
picture-labeling activity significantly reduces subsequent
RMTS performance. On its own, this outcome suggests that
language learning—and an emphasis on nouns in
particular—may negatively impact relational reasoning in
toddlers.
However, earlier work by Christie and Gentner (2014)
leads to the opposite conclusion, that linguistic concepts—
and nouns in particular—facilitate relational reasoning in
the standard RMTS task. They find that providing children
with a novel noun (“truffet”) for pairs of objects improves
toddlers’ subsequent RMTS performance. Here, and
elsewhere, the authors argue that young children do not
initially have access to a hypothesis space that is “sufficient
to allow for the range of possible semantic categories” but
instead form hypotheses about relational meanings by
comparing co-labeled items to identify common structure
(Christie & Gentner, 2010).
Taken together, this account and the conflicting findings
create an apparent paradox, in which a linguistic emphasis
on nouns orients young learners away from relations, but
language simultaneously provides the necessary scaffolding
for relational learning by highlighting relational structure. In
this way, language learning appears to solve the very
problem it creates. Accordingly, this account implies that
language learning may be interpreted as a double-edged
sword, drawing attention to objects at the expense of
relations, but in doing so, ultimately helping children to
construct novel relational categories.

Language as a driver of children’s hypotheses
The current research further explores the hypothesis that
language learning influences the types of concepts and
categories that young children entertain. Under the paradox
account presented above, language learning helps children
develop new relational categories to further populate their
hypothesis space. An alternative possibility is that children
have access to both relational and object-based hypotheses
throughout development, but that the probabilities assigned
to each type of hypothesis change as a result of prior
knowledge and past experience, including language
learning. This account draws on probabilistic models of
cognitive development in which children are seen as
Bayesian learners (e.g., Gopnik & Wellman, 2012), who
weight the likelihood of a given hypothesis (the probability
of the data given the hypothesis) by its prior probability (the
general probability of the hypothesis, before any data are
observed). Consequently, if a hypothesis has high prior
probability, it will require stronger data to overturn it. This
reasoning may also be applied to entire categories of

hypotheses in the form of an overhypothesis, a general
principle by which the learner assigns higher prior
probability to particular types of hypotheses (Kemp,
Perfors, & Tenenbaum, 2007). From this perspective, the
“noun explosion” in early language learning could motivate
an object bias—and temporary dip in relational reasoning—
in the form of an overhypothesis that privileges object-based
hypotheses over relational ones (for a discussion of
language-induced overhypotheses and their relevance
beyond language, see Colunga & Smith, 2005). By this
account, language acts as one of many possible influences
that affect a learner’s hypothesis space, not by providing for
new hypotheses (as the paradox view suggests), but by
adjusting children’s existing prior expectations.
Despite this distinction, both of these accounts leave room
for an important role of language in driving children’s
relational reasoning, and both predict that a noun focus in
word learning would (at least initially) bias children toward
object properties and away from relations.
Previous demonstrations (e.g., Christie & Gentner, 2010;
Hoyos, Shao, & Gentner, 2016) have tested this hypothesis
indirectly, showing that immediate exposure to nouns
modulates success on RMTS tasks, presumably by directing
the learner’s attention toward or away from relational
information. However, these findings (which may reflect
simple priming effects) do not necessarily demonstrate a
relationship between noun focus in word learning and
RMTS performance, as the experimental groups all involve
English speakers, without any systematic between-group
differences in degree of noun focus.
Conveniently, not all word learning follows the same
trajectory. In particular, the “noun explosion” that has been
documented in English-language learners is not universal
across languages. In Korean, for instance, there is evidence
for a comparable “verb spurt” (Choi & Gopnik, 1995).
Similarly, several studies have found that children learning
Mandarin Chinese produce more verbs than nouns in their
spontaneous speech (both types and tokens), in contrast with
English speakers of the same age, who produce a greater
proportion of nouns than verbs (Tardif, 1996; Tardif, Shatz,
& Naigles, 1997).
If an emphasis on noun learning (relative to other parts of
speech) indeed drives the dip in relational reasoning by
fostering an object bias, then children learning a more verbcentric language should show an attenuated or reversed bias.
While nouns may direct focus to object properties by relying
on these in picking out meanings, verbs often signal
relational meanings across multiple entities, and might serve
to redirect attention accordingly.
The difference in noun focus between English and
Mandarin Chinese therefore presents two natural conditions
in word learning, which we exploit as a test of the proposal
that properties emphasized in word learning induce a bias in
reasoning more generally.

1722

Experiment 1: Causal relational reasoning in
Mandarin-speaking children
To test for a relationship between noun focus in word
learning and relational reasoning, we first reproduced
Walker et al.’s (2016) causal RMTS task (see Figure 1) with
Mandarin-speaking children (36-48 months) in China.
Methods
Participants. A total of 64 Mandarin-speaking 36-48month-olds (M = 42.1 months; 28 female) took part in
Experiment 1. This sample size was chosen based on
previously published studies using the same paradigm.
Participants were pseudo-randomly assigned to either the
same or different condition. Five additional participants
were excluded due to experimenter error or failure to
complete the study. All participants were native speakers of
Mandarin Chinese, and were recruited and tested at
preschools in China.
Materials and procedure. The materials and procedure
replicated those used in Experiment 1 of Walker et al.
(2016), with the exception that instructions were given in
Mandarin Chinese. The original English instructions
(described here in English) were independently translated
and backtranslated to ensure accuracy.
Children were tested individually, seated at a table across
from the experimenter. The causal RMTS task began after a
brief warmup to familiarize the child with the experimenter.
During the task, the experimenter placed matching and
mismatched pairs of painted wooden blocks on top of a box
which appeared to play music in response to certain blocks.
In reality, the experimenter activated a wireless doorbell
inside the box by surreptitiously pushing a button.
The experimenter began by placing an opaque cardboard
box on the table, saying “This is my toy! Sometimes it plays
music when I put blocks on top and other times it does not.
Should we try some and see how it works?” The
experimenter then produced two blocks, said “Let’s try!”
and put both blocks on top of the toy simultaneously. The
toy played music and the experimenter said “Music! My toy
played music!” The experimenter picked up the blocks and
set them back on the toy, which again played music, saying
“Music! These ones made my toy play music!” She then
repeated this procedure with a new pair of blocks in the
opposite relation. The new pair did not make the toy play
music, and the experimenter responded to the first try with
“No music! Do you hear anything? I don’t hear anything,”
and after the second try, said “No music. These ones did not
make my toy play music.” This pattern was repeated with
two additional pairs of blocks. The experimenter always
began with a causal pair (identical blocks in the same
condition and blocks of differing colors and shapes in the
different condition), and alternated inert, causal, inert, using
novel blocks in each new pair, and randomizing the specific
blocks between participants.

Figure 1: Schematic illustration of training and test trials in
Experiment 1. Reprinted from Walker et al. (2016).
After the four training trials, the experimenter said “Now
that you’ve seen how my toy works, I need your help
finding the things that will make it play music. I have two
choices for you.” The experimenter presented the child with
two new pairs made of novel blocks, one “same” pair and
one “different.” Each pair was supported by a tray, which
the experimenter held up as she said “I have these…and I
have these. Only one of these trays has things that will make
my toy play music. Can you point to the tray that has the
things that will make it play?” They trays were placed on
either side of the toy, just out of reach of the child, with the
side of the correct pair and order of presentation
counterbalanced between participants. The experimenter
recorded the child’s first point or reach, and scored the
answer as correct if the child chose the test pair (same or
different) that corresponded to her training.
Results and discussion
Mandarin-speaking preschoolers selected the test pair that
was consistent with their training in both same (69%; onetailed binomial p = .025) and different (72%; one-tailed
binomial p = .010) conditions (see Figure 2).1

1

One-tailed binomial tests reflect the directional nature of our
hypothesis, but the outcome is comparable with two-tailed tests
(same: p = .052; different: p = .020).

1723

Propor%on correct (rela%onal match)

1
0.8
0.6

Same

0.4

Diﬀerent

0.2
0

English

Mandarin

Figure 2: Proportion of correct relational matches selected
by English- and Mandarin-speaking toddlers. English
speaker data is reproduced from Experiment 1 of Walker et
al. (2016). Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals.
As predicted, Mandarin-speaking preschoolers succeed in
the RMTS task at an age at which their English-speaking
counterparts fail (English speakers in the Walker et al. study
performed at chance in both same (46%) and different
(43%) conditions).2 Although this outcome is consistent
with an account in which verb-focused word learning biases
children toward relational solutions, it is also possible that
Mandarin speakers succeed at the task for more general
reasons (attention, etc.), without having a relational bias.
We can discriminate these two possibilities by examining
bias in an ambiguous task, with both relational and object
matches available, and no definitive correct answer. If
Mandarin-speaking toddlers succeeded in Experiment 1
because of a general aptitude for test-taking, and not a
specific bias toward relations, then they should respond at
chance in a modified RMTS with no correct answer.
Additionally, if an object bias is responsible for the poor
performance of English speakers (and not just random
responding), then we should observe systematic preferences
for object matches when there is no conflicting evidence for
relations. In Experiment 2, we assess these possibilities.

we presented children with a “different is causal” condition,
in which the same object appears in each of the causal pairs
(see Figure 3). In this case, it is perfectly reasonable to infer
that either the individual object (i.e., the blue square) or the
relation (i.e., different) produced the effect. We pit these
options against each other by presenting the same objects in
the test pairs. The individual objects come together to create
a “same” pair—which is correct with respect to the object
hypothesis, but incorrect with respect to the relational
hypothesis, and the other objects associated with the effect
come together to create a “different” pair—which is correct
with respect to the relational hypothesis and incorrect with
respect to the individual object hypothesis.
If a focus on verbs in early language learning induces a
bias toward relational hypotheses, we should observe a
tendency toward relational solutions in Mandarin-speaking
toddlers, and a converse bias toward objects in nounfocused English-speaking toddlers.
Methods
Participants. A total of 112 3-year-olds participated in
Experiment 2, 56 native Mandarin speakers (M = 41.4
months; 28 female) and 56 native English speakers (M =
41.4 months; 21 female). An additional 11 children were
tested but excluded as a result of experimenter error or
failure to complete the study. Mandarin-speaking children
were recruited and tested at preschools in China, and
English speakers at preschools and museums in the U.S. In
all settings, children were tested individually with the
experimenter in a private room.
Materials and procedure. Materials were identical to those
in Experiment 1, and the procedure closely resembled that
of the “different” condition, but with several modifications
to create an ambiguous causal structure (see Figure 3).

Experiment 2: Comparing relational and
object focus across cultures
Experiment 2 tests for baseline differences in bias toward
relational or object-based hypotheses across Mandarin and
English speakers. To do this, we created an ambiguous
paradigm, in which it is unclear whether a particular object
or the relationship between objects is causal. Specifically,
2

We compared performance of Mandarin-speaking preschoolers in
the current study with English-speaking preschoolers in Walker et
al. (2016). Considering each condition separately, we find a
significant difference between Mandarin- and English-speaking
preschoolers in the different condition (one-tailed p = .022,
Fisher’s exact) and a marginal difference in the same condition
(one-tailed p = .068, Fisher’s exact). Combining across different
and same conditions, we find that Mandarin-speaking preschoolers
significantly outperform English speakers (one-tailed p = .004,
Fisher’s exact).

Figure 3: Schematic illustration of ambiguous training and
test trials in Experiment 2, in which the evidence was
consistent with both object and relational solutions.
First, one of the blocks (represented by the blue square in
Figure 3) appears in both different pairs. This reoccurring
block provides the object-based hypothesis (i.e., the blue

1724

square is causal). Second, the test trial included two pairs
composed of blocks that were previously observed in the
“different” training pairs. Finally, due to the constraints of
the study design, it was not possible to present an
ambiguous same condition. As a result, Experiment 2 only
included the different condition. As in the previous study,
the experimenter asked the child to choose the pair that
would activate the machine. The child’s first point or reach
was scored as consistent with either an object selection or a
relational selection.
Results and discussion
Given an ambiguous choice between object and relational
matches, English-speaking preschoolers selected the object
match (64%; two-tailed binomial p = .044) and Mandarinspeaking preschoolers chose the relational match (66%;
two-tailed binomial p = .022; see Figure 4).

Propor%on of par%cipants

1
0.8
0.6

Object Match

0.4

Rela;onal Match

0.2
0

English

Mandarin

Figure 4: Proportion of object and relational matches
selected by English- and Mandarin-speaking toddlers in
Experiment 2. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals.

General discussion
In two experiments, we find that Mandarin-speaking
children tend to privilege relations whereas Englishspeaking children tend to privilege individual objects, often
missing the abstract relation.
In Experiment 1, we evaluated whether the noun focus in
English word learning can account for the dip in relational
reasoning observed in English-speaking preschoolers. To do
so, we examined relational reasoning in Mandarin-speaking
preschoolers, whose early language learning is more
focused on verbs. Consistent with the noun-focus account,
we found that Mandarin-speaking preschoolers substantially
outperform their English-speaking peers in identifying
shared relational structure in the RMTS.
In Experiment 2, we tested for the key factor predicted to
mediate the relationship between language and RMTS
performance. This study explored whether English- and
Mandarin-speaking preschoolers exhibit differing biases
toward relational and object-based solutions. Indeed, we
found that in an ambiguous context with no correct answer,
Mandarin speakers tend to favor solutions consistent with

relational hypotheses and English speakers show a
contrasting object bias.
It is important to note that while English-speaking
preschoolers have often exhibited poor performance in
relational tasks of the same format, their consistent selection
of object-based matches in this experiment is not trivial.
Choosing the object match may indeed present a more
challenging cognitive task. In order to select the object
match at test, children must track and remember the relevant
object (the blue square) throughout the training trials, which
(perhaps counterintuitively) increases the cognitive load
compared with learning the abstract relation, which does not
require tracking of any particular objects. Accordingly, this
outcome demonstrates a surprising competence on the part
of English-speaking preschoolers, which may also be
attributable to their noun-centric language learning.
Taken together, these findings inform potential sources of
bias in early learning and the development of relational
reasoning. In particular, they rule out the possibility that
language learning in general produces an object bias.
Instead, we show that preschoolers of the same age in
different linguistic and cultural contexts may have varying
degrees of relational and object focus, and that these
differences correlate with robust population-level
differences in relational reasoning.
Our findings stand in contrast to the suggestion that
language plays a paradoxical role in relational development,
by both hindering relational reasoning and facilitating it
(Hoyos et al., 2016). Although this may be true in nounfocused languages, like English, it does not appear to be a
general feature of language learning.
Furthermore, we suggest that language may well act to
hinder and facilitate relational reasoning, without the need
to view this phenomenon as a paradox. Instead, it is possible
that the object bias and the associated dip in relational
reasoning observed in English speakers result from general
learning processes with no exceptional role for language.
Instead, the structures and features of language may be
interpreted as some of many sources of input informing the
types of concepts that are privileged during early learning.
Of course, several questions remain regarding the source
of the population differences observed here. For example, it
is certainly possible that cultural factors (other than
language) play a role in facilitating a relational focus in
Mandarin speakers. Indeed, there are well-documented
differences between collectivist and individualist cultures,
which may similarly result in an emphasis on relationships
between entities or on characteristics of individual entity
kinds (e.g., Chiu, 1972; Choi, Nisbett, & Norenzayan, 1999;
Nisbett, Peng, Choi, & Norenzayan, 2001; Oyserman &
Lee, 2008; Peng & Knowles, 2003). Our ongoing research is
aimed at further pulling these hypotheses apart.
That said, regardless of whether language, culture, or
some combination of the two is ultimately responsible for
these effects, the current findings demonstrate that
preschoolers have the capacity to infer relational properties,
providing additional evidence that the object bias is learned
after early competence in relational reasoning is achieved

1725

(Walker et al., 2016). More broadly, we have established
population-level differences in relational focus that occur
naturally across cultures early in development and predict
the developmental trajectory of relational reasoning.

Acknowledgments
We thank Gail Heyman, Kang Lee, Jing Zhang, Caitlyn
Lanigan, and Amy Zou for invaluable assistance with data
collection. This work was supported by the Ammodo
KNAW Award and the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship
Program under grant DGE 1106400 to AC.

References
Chiu, L. H. (1972). A cross-cultural comparison of
cognitive
styles
in
Chinese
and
American
children. International journal of psychology, 7(4), 235242.
Choi, I., Nisbett, R. E., & Norenzayan, A. (1999). Causal
attribution
across
cultures:
Variation
and
universality. Psychological bulletin, 125(1), 47.
Choi, S., & Gopnik, A. (1995). Early acquisition of verbs in
Korean: A cross-linguistic study. Journal of child
language, 22(03), 497-529.
Christie, S. & Gentner, D. (2007). Relational similarity in
identity relation: The role of language. In S. Vosniadou &
D. Kayser (Eds.), Proceedings of the second European
cognitive science conference. London, UK: Taylor &
Francis.
Christie, S. & Gentner, D. (2010). Where hypotheses come
from: Learning new relations by structural alignment.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 11(3), 356-373.
Christie, S., & Gentner, D. (2014). Language helps children
succeed on a classic analogy task. Cognitive Science, 38,
383-397.
Colunga, E., & Smith, L. B. (2005). From the lexicon to
expectations about kinds: A role for associative
learning. Psychological review, 112(2), 347-382.
Ferry, A., Hespos, S., & Gentner, D. (2015). Prelinguistic
relational concepts: Investigating analogical processing in
infants. Child Development, 86(5), 1386–1405.
Gentner, D. (1988). Metaphor as structure mapping: The
relational shift. Child Development, 59, 47-59.
Gentner, D. (2003). Why we're so smart. In D. Gentner and
S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in mind: Advances
in the study of language and thought (pp.195-235).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D. (2010). Bootstrapping the mind: Analogical
processes and symbol systems. Cognitive Science, 34(5),
752–775.

Gentner, D., & Medina, J. (1998). Similarity and the
development of rules. Cognition, 65, 263– 297.
Gentner, D., & Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language and the
career of similarity. In S. A. Gelman & J. P. Byrnes
(Eds.), Perspectives on thought and language:
Interrelations in development (pp. 225-277). London:
Cambridge University Press.
Gopnik, A., & Wellman, H. M. (2012). Reconstructing
constructivism: Causal models, Bayesian learning
mechanisms, and the theory theory. Psychological
Bulletin, 138(6), 1085.
Hall, D. G., & Waxman, S. R. (1993). Assumptions about
word meaning: Individuation and basic-level kinds. Child
Development, 64, 1550–1570.
Hoyos, C., Shao, R., & Gentner, D. (2016). The paradox of
relational development: Could language learning be
(temporarily) harmful? D. Grodner, D. Mirman, A.
Papafragou, J. Trueswell, J. Novick, S. Arunachalam, S.
Christie, & C. Norris (Eds.), Proceedings of the 38th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Kemp, C., Perfors, A., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007).
Learning overhypotheses with hierarchical Bayesian
models. Developmental science, 10(3), 307-321.
Nisbett, R. E., Peng, K., Choi, I., & Norenzayan, A. (2001).
Culture and systems of thought: holistic versus analytic
cognition. Psychological review, 108(2), 291.
Oyserman, D., & Lee, S. W. (2008). Does culture influence
what and how we think? Effects of priming individualism
and collectivism. Psychological bulletin, 134(2), 311.
Peng, K., & Knowles, E. D. (2003). Culture, education, and
the attribution of physical causality. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 29(10), 1272-1284.
Penn, D. C., Holyoak, K. J., & Povinelli, D. J. (2008).
Darwin’s mistake: Explaining the discontinuity between
human and nonhuman minds. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 31(2), 109-130.
Tardif, T., Shatz, M., & Naigles, L. (1997). Caregiver
speech and children's use of nouns versus verbs: A
comparison of English, Italian, and Mandarin. Journal of
Child Language, 24(03), 535-565.
Tyrrell, D. J., Stauffer, L. B., & Snowman, L. G. (1991).
Perception of abstract identity/difference relationships by
infants. Infant Behavior Development, 14 (1), 125–129.
Walker, C.M., Bridgers, S., & Gopnik, A. (2016). The early
emergence and puzzling decline of relational reasoning:
Effects of knowledge search on inferring abstract
concepts. Cognition, 156, 30-40.
Walker, C. M., & Gopnik, A. (2014). Toddlers infer higherorder relational principles in causal learning.
Psychological Science, 25, 161–169.

1726

