The effect of acute physical activity on children’s memory for language
Carla Pastorino Campos (cap72@cam.ac.uk)
Department of Theoretical and Applied Linguistics, 9 West Road
Cambridge, CB3 9DP UK

John N. Williams (jnw12@cam.ac.uk)
Department of Theoretical and Applied Linguistics, 9 West Road
Cambridge, CB3 9DP UK
Abstract
Research on the relationship between acute physical activity
and cognition in children has often found beneficial effects of
exercise on a variety of cognitive abilities. One domain that
remains underexplored, however, is the relationship between
exercise and long-term memory in children, and in particular
whether the general-domain effects observed in previous
studies could translate to a school-based learning activity,
such as vocabulary learning. To address this issue, this study
focused on the possible effects that a bout of moderate,
aerobic physical activity could have on the immediate and
delayed recall of newly acquired word forms and formmeaning connections of children in a school setting. In line
with previous research, the results show a positive effect of
exercise, but only for word form recall. This study expands
our understanding of the differential effects of exercise on
memory, while raising questions regarding the possible
moderating influence of gender and memory consolidation.
Keywords: language acquisition, acute physical activity,
memory, vocabulary learning, child cognition.

Introduction
Research on the effects of physical activity has consistently
shown that children who lead an active lifestyle also have
healthier bodies, and that exercise plays a significant role in
the prevention and control of certain diseases, including, but
not limited to, obesity and cardiovascular disease
(Kesaniemi et al., 2001). The effects of exercising, however,
are not purely physiological. Over the last couple of
decades, a growing body of research has concentrated on the
effects of physical activity on the developing mind, mainly
focusing on whether acute or chronic physical activity can
influence cognition.
Interest in the effects of exercise on cognition was
sparked by the observation that exercising provokes a series
of transient cardiorespiratory, hormonal and metabolic
changes that affect the brain’s function and organization.
These changes ultimately influence the way in which
humans, and other animals, perform cognitive activities,
including those involving executive function, attention, and
memory (Coles & Tomporowski, 2008; Hötting & Röder,
2013; McMorris, Turner, Hale, & Sproule, 2016). In recent
work, memory consolidation has emerged as a process that
could be particularly affected by physical activity
(Robertson & Takacs, 2017). The possible pathways by
which exercise-induced arousal may affect long-term
memory are still not entirely understood. However, it has

been suggested that exercise-induced upregulation of
catecholamines, cortisol or brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF), a protein shown to be involved in
neurogenesis and neuroplasticity, could underlie the effects
of acute physical activity on memory processes (McMorris
et al., 2016; Roig et al., 2016).
Regarding child cognition, few studies have focused on
the possible effects of physical activity on children’s longterm memory. An exception would be the work of Pesce and
colleagues (Pesce, Crova, Cereatti, Casella, & Bellucci,
2009) who studied the performance of a group of 11 and 12year-old students in an immediate and delayed (12 minutes
later) free-recall test. The participants attended several
learning sessions, two of which were preceded by a physical
education class, one involving high cognitive and social
demands (team games) and one with low demands (circuit
training). Delayed recall improved for both exercise
conditions when compared with the rest condition, whereas
immediate recall improved only after the team games. More
recently, Etnier, Labban, Piepmeier, David, & Henning,
(2014) observed children’s performance on the Rey
Auditory Verbal Learning Test - intended to evaluate verbal
learning and memory, administered after a period of
physical activity or rest. The participants were tested
immediately and 24 hours later. Results showed that
participants who exercised had better memory retention
immediately, but not 24 hours later.
These studies provide interesting insights regarding the
effect of exercise on children’s memory, yet they focus on
general-domain cognitive abilities, tested through tools that
do not closely resemble ordinary classroom activities. In
both experiments, the participants were tested on their recall
of already known words, a task that, though related to
different aspects of memory, does not involve learning new
linguistic information, such as word forms or form-meaning
connections. Learning such linguistic information is at the
core of one standard part of school curricula around the
world: second/additional language learning. Therefore, it
would be of interest to extend the findings of these studies
by assessing whether the advantages noticed in these
general memory tasks could translate to a particular
language learning activity, such as vocabulary learning.
There is some precedent for this type of studies in
research done with adults. For example, despite some
differences in the experimental designs, benefits of a
moderate to intense bout of exercise were found for

2864

vocabulary learning, achieved through the association of
translation equivalents (Schmidt-Kassow et al., 2013;
Schmidt-Kassow, Kulka, Gunter, Rothermich, & Kotz,
2010) or through a statistical, associative learning paradigm
(Winter et al., 2007). These encouraging results, however,
have not yet been observed in children.
Based on the brief review of the literature presented
above, the primary purpose of this study was to assess the
possible effects of a bout of aerobic, moderate physical
activity on children’s memory for language learning. In
particular, we were interested in observing whether
exercising before encoding could lead to a higher rate of
recall immediately after learning and after a delay.
Acquiring new vocabulary items is a complicated process
that involves many different learning activities, from item
segmentation to the integration of novel items to existing
networks. In this instance, however, we have chosen to
focus on only two of these activities: the acquisition of the
word’s phonological/orthographical form and the linking of
the newly acquired form to a meaning. From the results of
previous studies and the theorized mechanisms underlying
the exercise-cognition effect, we hypothesize that children
in the exercise group would exhibit increased recall of both
forms and meanings in the delayed tests, after a period of
consolidation including sleep.

Method
Participants
51 school-aged children (mean age = 9.3, 25 females) were
recruited at their school to participate in this experiment. All
children were monolingual Spanish speakers, with no
knowledge of other languages besides school-level English.
None of the children had visual or hearing impairments, nor
cardiac or respiratory conditions that would prevent them
from exercising at a moderate pace. As reported by their
parents or tutors, the children had normal sleeping patterns,
with an average sleeping time of 8.5 hours per night.

Materials
Pseudowords Twenty-four bisyllabic, pronounceable
pseudowords were created using legal Spanish
consonant/vowel combinations. All pseudowords were four
letters long and followed a CVCV pattern. Care was taken
to ensure that an equal amount of pseudowords were
‘masculine’ (ended with ‘o’) and ‘feminine’ (ended with
‘a’).
Pictures Twenty-four pictures of everyday objects extracted
from a subset of Rossion & Pourtois' (2001) pictorial set,
which was based on Snodgrass & Vanderwart's (1980)
original standardized set of visual stimuli but with added
detail and colour. For this experiment, we transformed the
pictures to greyscale to preserve the enhanced details while
avoiding the distraction of colour. Pertinent country-specific
normative data was used to assess the concreteness and
imagery ratings of the objects depicted (Manoiloff, Artstein,

Canavoso, Fernández, & Segui, 2010). Following Pesce et
al's (2009) procedure, the objects were evaluated by
classroom teachers to ensure that they would be
recognizable and familiar to the children.
Learning lists Each pseudoword was randomly paired with
one of the pictures selected. We divided the
pseudoword/picture pairings into two lists of 12 items, that
would be presented in different experimental sessions. The
order of presentation of both the learning and testing stimuli
was randomized for each group.

Procedure
The experiment used a within-subjects design,
counterbalancing the order in which the children
participated in each of the experimental conditions, exercise,
and no-exercise (control).
The experiment was carried out at the participants' school,
during school hours, with the assistance of classroom and
physical education teachers. Participants attended six
sessions spread over three weeks. The first and fourth
sessions started with an intervention stage, where
participants either performed a 30-minute bout of aerobic
physical activity (exercise condition) or remained in the
classroom doing a passive activity (drawing and colouring)
for the same amount of time (control condition). After the
intervention, and after a 5-minute recovery time for the
exercise group, the children performed the vocabulary
learning activity. In the final stage of the first session, the
children were asked first to write down all the words they
remembered, regardless of the order of presentation (free
recall) and later to write down the words corresponding to
the pictures shown in posters by the teachers (cued recall).
The free and cued recall tasks constituted the first testing
session (immediate test).
This testing phase was repeated on sessions two and three
for the pairings learnt in session one, and on sessions five
and six for the pairings learnt in session four.
All participants were exposed to both learning lists and
took part in both intervention conditions (exercise or
control); the order of the interventions was counterbalanced
and randomized so that some participants exercised on
session one while others exercised on session four.
The experimental procedure is schematized in Figure 1.
Vocabulary learning activity The children were exposed to
the lists of 12 pseudoword/picture pairings, presented in
printed posters, and shown at a regular interval. The
classroom teachers led the presentation, reading the
pseudoword aloud and asking the children to repeat it back.
This exposure was repeated three times.
Testing tasks Two testing tasks were intended to separately
measure children’s ability to recall the phonological form as
well as the form-meaning connections of the pseudowords
learnt in the exposure phase.

2865

24h

Session 1

6d

Session 2

• Intervention
• Vocabulary
learning (L1)
• Immediate
test (L1)

they were performing the activities. This scale has been
widely used for children in similar contexts and has proved
to be reliable not only in assessing intensity but also in
determining the nature of the exercise being conducted
(aerobic versus anaerobic). By maintaining the general
perceived exertion of the group in the second tier
(considered “moderate” in our scale), it was assured that the
children were performing aerobic exercise at a moderate
intensity.

Session 3

• Delayed test
(L1)

• Very delayed
test (L1)

Results
Data pre-processing

1wk

Session 4

Session 5

• Intervention
• Vocabulary
learning (L2)
• Immediate
test (L2)

Session 6

• Delayed test
(L2)

24h

• Very delayed
test (L2)

6d

Figure 1: Experimental procedure. L1 = word list 1, L2 =
word list 2, 24h = 24 hours later, 6d = 6 days later, 1wk = 1
week later.
The first task, free recall, was designed to assess whether
the participants could remember the phonological forms of
the newly acquired pseudowords, without prompting from
their associated meanings. To perform this task, the teachers
instructed the students to write down all the pseudowords
they could remember, irrespective of the order of
presentation or their ability to associate the words with the
drawings.
For the second task, cued recall, the teachers showed the
students only the pictures, and the children had to write
down which pseudoword corresponded to each picture
shown. The pictures were shown at a steady pace, and the
children were instructed to leave blank spaces for the
pictures they did not remember. This test intended to
observe if children could recall the form-meaning
connections they had previously learnt.
Physical activity intervention The physical activity
intervention consisted of 30 minutes of child-adapted circuit
training, focalised on activities that would engage the
aerobic system. We chose this type of exercise task since it
maintains a major focus on aerobic exercise - as opposed to
group games, for example, that may be more cognitively
and socially demanding - while still being part of what
students normally do in their physical education classes, and
thus ecologically valid. The task took place in the school’s
playground under the supervision of the children’s physical
education teachers (student-to-teacher ratio = 15:1).
We used a modified Borg Scale of Perceived Exertion
(Borg, 1998) to assess exercise intensity. It was
administered to the children in the exercise condition while

Ten participants were removed from the final sample, two
for reporting learning or psychological conditions that might
interfere with the experiment's outcome and eight for not
having participated in either of the two experimental
conditions (exercise or control). Given that a significant
number of children were absent on the day of the very
delayed test, for reasons not related to the experiment, we
excluded the very delayed test (sessions three and six) in the
reported analyses. To keep the design balanced, we
additionally removed two participants for not having
completed the delayed testing session. All analyses were
carried out on the remaining 39 participants (mean age =
9.32, 21 females).
We computed an accuracy score for each testing activity
(free or cued recall) by summing all the correct responses
given at each testing time. Participant responses were given
one point when they matched exactly one of the taught
pseudowords (e.g. lofa/lofa), and half a point if the answer
had one substitution (e.g. lofa/lifa). For the cued recall task,
the responses had to match one of the pseudowords in the
taught set in addition to matching the corresponding picture.
Partial matches that were placed with the correct picture
were awarded half a point.
All statistical analyses were performed using R (R Core
Team, 2016) and the ez package (Lawrence, 2016).

Free recall
A two-way analysis of variance was conducted to evaluate
the effects of the experimental condition and testing time on
the number of items recalled in the free recall task.
Experimental condition (exercise vs. control) and testing
time (immediate vs. 24 hours later) were included as factors.
No significant effect of experimental condition, F(1, 38) =
1.092, p = .302, or testing time, F(1, 38) = .032, p = .574
was found. However, the interaction between exercise
intervention and testing time was significant, F(1, 38) =
5.932, p = .019, ηg2 = .006). As shown in Figure 2, it would
seem that, whereas there is no difference in the immediate
test for the experimental conditions (exercise: M = 5.97
[49.7%], SD ± 2.73; control: M = 6.07 [50%], SD ± 2.59),
participants recalled more items in the delayed test if they
had exercised prior to encoding (exercise: M = 6.26 [52%],
SD ± 2.71; control: M = 5.5 [45.8%], SD ± 2.94).

2866

non-significant, F(1,38) = .014, p = .9, ηg2 ≤ .001. These
results indicate that exercise did not influence the cued
recall of form-meaning connections in this sample, either
immediately (exercise: M = 5.43 [45.2%], SD ± 2.93;
control: M = 5.51 [45%], SD ± 2.52) or 24 hours after
encoding (exercise: M = 5.64 [47%], SD ± 2.48); control: M
= 5.66 [47.2%], SD ± 3.05).

Figure 2. Free recall correct responses per condition and
testing time.
Gender differences were also taken into account in the
analysis. Figure 3 displays the number of correct responses
in each experimental condition, grouped by gender and
testing time. From this graph, it is possible to see that,
overall, girls seem to remember the same or a larger number
of items when compared to boys. Furthermore, the profiles
of performance per experimental condition appear to be
similar for both genders: when in the exercise condition, the
number of accurate responses is either maintained or
increases from the immediate to the delayed test, whereas
when in the control condition performance decreases.
However, while the girls’ performance does not seem to be
particularly affected by the exercise intervention in either of
the tests (exercise immediate: M = 5.28 [44%], SD ± 2.72;
exercise delayed: M = 5.85 [48.8%], SD ± 2.86; control
immediate: M = 6.04 [50%], SD ± 1.8; control delayed: M =
5.71 [47.6%], SD ± 2.93), the boys recalled more items
immediately (exercise: M = 5.22 [43.5%], SD ± 2.79;
control: M = 4.33 [36%], SD ± 2.95) and 24 hours (exercise:
M = 5.33 [44.4%], SD ± 2.63; control: M = 4 [33.3%], SD ±
2.76) when they exercised before encoding.
Given the unequal number of boys and girls in the sample
(female = 21, male = 18), which limits the possibility of
comparing the groups, a two-way repeated measures
ANOVA, including experimental condition and testing time
as factors, was conducted on a reduced dataset comprising
only the boys’ data. The effect of experimental condition
was significant, F(1, 17) = 5.101, p = .037, ηg2 = .035,
indicating that the difference between experimental
conditions (exercise vs. control) observed in Figure 3, albeit
numerically small, may be worth further exploration.

Figure 3. Free recall correct responses by gender,
experimental condition and testing time.
A visual inspection of the plotted cued recall data divided
by gender showed no indication of a differential effect of
exercise. Hence no additional analyses were conducted.

Figure 4. Cued recall correct responses per condition and
testing time.

Discussion
Cued recall
To assess the effects of experimental condition and testing
time, a two-way, repeated-measures ANOVA was
performed. As shown in Figure 4, no significant main
effects of experimental condition, F(1,38) = .026, p = .872,
or testing time, F(1,38) = .638, p = .429, were found. The
interaction between both independent variables was also

The purpose of this study was to assess whether a bout of
aerobic, moderate physical activity performed before
encoding could affect children’s retention of newly acquired
pseudowords and their meanings, immediately after learning
and with a delay. In particular, we were interested in
observing the possible effects of physical activity in the
recall of novel word-forms (pseudowords) and meanings

2867

(pseudoword/picture association). These questions were
motivated by the scarcity of studies focusing on exercise
and language learning, particularly with child participants.
The free recall test focused on the children’s retention of
word forms. Data from this task showed that exercising
before encoding facilitated recall, but only on the delayed
test (24 hours after learning). This outcome may indicate
that exercising before learning could help reduce timedependent forgetting on a moderate scale. This finding
concurs with previous research outlining the beneficial,
rather than detrimental, effects of acute exercise on
children’s recall (Etnier et al., 2014; Pesce et al., 2009).
However, in contrast to these studies, in which increased
memory performance was noticed in the immediate test (or
after a very short delay), in this experiment the influence of
exercise appears to affect the delayed test, performed 24
hours later and after a period of sleep. This may indicate a
possible link between acute physical activity and memory
consolidation. A relationship between exercise and
consolidation has already been postulated for healthy adults
(e.g. Coles & Tomporowski, 2008; Labban & Etnier, 2011;
Robertson & Takacs, 2017), but would require further
exploration to extend it to child memory consolidation. The
discrepancy between the results of the present study and
previous work could also suggest that, consistent with
several meta-analyses (Chang, Labban, Gapin, & Etnier,
2012; Lambourne & Tomporowski, 2010; Tomporowski,
2003), the effects of physical activity on cognition could be
selective. Since the learning activities used in Etnier and
colleagues and Pesce and colleagues’ work were focused on
the recall of already known linguistic information, and not
on the acquisition of entirely novel forms as was the case in
this experiment, the tasks rely on different memory
processes that may be differentially affected by exercise.
A bout of physical activity before encoding did not affect
recall of form-meaning connections. This finding is
somewhat unexpected, given that previous research had
found an influence of bouts of aerobic physical activity on
associative memory in adults (Schmidt-Kassow et al., 2013;
Schmidt-Kassow, Kulka, Gunter, Rothermich, & Kotz,
2010; Winter et al., 2007). Since this experiment required
children to learn forms and form-meaning connections
simultaneously, it may be that the acquisition of the form
was privileged to the detriment of the formation of formmeaning connections. This could have been reinforced by
the order of the testing activities – always free recall
followed by cued recall – that could have made the recall of
forms more prominent. To our knowledge, this is the first
study that addresses the effect of a bout of physical activity
on the formation of form-meaning connections in children;
as such, it only begins to describe the effects observed.
Further research could help elucidate whether the effects of
exercise seen on standardized associative memory tests
could transfer to memory-supported activities that more
closely resemble the tasks performed by children in a
learning environment.

Another surprising effect was the difference observed in
boys and girls. A tentative explanation of this difference,
based on the assumption that exercise works as a stressor,
would fall in line with research highlighting gender-based
differences in brain reaction to stressors, both of an
emotional and physical nature (for a review, see Cahill,
2006). Furthermore, because this gender difference appears
on the second day, the possibility of the existence of gender
differences in offline consolidation, that could be enhanced
by exercise, should also be considered. Some evidence
points towards greater motor skill memory gains obtained
by males after a period of offline consolidation (Dorfberger,
Adi-Japha, & Karni, 2009), an advantage that may be
related to differential responses to cortisol levels (Andreano
& Cahill, 2006). Cortisol is a stress hormone shown to be
affected by acute exercise interventions, and that plays a
role in memory consolidation. It should nonetheless be
noted that since not all previous studies on the effects of
exercise on cognition have addressed gender differences,
and as it was not the primary purpose of this study, it is hard
to draw conclusions from this result.
There are some limitations that should be considered in
relation to the current study. First, the sample size is
relatively small when considering the number of variables
addressed. Furthermore, the effects found, although
significant, were subtle and can therefore only be considered
with caution. Future experiments should also include more
information about the sample, including a measure of fitness
level and baseline memory performance, as well as some
indication of school achievement (e.g. grades). The
inclusion of these data could help disentangle variation that
might be motivated by external factors not related to the
experimental manipulation.
Overall, this study expands our knowledge of the effects
of acute, aerobic physical activity on children’s cognition, in
that it includes a ‘learning element’ that had been thus far
overlooked. The fact that participants had to learn novel
word forms, as well as their connection to meaning, after
exercising makes this experimental activity more closely
related to regular classroom language learning activities,
thus providing an initial glimpse into the effects of physical
activity in a school environment. The finding that the
experimental condition affected free- but not cued-recall in
this experiment could suggest a selective effect of exercise
on children’s memory, but it could also underline the need
to utilize more nuanced tests to assess associative memory
in this context. Future research on this topic could build
upon these findings, by adding more and more sophisticated
tests of relational memory, as well as addressing some of the
questions that this study has raised, such as the possible
moderating effect of gender and the influence of acute
physical activity on memory consolidation in children.

References
Andreano, J. M., & Cahill, L. (2006). Glucocorticoid release
and memory consolidation in men and women.
Psychological Science, 17(6), 466–470.

2868

Cahill, L. (2006). Why sex matters for neuroscience. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 7(6), 477–84.
Chaddock, L., Erickson, K. I., Prakash, R. S., Kim, J. S.,
Voss, M. W., Vanpatter, M., … Kramer, A. F. (2010).
A neuroimaging investigation of the association
between aerobic fitness, hippocampal volume, and
memory performance in preadolescent children. Brain
Research, 1358, 172–183.
Chaddock, L., Hillman, C. H., Buck, S. M., & Cohen, N. J.
(2011). Aerobic fitness and executive control of
relational memory in preadolescent children. Medicine
and Science in Sports and Exercise, 43, 344–349.
Chang, Y. K., Labban, J. D., Gapin, J. I., & Etnier, J. L.
(2012). The effects of acute exercise on cognitive
performance: A meta-analysis. Brain Research,
1453(250), 87–101.
Coles, K., & Tomporowski, P. D. (2008). Effects of acute
exercise on executive processing, short-term and longterm memory. Journal of Sports Sciences, 26(3), 333–
344.
Dorfberger, S., Adi-Japha, E., & Karni, A. (2009). Sex
differences in motor performance and motor learning
in children and adolescents: An increasing male
advantage in motor learning and consolidation phase
gains. Behavioural Brain Research, 198(1), 165–171.
Etnier, J. L., Labban, J. D., Piepmeier, A. T., David, M. E.,
& Henning, D. A. (2014). Effects of an acute bout of
exercise on memory in 6th-grade children. Pediatric
Exercise Science, (March 2015), 250–258.
Hötting, K., & Röder, B. (2013). Beneficial effects of
physical exercise on neuroplasticity and cognition.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 37(9),
2243–2257.
Kesaniemi, Y. K., Danforth, E., Jensen, M. D., Kopelman,
P. G., Lefèbvre, P., & Reeder, B. A. (2001). Doseresponse issues concerning physical activity and
health: an evidence-based symposium. Medicine and
Science in Sports and Exercise, 33(6), S351–S358.
Labban, J. D., & Etnier, J. L. (2011). Effects of acute
exercise on long-term memory. Research Quarterly
for Exercise and Sport, 82(4), 712–721.
Lambourne, K., & Tomporowski, P. (2010). The effect of
exercise-induced
arousal
on
cognitive
task
performance: A meta-regression analysis. Brain
Research, 1341, 12–24.
Manoiloff, L., Artstein, M., Canavoso, M. B., Fernández,
L., & Segui, J. (2010). Expanded norms for 400
experimental pictures in an Argentinean Spanishspeaking population. Behavior Research Methods,
42(2), 452–460.
McMorris, T., Turner, A., Hale, B. J., & Sproule, J. (2016).
Beyond the catecholamines hypothesis for an acute
exercise–cognition interaction: A neurochemical
perspective. In T. McMorris (Ed.), Exercise-Cognition
Interaction: Neuroscience Perspectives (pp. 65–103).
New York, NY: Academic Press.
Pesce, C., Crova, C., Cereatti, L., Casella, R., & Bellucci,

M. (2009). Physical activity and mental performance
in preadolescents: Effects of acute exercise on freerecall memory. Mental Health and Physical Activity,
2, 16–22.
Robertson, E. M., & Takacs, A. (2017). Exercising Control
Over Memory Consolidation. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 21(5), 310–312.
Roig, M., Thomas, R., Mang, C. S., Snow, N. J., Ostadan,
F., Boyd, L. A., & Lundbye-Jensen, J. (2016). Timedependent effects of cardiovascular exercise on
memory. Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews, 44(2),
81–88.
Rossion, B., & Pourtois, G. (2001). Revisiting Snodgrass
and Vanderwart’s object database: Color and texture
improve object recognition. Journal of Vision, (1.3),
413–413.
Schmidt-Kassow, M., Deusser, M., Thiel, C., Otterbein, S.,
Montag, C., Reuter, M., … Kaiser, J. (2013). Physical
exercise during encoding improves vocabulary
learning
in
young
female
adults:
a
neuroendocrinological study. PloS One, 8(5), e64172.
Schmidt-Kassow, M., Kulka, A., Gunter, T. C., Rothermich,
K., & Kotz, S. A. (2010). Exercising during learning
improves vocabulary acquisition: behavioral and ERP
evidence. Neuroscience Letters, 482(1), 40–44.
Snodgrass, J. G., & Vanderwart, M. (1980). A standardized
set of 260 pictures: norms for name agreement, image
agreement, familiarity, and visual complexity. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and
Memory, 6(2), 174–215.
Tomporowski, P. D. (2003). Effects of acute bouts of
exercise on cognition. Acta Psychologica, 112, 297–
324.
Winter, B., Breitenstein, C., Mooren, F. C., Voelker, K.,
Fobker, M., Lechtermann, A., … Knecht, S. (2007).
High impact running improves learning. Neurobiology
of Learning and Memory, 87(4), 597–609.

2869

