The provenance of modal inference
Sangeet Khemlani1, Thomas Hinterecker2, P.N. Johnson-Laird3,4
sangeet.khemlani@nrl.navy.mil, thomas.hinterecker@tuebingen.mpg.de, phil@princeton.edu
1

2

US Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC 20375 USA
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen, Germany
3
Princeton University, Princeton NJ 08540 USA
4
New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA

Abstract

concern unqualified propositions that are either true or else
false. Consider these two assertions:

People reason about possibilities routinely, and reasoners can
infer “modal” conclusions, i.e., conclusions that concern what
is possible or necessary, from premises that make no mention
of modality. For instance, given that Cullen was born in New
York or Kentucky, it is intuitive to infer that it’s possible that
Cullen was born in New York, and a recent set of studies on
modal reasoning bear out these intuitions (Hinterecker,
Knauff, & Johnson-Laird, 2016). What explains the tendency
to make modal inferences? Conventional logic does not apply
to modal reasoning, and so logicians invented many
alternative systems of modal logic to capture valid modal
inferences. But, none of those systems can explain the
inference above. We posit a novel theory based on the idea
that reasoners build mental models, i.e., iconic simulations of
possibilities, when they reason about sentential connectives
such as and, if, and or (Johnson-Laird, 2006). The theory
posits that reasoners represent a set of conjunctive
possibilities to capture the meanings of compound assertions.
It is implemented in a new computational process model of
sentential reasoning that can draw modal conclusions from
non-modal premises. We describe the theory and
computational model, and show how its performance matches
reasoners’ inferences in two studies by Hinterecker et al.
(2016). We conclude by discussing the model-based theory in
light of alternative accounts of reasoning.

1a. Sarah is Egyptian.
b. Possibly, Sarah is Egyptian.
Assertion (1a) is unqualified: it asserts a fact about Sarah. If
it is true then Sarah is indeed an Egyptian, and if it is false,
she is not an Egyptian. Assertion (1b) is subtler. In addition
to facts and their negations, it introduces possibilities.
Logicians have historically analyzed modal assertions as
referring to a set of “possible words” (see Kneale & Kneale,
1962; Portner, 2009). To say that something is possibly the
case is to say that it is true in at least one possible world,
and to say that something is necessarily the case is to say
that it is true in all possible worlds.
Many different systems of modal logic exist (Kaufmann,
Condoravi, & Harizanov, 2006). Each adopts a different set
of axioms that affect which inferences can be proved.
Different axiom systems affect which modal inferences are
valid and which are not (see, e.g., Kripke, 1963). An
inference is valid if it yields a conclusion that is true in
every case in which the premises are true (Jeffrey, 1981, p.
1). In principle, an infinite number of modal logics exists,
but logicians tend to focus on the axioms themselves, which
run in parallel with semantic assumptions about the
accessibility of one possibile world from another (Kripke,
1963). For instance, the axiom:

Keywords: mental models, modal reasoning, possibilities,
reasoning, probability logic

Introduction
The word “possibility” is fraught with ambiguity, because
philosophers distinguish between different sorts of
possibility. An “alethic” possibility is any description that is
not self-contradictory. “Deontic” possibilities are those that
are permissible (e.g., instances of drinking alcohol when
over the legal age restriction), and impossibilities are those
that are prohibited (e.g., drinking while under the age
restriction). Deontic possibilities can be violated, whereas
alethic possibilities cannot (cf., Bucciarelli & JohnsonLaird, 2005; Bucciarelli, Khemlani, & Johnson-Laird,
2008). The present paper focuses on a different notion of
possibility: “epistemic” possibilities concern possibilities
that are consistent with a reasoner’s personal knowledge.
Reasoning based on possibilities is referred to as “modal”
reasoning, because when you assert that something is
“possible”, you qualify its occurrence. Conventional
systems of logic cannot take into account the logical
properties of modals to draw conclusions, because they

□A → A
where ‘□’ is a symbol that stands for the logical notion of
necessity, A is any proposition whatsoever, and ‘→’ denotes
material implication. The axiom asserts that the necessity of
A material implies A. The axiom does not hold in the modal
logic “system K” (for “Kripke”), but it does hold another
logic, “system T”, and it corresponds to the assumption that
accessibility is reflexive, i.e., if a proposition is necessary in
a world then it holds in that world.
Here is a set of inferences that are invalid in all systems of
modal logic:
2a. A or B or both.
b. Therefore, possibly A.
c. Therefore, possibly B.
d. Therefore, possibly A and B.

663

These inferences seem intuitively reasonable, but the
conclusions (2b-d) are invalid in any modal logic. Suppose
that A is impossible but B is true. In logic, the premise is
true, but (2b) is false. So, the inference is invalid. Similar
suppositions show that all the inferences are invalid, and so,
no modal logic permits them. Why, then, are the inferences
compelling – almost “obvious” – for humans?
Despite some investigations into reasoning about
possibilities (e.g., Bell & Johnson-Laird, 1998; Byrnes &
Beilin, 1991; Goldvarg & Johnson-Laird, 2000; Inhelder &
Piaget, 1958; Piéraut-Le Bonniec, 1980; Osherson, 1976;
Sophian & Somerville, 1988), no comprehensive theory of
human reasoning exists that explains how humans integrate
reasoning about facts with reasoning about possibilities. The
fundamental mystery is: where do the possibilities come
from? Anecdotally, some researchers find that when
participants are allowed to write or type out their own
responses to a set of reasoning problems, they
spontaneously qualify their inferences, e.g., by noting that a
conclusion “is possible” or “could be true” or “might
follow.” These responses are, of course, different ways of
expressing modal conclusions. Other research finds that
reasoners are capable of carrying out various modal
reasoning tasks systematically, e.g., given a set of premises,
they are able to determine whether a conclusion is necessary
or possible (e.g., Bell & Johnson-Laird, 1998; Khemlani,
Lotstein, Trafton, & Johnson-Laird, 2015; Newstead &
Griggs, 1983). But only recently have researchers examined
reasoners’ tendency to endorse modal conclusions from
non-modal premises. Hinterecker and colleagues (2016)
gave participants a battery of problems in which participants
had to endorse or reject different conclusions from modal
premises. Contrast this inference:

i.e., it can be true independent of whether A or B are true.
The premise, A or B or both, in contrast, rules out the
situation in which both A and B are false. And so, the
conclusion has a probability greater than that of the premise
in (3), and it is p-valid. In a similar vein, (4) is p-invalid
because the probability of the conclusion, possibly(A and
B), is 0 given the premise. And so, no matter what
probability is assigned to the premise, the inference is pinvalid. P-logic is central to recent probabilistic accounts of
human reasoning known colloquially as the “new paradigm”
(see, e.g., Evans, 2012; Oaksford & Chater, 2007; Over,
2009; Johnson-Laird, Khemlani, & Goodwin, 2015).
But, p-logic does not always make sensible predictions.
For instance, it predicts that the following inference is pvalid:
5. A or B, but not both.
Therefore, A or B, or both.
The probability of the conclusion in (5) is greater than or
equal to that of the premise, and so p-logic predicts that
reasoners should make it. (The inference is always valid in
logic.) Yet, participants rejected it on 97% of trials in the
aforementioned study by Hinterecker and colleagues.
Perhaps a deeper problem with probabilistic accounts is that
they do not explain the provenance of modal conclusions,
e.g., “possibly A”, from non-modal premises. Hence, an
alternative account of reasoning is needed to explain modal
inferences.

A model-based theory of modal inference
The mental model theory of reasoning – hereafter, the
“model theory” – posits that reasoners draw conclusions by
building and scanning iconic representations of possibilities,
i.e., mental models (Johnson-Laird, 2006; Johnson-Laird &
Byrne, 1991). The theory assumes that interpreting
compound assertions such as those linked by the
connectives and, or, and if, yields a set of discrete
possibilities. Models mimic the structure of what they
represent, i.e., they are iconic (Peirce, 1931-1958, Vol. 4).
But, they can also contain abstract tokens, such as symbols
denoting negations (Khemlani, Orenes, & Johnson-Laird,
2012). They can represent temporal sequences of events as
multiple models unfold in time the way events do
(Bucciarelli, Mackiewicz, Khemlani, & Johnson-Laird,
under review; Khemlani, Mackiewicz, Bucciarelli, &
Johnson-Laird, 2013).
The theory posits two primary systems for reasoning (see,
e.g., Johnson-Laird & Steedman, 1978): a fast system builds
mental models and scans them without the use of working
memory. A slower system revises models and fleshes them
out to yield a set of fully-explicit models. It also searches for
alternative models consistent with the premises. It can
correct the errors and biases that the fast system yields, but
it is subject to the limitations of working memory. The
difference between mental models and fully-explicit models
is clear when reasoning about disjunctions, e.g., He has the

3. A or B or both.
Therefore, possibly A and B.
with this one:
4. A or B, but not both.
Therefore, possibly A and B.
Reasoners responded sensibly: they accepted (3) most of the
time (82% of trials) but they accepted (4) on only a small
minority of trials (10%; see Hinterecker et al., 2016,
Experiment 1). But, both (3) and (4) are invalid in logic.

Probabilistic logic
Can Hinterecker and colleagues’ findings be explained by
an alternative theory? The two inferences above may be
treated more sensibly in probabilistic logic, hereafter, “plogic”, which is a formal system devised by Adams (1975;
1988). P-logic reinterprets validity on probabilistic terms: a
conclusion is probabilistically valid (p-valid) only if in any
consistent assignment of probabilities its conclusion is at
least as probable as its premises. Hence, in (3), the
conclusion, possibly(A and B), does not rule out any cases,

664

soup or the salad or both. Mental models abide by a
“principle of truth”, i.e., they represent what is true in a
compound clause, and not what is false. They can flesh out
the initial mental models to yield a set of fully-explicit
models, i.e., possibilities that specify both what is true and
what is false. The mental models of the disjunction above
can be depicted in the following schematic diagram:

The principle posits that a disjunction, He has the soup or
the salad or both, refers to a set of possibilities, i.e.:
possible( soup & ¬salad ) &
possible(¬soup & salad ) &
possible( soup & salad )

The addition of the principle solves two mysteries of modal
reasoning: first, it explains why reasoners are apt to make
modal inferences from non-modal assertions. If compound
assertions refer to possibilities, then reasoning about
possibilities is the default instead of an extension to more
basic reasoning patterns (cf. Inhelder & Piaget, 1958).
Second, because the principle is that possibilities are related
through conjunction, it allows reasoners to conclude that
any of the separate possibilities can be concluded as
possible. An immediate consequence of the assumption is
that modal inferences are the default, and reasoning about
facts is a special case of reasoning about possibilities.
The principle is presaged by recent ideas due to
Zimmerman (2000), who proposed that disjunctions refer to
lists of alternatives in a “possible worlds” semantics, and
Geurts (2005) who extended the idea to disjunctions that
concern facts. The principle we propose, however, applies to
all sorts of sentential connectives, including disjunctions,
conjunctions, conditionals, and even causal relations, e.g.,
causes, enables, and prevents (Johnson-Laird & Khemlani,
in press; Khemlani, Barbey, & Johnson-Laird, 2014).
The principle maintains the separation between mental
models and fully-explicit models. Hence, it makes all of the
same predictions as previous versions of the model theory.
It also predicts that reasoners should deem (5) invalid,
which we repeat here:

soup
soup

salad
salad

Each row in the diagram denotes a different possibility.
Hence, the first row denotes the possibility in which he has
the soup. In contrast, a fully-explicit model represents both
what is true in each possibility, as well as what is false:
soup
¬ soup
soup

¬ salad
salad
salad

Three primary findings support the model theory. First,
inferences from one model are easier than inferences from
multiple models (e.g., Johnson-Laird, Byrne, & Schaeken,
1992). Second, because reasoners tend to build mental
models instead of fully-explicit models, they are prone to
systematic errors (see Khemlani & Johnson-Laird, 2017, for
a review). Third, reasoners rely on counterexamples to
correct erroneous inferences (e.g., Johnson-Laird & Hasson,
2003).
But, the theory has at least two serious shortcomings.
First, it does not integrate facts and possibilities. As a result,
it cannot explain the “obvious” inferences in example (2)
above. Indeed, no theory of reasoning adequately integrates
facts and modal reasoning, but the problem is particularly
acute for the model theory, as the theory is based on the
representation of possibilities, and so modal reasoning is
within its purview. And second, its various computer
implementations do not make quantitative predictions
(Johnson-Laird & Yang, 2008). To rectify these
shortcomings, we describe a novel assumption about the
representation of mental models below, and then we present
a new computational model capable of delivering
quantitative predictions by varying how models are built
and revised.

5. A or B, but not both.
Therefore, A or B, or both.
Both a truth-functional analysis in logic and the notion of pvalidity in p-logic treats (5) as valid. But, if reasoners
represent the exclusive disjunction as a conjunction of
possibilities, i.e.:
possible( soup & ¬salad ) &
possible(¬soup & salad )

then the conclusion does not follow from the representation,
because nothing yields the possibility in which both cases
hold.
Nevertheless, the previous predictions are qualitative, not
quantitative. A veridical simulation of human reasoning
needs to provide a quantitative simulation of the extant data.
To do so, we developed a novel computational
implementation of the model theory, and we tested it against
two experiments by Hinterecker et al. (2016). We now
describe the computational model and its simulation of data.

The principle of conjunctive possibilities
We amend the model theory to explain where possibilities
come from in inferences that make no mention of them with
the following principle:
The principle of conjunctive possibilities: By
default, compound assertions between clauses refer
to conjunctions of possibilities. A clause can be
evaluated as possible if it is affirmed in at least one
possibility of the conjunctive set. It can be
evaluated as necessary if it can be affirmed in all
possibilities. And it is deemed factual if it is
affirmed in a set of only one possibility.

A computational implementation
of the model theory
We developed a computational theory of sentential
reasoning that integrates reasoning about facts and reas-

665

Parse premise

assessing that a given conclusion is possible, and assessing
that it is necessary. In order to assess an inference, the
computer model checks that each possibility in the
conjunction corresponding to the conclusion is supported by
the premises. If they all are, then the conclusion follows of
necessity, and if at least one is, then the conclusion is a
possibility. The concept of necessity may vary from
participant to participant and from problem to problem:
some problems may encourage reasoners to check that the
models of the premises hold in all models of the conclusion
(a strong notion of validity), and some problems may
encourage reasoners to check only that all the possibilities to
which the conclusions refer hold in the premises (a weaker
notion of validity). Consider how you might respond to
problems such as this one:

Build or update
mental model

Linguistic
Null
model?

Working
memory
System 2

Build fully explicit
models

Scan model(s)

Search for
counterexamples

Make inference
System 1

6. Suppose that: A or B, or both.
Does it follow that: A or B, but not both?

Figure 1. A schematic diagram of the computational model of
reasoning. The system operates by parsing premises in natural
language, constructing mental models and scanning them to
formulate initial conclusions (system 1), and then searching for
counterexamples and building fully-explicit models to interrogate
initial inferences (system 2).

The conjunctive possibilities to which the first premise
refers are:
possible( A & ¬B ) &
possible(¬A & B ) &
possible( A & B )

oning about possibilities. It implements the principles of the
mental model theory of reasoning (see, e.g., Khemlani &
Johnson-Laird, 2013) and the principle of conjunctive
possibilities introduced here. Figure 1 provides a schematic
of the program. The computational model is structured
around three general systems:
a) A linguistic system uses a grammar and lexicon to parse
verbal assertions.
b) An intuitive system (System 1) uses the parse to
construct an initial mental model, i.e., a conjunction of
possibilities. It also scans the model to formulate initial
inferences.
c) A deliberative system (System 2) can flesh out the
mental model and search for alternative models. This
system can manipulate and update the representations
created in System 1, and it can modify conclusions, but it
too can fail when a problem calls for more working
memory than it has (Khemlani & Johnson-Laird, 2017).
In the computational model, system 1 does not have access
to working memory, and so it can construct only one mental
model at a time. It can flesh out the mental model to make it
explicit. The probability of doing so is governed by a
parameter, φ. System 2, however, has access to working
memory. As a result, the operations of system 1 are faster
and more prone to err than system 2. System 2 can operate
on multiple models at a time, search for counterexamples,
and construct a set of fully explicit models. The probability
of calling system 2 is governed by a separate parameter, s.
In principle, the size of working memory could also be
governed by a parameter in order to model individual
differences in reasoning.
The system is capable of carrying out a number of
inferential tasks, but for brevity, we consider just two:

And the possibilities to which the second premise refers are:
possible( A & ¬B ) &
possible(¬A & B )

Reasoners with a strong notion of validity should judge that
(6) is invalid, because the models of the premise do not all
hold in the models of the conclusion. Reasoners with a
weaker notion of validity should assess that (6) is valid,
since the models of the conclusion hold in all the models of
the premises. To simulate this non-determinism of human
reasoning, we built a third and final parameter into the
system, g, that denotes the probability of the system
adopting a weak version of validity.
We applied the computational model to simulate recent
data on modal reasoning. The simulations show a close fit
between the predictions of the system and humans’
inferential behavior after conservative parameter searching.

Simulations of Hinterecker et al. (2016)
We sought to use the computational implementation of the
model theory to simulate participants’ performance in
Experiments 1 and 3 in Hinterecker et al. (2016), as those
two studies are directly pertinent to how reasoners draw
modal conclusions from non-modal premises. In
Experiment 1, Hinterecker and colleagues gave participants
a battery of diagnostic problems that involve disjunctions.
Two of those problems tested the tendency to draw modal
conclusions from disjunctions that make no mention of
possibilities, and two tested the ability to infer an inclusive
disjunction from an exclusive one, and an exclusive

666

Proportion acceptance

[γ = 0.75]

computer model matched the participants’ performance in
the experiment well (r = .99, RMSE = .10). The predictions
of the computer model were in the 99th percentile relative to
hypothetical datasets (Khemlani & Trafton, 2013).
Hinterecker’s et al. (2016) Experiment 3 was a more
stringent test of reasoners’ ability to infer modal conclusions
from an inclusive disjunction, A or B or both. For each
problem in the experiment, participants assessed the
disjunction and then accepted or rejected the one of the
following four conclusions: possibly A and B, possibly A,
possibly B, possibly not-A and not-B. None of these
inferences is valid in any known logic, but as Figure 2
(bottom panel) shows, reasoners endorsed three of the four
conclusions. We disabled all of the parameters to see how
the computer model matched the participants’ performance;
it did so extremely well (r = .99, RMSE = .12), and
additional parameter manipulations would have resulted in
only nominal changes to the fit.
In sum, the computational model implementing the model
theory and the principle of conjunctive possibilities yielded
a close fit to the data from Hinterecker et al. (2016).

r = 0.99

1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00

Proportion acceptance

.
.
.
.
oth
oth
oth
oth
or b d B. t not b d B. t not bboth. B or bboth.
B
r
r
u
u
t
r
an
an
A o ly A r B b ly A r B b r B o A o ut no
b A o sib A o A o
b
i
s
s
s
rB
Po
Po
Ao

Hinterecker
[parameter
free]

et al. (2016)r Exp.
= 0.991

1.00
0.75

General discussion
Reasoners have no difficulty drawing modal conclusions
from compound assertions that make no mention of
modality. The ability to do so often seems “obvious”; only
experts are likely to realize that this inference is invalid in
logic:

0.50
0.25
0.00

7. A or B or both.
Therefore, possibly A.

th.
th.
th.
th.
r bo B. or bo A. or bo B. or bo t B.
o
y
d
r B an or B ssibl or B sibly or B d no
A o ly A
A Po
A Pos
A
an
b
i
s
s
ot A
o
n
P
bly
ssi
Po
Figure 2. Observed
(histograms)
and predicted
Hinterecker
et data
al. (2016)
Exp. 3(circles)
proportions of accepting the conclusion for different inferences.
Top panel: inferences from Hinterecker et al. (2016, Experiment
1). Bottom panel: inferences from Hinterecker et al. (2016,
Experiment 2). For each of the problems, the assertion on top
denotes the premise and the assertion on the bottom denotes the
conclusion.

No known logical system designed to deal with modalities,
i.e., a modal logic concerning what is possible or necessary,
permits the inference above. Reasoners naive to logic may
also be surprised to find that both orthodox logic and
probabilistic logic render the following inference valid:
8. A or B, but not both.
Therefore, A or B, or both.
On our account, reasoners are justified in feeling that the
invalidity of (7) and the validity of (8) are counterintuitive
and incorrect. The model theory of reasoning, which is
based on possibilities (Johnson-Laird, 2006), treats
compound assertions, such as conjunctions, conditionals,
and the disjunctions in (7) and (8), as conjunctions of
possibilities. Hence, reasoning about possibilities is
fundamental. Reasoners represent possibilities directly, and
so modal reasoning is a natural consequence of the way
people represent assertions.
The principle of conjunctive possibilities characterizes the
inferences in (6) and (7) more intuitively: it predicts that (6)
should be deemed valid and (7) should be deemed invalid.
And a computational implementation of the principle makes
identical predictions, which are validated by recent
experiments on modal reasoning by Hinterecker et al.
(2016).

disjunction from an inclusive one. Figure 2 summarizes the
proportion of participants to accept the varying conclusions
given the single premise.
The only parameter that could have affected the system’s
simulations on the problems in Experiment 1 was the g
parameter, which dictates how probable it is for participants
to make use of a weak notion of validity. An exhaustive
exploration of the parameter space yielded an optimal g
value of .75, i.e., the system optimally modeled the data
when it stochastically applied weak validity to 75% of
simulated problems. We generated synthetic data by running
1000 simulations of the four inferences in Experiment 1.
Figure 2 (top panel) shows the proportion of correct
responses in the observations (histograms) and predictions
(circles) in the study as a function of the inference. The

667

Johnson-Laird, P. N. & Khemlani, S. (in press). Mental models and
causation. In M. Waldmann (Ed.), Oxford Handbook of Causal
Reasoning.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Khemlani, S. S., & Goodwin, G. P. (2015).
Logic, probability, and human reasoning. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 19, 201–214.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Steedman, M. J. (1978). The psychology of
syllogisms. Cognitive Psychology, 10, 64–99.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Yang, Y. (2008). Mental logic, mental models,
and computer simulations of human reasoning. In Sun, R. (Ed.)
Cambridge Handbook of Computational Psychology. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Kaufmann, S., Condoravdi, C. & Harizanov, V. (2006). Formal
approaches to modality. In Frawley, W. (Ed.). The Expression of
Modality. Berlin, New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Khemlani, S., Barbey, A., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2014). Causal
reasoning with mental models. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8.
Khemlani, S., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2013). The processes of
inference. Argument & Computation, 4, 1-20.
Khemlani, S., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2017). Illusions in reasoning.
Minds & Machines, 27, 11-35.
Khemlani, S., Lotstein, M., Trafton, J. G., & Johnson-Laird, P. N.
(2015). Immediate inferences from quantified assertions. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 68, 2073–2096.
Khemlani, S., Orenes, I., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2012). Negation: a
theory of its meaning, representation, and use. Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 24.
Khemlani, S. S., Mackiewicz, R., Bucciarelli, M., & Johnson-Laird, P.
N. (2013). Kinematic mental simulations in abduction and
deduction. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 110, 16766-16771.
Khemlani, S. & Trafton, J. G. (2014). Percentile analysis for goodnessof-fit comparisons of models to data. In Proceedings of the 36th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Kneale, W., & Kneale, M. (1962). The development of logic. Oxford,
England: Oxford University Press.
Kripke, S. (1963). Semantical considerations on modal logic. Acta
Philosophica Fennica, 16, 83-94.
Newstead, S. E., & Griggs, R. A. (1983). Drawing inferences from
quantified statements: A study of the square of opposition. Journal
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 22, 535–546.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2007). Bayesian rationality: The
probabilistic approach to human reasoning. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Osherson, D. N. (1976). Logical abilities in children, Vol. 4:
Reasoning and concepts. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Over, D. (2009). New paradigm psychology of reasoning. Thinking &
Reasoning, 15, 431-438.
Peirce, C. S. (1931-1958). Collected papers of Charles Sanders Peirce.
8 vols. C. Hartshorne, P. Weiss, and A. Burks, (Eds.). Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Piéraut-Le Bonniec, G. (1980). The development of modal reasoning:
Genesis of necessity and possibility notions. New York: Academic
Press.
Portner, P. (2009). Modality. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Rips, L. J. (1994). The psychology of proof. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Sophian, C., & Somerville, S. C. (1988). Early developments in logical
reasoning: Considering alternative possibilities. Cognitive
Development, 3, 183-222.
Zimmermann, T. E. (2000). Free choice disjunction and epistemic
possibility. Natural Language Semantics, 8, 255-290.

At present, no alternative theory of reasoning, whether
based on mental logic (e.g., Rips, 1994) or on the
probability calculus (e.g., Oaksford & Chater, 2007), can
explain these phenomena of modal reasoning. Moreover, no
computational model of reasoning, whether in psychology,
artificial intelligence, or logic, characterizes the inferences
in the same manner as the system we outlined above. The
reason, as we argue, is that everyday reasoning is based on
possibilities, not probabilities or truth-functions.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a grant from the Office of Naval
Research to SK. We are also grateful to many colleagues for help
and advice. They include Aron Barbey, Paul Bello, Monica
Bucciarelli, Ruth Byrne, Nick Chater, Nicole Cruz, Alan Garnham,
Gernot Kleiter, Markus Knauff, Philipp Koralus, Paolo Legrenzi,
Max Lotstein, Robert Mackiewicz, Juan García-Madruga, Geoff
Goodwin, Todd Gureckis, Greg Murphy, Mike Oaksford, Jane
Oakhill, Klaus Oberauer, Isabelle Orenes, Dan Osherson, Barbara
Partee, Guy Politzer, Cristina Quelhas, Marco Ragni, Célia Rasga,
Bob Rehder, Carlos Santamaría, Walter Schaeken, Mark
Steedman, and Greg Trafton.

References
Adams, E. W. (1975). The logic of conditionals. Dordrecht, the
Netherlands: Reidel.
Adams, E. W. (1998). A primer of probability logic. Stanford, CA:
CSLI Publications.
Bell, V., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1998). A model theory of modal
reasoning. Cognitive Science, 22, 25-51.
Bucciarelli, M., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2005). Naive deontics: a
theory of meaning, representation, and reasoning. Cognitive
Psychology, 50, 159-193.
Bucciarelli, M., Khemlani, S., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2008). The
psychology of moral reasoning. Judgment and Decision Making, 3.
Bucciarelli, M., Mackiewicz, R., Khemlani, S., & Johnson-Laird, P. N.
(under review). Recursion in children’s comprehension and
formulation of algorithms. Manuscript under review.
Byrnes, J. P., & Beilin, H. (1991). The cognitive basis of uncertainty.
Human Development, 34, 189-203.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2012). Questions and challenges for the new
psychology of reasoning. Thinking & Reasoning, 18, 5–31.
Goldvarg, Y., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2000). Illusions in modal
reasoning. Memory & Cognition, 28, 282-294.
Geurts, B. (2005). Entertaining alternatives: disjunctions as modals.
Natural Language Semantics, 13, 383–410.
Hinterecker, T., Knauff, M., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2016). Modality,
probability, and mental models. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 42, 1606–1620.
Inhelder, B., & Piaget, J. (1958). The growth of logical thinking from
childhood to adolescence. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Jeffrey, R. J. (1981). Formal logic: Its scope and limits (2nd Ed.). New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2006). How we reason. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Byrne, R. M. J., & Schaeken, W. S. (1992).
Propositional reasoning by model. Psychological Review, 99.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Hasson, U. (2003). Counterexamples in
sentential reasoning. Memory & Cognition, 31, 1105-1113.

668

