The Effect of Economic Scarcity Priming on Perception of Race
Dariusz Lukasz Pilucik (dpiluc01@mail.bbk.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford
South Parks Rd, Oxford OX1 3UD, Oxford, United Kingdom

Jens Koed Madsen (jens.madsen@ouce.ox.ac.uk)
School of Geography and the Environment, University of Oxford
OX1 3QY, South Parks Road, Oxford, United Kingdom
Orcid: 0000-0003-2405-8496
Abstract
Existing research suggests that White individuals are more
likely to categorise biracial faces as Black in conditions of
resource scarcity. It has been theorised that this effect is due
to in-group boundaries becoming more exclusive in scarce
conditions. An alternative explanation refers to implicit socioeconomic association between Black individuals and lower
level of resources. These two approaches entail different
predictions for Black participants performing the
categorisation task. If scarcity prompts greater in-group
exclusivity, Black participants should, ceteris paribus,
categorise more biracial faces as White. If, however, scarcity
invokes socio-economic status associations, Black
participants should categories biracial faces in the same way
as White participants. Experiment 1, explored the effects of
priming on White and Black groups. It provided support for
the implicit socio-economic association theory. Furthermore,
experiment 2 on Asian sample, provided additional support as
Asian participants showed the same pattern of response. The
paper discusses implications of these findings.
Keywords: intergroup bias; perception of race; boundary
formation; resource scarcity; scarcity priming

Introduction
Substantial evidence suggests that the perception of race
can be influenced by environmental factors (e.g. Davis,
1991; Peery & Bodenhausen, 2008; MacLin & Malpass,
2001). This effect was examined by Rodeheffer, Hill and
Lord (2012), who primed participants with the concepts of
resource scarcity, abundance and neutral control. The
priming stimuli included slides with captioned pictures
showing relevant concepts. Participants were then presented
with twenty composite images of biracial faces generated
using 50% content of White and 50% content of Black
individuals’ photographs. The task was to categorise faces
as either Black or White. Results showed that participants in
the scarcity condition were more likely to categorise faces
as Black, relative to the abundance or neutral conditions.
There was no significant difference between neutral and
abundance conditions. Rodeheffer et al. theorised that, in
times of economic crisis, boundaries of in-group
categorisation become more exclusive where less people are
classified as in-group members.
Results from Krosch and Amodio (2014) support
these conclusions. Participants were primed with scarcity,
negativity, and neutral conditions. Priming consisted of

subliminal presentation of relevant word primes for 20ms
prior to each trial. Participants subsequently categorised
faces as either Black or White. Facial stimuli included
morphed pictures of mixed race individuals generated using
different proportions of original faces of Black and White
people at 10% increments. The dependent variable was the
point of subjective equality, defined as the proportion of
original Black face content required for the morphed image
to be equally likely to be categorised as either Black or
White. Results showed that in the scarcity condition, a given
image may have significantly lower proportion of Black
content to reach the point of subjective equality. In other
words, a higher number of images were identified as Black
in the scarcity condition. Consistently with previous
explanations of Rodeheffer et al. (2012), authors of the
study concluded that in the conditions of resource scarcity
the boundaries of in-group categorisation become more
exclusive, as participants tended to exclude biracial
individuals from the White group in the scarcity condition.
However, the study had a certain limitation as a quarter of
the sample consisted of Asian participants. The facial
stimuli included only images of Black and White
individuals and no Asian individuals. The experiment was
therefore unable to examine any effect of change of ingroup boundaries since there were no in-group images in the
stimuli from the point of view of Asian participants. This
may indicate that the effect was driven by other factor. The
present study explores this possibility.
The paper thus postulates an alternative theoretical
explanation relating to the effect of implicit racial bias,
based on presumption that Black people constitute a
disadvantaged group with lower level of resources (Gilens,
2003). That is, people’s sematic network may include an
association between scarcity (or lower socio-economic
status) and Black individuals. Activation of the concept of
scarcity may therefore result in higher cognitive
accessibility of the concept of Black individuals. This in
turn increases the probability of a given face to be classified
as Black following scarcity priming. Extensive previous
literature demonstrated a wide range of similar implicit
racial biases, which, more importantly, are exhibited by
individuals across different ethnicities, including Black
people themselves (e.g. Payne, 2006; Correll, Park, Judd &
Wittenbrink, 2002).

2902

We might therefore reconsider the above evidence from
Rodeheffer et al. (2012) and Krosch and Amodio (2014). It
is possible that the results were driven not by a change in ingroup exclusivity, but by implicit association between lower
level of resources and Black individuals. The present study
investigates these two theoretical explanations by testing
different ethnic groups. According to the initial account,
scarcity yields an increase in exclusivity of the in-group
categorisation. If this theory is correct, White participants
will show a tendency to exclude biracial individuals from
the White in-group, increasing the number of faces being
judged as Black. Conversely, Black participants should
show the opposite pattern of response. According to the
alternative explanation, scarcity priming activates the
concept of lower level of resources and increases cognitive
accessibility of the associated concept of Black individuals.
Similar to other implicit race-related biases, this effect can
be expected to occur irrespective of the ethnicity of the
participant. Therefore, both Black and White participants
will show the same pattern of responses, with increased
probability of judging ambiguous faces as Black in the
scarcity condition, relative to the neutral condition. As
neither of the original studies included Black participants,
new data is required to decide between the two hypotheses.
Experiment 1 directly tests these predictions by analysing
responses from Black and White participants. Experiment 2
further tests the hypotheses by analysing responses from
Asian participants. Asian people are out-group members to
both Black and White faces included in the stimuli.
According to the in-group exclusivity theory, they should be
unaffected by scarcity priming, as no change in in-group
exclusivity can be observed. According to the socioeconomic account, however, they should exhibit similar
response patterns, as the White and Black participants from
experiment 1.

Experiment 1: Black and White participants
In the original studies, participants were White. Given the
competing hypotheses (in-group/out-group versus implicit
biases), we recruited both Black and White participants. If
the group hypothesis is correct, we should expect Black
participants to exhibit the opposite in-group behaviour as
White participants. If, however, the implicit bias hypothesis
is right, we should expect both groups of participants to
have the same response patterns.

Participants
Sixty-four people participated in the experiment (N = 64);
40 female, 23 male and 1 person classified their gender as
“other”. The amount of participants was chosen prior to
recruiting the participants, and consequently no direct
stopping rule was in place. The age of participants ranged
from 18 to 55 (mean = 29.84, SD = 8.69). Participants were
recruited opportunistically from Birkbeck, University of
London.

Design
The experiment included two independent variables:
priming (two levels: scarcity and neutral), and group (two
levels: Black or White). The experimental design was 2x2
mixed with group as the between subject variable and
priming as the within subject variable. The dependent
variable measured the mean response rate across all trials in
both conditions (scarcity or neutral) for each group (Black
or White). The scope of possible values ranged from 1.0
indicating that 100% of 45 images presented were identified
as Black to 2.0 indicating that 100% of images were
identified as White. The mean score of 1.5 represents that
50% of the images were classified as White and 50% as
Black.

Materials
The experiment used Qualtrics survey software and could be
conducted online. The priming stimuli for the scarcity
condition were obtained from the Rodeheffer et al. (2012)
study, as they were proven to be of sufficient quality to
produce priming effects. They consisted of captioned
pictures showing economic recession, poverty and scarce
resources. The stimuli for the neutral condition included
three slides showing pictures of clocks, as there is no reason
to assume that images of clocks should prime participants in
terms of economic scarcity or abundance. Similarly, in order
to replicate and test previous findings, the facial stimuli
were obtained from the Krosch and Amodio (2014) study.
They included morphed pictures generated from
photographs of Black and White individuals at 10%
increments from 10% Black to 90% Black1.

Procedure
In accordance with ethical approval requirements,
participants consented to their involvement and that they
could terminate the experiment at any time if they so
desired. First, participants saw slides with neutral priming
(images of old-fashioned clocks). Having seen the images,
participants were presented with 45 morphed facial images
(from Krosch & Amadio, 2014), one picture per slide.
Following Rodeheffer et al. (2012), the instruction read: “If
you had to choose, would you describe this person as
[Black/White]”. Participants indicated their response by
clicking one of two radio buttons. Following the first set of
pictures, participants were presented with the scarcity
priming (caption and images of economic scarcity), and
then the second set of 45 pictures. The experiment ended
with a page requesting the demographic information,
including ethnicity, gender and age. The last page included
debriefing. The entire procedure lasted for about 15
minutes.

1

The authors wish to express their gratitude to both sets of
authors for supplying the stimuli that allows for a direct test of the
hypotheses.

2903

Experiment 1: Results

Experiment 2: Asian participants

Only data of participants who classified themselves as Black
or White were analysed. The means and standard deviations
are presented in Table 1. The lower the mean response rate,
the higher is the bias towards categorising faces as Black
(cf. the above description of the design). The descriptive
statistics show that in neutral conditions the results were
close to the expected value of 1.5. The results in the
experimental conditions were lower, which means that more
images were classified as Black.

Experiment 1 showed that both Black and White
participants rated more faces as Black in scarcity conditions.
Experiment 2 pursues this hypothesis by testing Asian
participants. As these are out-group members for both Black
and White faces, they should, according to the in-group/outgroup hypothesis, be unaffected by the priming. If, however,
the implicit socio-economic association hypothesis is
correct, Asian participants should respond in a similar way
as the Black and White participants in experiment 1. Given
these results, we predict the latter hypothesis.

Neutral priming

Black
1.51 (.06)

White
1.47 (.13)

Scarcity priming

1.42 (.07)

1.43 (.14)

Participants

Table 1: Scarcity effect on participant groups
A mixed 2-way ANOVA revealed a significant main effect
of priming: F(1,62) = 31.57, p < 0.001. Thus, results varied
significantly between the priming conditions across both
groups such that more faces were categorised as Black in
the scarcity condition. The main effect of group was not
significant: F(1,62) = .28, p = .60, indicating that both
groups had similar response rates across the priming
conditions. In addition, there was no significant interaction:
F(1,62) = .135, p = .14. This shows that the effect of
priming did not vary as a function of the group variable. In
order to further test effects of scarcity within each group
separately, two 1-way repeated measures ANOVAs were
performed. The test in the Black group confirmed a
significant effect of scarcity: F(1,33) = 9.27, p = .003.
Similarly, in the White group, a significant effect was also
obtained: F(1,29) = 23.13, p < .001 (see fig. 1). This
confirms that the main effect of priming in the 2-way
ANOVA was driven by significant differences in both
groups. As illustrated in Figure 1, results of the experiment
were consistent with the poverty priming hypotheses.

Fig. 1: Main results, experiment 1

Thirty-one people of Asian origin were recruited from
Mechanical Turk (8 female, 23 male)2. In order to ensure
Asian origin without priming the participants to consider
this as an issue for selection, a pre-screening including a
number of filler questions unrelated to race and ethnicity as
well as information to identify the respondent’s ethnicity
and race was conducted to pick out participants with
relevant ethnicity. Only Asian participants would
subsequently allowed to continue with the actual
experiment. The age of participants ranged from 18 to 60
(mean = 30.00, SD = 9.55).

Design, materials, and procedure
As in experiment 1, scarcity and neutral conditions were
independent variables. The design was within-subjects,
hence all participants were allocated to both conditions. The
experiment used the same dependent measure as in the
previous experiment.

Experiment 2: Results
Only data of participants who classified themselves as Asian
were analysed (two participants who passed the
qualification test, subsequently identified themselves as
mixed-race). The mean response rate in the neutral
condition was 1.48 (SD = .14). This result was close to the
chance rate of 1.5. The outcome in the scarcity condition
was 1.43 (SD = .13), revealing that more pictures were
classified as Black. A related sample t-test showed that the
effect was significant (t(30) = 2.35, p = .013).3 The results
from experiment 2 are thus in line with findings from
experiment 1 and suggest that scarcity priming invoked
implicit socio-economic associations rather than increasing
in-group/out-group exclusivity.

2
Paolacci, Chandler & Ipeirotis (2010) for validation of using
Mechanical Turk. Note that Asian origin may also include
Bangladeshi, Indian, and Pakistani participants. For the current
experiment, however, participants were limited to people with Far
Eastern origin.
3
Further analysis using 2x3 two-way ANOVA with all three
groups (Black, White, and Asian) revealed no significant
interaction: F(2, 92)= 1.76, p = .18. This confirms that all three
groups had the same pattern of response.

2904

Discussion
The outcomes of the experiments demonstrate that priming
the concept of resource scarcity changes the perception of
race. Participants in the scarcity condition were more likely
to categorise biracial faces as Black, relative to the neutral
condition. This effect has been shown to exist across all
groups included in both experiments. The results provide
empirical support for the theory of implicit association
between the concept of poverty and Black individuals,
yielding more faces to be categorised as Black. The results
challenge the original explanation presented by Rodeheffer
et al. (2012) and Krosch and Amodio (2014). Here, the shift
of perceptual threshold of racial categorisation is based on
scarcity-related increase of ingroup exclusivity. This was
theorised to facilitate resource allocation towards the
ingroup. The present results showed that Black, White, and
Asian participants had the same pattern of response, which
is contrary to the hypotheses derived from their theory.
Thus, the present study confirms that the implicit poverty
priming theory has higher explanatory power relative to the
reduction of the ingroup inclusivity theory.
The results of the study are of high social
significance in terms of intergroup relationships, potentially
concerning the distribution of wealth and power, and
regarding implicit socio-economic associations. The implicit
association between poverty and Black individuals may be
related to the stereotype of a Black person as poor and
chronically welfare dependent. According to Gilens (2003),
media portrayal of poverty has become increasingly
“racialized” – it shows disproportionately higher number of
Black people depicted as poor. He found that almost 60% of
images in American articles on poverty present Black
individuals, whereas around 27% of the poor are Black.
This tendency culminated in articles published in 1962 and
1963 during a broad coverage of welfare system abuses
which saw 75% of images representing Black people. This
trend reversed in the early 1980s in the times of economic
downturn, with the percentage reduced to 33%. These
changes indicate that the media increase the
overrepresentation in the negative context of welfare system
abuse and the “undeserving” poor. Furthermore, they
decrease the overrepresentation when poverty can be
justified by overall economic decline. Further studies show
that attitudes towards the poor are context dependent, e.g.
people are more likely to classify poor senior citizens or
medical care receivers as deserving public assistance
(Smith, 1987; Cook & Barrett, 1992). Consistently with
these notions, Gilens (1999) established that the
representation of Black people among the poor varies as a
function of positivity of the context. No images of Black
individuals were found in articles on senior citizens.
Consistently, the overrepresentation in articles on
underclass, urban problems and criminality ranged between
85% and 100%. It can, therefore, be theorised that the
disproportionate representation of Black people among the
poor in the media contributes to the establishment of the
implicit association. In addition, this effect is magnified by

negative context of the media article, which may bias
people’s beliefs concerning reasons for Black poverty.
Indeed, studies demonstrated that news reports on poor
Black children produce more personal attributions relative
to news reports on poor White children (Iyengar, 1991). In
other words, participants were more likely to attribute Black
poverty to alleged negative personal characteristics of Black
people, while White poverty is more likely to be explained
in terms of structural and social factors rather than personal
(e.g. economic crisis, unemployment etc.).
Another socially significant consequence of this
implicit association relates to the fact that people tend to
behave consistently with the content of activated stereotype.
In a classic study, Bargh, Chen and Burrows (1996)
examined this notion by priming participants with the
concept of elderly people. Results showed that participants
walked more slowly following this priming, which is part of
the stereotype of senior citizens. In addition, priming
participants with the concept of Black individuals resulted
in a more aggressive behaviour. These phenomena are
consistent with previously outlined theoretical explanations
of increased cognitive accessibility of concepts associated
with currently activated ideas. The study showed that
stereotypes not only affect task performance in laboratory
settings but also can affect daily behaviour. Results
consistent with this notion were obtained by other studies
which used the stereotype threat paradigm. Research
showed that priming people with racial or gender
stereotypes (e.g. lower mathematic ability of Black people
and women, while higher ability of Asians) results in
stereotype-congruent behaviour (e.g. Steele, 1997; Steele &
Aronson, 1995; Walton & Cohen, 2003; Steen, 1987).
Further evidence demonstrates that the effects of stereotype
activation are not limited to academic or IQ tests only, but
also extend to economic decision making. For example,
women primed with gender stereotypes are less likely to
engage in risky financial activities (Powell & Ansic, 1997;
Schubert, Brown, Gysler & Brachinger, 1999), and they are
less likely to pursue careers traditionally regarded as male
(Rudman & Phelan, 2010).
Collectively, these studies suggest that stereotypes can have
a long-lasting effect on a range of aspects crucial for life
success, such as education and career choice, which
translates into wealth and social status. It can be therefore
argued that negative racial stereotypes hinder the prospects
of Black people, since people have a tendency to
unwittingly act in accordance with the content of
internalised stereotypes. Concurrently, socio-cultural
stereotyping may be activated by relevant cues such as
economic scarcity (as the current studies explore). Black
people, therefore, experience double social jeopardy –
effects of implicit racism of White people and damaging
effects of the internalised stereotypes. These phenomena
contribute to the continuation of Black poverty, which
reinforce stereotypes concerning Black people. It can also
be hypothesised that biased media portrayal of Black people
as poor and dependent on welfare further magnifies this

2905

effect. This means that the media and other organisations,
e.g. charities which advertise fundraising campaigns for
people in Africa, should be made aware of the negative
effects that this continuing bias has. Due to holding social
responsibility, the media articles or advertisement should
present a balanced and accurate picture of reality. Issues
concerning the relationship between socio-cultural
stereotypes, group dynamics, socio-economic power,
ethnicity, and cognitive function are complex, multifacetted, and inter-dependent. They relate to very real
problems in society, and further studies are warranted to
explore these delicate aspects, how they function, and how
they relate to one another in much more detail.

Author contributions
D. L. Pilucik developed the idea of the study, rationale and
method, conducted data collection and analysis and wrote
manuscript draft. J. K. Madsen provided support with
developing the study, critical revision, finalised the
manuscript, and prepared it for submission. Both authors
approved the final version of the manuscript for submission.

Acknowledgements
The authors of the study wishes to express their gratitude to
Amy Krosch and Christopher Rodeheffer for supplying the
stimuli materials (see Krosch & Amodio, 2014; Rodeheffer
et al., 2012).

References
Bargh, J., A., Chen, M., & Burrows, L. (1996).
Automaticity of Social Behaviour. Direct Effects of
Trait Construct and Stereotype Activation on
Action. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 71(2), 230-244.
Cook, F. L., & Barrett, E. J. (1992). Social Welfare Policy
in America: The 1980s as a Crossroads Support for
the American Welfare State. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Correll, J., Park, B., Judd, C.M., & Wittenbrink, B. (2002).
The police officer’s dilemma: Using race to
disambiguate potentially threatening individuals.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83,
1314-1329.
Davis, F. J. (1991). Who is Black? One Nation’s Definition.
University Park: Pennsylvania State University
Press.
Gilens, M. (1999). Why Americans Hate Welfare: Race,
Poverty, and the Politics of Antipoverty Policy.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gilens, M. (2003). How the Poor Became Black. Race and
the politics of welfare reform. Michigan: The
University of Michigan Press.
Iyengar, S. (1991). Is Anyone Responsible? How Television
Frames Political Issues. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Krosch, A. R., & Amodio, D. M. (2014). Economic scarcity
alters the perception of race. Proceedings of The
National Academy of Science, 111(25), 9079-9084.
MacLin, O. H., & Malpass, R. S. (2001). Racial
categorization of faces. The ambiguous race face
effect. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 7(1),
98-118.
Paolacci, G., Chandler, J., & Ipeirotis, P. G. (2010) Running
experiments on Amazon Mechanical Turk,
Judgement and Decision Making 5, 411–419
Payne, B. K. (2006). Weapon bias. Split-second decisions
and unintended stereotyping. Current Directions in
Psychological Science. 15(6), 287-291.
Peery, D., & Bodenhausen, G. V. (2008). Black + White =
Black: Hypodescent in reflexive categorization of
racially ambiguous faces. Psychological Science,
19, 973-977.
Powell, M., & Ansic, D. (1997). Gender differences in risk
behaviour in financial decision-making: An
experimental analysis. Journal of Economic
Psychology, 18(6), 605-628.
Rodeheffer, C. D., Hill, S. E., & Lord, C. G. (2012). Does
this recession make me look Black? The effect of
resource scarcity on the categorization of biracial
faces. Psychological Science, 23(12), 1476-1478.
Rudman, L. A., & Phelan, J. E. (2010). The effect of
priming gender roles on women’s implicit gender
beliefs and career aspirations. Social Psychology,
41(3), 192.
Schubert, R., Brown, M., Gysler, M., & Brachinger, H. W.
(1999). Financial decision-making: are women
really more risk-averse? American Economic
Review, 89(2) 381-385.
Smith, T. W. (1987). That which we call welfare by any
other name would smell sweeter. An analysis of the
impact of question wording on response patterns.
Public Opinion Quarterly, 51(1), 75-83.
Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes
shape intellectual identity and performance.
American Psychologist, 52(6), 613–629.
Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995). Stereotype threat and
the intellectual test performance of African
Americans. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 69(5), 797–811.
Steen, L. A. (1987). Mathematics education: A predictor of
scientific competitiveness. Science, 237(4812),
251–302.
Walton, G. M., Cohen, G. L. (2003). Stereotype lift. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 39(5), 456–467.

2906

