The Role of Schema-Governed Relational Categories in Analogical Inference
Ricardo A. Minervino (minervinora@gmail.com)
IPEHCS-CONICET-UNCo, Av. Argentina 1400, 8300 Neuquén
Department of Psychology, University of Comahue.

Adrián Margni (adrianmargni@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, University of Comahue,
Irigoyen 2000, 8324 Cipolletti.

Máximo Trench (maximo.trench@crub.uncoma.edu.ar)
Department of Psychology, University of Comahue,
IPEHCS-CONICET-UNCo, Quintral 1250, 8400 Bariloche.
Abstract
The standard approach posits that analogical inferences are
generated by copying unmapped base relations, substituting
base entities by their corresponding target ones, and generating
slots for unmapped base entities. Contra this account, results
from Experiment 1 revealed that analogical inferences seldom
include relations that resemble the base relation from which
they were derived. Most of the inferences, however, could be
categorized as exemplars of a schema-governed category
capable of characterizing the base information to be projected.
To gather further precision about the criteria that guide inference
generation, in Experiment 2 we showed that analogical
inferences tend to match the base information from which they
are derived in values of salient dimensions of the relational
category to which they belonged. Our results suggest that the
relational constructs employed in modeling analogical inference
should move beyond one-term multiplace predicates so as to
include more complex relational structures.
Keywords: analogy; inference; relational category.

Introduction
Analogical thinking is a central mechanism in human
cognition (Gentner, 2003; Hofstadter & FARG, 1995; Holyoak
& Thagard, 1995), playing an important role in activities as
diverse as categorization, problem solving, scientific discovery,
decision making, and argumentation (Gentner, Holyoak, &
Kokinov, 2001). In all these activities, analogy involves
establishing a mapping between the compared situations and
transferring new knowledge from a more familiar situation
(base analog) to a less familiar one (target analog).
Almost all current theories of analogy agree that the
alignment that takes place during mapping should satisfy the
constraints of one-to-one mapping and parallel connectivity,
(e.g., Falkenhainer, Forbus, & Gentner, 1989; Gentner, 1989,
Holyoak & Thagard, 1989; Hummel & Holyoak, 1997). While
one-to-one mapping requires that each element in one situation
maps to at most one element in the other situation, parallel
connectivity entails that if two predicates are matched, their
arguments must be placed in correspondence according to
their roles. The following analogy illustrates these constraints:
Base analog: John loved Mary and this made John
give Mary a perfume
Target analog: Peter loved Susan

While one-to-one mapping implies that pairing John with
Peter should prevent pairing John with Susan, parallel
connectivity dictates that if love has been paired with want,
John must be placed in correspondence with Peter and Mary
with Susan, as agents and patients, respectively, of the
previous matched relations.
Theories of analogy also agree in that base assertions that
are connected to the collection of mapped elements but which
do not have a counterpart in the target will be brought over as
candidate inferences. To formulate these inferences, the
cognitive system would apply some variant of a copy with
substitution and generation mechanism (CWSG; e.g.,
Falkenhainer et al., 1989; Holyoak, Novick, & Melz, 1994;
Hummel & Holyoak, 2003). In our example, after projecting
the base higher order relation cause to the target, the
cognitive system would generate and transfer a “template”
proposition like “Peter [give or a similar action1] Susan
[something like a perfume]" into the target. This template
proposition is generated from “John gave Mary a perfume”,
via copying give, substituting John by Peter and Mary by
Susan (matched during mapping), and generating a slot for
the entity perfume.

1

The structure-mapping theory and the multiconstraint theory
postulate that the new hypothetical entities should be capable of
filling the role played by their corresponding base objects, but they
do not give further specifications about how to identify these
entities in the target domain (see, e.g., Falkenhainter et al., 1989;
Holyoak et al., 1994). With respect to the transferred relations, the
structure-mapping theory (see, e.g., Falkenhainer et al., 1989)
maintains that a generated relation in the target will be assumed to
be identical to the corresponding source predicate. However, to the
extent that this theory has always treated identicality as a “tiered”
condition (Forbus, Ferguson, Lovett, & Gentner, in press), we
suppose the theory would admit inferences that include nonidentical relations as long as they can be regarded as identical at a
higher level of abstraction. The multiconstraint theory adheres to
the “copy of relations” postulate, but it treats it as a default rule
that is adequate for initial explorations in the target (see, e.g.,
Holyoak et al., 1994). Under these considerations, we assume that
CWSG involves either copying the base relations or replacing
them by similar ones.

2735

Supporting the postulations of the dominant theories of
inference generation, there is some evidence that people tend
to apply the syntactic constraints of one-to-one mapping (i.e.,
previous correspondences will dictate substitutions in CWSG)
and systematicity (i.e., people are more likely to import an
inference from base to target when the fact is causally
connected to other matching facts) (e.g., Clement & Gentner,
1991; Gentner, Ratterman, & Forbus, 1993; Markman, 1997).
There is also evidence that people tend to apply pragmatic
criteria to derive their inferences (Spellman & Holyoak,
1996). The application of these principles would be in the
service of guaranteeing some minimal initial plausibility and
relevance for the generated inferences (see, e.g., Holyoak et
al., 1994).
As a pattern-completion process that takes maximal
advantage of the mapping process, CWSG can be regarded as
fast and computationally inexpensive. As most theories agree,
analogical inference mechanisms should not be required to
provide an adequate content to the produced inferences,
something that should allegedly rely on post-inference stages
of analogical reasoning such as evaluation and adaptation
(Holyoak et al., 1994). The question arises as to whether the
information conveyed by the templates obtained via CWSG
can adequately guide post-inference generation processes in
filling them in a semantically appropriate way.
In our example, if we repeat give, there is some probability
of generating semantically appropriate inferences from the
template “Peter gave [something like a perfume] to Susan"
simply by replacing perfume by another exemplar of toiletry.
However, while substituting perfume with spa set gives rise
to a somewhat adequate inference, substituting perfume with
deodorant would be inappropriate. It seems that combining
give with an exemplar of toiletry will be adequate only if it gives
rise to an instance of say, “manifestations of love”. In this sense,
the strategy of repeating the base relation and searching for a
new exemplar of the base entity categories seems insufficient
to guarantee some minimal semantic appropriateness of
analogical inferences, to the extent that it requires some kind
of “semantic supervision” from more complex category
structures that the analogizer should keep in mind during the
process. Combining substitutes (similar relations) of the
relation give with substitutes of the entity perfume so as to
obtain cases of “manifestations of love” would require even
more thoughtful control. Just to exemplify, if we replace give
by lend, no toiletry seems appropriate to generate a
demonstration of love, although we can generate an exemplar
of this category via replacing perfume by “his new car” or by
“his weekend house at the beach”.
The second problem with the CWSG strategy is that it can
lead to inconvenient fixations, since many combinations of
non similar verbs and objects could result in manifestations of
love: write her a poem, prepare her favorite meal, or pick
some wildflowers. Searching for cases of manifestations of
love without the semantic restrictions imposed by the
mechanism of CWSG seems to be a more flexible and
productive strategy.

Based on the above considerations, we propose an
alternative to CWSG which consists in categorizing the base
analog information from which the inference will be derived
as an exemplar of a schema-governed relational category
(SGC), and searching for new exemplars for this category.
Members of SGCs such as murder share a structure that can
be instantiated by very different exemplars (Gentner &
Kurtz, 2005; Goldwater, Markman, & Stilwell, 2011;
Markman & Stilwell, 2001), such as "Fred thrust a knife
into Gina’s heart", "Mary had Bob drink poison", or "The
offender disconnected the patient’s oxygen supply". When
the situations in an analogical comparison are exemplars of
a SGC, the similarity between the relations and entities of
the compared events is no longer necessary to have a good
analogy (Minervino, Oberholzer, & Trench, 2013). The
analogical relatedness between "John gave Mary a perfume”
and “Peter wrote Susan a poem” is not based on semantic
resemblances between give and write or perfume and poem,
but rather on the fact that both acts represent exemplars of
the SGC “manifestation of love”. In this sense, the
limitation of CWSG seems to stem from treating analogical
inference as an element-by-element pattern replacement
guided by isolated similarities, and from not considering the
broader meaning of the facts described by propositions.
When this broader meaning is taken into account, the
cognitive system can do away with element-to-element
similarities.
With the aim of determining which of these alternative
mechanisms constitutes a better account of how analogical
inferences are generated, one of the conditions of Experiment 1
served to document the extent to which analogical inferences
produced by participants involve relations that are similar to
those of the base analog (as posited by dominant theories),
as well as the extent to which they involve facts that pertain
to the same schema-governed category as the base effect.
In order to confirm that participants' inferences took into
account the analogical relation between the target and the
source—as opposed to representing plausible consequences
of the target analog considered in isolation—, the inferences
generated by the abovementioned group were contrasted to
the inferences produced by a second group of participants who
had to propose likely consequences of the target situations,
but without having previously received an analogous source.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants and Design Fifty students of psychology at
the University of Comahue (mean age = 22.86 years, SD =
3.42 volunteered to participate in the experiment. They were
randomly assigned in equal number to the analogy and the
target-only groups. The dependent variables were (1) the
similarity between the relation of the base effect and that of
the inferred situation, and (2) whether or not the inferred
situation belonged to the same SCG as the base effect on
which it was inspired.

2736

Materials Ten sets of stimuli were built, each one
comprising a base and a target analog. The base analog
consisted of a base cause that engenders a base effect. The
base causes consisted in three-place predicates in which an
agent exerts an action over an object, and directed to a
patient. The base effects were predicates in which the
former patient exerted another action to another object, but
which is directed to the former agent. Participants were
tasked with generating a consequence of the target cause that
they deemed analogous to that of the base analog. Table 1
displays a sample of the experimental materials.
Table 1: Sample of experimental materials, Experiment 1
Set # Category

Situation

1

BC: An old man left the door of his
kitchen open to his two-year old
grandson

Danger

BE: The grandson ingested the old
man's medicines
TC: Another old man left the door of
his kitchen open to his two-year old
grandson
4

Public
welfare

BC: Latvian's low-income population
held a manifestation against the
government
BE: The government sent food to the
low-income population b
TC: Another low-income population
held a manifestation against the
government

8

Promotion BC: A student questioned the theory
of critical to his professor
thinking
BE: The professor raised the
student's grade
TC: Another student questioned the
theory to his professor

Note. BC: Base Cause; BE: Base Effect; TC: Target Cause.
Procedure Participants in the analogy condition received a
brief written explanation about the potential of analogical
comparisons to infer new information about a target situation.
The instructions presented the main activity as one in which
they were going to receive a first situation comprising a
cause and its associated effect, followed by a second
situation for which they had to proposed an effect that could
be considered analogous to that of the original fact.
Participants of the target-only group received a brief written
explanation about how people hypothesize effects for

certain facts. The instructions presented the main activity as
one in which participants were going to receive a simple
situation, with the task of proposing a likely effect.
Participants received the stimuli in random order. The
experimental stimuli were presented on a computer screen,
with participants typing their answers within prespecified
fields. The administration took place in groups ranging from
two to five participants, with each participant working
individually. Participants were allotted a maximum of 30
min to complete the trials at their own pace.
Coding Each of the inferences proposed by participants was
analyzed along two key dimensions: (1) the extent to which
the action included in an inference was semantically similar
to that of the base effect of the corresponding set of
materials—a central prediction of the CWSG approach—,
and (2) whether o not the inferred fact and its corresponding
base effect belonged to the same schema-governed category.
To carry out the first analysis, two judges unfamiliar with
the purpose of the study received a ten-page table in which
the verbs of the critical base effects (one from each set of
materials) were matched against the verbs of all the
inferences generated by participants for that particular set.
Judges were asked to rate the similarity of the verb-pairs
using a 5-point scale (1 = highly dissimilar; 5 = highly
similar). They worked independently of one other, and the
scores given by the two judges to each of the verb-pairs
were averaged. Judges' scores were found to be reasonably
reliable, Cronbach's α = .797. While verbs yielding an
average score of three or more were classified as "similar",
those obtaining an average score of less than three were
sorted as "dissimilar". In order to perform the second
analysis, two additional judges received each of the
inferences proposed by participants preceded by its
corresponding target cause and followed by a list of four
words or brief descriptors representing SGCs, with the
instruction to draw a mark next to any of the descriptions
that could be used to categorize the target effect (they could
mark as many as they wanted, or leave all of them
unchecked in case they considered that none of them
applied). For all inferences corresponding to a given set of
materials, the list of event categories comprised two SGCs
that corresponded to the base effect and two SGCs that did
not correspond to the base effect, all presented in random
order. For example, for Set 1 (see Table 1), one of the
participants generated the inference "The grandson played
with the stove". In order to determine whether this inference
could be encompassed by the same SGC as the base analog
in which it was inspired, judges received the target cause
plus the inference at stake, coupled with the following event
descriptions: (1) revenge, (2) dangerous situation (3)
jealousy reaction, and (4) risky situation. Inferences were
scored as sharing a SGC with the base effect in all those
cases where the two judges checked at least one of the two
“correct” event descriptors (danger and/or risk), regardless
of whether they agreed on which of the correct descriptors
was checked.

2737

Results and Discussion
The verbs of the inferences generated by participants of
the analogy group resembled those of their corresponding
base effect in 31.6% of the cases. It should be noted,
however, that 12.7% of the inferences generated in response
to the target analog alone (i.e., those of the target-only group)
involved verbs that resembled those of the base effect received
by participants of the analogy group. More fine-grained
analyses using chi-square statistics revealed that the rate of
utilization of similar verbs by the analogy group differed from
the rate of spontaneous utilization of those same verbs by the
target-only group in 4 of the 10 sets of materials (see Table 1).
With regards to SGC similarity, judges' analyses showed
that while the inferences generated by the analogy group
involved the SGC of the base effect in 88% of the cases, the
inferences produced in response to the target analog alone
belonged to these same categories in 34.4% of the cases.
Chi- square tests revealed that for all 10 sets of materials the
probability of generating an inference that pertains to the
SGC of the base effect by participants of the analogy group
was higher than the proportion of inferences pertaining to
those same SGCs within the target-only condition (See
Table 1).
The low proportion of semantically similar relations among
the inferences produced by the analogy group suggests that
the mechanism of postulating target relations that resemble
their counterparts in the base analog, as dictated by CWSG,
cannot adequately account for how analogical inferences are
derived. In contrast, the fact that the vast majority of the
inferences belonged to the same SGC as the causal consequent
of the base analog suggests that the dominant mechanism
involved in the generation of analogical inferences consists
in analyzing the SGCs to which the base effect belongs, and
generating further exemplars of such categories.

Set Analogy Target-only
# . condition condition

Same relational category
χ2

Analogy
condition

Target-only
condition

χ2

17.01**

1

32% (8) 16% (4)

1.75

92% (23)

36% (9)

2

36% (9) 12% (3)

3.95*

88% (22)

40% (10) 12.5**

3

32% (8)

4.5*

84% (21)

52% (13) 5.88*

4

28% (7) 12% (3)

2

88% (22)

12% (3)

28.88**

5

20% (5) 12% (3)

0.6

84% (21)

24% (6)

18.12**

6

32% (8) 36% (9)

0.09

92% (23)

20% (5)

26.3**

7

16% (4) 36% (9)

2.6

88% (22)

56% (14) 6.35*

8

44% (11) 0% (0)

14.1*

88% (22)

36% (9)

14.35**

9

44% (11) 4% (1)

10.96*

96% (24)

32% (8)

22.22**

0.09

80% (20)

28% (7)

13.61**

8% (2)

10 32% (8) 36% (9)

Note. *Significant at α = .05; **Significant at α = .01

.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants Twenty-four students of psychology at the
University of Comahue (mean age = 21.1 years, SD = 3.36)
volunteered to participate in the study.

Table 2. Percentages of inferences exhibiting verb and
relational category similarity with the base analog
Similar relations

Having documented that the majority of inferences were
exemplars of a relational category that was readily applicable
to the base analog effect, a sensible research question
concerned whether inclusion to such relational category
suffices as a criterion for generating analogical inferences.
As suggested by data obtained by Minervino et al. (2013), a
factor that seems to influence the perception of analogical
resemblance between exemplars of a SGC has to do with
whether the target situation matches the base situation along
the most salient dimensions of the relational category to which
they belong. Taking the category robbery as an example, the
analogability of two exemplars depends on whether they match
in central dimensions such its importance, violence or planning.
Experiment 2 was aimed at determining whether the observed
sensitivity to this constraint generalizes to analogical inference.
As in Experiment 1, participants received a base analog
comprising two causally related situations, followed by the
presentation of a target situation that was virtually identical
to the causal consequent of the base analog and by the task
of completing the target situation with a consequence that
they deemed analogous to that of the base. The main
difference with Experiment 1, however, was that the
exemplars of SGCs that were employed as the effects of the
base situations were chosen to instantiate either a high or a
low value along a central dimension of the relational
category to which they belonged. The purpose of the
experiment was to assess the extent to which the exemplars
of SGCs included in participants' inferences matched the
consequent of the base situation in terms of its values along
the manipulated dimension.

Materials and Procedure Ten new sets of materials were
built. The sets had the same general structure as those of
Experiment 1, with the main difference being that for each
base cause we derived two possible base consequences
instead of one. These two consequences belonged to the
same SGC, but differed from each other in that they scored
differently along a central dimension of such category. As
an example, the base cause A paleontologist brought fossils
to the Trelew Museum was followed either by the base effect
The museum commissioned a statue of the paleontologist
(an instance of reward with a high value in the dimension
"magnitude") or by The museum issued a diploma to the
paleontologist (low value in the dimension "magnitude").
Table 3 displays a sample of the experimental materials.
To ensure that participants encoded the base consequences
as members of the SGC whose critical dimension was being
manipulated, participants were explicitly informed about the
specific category to which the base consequence belonged
(see Table 3).

2738

Table 3: Sample of experimental materials, Experiment 2
Set Category

Base and target situations

1

REWARD

BC: A paleontologist brought fossils to the
Trelew Museum
BEhv: The Museum commissioned a
statue of the paleontologist
BElv: The Museum issued a diploma to
the paleontologist
TC: Another paleontologist brought
important fossils to the Rawson Museum

2

ROBBERY

BC: The old lady trusted her house's keys
to her nanny
BEhv: The nanny sold the old lady's
jewelry
BElv: The nanny took a book from the old
lady's house
TC: Another old lady trusted her house's
keys to her nanny

5

CONTRIBUTION

These results demonstrate that the way in which the base
effect fares along a critical dimension of the SGC to which
it belongs constrains the way analogical inferences will fare
along such dimension. In order to gather a subtler estimate
of the strength of this association, judges were also required
to score the base effects along the manipulated dimensions.
The correlation between the scores assigned to the base
effects and those of their associated inferences was strong, r
= .476, n = 260, p < .001. Furthermore, in 71.54% of the
cases the scores of the generated inferences along the
manipulated dimension were no farther than one point away
from those of the base analogs on which they were inspired.

General Discussion

BC: A young man was invited to a
barbecue by his friends
BEhv: He volunteered to pay the meat to his
friends
BElv: He volunteered to bring matches to his
friends
TC: Another young man was invited to a
barbecue by his friends

Note. BC: Base Cause; BEhv: Base effect with high values
on a key dimension of the relational category; BElv: Base effect
with low values on such dimension; TC: Target Cause.
Two complementary booklets of materials were built. In each
version half of the sets were coupled with consequences
instantiating low values along the manipulated dimension of
the SGC to which they belonged, and half with consequences
embodying high values along such dimensions. The
procedure was identical to that on Experiment 1.
Coding Two new judges received each of the inferences
generated by participants coupled with the critical dimension
that corresponded to that set of materials. They were asked
to rate how it fared along such dimension using a 5-point
scale ranging from the minimum to the maximum possible
levels along the manipulated dimension (e.g., for the reward
example, they had to rate the magnitude of the reward from
1 = very small, to 5 = huge). The scores given by the two
judges to each of the inferences were averaged. Judges'
scores were found to be reliable, Cronbach' α = .823.

Results and Discussion
The inferences generated out of base facts ranking high
along the manipulated dimensions obtained higher scores
than those generated out of base facts displaying lower levels
along that dimension (M = 3.18, SD = 0.40 vs. M = 2.18, SD =
0.36, t(25) = -10.05, p < .001.

A key prediction of the CWSG approach to analogical
inference consists in that people will tend to construct their
inferences repeating the base relations from which the
inferences will be derived or replacing them by similar ones.
Against this position, Experiment 1 showed that people do not
care much about preserving similarity to base relations but
instead focus on generating new exemplars of the SGC applied
to the base information from which inferences are derived. In
Experiment 2 we collected data favoring a further hypothesis
associated to our category-based perspective, namely, that
when proposing new exemplars of SGCs people tend to
generate cases that fare closer to the base exemplar along
critical dimensions of the category to which they pertain.
We have argued that the templates generated by CWSG
could sometimes be insufficient to guide the analogizer in
generating semantically sensible inferences during the post
inference stages of evaluation and adaptation. Returning to
the example presented in the Introduction, the chances of
generating semantically appropriate inference from the
template “Peter [give or a similar action] Susan [something
like a perfume] seems rather low. We speculated that while
some toiletries could perhaps result in a sensible inference,
others do not, and that post-inference generation mechanisms
have no semantic basis to distinguish between them.
The standard approach to analogical inference generation
could argue that “something like a perfume” should not be
interpreted as “an exemplar of toiletry”, and that this
interpretation is to some extent caricaturizing CWSG, since
an intelligent system operating in an analogical mode will not
be guided by superficial similarities such as membership to a
same category, but would rather interpret it as, say, “give +
things that a woman finds romantic”. In this sense, the system
would promote the search for new exemplars of this ad hoc
category (e.g., a teddy, necklace or a bouquet). The problem
with this argument is that the very consideration of this ad hoc
category supposes the prior conceptualization of the template
as a "manifestation of love", something that the analogical
machinery has not generated. It is possible that the generalized
support that the CWSG approach has received comes in part
from the fact that programmers inadvertently read far more
understanding than is warranted into the templates produced by
this mechanism, as an effect of projecting the SGC that they
apply to capture the whole meaning of the template.

2739

The standard approach could also argue that the analogical
machinery was not meant to deal with the activity of
comprehending the analogs, but rather to start operating
once the analogs have been fully comprehended (see, e.g.,
Morrison & Dietrich, 1995). In this vein, the analogical
engine would receive the fact that John gave Mary a
perfume already interpreted as a case of “carrying out a very
romantic manifestation of love” (i.e., as a case of this
category, and with some specific properties). A problem with
this argument is that this conceptualization cannot be
captured by a relation—defined as one-term multiplace
predicates. The execution of a very romantic demonstration of
love would be propositionally represented, stricto sensu, as
CARRY OUT [John, ((VERY) ROMANTIC (manifestation
of love)), Mary]. The essential information to be transferred
is located in an argument represented as a noun (manifestation
of love) and its property (VERY ROMANTIC), and not in
the one-term predicate outside the brackets (CARRY OUT).
We are far from calling into question the importance of
relational aspects in analogical thinking, but we believe it is
necessary to discuss and amplify the meaning of “relational”,
so as to avoid reducing it to one-term multiplace predicates.
It should be broadened to include, for example, relational
structures as those captured by SGCs. In these structures,
relations are only a constituent, being other thematic roles
(e.g., agents, patients, objects or instruments) just as important.
For example, if an instance of the category “manifestation of
love” includes the relation give, the agent's intention should be
to awake certain emotions in a person, the patient has to be a
candidate for being emotionally affected by the agent at
stake, and the object should be pleasant to the patient.
The complex interdependency of the constituents of a fact
that make it pertain to a SGC makes it proper to talk about
these categories as “relational” structures, but the sense of
the term is broader than the one employed in computational
models of analogy (i.e., a one-term multiplace predicate).
The relational character of these categories is also evident in
the extremely different situations that can constitute
exemplars of a SGC, which could differ even in their
relations defined in the traditional way.

Acknowledgments
We thank Micah Goldwater for suggesting how to operationalize
whether participants' inferences belonged to the SCG of the source.
This work was supported by the National Agency for Scientific
and Technical Research (ANPCyT) under Grants PICT 2352 and
PICT 2650, by the University of Comahue under Grants B213,
C123 and C134, and by the National Council for Scientific
and Technical Research (CONICET) under Grant PIP 0567.

References
Clement, C. A., & Gentner, D. (1991). Systematicity as a
selection constraint in analogical mapping. Cognitive
Science, 15, 89-132.
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1989). The
structure-mapping engine: Algorithm and examples.
Artificial Intelligence, 41, 1-63.

Forbus, K. D., Ferguson, R. W., Lovett, A., & Gentner, D.
(in press). Extending SME to handle large-scale cognitive
modeling. Cognitive Science.
Gentner, D. (1989). The mechanisms of analogical transfer.
In S. Vosniadou, & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and
Analogical Reasoning. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Gentner, D. (2003). Why we are so smart. In D. Gentner, &
S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in mind: Advances
in the study of language and thought. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Gentner, D., & Kurtz, K. J. (2005). Learning and using
relational categories. In W. K. Ahn, R. L. Goldstone, B.
C. Love, A. B. Markman, & P. W. Wolff (Eds.),
Categorization Inside and Outside the Laboratory (Vol.
43). Washington, DC: APA.
Gentner, D., Holyoak, K. J., & Kokinov, B. N. (Eds.)
(2001). The analogical mind: Perspectives from cognitive
science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M. J., & Forbus, K. D. (1993).
The roles of similarity in transfer: Separating
retrievability from inferential soundness. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 431-467.
Goldwater, M. B., Markman, A. B, & Stilwell, C. H. (2011).
The empirical case for role-governed categories.
Cognition, 118, 359-376.
Hofstadter D. R., & the Fluid Analogies Research Group
(1995). Fluid concepts and creative analogies: Computer
models of the fundamental mechanisms of thought. New
York: Basic Books.
Holyoak, K. J., Novick, L. R., & Melz, E. R. (1994).
Component processes in analogical transfer: Mapping,
pattern completion, and adaptation. In K. J. Holyoak, & J.
A. Barnden (Eds.), Advances in connectionist and neural
computation theory (Vol. 2). Norwood, N.J.: Ablex.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. R. (1989). Analogical mapping
by constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13, 295-355.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. R. (1995). Mental leaps:
Analogy in creative thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: A theory of analogical access
and mapping. Psychological Review, 104, 427-466.
Markman, A. B. (1997). Constraints on analogical
inference. Cognitive Science, 21, 373-418.
Markman, A., & Stilwell, C. (2001). Role-governed
categories. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical
Artificial Intelligence, 4, 329–358.
Minervino, R., Oberholzer, N., & Trench, M. (2013).
Overall similarity overrides element similarity when
evaluating the quality of analogies. Journal of Cognitive
Science, 14, 287-317.
Morrison, C., & Dietrich, E. (1995). Structure-mapping vs.
High-level perception: The mistaken fight over the
explanation of analogy. In J. D. Moore and J. Fain
Lehman (Eds.), Proceedings of the Seventeenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 678682). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

2740

