The Development of Structural Thinking about Social Categories
Nadya Vasilyeva (vasilyeva@berkeley.edu),
Alison Gopnik (gopnik@berkeley.edu), Tania Lombrozo (lombrozo@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, 3210 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

Abstract
Representations of social categories help us make sense of the
social world, supporting predictions and explanations about
groups and individuals. Here we explore whether children and
adults are able to understanding category-property associations
in structural terms, locating an object of explanation within a
larger structure and identifying structural constraints that act
on elements of the structure. We show that children as young
3-4 years of age show signs of structural thinking, but that this
capacity does not fully develop until after 7 years of age. These
findings introduce a viable alternative to internalist accounts of
social categories, such as psychological essentialism.
Keywords: structural explanation, structural factors, social
categories, essentialism, category representation

Imagine that a school introduces a dress code stating that
all items of a student’s clothing must match in color. When
school begins, most boys show up wearing blue, and most
girls show up wearing pink. What explains the correlation
between gender and color? One explanation is that boys
naturally prefer blue, and girls pink. But a quick glance at
history shows that in the 19th century, pink was considered
the vigorous, masculine color, whereas girls wore “delicate
and dainty” blue (Fausto-Sterling, 2012). If an explanation
that appeals to intrinsic preferences is inadequate, an
alternative might be to appeal to a structural feature of the
environment: department stores reliably stock more pink
options for girls than for boys. In this case, availability could
be a sufficient explanation for the observed correlation.
This example illustrates what we call “structural thinking.”
A hallmark of structural thinking is locating an object of
explanation within a larger structure and identifying
structural constraints that act on components of the structure
to shape the distribution of outcomes for each component. In
our example, girls occupy a position within larger social and
institutional structures that make them more likely than boys
to choose pink over blue. A structural approach to social
categories differs from internalist approaches, which focus
on essential or inherent properties of the category itself. In
the current paper, we ask whether and when children develop
the ability to think about social categories in structural terms.
Internalist approaches to category representation. One
prominent approach to theorizing about the representation of
social categories (such as “girl”) is based on the notion of
psychological essentialism, which refers to the tendency to
represent (some) categories in terms of an underlying essence
that is constitutive of category membership and/or causally
responsible for key category features (Gelman, 2003).
Psychological
essentialism
can
support
efficient
generalizations about natural kinds, but can also lead to
unwarranted normative expectations about categories,
stereotypical generalizations, and prejudice (Leslie, 2015).

1266

A related internalist approach comes from Cimpian and
Salomon (2014), who argue for the inherence heuristic,
defined as the tendency to explain observed patterns in terms
of the inherent properties of the objects that instantiate them.
If girls wear pink, people might infer that it must be due to
something inherent about pink (“it is delicate”) and/or girls
(“they are attracted to delicate colors”), rather than
considering a broader range of external, historical factors.
Cimpian and Salomon argue that the inherence heuristic is
distinct from, but potentially a precursor to, essentialized
representations of social categories.
A final approach, the aspect hypothesis, comes from
Prasada and Dilllingham (2006, 2009), who offer a nonessentialist account of categorical representation. On this
view, some features of a category are viewed as aspects of
the kind. For example, “fighting crime” is an aspect of being
a police officer (in contrast to merely statistical associations,
such as between police officers and “eating donuts”).
While psychological essentialism, the inherence heuristic,
and the aspect hypothesis are importantly distinct in their
commitments regarding categorical representations, they all
support internalist explanations for associations between a
category and a feature (e.g., “she chose pink because girls
like warm colors”), as well as formal explanations that appeal
to category membership (e.g., “she chose pink because she is
a girl”). By contrast, they lack mechanisms for differentiating
kinds (i.e., “girls”) from the structures in which they are
embedded (i.e., the social position occupied by girls). As a
result, they cannot readily accommodate the kind of
structural thinking supported by a structural approach.
A structural approach to category representation. Our
study explores an alternative to internalist accounts.
According to a structural view of categorical representation,
reliable connections between properties and categories can be
represented as a consequence of stable structural constraints
acting on categories from the outside.
This approach is based on the notion of structural
explanation developed in philosophy of social sciences,
where it is defined by situating the object of explanation in a
network of relationships within a larger, organized whole (a
structure), and identifying how relationships to other parts of
the whole modify the probability distribution over possible
states of the part whose behavior is explained (relative to a
hypothetical case outside a structure, relative to other nodes
within the structure, or relative to different structures;
Haslanger, 2015). For example, an internalist explanation for
why many women in heterosexual relationships leave their
jobs after having a child might appeal to women’s priorities
or abilities, whereas a structural explanation would identify
constraints that affect women in virtue of their position
within the social structure (e.g., lack of paid parental leave, a

gender wage gap, etc.). These structural constraints shift the
probability distribution across different outcomes for women
versus men. For another position subjected to different
structural constraints (e.g., “men,” “women in a different
culture”), the same event (having a child) need not trigger the
same outcomes. Rather than pinpoint triggering causes (e.g.,
the baby’s arrival), structural explanations identify
constraints that shape the causal relationships between
triggering causes and their effects (Dretske, 1988).
The structural view capitalizes on the distinction between
nodes (positions within social structures) and node-occupiers
(categories that occupy those positions, and come to possess
particular properties by virtue of their location within the
structure; Haslanger, 2015). This distinction brings to light a
potential ambiguity in formal explanations (e.g. “Smith quit
her job after having a baby because she is a woman”), given
that the term “woman” can refer to either the node or the
node-occupier. Such explanations could attribute properties
directly to the node (i.e., women’s location in a structure),
without necessarily tying them to its inherent nature (i.e., to
women themselves). In other words, a formal explanation
could support both structural and internalist interpretations, a
prediction that our experiments test.
Structural vs. other externalist approaches. One way to
appreciate what constitutes a structural explanation is to
consider what it is not. Structural explanations are not merely
“situation” explanations from the traditional person-situation
dichotomy (Ross & Nisbett, 2011), nor “causal history of
reasons” explanations from Malle’s (2004) taxonomy, which
are narrower in their restriction to intentional behavior, yet
broader in allowing for non-structural antecedents to reasons.
Structural explanations are a sub-type of externalist
explanations that invoke stable constraints acting on a
category in virtue of its position in a structure.
It’s useful to think of structural explanations in terms of the
ANOVA or “cube model” (Kelley, 1973), in which a
behavior is attributed to co-varying factors (person, situation,
or stimulus). However, the cube model assumes that the data
(behaviors) come from an “unconfounded” factorial design,
where person and external factors vary independently.
Structural thinking is instead sensitive to confounds between
people and situations; within a social structure, categories are
often constrained by their nodes. The category “women” can
only occupy the “women” node, which constrains the range
of properties the occupier can display.
The notion of a confound between a category and its social
location also helps to position the structural view of
categories relative to role-based categories, such as guest,
which specify a role in a relational structure (Asmuth &
Gentner, 2016; Markman & Stilwell, 2001). Role-based
categories involve relational structure, but structural thinking
about social categories critically applies to cases in which a
relational position is confounded with membership in a
(perceived) taxonomic category.
Cross-cultural research on independent vs. interdependent
(object vs. field) construals (Nisbett, 2003) suggests that the
reasoning style associated with structural thinking is not as
“unnatural” as it may seem. Research on analogy (Gentner,

1267

1983; 2005) and recent work on role-based concepts
(Goldwater, Bainbridge, & Murphy, 2016) offer additional
indications that people have the representational capacities to
reason about structures. If people possess the requisite
resources for engaging in structural reasoning, the question
is: do they? And if so, when does this capacity develop?
These are the questions our study addresses.
The development of structural thinking. Our study
evaluates two competing hypotheses. Hypothesis 1 is that
young children lack the conceptual prerequisites and/or
knowledge to engage in structural thinking. Hypothesis 2 is
that young children can successfully engage in structural
thinking from an early age.
Each hypothesis receives some support from existing
research. In favor of the first hypothesis, prior work
demonstrates that children view some social categories (such
as gender) as essentialized natural kinds from an early age
(Rhodes & Gelman, 2009; Taylor, 1996), even when cultural
input suggests otherwise (Astuti et al., 2004). There is also
evidence that young children have trouble endorsing
environmental mechanisms that could produce category
features (Rhodes & Taylor, 2009), although the
“environmental factors” that were examined were primarily
non-structural in nature. Finally, as young as 4-5 years of
age, children tend to generate and endorse “inherent”
explanations of categorical patterns over “extrinsic” ones
(Cimpian & Markman, 2011; Cimpian & Steinberg, 2014).
Beyond evidence of early essentialist and inherence-based
reasoning, there is evidence that children lack capacities
involved in structural thinking. Structural explanation could
rely on structure-wide counterfactual alternatives, which do
not fully emerge until age 7-8 (Beck et al., 2006; Rafetseder,
Cristi-Vargas, & Perner, 2010). Structural reasoning also
relies on representing relations, and research on relational
reasoning suggests a developmental shift in relevant
capacities throughout and beyond the preschool years (e.g.,
Gentner, 1988; Richland, Morrison, & Holyoak, 2006).
On the other hand, there is evidence that potentially favors
Hypothesis 2. Several findings suggest that young children
appreciate external constraints on social categories. Seiver,
Gopnik, and Goodman (2013) demonstrated that children as
young as 4 can use situational information in explanation and
prediction when appropriate covariation evidence is
available. Four-year-olds also recognize moral constraints on
their own behavior (Chernyak & Kushnir, 2014) and
acknowledge that the behavior of members of a social
category can be driven by common norms (Kalish, 2011; see
also Kalish & Shiverick, 2004; Rakoczy, Warneken, &
Tomasello, 2008; Smetana, 1981; Turiel, 1983).1
1

Translating research on norms into predictions about structural
reasoning is not straightforward. First, moral norms carry deontic
content, which distinguishes them from other kinds of structural
constraints (such as a wage gap) that do not. Second, categoryspecific norms can be interpreted in either essentialist or structural
terms (e.g., if girls are not allowed to go out after 9 pm, this could
stem from inherent characteristics of girls, or structural forces).
Existing studies about norms have not made these distinctions,
complicating their interpretation with regard to structural reasoning.

A final and more intriguing possibility is that young
children may be more open to structural reasoning than older
children and adults. Rhodes and Gelman (2009) showed that
young children are more flexible than older children about
some social categories, such as race. In Seiver et al. (2013), it
was older children, not younger children, who showed an
overall bias for person over situation explanations. Moreover,
young children may be less biased by prior assumptions than
adults, and thus open to learning a broad range of causal
relationships (Lucas, Bridgers, Griffiths, & Gopnik, 2013).
This body of work suggests that relative to older children and
adults, young children could be more open to integrating
external constraints in their representations of social
categories and relying on structural relations in reasoning.

Experiment
This study had three goals: to determine whether and when
children can successfully engage in structural thinking in
explaining the association between a category and a property;
to determine whether a structural construal can be
experimentally induced; and to evaluate the prediction that
structural thinking can support formal explanations under a
structural interpretation of the category.
To address these three goals, we adopted an approach
mirroring Prasada and Dillingham (2006, 2009), who
developed a set of tasks that can be used to identify whether
people construe the connection between a feature and a
category as principled (such as between “fighting crime” and
being a police officer) or statistical (such as between “eating
donuts” and being a police officer). They showed that only
the principled connections between kinds and features
supported judgments of feature immutability (a person who
does not fight crime is not really a police officer), partial
definitions (a police officer is a person who fights crime), and
formal explanations (“this person fights crime because she is
a police officer”). With the aim of detecting structural
thinking and differentiating it from internalist thinking, we
modified these three measures (described below). Vasilyeva
and Lombrozo (in prep) found that with adults, responses
across these judgments can successfully be used as a
“profiling tool” to detect structural thinking, which generates
a unique signature: relatively high mutability ratings, low
partial definition ratings, and high formal explanation ratings.
In contrast, the pattern for an internalist construal should be
low – high – high. To further validate the profiling tool, we
additionally included an open-ended explanation prompt and
close-ended causal explanation evaluations.

Materials, Design, and Procedure Participants were first
introduced to a school where girls and boys study in separate
classrooms, and presented with fictitious data about students
playing different games during recess: girls predominantly
played Yellow-Ball while boys predominantly played GreenBall. Participants were told that the game each child played
was determined by tossing a pebble towards two buckets
standing side by side: if the pebble fell into the yellow
bucket, the child played Yellow-Ball that day, and if the
pebble fell into the green bucket, that child played GreenBall that day (Figure 1a). The critical manipulation
concerned the sizes of the buckets. In the internalist
condition, both buckets were of the same size (Figure 1b),
inviting participants to infer that the correlation between
category membership and game choice was the product of
inherent preferences (see Kushnir, Xu, & Wellman, 2010, for
evidence that even younger children can use statistical
evidence to infer a preference). In the structural condition,
one bucket was instead much larger than the other: in the
girls’ classroom the yellow bucket was larger than the green
bucket, with the reverse in the boys’ classroom (Figure 1c).
The size difference imposed a stable structural constraint on
the probability distribution over options available to members
of each category, inviting a structural interpretation of the
category-property connection.
After comprehension checks, all participants completed a
series of measures designed to differentiate an internalist
from a structural construal of the property. First, in the openended explanation task, participants were asked why girls in
the girls’ classroom play Yellow-Ball a lot at their school.
Second, participants completed a causal explanation
evaluation task and the three profiling tools measures: a
mutability judgment, a partial definition, and formal
explanation ratings.
In the causal explanation evaluation task, children
evaluated three kinds of causal explanations offered by
puppets that “sometimes say things that are smart, and
sometimes say things that are silly.” The puppets explained
that girls tend to play Yellow-Ball “because girls like playing
Yellow-Ball” (internalist); “because in the girls’ classroom,
it’s easier to throw a pebble in the yellow bucket” (structural);
or “because they got sprinkled with water” (an incidental
explanation invoking an irrelevant fact from the cover story).
Participants evaluated each explanation using a two-step, four-

Method
Participants We recruited 41 3-4-year-olds (mean age 4.3
years, range 3.0-4.9; 23 females, 18 males) and 48 5-6-yearolds (mean age 5.6 years, range 5.0-6.9; 23 females, 25
males). Additionally, 67 adults (mean age 33 years, range 1971; 33 females, 64 males) were recruited via Amazon
Mechanical Turk; participation was restricted to users with
an IP address within the US and an approval rating of at least
95% based on at least 50 previous tasks. Children were tested
in person using an illustrated storybook presented on a
laptop; adults were tested online.

1268

Figure 1: Illustrations of the procedure determining which game each
student played in the story (a) and of the different constraints on the
probability of outcomes in the internalist (b) and structural conditions (c).

point thumb scale: they first chose one of two thumbs
representing “good explanation” (up) and “bad explanation”
(down), and they then chose between two subsequent options
based on their choice: “kind of good/bad” (small thumb) or
“really good/bad” (big thumb) – a scale previously shown to
work well to measure children’s agreement with explanations
(Cimpian & Steinberg, 2014; Hussak & Cimpian, 2015).
For the mutability judgment, participants were told that
after a change in the school’s rules allowing children to
attend any classroom, Suzy’s parents transferred her to the
boys’ classroom. Participants were asked to guess which
game Suzy would play after transferring, responding on a
two-step, four-point scale ranging from “for sure YellowBall” to “for sure Green-Ball.” This mutability judgment
mirrors more familiar “switched at birth” tasks in the
essentialism literature (Gelman & Wellman, 1991), in which
children are asked, e.g., whether a cow raised by pigs will
moo or go oink. Similarly, our mutability judgment involves
a change in environment (structural constraints), and
participants are asked to infer whether a property will match
the exemplar’s category (the node occupier) or the new
environment (the node). A shift in predictions from YellowBall to Green-Ball should track the causal influence of the
node, and indicate structural thinking (as well as show that
structural positions are seen as influencing behavior, rather
than merely reflecting existing internal preferences).
For the partial definition task, participants rated whether an
alien did a good job telling what a girl is to another alien who
had never heard about girls: “A girl is a person who plays
Yellow-Ball a lot.” Participants used a two-step, four-point
scale (“really bad job” - “really good job”).
In the formal explanation task, participants met Suzy who
“plays Yellow-Ball a lot at her school” and were asked to
evaluate a formal explanation offered by a puppet - “Because
Suzy is a girl” - using the two-step, four-point thumb scale
ranging from “really bad” to “really good.”

Results and Discussion
Due to differing test formats and sample sizes, data from
children and adults were analyzed separately. For the openended explanation task (see Figure 2), participants’
explanations were coded as internalist (“maybe the girls just
like it better, so they always aim to get their pebbles into the
yellow ball bucket”), structural (“because the pebble went
into the yellow bin, because the yellow one is bigger”), or
miscellaneous, comprised of “I don’t know,” question
restatements, and unclassifiable responses (“the yellow ball is
brighter”). The distribution of explanations was affected by
condition for each age group (3-4-year-olds: χ2(N=41)=6.19,
p=.045; 5-6-year-olds: χ2(N=48)=16.80, p<.001; adults:
χ2(N=67)=42.86, p<.001). Critically, in the structural
condition some proportion of participants in each age group
produced structural explanations (Figure 2, right panel, black
bars). There was also evidence of developmental change: in
the structural condition, the percentage of internalist
explanations dropped as the percentage of structural
explanations increased, so that the overall preference for
internalist explanations in the younger age group flipped to a
preference for structural explanations for older children.

1269

Figure 2: Distribution of internalist and structural explanations
generated in response to question about why girls play Yellow-Ball,
as a function of condition and age group.

Children’s evaluations of causal explanations (see Figure 3)
were analyzed as a function of explanation type (internalist,
structural, incidental), condition (internalist, structural), and
age group (3-4, 5-6 year-olds) in a mixed ANOVA, with the
key prediction concerning an interaction between explanation
type and condition. The analysis revealed a main effect of
explanation type, F(2,170)=9.87, p<.001, ηp2=.104, which was
qualified by a significant interaction between explanation
type and condition, F(2,170)=6.00, p=.003, ηp2=.066: only
the structural explanation ratings were boosted by the
structural framing. Most importantly, we observed the target
three-way interaction: F(2,170)=3.73, p=.026, ηp2=.042,
driven by the selective effect of condition on 5-6-year-olds’
evaluations of the structural explanation: older children, but
not younger children, rated structural explanations higher in
the structural condition than in the internalist condition
(polder<.001, pyounger=.390). The interaction remained significant
when restricting the analysis to internalist and structural
explanations, p=.012. For adults, an explanation type
(essentialist, structural, incidental) by condition (essentialist,
structural) mixed ANOVA revealed a significant effect of
explanation type, F(2,126)=171.15, p<.001, ηp2=.731, and a
marginal effect of condition, F(1,63)=3.74, p=.058, ηp2=.056,
qualified by a significant interaction, F(2,126)=117.83,
p<.001, ηp2=.652: adults favored the internalist explanation
over the structural in the internalist condition, with the
reverse in the structural condition (p’s<.001, see Figure 3).
Having succeeded in finding evidence of structural thinking
in our open- and close-ended causal explanation tasks, we
next turn to the profiling tool measures to see whether they
reveal developmental differences mirroring these patterns.
For adults, who exhibited high levels of structural thinking,
we would predict the following for the structural condition
relative to the internalist condition: more frequent predictions

Figure 3: Explanation evaluation as a function of explanation type,
framing condition, and age group.

General Discussion

Figure 4: Mutability (a), partial definition (b), and formal explanation
ratings (c) as a function of framing condition and age group.

that Suzy will play Green-Ball when switched to the boys’
classroom, lower endorsement of the partial definition, and
no difference in endorsement of the formal explanation. For
children, we would predict the same patterns, with smaller
effects for the younger children. This is what we found.
For the mutability judgment task (see Figure 4a), the
predicted main effect of condition was marginal for the
youngest group, t(39)=1.96, p=.057, d=.42, but significant for
the older children, t(46)=2.29, p=.027, d=.63, and for adults,
t(65)=8.04, p<.001, d=2.00. The age by condition interaction
for children was not significant, F(1.85)<.01, p=.984, but it
appears that the property (playing Yellow-Ball for girls) was
seen as more mutable in the structural condition than in the
essentialist condition by age 5-6.
For the partial definition task (Figure 4b), we predicted
that properties construed as internalist should support
definitions better than properties construed as structural.
Neither younger nor older children displayed such a pattern
(p’s≥.687), but adults did, t(65)=2.11, p=.039, d=.52.
Finally, as predicted, formal explanation ratings did not
significantly differ across the essentialist and structural
conditions for any age group, all p’s≥.915 (see Figure 4c),
suggesting that these explanations support both internalist
and structural construals.
These results show that even young children are
capable of structural thinking, as reflected in their openended explanations. They also provide the first demonstration
that across all age groups formal (categorical) explanations
support two interpretations: essentialist and structural.
Beyond these age-general effects, they reveal developmental
changes in structural thinking, with older children and adults
more readily engaged in structural thinking. (Notably, we
have reasons to believe that the observed pattern of
developmental change is not due to younger children simply
not understanding the task or explanations: in the explanation
generation task younger children produced predominantly
internalist explanations regardless of the framing, and when
asked to break ties in the explanation evaluation task, they
ranked internalist explanations higher under the internalist
framing.) Moreover, these results suggest that internalist
versus structural construals can be effectively induced, though
in reality, they likely coexist, and are triggered by different
cues. Finally, our results show that the profiling tool can
effectively track internalist versus structural thinking across
development.

1270

Using novel tasks designed to assess structural thinking,
we find evidence that even young children are able to reason
about social categories in structural terms. By age 5-6,
children preferentially generated and accepted structural
explanations for a category-property association when a
structural constraint was presented, with hints of an emerging
sensitivity by ages 3-4.
Recognizing structural reasoning as a distinct cognitive
phenomenon invites us to rethink some of the findings in the
literature on psychological essentialism. For example, many
discussions of essentialism emphasize its capacity to support
predictions and promote generalizations across category
members (Gelman, 2003). In fact, generalization tasks are
often used to measure the extent to which a category
representation is essence-based. However, a structural
representation of a category can likewise support such
generalizations: structural forces shape properties of the
nodes within the structure, and the occupiers of the nodes,
being subject to these forces qua occupiers, are likely to
obtain the properties in spite of idiosyncrasies in their
individual histories and predispositions. Haslanger (2015)
correspondingly praises structural explanations for their
stability and identification of broad patterns that hold across
“inessential perturbations,” suggesting that such explanations
may be particularly good in supporting generalizations within
stable structures. These features of structural thinking challenge
the widespread assumption that the stability and generalizability
of category properties imply internalist (essentialist)
representations. More generally, our findings lay the
groundwork for refining internalist claims and the evidence
that is taken to support them, and for making more finegrained distinctions when it comes to externalist alternatives.
We have also demonstrated that formal explanations
support both structural and internalist interpretations.
Introducing structural connections as a new type of nonaccidental relationship between a property and a category
raises new questions about generics (e.g., “Girls prefer
pink”), which are implicated in perpetuating stereotypes. On
most accounts, generics are interpreted as expressing
something about the underlying nature of the category,
reinforcing essentialist beliefs (Cimpian & Markman, 2011;
Leslie, 2014; Prasada & Dillingham, 2009). For example,
Leslie argues that generics are by default interpreted as
expressing “generalizations that hold because of common,
inherent features of the members of the kind” (p. 217), where
the only alternative available to people is interpreting
generics as describing statistical connections, along the lines
of “police officers eat donuts,” on the basis of “specific
worldly knowledge.” But if people can interpret generics
structurally, by construing features of category members as
products of structural constraints rather than inherent
attributes of the kind, this potentially opens up a new way to
mitigate harmful side-effects of generic language without
purging it from everyday speech (or, equally implausibly,
convincing people that many associations between properties
and social categories are merely “accidental”).

By introducing a structural alternative into the dichotomy
of internal vs. vaguely and variably defined external
(situational) factors in explanations of behavior, we have
unmasked a gap in our understanding of categorical
reasoning, and opened up new directions of study that may
help account for some of the mixed evidence in research on
the development of relational reasoning, essentialist beliefs
about social categories, and reasoning about moral and
conventional norms. The reported work already calls for
revision of current accounts of generic language and formal
explanation, and highlights the need to study categories
embedded in relational structures. But of course, a lot more
remains to be done.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Varieties of Understanding
Project, funded by the John Templeton Foundation, and by the
McDonnell Foundation.

References

Asmuth, J., & Gentner, D. (2016). Relational categories are more
mutable than entity categories. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 0, 1-19.
Astuti, R., Solomon, G. E., Carey, S., Ingold, T., & Miller, P. H.
(2004). Constraints on conceptual development: A case study of
the acquisition of folkbiological and folksociological knowledge
in Madagascar. Monographs of the society for Research in Child
Development, i-161.
Beck, S. R., Robinson, E. J., Carroll, D. J.,& Apperly, I. A. (2006).
Children’s thinking about counterfactuals and future hypotheticals
as possibilities. Child Development, 77(2), 413- 426.
Chernyak, N., & Kushnir, T. (2014). The self as a moral agent:
Preschoolers behave morally but believe in the freedom to do
otherwise. Journal of Cognition and Development, 15(3), 453464.
Cimpian, A.,& Markman, E.M. (2011). The generic/nongeneric
distinction influences how children interpret new information
about social others. Child Development, 82(2), 471–492.
Cimpian, A., & Salomon, E. (2014). The inherence heuristic: An
intuitive means of making sense of the world, and a potential
precursor to psychological essentialism. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 37(5), 461–480.
Cimpian, A., & Steinberg, O. D. (2014). The inherence heuristic
across development: Systematic differences between children’s
and adults’ explanations for everyday facts. Cognitive
Psychology, 75, 130–154.
Dretske, F. (1988). Explaining behavior: Reasons in a world of
causes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fausto-Sterling, A. (2012). Sex/Gender: Biology in a social world.
Routledge.
Gelman, S.A. (2003). The essential child: Origins of essentialism in
everyday thought. Oxford University Press.
Gelman, S.A., & Wellman, H.M. (1991). Insides and essences:
Early understandings of the nonobvious. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical framework for
analogy. Cognitive science, 7(2), 155-170.
Gentner, D. (1988). Metaphor as structure-mapping: The relational
shift. Child Development, 59, 47-59.
Gentner, D. (2005). The development of relational category
knowledge. In L. Gershkoff-Stowe & D. Rakison (Eds.), Building
object categories in developmental time (pp. 245–275). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Goldwater, M. B., Bainbridge, R., & Murphy, G. L. (2016).
Learning of role-governed and thematic categories. Acta
Psychologica, 164, 112-126.
Haslanger, S. (2015). What is a (social) structural explanation?
Philosophical Studies, 1–18.

1271

Hussak, L. J., & Cimpian, A. (2015). An early-emerging
explanatory heuristic promotes support for the status quo. Journal
of Personality and Socisal Psychology, 109(5), 739-752.
Kalish, C.W. (2011). Generalizing norms and preferences within
social categories and individuals. Developmental Psychology,
48(4), 1133-1143.
Kalish, C.W., & Shiverick, S.M. (2004). Children’s reasoning about
norms and traits as motives for behavior. Cognitive Development,
19(3), 401–416.
Kelley, H. H. (1973). The processes of causal attribution. American
Psychologists, 28(2), 107-128.
Kushnir, T., Xu, F., & Wellman, H. M. (2010). Young children
use statistical sampling to infer the preferences of other people.
Psychological Science, 21(8), 1134-1140.
Leslie, S.-J. (2015). The original sin of cognition: Fear, prejudice
and generalization. The Journal of Philosophy, 3.
Leslie, S.-J. (2014). Carving up the social world with generics. In T.
Lombrozo, J. Knobe, & S. Nichols (Eds.), Oxford Studies in Exp.
Philosophy, (pp. 208-232).
Lucas, C. G., Bridgers, S., Griffiths, T. L., & Gopnik, A. (2014).
When children are better (or at least more open-minded) learners
than adults: Developmental differences in learning the forms of
causal relationships. Cognition, 131(2), 284–299.
Malle, B. (2004). How the mind explains behavior: Folk explanations,
meaning, and social interaction. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Markman, A.B., & Stilwell, C.H. (2001). Role-governed categories.
Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence,
13(4), 329-358.
Nisbett, R.E. (2003). The geography of thought: How Asians and
Westerners think differently… And why. New York, NY: The Free
Press.
Prasada, S., & Dillingham, E. M. (2006). Principled and statistical
connections in common sense conception. Cognition, 99, 73–112.
Prasada, S.,& Dillingham, E. M.(2009). Representation of principled
connections: a window onto the formal aspect of common sense
conception. Cogitive Science, 33(3), 401–48.
Rafetseder, E., Cristi‐Vargas, R., & Perner, J. (2010). Counterfactual
reasoning: Developing a sense of “nearest possible world”. Child
development, 81(1), 376-389.
Rakoczy, H., Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2008). The sources of
normativity: young children’s awareness of the normative structure
of games. Developmental Psychology, 44(3), 875–881.
Richland, L. E., Morrison, R. G., & Holyoak, K. J. (2006).
Children’s development of analogical reasoning: Insights from
scene analogy problems. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 94, 249–273.
Rhodes, M., & Gelman, S. (2009). A developmental examination of
the conceptual structure. Cognitive Psychology, 59(3), 244–274.
Ross, L., & Nisbett, R. E. (2011). The person and the situation:
Perspectives of social psychology. Pinter & Martin Publishers.
Seiver, E., Gopnik, A., & Goodman, N. D. (2013). Did she jump
because she was the big sister or because the trampoline was safe?
Causal inference and the development of social attribution. Child
Development, 84, 443–454.
Smetana, J.G. (1981). Preschool children’s conceptions of moral and
social rules. Child Development, 52, 1333–1336.
Taylor, M.G. (1996). The development of children’s beliefs about
social and biological aspects of gender differences. Child
Development, 67, 1555-1571.
Thibaut, J. P., French, R., & Vezneva, M. (2010). The development
of analogy making in children: Cognitive load and executive
function. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 106(1), 1-19.
Turiel, E. (1983). The development of social knowledge: Morality
and convention. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Vasilyeva, N. & Lombrozo, T. (in prep.) Structural thinking.

