The Motor System Does Not Use a Curvilinear Impetus Belief:
Folk Physics and Embodied Cognition
Jay Jennings (jayjennings@cmail.carleton.ca)
Jim Davies (jim@jimdavies.org)
Institute of Cognitive Science, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, ON K1S5B6 Canada
Abstract
Previous work shows that people often believe, contrary to
actual physics, that objects travelling in a curved path through
a tube will continue to travel in a curved path after exiting the
tube. In the present study, previous work was replicated, but
accuracy increased in a new condition in which people were
asked to catch an actual ball emerging from a tube. That is, in
this case there is a discrepancy between how we believe the
world works, and how our motor system responds to events in
the world. This finding supports the theory that the perception
and action systems of the brain use different methods to
predict how things move in the world, and that the abstract
reasoning systems used to explain how the world works are
often in conflict with the action systems.

Introduction
People are not only brains, they are bodies too, and these
bodies experience the world and the laws that govern its
physics every day. Both children and adults make similar
mistakes when verbally describing how they would crawl on
their hands and knees – even after they have just physically
crawled (Piaget, 1976). With something so fundamental to
our everyday experience, we should easily be able to
describe its physics and procedures. The systematic
discrepancies observed between the ability to do a physical
task and the inability to accurately describe or depict it has
been studied under the umbrella term of folk or “naïve
physics.”
Since Piaget (1976) detailed several of these phenomena,
one of the most notable instances of this effect is the
curvilinear impetus belief: the incorrect assumption that an
object travelling in a circular motion will continue this
curved path upon exiting a spiral. In previous studies the
average percentage of curved lines predicted had been
around 36%, and 49% for participants that had no formal
physics education (McCloskey, Caramazza, & Green, 1980;
McCloskey & Kohl, 1983; Cook & Breedin, 1994; Freyd &
Jones, 1994; Kaiser, Jonides, & Alexander, 1986).
Some have suggested that the abstractness of the task
affected accuracy (Freyd & Jones, 1994; McCloskey &
Kohl, 1983). For instance, when people are presented with
the spiral problem on paper, but are told it is a garden hose
and water as opposed to a ball and tube, they accurately
predict the straight trajectory of the water, but continue to
make incorrect predictions about the ball (Catrambone,
Jones, Jonides & Seifert, 1995). Freyd and Jones (1994)
theorized that in order to understand the abstract diagrams

presented on paper, the participants may be generating
abstract theories that are separate from their experiences in
the real world, or on patterns of motion observed in living
objects as opposed to inanimate objects. Thus, even though
the problem is essentially the same, a physical example that
has likely been experienced by the participants before (the
garden hose), generates more correct answers. Therefore,
previous experience from seeing an object in motion may be
recruited to solve abstract problems. If this is true, then it
would indicate that people can make good predictions about
situations they have seen, but have trouble transferring that
skill to new domains.
To test whether observing motion could influence
accuracy, McCloskey and Kohl (1983) presented
participants with 3 conditions designed to alter the degree of
motion in a curvilinear task. Participants viewed three
training conditions: no motion (a paper and pencil diagram),
dynamic rotation (where the ball on-screen simply orbited
around the circumference), and dynamic trajectory (where
the ball left the orbit). The trajectory condition produced
both correct and curvilinear trajectories. Surprisingly, there
was no significant difference between these groups. The
perceptual experiences failed to facilitate accurate
trajectories. The authors argued that visual information was
not sufficiently embodied to produce accurate responses.
This led to postulating whether physical touch improved
the accuracy of participants’ responses. McCloskey and
Kohl (1983) asked participants to physically push a puck
through a slightly curved ‘C’ shaped path. The task could be
accomplished if a straight-line method was used. The task
was designed to add a motor component to test whether
participants used curvilinear strategies to try to complete the
exercise, which would result in a failure to complete the
task. Still, 25 percent of the participants demonstrated some
curvilinear impetus belief, and participants who failed to
pass the puck through the curved area with the correct
straight-line method demonstrated on a post-test
questionnaire that an alternative method might have been
curvilinear. Previous research, such as work on the
Ebbinghaus Illusion, showed that the physical grasping of
two identically sized objects was completed accurately by
the motor system, while the perceptual system
simultaneously perceived one as substantially bigger. This
would suggest that the action system of the brain would not
be fooled by perceptual illusions (Haffenden, Schiff &
Goodale, 2001). However, curvilinear impetus types of

2296

problems are not visual illusions, but internal
misconceptions involving object motion, which seem to
form the basis of our understanding of object physics.
Reliance on curvilinear impetus concepts today may seem
counterintuitive, but in the past they were part of a dominant
theory of physics in Medieval Europe. It was believed that
moving objects were imbued with their own force, or
impetus, that compelled them to behave in a certain way
(Kozhevnikov & Hegarty, 2001). But the fact that most
present-day people are ignorant of this theory suggests that
these impetus beliefs are systematic and consistent between
human beings. Impetus theories may provide a way of
conceptualizing the world when no analogy or previous
experience is accessible – a default physics in want of
physical experience (Kozhevnikov & Hegarty, 2001). If
this is true, then these errors should persist even when
people have abstract, rule-based physics knowledge.
Kozhevnikov and Hegarty (2001) tested this by giving
physicists and non-physicists a spiral diagram and asking
them to draw the trajectory. In one condition, participants
were given as much time as they needed to answer, and in
the other condition they had to answer as quickly as
possible. Interestingly, both groups fell back on curvilinear
impetus beliefs in the time-pressured condition. Thus, even
people who possess expert physics knowledge still fall back
on impetus theory when under time constraints.
There is now some evidence that impetus theories,
specifically curvilinear impetus theories, are part of a
default physics. However, many experiments tested impetus
beliefs using abstract stimuli, and were testing the
production or prediction of trajectories rather than how
people responded to them. For instance, people do not
regularly predict where water will exit from a coiled hose;
however, they do respond to it physically and accurately
without effort.
Many of the experiments on curvilinear impetus belief
overlook the way our motor system, which tends to respond
to the environment accurately, predicts the motion of objects
in the world (Oberle, McBeath, Madigan & Sugar, 2005;
Zago & Lacquaniti, 2005). The ability of the motor system
to respond to moving objects may be an entirely embodied
phenomena, one that has been explained with complex
abstract terms, but is easily accomplished with simple,
embodied perception-action rules (Wilson & Golonka,
2013).
For instance, complex motion problems like the outfielder
problem can be easily explained with perception-action
rules, rather than with abstract, representational
explanations. The outfielder problem asks the question,
‘how does an outfielder know where to be to catch a fly
ball?’ The traditional cognitive approach would suggest
reasoning based on a model or rules—for example, that the
outfielder calculates initial speed and angle, and uses laws
of projectile motion to predict where the ball will land and
moves there in a straight line. The embodied approach, on
the other hand, would state that as the outfielder moves,
they utilize a combination of their motion through space as

well as the ball’s motion through space. The embodied
approach claims that the outfielder simply follows two
elementary, perceptually based rules; first, move in a curved
path that mirrors the path of the ball, so that it appears that it
is moving in a straight line, and second, match speed so that
it appears that the ball is moving at a constant velocity
(Wilson & Golonka, 2013). Furthermore, most outfielders
run in curved lines. There have been many elaborations on
these simple embodied rules to catch a fly ball that rely
entirely on reactionary rules (Chapman, 1968; McLeod,
Reed, Dienes, 2006; Tresilian, 1995). To further add to the
evidence that the motor system responds in real time to the
environment, rather than following a previously simulated
prediction, outfielders can catch fly balls in virtual reality
whose paths actually defy physics, where it is impossible to
predict trajectories (Fink, Foo & Warren, 2009).
The apparent discrepancy between the motor system
responding to a trajectory and the abstract prediction or
production of one could explain why multiple studies report
surprisingly high prediction errors in schematized spiral
problems. This effect may be due to there being separate
pathways for perception and action of visual stimuli
(Goodale & Milner, 1992; Haffenden, Schiff & Goodale,
2001). For example, when a ball is dropped from a certain
height, regardless of the weight, participants will react
accordingly and catch the ball, and their implicit motor
knowledge will even account for the mass by demonstrating
stronger muscle activity in anticipation of a heavier object
(Oberle et al, 2005; Zago & Lacquaniti, 2005). Interestingly,
the same participants will make incorrect Aristotelian
assumptions about which ball will hit the ground first when
posed the question abstractly, but will demonstrate implicit
motor knowledge of Newton's Laws of Dynamics when
responding physically. These results demonstrate that the
motor system is responsible for accurately responding and
accomplishing a task that the same participants are unable to
accurately describe conceptually.
This discrepancy between being able to do something
and being able to accurately describe it has produced some
interesting theories to account for it. Rather than the
embodied/abstract distinction, Tresilian (1995) proposes a
dual system of object motion that is treated separately in the
mind, using different mechanisms to process information:
the cognitive-perceptual and the action-oriented. The
cognitive-perceptual pathway would deal with more abstract
information, based on prediction or using rule-based
algorithms, whereas the action-oriented pathway mirrors
what embodiment researchers have called the perceptionaction loop. This action-oriented pathway would consist of
simple, automatic, and reactionary rules that utilize
relational information between the body and the
environment – information that sophisticated robots use to
locomote or otherwise interact with their surroundings, or
how an outfielder catches a fly ball (Raibert et al., 2008,
Tresilian, 1995; Wilson & Golonka, 2013). Tresilian
proposed that we naturally conceptualize the world via the
cognitive-perceptual pathway, and physically respond to the

2297

world via the action-oriented pathway. The errors observed
in folk physics research may be due to the cognitiveperceptual pathway processing information that is more
naturally suited to processing by the action-oriented
pathway. In Tresilian’s model, the errors that are observed
in curvilinear impetus belief problems are the result of the
cognitive-perceptual pathway being forced to perform an
inherently artificial task that it is not biologically suited to,
whereas a real spiral and ball would have the action-oriented
pathway perform as intended – quickly, accurately, and
situated in the real world. Thus, a cognitive-perceptual
pathway set opposite to an action-oriented pathway would
account for all types of object motion perception, as well as
the errors observed in the literature.
The goal the present study was to test the distinction
between the cognitive-perceptual pathway and the actionoriented pathway by systematically increasing the degree of
embodiment on variations of the spiral tasks used in
McCloskey et al. (1980). The curvilinear impetus belief was
tested in the abstract sense on paper, as well as in an
embodied sense where participants were instructed to reach
for a ball as it rolled out of a physical spiral. An
intermediate condition was presented so that the spiral
device was present, but the participant chose from multiplechoice correct and incorrect trajectories drawn on paper in
front of the physical spiral. We hypothesize that, in the
abstract condition, the brain will use the cognitiveperceptual pathway, which will result in many errors. In
the prediction condition, both the cognitive-perceptual
pathway and the action-oriented pathway will be engaged,
which will result in fewer errors. In the action condition,
only the action-oriented pathway will be engaged, resulting
in the fewest errors of the three conditions.

Method
The first group of participants were given a diagram from
McCloskey et al. (1980) to control and replicate the
findings, and to provide an abstract condition. They were
asked to draw the trajectory of an imagined ball exiting a
spiral on the diagram.
The second group was presented with a spiral device
designed to carry a small metal ball, and the participants
were asked to select a labeled trajectory similar to
McCloskey and Kohl (1983), thus providing data for a
prediction condition between abstract and action conditions,
as the spiral no longer had to be imagined but was
physically instantiated in front of them.
Participants in the third group, the action condition, were
presented with the device and were asked to catch the ball as
it exited the spiral. We recorded the distance from their
hands to the correct trajectory of the ball.
All responses were recorded categorically as correct or
incorrect.

Participants:
A total of 72 adults, all undergraduate students were
recruited to participate from February 28, 2015, to

November 27, 2016 through the online recruitment site at
Carleton University in exchange for extra credit in a class.
Two participants were excluded from the dataset due to a
misunderstanding of the instructions. From the remaining
participants, there were 40 females and 30 males. The
average number of physics courses taken was 1.6, and the
average year of university of the participants was 2.2.
Participants were split into three groups: an abstract
condition, a prediction condition, and an action condition.
There were 24 participants for the abstract condition, 23 for
the prediction condition, and 22 for the action condition,
with a mean age of 20.6. All participants had normal or
corrected to normal vision.

Materials:
Participants in the abstract condition were provided with a
pen, and a spiral diagram that was used in McCloskey et al.
(1980) on 8.5” x 11” white standard weight paper.
The prediction and action conditions were presented with
the physical device sitting on a table, positioned
approximately 45cm to the left of the participant. The
device was 90cm tall, with a diameter of 44cm (See Figure
3). For the prediction condition, the device was set
alongside pre-drawn predictions of correct and incorrect
trajectories on a large sheet of 61 x 90.2 cm graph paper,
placed so that they appeared to emerge from the exiting end
of the tube. The spiral was made of one inch clear tubing,
3-inch PVC pipe, and wood fittings. The metal bearing
used in Condition 3 weighed 28.3 grams.
To determine where the participants were reaching in
Condition 3, a Nikon P7700 Powershot video camera was
placed above the area on a tripod so as to include the
participant’s hand, as well as 1-inch measurement marks to
measure correct or incorrect responses.

Stimuli:

Figure 1: Spiral figure for the Abstract condition
The stimuli for the abstract condition was taken from
McCloskey et al. (1980) in order to verify that the groups of
students used in our experiment produced similar errors to
the students in the previously mentioned paper, as well as
provide data for an abstract condition (Figure 1).
In the prediction condition, participants were seated in the
same orientation to the apparatus as the action condition to
select from set trajectories. The participants were presented
with the spiral apparatus (rather than solely a picture) and

2298

were asked to verbally make a selection from the set of
predefined trajectories. The trajectories were taken from the
most likely errors in McCloskey et al. (1980) that were

In the prediction condition, after completing the
questionnaire, the participants were shown the physical
apparatus and were asked to choose from 6 set trajectories
from McCloskey and Kohl (1983). The participants in this
condition were instructed as follows:
“This device will allow a small metal ball to travel down the
tube. The ball will then exit the tube and travel on its trajectory.
Your task is to pick which labeled trajectory the ball will most
likely follow without using your hands. Please verbally indicate
your answer.”

In the action condition, after completing the
questionnaire, the participants were shown the physical
spiral device and given the following instructions:
Figure 2: Spiral figure used in conjunction with spiral
device for the Prediction condition
subsequently used in the multiple-choice condition in
McCloskey and Kohl (1983) (Figure 2).
In the action condition, participants were presented with
the spiral apparatus and were asked to catch the ball as it
exited the tube (Figure 3). A camera was employed to
measure the reactions and catalogue the accuracy of the
motor response.

“This device will allow a small metal ball to travel down the
tube. Once the ball is inserted into the tube, your task is to reach
for the ball only when it passes the marked area in red so as to
catch it in the palm of your hand. Please move your hand in a
straight line away from you.”

Participants were asked to wait until the ball had passed
the marked area so that their hand would have to move late
and fast, to prevent them from moving their hand in
response to the perceived trajectory—we wanted to measure
where their motor system thought the ball would go, not
how it might change trajectory on the fly.

Measures:
We counted any curved lines drawn in the abstract
condition as erroneous and took them to indicate a
curvilinear impetus belief. Similarly, we categorized as
incorrect any curved responses selected in the prediction
condition.
In the action condition, we coded any deviations away
from the correct trajectory as erroneous. This was
accomplished by measuring, on the video, how far the
participant’s knuckle on the index finger was from the
correct trajectory. When the participants reached for the ball
after it had passed the marker, any deviations from the
correct trajectory exceeding 1 inch away from the zero line
were recorded as errors. If while attempting to catch the
ball, the knuckle of the hand was within one inch on either
side of the zero line, the response was categorically correct.

Figure 3: Spiral device for the prediction and action
conditions. Side view (left) and top view (right)

Procedure:
In the abstract condition, the participants were presented
with a paper and pencil test with the diagram from
McCloskey et al. (1980), hidden beneath the short
demographic questionnaire. They were then given the
following instructions:
“This diagram is intended to show a curved tube. In the diagram
you are looking down on the tube from above. A metal ball is put
into the end of the tube indicated by the arrow. The ball is then
shot out of the other end. Your task is to draw the path the ball
will follow after it comes out of the tube. Please flip the page and
proceed.”

Design:
Participants were assigned to the three conditions in the
order of abstract, prediction and action, in a between
subjects design. A Chi Square Test for Independence was
conducted for all three conditions, and between paper and
prediction, paper and action, and prediction and action as
post hoc analyses. The number of physics courses was split
into three arbitrary groups of None (0), Some (1-3), and
Many (3 or more), and were analyzed with the Chi Square
test for independence as well. All post-hoc tests were
corrected using the Bonferroni correction.

2299

Results
Participants in the action condition, where people actually
reached for the ball rolling out of a curved tube, were much
more accurate than participants who merely predicted the
path of the ball on paper.
Over all three conditions, the accuracy of responses
differed significantly between the conditions, though not in
the predicted increasing fashion. A Chi Square test for
Independence between the three groups produced χ² = (2, N
= 68) = 26.31, p < .001, Cramer’s V = .43, which is
statistically significant and indicates a large effect size.
Figure 4: Number of Correct and Incorrect Responses per
Condition

Post hoc analysis illustrates that the main effect, between
all three conditions, was primarily driven by the difference
between the prediction condition and the action condition,
as can be observed in Figure 4. Post hoc testing using the
Bonferroni Correction for pairwise comparisons with the
Chi Square test determined that there was a significant
difference between the abstract and prediction comparison,
χ² = (1, N = 47) = 10.55, p < .017, the abstract and action
comparisons, χ² = (1, N = 47) = 16.42, p < .017, as well as
the prediction and action comparisons, χ² = (1, N = 46) =
25.66, p < .017.
There was no relationship between the number of physics
courses taken, χ² = (2, N = 70) = 1.59, p = .45. Post Hoc
tests with the Bonferroni Correction also revealed no
significant differences between groups, p > .017.

Discussion
These results have provided some support for the original
hypothesis that the degree of embodiment significantly
influences the accuracy of responses. However, we did not
observe the stepped increase from the abstract condition to
the action condition. There was no effect of the number of
physics courses on the number of correct responses, which
supports Kozhevnikov and Hegarty’s (2001) finding that
physicists and non-physicists alike seem to rely on an
incorrect default curvilinear physics for abstract problems.
In the abstract condition, 62.5% of the respondents
produced incorrect trajectories compared to the 36% and
49% reported in McCloskey et al. (1980).

The original hypothesis that the difference between the
abstract condition and the action condition would produce
significantly
different
responses
was
supported.
Surprisingly, however, the prediction condition had the
fewest correct responses, with most participants choosing
between two of the 6 options (E and D in Figure 2), whereas
it was hypothesized that the prediction condition would
have more correct responses than the abstract condition.
Lastly, the action condition had the most correct responses,
which supported our hypothesis that there is a dissociation
between our action-oriented pathway and our cognitiveperceptual one.
With this paradigm in mind, the finding that many of the
prediction condition responses were incorrect might be
explained by the fact that both the cognitive-perceptual and
the action-oriented pathways were in conflict, causing more
errors. Alternatively, there was no participant motion
involved, and this lack of a motor aspect in the prediction
condition might have hindered its validity as a medium
embodied condition. Also, the relatively high number of
correct responses in the action condition suggests that
physical responses are more biologically adapted for
accuracy. Taking these findings into account, the act of
drawing in the abstract condition may have allowed the
action-oriented pathway to provide more correct paths of the
imaginary ball, while the stationary aspect of the prediction
condition may have only allowed the cognitive-perceptual
pathway to be used. Thus, the abstract condition may have
been more embodied than the prediction condition, which if
true, would demonstrate the stepped increase hypothesized.
The significant differences observed in this experiment
have illustrated the degree to which our minds are divided
depending on the task and level of physical action.
However, future research could expand the prediction
condition of this experiment by investigating how
participant motion, for example pointing to the correct
trajectory or producing it alongside the spiral might increase
the number of correct responses by activating the actionoriented pathway. Other areas of research may include
asking participants to imagine the trajectory of the ball
before choosing or drawing their prediction, to more
accurately determine the capacities of the cognitiveperceptual pathway. Furthermore, the method for coding
accuracy was done categorically and was measured
differently between conditions, posing some reliability
concerns. Because of these limitations, future projects
should investigate the production of the trajectories, as in
the abstract condition, in a setup identical to the prediction
and
action
conditions,
thereby
increasing
the
generalizability of the results.
The implications of this research are broad. The
pedagogical implications for teaching elementary physics
could be substantial. Participants were largely incorrect
when presented with abstract, as well as non-dynamic
examples of this physics problem (i.e. prediction condition),
so it might be beneficial for educational authorities to
encourage more embodied examples of physics problems to

2300

facilitate student understanding. The results partially support
Tresilian’s (1995) model that the cognitive-perceptual
pathway demonstrates poorer performance on abstract
physical tasks, whereas the action-oriented pathway does
better on responsive and physical tasks.
These results have provided evidence for one of the
cornerstones of embodied cognition: that cognition evolved
for action (Wilson, 2002). This is not usually the case in
many research papers, as much embodied research that is
publically received involves associations between mental
representations and bodily postures, types of movement, and
even the types of clothes people wear (Adam & Galinsky,
2012; Markman & Brendl, 2005; Reutner, Hansen, &
Greifeneder, 2015). Although the results from these
associational studies are interesting, they support a weaker
version of embodied cognition; one that implies that
cognition is merely influenced by the brain, the body and
the environment. This study suggests a distributed view of
the mind, one that engages the action-oriented pathway
when solving embodied motion problems, yet falls back on
the cognitive-perceptual pathway when motion is absent.
At present there is evidence for a dual-pathway system:
one utilized when the mind is processing abstract
conceptualizations, and one that utilizes the motor system
when the mind is processing motion problems, using
perception-action loops in a reactionary fashion. The
classical view of the mind within cognitive science as a
symbol manipulator falls apart when real world motion is
involved, and embodied cognition and Tresilian’s dual
pathway system for object motion may provide a new way
of conceptualizing how minds react and think about object
motion.

References
Adam, H., & Galinsky, A. D. (2012). Enclothed cognition.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48(4), 918925.
Catrambone, R., Jones, C. M., Jonides, J., & Seifert, C.
(1995). Reasoning about curvilinear motion: Using
principles or analogy. Memory & Cognition, 23(3), 368373.
Chapman, S. (1968). Catching a baseball. American Journal
of Physics, 36(10), 868-870.
Cook, N. J., & Breedin, S. D. (1994). Constructing naive
theories of motion on the fly. Memory & Cognition,
22(4), 474-493.
Fink, P. W., Foo, P. S., & Warren, W. H. (2009). Catching
fly balls in virtual reality: A critical test of the outfielder
problem. Journal of Vision, 9(13), 14.
Freyd, J. J., & Jones, K. T. (1994). Representational
momentum for a spiral path. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20(4),
968-976.
Goodale, M. A., & Milner, A. D. (1992). Separate visual
pathways for perception and action. Trends in
neurosciences, 15(1), 20-25.

Haffenden, A. M., Schiff, K. C., & Goodale, M. A. (2001).
The dissociation between perception and action in the
Ebbinghaus illusion: Nonillusory effects of pictorial cues
on grasp. Current Biology, 11(3), 177-181.
Kaiser, M. K., Jonides, J., & Alexander, J. (1986). Intuitive
reasoning about abstract and familiar physics problems.
Memory & Cognition, 14(4), 308-312.
Kozhevnikov, M., & Hegarty, M. (2001). A dissociation
between object manipulation spatial ability and spatial
orientation ability. Memory & Cognition, 29(5), 745-756.
Markman, A. B., & Brendl, C. M. (2005). Constraining
theories of embodied cognition. Psychological Science,
16(1), 6-10.
McCloskey, M., & Kohl, D. (1983). Naive physics: the
curvilinear impetus principle and its role in interactions
with moving objects. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 9(1),
146-156.
McCloskey, M., Caramazza, A., & Green, B. (1980).
Curvilinear motion in the absence of external forces:
Naive beliefs about the motion of objects. Science,
210(4474), 1139-1141.
McLeod, P. Reed, N. Dienes, Z. (2006). The generalized
optic acceleration cancellation theory of catching. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 32, 139–148.
Oberle, C. D., McBeath, M. K., Madigan, S. C., & Sugar, T.
G. (2005). The Galileo bias: A naive conceptual belief
that influences people's perceptions and performance in a
ball-dropping task. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31(4), 643-653.
Piaget, J. (1976). The grasp of consciousness: Action and
concept in the young child. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Raibert, M., Blankespoor, K., Nelson, G., Playter, R., &
Team, T. B. (2008, July). Bigdog, the rough-terrain
quadruped robot. In Proceedings of the 17th World
Congress (Vol. 17, No. 1, pp. 10822-10825). Proceedings
Seoul, Korea.
Reutner, L., Hansen, J., & Greifeneder, R. (2015). The Cold
Heart Reminders of Money Cause Feelings of Physical
Coldness. Social Psychological and Personality Science,
1948550615574005, 1-6.
Tresilian, J. R. (1995). Perceptual and cognitive processes in
time-to-contact estimation: analysis of prediction-motion
and relative judgment tasks. Perception & Psychophysics,
57(2), 231-245.
Wilson, A. D., & Golonka, S. (2013). Embodied cognition
is not what you think it is. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 58.
Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(4), 625-636.
Zago, M., & Lacquaniti, F. (2005). Cognitive, perceptual
and action-oriented representations of falling objects.
Neuropsychologia, 43(2), 178-188

2301

