The Influence of Pop-Culture on Misattribution of Memory
Daljit Ahluwalia (Daljit.ahluwalia@rutgers.edu)
Pernille Hemmer (Pernille.hemmer@rutgers.edu)
Kimele Persaud (Kimele.persaud@rutgers.edu)
Department of Psychology, Rutgers University, New Brunswick
152 Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, NJ 08854
Abstract
Social media platforms provide a source for transmitting
information that can become widely accepted. However, in
this process of transmission, information becomes susceptible
to distortion. In this study, we assessed people’s semantic
(i.e., prior expectations) and recognition memory for pop
culture content, as a function of confidence and perceived
information source. In Experiment 1, we investigated
semantic memory for ubiquitous movie quotes (e.g., the
famous Star Wars quote “Luke I am your father”). Notably
this quote is incorrect, but we found that a majority of
participants accepted these lure quotes as true with high
confidence and indicated they had experienced the original
source. In Experiment 2, participants viewed the original
movie sources before a recognition test of the quotes. We
found that while there was some improvement, people still
preferred the lure quote with high confidence. We discuss the
findings in terms of the strength of people’s prior expectations
when reconstructing events from memory.
Keywords: Semantic memory, recognition memory, source
attribution, pop culture, confidence ratings.

Introduction
Social media platforms such as Reddit, Facebook, and
Twitter are popular outlets to discuss a broad range of topics
including people’s memories of favorite movies, movie
quotes, and scenes. Recently a viral online forum topic
focused on people who recalled watching a movie dating
back to the ‘90s called ‘Shazaam,’ which starred the actor
Sinbad playing the role of a genie (“People Claim to Have
Seen”, 2016). Interestingly, there is no record of a movie
called ‘Shazaam,’ and Sinbad himself denies the movie ever
existed. This raises the question: how could so many people
feel so strongly about a shared false memory of watching a
movie that never was? While misremembering a movie might
be harmless, imagine being misinformed about a real-world
event—such as falling prey to fake news about politics or
terrorist attacks. In this paper, we assess people’s semantic
(i.e., prior expectations) and recognition memory for pop
culture content, as a function of their confidence and
perceived information source.
There are a number of cognitive mechanisms that might
underpin this behavior. One explanation might be that people
are falling victim to “the social contagion of memory”, which
occurs when one person’s recollection of events influences
and shapes another person’s recollection (Roediger, Meade,
& Bergman, 2001). People integrate the false information
with their true source representation. In this case, the
contagion becomes exacerbated online as people’s personal

recollections are being influenced by the recollections of
people from around the world in an instant, thus allowing
these false memories to be shared and spread.
Take the game of telephone as an example. It begins with
one person whispering a message to the person next to them,
and so on. Oftentimes, the last message is significantly
different from the original. The transmission for any
individual in the chain would become a question of
reconstructing the noisy information from memory (Xu &
Griffiths, 2009).
These same factors also have implications for everyday
memory such as singing the wrong song lyrics or misquoting
common phrases and movie lines. As illustrated by the shared
internet memory of ‘Shazaam,’ many of our memories for
ubiquitous and pop culture concepts are not learned through
first-hand experience with the original source—such as
learning a quote directly from a movie—but rather are the
result of information being passed from one person to
another. In this case, the information transmitted takes on an
abstracted nature.
Such distortion can happen in three different ways:
assimilation, leveling, and sharpening (Bartlett, 1932).
Assimilation occurs when details of the information are
altered in memory to reflect one’s own culture. Leveling
occurs when information that is deemed non-essential is left
out, reflecting a ‘gist’ representation of the event rather than
the details. Sharpening occurs when the order of some details
is changed. This illustrates how the reconstructive process
can influence the transmission of information, leading to an
event being slightly altered with each retelling to reflect the
biases of the people participating in the transmission process.
While assimilation, leveling, and sharpening can result
unintentionally from either the person transmitting the
information or the person encoding the information, it is also
possible to intentionally distort the shared information. This
has been apparent in many experiments involving eyewitness
testimony. Repeated exposure to suggestion, specifically, has
been found to alter recall for a previous event (e.g., Loftus &
Palmer, 1974). When shown a video of a car stopped at a stop
sign and asked questions containing misinformation, such as
"did the car stop at the yield sign," most participants
responded in the way suggested by the misleading interview
question, rather than what they had witnessed in the video
(Loftus, Miller, & Burns, 1978; Loftus & Palmer, 1974;
Mitchell & Zaragoza, 1996). It has been suggested that when
misleading information is presented, it is introduced into the
representation for the event and causes an alteration of that
representation (Loftus, Miller, & Burns, 1978). This

1513

illustrates a reconstructive process similar to that of the
telephone game leading to biases in memory.
One possible hypothesis to explain this willingness to
accept misinformation as part of the original event is source
misattribution, where people incorrectly attribute the source
of the memory (e.g., Schacter, 2001). According to the source
monitoring framework, participants fall prey to
misinformation because they have confused the source of the
original information with the source of the misinformation
(e.g., Johnson et al., 1993; Lindsay, 1994; Lindsay &
Johnson, 1989).
In addition to confusing the source of information, people
tend to express high levels of confidence in their memory,
whether it is accurate or not (Bacon, 1979; Mitchell &
Zaragoza, 1996). People are equally confident when
reporting false information about an event that they heard
from a secondhand source, as when they are correctly
recalling the event as they experienced it (Mitchell &
Zaragoza, 1996). Higher confidence has also been reported
for more familiar statements (those that have been heard
before), regardless of the accuracy of those statements
(Hasher, Goldstein, & Toppino, 1977). This suggests that
confidence in memory is not directly related to the accuracy
of that memory.
Each of these cases demonstrates how memory is a
constructive process, prone to distortions from factors
including intrusions from semantic memory, source
misattribution, and misinformation. Although there is
extensive literature on false memories and source
misattribution across a number of domains, one domain that
has not been widely studied is memory for ubiquitous
concepts, specifically the type that would be prone to
influences from popular culture. Therefore, we were
interested in evaluating people’s semantic memory (i.e. prior
expectations) for pop-culture content and how their semantic
memory influences recognition memory for this content. We
tested semantic and recognition memory for well-known
quotes that tend to be misrepresented in popular culture,
specifically focusing on how pervasive the misremembering
of popular incorrect information is, what source people
attribute the information to, and how confident they are in
their responses. We compared these ubiquitous quotes to
performance on common graphics such as the Apple logo,
which are less likely to undergo transmission distortion.
In Experiment 1 we assessed participant's semantic
memory and attribution of the source of the information, but
we did not test recognition memory given the true source
information. In Experiment 2 we investigated recognition
memory for the original source of the ubiquitous information,
in order to compare it to the semantic memory in Experiment
1. We hypothesized that selections of the incorrect popular
lure quote would be made with high confidence, and that the
likelihood a selecting the lure quote even after studying the
video would be similar to the likelihood of selecting the lure

quote in Experiment 1. If prior expectations exert a strong
influence on memory, it is possible that even after viewing
the original source material participants will still recall the
misinformation that is pervasive in popular culture.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Sixty-three Rutgers University undergraduate
students participated in this study in exchange for course
credit.
Materials The stimuli consisted of a brief demographics
questionnaire (i.e. age, primary language, major, and media
usage), and 27 3-alternative forced choice (AFCs) questions:
three movie quotes, three famous quotes, four logos (note: the
Google logo had six individual test questions, one for each
letter1, so the total number of logo questions was nine), and
12 distractor questions. See Figure 1 for the set of target
stimuli. The 3-AFCs for each question included the correct
response, a critical lure (i.e., the quote that has become
common usage), and a non-critical lure. We selected the
critical lures based on what has circulated on the Internet (e.g.
In 2012’s “Snow White and the Huntsman,” Charlize
Theron’s character can be heard saying, “Mirror, Mirror, on
the wall…”). For the graphics questions, the lures were
selected based on one that closely resembled the target and
one that did not. Both the demographics questionnaire and the

1
Due to the difference, the Google graphic was not included in
the analysis since it was designed differently compared to the other
questions.

1514

Movie Quotes:
Star Wars: “No. I am your father.”
Snow White and The Seven Dwarves: “Magic, mirror
on the wall, who is the fairest of them all?”
Forrest Gump: “Life was like a box of chocolates.”
Graphics:

Figure 1. Stimuli (movie quotes and graphics) used in
Experiments 1 and 2.

Figure 2. First panel: demographic questionnaire; Second
panel: sample stimuli.

3-AFC questions were written in Matlab and presented on 23inch Dell monitors
Design Given the types of questions that were asked (e.g.
recognition of the Apple logo), participants were instructed
to put away all cellphones and other electronic devices before
the experiment began. First, participants completed the
demographic questionnaire (Figure 2, first panel). Next,
participants answered 27 questions, one at a time, which
consisted of three parts: 1) participants responded to each
question by selecting one of the 3-AFCs from a drop-down
menu 2) participants rated their level of confidence in their
answer on a seven point Likert scale, with one being not
confident at all and seven being very confident 3) participants
indicated from a drop-down menu if and how they had
previously been exposed to the information presented in the
question. The options included: “I recently discussed this
with a friend", "I have seen the TV show/movie, read the
book/play, or heard the song/phrase before”, "I have not seen
the TV show/movie, read the book/play, or heard the song,
but I have seen this referenced elsewhere", "I have never seen
or heard of this before", or "Other", which then allowed
participants to elaborate on their source of knowledge using
the keyboard (Figure 2, second panel). The presentation order
of the 27 questions was randomized across participants. On
average, it took participants 20 minutes to complete the
experiment.
Results
Because the goal was to compare performance on the
ubiquitous movie quotes and graphics between Experiments
1 and 2, only these target questions were used in the analysis.
To evaluate whether participants could correctly identify the
true quotes/graphics, we computed the response probability
for the target, the critical lure, and the non-critical lure for
each question (see Figure 3). We found that the preferred
response for the movie questions was the critical lure (Star
Wars: 95%; Snow White: 95%; Forrest Gump: 92%). The
preferred response for most of the graphic questions was the
target (Apple logo: 82%; American flag: 79%). However, for
the Microsoft logo question, participants were split, with
48% of participants choosing the target, and 48% choosing
the more closely matching lure.
A series of binomial tests were conducted to assess whether
the proportion of correct responses for each question was
different from chance. The tests revealed that performance
was significantly worse than chance for the movie quote
Table 1: Proportion Correct Compared to Chance
Question
Exp1
Exp2
Chi Square
Exp1 & Exp2
**
Star Wars
p<.001
p=.08
χ²=25.04, p<.001**
Snow White
p<.001** p=.01*
χ²=2.39, p=0.12
Forrest Gump
p<.001** p=.004* χ²=4.54, p=0.03*
Apple Logo
p<.001** p=.08
χ²=11.22, p<.001**
**
**
Flag
p<.001
p<.001
χ²=0.09, p=0.77
Microsoft Logo
p<.001** p=.007* χ²=1.34, p=0.25
*
p<.05; **p<.001

Figure 3: Response probabilities for the target and
critical lure for each question in Experiments 1 and 2.
questions and significantly better than chance for the graphics
questions (see Table 1).
We then assessed confidence for the preferred response for
each question. For the movie related questions, a majority of
those who chose the critical lure also responded with high
confidence, defined as five or higher (Star Wars: 86%; Snow
White: 92%; Forrest Gump: 77%). For the graphics
questions, a majority of those who chose the target responded
with high confidence (Apple logo: 78%, American flag: 94%;
Microsoft logo, target: 55%, most closely matching lure:
45%), see Figure 4. When comparing confidence ratings for
targets to critical lures, we found that for most of the movierelated questions, confidence was greater for the critical lure
than the target. We report the mean and standard deviation
because there were not enough participants who chose the
target to conduct a statistical test comparing confidence
between target and critical lure (Star Wars: critical lure
M=6.14, SD=1.63, target M=3.50, SD= 3.54; Snow White,
critical lure M=6.55, SD=0.82, target M=3.50, SD=2.12;
Forrest Gump, critical lure M=5.6, SD=1.6, no participants
chose the target for this question). There was no significant
difference in confidence ratings between targets and more
closely matching lures for the Apple logo, American flag, and
Microsoft logo questions.
For source attribution, we computed the response
probability for each possible source conditioned on target and
critical lure responses. Here we report the most frequently
selected source for the preferred response for each question.
Given that a majority of participants responded with the
critical lure for the movie related questions, we analyzed
which source they attributed their response to and found that
they responded “watched the movie” as their direct source of
knowledge (Star Wars: 71%; Snow White: 83%; Forrest
Gump: 84%), see Figure 5.

1515

Figure 4: Confidence ratings for target and critical lures for movie related and graphic questions in Experiments 1 (top
row) and 2 (bottom row).

Figure 5: Source attribution for the movie related questions in Experiment 1 (left column) and Experiment 2 (right
column).

Experiment 2
Method
Participants Thirty-six Rutgers University undergraduates
participated in exchange for course credit.
Materials The demographic questionnaire was identical to
Experiment 1. The study stimuli consisted of eight videos
corresponding to the movie quotes and graphics, as well as
one distractor clip. The video clips were scenes from movies
that contained the quotes and commercials that contained the
logos that were the basis of the questions in Experiment 1.
The clips varied in length from 30 seconds to one minute. The
test stimuli consisted of 12 3-AFC questions identical to those
in Experiment 1, and related to the video clip content (three
movie quotes, three logos, and three Google logo related
questions2). The demographics questionnaire and 3-AFC

questions were administered through Qualtrics Survey
System on Dell computers in the lab.
Design After completing the demographic questionnaire,
participants viewed seven of the eight video clips, one at a
time, wearing a pair of provided headphones. Participants
were instructed that they would receive a memory test on the
content of the video clips. After viewing all seven target
video clips, participants then watched an eighth clip which
was unrelated to the memory test. This clip served as a
distractor between study and test and lasted for roughly five
minutes. After the distractor, participants answered 12
recognition memory questions related to the seven clips they
had just viewed. Importantly, these questions were identical
to those in Experiment 1 including the 3-AFC (target
response, critical lure, and non-critical lure), confidence
ratings, and source attribution questions. The recognition

2

The 6 Google logo related questions tested participants on
correctly recalling the colors of each of the letters in ‘google.’

1516

questions were self-paced and took participants 15 minutes,
on average, to complete.
Results
To evaluate whether participants could correctly recognize
the target quote and graphic after having viewed the original
source, we computed the response probability for the target,
critical lure, and non-critical lure for each question (see
Figure 3). We found that participants were split for the Star
Wars question with 44% choosing the lure response and 47%
choosing the target response, indicating that performance was
substantially better for participants after watching the
original source (with 95% choosing the critical lure in
Experiment 1). Interestingly, however, for the other movie
related questions the preferred response was still the critical
lure (Snow White: 75%; Forrest Gump: 78%). Participants
were split for the Apple logo question, with 47% of
participants choosing the target, and 33% choosing the more
closely matching lure. It is important to note that more
participants responded correctly with the target in
Experiment 1 than in Experiment 2. For the other graphic
questions, the preferred response remained the target
(American flag: 84%; Microsoft logo: 56%).
A series of binomial tests were conducted to assess
whether the proportion of correct responses for each question
was different from chance (see Table 1). The tests revealed
no significant difference for the Star Wars question and the
Apple logo question. There was a significant difference in
performance for the remaining questions, with participants
doing significantly worse than chance for the Snow White
and Forrest Gump questions, and significantly better than
chance for the American flag and Microsoft Logo questions.
In order to further examine whether the introduction of the
video clips improved performance, a chi-square test was
conducted to compare the proportion of correct responses in
Experiment 1 to the proportion of correct responses
in Experiment 2 (see Table 1). The test revealed that
performance on the Star Wars and Forrest Gump questions
were slightly better for those participants who watched the
video clips in Experiment 2. For the Star Wars question, there
were significantly more people who answered correctly in
Experiment 2 (47.22%) compared to Experiment 1
(3.28%). For the Forrest Gump question, there were
significantly more people who answered correctly
in Experiment 2 (11.11%) compared to Experiment 1 (0%),
indicating that recognition accuracy was higher for those
participants who had studied the direct source. However,
there was no significant difference in performance between
experiments for the Snow White, American flag, or Microsoft
logo questions, indicating that for some questions, even for
participants who had seen the video clips, recognition
performance was no better than for participants in
Experiment 1 who had not viewed the direct source. For the
Apple Logo question, there were significantly more people
who answered correctly in Experiment 1 (81.97%) compared
to Experiment 2 (47.22%).
We then assessed confidence for the preferred response for
each question in Experiment 2. For the movie related

questions, a majority of those choosing the critical lure also
responded with high confidence, defined as five or higher
(Star Wars: 88%; Snow White: 81%; Forrest Gump: 75%,
Apple logo, critical lure: 71%, more closely matching lure:
58%). It is important to note that for the Apple Logo question,
more people answered with the critical lure in Experiment 2
than in Experiment 1. However, for the remaining graphic
questions, a majority of those choosing the target responded
with high confidence (American flag: 90%; Microsoft logo:
55%), see Figure 4. When comparing confidence ratings for
targets to critical lures, we found that there was no significant
difference in confidence ratings between target and critical
lures for any of the questions, indicating that participants who
chose the critical lure were just as confident as those who
chose the target.
For source attribution, in Experiment 2 we computed the
response probability for each possible source conditioned on
target and critical lure responses. Here we report the most
frequently selected source for the preferred response for each
question. We found that a majority of those who chose the
critical lure also responded that they had “watched the
movie” as their source of knowledge (Star Wars, critical lure:
50%, target: 53%; Snow White, critical lure: 93%; Forrest
Gump, critical lure: 82%), see Figure 5.

Discussion
The current study investigated people’s semantic memory
(i.e., prior expectations) and recognition memory for pop
culture content, as a function of their confidence and
perceived information source. We found that people chose
the ubiquitous incorrect (critical) lure for the movie related
questions. These results are consistent with the finding that
people remember the gist of sources and not most of the
details (Sachs, 1967). These responses were given with high
confidence, with participants indicating that they had learned
this information from the direct source, i.e., the movie. This
suggests that people have strong prior expectations for pop
culture content frequently circulated through the media –
even though these expectations are not correct.
We found that in Experiment 2, exposure to original source
material did not overwhelm pop-cultural distortions or lead
to higher recognition accuracy for all of the movie quotes.
Participants were still prone to select the critical lure, and did
so with high confidence. This suggests that when prior
expectations are strong, even if they are misaligned to the
truth, viewing the original source cannot always overcome
this inaccuracy.
Although there has been some success in correcting false
memories (Brewer, 1977; Fazio & Marsh, 2010), we did not
observe this in our study. Providing the original source
material may have been ineffective in our task because we
did not explicitly inform our participants to attend to the
original source material (movie quotes or graphics). This was
purposely done to simulate real world settings where people
may passively encode information.
These two findings together present a somewhat dangerous
picture of what misinformation can do to episodic memory.

1517

For example, for the Apple logo where semantic memory
(Experiment 1) was highly accurate, recognition memory
(Experiment 2) faltered. This might be because the somewhat
abstract noisy semantic representation is integrated with a
noisy episodic representation in the reconstruction process.
In contrast, for the pop culture movie quotes, recognition
memory was only slightly better than semantic memory. This
might be a result of semantic representations exerting a strong
influence on the noisy episodic traces in the reconstruction
process–consistent with a Bayesian interpretation of memory
(e.g., Hemmer & Steyvers, 2009). In other words, the false
semantic representation provides a high baseline contribution
to episodic memory that is too strong to overcome even with
exposure to the true source.
The implications of these findings as they relate to real
world events are far reaching. Much of the “fake news” that
was circulated the Internet throughout the 2016 presidential
election consisted of fabricated stories posing as professional
journalism. These stories were spreading misinformation,
and ultimately became a means to influence public opinion.
The importance of this issue has grown over time, as more
people have reported that they get their news from the
Internet (Lee, 2016). If we examine contemporary popular
culture and the focus on social network distribution, it is easy
to see how information spreads very rapidly through re-posts,
re-tweets, or sharing via word of mouth throughout the
Internet population, often in ways that the original producers
cannot determine or control (Burgess, 2008). So, the next
time you share a post on Facebook, or quote a movie, make
sure you check your sources.

Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge that the first author of this
paper is an undergraduate in the Rutgers University Honors
in Psychology program. This research was supported by the
National Science Foundation grant #1453276.

References
Bacon, F.T. (1979). Credibility of repeated statements:
Memory for trivia. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 5,
241-252.
Bartlett, F. (1932). Remembering: A study in Experimental
and Social Psychology. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Brewer, M. (1977). Memory for the pragmatic implications
of sentences. Memory & Cognition, 5(6), 673-678.
Burgess, Jean (2008) 'All your chocolate rain are belong to
us?' Viral Video, YouTube and the dynamics of
participatory culture. In Video Vortex Reader: Responses
to YouTube. Institute of Network Cultures, Amsterdam, pp.
101-109.
Fazio, L. K., & Marsh, E. J. (2010). Correcting false
memories. Psychological Science, 21, 801-803.
Hasher, L., Goldstein, D., & Toppino, T. (1977). Frequency
and the conference of referential validity. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 16, 107- 112.

Hemmer, P., Steyvers, M. (2009). Integrating Episodic
Memories and Prior Knowledge at Multiple Levels of
Abstraction. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16, 80-87.
Lee, T. B. (2016, November 16). Facebook's fake news
problem, explained. Retrieved January 18, 2017, from
http://www.vox.com/newmoney/2016/11/16/13637310/fa
cebook-fake-news-explained.
Lewandowsky, S., Ecker, U. K. H., Seifert, C. M., Schwarz,
N., & Cook, J. (2012). Misinformation and Its Correction:
Continued
Influence
and
Successful
Debiasing. Psychological Science in the Public Interest,
Supplement, 13(3), 106-131.
Lindsay, D. S. (1994). Memory source monitoring and
eyewitness testimony. In D. F. Ross, J. D. Read, & M. P.
Toglia (Eds.), Adult eyewitness testimony: Current trends
and developments (pp. 27-55). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Loftus, E. F., & Palmer, J. C. (1974). Reconstruction of automobile destruction: An example of the interaction between
language and memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 13, 585-589.
Loftus, E. F., Miller, D. G. & Burns, H. J. (1978). Semantic
integration of verbal information into a visual memory.
Human Learning and Memory, 4, 19-31.
McKenzie, S. & Eichenbaum, H. (2011). Consolidation and
reconsolidation: two lives of
memories? Neuron, 71
(2011), pp. 224–233.
Mitchell, K. J., & Zaragoza, M. S. (1996). Repeated exposure
to suggestion and false memory: The role of contextual
variability. J Mem Lang, 35, 246–260.
People Claim to Have Seen a Mysterious Movie That Never
Existed. (2016, December 31). Relevant Magazine.
Retrieved from http://www.relevantmagazine.com/slices/
people-claim-have-seen-mysterious-movie-never-existed.
Roediger, H. L., III, Meade, M. L., & Bergman, E. T. (2001).
Social contagion of memory. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review, 8, 365– 371.
Roediger, H. L., & DeSoto, K. A. (2016). The power of
collective memory: What do large groups of people
remember - and forget? Scientific American.
Sachs, J. (1967). Recopition memory for syntactic and
semantic aspects of connected discourse. Attention,
Perception, & Psychophysics, 2(9), 437-442.
Schacter, D. L. (2001). The seven sins of memory: How the
mind forgets and remembers. Boston, MA: Houghton
Mifflin.
Xu, J. & Griffiths, T.L. (2009). How memory biases affect
information transmission: A rational analysis of serial
reproduction. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 21.
Zaragoza, M. S., & Lane, S. M. (1994). Source
misattributions and the suggestibility of eyewitness
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, & Cognition, 20, 934–945.

1518

