The dilution effect: Conversational basis and witness reliability
Jens Koed Madsen (jens.madsen@ouce.ox.ac.uk)
School of Geography and the Environment, University of Oxford
OX1 3QY, South Parks Road, Oxford, United Kingdom
Orcid: 0000-0003-2405-8496

Ulrike Hahn (u.hahn@bbk.ac.uk)
Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck College, University of London
WC1E 7HX, Malet Street, London, United Kingdom

Marion Vorms (mvorms@gmail.com)
Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck College, University of London
WC1E 7HX, Malet Street, London, United Kingdom
Abstract
The dilution effect occurs when the introduction of nondiagnostic information lessens the impact on reasoning of
diagnostic information despite having no relevance to the
hypothesis in question. While the effect has been reproduced
in several studies, the psychological basis of the effect
remains unclear. Some believe it to be conversational while
others believe it to be cognitive and social.
The paper tests the conversational basis of the effect by
minimising pragmatic, conversational influence. To this end,
it makes use of a legal setting with witness testimonies. The
studies replicate the dilution effect, which suggests that the
basis of the results in the original studies is not
conversational. However, the credibility of the source
strongly influences whether or not the effect occurs. If
reliable sources provide the non-diagnostic information, the
effect lessens. Conversely, if unreliable sources provide the
non-diagnostic information, we observe a stronger dilution
effect.
Keywords: Dilution effect;
credibility; witness testimonies

legal

reasoning;

source

Introduction
Most information that humans gain throughout their lives
comes from other sources. It may come from friends and
colleagues, from professionals such as weather forecasters
or news anchors, or it may come through de-personalised
sources such as the Associated Press. However, information
comes in various guises. Concerning the evidence itself,
information may be highly diagnostic and related to a
particular hypothesis at stake in the context or entirely
unrelated and non-diagnostic. If, for example, an athlete is
tested for doping before a race, the subsequent outcome of
the test will be highly relevant in determining whether or
not the athlete should be allowed to compete. The colour of
the athlete’s trousers worn during the drug test, however,
should not. In addition, the information may be more or less
noisy for a variety of reasons. This noise may be due to
degradations in the access to information relating to the
hypothesis (such as faulty equipment or poor visibility) or it

may be due to the reliability of the person who delivers the
information.
The aim of the current paper is threefold. First, as
discussed in the following section, it has been suggested that
the dilution effect (see next section) is a conversational
rather than a social or a cognitive effect. In the original
studies, it is the experimenter himself who presented the
participants with diagnostic and non-diagnostic information.
If participants believe that the experimenter has chosen the
non-diagnostic information for a reason, it may prompt
them to try and interpret the information as somehow
diagnostic. By removing the experimenter as the source of
the diagnostic and non-diagnostic information, we test this
possibility. We offer a possible control of this by placing the
information in a legal setting and by having witnesses
provide the testimonies. Second, as the role of the source of
the information has been suggested as an influential element
in reasoning, we manipulate the reliability of the source
such that the source is either highly reliable or entirely
unreliable. Third, from the literature, it is unclear how
participants conceptualise non-diagnostic information. In
particular, it is unclear whether or not the participants
expect the dilution effect to occur if they were put in an
observer role. To test this, study 2 allows participants to
provide qualitative replies. Here, they are asked to imagine
how a jury would react to the information and whether they
believe it would make a difference to include the nondiagnostic information with the diagnostic.

The dilution effect: A conversational
explanation?
The dilution effect has been reported in several studies (e.g.
Nisbett et al., 1981; Hilton & Fein, 1981; Krueger &
Rothbart, 1988; Tetlock & Boettger, 1989, see also
Troutman & Shanteau, 1977). However, aside from a few
notable exceptions (e.g. Waller & Zimbelman, 2003), the
effect has received relatively little attention in recent years
compared with more prominent cognitive influences on
reasoning such as the confirmation bias (e.g. Frost et al.,

2663

2015). In particular, the basis of the effect has remained
under-explored.
One question, though, has been raised about the dilution
effect, namely whether the effect has a conversational,
pragmatic basis rather than a social perceptual basis (see
Igou & Bless, 2005; Kemmelmeier, 2007; Igou, 2007). It is
well-known in the field of pragmatics that conversational
expectations and extra-linguistic content can influence the
interpretation of an utterance (see e.g. Sperber & Wilson,
1995; Carston, 2002; Katsos, 2008; 2009). If the nondiagnostic information was somehow perceived as relevant
given the inclusion by the experimenter, it is plausible that
the participants could generate interpretations that make the
information more relevant than the experimenter intended.
It is possible that the methodology of the experiments
prompts participants to treat all information given to them
as relevant, as the experimenter provides it to them. If the
participants approach non-diagnostic evidence as potentially
diagnostic in some way that they did not understand given
the fact that the information was chosen by the
experimenter, this may introduce noise into belief revision,
which should make judgments less extreme. That is, given
an increase in the noise of the data, a participant would be
expected to update in a more tempered manner.
Kemmelmeier (2007) describes this position (which he
criticises) thusly: “The mere fact that the information is
provided in the experiment suggests to participants that the
experimenter considers this information relevant and wants
participants to use it in making their judgments.” (p. 49)
The above studies aimed at testing the conversational
basis of the dilution effect by trying to manipulate the
relevance of the information provided, but kept using the
main methodology where the information is provided by the
experimenter, and the task had generally to do with social
judgment. One way of manipulating the relevance was by
explicitly warning participants that the information might
not be relevant. For example, Igou and Bless (2005) state,
“prior to the sales scenario, half of the participants were
informed that some of the presented information might not
be relevant to their task”. This is a methodological attempt
to prepare the participant for the fact that they may
encounter irrelevant information.
Kemmelmeier, who argues against the conversational
account of the dilution effect, claims that the alleged
evidence in favour of the conversational basis is not proving
anything. Kemmelmeier concludes:
“Last, there is a very mundane reason to suspect that the dilution
effect is not the product of conversational dynamics. The
dilution effect occurs as much inside the psychological
laboratory as outside of it (see Waller & Zimbelman, 2003, for a
review). Often there are no specific individuals who can be
identified as the source of non-diagnostic information, or one
even has to assume that one’s communication partner is
potentially deceptive, as in the case of an accounting audit
(Waller & Zimbelman, 2003). Because the dilution effect occurs
regardless of whether non-diagnostic information can be
assumed to be part of a meaningful communication, it seems
highly questionable that the dilution effect has a conversational
basis.” (Kemmelmeier, 2007, p. 58)

In order to test the potential influence of the experimenter
and to lessen the influence of social context, the current
studies are set in a legal setting where the information is
presented as a summarised court case concerning a murder
in Paris. The existence of identified witnesses (with certain
characteristics) attempts to alleviate the methodological
problem of the experimenter providing ‘irrelevant’
information, as witnesses may provide more or less relevant
statements during a trial. In order to manipulate the
relevance of the statements, we manipulate the witness
condition. As discussed in the following section, several
studies have shown the influence of source credibility in
reasoning tasks.

The dilution effect and source credibility
As the dilution effect has mainly been explored with the
information being provided by the experimenter, little is
known about the relationship between the effect and the
credibility of the source.
Source credibility has been shown to influence several
cognitive phenomena related to reasoning, argumentation,
and decision-making. It influences the reception of
persuasive messages (Petty & Cacioppo, 1984; Chaiken &
Maheswaran, 1994; Tormala & Clarkson, 2007), is integral
to the development of children’s perception of the world
(Harris & Corriveau, 2011), influences candidate choice
(Hetherington, 1999; Citirin & Muste, 1999), increases
adherence with persuasion strategies (Cialdini, 2007), and
influences how people judge the quality of evidence from
others in social situations (Fiske et al., 2007; Cuddy et al.,
2011). The normative function of source credibility in
reasoning and argumentation remains contentious. The dualprocess-based Elaboration-Likelihood Model (Petty, 1981)
describes reliance on the source of the message as a
heuristic and shallow cue (Petty & Cacioppo, 1984; Briñol
& Petty, 2009). Comparatively, Bayesian models integrate
credibility in beliefs revision when a source provides
information (Bovens & Hartmann, 2003; Hahn et al., 2012;
Harris et al., 2015; Madsen, 2016).
According to the dilution effect, participants who are
faced with non-diagnostic information in addition to the
diagnostic information provided will become less extreme
in their degree of belief in the overall proposition. Given the
findings in the literature, we predict that testimonies from
reliable witnesses will be seen as more persuasive than
testimonies from unreliable witnesses.

The case study: Murder in Paris1
In order to make the experimental setting seem realistic, we
made use of simplified version of a court case that happened
recently in Paris. In the court case, the defendant, Siem, was
accused of assaulting the victim, Tommy, which caused
Tommy's fall to the ground. Further, they were told that

1

For the sake of clarity, we provide the background story as an
appendix after the bibliography.

2664

the impact of the ground caused the brain injury, which led
to Tommy’s death.
The participants were told that they would read an excerpt
from a court case in Paris, France. They were further told
that the names of the people involved had been changed and
that the story had been abbreviated significantly. The
participants were then instructed to read the summary of the
court case thoroughly as if they were a member of the jury
in the trial. Specifically, they were asked to pay attention to
what had happened and whether or not the defendant was
likely to be guilty or innocent.

Study 1
Study 1 aims to replicate the dilution effect. To test the
potential pragmatic basis of the dilution effect, the study
was set in the legal context of a trial with all information
provided by witnesses rather than by the experimenter. By
using a realistic court case and witness testimonies rather
than instructions from the experimenter, the design lessens
the likelihood that the experimenter influenced the
participants. The dilution effect predicts that participants
should decrease their belief in the likelihood of the
defendant being guilty when a non-diagnostic testimony
was added to the diagnostic witness testimony.
The study was a 2x2 between-subjects design. To explore
the influence of source credibility on belief revision and on
the dilution effect, participants in the ‘no witness’ condition
were told that the statements were ‘information added to the
initial enquiry’. As such, the information was provided with
no specific source. In the ‘witness’ condition, a reliable
witness presented the diagnostic testimony while an
unreliable witness provided the non-diagnostic testimony2.
To test if the dilution effect was replicable, half of
participants saw only the diagnostic information while the
other half saw the diagnostic and the non-diagnostic
information. Diagnostic statements read: “There was a
dispute about drugs between Siem and Tommy, and Siem
had threatened Tommy several times. Siem was heard
several times saying ‘he will be dealt with soon, this fucking
Caribbean!” Non-diagnostic statements read: “When
walking, Siem always took great and long strides. Siem
used to wear funny clothes. In particular, he liked to wear
bright colours”.
Participants: 200 participants were recruited from MTurk
(see Paolacci et al., 2010 for validation of MTurk as a tool
for data collection in social sciences). All participants had to
be native English speakers and aged 18 or above.
Procedure: Having read the background story (see
appendix), participants provided their degree of belief in the
likelihood that Siem had assaulted Tommy on a gradient
scale from 0-1, with 0 representing complete certainty that
Siem did not assault Tommy and 1 representing complete
certainty that Siem did assault Tommy. This elicited their

2

Alongside the background story, full witness descriptions can
be found in the appendix.

belief in the likelihood of guilt prior to hearing witness
testimonies.
After providing their prior belief in the likelihood of guilt,
participants read the testimonies. Having read the
testimonies (witness statements or additional information //
diagnostic or diagnostic as well as non-diagnostic
information), participants were asked to indicate their
posterior degree of belief in the likelihood of guilt on an
identical sliding scale from 0-1. Diagnostic evidence was
presented before non-diagnostic evidence. In order to test
the dilution effect, we compare the changes in beliefs from
prior to posterior belief between conditions.
Results: As the study was carried out online via MTurk,
we eliminated any participants who carried out the study in
less than 120 seconds, as the study could not be completed
in seriousness in such short time. In total, this eliminated 15
participants, leaving 185 participants.
To test the dilution effect, paired-sample t-tests show a
significant difference between prior and posterior degrees of
beliefs in both diagnostic groups (No witness condition: t =
3.105, p = 0.003 (df, 42); Witness condition: t = 2.890, p =
.006, df (45)) while we observe no difference in degree of
belief when non-diagnostic information is provided
alongside the diagnostic (No witness condition: t = 1.839, p
= 0.072 (df, 48); Witness condition: t = .459, p = .648, df
(46)), see Fig. 1 for means and standard deviations.
Condition
Diagnostic, no witness
Non-diagnostic, no witness
Diagnostic, witness
Non-diagnostic, witness

Prior belief
60.67 (21.49)
64.36 (17.88)
58.97 (18.87)
62.68 (22.24)

Posterior belief
69.93 (18.43)
69.18 (17.94)
66.32 (19.38)
61.29 (22.27)

Table 1: Prior and posterior beliefs
Tentatively, it looks as if the witness condition yields
different patterns in the non-diagnostic condition (as the no
witness condition is borderline significant). To test the
influence of witnesses, we calculate a change score by
subtracting the prior belief from the posterior. Having done
this, we run a 2x2 ANOVA to test the influence of the
inclusion of a witness. We find an effect of diagnosticity (p
= .019, F = 5.556), but no effect of the witness condition (p
= .149, F = 2.105).
Testing for influence of gender and age yielded no
significant results, as p’s were between .103 (influence of
age on posterior degree of belief in the likelihood of guilt)
and .881 (influence of gender on prior beliefs).

Study 2
Study 1 suggests that the dilution effect was replicated in an
experimental design aimed to lessen the experimenter’s role
and thereby reduced the potential for conversational effects.
However, while the results of study 1 replicated the dilution
effect, tentative evidence suggested that the reliability of the
witness might have an impact on the relative strength of the
effect. For one, the reliable witness always presented

2665

condition the diagnostic information and the unreliable
witness always presented the non-diagnostic information.
To test the potential influence of source reliability on the
perception of evidence, half of the participants read the
diagnostic testimony from the reliable witness and the nondiagnostic testimony from the unreliable witness whilst the
other half were presented with the opposite source-message
matrix.
While study 1 tested a specific question concerning the
conversational basis for the dilution effect, study 2 is more
exploratory, as the relationship between source credibility
and the dilution effect has, to our knowledge, not been
explored in detail (although, see Harkins & Petty, 1987). As
a consequence of the exploratory nature, participants were
given the opportunity to provide qualitative feedback.
Importantly, study 2 used a different dependent variable:
In study 1, as participants in the previous study were asked
to provide their own degree of belief in the likelihood of
guilt; in the present study, the participants were asked to
provide their personal estimation of how convinced a
member of a jury would be if confronted by the diagnostic
information in isolation or by the inclusion of the nondiagnostic statement. As such, they were asked to provide
an estimation of the strategic potential of including or
omitting the non-diagnostic statement. Consequently, all
participants read the diagnostic and the non-diagnostic
statements. Thus, only two participant groups emerged in
the present study: diagnostic (reliable witness) and nondiagnostic (unreliable witness) or diagnostic (unreliable
witness) and non-diagnostic (reliable witness).
Participants: 100 participants were recruited from
MTurk. All participants had to be native English speakers
and be aged 18 or above.
Procedure: Prior belief elicitations were identical to study
1, as participants read the court case and provided their
initial estimation of the likelihood of guilt. After the initial
case presentation, participants read both the diagnostic and
the non-diagnostic statements and were asked to evaluate
the degree to which they believed a jury would believe the
defendant to be guilty if the diagnostic information was
presented in isolation or in conjunction with the nondiagnostic statement. As such, each participant provided one
prior degree of belief and two posterior degrees of belief:
diagnostic and non-diagnostic.
Results: Initial paired-sample t-tests were conducted
between prior and posterior degrees of belief to test the
influence of the source on the likelihood that a jury would
find the defendant guilty. In accordance with expectations
from studies on source credibility in argumentation (e.g.
Harris et al., 2015), participants who were presented with
diagnostic incriminating evidence from the unreliable
source either significantly or borderline significantly
decreased their posterior degree of belief in the likelihood
of guilt (diagnostic: t = 2.812, df (50), p = .034; nondiagnostic: t = 1.799, df (50), p = .078). Comparing the
diagnostic and non-diagnostic posteriors, we observe no
significant difference (t = .893, df (50), p = .376). This

suggests that testimonies from an unreliable source might
decrease adherence with the proposition despite being
diagnostic. It further suggests that no dilution effect was
observed when the witness was reliable. See table 2 for
means and standard deviations for both conditions.
In the condition where the reliable witness provides the
diagnostic evidence, we observe a significant or borderline
significant increase in the degree of belief in the likelihood
of guilt (diagnostic: t = 4.848, df (49), p < .001; nondiagnostic: t = 1861, df (49), p = .069). While we did not
find support for the dilution effect when the reliable witness
presented the non-diagnostic information, we observe a
significant difference in the condition where unreliable
witness presents the non-diagnostic information (t = 2.983,
df (49), p = .004). That is, compared with the condition in
which the reliable witness presented diagnostic evidence,
the condition where the reliable diagnostic testimony was
followed by an unreliable non-diagnostic testimony
decreased the overall estimation of guilt.
Comparing the two conditions, this suggests the reliability
of the source that provides the non-diagnostic information
influences whether the dilution effect occurs or not. As we
did not have a clear hypothesis as to the direction of the
influence, qualitative replies were also collected. In the
following, we examine these replies.
Condition

Prior belief

Unreliablereliable
Reliableunreliable

64.19
(17.18)
57.4 (22.25)

Posterior
belief
(diagnostic)
56.09 (22.31)

Posterior
belief (nondiagnostic)
58.57 (23.66)

71.60 (18.33)

63.82 (23.82)

Table 2: Prior and posterior beliefs
Qualitative replies By analysing the qualitative responses,
we can get a tentative impression of the differences between
reliability conditions and between participants themselves.
In the unreliable-reliable condition, 25 participants provided
qualitative feedback. In the reliable-unreliable condition, 30
participants provided feedback.
Participants in the condition where the unreliable witness
presented the diagnostic information did not make specific
comments about the persuasive advantage or disadvantage
of presenting the non-diagnostic information (despite the
fact that it was presented by the reliable witness). Rather, in
line with expectations, they provided character-related
comments for the unreliable witness and content-related
comments for the reliable witness (e.g. “I'm not sure what
Mrs. Lanavan's statement had to do with the case. And the
fact that Ms. Harry is unstable would reduce her credibility”
and “I think the first is incredible due to her personal history
and the second's testimony really is irrelevant to the
incident”).
In the condition where the reliable witness presented the
diagnostic information, comments were more mixed. 11
participants directly stated that including the non-diagnostic
witness would not make a difference (e.g. “I don't see how

2666

Ms. Harry changes anything. Her testimony doesn't really
say anything useful” and “I think the jury would react the
same way”). Comparatively, 13 participants stated that it
would make a difference to include the unreliable witness
(e.g. “The statement by Ms. Harry doesn't prove or disprove
anything, but it takes away from the validity of the first
witness, IMO”, “Tough call- the statement of Ms. Harry
would irritate the jury and would lean the jury to the more
credible witness”, and “I think maybe the prosecution loses
some credibility if they put someone on the stand who gives
testimony that doesn't seem substantive”). One participant
argued that the inclusion would boost the probability of
getting Siem convicted (“more witnesses the more weight
the testimony will get I imagine, also the woman is more
convincing”).
Given the limited population size, the above comment
should be taken with extreme caution. However, it suggests
that participants may entertain two very different ideas of
the reasoning of jurors. While the sample is too small for
statistical analysis, the participants appear to entertain
realistic approximations of their estimations of the reactions
of jury members concerning the inclusion of the nondiagnostic information. The 11 participants who stated it
would make no difference report no difference between the
prior and the posterior.

Concluding remarks
The paper set out to explore three different aspects of the
dilution effect. First, given the debate concerning the basis
for the dilution effect (whether it is conversational,
cognitive, or social), study 1 used a legal setting to lessen or
alleviate the potential influence of the experimenter and
present the information as a court case with witness
testimonies. Study 1 replicated the dilution effect.
Study 1 suggested that the credibility of the source might
influence the strength of the dilution effect. Consequently, ,
study 2 manipulated the reliability of the witnesses who
provided the diagnostic and the non-diagnostic information.
Argumentation studies in source credibility suggest that the
degree of belief in a proposition can be negatively
influenced despite a diagnostic statement in cases where the
source is unreliable or distrusted (see Madsen, 2016). In line
with these findings, study 2 found that diagnostic statements
from an unreliable source decreased participants’ degree of
belief in the likelihood of guilt while the same statement
from a reliable source increased participants’ degree of
belief. Further, study 2 suggests that the dilution effect does
not occur in situations where the non-diagnostic information
is provided by a reliable source while we observe a strong
dilution effect when an unreliable source presents nondiagnostic information. Future studies should look at the
function of and relationship between source credibility and
diagnosticity in more detail.
Study 2 gave participants the opportunity to provide
qualitative feedback. Of particular interest, we noted a
tendency for two strategy approximations to occur when the
reliable source presented the diagnostic evidence and the

unreliable source presented the non-diagnostic statement. 11
(of 50) participants believed it would make no difference to
the minds of a jury while 13 (of 50) believed it would have
a negative effect. Their posterior belief revisions were in
line with these estimations. This suggests that participants
might entertain different perceptions of persuasion strategies
and of the effect of evidence. However, as the current study
is exploratory, we cannot draw any strong conclusions from
these reports. We hope that future studies will explore the
role of persuasion strategies and the dilution effect in more
detail.

References
Bovens, L., & Hartmann, S. (2003). Bayesian epistemology.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Briñol, P., & Petty, R. E. (2009). Source factors in
persuasion: A self-validation approach, European
Review of Social Psychology, 20, 49-96.
Carston, R. (2002) Thoughts and Utterances: The
Pragmatics of Explicit Communication, Blackwell
Publishing
Chaiken, S. & Maheswaran, D. (1994) Heuristic Processing
Can Bias Systematic Processing: Effects of Source
Credibility, Argument Ambiguity, and Task Importance
on Attitude Judgement, Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 66 (3), 460-473
Cialdini, R. B. (2007) Influence: The Psychology of
Persuasion, Collins Business
Citrin, J. & Muste, C. (1999) Trust in government, in
Robinson, J. P.. Shaver, P. R., Wrightsman, L. S. (Eds.),
Measures of political attitudes. Measures of social
psychological attitudes, Vol. 2. (pp. 465-532), San
Diego, CA, US: Academic Press
Cuddy, A. J. C., Glick, P. & Beninger, A. (2011) The
dynamics of warmth and competence judgments, and
their outcomes in organizations, Research in
Organizational Behavior 31, 73-98
Fiske, Susan T., Cuddy, A. J. C. & Click, P. (2007)
Universal dimensions of social cognition: warmth and
competence, Trends in Cognitive Sciences 11 (2), 77-83
Frost, P., Casey, B., Griffin, K., Raymundo, L.,Farrell, C. &
Carrigan, R. (2015) The influence of confirmation bias
on memory and source monitoring, The Journal of
General Psychology 142 (4), 238-252
Hahn, U., Oaksford, M., & Harris, A. J. L. (2012).
Testimony and argument: A Bayesian perspective. In F.
Zenker (Ed.), Bayesian Argumentation (pp. 1538). Dordrecht: Springer.
Harkins, S. G. & Petty, R. E. (1987) information utility and
the multiple source effect, Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 52 (2) 260-268
Harris, A. J. L., Hahn, U., Madsen, J. K., & Hsu, A. S.
(2015). The Appeal to Expert Opinion: Quantitative
support for a Bayesian Network Approach, Cognitive
Science 40, 1496-1533

2667

Harris, P. L., & Corriveau, K. H. (2011). Young children’s
selective trust in informants, Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society B, 366, 1179-1187
Hetherington, M. J. (1999) The effect of political trust on
the presedential election, 1968-96, American Political
Science Review 93 (2), 311-326
Hilton, J. L., & Fein, S. (1989). The role of typical
diagnosticity in stereotype-based judgments, Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 57 (2), 201-211
Igou, E. R. (2007) Additional thoughts on conversational
and motivational sources of the dilution effect, Journal
of Language and Social Psychology 26 (1), 61-68
Igou, E. R., & Bless, H. (2005). The conversational basis for
the dilution effect. Journal of Language and Social
Psychology 24, 25-35
Katsos, N. (2008) The semantics/pragmatics interface from
an experimental perspective: the case of scalar
implicatures, Synthese 165, 385-401
Katsos, N. (2009) Evaluating under-informative utterances
with context-dependent and context-independent scales:
experimental and theoretical implications, In Sauerland,
U. & Yatsushiro, K., Experimental Semantics and
Pragmatics, Basingstoke: Palgrave Studies in
Pragmatics, Language & Cognition, 51-73
Kemmelmeier, M. (2007) Does the Dilution Effect have a
Conversational Bias? Journal of Language and Social
Psychology 26, 48-60
Krueger, J., & Rothbart, M. (1988). Use of categorical
information and individuating information in making
inferences about personality, Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 55 (2), 187-195
Lagnado, D., Fenton, N. & Neil, M. (2012) Legal Idioms: A
framework for evidential reasoning, Argumentation &
Computation 1, 1-18
Madsen, J. K. (2016) Trump supported it?! A Bayesian
source credibility model applied to appeals to specific
American presidential candidates’ opinions, Papafragou,
A., Grodner, D., Mirman, D., & Trueswell, J.C. (Eds.)
Proceedings of the 38th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society, 165-170
Nisbett, R. E., Zukier, H. & Lemley, R. E. (1981) The
Dilution Effect: Nondiagnostic information weakens the
implications of diagnostic information, Cognitive
Psychology 13, 248-277
Paolacci, G., Chandler, J., & Ipeirotis, P. G. (2010) Running
experiments on Amazon Mechanical Turk, Judgement
and Decision Making 5, 411–419
Petty, R. E. & Cacioppo, J. T. (1984) The Effects of
Involvement on Responses to Argument Quantity and
Quality: Central and Peripheral Routes to Persuasion,
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 46 (1), pp.
69-81
Sperber, D. & Wilson, D. (1995) Relevance:
Communication and Cognition, 2nd edition, Blackwell
Publishing

Tetlock, P. E. & Boettger, R. (1989) Accountability: A
Social Magnifier of the Dilution Effect, Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 57 (3), 388-398
Tormala, Z. L. & Jackson, J. J. (2007) Assimilation and
Contrast in Persuasion: The Effects of Source Credibility
in Multiple Message Situations, Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin 33 (4), 559-571
Troutman, C. M. 6 Shanteau, J. (1977) Inferences based on
nondiagnostic information, Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Performance 19, 43-55
Waller, W. S., & Zimbelman, M. F. (2003). A cognitive
footprint in archival data: Generalizing the dilution
effect from laboratory to field settings, Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Performance 91, 254268

Appendix: Background story and witness
descriptions
Background story
On the 31st of December 2010, around 7:30pm, the body of a man
was found on the Place de Stalingrad, in Paris. The man was later
identified as M. Tommy Tessel, a homeless drug-addict from
Martinique. He died a few hours later, in the hospital.
A local police inquiry was conducted. All the people questioned
in the neighbourhood initially denied having seen anything
directly.
Some of them reported having heard that the victim had fallen
after having been punched by a third party. The case was initially
treated as an accident. No crime scene inspection was performed;
no trace of blood was found.
On the 5th of January 2011 (5 days after the event), a person,
who wanted to remain anonymous, reported to the police that a
drug-addict often hanging around near the Rotonde (the rotunda of
the Place de Stalingrad), of Senegalese descent, in his fifties, had
punched the victim in the face and the victim had fallen heavily on
the ground.
On the 8th of January, a crime investigation was opened. The
criminal investigation department asked the local police for the
victim’s clothes so as to perform a DNA test. But it appeared that
they were thrown away on the 5th of January for hygienic reasons.
An autopsy was performed on the deceased. The victim death’s
was directly caused by the brain injury resulting from the shock of
his skull on the ground, probably due to a fall.
Reliable witness: Mrs. Rose Lanavan (55, social worker)	  
Mrs. Lanavan was employed as a cleaner in a pharmacy for around
20 years, after which she decided to enroll in a training programme
for adults to become a social worker. She now works with drugaddicts and homeless people, helping them with any administrative
procedures in relation to health, lodging, and judicial issues.	  
She is unanimously reported as a trustworthy and caring
person.	  She works and lives in the area of Stalingrad, and knows
well the people living there.
Unreliable witness: Ms. Edith Harry (26, no occupation)	  
Ms. Edith Harry is a drug-addict, often lurking in the area. She has
tried a rehab several times, but always went back to smoking
crack. She is reported to be psychologically unstable (she is
reported to suffer from a serious personality disorder — labeled
‘paranoid-delusional’).

2668

