Training Graph Literacy: Developing the RiskLiteracy.org Outreach Platform
Vincent T. Ybarra (Vincent.Ybarra@ou.edu)
National Institute of Risk and Resilience, 201 Stephenson Parkway, Suite 2300, 5 Partners Place
Norman, OK 73019 USA

Edward T. Cokely (cokely@ou.edu)
National Institute of Risk and Resilience, 201 Stephenson Parkway, Suite 2300, 5 Partners Place
Norman, OK 73019 USA

Cody Adams (Codyadams@ou.edu)
National Institute of Risk and Resilience, 201 Stephenson Parkway, Suite 2300, 5 Partners Place
Norman, OK 73019 USA

Margo Woller-Carter (Mwoller@mtu.edu)
Michigan Technological University, 1400 Townsend Dr.
Houghton, MI 49931 USA

Jinan N. Allan (jnallan@ou.edu)
National Institute of Risk and Resilience, 201 Stephenson Parkway, Suite 2300, 5 Partners Place
Norman, OK 73019 USA

Adam Feltz (adfeltz@mtu.edu)
Michigan Technological University, 1400 Townsend Dr.
Houghton, MI 49931 USA

Rocio Garcia-Retamero (rretamer@ugr.es)
University of Granada, Av. del Hospicio,
Granada 18010 Spain

Keywords: Graph literacy, decision making, risk literacy,
intelligent tutors, risk communication, brain training, numeracy

Abstract
Visual aids have been found to provide an unusually efficient
means of risk communication for diverse and vulnerable
individuals facing high-stakes choices (e.g., health, finance,
natural hazards). Research indicates the benefits of visual aids
follow from scaffolding of cognitive and metacognitive
processes that enable independent evaluation and
understanding of risk—i.e., risk literacy (see Skilled Decision
Theory; Cokely et al.,. 2012; in press). Here, we present a brief
review and progress report on the development of an online
adaptive graph literacy tutor developed as part of the
RiskLiteracy.org decision education platform. We begin with
a brief review of theoretical foundations of the current tutor
based on graph comprehension theory. Next, we discuss key
steps in developing and validating our pseudo-intelligent
adaptive tutor with emphasis on cognitive and psychometric
item analyses and transfer assessments (i.e., decision-making
biases). Finally, we present recent changes in technical
implementation of the RiskLiteracy.org platform (i.e., Python
based with a NoSQL database) that are designed to facilitate
interactive, yet brief (5 minute to 3 hour) and easier-to-develop
training and risk communication tutors. Discussion focuses on
emerging opportunities including cognitive oriented usability
analyses that should help promote an effective, enjoyable, and
inclusive user experience.

Introduction
Well-informed, skilled decision making is associated with a
wide-range of socially and economically valuable decision
making outcomes (e.g., health, wealth, happiness; for a
review see Skilled Decision Theory, Cokely et al., in press).
In part, the benefits of general decision making skill, as
measured by tests like the Berlin Numeracy Test, result
because skilled decision makers tend to be better prepared to
independently evaluate and understand risk as presented in
common risk communications (e.g., information about
health, finance, natural hazards; RiskLiteracy.org) (Cokely et
al., 2012). Unfortunately, individuals with lower skill levels,
including many at-risk individuals, are routinely biased by
standard and well-intentioned risk communication practices,
which can result in dangerous decision errors (e.g., ignoring
a heart attack; Petrova et al., 2016).
To help address limitations of current risk communication
practices, recent scientific efforts have endeavored to develop
more inclusive decision education technologies and outreach
platforms (e.g., adaptive decision support and training). For

3566

example, simple, transparent visual aids have been found to
dramatically enhance risk literacy and independent decision
making, conferring major benefits to diverse decision makers
who vary widely in ages, backgrounds, abilities, cultures, and
values (Garcia-Retamero & Cokely, 2013). Consider a recent
systematic review by Garcia-Retamero and Cokely (2017)
spanning dozens of experiments involving more than 25,000
participants from 60 countries. This work specifically
mapped informed, skilled decision-making and how it
interacts with graph literacy and visual aids, presenting
insights on (a) visual aid effectiveness, (b) heuristics for
construction and evaluation of user-friendly visual aids, and
(c) the relatively large and robust benefits of visual aids for
diverse individuals. While the review documented
remarkably large benefits of visual aids for “real world”
decision making in general, the review also identified some
significant problems, namely: 1) Despite the successes of
well-designed visual aids, some at-risk users lack basic graph
evaluation and interpretation skills and are not graph literate
enough to benefit from effective risk communications
(Galesic & Garcia-Retamero, 2011) and 2) Given conflicts of
interests and other factors, it can be hard to get risk
communicators to adhere to best design practices (e.g.,
distorted visual aids can shape attitudes and perceptions
without violating truth in advertising regulations, etc.).
In what follows, we present an overview of details,
successes, and obstacles in our ongoing efforts to develop a
brief and adaptive computerized training programs using the
RiskLiteracy.org platform. Focus will be on the development
of our Graph Literacy Tutor (Cokely et al., in press; WollerCarter, 2015). A growing body of evidence has documented
that substantial, decision-relevant benefits tend to emerge in
a relatively short amount of time. Recent advances in the
platform also enable more rapid and robust development of
pseudo-intelligent (adaptive, but not fully intelligent)
interfaces that reduce the costs and time required for
development of brief interactive training and risk
communication programs (Koedinger & Corbett, 2006).
Accordingly, we begin by reviewing our formal cognitive
science based on graph comprehension research and Skilled
Decision Theory. We then discuss the development and
testing of specific graph literacy modules and assessments
and we present results from a recent control trial study
documenting near and (relatively) far transfer (i.e., graph
literacy training improved graph literacy skills, but also
improved text based decision skills including resistance to
framing and reference class neglect). Next, we consider
advances in platform design and implementation, including
efforts to integrate psychometric approaches to circumvent
the need for more extensive intelligent tutor engines. We
close with brief discussion of future directions, limitations,
and ongoing projects focusing on user experience
optimization.

understanding of the underlying essential (causal) cognitive
processes. As such, we drew from the well-established body
of empirical literature on graph comprehension to provide a
foundation for our tutor development. Graph comprehension
models generally indicate that when an individual views a
graph they engage in three processes: 1) encoding of the
visual pattern, 2) translation of the identified visual features
into conceptual relations, and 3) the selection of referents for
the identified concepts (Bertin, 1983; Carpenter & Shah,
1998; Cleveland & McGill, 1986; Kosslyn, 1989; Lohse,
1993; Okan, Galesic, & Garcia-Retamero, 2016; Pinker,
1990; Simkin & Hastie, 1987; Shah & Carpenter, 1995).
Together these processes allow for individuals to make a
piece-wise interpretation of graphs before fully integrating
the underlying mental model required for inductive and
deductive inferences (e.g., reasoning that goes beyond
givens). Theoretically, each step of this evaluation process
involves essential processes and judgments that an individual
must accurately make to correctly interpret the visualized
data.
Broadly, it is often assumed that graph comprehension
focuses on encoding the visual pattern, which requires the
identification of key features of the graph (e.g., attending to
many bars of varying height in a bar chart). Once key
features are identified, a relative visual judgement is made to
determine relative shape of the graph (e.g., positions of the
graph elements within the axis, size, and length of the
elements within the graph, the slope or angle of graph items).
Translating the identified visual features into conceptual
relations then assigns relative quantitative meaning to the
features of the graph. The comparison of size and spatial
relations between graph features (e.g., a line graph with one
positive and one negatively slopped line). For example, tall
bars on a traditional bar graph would be interpreted as “more”
compared to short bars. There is reason to believe that the
spatial-to-conceptual mappings (e.g., “higher equals more,”
“steeper equals faster”) found with graphs are analogous to
ecological heuristics that persist within both adults and
children with zero graphing experience (Gattis, 2002; Gattis
& Holyoak, 1996).
Theoretically, the final step in graph comprehension is
determining the referents of the concepts identified. Here,
one must accurately identify the associations of variables
within the graph with numerical values. This is where the
conventional features of the graph (title, axes labels, legends,
and numerical values) are added into the mental
representation of the whole graph. For instance, one must
identify the context that the graph represents or the scale at
which the y-axis is set before an inference can be made. This
process seems to be closer to a skill that is not analogous to
real-world conventions (Okan, Garcia-Retamero, Galesic, &
Cokely, 2012). This assumes that the skills needed to create
proper schema for the conventional elements are trainable.

Cognitive Processes in Graph Comprehension

Skilled Graph Comprehension

Theoretically, the design of an efficient graph literacy
training program will depend on the accuracy of our

The idea that reading a graph is trainable is embodied in many
theories. One holds that graph schema will be formed in

3567

long-term memory (Maichle, 1994; Peebles & Cheng, 2001;
Pinker, 1990; Ratwani & Trafton, 2008). Training graph
literacy should then aim to increase the available schemas and
enhance the already present ones, aiding in the identification
of the conventional graph features and improving inferences
made. Specifically, the training of skills would be aimed at
the increasing of knowledge content, and thus can be
relatively independent of limited working memory or
visuospatial abilities (Hegarty & Waller, 2005; Shah et al.,
2005). Previous research has found that expertise in a specific
domain can increase associations between visual patterns and
concepts (Tabachneck-Schijf, Leonardo, & Simon, 1997) and
that inferences become easier to make (Roth & Bown, 2003).
One strategy to train is the use of online adaptive tutors
(Anderson, Corbett, & Koedinger, 1995; Koedinger &
Corbett, 2006; Lovett, Meyer, & Thille, 2008).
The benefits of tutors are often attributed to factors such as:
reduction of cognitive load during learning via worked
examples, faster (ideally immediate) performance feedback,
easier to understand instructions, frequent and more precise
diagnostic tests of knowledge, consistent and direct modes of
delivering material, and greater opportunities for detection
and self-correction of errors during learning (Corbett &
Anderson, 1991; Koedinger & Aleven, 2007; Mathan &
Koedinger, 2005; Roediger & Karnicke, 2006; Sweller, Van
Merrieoboer, & Pass, 1998).
Validated adaptive tutors are currently available for many
topics in math, statistics, reading, and physics. However,
despite the ubiquitous nature of visual aids in risk
communications, there are few validated computerized graph
tutors available. However, the available graph tutors are
generally designed for specialized, narrow audiences (e.g.,
geared toward younger high school students). Among the few
graph literacy training programs that have been specifically
designed for diverse adults, none have been subject to
evidence-based validity studies providing estimates of: 1) the
efficacy of graph literacy training for various users, 2) the
magnitude of associated benefits for naturalistic decision
making (e.g., interpreting real high-stakes risk
communications about health and natural hazards), and 3)
essential usability and user experience outcomes, strengths,
and weaknesses.

task, which requires participants to identify the necessary
information from data to create a graph that accords with best
practices by selecting from four candidate graphs.
Note that all graph selection tasks were chosen from an
initial study where 217 participants completed multiple graph
selection problems, the Berlin Numeracy Test, and the Graph
Literacy Assessment (Cokely, Galesic, Schulz, & GarciaRetaneri, 2012; Galesic & Garcia-Retamero, 2011). An item
analysis based on Classical Testing Theory was conducted to
parse out item difficulty and discriminability, in accordance
with Formal Item Response Theory approaches. The same
procedure was followed for the graph design task. In total,
862 participants completed a random sample of 10-11 graph
design
problems
(e.g.,
Approximately
100
participants/problems). Analyses provided a detailed account
of the relevant psychometric properties of all task items,
facilitating a theoretical optimization of problem type across
the underlying skill dimensions (e.g., precisely selected items
that were most representative and unbiased problems
spanning the difficulty range; see Woller-Carter, 2015).

RiskLiteracy.org Graph Tutor Methods

To further explore how risky decision-making interacts with
graph literacy the creation of sensitive measurement tools is
needed. The results of the 2015 tutor indicated what type of
tools may be necessary. Training graph literacy aided in
general decision-making skills that focused on “visualizable”
risk situations (e.g., sunk cost). For instance, if someone is
confronted with a risky decision and the aid of a graph would
increase their ability to decide (e.g., icon arrays and safe sex
practices), then graph literacy training will help (Cokely &
Garcia-Retamero, 2015). Our lab took the firsts steps by
conducting a battery of previous, validated bias questions.
Then we used Formal Item Response Theory to analyze the
problems for difficulty and discriminability. The battery
focused on three different biases: Sunk cost, reference class

Woller-Carter (2015) created an online graph tutor for
RiskLiteracy.org that trained participants on the foundations
of graph literacy and the application of graphs to everyday
risky situations. The graph tutor was the prototype that which
the new online graph tutor was created upon. The goal of the
graph tutor is to briefly and efficiently train adult learners in
essential selection, design, and display of graphs that are
common in risk communications and related decision
education programs. Broadly, the graph tutor contains two
major components. The first consists of graph selection tasks
where participants choose the correct graph that (by current
standards) is best-suited for depicting specific types of data.
The second major training component is the graph design

Control Trial Results
Woller-Carter (2015) found large pre-test, post-test
differences in graph literacy that remained significant even
after controlling for initial levels of graph literacy (t(89) =
5.23, p ≤ .001, d = 1.10) after participants completed the
graph tutor. Interestingly, beyond general competency in
graph literacy, compared to a control group that completed a
STEM Foundations study skills training, graph literacy
training also significantly improved some general decision
making skills for decision tasks that did not otherwise include
any visual aid or graphical content (F(3, 87) = 10.08, p ≤ .001,
R2 = .033, d = 1.30). Findings are consistent with Skilled
Decision Theory and theoretical accounts of risk literacy
(Cokey et al., in press). Partial mediation between condition
and decision task performance indicated that improvements
in graph literacy directly mediated observed improvements in
general decision making skills (e.g., learning how to
represent data in a graph also helps people represent decisionrelevant data in useful ways).

Additional Decision-Making Items

3568

neglect, and framing. Fifty-three University of Oklahoma
students completed 90 (30 each bias) decision tasks taken
from various sources.
The finished product are six psychometrically sensitive
questions for each of the three types of bias. Results of the
analysis are seen below in Figure 1.

Sunk Cost

minutes to complete (e.g., mortgage or surgical risk
disclosure; medical treatment risk information). There is
currently no well-established solution, like CTAT, for the
creation of small scale, brief, scientifically validated
interventions. To fill this gap, following a survey of the
available literature, we developed a “proof of concept”
application in Python, following best practices based on
CTAT and related efforts (Aleven, Mclaren, Sewall, &
Koedinger, 2009; Anderson, Corbett, Koedinger, & Pelletier,
1995; Walker, Koedinger, Mclaren, & Rummel, 2006).
Specifically, we implemented the Risk Literacy Graph Tutor
platform in Python, to assess viability and trade-offs, as
compared to standard approaches implemented in Adobe
Flash.

Reference Class Neglect

Figure 2. The original graph literacy tutor programmed in
CTAT. The tutor was hosted on moodle.com, an open source
Learning Management System.

Framing

Figure 1. Visual representations of the Formal Item Response
Theory analysis for the three biases in our pilot measurement
study: Sunk cost (top), reference class neglect (middle), and
framing (bottom).

Construction of Python Graph Literacy Tutor
To better create a tutor development platform that meets the
needs of brief risk interventions the decision was made to
transfer the initial graph tutor from a Flash based platform
built in Carnagie Mellon University’s Cognitive Tutor
Authoring Tools (CTAT) to an independent Python built,
Flask tutor. For an example of the original graph tutor see
figure 2. A large and growing body of research has made
CTAT a quintessential and evolving intelligent tool for large
scale tutors. Despite many advantages, there are many
potentially valuable applications for (pseudo)intelligent and
adaptive tutors which may be narrow. For example, many
general-use decision support systems or decision aids made
for risk communication may only require between 10 and 120

The new graph tutor was built from the ground up with
Flask, a micro web framework written in Python. Some
notable advantages of Flask include:
• Flask is not tied to specific libraries or tools allowing
flexible design of the graph tutor to better suit immediate
needs (e.g., database connectivity, form validation, etc.).
• Flask is lightweight (no object-relational mapping,
simple routing, and easy set-up) reducing the system
requirements and development time.
• Flask is documented and community adopted,
reducing the learning curve of implementing new
solutions.
Beyond several notable benefits of re-development of the
graph tutor, there are also some notable costs. First, the initial
tutor programmed in Flash proved problematic with the
number of online interfaces pivoting from the platform and
potentially requiring extra authentication. These issues were
persistent enough that, ultimately, an entirely new web
template (e.g., User interface) had to be created. Second, the
Learning Management System (LMS) platform (e.g., Moodle
or Blackboard) had to be entirely abandoned to better
accommodate easier implementation for experimentation,
which could prove problematic whenever researchers want to
track large numbers of specific users over extended periods

3569

of time (e.g., months). Third, creating online tools that use
the Intelligent Tutoring System (ITS) model.
Creating an authorizing adaptive tutor in Python also
required development of additional infrastructure
components. First, we developed APIs (“Application
Programming Interfaces”) for user profiles and tutor
validation, database connectivity, and a user interface. More
specifically, the previous graph tutor used a LMS to track
students, which needed a student to enroll in the created class
and be approved by the class admin. Now, users can create
their own profile that is encrypted and inserted into a
database. This design allows for the sharing of the tutor to
participants for experimental purposes or for a casual user to
independently take the tutor.
Backend and platform development also employed
MongoDB, a NoSQL database, to power our tutor
application. As a NoSQL database, MongoDB records are
structured like that of Python dictionary objects. This feature
was emphasized in our selection of a database management
system (DBMS) as it relied on existing knowledge of Python,
reducing the prerequisites to contribute new features for the
graph tutor in the future. There are many technical
differences between MongoDB and other DBMS; however,
the nuances of SQL versus NoSQL, or variations of DBMS
within the NoSQL categories generally seem practically
irrelevant for (most) projects of similar size and scope.
Finally, authorizing via Java Script allows for the immediate
feedback essential to worked-example tutors, which proved
essential given the theoretical and practical importance of
immediate user feedback during training.

Conclusions
Graphs are ubiquitous across modern media and risk
communications. For many people, graphs simplify and
clarify important information about risk, which is essential
for informed decision making. In this paper we presented a
brief overview of progress and ongoing efforts aimed at
developing inclusive decision education programs designed
to efficiently improve fundamental adult graph literacy and
decision making skills. These efforts represent a significant
extension to the RiskLiteracy.org platform, which has been
accessed by more than 50,000 people from 166 countries
since 2012. The mission of this multinational collaborative
effort is to advance the science for informed decision making,
with support of a network of scientists who provide validated
educational resources such as research instruments (e.g.,
Berlin Numeracy Test) and inclusive decision education
programs (e.g., the Graph Literacy Tutor).
Beyond
increasing the availability of skilled decision making
resources, the current review also provides an overview of the
first proof-of-concept for the Python-based (simplified)
extension of the RiskLiteracy.org platform. Although this
new approach may streamline development of related
dynamic risk communications and training programs, several
pressing issues remain. For example, we currently have a
need for greater integration of iterative (life-cycle)
approaches to user-experience and usability optimization.

There is also a need to further investigate the robustness of
and longitudinal stability of training effects across diverse
participants and naturalistic decision tasks.
In closing, it is useful to note that most consumers should
not expect to gain any general cognitive benefit from
commercially available products designed to train general
cognitive capacities. While this may seem problematic for us
given our stated goals, our approach is actually quite
different. Our goal is not to train basic abilities or capacities.
Instead, we are focused on complex types of cognitive skills
that must be acquired through deliberate practice and training
(Cokely et al., in press), with an emphasis on acquired skills
that are known to be valuable for everyday and high-stakes
naturalistic decision making (e.g., numeracy, risk literacy,
graph literacy). Accordingly, it should not be surprising that
our basic skill tutor results indicate near and far(ish) transfer
to applications beyond the specific training context (e.g.,
learning how bar graphs can be used to deceive in general
may help people navigate complicated graphs in political,
financial, or health contexts). Just as skilled reading
comprehension is a valuable component of many everyday
activities, the ability to evaluate and understand risk is also
widely-applicable. To the extent our control trial results
generalize, we should expect that there are likely many
currently under-appreciated opportunities to develop and
apply pseudo-intelligent tutoring programs to great effect.

References
Allan, J.N., Ripberger, J., Ybarra, V.T., Cokely, E.T. (in
press) Predicting Decision Resilience: A Model of
Tornado Myth Vulnerability
Aleven, V., Mclaren, B. M., Sewall, J., & Koedinger, K. R.
(2006). The Cognitive Tutor Authoring Tools (CTAT):
Preliminary Evaluation of Efficiency Gains. Intelligent
Tutoring Systems Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, 61-70.
Aleven, V., Mclaren, B., Sewall, J., & Koedinger, K. (2009).
A new paradigm for intelligent tutoring systems:
Example-tracing tutors. International Journal of
Artificial Intelligence in Education,19(2), 105-154.
Anderson, J., Boyle, C. F., & Reiser, B. J. (1985). Intelligent
Tutoring Systems. Science,228, 456-461.
Anderson, J. R., Corbett, A. T., Koedinger, K. R., & Pelletier,
R. (1995). Cognitive Tutors: Lessons Learned. Journal
of the Learning Sciences,4(2), 167-207.
Bertin, J. (2011). Semiology of graphics: diagrams, networks,
maps. Redlands, CA: ESRI Press.
Carpenter, P. A., & Shah, P. (1998). A model of the
perceptual and conceptual processes in graph
comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied,4(2), 75-100.
Cleveland, W. S., & McGill, R. (1986). An experiment in
graphical perception. International Journal of ManMachine Studies, 25, 491–500.
Cokely, E. T., Galesic, M., Schulz, E., Ghazal, S., & GarciaRetamero, R. (2012). Measuring risk literacy: The Berlin

3570

Numeracy Test. Judgment and Decision Making. 7(1).
25-47
Cokely, E.T., Feltz, A., Ghazal, S., Allan, J.N., Petrova, D.,
& Garcia-Retamero, R., (in press). Decision making
skill: From intelligence to numeracy and expertise. In K.
A. Ericsson, R. R. Hoffman, A. Kozbelt, & A. M.
Williams (2nd Eds.), Cambridge Handbook of Expertise
and Expert Performance. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Corbett, A., & Anderson, J. R. (1991). Feedback control and
learning to program with the CMU LISP tutor. AERA
Annual Meeting.
Galesic, M., & Garcia-Retamero, R. (2011). Graph Literacy:
A Cross-Cultural Comparison. Medical Decision
Making,31(3), 444-457.
Garcia-Retamero, R. & Cokely, E. T. (2013).
Communicating
Health
Risks
with
Visual
Aids. PsycEXTRA Dataset.
Garcia-Retamero, R. & Cokely, E. T. (2017). Designing
visual aids that promote risl literacy: A systematic
review of health research and evidence-based design
heuristics. Human Factors.
Gattis, M. (2002). Structure mapping in spatial reasoning.
Cognitive Development, 17, 1157–1183.
Gattis, M., & Holyoak, K. J. (1996). Mapping conceptual to
spatial relations in visual reasoning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 22, 231–239.
Hegarty, M., & Waller, D. (2005). Individual differences in
spatial abilities. In P. Shah & A. Miyake (Eds.), The
Cambridge handbook of visuospatial thinking (pp. 121–
169). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Koedinger, K. R., & Aleven, V. (2007). Exploring the
Assistance Dilemma in Experiments with Cognitive
Tutors. Educational Psychology Review,19(3), 239-264.
Koedinger, K. R., & Corbett, A. (2006). Cognitive Tutor
. The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences, 135.
Kosslyn, S. M. (1989). Understanding charts and
graphs. Applied Cognitive Psychology,3(3), 185-225.
Lohse, G. L. (1993). A Cognitive Model for Understanding
Graphical
Perception.
Human–Computer
Interaction,8(4), 353-388.
Lovett, M., Meyer, O., & Thille, C. (2008). JIME - The Open
Learning Initiative: Measuring the Effectiveness of the
OLI Statistics Course in Accelerating Student
Learning. Journal of Interactive Media in
Education,2008(1), 13.
Maichle, U. (1994). Cognitive processes in understanding
line graphs. In W. Schnotz & R. W. Kulhavy (Eds.),
Comprehension of graphics (pp. 207–227). Amsterdam,
The Netherlands: North-Holland Elsevier Science.
Mathan, S. A., & Koedinger, K. R. (2005). Fostering the
Intelligent Novice: Learning From Errors With
Metacognitive
Tutoring.
Educational
Psychologist,40(4), 257-265.
Nelson, D. E., Hesse, B. W., & Croyle, R. T. (2009). Making
data talk: communicating public health data to the

public, policy makers, and the press. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Okan, Y., Woller-Carter, M., Simon, S., Russell, K., Ghazal,
S., Parpart, P., . . . Cokely, E. T. (2013). Overcoming
distortions in political and health communication:
mechanisms of graph literacy. PsycEXTRA Dataset.
Peebles, D., & Cheng, P. C. H. (2001). Graph-based
reasoning: From task analysis to cognitive explanation.
In J. D. Moore & K. Stenning (Eds.), Proceedings of the
Twenty Third Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 762–767). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Petrova, D., Garcia-Retamero, R., Catena, A., Cokely, E. T.,
Heredia Carrasco, A., Arrebola Moreno, A., & Ramírez
Hernández, J. A. (2016). Numeracy predicts risk of PreHospital decision delay: A retrospective study of acute
coronary syndrome survival. Annals of Behavioral
Medicine.
Pinker, S. (1990). A theory of graph comprehension. In R.
Freedle (Ed.), Artificial intelligence and the future of
testing (pp. 73–126). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ratwani, R. M., & Trafton, J. G. (2008). Shedding light on
the graph schema: Perceptual features versus invariant
structure. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15, 757–
762.
Roediger, H. L., & Karpicke, J. D. (2006). The Power of
Testing Memory . Perspectives on Psychological
Science,1(3), 181-210. d
Shah, P., Freedman, E. G., & Vekiri, I. (2005). The
comprehension of quantitative information in graphical
displays. In P. Shah & A. Miyake (Eds.), The Cambridge
handbook of visuospatial thinking (pp. 426–476). New
York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Simkin, D., & Hastie, R. (1987). An information-processing
analysis of graph perception. Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 82, 454–465.
Sweller, J., Van Merrienboer, J. J., & Pass, F. G. (1998).
Cognitive Architecture and Instructional Design.
Educational Psychology Review,10(3).
Walker, E., Koedinger, K., Mclaren, B., & Rummel, N.
(2006). Cognitive Tutors as Research Platforms:
Extending an Established Tutoring System for
Collaborative and Metacognitive Experimentation.
Intelligent Tutoring Systems Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, 207-216.
Woller-Carter, M. M., Okan, Y., Cokely, E. T., & GarciaRetamero, R. (2012). Communicating and Distorting
Risks with Graphs: An Eye-Tracking Study.
PsycEXTRA Dataset
Woller-Carter, M. (2015). Development of the intelligent
graphs for everyday risky decisions tutor. Open Access
Dissertation, Michigan Technological University.
Retrieved from http://digitalcommons.mtu.edu/etdr/59/

3571

