Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS) and the Face Inversion Effect:
Anodal stimulation at Fp3 reduces recognition for upright faces
Ciro Civile (ciroc@mcmaster.ca)
Department of Psychology, Neuroscience, & Behaviour,
McMaster University, Canada.

Sukhvinder Obhi (obhi@mcmaster.ca)
. Department of Psychology, Neuroscience, & Behaviour,
McMaster University, Canada.

I.P.L. McLaren (I.P.L.McLaren@exeter.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, College of Life and Environmental Sciences,
University of Exeter, UK.

Abstract
Perceptual learning is a key perceptual skill that people possess,
in particular, it contributes to their ability to distinguish between
faces thus recognize individuals. Recently, we showed that anodal
transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS) at Fp3 abolishes
the inversion effect (that would otherwise exist) for familiar
checkerboards created from a prototype. Because of the close
analogy between the inversion effect obtained with checkerboards,
which we use as a marker for perceptual learning, and the
traditional face inversion effect (upright faces recognized better
than inverted ones), we investigated the effects of anodal tDCS at
Fp3 during an old/new recognition task for upright and inverted
faces. Results showed that stimulation significantly reduced the
face inversion effect compared to controls. The effect was
strongest in reducing recognition performance to upright faces.
This result supports our account of perceptual learning and its role
as a key factor in face recognition.
Keywords: TDCS; Perceptual learning; Face inversion effect;
Old/new recognition task; Face recognition

Introduction
Perceptual learning refers to an enhanced ability to
distinguish between similar stimuli as a consequence of
experience with them or stimuli like them. It also plays a
key role in learning to identify stimuli as specific exemplars
of a category, and not confuse one stimulus with another
similar one (e.g. wine experts and wines, or bird watchers
and warblers; James, 1890; see Hall, 1980 for a review). We
know that people (and other animals) can improve their
perceptual skills as a result of experience with stimuli, and
recent studies have shown this phenomenon to be
responsible for some key perceptual skills that people
possess. In particular, it contributes to our ability to
distinguish between faces and recognize individuals. For
example, if we pre-expose someone to a set of
checkerboards, all of which are produced by imposing
random variation on one original prototype checkerboard,
then this will have the effect of making them better able to
distinguish between exemplars generated in this way – a

basic perceptual learning effect. They will now be able to
tell two otherwise similar checkerboards apart where once
they might have found it difficult to do so, and such preexposure improves their ability to identify checkerboards
they have been asked to memorize in a subsequent
recognition test (McLaren, Leevers & Mackintosh, 1994).
McLaren (1997) extended this result to show that the same
procedures could also produce an inversion effect, with
upright exemplars discriminated better than inverted ones.
Civile et al. (2014) further developed the case for
perceptual learning as a contributor to the face inversion
effect (i.e. that upright faces are recognized much better than
inverted ones), by showing that these results can be obtained
with the kind of old/new recognition paradigm
conventionally used in such studies (Yin, 1969; Diamond &
Carey, 1986; see Maurer, Le Grand, & Mondloch, 2002 for
a review).
Participants were trained to categorize
(categorization task) checkerboard exemplars from two
prototype-defined categories (the pre-exposure phase),
before being shown an equal number of checkerboard
exemplars (which they had not previously encountered)
drawn from either one of the now familiar categories or a
novel category, half of which were upright and half
inverted. Participants were then tested for recognition of
these exemplars after this study phase. The results
confirmed the inversion effect for checkerboard exemplars
drawn from a familiar category, and its absence for
exemplars drawn from a novel category, strengthening the
case for perceptual learning contributing to the inversion
effect found with faces.
In a recent study, Civile et al. (2016) demonstrated
that tDCS to dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) at Fp3
site significantly affected perceptual learning and reduced
the inversion effect that can otherwise be obtained with
checkerboards. The authors adopted the same old/new
recognition task as in Civile et al. (2014)’s study which
uses a categorization task to pre-expose participants to the
stimuli i.e. checkerboards. A previous study by Ambrus et
al., (2011) had found that anodal tDCS (compared to sham)

1782

applied to the Fp3 during the training phase of a
categorization task where participants had to identify
prototype and low-distortion patterns as category members
reduced classification accuracy for the prototype. Thus, as
Civile et al. (2014)’s study used prototype-defined
checkerboard categories and formation of a strong
representation of the prototype is a prerequisite for
perceptual learning (McLaren, Kaye, & Mackintosh,1989),
Civile et al. (2016)’s study adopted the same Fp3 montage
as that adopted by Ambrus et al. (2011). Civile et al. (2016)
showed that the control condition (sham tDCS stimulation
over Fp3 delivered during the pre-exposure phase, i.e. the
checkerboard categorization task) replicated the usual
inversion effect for checkerboards drawn from a familiar
category, but, as expected, not for checkerboard exemplars
drawn from a control (novel) category that had not been preexposed. Critically, anodal tDCS to the same brain region
changed this pattern, as there was now no inversion effect
for stimuli drawn from either familiar or unfamiliar
category, and the upright exemplars drawn from a familiar
category were less well recognized than those drawn from
the novel category, an indication that perceptual learning
may even have been reversed. This remarkable and
informative result suggested that perceptual learning in
humans could be turned 'on' and 'off".
Civile et al.’s (2016) study is the first evidence that
anodal tDCS administered during the pre-exposure phase
can affect perceptual learning later on when participants are
asked to memorize and recognize exemplars of
checkerboards drawn from the checkerboard categories seen
in during the pre-exposure phase (categorization task). The
next important question to address is whether or not the
same tDCS procedure would also affect perceptual learning
that has already taken place. Given the lifelong expertise we
have for faces, and given the already established analogy
between the inversion effect obtained with checkerboards
(McLaren, 1997; McLaren & Civile, 2011; Civile et al.,
2014; Civile et al., 2016) and that usually obtained with
faces (for a review see Maurer et al., 2002), in the current
study we extended the tDCS paradigm used in Civile et al.’
(2016) to the inversion effect for faces. We expected to
obtain a strong inversion effect for familiar faces in the
sham tDCS group, but a significantly reduced inversion
effect for familiar faces in the anodal tDCS group because,
as was the case for Civile et al.’s (2016) familiar upright
checkerboards, we expected anodal tDCS over Fp3 to
disrupt recognition performance for familiar upright faces.
Such a result would advance our understanding of
both the mechanisms controlling perceptual learning and the
face inversion effect in a number of ways. We would have
found an experimental procedure (anodal tDCS at Fp3 brain
site) able to selectively affect perceptual learning and its
expression, and this would help in discriminating between
competing theories. Furthermore, we would have additional
evidence that perceptual learning is a contributor (at least in
part) to the face inversion effect. Finally, this would be the
first demonstration in the literature of how relatively brief

tDCS stimulation could reduce our ability to recognize
upright familiar faces.

Method
We adopted the tDCS montage used in Civile et al.
(2016). Each subject was randomly assigned to either sham
or anodal tDCS conditions. In the sham condition, the tDCS
stimulation was only delivered for 30s, to evoke the
sensation of being stimulated, without causing
neurophysiological
changes
that
may
influence
performance. In the anodal tDCS condition, the stimulation
was delivered for 10 mins while the subjects were
completing an old/new recognition computer task that used
images of faces. In both sample groups, the sham and tDCS
stimulation started when the computer task began. In the
first part of the computer task, the study phase, subjects
were asked to memorize a set of upright and inverted faces
presented one at a time. Following this, subjects were given
a recognition task where they pressed one key if they
thought they had seen the face before, and another key if
they thought they had not seen the face before. All the faces
seen in the study phase were presented again intermixed
with an equal number of new faces of each type (i.e. upright
faces, and inverted faces). This old/new recognition task is a
standard method of assessing face processing and the
inversion effect (Yin, 1969; Diamond & Carey, 1986;
Civile, McLaren, & McLaren, 2016; Civile, McLaren, &
McLaren, 2014). Our main measure was accuracy scores
during recognition converted into signal-detection d-prime
“d´”. We also examined reaction time responses to check for
any speed-accuracy trade-off that could affect our
interpretation of the results.

Subjects
Forty-eight students (39 women; mean age = 18.9,
age range = 18-22 years) from McMaster University
participated in this experiment. Twenty-four subjects were
randomly assigned to each of two groups (sham tDCS,
anodal tDCS). All subjects were right-handed and were
given course credits for their participation. The experiment
was approved by the research ethics committee at McMaster
University. Written informed consent was obtained after the
nature and possible consequences of the study were
explained. Sample size was determined in advance based on
previous studies (Civile et al., 2014; McLaren 1997) that
found the original inversion effect for checkerboards and
that showed a clear effect of tDCS on perceptual learning
(Civile et al., 2016; McLaren, Carpenter, Civile, McLaren,
Zhao, Ku, Milton, Verbruggen, 2016), as well as previous
studies that adopted the same old/new recognition task and
face stimuli that we used here (Civile, McLaren, McLaren,
2014; and Civile, McLaren, McLaren, 2016 obtained a
strong face inversion effect with group samples of 24
subjects). Additionally, we conducted a post-hoc power
analysis using G*power software (Faul, Erdfelder, Lang, &
Buchner, 2007) that revealed a statistical power of 0.92, in

1783

line with the recommended 0.80 level of power (Cohen,
1988).

Trial Structure
Following the instructions, in each trial of the study
phase subjects saw a fixation cross in the center of the
screen presented for 1 second. After this, one of the faces
was presented on screen for 4 seconds. The next trial started
with the presentation of a fixation cross again. After all 64
faces had been presented, the program displayed another set
of instructions, explaining the recognition task. In this task,
subjects were asked to press the ‘.’ key if they recognized
the stimulus as having been shown in the study phase on
any given trial, or press ‘x’ if they did not (the keys were
counterbalanced). During the recognition task, the faces
were shown for 4 seconds during which time subjects had to
respond. The experiment was implemented using SuperLab
4.5 installed on a PC (see Figure 1, Panel B).

Materials
The study used 128 images of male faces. Only male
faces were used because they allowed the inclusion of ears
in the images as well. Men tend to have shorter hair with
ears visible whereas women often have longer hair covering
the ears, making the visibility of these features rather
variable. The faces were standardized in gray-scale format
and cropped around the hairline in Adobe Photoshop. The
same set of faces was previously used in studies that
adopted the same old/new recognition task with upright and
inverted faces that we used in the study here reported
(Civile, McLaren, & McLaren, 2014; Civile, McLaren, &
McLaren, 2016).

Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS)
All participants first completed a brain stimulation
safety screening questionnaire. Stimulation was delivered by
a battery driven, constant current stimulator (Neuroelectrics)
via a pair of surface sponge electrodes (25 cm2), soaked in a
saline solution (0.9% NaCl), and applied to the scalp at the
target areas of stimulation. Electrodes delivered a constant
current of 1.2 mA (current density: 0.048 mA/cm²); the
choice of the intensity is in line with Civile et al. (2016)’s
study (see Neuroelectics website for a review of clinical
studies that suggest keeping the average current densities in
electrodes below 0.06 mA/cm2). As in Civile et al. (2016)’s
study, we adopted a bilateral bipolar-non-balanced montage
with one of the electrodes (anode/target) placed over the left
PFC (Fp3) and the other (Ambrus et al., 2011; Kincses et
al., 2003) was placed on the forehead, just above the right
eyebrow. In the anodal tDCS condition, the current was
applied for 10 mins (fade-in and fade-out of 5 s) from when
the subjects began the computer task and throughout the
old/new recognition task. Sham received the same 5 s fadein and fade-out, but only 30 s stimulation between them,
which terminated shortly after the computer task started.
The electrodes were left on the participant throughout the
experiment (see Figure 1, Panel A).

Behavioral Task
The old/new recognition task consisted of two
parts: a ‘study phase’ and an ‘old/new recognition phase’
(Civile, McLaren, & McLaren, 2014; Civile, McLaren, &
McLaren, 2016). In the study phase, each subject was
shown upright and inverted faces with 32 images for each
type (64 images in total). Faces were presented one at a time
in random order. In the old/new recognition phase, 64 novel
faces split into the same stimulus types were added to the 64
faces seen in the study phase, and all 128 images were
presented one at a time in random order. Each face never
appeared in more than one condition during the experiment
for the same participant.

Figure 1: Panel a shows the electrode configuration of the
tDCS and the stimulation set up on the Neuroelectrics
software (NIC). Panel b shows the structure of the trials
presented during the old/new recognition task.

1784

Data Analysis
Our primary measure was performance accuracy in
the two recognition tasks. The data from all the participants
was used in the signal detection d' analysis of the
recognition task (old and new stimuli for each stimulus
type) where a d’ = of 0.00 indicates chance-level
performance (Stanislaw & Todorov, 1999). Each p-value
reported in this paper is two-tailed, and we also report the F
or t value along with measures of variability (SE or SEM)
and effect size (Cohen’s d followed by the 95% confidence
interval [CI] for d). The study had a 2 x 2 mixed model
design using as a within-subjects factor Face Orientation
(upright, inverted) and the between-subjects factor tDCS
(sham, anodal). Follow up, paired t-tests analyses were
conducted to compare performance on upright and inverted
faces (the inversion effect) in each tDCS group (sham,
anodal). We also assessed performance against chance (d' of
0) to show that both upright and inverted faces in the tDCS
sham and anodal groups were recognized (for all four
conditions we found a p < .001).

Results
The statistical analysis (ANOVA) using the factors
Face Orientation (upright/inverted) x tDCS (anodal/sham)
revealed a significant interaction, F(1, 46) = 7.45, MSE =
0.12, p = .009, d = 0.78, CI = 0.98, 0.58. We decomposed
the interaction by looking at the inversion effect (upright
faces – inverted faces) in each tDCS group (sham, anodal)
separately. Following Civile et al’s (2016) study, we
expected to find the usual inversion effect for faces in the
tDCS sham group. As predicted, a planned comparison
showed a significant inversion effect with upright faces (M
= 1.09, SE = 0.11) being recognized significantly better than
inverted faces (M = 0.35, SE = 0.07), t(23) = 7.48, SE =
0.09, p < .001, d = 1.59, CI = 1.78, 1.41. Critically, we
found a reduced (but still significant) inversion effect in the
tDCS anodal group, recognition of upright faces (M = 0.78,
SE = 0.11) compared to inverted faces (M = 0.44, SE =
0.08), t(23) = 3.19, SE = 0.11, p = .004, d = 0.69 , CI = 0.89,
0.49 (see Figure 2). Thus, the inversion effect in the tDCS
sham group was significantly greater than that in the tDCS
anodal group, a similar result to that previously found in
Civile et al. (2016)’s study using prototype-defined
categories of familiar checkerboards.
Importantly, in Civile et al. (2016)’s study
(Experiment 1) statistical analysis showed recognition of
upright familiar checkerboards in the tDCS anodal group
was reduced compared to that for familiar checkerboards in
the tDCS sham group. We computed an additional analysis
in our study to directly compare the recognition
performance for upright faces in the two tDCS groups
(sham, anodal). The results were that recognition for upright
faces in the tDCS anodal group was reduced compared to
that in the tDCS sham group, t(46) = 1.95, SE = 0.14, p =
.028 (1-tail), d = 0.56, CI = 0.78, 0.34. Thus, in both Civile
et al. (2016)’s study (Experiment 1) and in our current

study, we have some evidence that anodal tDCS may affect
the recognition of upright familiar stimuli (checkerboards in
Civile et al, 2016, and faces in the current study). We
calculated the Bayes factor using the procedures outlined by
Dienes (2011) for this effect with faces using the effect for
checkerboards in Civile et al. (2016)’s study (Experiment 1)
as the prior, setting the standard deviation of p (population
value |theory) to the mean for the difference between
recognition for familiar upright checkerboards in the tDCS
sham group vs that in the tDCS anodal group (0.359). We
used the standard error and the mean difference for tDCS
sham upright faces vs tDCS anodal upright faces effect
found in our study and assumed a one-tailed distribution for
our theory and a mean of 0. This gave a Bayes factor (B) of
3.65. This factor is greater than 3, providing good support
for this component of the reduction in the inversion effect
(for Bayes factor calculator see Dienes, 2011).
Statistical analysis (ANOVA) of the response
latencies was also conducted. Simple comparisons showed a
significant inversion effect for both Anodal (p <.001) and
Sham (p =.009) groups, and the inversion effect was
numericaly larger for the Anodal group, but no significant
interaction (p = .63) was found. For completeness, we report
the mean latencies for each stimulus condition: Sham
upright faces, 1.37 s; Sham inverted faces, 1.47 s; Anodal
upright faces, 1.48 s; Anodal inverted faces, 1.61 s.
Finally, we also report here the SDT Bias estimates for
each of the four stimulus’ conditions: Sham upright faces,
β= 1.33; Sham inverted faces, β= 1.12; Anodal upright
faces, β= 1.70; Anodal inverted faces, β= 1.04.

1785

Figure 2: The y-axis gives d’ means for the old/new
recognition task (higher _ better, 0 _ chance), and the
different stimulus’ conditions in the two tDCS groups
(sham, anodal) are shown on the x-axis. The dimensions of
the stimuli were 6.95 cm × 5.80 cm. Participants sat 1 m
away from the screen on which the images were presented.

Discussion
We adopted the same procedures used in Civile et
al. (2016) employing the old/new recognition task for faces
that is a standard in the literature. The results indicate that
anodal tDCS impaired recognition performance for upright
faces, and as a consequence, the inversion effect was
significantly reduced compared to the usual inversion effect
found with faces that can be seen in the sham condition.
The MKM model (McLaren, Kaye and
Mackintosh, 1989) and its later development in McLaren
and Mackintosh (2000) and McLaren, Forrest and McLaren
(2014) can explain the inversion effects reported by
McLaren (1997) and Civile et al (2014) by appealing to
perceptual learning as a consequence of experience with the
category. But if the salience modulation based on prediction
error implemented by this model is disrupted (by anodal
tDCS), then the MKM model turns into one more akin to
McClelland and Rumelhart’s (M&R) (1985) model of
categorization, and enhanced generalization between
exemplars as a consequence of familiarity with that category
is predicted rather than the enhanced discriminability that is
the hallmark of perceptual learning. The result is the
elimination of the inversion effect seen with artificial
stimuli (that we take to be entirely due to perceptual
learning), and even some reversal of the perceptual learning
effect, explaining the pattern observed by Civile et al
(2016). This interpretation of the results from Civile et al.
(2016)’s study also applies to Ambrus et al. (2011)’s finding
that tDCS reduces learning to the prototype, and increases
generalization to random patterns. This would result in the
elimination of the prototype effect, which is what we would
expect if the MKM model of perceptual learning were, in
effect, to be turned into the M&R model of categorization
by turning off the error-based modulation of salience that is
the hallmark of MKM.
Our present data imply that anodal tDCS to Fp3 not
only affects perceptual learning for artificial stimuli (the
checkerboards in Civile et al., 2016) that were novel until
encountered in the experimental setting but can also affect
the long established perceptual learning for faces that is a
result of experience over many years. This is a truly striking
result that suggests that perhaps anodal tDCS over Fp3 may
prevent individuals from exploiting “expertise” when called
on to discriminate between stimuli of a class they are very
familiar with.
These data strengthen the analogy between our
checkerboard experiments and those with faces. In both
cases, anodal tDCS reduces the inversion effect and reduces
performance on upright exemplars taken from a familiar
category. This suggests that the inversion effect obtained
with what were novel, artificial stimuli, and that we attribute
to perceptual learning, is at least one component of the face
inversion effect. True, the inversion effect was completely
eliminated by anodal stimulation in Civile et al (2016) but is
still present in our stimulation group when we use faces.
This could mean that any disruption of perceptual learning
(which might be expected to be stronger after many years of

experience) is not complete in the current experiment, or it
might be that there is a component of the face inversion
effect that is not due to perceptual learning. We cannot say
at present. What we can say is that the theory we have of
how anodal tDCS to Fp3 works predicted a reduced
inversion effect, and our salience modulation via error
account of perceptual learning is, to that extent, further
validated. We have also shown that we can turn perceptual
learning in humans on and off, which opens the door to
future applications.
These data also contribute to a recent line of
studies that tested that effects of tDCS stimulation delivered
at occipital brain regions on face recognition tasks. In one
study the authors tested tDCS stimulation on an orientation
judgment task for faces while recording brain activity with
EEG. Results showed that anodal tDCS compared to sham,
significantly reduced the N170 for both upright and inverted
faces, despite not affecting the size of the inversion effect
(Yang et al., 2014, Experiment1). In the same study
(Experiment 2) the authors also showed that the same tDCS
paradigm applied before a composite face effect task (the
effect refers to an impairment at recognizing the top half of
a familiar face when matched with the bottom half of
another face) can significantly reduce the composite effect
by enhancing performance for incongruent faces (composite
faces created by mismatched top and bottom halves). In a
similar vein, another study found that off-line (stimulation
delivered before the task) anodal tDCS enhances memory
performance for both upright faces and objects (inversion
was not tested). In contrast, no enhancement was found for
online (stimulation delivered during task execution) and
sham tDCS stimulation (Barbieri et al., 2016). Together, the
results from these studies show that tDCS at occipital
regions seems to be effective at enhancing recognition
performance (at least when tDCS is delivered off-line).
Thus, this suggests that tDCS at occipital brain regions
could possibly enhance perceptual learning in our
experimental paradigm (either with checkerboards or faces).
Future studies should test this and directly compare the
effect of tDCS at Fp3 with that of tDCS at occipital sites
during (and off-line) using Civile et al. (2016)’s
checkerboard paradigm and our face paradigm.

References
Ambrus G. G., Zimmer M., Kincses Z. T., Harza I., Kovacs
G., Paulus W., and Antal, A. (2011). The enhancement
of cortical excitability over the DLPFC before and
during training impairs categorization in the prototype
distortion task. Neuropsychologia 49, 1974–1980.
Barbieri, M., Negrini, M., Nitsche, M., and Rivolta, D.
(2016). AnodaltDCS over the human right occipital
cortex enhances the perception and memory of both
faces and objects. Neuropsychologia, 81, 238– 244
Civile, C., Zhao, D., Ku, Y., Elchlepp, H., Lavric, A., and
McLaren, I.P.L. (2014). Perceptual learning and
inversion effects: Recognition of prototype-defined
familiar checkerboards. Journal of Experimental

1786

Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 40, 144-61.
Civile, C., Verbruggen, F., McLaren, R., Zhao, D., Ku, Y.,
and McLaren, I.P.L. (2016). Switching off perceptual
learning: Anodal transcranial direct current stimulation
(tDCS) at Fp3 eliminates perceptual learning in humans.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Learning
and Cognition, 42, 290-296.
Civile, C., McLaren, R., and McLaren, I.P.L. (2016). The
face inversion effect: Roles of first and second-order
relational information. The American Journal of
Psychology, 129, 23-35.
Civile, C., McLaren, R., and McLaren, I. P. L. (2014b). The
face inversion effect: Parts and wholes. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 67, 728–746.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the
behavioural sciences (2nd ed.). HillSEale, NJ: Lawrence
Earlbaum Associates.
Diamond, R. & Carey, S. (1986). Why faces are and are not
special: An effect of expertise. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 115, 107-117.
Dienes, Z. (2011). Bayesian versus orthodox statistics:
Which side are you on? Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 6, 274–290.
Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Lang, A., and Buchner, A. (2007).
G*Power3: A ﬂexible statistical power analysis program
for the social, behavioural, and biomedical sciences.
Behaviour Research Methods, 39, 175–191.
Hall, G. (1980). Exposure learning in animals.
Psychological Bulletin, 88, 535-550.
James, W. (1890). Principles of psychology. New York:
Holt.
Kincses T. Z., Antal A., Nitsche M. A., Bártfai O., and
Paulus W. (2003). Facilitation of probabilistic
classification learning by transcranial direct current
stimulation of the prefrontal cortex in the
human. Neuropsychologia, 42, 113–117
Maurer, D., Le Grand, R., and Mondloch, C. (2002). The
many faces of conﬁgural processing. Trends in
Cognitive Science, 6, 255-260.
McClelland, J.L. & Rumelhart, D.E. (1985). Distributed
memory and the representation of general and specific
information. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 114, 159-197.
McLaren, I.P.L. (1997). Categorization and perceptual
learning: An analogue of the face inversion effect. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 50A,
257-273.
McLaren, I.P.L., Carpenter, K., Civile, C., McLaren, R.,
Zhao, D., Ku, Y., Milton, F., and Verbruggen, F. (2016).
Categorisation and Perceptual Learning: Why tDCS to
Left DLPC enhances generalisation. Associative
Learning and Cognition. Homage to Prof. N.J.
Mackintosh. Trobalon, J.B., and Chamizo, V.D. (Eds.),
University of Barcelona.
McLaren, I.P.L., and Civile, C. (2011). Perceptual learning
for a familiar category under inversion: An analogue of
face inversion? In L. Carlson, C. Hoelscher, & T.F.

Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, (pp. 33203325). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
McLaren, I. P. L., Leevers, H. L., & Mackintosh, N. J.
(1994). Recognition, categorisation and perceptual
learning. In C. Umilta & M. Moscovitch (Eds.),
Attention & performance XV (pp. 889–909). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
McLaren, I.P.L., Kaye, H. & Mackintosh, N.J. (1989). An
associative theory of the representation of stimuli:
Applications to perceptual learning and latent inhibition.
In R.G.M. Morris (Ed.) Parallel Distributed Processing
- Implications for Psychology and Neurobiology.
Oxford, Oxford University Press.
McLaren, I.P.L. and Mackintosh, N.J. (2000). An elemental
model of associative learning: Latent inhibition and
perceptual learning. Animal Learning and Behavior, 38,
211-246.
McLaren,
I.P.L.,
Forrest,
C.L.,
McLaren,
R.P. (2012). Elemental representation and configural
mappings: combining elemental and configural theories
of associative learning. Learning and Behavior, 40, 320333.
Stanislaw, H., and Todorov, N. (1999). Calculation of signal
detection theory measures. Behaviour Research
Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 31, 137–149
Yang, L-Z., Zhang, W., Shi, B., Yang, Z., Wei, Z., Gu, F.,
Zhang, J., Cui, G., Liu, Y., Zhou, T., Zhang, X., and
Rao, H. (2014). Electrical Stimulation over bilateral
occipito-temporal regions reduces N170 in the right
hemisphere and the Composite Face Effect. PLoS ONE
9(12): e115772. pmid:25531112
Yin, R. K. (1969). Looking at upside-down faces. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 81, 141-145.

1787

