Uncovering visual priors in spatial memory using serial reproduction
Thomas A. Langlois* (thomas.langlois@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

Nori Jacoby* (kj2413@Columbia.edu)
Center for Science and Society, Columbia University
New York, NY 10027 USA

Jordan Suchow (suchow@berkeley.edu)
Thomas L. Griffiths (tom_griffiths@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
*These authors contributed equally to this work
Abstract

it in the recalled position (see Figure 1). Huttenlocher et al.
(1991) found that participants tend to misplace dots toward
a central (prototypical) location in each of the quadrants of
a circle. Following these results, Wedell et al. (2007) tried
to predict prototypical positions in spatial memory for dots
presented inside a variety of geometric shapes (circle, square,
triangle, vertical oval, horizontal oval, and pentagon). In the
study, participants were shown thirty-two dots aligned along
two concentric circles within each shape. A parametric model
with four components (prototypes) was fitted to the remembered positions of the dots, confirming that visual memory of
these shapes shows substantial categorical effects.
The approach to characterizing categorical biases used in
Huttenlocher et al. (1991) has a number of limitations—
specifically, a relatively small number of to-be-remembered
locations (32) and a weak measurement of the biases, resulting in limited resolution for capturing the locations of the categories. In addition, Wedell et al. (2007) used a parametric
model with a fixed number of categories. The choice of the
model, and the number of categories that were used were not
fully justified, requiring certain a priori assumptions. Here,
we propose to use a paradigm based on serial reproduction to
characterize visual memory biases without needing to rely on
parametric modeling and with substantially better resolution
and accuracy.

Visual memory can be understood as an inferential process that
combines noisy information about the world with knowledge
drawn from experience. Biases can arise during encoding of
information from the outside world into internal representations, or during retrieval. In this work, we use the method
of serial reproduction, in which information is passed along a
chain of participants who try to recreate what they observed.
We apply this method to the study of visual perception in the
context of spatial memory biases for the remembered position
of dots inside different geometric shapes. We present the results of non-parametric kernel density estimation of the end result of serial reproduction to model visual biases. We confirm
previous findings, and show that memory biases revealed with
our method are often more intricate and complex than what
had previously been reported, suggesting that serial reproduction can be effective for studying perceptual priors.
Keywords: Vision; spatial memory; inductive biases; serial
reproduction; iterated learning;

Introduction
Retrieving detailed visual information from memory requires
efficient representations of often complex and noisy visual
scenes. In Bayesian accounts of reconstruction from visual memory, the memory system integrates sensory information with knowledge acquired from previous experience
(“priors”). Effective use of this information may reduce variability in visual memory and improve overall reconstruction
accuracy (Weiss et al., 2002). Using priors is usually advantageous because they capture regularities in the structure of the
world that are innate or observed over our lifetimes. However, this can lead to substantial biases during reconstruction.
This is because prior information may deviate significantly
from our observations, especially when a visual scene is unexpected given previous experience.
In many cases, visual priors are categorical (or prototypical), represented in memory as schematic or simplified
objects (Huttenlocher et al., 1991). In one experimental
paradigm that reveals categorical effects, participants are
asked to remember the location of a dot presented within a
circle or other bounding shape. After a brief presentation and
a delay, participants reproduce the dot’s location by placing

The method of serial reproduction
Serial reproduction has a long history in experimental psychology, where it has been used to study how various biases
distort information when it is transmitted from person to person (Bartlett, 1932). Figure 2 shows a schematic illustration
of the experimental paradigm: a participant views a stimulus, such as a dot presented within a bounding shape, and is
then asked to reproduce the stimulus as accurately as possible from memory. Critically, the reproduction created by the
first participant is used as the stimulus for the second participant, who is then asked to do the same. At each iteration, the
reconstruction produced by the previous participant becomes

712

prior predictive distribution, which defines the probability of
observing a stimulus x when µ is sampled from the prior:
Z

p(x) =

This process approximates a Gibbs sampler for the joint distribution on x and µ defined by multiplying p(x | µ) and p(µ).
This finding is significant because it provides a mathematical
formalism for describing the consequences of serial reproduction: assuming that participants share common inductive
biases, the transmission chain will converge to a sample from
their shared prior.
In this paper, we explore spatial memory priors in a task
where participants were asked to remember the position of
a small black dot inside a variety of geometric shapes. Operating under the assumption that people share the same inductive biases, or spatial memory priors, we show that serial
reproduction appears to converge on these priors remarkably
quickly, revealing patterns that are consistent with some established findings, although in many cases revealing new and
intricate patterns that were previously unknown. Finally, we
demonstrate the advantages of using a non-parametric kernel
density estimation procedure to characterize the prior.

Figure 1: Illustration of prototype effects in memory for
points in a circle. The red crosses represent prototypes, and
the small points are typically misremembered as being closer
to those prototypes.
the stimulus for the next participant to reproduce. Famous
early results include the transformation of an owl-like Egyptian hieroglyph into a small cat after ten iterations of a serialreproduction drawing task (Bartlett, 1932). This result was
interpreted in terms of inductive biases in memory: as veridical information from the input becomes degraded following
successive iterations, the reconstruction of the ambiguous image is pulled towards a prototypical object with similar visual
properties.
Serial-reproduction experiments have long been used to
simulate phenomena in cultural transmission, evolutionary
biology, anthropology, and cognitive science (Kirby et al.,
2008; Claidière et al., 2014), but it wasn’t until recently that
a rational analysis of serial reproduction considered how information should change as it is transmitted along a chain of
rational agents (Xu & Griffiths, 2010). Under a rational analysis, reconstruction from memory is defined as the problem
of inferring the most accurate state of the world from noisy
data, such as an imperfect memory trace and perceptual noise
during encoding of the image. This problem is modeled using
the framework of Bayesian statistics. Previous experience is
captured by a prior distribution over possible states (a hypothesis space of world states). A posterior is computed, based on
the likelihood, which indicates the probability of observing
that information, given some hypothesis about the true state
of the world. Xu & Griffiths (2010) examined the predictions
of this Bayesian account of reconstruction from memory for
serial reproduction. They found that serial reproduction by
Bayesian agents defines a Markov chain with the following
transition probabilities:
p(xn+1 | xn ) =

Z

p(x | µ)p(µ)dµ.

Methods
Participants
Participants were recruited online using Amazon Mechanical
Turk. All gave informed consent. The experimental protocol
was approved by The Committee for the Protection of Human
Subjects (CPHS) at the University of California, Berkeley.
Each experiment required approximately 70-100 participants.
A total of 570 participants took part in Experiment 1 and an
additional 590 took part in Experiment 2.

Stimuli
All images were approximately 400×400 pixels in size. Each
shape was a 6-pixel-wide black outline over a white background. The sizes and colors of the backgrounds for the images were intended to ensure that the images would be clearly
visible in any standard browser window (unlikely to become
occluded), and such that the boundaries of the images would
be invisible.

Procedure
We carried out a series of serial reproduction experiments.
Participants were presented with timed displays (a shape outline with a dot initialized somewhere within the boundaries
of the shape), and were instructed to reproduce the exact location of the dot inside of the shape. Once complete, their response was sent to another worker (again, as a timed display),
who was instructed to reconstruct this display from memory,
and so on. A total of ten iterations were completed for each
chain. See Figure 2 for a schematic diagram of the serial reproduction procedure.

p(xn+1 | µ)p(µ | xn )dµ,

where x is a noisy stimulus (such as an imperfect memory
trace) and µ is the true state of the world that generated that
stimulus (in this case, the veridical image that impinged on
the visual system). This Markov chain captures the probability of a new stimulus xn+1 being created as a reconstruction of
a previously seen stimulus xn in each iteration in the serial reproduction chain, and has a stationary distribution, called the

713

Standard Memory Paradigm

Practice trials. Participants completed ten practice trials in
order to become familiar with the user interface. During these
practice trials, they were presented with a circle (a black outline of a circle over a white screen), with a dot initialized
somewhere within its boundaries. This display was presented
for 4000 ms, followed by a blank screen lasting 1000 ms.
Next, the circle was presented without the dot and remained
on the screen until the participant positioned the dot in the
location that they remembered. As soon as the participant
clicked, the dot appeared under the mouse cursor. Participants could reposition the dot as many times as they needed.
Once done, they pressed a button to proceed to the next trial.

Presentation

Retention

Response

Subject
Response

1st
Iteration

Subject
Response

2nd
Iteration
Subject
Response

3rd
Iteration

Experimental trials. Following the ten practice trials with
the circle, there were ninety-five experimental trials with exactly one of the shapes. In Experiment 1, the shape could
be a circle, triangle, square, vertical oval, horizontal oval, or
a pentagon. In Experiment 2, the shape could be a regular
polygon with more than five vertices. For each of the 95 experimental trials, the presentation time was reduced to 1000
ms. As with the practice trials, the position of the shape on
the screen was randomized somewhere inside a larger canvas in order to control for participants resorting to tracking
the position of the dot by trivially marking its absolute position on their computer screens. In addition, participants were
given trial-by-trial feedback regarding their accuracy. If their
responses were within eight percent of the width and height
subtended by the shape on the screen, they were told that their
response was accurate (a message in green font: “This was
accurate”), and received a small monetary bonus. If not, they
received no bonus beyond the basic payment for the HIT, in
addition to any bonuses accrued from the previous trials, and
were presented with a red message (“this was not accurate”).
These trials were discarded from the experiment. Participants
could not provide multiple responses within a chain.
Experiment 1: We used the same six shapes as Wedell et
al. (2007): A circle, equilateral triangle, square, vertical and
horizontal ovals, and a regular pentagon. For each shape, we
initialized the position of five hundred dots within its boundaries (for the circle, we initialized four hundred dots).
Experiment 2: Because our method revealed a variable
number of peaks (prototypes) in the prior for the angular
shapes in Experiment 1, and that these appeared to be due in
large part to the number of vertices in the polygons (all were
regular polygons—an equilateral triangle, square, and pentagon), we wanted to determine the point at which the prototypes begin to merge into the four prototypes in the prior
for the circle. We did this by conducting the same experiment
with polygons containing increasingly more vertices (approximating a circle more closely as vertices were added).

4th Iteration

...

Figure 2: Serial reproduction chain for one trial in the memory task, illustrating the iterative process for a single dot being remembered. The trial in black represents a standard
memory paradigm. In red are additional iterations of the task
using the result from the previous iteration as the new stimulus, which form the nodes in the serial reproduction process.

estimation, replicates some (but not all) of their key findings.
In particular, we find four prototypes arranged in the centers
of the four quadrants of the circle, as well as the horizontal
and vertical oval shapes, as they did. However, we also show
new and intricate patterns in the priors for the angular shapes
(triangle, square, and pentagon). We evaluate the predictions
of the model by Wedell et al. (2007) on the data we obtained
following one iteration, for all the shapes, and compare them
to predictions that we obtain from our estimates of the prior
following all ten iterations. In addition, we show quantitative
evaluations of the change in copying accuracy for the equilateral triangle. Second, we show the results for Experiment
2, where we illustrate the effect of adding vertices to regular
polygons on the prior, revealing hitherto unknown grouping
effects of the prototypes in spatial memory that occur as regular polygons begin to approximate a circle.

Measuring spatial memory priors
Serial reproduction results. Figure 3 shows visualizations
of the estimates that we obtained following ten iterations of
the serial reproduction experiment using four hundred initial
seeds for the circle. Each panel shows the results for each of
the ten iterations, including the initial seeds. Notice that the
prototypes begin to emerge in as early as the fourth iteration.
For the panel showing the results of the tenth iteration, we
show an estimate of the prior using our non-parametric kernel
density estimate in lieu of plotting the points. Figure 4 shows
the results that we obtained for the equilateral triangle. Notice
the emergence of bimodal peaks near each of the vertices.
This finding suggests that for this shape, there are a total of
six prototypes in the prior, grouped in pairs at each corner.

Results
Our results are presented in two parts. First, we present all our
results for Experiment 1, in which we used the same shapes as
Wedell et al. (2007). We demonstrate that using a serial reproduction paradigm, as well as non-parametric kernel density

714

Figure 3: Serial reproduction of 400 dots presented in a circle, for ten generations (iterations) of the process. The top
left scatterplot shows the positions of the original seeds (sampled from a uniform distribution) inside the circle shape. The
remaining subplots show scatterplots of the results of the serial reproduction chain for iterations 1-10. The subplot of the
tenth iteration, in the bottom right, also shows the kernel density estimate. Note that from one iteration to the next, points
that were originally scattered uniformally within the circle
boundary begin to converge on each of the nearest prototypes
at the center of each of the four quadrants in the circle. By
the tenth iteration of the process, four clusters are clearly discernable.

Figure 4: Results we obtained for each iteration in the chain
for the triangle shape. A. Kernel Density Estimate (KDE)
for the initial distribution and the 10 iterations. B. Convergence analysis using the Jensen-Shannon divergence (JSD)
between consecutive iterations. C. JSD between all iterations
and the last iteration. Note that both measures decrease with
the number of iterations, and suggest that convergence occurs
at or near the tenth iteration in the serial reproduction chain.

Simple shapes. In Figure 5 (panels B and D), we show the
kernel density estimates that we obtained for all the shapes.
In the case of the circle, vertical oval, and horizontal oval,
our results are consistent with past findings (shown in panels
A and C). However, we discover bimodal peaks in the vertices of the angular shapes (prototype pairs clustered at each
of the corners). This result is particularly striking for the triangle and the square shapes. The same result is present for
the pentagon shape, although unlike the peaks in the prior for
the triangle and square, those in the pentagon are not quite rotationally invariant, although all three geometric shapes are,
suggesting that the shapes and orientations of the modes in
the priors are not a simple function of the presence of edges,
or the angles at these edges.
Convergence analysis. For the triangle results, we completed a convergence analysis (See Figure 4, panels B and
C), using the Jensen-Shannon divergence (JSD). To estimate
the variability of these JSDs, we generated 100 bootstrapped
data sets sampled from the original data (with replacement).
For each one, we computed the JSDs of consecutive iterations (see panel B). The JSD between the initial distribution
and iteration 1 was significantly larger than that between the
two final iterations (p = 0.02) and there were no significant
differences between the distance between iterations 9 and 10
compared with iterations 8 and 9 (p = 0.43).

As another measure of convergence, we also computed the
JSD between all iterations and the last iteration (Jacoby &
McDermott, 2017) (see panel C). The distance between the
last two iterations was significantly smaller than the distances
between iteration 10 and each of the remaining iterations (0
through 8). The distance between iteration 10 and 9 was
marginally larger than the distance between iteration 10 and 8
(p = 0.041). These analyses suggest that convergence occurs
at or near the tenth iteration. To test if the responses of participants became more "prototypical" over the course of the
experiment (as they progressed through their trials), we used
the estimate of the prior from the final iteration to measure the
average log-likelihood of their responses. We used data from
the 83% of the participants who performed more than 80% of
the trials within the accepted criteria (responses within 8% of
the height and width of the shape on the screen). We found
that the log-likelihood significantly improved when comparing the first and second half of their responses (t(49) = -2.47,

715

p = 0.008), and when comparing the first 10 trials to the last
10 trials of each of the subjects (t(49) = -2.04, p = 0.046).

rameters. The model describes the remembered position for
#»
a dot i (a response vector Ri ) as a weighted average of the
actual location at which the dot was presented, which they
refer to as the “fine-grain memory representation”, and the
weighted sum of the prototype locations, using the following
equations:
4
#»
#»
#»
Ri = w S i + (1 − w) ∑ vi j P j

(1)

j=1

#»

vi j =

#»

e−ck S i − P j k
#»

#»

∑4k=1 e−ck S i − P k k

(2)

#»
#»
where S i and Ri are vectors in R2 containing the x and y
coordinates for each point i in the stimulus phase (iteration 0),
and in the first response phase (iteration 1), respectively. The
#»
P j terms correspond to the four prototype vector coordinates
being estimated by the model, in addition to weights w that
correspond to the relative strength of the veridical memory
(as opposed to the strength of a prototype in the prior).The vi j
capture the relevance weight of each of the four j prototypes
for each point i. In other words, the strength of the influence
of prototype j for each point i. The parameter c corresponds
to a “sensitivity” parameter that models the sharpness of the
prototype boundaries.
We generated 100 split-half samples of the points for iteration 0 (inital seeds), iteration 1, and iteration 10. Next,
for each sample, we obtained estimates of the prototype locations for four prototypes (the same number used by Wedell
et al.) by running their model using the training half of iteration 0 and the same points in iteration 1. In order to ensure
a fair comparison, we sampled four points under local maxima from the Kernel Density Estimate (KDE) fit to the same
points in iteration 10. This gave us four prototype estimates
from the Wedell et al. (2007) model, and four points corresponding to local maxima in the KDE we fit to the points in
the training half of iteration 10 (which can only be obtained
from our paradigm), for each training split half. We evaluated
the accuracy of these two sets of four prototype estimates by
computing the sum of the negative-log-likelihood values from
a KDE that we fit to the remaining points in the testing half of
iteration 10. Next, we computed the log likelihood difference
for the two models, for each of the shapes. In all cases, the
serial reproduction model performed significantly better (p <
0.01 for all shapes except the vertical oval (p = 0.03) resulting in positive log-likelihood differences. Boxplots showing
all the results are displayed in Figure 5E.
Grouping of prototypes. The apparent increase in peaks
in the prior for more complex regular shapes afforded the
opportunity to consider changes to the prior in the limit, as
the shapes begin to approximate a circle. We computed the
entropy of the obtained KDEs to quantify their complexity. Complexity increased with the number of vertices (going
from a triangle to a heptadecagon, or seventeen-sided regular
polygon). However, the prior for a icosihenagon (twenty-one
sided regular polygon) begins to reveal the transformation of

Figure 5: Kernel density estimates for the priors were estimated for all six shapes using the tenth iteration of the serial
reproduction chain. A. & C. Original result by Wedell et al.
(2007). B & D. Kernel density estimates with serial reproduction. E. Boxplots showing model comparisons. We computed
the log likelihood difference for the two models as explained
in the main text. In all cases the serial reproduction model
was significantly better (p < 0.01 for all shapes except vertical oval (p = 0.03) resulting in positive log-likelihood ratios.
Model comparisons. Using a combination of nonparametric kernel density estimation and serial reproduction
lets us uncover intricacies in the prior for angular shapes (including bimodal peaks at the vertices) that paint a nuanced
picture of human spatial memory priors. In addition, our approach enables us to obtain more than just point estimates of
the locations of prototypes in spatial memory. Nevertheless,
we provide a comparison between point estimates obtained
from our method to those obtained from the model by Wedell
et al. (2007), for each shape, using the same number of pa-

716

the corner peaks into one of the quadrant peaks. Entropy further decreases for the icosipentagon (p < 0.001), revealing a
prior that appears nearly identical to the prior for a circle, and
with similar entropy (p = 0.68) (see Figure 6).

(within-subject design). While some studies show differences
between within and between-subject designs (Claidière et al.,
2014), most studies showed high agreement between these
versions (Xu & Griffiths, 2010; Jacoby & McDermott, 2017).
Our results suggest that our approach may provide an opportunity to uncover complex priors for a wide range of perceptual phenomena that would otherwise elude traditional experimental approaches, and parametric models. We plan to
use it to measure memory biases when there is more than one
point to be remembered (Lew & Vul, 2015), and to probe
for structured priors in memory for local orientation (Wei &
Stocker, 2016). Finally, we intend to uncover perceptual biases in spatial memory using natural complex images, and
maps, to explore the effect of higher-order visual features and
semantic content on spatial memory biases, and to probe for
the emergence of geographic landmarks.

Acknowledgments
Figure 6: Grouping, and complexity of prior estimates. A.
KDEs for regular polygons of increasing complexity. B. Entropy of the last iteration computed for all shapes. Entropy
increases steadily with shape complexity (3 to 17 vertices).
After the number of vertices exceeds 21, entropy stabilizes,
and peaks start grouping toward the nearest quadrant center
(as with the circle). We used the Bonferroni correction for
multiple comparisons.

This work was funded in part by NSF grant 1456709 to
T.L.G., and DARPA Cooperative Agreement D17AC00004
to T.L.G and J.W.S. We would like to thank Thomas Morgan
for his help with online experiments.

References
Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering: An experimental and
social study. Cambridge: Cambridge University.
Claidière, N., Smith, K., Kirby, S., & Fagot, J. (2014). Cultural evolution of systematically structured behaviour in a
non-human primate. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London B: Biological Sciences, 281(1797), 20141541.
Huttenlocher, J., Hedges, L. V., & Duncan, S. (1991). Categories and particulars: Prototype effects in estimating spatial location. Psychological review, 98(3), 352.
Jacoby, N., & McDermott, J. H. (2017). Integer ratio priors on musical rhythm revealed cross-culturally by iterated
reproduction. Current Biology.
Kirby, S., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2008). Cumulative
cultural evolution in the laboratory: An experimental approach to the origins of structure in human language. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(31),
10681–10686.
Lew, T., & Vul, E. (2015). Structured priors in visual working
memory revealed through iterated learning. In Cogsci.
Wedell, D. H., Fitting, S., & Allen, G. L. (2007). Shape
effects on memory for location. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 14(4), 681–686.
Wei, X.-X., & Stocker, A. A. (2016). Mutual information,
fisher information, and efficient coding. Neural computation.
Weiss, Y., Simoncelli, E. P., & Adelson, E. H. (2002). Motion
illusions as optimal percepts. Nature Neuroscience, 5(6),
598–604.
Xu, J., & Griffiths, T. L. (2010). A rational analysis of the
effects of memory biases on serial reproduction. Cognitive
Psychology, 60(2), 107–126.

Discussion
In this paper, we made a preliminary foray into exploring
spatial memory priors using serial reproduction: a process
in which information being transmitted through successive
participants leaves behind only a signature of the transformation process itself: the perceptual and reconstructive biases of
those participants. This iterative process provides an effective
tool for greatly amplifying biases in perception and memory.
We used a serial reproduction paradigm in the context of
a spatial memory task. KDEs of the dots’ final positions revealed detailed structure in priors over location. We found
that the priors for circles and ovals show peaks at the center of each of their four quadrants, but also discovered that
angular shapes show bi-modal peaks at the vertices in the
prior. The modes appear on either side of each vertex, and
do not seem to be a simple function of the angle at each
vertex, since they are not rotationally invariant in all cases.
We provided quantitative comparisons between the performance of a parametric model, and point estimates derived
from the KDEs we obtained following ten iterations of the
chain. These comparisons demonstrated that our estimates
were significantly better than those obtained from the parametric model (we used the same number of parameters—four
prototype estimates, even though our method yields kernel
density estimates that clearly reveal more than four in some
cases). In future work, we intend to determine if priors differ across individuals, by repeating the experiments so that
each participant completes a subset of chains in their entirety

717

