Using punctuation as a marker of sincerity and affective convergence during texting
Katherine Reynolds (kreyno20@kent.edu)
Speech Pathology & Audiology, Kent State University
Kent, OH 44223 USA

Blair Casarotto (casarotto@wisc.edu)
Communication Sciences and Disorders, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706 USA

Sarah Noviski (snovisk@bgsu.edu)
Communication Sciences and Disorders, Bowling Green State University
Bowling Green, OH 43403 USA

Jennifer M. Roche (jroche3@kent.edu)
Speech Pathology & Audiology, Kent State University
Kent, OH 44223 USA
Abstract
Face-to-face communication is a rich, natural form of
communication that incorporates multimodal behavioral cues
belying meaning and intention. However, computer-mediated
communication (e.g., texting) removes many of the
multimodal cues in face-to-face communication (e.g., vocal
prosody). Recent research has suggested that punctuation
might mimic vocal prosody in text (Gunraj et al., 2016), but
there is no clear indication of what the overall effects may be.
Therefore, the current study investigates the use of
punctuation to express intonation. We first replicate Gunraj
and his colleagues by showing that a single word ending in a
period promotes the appraisal of negative affect. Interestingly,
we extend this research by demonstrating that intonational
punctuation has the potential to increase social distance,
which our preliminary results suggest may occur through
processes of emotional contagion and interactive alignment.

Keywords: ​pragmatics; texting; emotion contagion;
interactive communication

Introduction
With an increased reliance on technology during
communication, mistaking the tone of a message may be
common. Though mistakes are possible, numerous
interesting studies suggest that some aspects of text may
help interlocutors interpret conversational (i.e., affective)
tone (e.g., lexical choices, punctuation, character features,
emoticons; Byron & Baldridge, 2007; Gunraj et al., 2016;
Niederhoffer & Pennebaker, 2002; Riordin & Kreuz, 2010).
While these studies have touched on many features of
text, less is known regarding the impact of pragmatic tone as
indicated by punctuation (i.e., intonational punctuation), on
lexical style matching during texting conversations. In the
current study, we evaluate the effect of a sender’s
punctuation use as a paralinguistic cue to emotional tone,
and its effect on a receiver’s tendency to align their tone and
texting preferences with the sender.

Conveying Tone of Voice in Text
Face-to-face (FFC) communication benefits from the use of
multimodal nonverbal cues like eye gaze, vocal prosody,
and shared attention (e.g., Banziger & Scherer, 2005;
Burgoon et al., 1995; Knapp et al., 2013). One common area
that most strongly affects text-based communication (TBC)
is its unimodality. This unimodality is typically confined to
linguistic, typographical, and/or grammatical cues, making
TBC less rich in non-verbal cues found in FFC (e.g., Byron
& Baldridge, 2007; Kruger et al., 2005). However, a large
body of research demonstrates that language users adapt to
and make use of the communication medium to convey
richer information about their message. For example,
interlocutors make use of vocal spelling (“yeaaaaaaah”),
non-standard spelling (“ermahgerd”), emoticons, and
manipulated grammatical markers (“...”); all of these
typographic cues have the potential to indicate tone of voice
(Harris & Paradice, 2007; Riordan & Kreuz, 2010).
More recently, Gunraj et al. (2016) found that the use of a
one-word response followed by a single period in TBC
(relative to written communication) was perceived by
participants to be rude and insincere. In fact, the use of
typographical cues is adaptive, as it may aid in the decoding
of an ambiguous message (e.g., when information is
missing; Byron & Baldridge, 2005; Derks et al., 2008;
Harris & Paradice, 2007; Lo, 2008; Riordan et al., 2014;
Walther & D’Addario, 2001). Though conventional
multimodal nonverbal cues are absent from TBC,
interlocutors have the potential to interpret a sender’s
intentions beyond the literal meaning.

Faster but Ambiguous Messages
In a texting context, language users are constrained by
the texting medium, in which their messages are typically
fast, agrammatical, and largely ambiguous (for review see

2986

Ling & Baron, 2007). When an interlocutor lacks the
relevant cues, one might rely more heavily on their own
representations of the world (i.e., egocentric perspective).
When this information is decoded incorrectly or the
message is overly ambiguous, miscommunication has the
potential to follow shortly behind.
Ambiguity has the potential to make receivers (listeners)
of a message uncomfortable with uncertainty. However,
listeners may handle this uncertainty by making predictions
about a speaker’s (sender’s) intentions (Uncertainty
Reduction Theory; Berger & Bradac, 1992). Interlocutors
essentially make predictions to decode ambiguous
information by relying on nonverbal cues (e.g.,
paralinguistic cues) presented by a communication partner
(Byron & Baldridge, 2007). From this account, the receiver
evaluates typographic cues (e.g., capitalization, emoticons,
etc.) in the message to determine the sender’s intentions.
Subsequently, the receiver attempts to synthesize known
personality traits with the typographic cues to derive the
correct intention. For example, when vocal tone is absent
from the sender, a receiver reading a text message may
construct an egocentric “tone” representation, similar to that
of representing verbally produced “tone” in a face-to-face
conversation -- as a means to reduce ambiguity, promote
successful communication and decrease social distance
(Byrne, 1971; Chartrand & Bargh, 1999; Dennis &
Valacich, 1999). This leads one to question how a receiver's
representation of tone is integrated in a deprived texting
environment. More specifically, do interlocutors use similar
communicative mechanisms to decrease social distance,
when the cards are stacked against them?

Convergence in Interpersonal Communication
A large amount of research has shown that lexical style
matching during communication has the potential to
decrease social distance (Byrne, 1971; Bernieri &
Rosenthal, 1991; Chartrand & Bargh, 1999; Niederhoffer &
Pennebaker, 2002). However, recent research has shown
that alignment need not always occur to promote positive
communication outcomes (Fusaroli et al, 2012). In fact,
these researchers show that though interlocutors have a
proclivity to converge linguistically, dyads that adapted and
diverged linguistically improved performance on a task i.e., more is not always better (Giles & Coupland, 1991). It
is possible, that under emotional contexts, one would be
more likely to converge linguistically and para-linguistically
during positive interactions and strategically diverge in
negative interactions to decrease social distance (Paxton &
Dale, 2013). Currently, the utility of behavioral convergence
and divergence during communication as a potential means
to promote pragmatic interpretation, has been less well
established in an emotional texting context.

When texting, the receiver of the message automatically
colors the message with their interpretation of the sender’s
tone. If the sender produces emotionally valenced
non-verbal cues, then the receiver might produce a similarly
valenced response. Hatfield et al. (1994), for example,
showed that interlocutors emotions tended to align when
interacting with a social other. Additionally, it has also been
argued that interlocutors prime each other (at various levels
of the interaction), to promote effort saving communication
behaviors (phonological to pragmatic priming: Dijksterhuis
& Bargh, 2001; Garrod & Pickering, 2004). But what if the
very nature of the intonational punctuation cue intends to
increase social distance? Does the receiver of such a
message diverge emotionally or with intonational
punctuation? Or will the receiver follow suit and respond
reciprocally (e.g., Theory of Reciprocity; ​McCroskey &
Richmond, 2000​), further breaking down the conversation
and increasing social distance?
The purpose of the current study is to determine the
effect of intonational punctuation on a texting conversation.
There are three main goals: (1) As a replication of previous
studies, do interlocutors process punctuation for affective
intent?, (2) Given intonational punctuation matching, will
intonational convergence occur equally across positive and
negatively valenced communication? and (3) What are the
effects of punctuation alignment on the perception of
conversational sincerity? We expect to see intonational
punctuation impacting the perceived sincerity, and thus
impacting the reciprocal use of punctuation to match
conversational tone. We evaluate convergence through a
distributional analysis, rather than time series analysis
(Paxton et al., 2016). This allowed for the preliminary
establishment of alignment, at the global level.

Method
Participants
Twenty Kent State University undergraduate students
(females = 11, mean​age = 19.5yrs, min​age = 19 yrs, max​age =
23yrs, sd = 1.30) participated in return for a $5 gift card.
One participant was excluded, because the program crashed
half-way through the experiment. All participants were
native speakers of English, with normal to normal-corrected
vision and no diagnosed speech or hearing impairments.

Materials
All stimulus presentations and data collection were
controlled by a Matlab, Psychtoolbox-3 program, that
recorded computer-mouse clicks. All participants were
seated in front of a 21-inch iMac computer screen in a
sound-attenuated booth.

2987

Stimuli
The pseudo-confederate (fake texting partner) texting
conversation was a neutral conversation about living in
Kent, OH. Thirty-two pseudo-confederate texting response
bubbles were created and paired with 5 alternative forced
choice participant response bubbles. The participant
response bubbles ranged from positive to neutral to negative
(similar to a Likert scale), with the top most response option
representing positive, the middle being neutral, and the
bottom most option being most negative (e.g., Fig. 1). More
specifically, the participant response bubbles contained one
of the punctuation types, with the exclamation being most
positive​, no punctuation, ellipsis, and question mark being
neutral​, and the period being most ​negative​ (see Fig. 1).
These five types of punctuation were also used in the
pseudo-confederate text messages: question mark, ellipsis,
period, no punctuation, and exclamation. No punctuation,
question marks, and ellipses acted as fillers and reflected
typical uses of typographical markers in texting behavior
(two-thirds of the trials; see Riordin & Kreuz, 2010). The
rest of the trials were primarily made up of exclamations
(positive condition) ​or​ periods (negative condition).

Design & Procedures
At the beginning of the task, participants were told they
would be having a texting conversation with another person,
but instead of being able to freely type their responses, they
would be given five response options to choose from (see
Fig. 1). The participant was also asked to imagine that the
conversation he or she was having was with a person he or
she knew well, to promote ecological validity.

Figure 1: This is an example of a negative (left) and
positive (right) pseudo-confederate text bubble, with the
participant 5 alternative forced-choice response bubbles.
During the course of the interaction, the participant was
presented with an image of an iPhone (Apple, Inc.), with a
pseudo-confederate text bubble. They were then asked to
read the text message, then to click the “next” button to
transition into the ​participant response screen​. On this

screen, they were able to see the pseudo-confederate text
message bubble, with the 5 forced choice response options
to the right of the iPhone (Fig. 1). After the response was
made, the participant was brought to another screen that
displayed a continuous rating scale, that required the
participant to rate his or her perception of the conversation’s
sincerity (Fig. 2). Participants were randomly assigned to
one of two between subjects conditions: Pseudo-confederate
Valence Condition (positive: n = 9 or negative: n = 10).

Figure 2: The continuous rating scale participants used to
rate the sincerity of the conversation, after each trial
(“Please rate how sincerity of the conversation.”)

Measures
Participant Valence Selection ​Participants had five
responses to choose from, that were ordered from positive
(exclamation), to neutral (no punctuation, ellipsis, question
mark), to negative (period). The response option chosen
corresponded with an ordinal scale (exclamation (1) = most
positive to period (5) = most negative). Though the
difference was not large, the participants in the positive
condition chose response options on the more positive side
of the Likert scale (mean: 1.99), relative to the negative
conversation (mean: 2.23; t = 2.212, ​p < .05 - independent
samples t-test), with a larger number indicating a more
negative valence. In order to reflect a more continuous
measure of emotional contagion, a running average of the
Likert scale ratings was calculated to reflect fluctuations in
valence over the course of the interaction.
Intonational Punctuation Alignment Each pseudoconfederate response had one form of punctuation -- with
each participant response bubble containing one of the five
punctuation types. Depending on the response option
chosen, the response was recoded as matching or
mismatching the pseudo-confederate’s use of punctuation.
That is, if the pseudo-confederate used a period, what was
the likelihood of the participant selecting a response option
containing a period, too? Participants in the positive
condition matched the pseudo-confederates choice of
punctuation approximately 48% of the time, but only 28%
of the time in the negative condition (t = 2.913, ​p < .001 independent samples t-test).
Conversation Sincerity ​Participants were also asked to rate
the sincerity of the conversation. This was done by clicking
along a continuous rating scale (see Fig 2), and was
measured based on pixels. The pixel rating scale ranged

2988

from approximately 400 - 1200px, with smaller numbers
being related to more sincerity, and higher numbers related
to lack of sincerity. Overall, positive conversations were
rated as significantly more sincere (mean: 613.22px) than
negative conversations (mean: 778.13px; t = 3.848, ​p <
.001- independent samples t-test).

Results
Outcomes are reported from linear mixed-effects models
built using lme4 package in R (R Core Development Team,
2008). A mixed effects regression was used to predict
receiver perceived sincerity by Pseudo-confederate Valence
Condition (positive or negative), Participant Valence
Selection (Likert-like response options), and punctuation
alignment (match or mismatch). The models implemented
maximal random effect structures to achieve model
convergence, with participants and trial set as random
intercepts. All categorical variables were dummy coded.

that interlocutors might be more likely to align under
positive, than negative contexts.
Conversational Appraisal ​In the above analyses, we show
that intonational punctuation and style matching occurs
differently depending on the conversational valence. The
last analyses (question 3) intended to determine whether or
not the appraisal of the interaction (sincerity) should be
affected by the pseudo-confederate's tone, similarity (to the
pseudo-confederate) of their intonational punctuation, and
the valence of the response selection.
The results indicated a number of main effects and an
interaction. Specifically, there was a main effect of
Pseudo-confederate Valence Condition, indicating that
participants in the positive condition rated the conversation
as significantly more sincere than participants in the
negative condition (ß = 124.675, se = 52.747, t = 2.364, ​p <
.05). This suggests that participants were sensitive to
pseudo-confederate affective tone.

Pseudo-Confederate Valence (Manipulation Check) ​As a
manipulation check, to determine if the conversations would
be perceived as positive or negative by our participants, the
pseudo-confederate responses were presented to four female
participants (mean age = 20.5) who did not participate in the
pseudo-texting conversation. These participants were asked
to rate each pseudo-confederate response bubble on a
continuous rating scale for positive/negative valence. The
rating scale spanned 400 - 1200 pixels, with lower numbers
representing more positive valence, and higher numbers
representing
negative
valence.
The
positive
pseudo-confederate messages received an average pixel
rating of 642.11px, while the negative pseudo-confederate
messages were rated at approximately 850.77px (ß =
-208.66, se = 28.03, t = -7.37, ​p​ < .001; similar to Fig 2.).
Intonational Punctuation Replication ​To determine if
pseudo-confederate punctuation was interpreted as affective
in nature (question 1), conversational sincerity was assessed
between the conversational valence conditions (dummy
codes: positive = 0, negative = 1). Results revealed that the
negative condition was rated as significantly more insincere
than the positive condition (ß = 208.66, se = 25.53, t = 8.17,
p​ < .001), replicating Gunraj et al. (2016).
Intonational Punctuation Style Matching ​To determine if
participants aligned with the pseudo-confederate’s use of
punctuation (question 2), intonational punctuation was
evaluated between the two conversational conditions
(dummy codes: positive = 0, negative = 1). Results from this
mixed effects model revealed that the negative condition
was rated as significantly more insincere than the positive
condition (ß = -1.05, se = 0.20, t = -5.22, ​p < .001; logistic
model, family set as binomial; Jaeger, 2008). This suggests

Figure 3: This figure represents the relationship between
punctuation alignment and sincerity, as a function of
pseudo-confederate valence.
There was also main effect of Participant Valence
Selection (i.e., Likert-like responses; ß = 97.348, se =
43.442, t = 2.241, ​p < .05) but no interaction between
Pseudo-confederate Valence Condition x Participant
Valence Selection. This suggests that as participants rated
the interaction as less sincere, they chose more negative
response options (e.g, emotional contagion).
Lastly, though there was no main effect of intonational
punctuation style matching (​p = .352), there was a
significant Pseudo-confederate Valence Condition x
punctuation alignment interaction (ß = 49.841, se = 18.424,
t = 2.705, p < .01; see Fig. 3). This indicated that as
participants assessed the sincerity of each turn, the more
sincere the turn seemed, the more likely the participant
would match the pseudo-confederate’s punctuation.

2989

Alternatively, the more insincere the conversation,
participants were less likely to align their punctuation, with
the caveat that highly insincere ratings increased negative
punctuation alignment.

Discussion
Texting provides a wealth of communicative benefits.
However, texting necessarily requires a fast, reduced, and
often ambiguous delivery of information (Ling & Baron,
2007). In the face of ambiguity, the receiver of these
messages must use their own representations of the world to
interpret tone correctly, especially when the tone is not as
explicit as vocal tone because of its dual meaning (i.e.,
grammatical and adapted pragmatic cues; Byron &
Baldridge, 2005; Derks et al., 2008; Harris & Paradice,
2007; Lo, 2008; Riordan et al., 2014; Walther & D’Addario,
2001). Therefore, it is not always easy for a receiver of an
emotionally valenced text message to correctly interpret
tone. In the current study, we specifically evaluate the role
of positive and negatively valenced punctuation and its
effect on a receiver's ability to interpret tone.
Consistent with Gunraj et al. (2016), the results indicate
that participants are in fact sensitive to punctuation as an
effective cue to conversational tone. Additionally, the
participants perception of the pseudo-confederate’s sincerity
shaped the participants’ responses -- with a more insincere
pseudo-confederate receiving responses that were more
negatively valenced, though dampened. And finally, we see
the convergence and divergence of punctuation use by the
participant for pragmatic effect.
Though the current results provide interesting insight into
the pragmatic nature of intonational punctuation, the current
study is not without limitation. The main limitation of the
current study is the lack of ecological validity, which may
have affected patterns of responding. For example,
participants in the positive condition may have attempted to
decrease social distance by using the same communicative
mechanisms engaged in FFC (behavioral entrainment;
Byrne, 1971; Bernieri & Rosenthal, 1991; Chartrand &
Bargh, 1999; Niederhoffer & Pennebaker, 2002).
Specifically, participants in the positive condition exhibited
emotional contagion and intonational punctuation
alignment, which in other domains has been suggested to
promote interpersonal liking and communicative
smoothness (Chartrand & Bargh, 1999). Even though the
participants were instructed to imagine they were texting
with someone they knew well, our participants may have
aligned less and been unsure of how to interpret the one
word responses ending with a period (negative), because
they lacked relevant history with their texting partner
(​Bernieri & Rosenthal, 1991)​.
Alternatively, participants may have defaulted to rules of
social engagement, in that it is typically socially

unacceptable to have contentious interactions with strangers
(Morand et al., 2003). Therefore, participants may have
been more likely to disengage synchronous mechanisms to
defuse the negative interaction. However, the more
contentious (i.e., more insincere the conversation seemed)
the more likely the participant converged their text response
with the pseudo-confederate. One should approach this
interpretation with caution, because it is difficult to claim
intentionality because the interaction was with an assumed
stranger, and behavioral frequencies were assessed, and not
via time course analysis. These results, nonetheless, are
consistent with negative FFC interactions, in which
decreases in convergence have been found (Abney, Paxton,
Kello, & Dale, 2014; Paxton & Dale, 2013).
Finally, we did not look specifically at the time course of
synchrony across the interaction. This was mostly due to the
low sample size and the preliminary nature of the current
study. We first wanted to show that emotional valence has
the potential to differentially impact communication in a
texting context. Punctuation matters just as much as vocal
prosody, because of the pragmatic implications of the cue.
Therefore, the next step of this project will be to expand this
paradigm, by collecting more data so we might be able to
explore the temporal dynamics of emotional valence during
text based communication.

Conclusions
We are relying more and more on digital forms of
communication, with even the most prominent political
leaders communicating through short, fast text-based
responses via social media. In the current study, we provide
preliminary insight into the cognitive mechanisms (e.g.,
emotional contagion) that drive the interpretation of
intentionality. Texters (college-aged) not only use
typographic variation to indicate pragmatic meaning, but
also use it to infer intentions. Additionally, the choice to use
certain typographical cues may push the valence of a
conversation in a more positive or negative direction.
Therefore, one should be aware that one’s use of
punctuation has pragmatic implications over and above
grammatical form, in texting. We see that texting follows
similar rules as FFC. In that, language is naturally
ambiguous, but in a texting context ambiguity is a critical
feature of communicating. Additionally, the texter will
follow the valence of their communicative partner as a
means to increase and decrease social distance. Therefore,
failure to use the appropriate (texting) affective cues could
lead
to
higher
rates
of
miscommunication,
misunderstandings, and generally hard feelings.

Acknowledgments
A special thanks goes to the MADI lab research assistants
that worked so hard to collect data.

2990

References
Abney, D. H., Paxton, A., Dale, R., & Kello, C. T. (2014).
Complexity matching in dyadic conversation. ​Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General​, ​143​(6), 2304.
Bänziger, T., & Scherer, K. R. (2005). The role of
intonation
in
emotional
expressions.
​Speech
communication​, ​46​(3), 252-267.
Berger, C. R., & Bradac, J. J. (1982). ​Language and social
knowledge: Uncertainty in interpersonal relations (Vol.
2). Hodder Education.
Bernieri, F. J., & Rosenthal, R. (1991). Interpersonal
coordination: Behavior matching and interactional
synchrony.
Burgoon, J. K., Le Poire, B. A., & Rosenthal, R. (1995).
Effects of pre interaction expectancies and target
communication
on
perceiver
reciprocity
and
compensation in dyadic interaction. ​Journal of
experimental social psychology​, ​31​(4), 287-321.
Byrne, D. E. (1971). ​The attraction paradigm​. Academic Pr.
Byron, K., & Baldridge, D. C. (2005). Toward a model of
nonverbal cues and emotion in email. In ​Academy of
Management Proceedings, 2005(1), B1-B6.
Chartrand, T. L., & Bargh, J. A. (1999). The chameleon
effect: The perception–behavior link and social
interaction. ​Journal of personality and social psychology​,
76​(6), 893.
Dennis, A. R., & Valacich, J. S. (1999, January). Rethinking
media richness: Towards a theory of media synchronicity.
In ​Systems Sciences, 1999. HICSS-32. Proceedings of the
32nd Annual Hawaii International Conference on (pp.
10-pp). IEEE.
Derks, D., Fischer, A. H., & Bos, A. E. (2008). The role of
emotion in computer-mediated communication: A review.
Computers in Human Behavior​, ​24​(3), 766-785.
Dijksterhuis, A., & Bargh, J. A. (2001). The
perception-behavior expressway: Automatic effects of
social perception on social behavior. ​Advances in
experimental social psychology​, ​33​, 1-40.
Fusaroli, R., Bahrami, B., Olsen, K., Roepstorff, A., Rees,
G., Frith, C., & Tylén, K. (2012). Coming to terms
quantifying the benefits of linguistic coordination.
Psychological science​, 0956797612436816.
Garrod, S., & Pickering, M. J. (2004). Why is conversation
so easy?. ​Trends in cognitive sciences​, ​8​(1), 8-11.
Giles, H., Coupland, J., & Coupland, N. (1991). ​Contexts of
accommodation:
Developments
in
applied
sociolinguistics​. Cambridge University Press.
Gunraj, D. N., Drumm-Hewitt, A. M., Dashow, E. M.,
Upadhyay, S. S. N., & Klin, C. M. (2016). Texting
insincerely: The role of the period in text messaging.
Computers in Human Behavior​, ​55​, 1067-1075.

Harris, R. B., & Paradice, D. (2007). An investigation of the
computer-mediated communication of emotions. ​Journal
of Applied Sciences Research​, ​3​(12), 2081-2090.
Hatfield, E., Cacioppo, J. T., & Rapson, R. L. (1994).
Emotional contagion​. Cambridge university press.
Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Categorical data analysis: Away from
ANOVAs (transformation or not) and towards logit mixed
models. ​Journal of memory and language​, ​59​(4),
434-446.
Knapp, M. L., Hall, J. A., & Horgan, T. G. (2013).
Nonverbal communication in human interaction​. Cengage
Learning.
Kruger, J., Epley, N., Parker, J., & Ng, Z. W. (2005).
Egocentrism over e-mail: can we communicate as well as
we think?. ​Journal of personality and social psychology​,
89​(6), 925.
Ling, R., & Baron, N. S. (2007). Text messaging and IM
linguistic comparison of American college data. ​Journal
of Language and Social Psychology​, ​26​(3), 291-298.
Lo, S. (2008). The nonverbal communication functions of
emoticons in computer mediated communication.
CyberPsychology & Behavior, 11, 595–597.
McCroskey, J. & Richmond, V. (2000). ​Applying
reciprocity
and
accommodation
theories
to
supervisor/subordinate communication. Journal of
Applied Communication Research, 28(3), 278-289.
Morand, D. A., & Ocker, R. J. (2003, January). Politeness
theory and computer-mediated communication: A
sociolinguistic approach to analyzing relational messages.
In ​System Sciences, 2003. Proceedings of the 36th Annual
Hawaii International Conference on​ (pp. 10-pp). IEEE.
Niederhoffer, K. G., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2002). Linguistic
style matching in social interaction. ​Journal of Language
and Social Psychology​, ​21​(4), 337-360.
Paxton, A., & Dale, R. (2013). Argument disrupts
interpersonal synchrony. ​The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology​, ​66​(11), 2092-2102.
Paxton, A., Dale, R., & Richardson, D. C. (2016). 18 Social
coordination of verbal and nonverbal behaviours.
Interpersonal Coordination and Performance in Social
Systems​, 259.
Riordan, M. A., & Kreuz, R. J. (2010). Emotion encoding
and interpretation in computer-mediated communication:
Reasons for use. ​Computers in human behavior,​ ​26​(6),
1667-1673.
Riordan, M. A., Kreuz, R. J., & Olney, A. M. (2014).
Alignment is a function of conversational dynamics.
Journal of Language and Social Psychology​, ​33​(5),
465-481.
Walther, J. B., & D’Addario, K. P. (2001). The impacts of
emoticons
on
message
interpretation
in
computer-mediated communication. ​Social science
computer review​, ​19​(3), 324-34.

2991

