Using Measurement Models to Understand Eyewitness Identification
Matthew Kaesler (matthew.kaesler@adelaide.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of Adelaide
Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia

John Dunn (john.dunn@uwa.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of Western Australia
Perth, WA, 6009, Australia

Carolyn Semmler (carolyn.semmler@adelaide.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of Adelaide
Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia

The members of a lineup may be presented
simultaneously, where the witness makes a single decision,
or sequentially, where the witness makes a yes/no decision
for each member before seeing the next. In experimental
studies, the sequential procedure terminates once an ID is
made, although variations of the procedure are used in
applied settings (Horry, Palmer & Brewer, 2012). Whether
presentation format affects witness accuracy has received
significant research attention (Steblay, Dysart & Wells,
2011). Initial work by Lindsay and Wells (1985) found that
the sequential procedure produced a marked reduction in
false ID rate, a desirable outcome, and a slight reduction in
correct ID rate compared to the simultaneous procedure.
Numerous subsequent studies and two meta-analyses
(Steblay et al., 2011) have supported this pattern of results
and, although the effect has not always been found (Dobolyi
& Dodson, 2013) and seems to have weakened with time
(Moreland & Clark, 2016), evidence for sequential
superiority has been persuasive enough for the procedure to
be adopted in the United Kingdom and in many jurisdictions
in the United States (Clark, 2012).

Abstract
Much research effort has been expended improving police
lineup procedures used in collecting eyewitness identification
evidence. Sequential presentation of lineup members, in
contrast to simultaneous presentation, has been posited to
increase witness accuracy, though analyses based in Signal
Detection Theory (SDT) have challenged these claims. A
possible way to clarify the effect of presentation format on
witness accuracy is to develop SDT-based measurement
models, which characterise decision performance in terms of
psychologically-relevant parameters, particularly discriminability and response bias. A model of the sequential lineup
task was developed with a “first-above-criterion” decision
rule, alongside a simultaneous model with a “maximum
familiarity” decision rule. These models were fit to a corpus
of data comparing simultaneous and sequential lineup
performance.
Results
showed
no
difference
in
discriminability between the procedures and more
conservative responding for the sequential lineup. Future
work will examine criterion setting in the sequential lineup
and model alternative decision rules.
Keywords: Eyewitness identification; Signal Detection;
memory

Signal Detection Theory Advantage

Introduction

Recently, researchers have advocated the use of analyses
based in Signal Detection Theory (SDT) to evaluate lineup
procedures (Mickes, Flowe & Wixted, 2012). SDT is an
approach used to analyse decision performance in a wide
variety of areas in which a target, such as an enemy jet on
radar or a tumor on an x-ray, must be discriminated from
similar non-targets under conditions of uncertainty. In its
most basic form, it characterises decision performance as
resulting from two sources; discriminability (d’), related to
how well a witness can distinguish targets from non-targets,
and response bias or criterion (c), related to overall
willingness to make a decision (MacMillan & Creelman,
2005). Claims of superior performance for the sequential
procedure have been based on findings of a higher ratio of
correct ID rates to false ID rates – the so called
“diagnosticity ratio” – compared to the simultaneous
procedure (Steblay et al., 2011). However, Mickes et al.

Typical six-person lineups used in police investigations
consist of one suspect, whom police believe may be guilty
of a crime, and five known-innocents called variously
“fillers’ or “foils”, selected to resemble the suspect in
specified ways (Clark, 2012). A witness may identify (ID) a
person from the lineup or reject the lineup (“the person I
saw is not here”), and may provide a confidence rating for
their choice. In experimental mock-crime studies, a lineup is
referred to as target-present (TP) if it includes the person
observed by the witness at encoding (the “culprit”) or targetabsent (TA) if it is composed entirely of fillers.
Possible decision outcomes are expressed as rates or
proportions over a series of trials. From a TP lineup,
witnesses may correctly ID the culprit, incorrectly ID a foil
or incorrectly reject the lineup. From a TA lineup, witnesses
may correctly reject the lineup or incorrectly ID a foil,
known as a false alarm.
1

625

(2012) have shown that diagnosticity confounds
discriminability and response bias. In fact, analysis of lineup
data using SDT reveals that there are a range of different
diagnosticity ratios associated with the same lineup
procedure and that, necessarily, the ratio increases as
response bias becomes more conservative, i.e. as people
reject more frequently (Wixted & Mickes, 2012). SDT
avoids this problem by computing all empirical or
hypothetical correct ID/false ID pairs, which can then be
plotted and analysed. Further, formal modelling of the task
allows estimation of the entire response curve from
estimated parameters – allowing tests of hypotheses about
the impact of system variables such as lineup member
similarity on theoretically relevant parameters.

lineup. Each member of a lineup is associated with a
particular value of memory strength or familiarity. Foil
familiarity on both TP and TA trials is modelled as a
random draw from a normal distribution (dashed line in
Figure 1) with mean zero and standard deviation one. Target
familiarity is modeled as a random draw from a normal
distribution (solid line in Figure 1), with a mean d’ and
standard deviation s.
A decision is made in relation to a decision criterion, c.
This functions as a ‘choice threshold’ and reflects response
bias. If familiarity is greater than c, the witness will identify
the lineup member as the culprit. Otherwise, they reject the
lineup. The greater the value of c, the more conservative is
the decision and the less likely that an ID is made.
The following functions define the hit rate (h) and false
alarm rate (f), where Φ(.) is the normal cumulative
distribution function:
h(c) = 1 – Φ((c – d’)/s)
f (c) = 1 – Φ (c)
For an n=1 lineup, h is the correct ID rate and f is the false
ID rate.

Measurement Models
A measurement model uses theoretically-derived
mathematical functions to link observed behavioural data to
psychological constructs. Psychologically meaningful
model parameters are estimated by fitting the model to
observed data (Farrell & Lewandowsky, 2010).
Palmer and Brewer (2012) sought to address the need for
formal modelling of the lineup task by fitting a SDT
compound detection model (SDT-CD; Duncan, 2006) to a
corpus of studies that compared simultaneous and sequential
lineup data. The ‘compound’ aspect of SDT-CD refers to
the fact that a lineup can be decomposed into two decision
tasks; target detection (is the target present?) and target
identification (if the target is present, which member is the
target?). Results showed that the simultaneous and
sequential lineups did not significantly differ in terms of
discriminability but that the sequential procedure led to
more conservative responding.
However, there were critical aspects of the analyses
conducted by Palmer and Brewer (2012) that may have
affected their results. First, the SDT-CD model was
developed to account for simultaneous presentation of
stimuli – it does not directly model the sequential procedure.
For this reason, we develop and apply a formal model of the
sequential procedure. Second, the best-fitting parameter
values reported by Palmer and Brewer (2012) may not have
been optimal as they appear not to have been estimated by
an optimization procedure. For this reason, we fit the two
models using a computational optimization routine. Third,
given distinct models of simultaneous and sequential
procedures, it is important to explore the dependence of
each task on the criterion that is set by the witness. Previous
research (Horry et al. 2012) has highlighted the
vulnerability of the sequential task to criterion setting so we
compare the simultaneous and sequential models in terms of
their dependence on the decision criteria.

Figure1: Basic representation of the unequal variance
signal detection model

Simultaneous Model (SDT-SIM). In a simultaneous
lineup, there are n > 1 members where typically, n = 6. Let
x1, …, xn be the familiarity values of each member of the
lineup and let m the maximum of these values. The SDTSIM model implements the decision rule to choose member
k if m > c and m = xk, otherwise to reject the lineup. For a
TP lineup, if a choice is made and member k is the target, a
correct ID has been made, otherwise, a foil ID has been
made. Any selection on a TA lineup is a false alarm.
Sequential Model (SDT-SEQ). In a sequential lineup, the
witness makes a decision for each member, presented in a
fixed order labelled by indices, from 1 to n. Let K be a
subset of these indices, such that xi > c for all i  K. If K is
empty then the lineup is rejected, otherwise the witness

New Models
Both the simultaneous and sequential models assume an
underlying unequal variance SDT model based on prior
recognition memory research (Mickes, Wixted & Wais,
2007). Figure 1 illustrates this model for a single person
2

626

chooses member k where k is the smallest (i.e. the first)
element in K. For a TP lineup, if a choice is made and
member k is the target then a correct ID has been made,
otherwise an incorrect ID is made. Any selection on a TA
lineup is a false alarm.

assumption in the eyewitness paradigm where each
participant encodes a single study item (the culprit). The
greater variance of the target distribution observed in
recognition memory research may be attributed to encoding
variability across a range of study items (Mickes et al.,
2007).
Additionally, Palmer and Brewer (2012), following
Duncan (2006), used a relative measure of criterion value
with the zero point positioned between the target and lure
distributions, i.e. C = c  d’/2. Both absolute (c) and relative
(C) criteria are reported here.

Summary & Aims
Despite recent efforts to apply SDT to eyewitness
identification, there has been no attempt to model the
sequential lineup task taking account of the differences in
the decision rule and the importance of criterion setting for
response probabilities. We offer, to our knowledge, the first
formal measurement model of the sequential lineup.
Further, previous research did not use optimization routines
to find the best fitting parameters for the data, and thus the
conclusions may be different. Finally, the application of
formal models in the eyewitness identification domain
highlights the most important factors likely to impact on the
rates of false identifications of innocent people and failure
to detect the presence of a guilty suspect. In summary, the
aims of the present study are:
1. To implement a formal model of the sequential
lineup procedure (SDT-SEQ).
2. To reanalyse the data reported by Palmer and Brewer
(2012), fitting SDT-SIM to the simultaneous lineup
results and SDT-SEQ to the sequential lineup
results.
3. To compare SDT-SIM and SDT-SEQ in terms of
their dependence on parameter values, particularly
decision criterion.

Results
The new models fit the data well; SDT-SIM could not be
rejected for 19 of 22 simultaneous data sets, as indicated by
non-significant values of G2. The model was rejected for
data from Carlson, Gronlund and Clark (2008; Experiment
2), Lindsay and Wells (1985), and Rose, Bull and Vrij
(2005). SDT-SEQ was also not rejected for 19 of 22
sequential data sets but was rejected for data from Carlson
et al. (2008; Experiment 2), Lindsay and Wells (1985), and
Pozzulo and Marciniak (2006). The SDT-CD model was
also rejected for data from Carlson et al. (2008; Experiment
2), Lindsay and Wells (1985) and Pozzulo and Marciniak
(2006), in addition to Greathouse and Kovera (2009).
Taking the parameter values estimated for each dataset,
average values of d’, c and C were calculated over the
corpus of data, weighted according to sample size. Table 1
displays the summary results obtained by Palmer and
Brewer (2012) obtained from fitting the SDT-CD model
(equivalent to the SDT-SIM model) to data from both
simultaneous and sequential lineups, compared to the
summary results obtained by fitting the SDT-SIM model to
data from both simultaneous and sequential lineups, and
fitting the SDT-SEQ model to data from sequential lineups.

Method
Studies Analysed
A corpus of 22 studies (N = 3871) assembled by Palmer and
Brewer (2012) that directly compared simultaneous and
sequential presentation, making 44 data sets in all, was
reanalysed. Following Steblay, et al.’s (2011) ‘full
diagnostic design’ inclusion criteria the studies all a)
manipulated both presentation format and target
presence/absence, b) showed ID performance above chance
levels and c) involved only adult participants.

Table 1: Mean weighted parameter values from SDT-CD,
SDT-SIM and SDT-SEQ
SDT-CD
Simultaneous
Sequential
SDT-SIM
Simultaneous
Sequential
SDT-SEQ
Sequential

Statistical Analyses
SDT-SIM and SDT-SEQ were fit using optimization of
maximum likelihood (implemented using Matlab
FMINCON function). This searches parameter space for
values of d’ and c that best characterise observed decision
performance. We report goodness-of-fit in terms of the G2
statistic which is a function of the maximum likelihood and
distributed as chi-squared.

d'
1.64
1.74

c
-.06
.44

C
-.89
-.43

1.37
1.33

1.21
1.53

.53
.87

1.40

1.55

.85

The first step in our analysis was to fit SDT-SIM to both
simultaneous and sequential datasets, attempting to recover
a similar pattern of results to those obtained by Palmer and
Brewer (2012). Fitting SDT-SIM to all datasets produced a
similar pattern of estimates to SDT-CD, with a significantly
higher mean weighted C value for the sequential datasets, as
indicated by a Welch two-sample weighted t-test, t(36.42) =
-3.89, p<.05, and no significant difference in mean

Statistical Considerations. Due to a lack of confidence
rating data in many of the studies analysed, the standard
deviation of the target distribution (s) was not estimated.
Instead, the value of s was fixed to one. This is a plausible
3

627

weighted d’ values between simultaneous and sequential
datasets, t(41.67) = .34, p = .73.
The second step was to compare the parameter values
recovered by fitting SDT-CD and SDT-SIM/SEQ. Figures 2
and 3 plot the estimated parameter values recovered for each
data set when fitting SDT-CD to both simultaneous and
sequential datasets and SDT-SIM and SDT-SEQ to their
respective datasets.

SDT-SEQ was significantly lower than SDT-CD as fit to
sequential datasets t(33.76) = 2.11, p<0.5.
The final stage of the analysis was to compare C and d’
values generated by fitting SDT-SIM and SDT-SEQ to their
respective data types, as displayed in Figure 3. Examining
Figure 3 reveals a cluster of sequential datasets with higher
C values than the cluster of simultaneous datasets. A Welch
two-sample weighted t-test, t(35.03) = -3.53, p<.05,
indicated that the mean weighted C value of the sequential
datasets as estimated by SDT-SEQ was significantly higher
than that of the simultaneous datasets as estimated by SDTSIM.
There are no such patterns evident relative to the
horizontal axis, with d’ values for most of the datasets
clustered from approximately 1 to 2. No significant
difference between the mean weighted d’ values for the
simultaneous and sequential datasets was found, t(41.54) = .28, p = .81.

Figure 2. C vs d’ estimates for all datasets SDT-CD

Discussion
The present study developed and fit two SDT-based formal
measurement models of the simultaneous (SDT-SIM) and
sequential (SDT-SEQ) eyewitness lineup task to a corpus of
data collected by Palmer and Brewer (2012) using an
optimization procedure, and compared the model’s
dependence on the parameters discriminability (d’) and
response bias (c) in order to better understand decision
performance on the lineup task.
Fitting SDT-SIM to both simultaneous and sequential
data, following Palmer and Brewer (2012), produced similar
parameter estimates to those generated by fitting SDT-CD,
with results suggesting that the sequential procedure
encourages more conservative responding but does not
differ in discriminability. Fitting SDT-SIM and SDT-SEQ
to their respective data types further reinforced this pattern
of results, supporting the conclusions reached by Palmer
and Brewer (2012).
Compared to SDT-CD, SDT-SIM and SDT-SEQ
produced higher criterion estimates for their respective data
types while, while SDT-SEQ also produced lower
discriminability estimates. The difference in parameter
values between Palmer and Brewer (2012) and the results
here is likely due to the task and fitting the models using an
efficient optimization procedure rather than grid search.
While no discriminability differences were reported here
or in Palmer and Brewer (2012), previous studies using
ROC analysis to calculate observed discriminability from
rating data have shown a discriminability advantage for the
simultaneous lineup (Dobolyi & Dodson, 2013; Mickes et
al., 2012). Results here do not necessarily contradict these
findings, as simulations can generate different shaped ROC
curves from different ID procedures despite holding
theoretical d’ constant between them (Rotello & Chen,
2016). The relationship between theoretical d’ as estimated
by SDT-SIM and SDT-SEQ and observed “Area Under the
Curve” measures of d’, as used in ROC analysis, will likely
be investigated in future work with new data that includes

Figure 3. C vs d’ estimates for all datasets SDT-SIM/SEQ

The difference in y-axis range between Figure 2 and
Figure 3 indicate that fitting SDT-SIM and SDT-SEQ to
their respective datasets produced higher criterion estimates
compared to SDT-CD. Welch two-sample weighted t-tests
indicated that mean weighted C was significantly higher for
SDT-SIM, t(36.74) = -16.41, p<.05, and SDT-SEQ, t(38.91)
= -9.87, p<.05, compared to mean weighted C from SDTCD for simultaneous and sequential datasets respectively.
There was no difference in mean weighted d’ for SDT-SIM
compared to SDT-CD as fit to simultaneous datasets,
t(40.33) = 1.89, p = .06, however mean weighted d’ for
4

628

confidence ratings. Regarding theoretical discriminability,
these results challenge the diagnostic feature detection
model (Wixted & Mickes, 2014) that proposes a
discriminability advantage for the simultaneous lineup
arising from witnesses’ ability to identify diagnostic
features between lineup members.
The more conservative decision criterion observed on the
sequential lineup can be explained by differences between
its “first-above-criterion” identification rule of SDT-SEQ
and the “maximum familiarity” rule of SDT-SIM. This
difference becomes evident as the decision criterion is made
more lenient. In the limit, the most liberal decision criterion
(i.e. always choose) in the sequential lineup results in
selection of the first lineup member, leading to chance
performance; a correct ID rate of 1/6 for TP lineups and a
false alarm rate of 1/6 for TA lineups. In contrast, the
“maximum familiarity” rule of SDT-SIM means that, for the
most liberal decision criterion, the witness always chooses
the most familiar lineup member. If d’ > 0, the lineup
member with maximum familiarity in TP lineups is more
likely than other members to be the target, leading to a
correct ID rate greater than 1/6, while for TA lineups the
false ID rate remains at 1/6. The effect of this difference is
that in order for ID performance to be comparable between
simultaneous and sequential lineups, the latter requires a
more conservative decision criterion.
Based on the present findings, any performance advantage
attributed to the sequential procedure is likely due to a
stricter decision criterion, not improved discriminability.
This suggests that changes in lineup procedure do not alter
underlying memory strength. Rather, the quality of memory
information available to a witness is largely determined at
encoding by factors such as distance, lighting and exposure
time (Maclin, Maclin & Malpass, 2001). The present
findings also do not support of the proposal that
performance differences are the result of procedural effects
on retrieval or reconstructive memory processes taking
place during a lineup decision as these are likely to affect
discriminability (Ebbesen & Flowe, 2002).
Wells (2014) acknowledged the mounting body of
evidence showing that any perceived sequential lineup
advantage is the result of a more conservative decision
criterion but contends that it is more useful in applied
settings no matter the source of any performance difference.
As other researchers have noted (e.g. Clark, 2012),
conservative responding reduces both false IDs and correct
IDs. If policy makers consider conservative responding in
the lineup task desirable, such an affect could be achieved
by simpler means than retraining police to administer
lineups sequentially, such as instructing witnesses to be very
careful in their choosing or by only counting IDs made at
high confidence (Wixted & Mickes, 2012).

with the so-called relative judgement strategy (Wells, 1984).
Wells (1984) proposed that the increased innocent suspect
ID rate of the simultaneous procedure may be due to the
tendency for witnesses to compare across lineup members,
selecting the one that most resembles their memory of the
perpetrator relative to the other members, rather than
comparing each lineup member directly to their memory of
the perpetrator as in the absolute decision strategy (cf.
Wixted & Mickes, 2014). The absolute vs. relative
distinction has gained some traction in the literature and has
received some empirical investigation, although the
superiority of one strategy over the other has not been
demonstrated (Fife, Perry & Gronlund, 2014). In line with
our present approach, formal modelling of the relative
decision strategy could clarify the utility of the
absolute/relative distinction to understanding lineup
performance.
One option for implementing relative judgement is to use
the difference in familiarity between the lineup member
with maximum familiarity (m) and the next-most-familiar
lineup member, which seems to accord with Wells’ (1984)
description. The rule would be; if this difference score
exceeds a criterion, then choose the lineup member with
maximum familiarity, otherwise reject the lineup. We are
currently developing a formal model based on this rule.

Future Directions
Criterion Shift in Sequential Lineup. The present work
demonstrates that the sequential lineup decisions are
critically affected by the placement of the decision criterion.
A further question is whether the decision criterion may
change over the course of the lineup. In an attempt to
forestall such changes, Horry, Palmer and Brewer (2012)
investigated the efficacy of “backloading”, telling the
witness that they will be viewing more photos than there are
lineup members. The results indicated that the more
photographs the witness was told to expect, the more
conservative were their decision criteria. On nonbackloaded lineups, foil choices increased in the later lineup
positions. Because Horry, Palmer and Brewer (2012) fit
SDT-CD to the data to generate parameter estimates, future
research could explore whether these conclusions remain
valid after fitting the SDT-SEQ model to these data.

Conclusion
This study presents two formal measurement models of the
simultaneous and sequential lineup tasks, which were fit to a
large corpus of data using computational optimization. The
development of a sequential model is particularly
noteworthy, it being, to our knowledge, the first of its kind
in the eyewitness literature. Results show no difference in
discriminability between the two procedures and a more
conservative decision criterion in the sequential procedure.
The models offer a means to investigate the effects of
system variables on eyewitness performance in terms of
theoretically relevant underlying parameters, demonstrating
the value of formal modelling in applied research.

Limitations
Decision Strategy. The present work uses an absolute
decision strategy for both the simultaneous and sequential
models, despite the simultaneous lineup’s long association
5

629

recognition memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
14(5), 858-865.
Moreland, M. B., & Clark, S. E. (2016). Eyewitness
Identification: Research, Reform, and Reversal. Journal
of Applied Research in Memory and Cognition, 5(3), 277283.
Palmer, M. A., & Brewer, N. (2012). Sequential lineup
presentation promotes less-biased criterion setting but
does not improve discriminability. Law and Human
Behavior, 36(3), 247-255.
Pozzulo, J. D., & Marciniak, S. (2006). Comparing
identification procedures when the perpetrator has
changed appearance. Psychology, Crime & Law, 12(4),
429-438.
Rose, R. A., Bull, R., & Vrij, A. (2005). Non-biased lineup
instructions do matter--A problem for older witnesses.
Psychology, Crime & Law, 11(2), 147-159.
Rotello, C. M., & Chen, T. (2016). ROC curve analyses of
eyewitness identification decisions: An analysis of the
recent debate. Cognitive Research: Principles and
Implications, 1(1), 10.
Steblay, N. K., Dysart, J. E., & Wells, G. L. (2011).
Seventy-two tests of the sequential lineup superiority
effect: A meta-analysis and policy discussion.
Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 17(1), 99-139.
Wells, G. L. (1984). The Psychology of Lineup
Identifications. Journal of Applied Social Psychology,
14(2), 89-103.
Wells, G. L. (2014). Eyewitness identification: Probative
value, criterion shifts, and policy regarding the sequential
lineup. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
23(1), 11-16.
Wixted, J. T., & Mickes, L. (2012). The Field of Eyewitness
Memory Should Abandon Probative Value and Embrace
Receiver Operating Characteristic Analysis. Perspectives
on Psychological Science, 7(3), 275-278.
Wixted, J. T., & Mickes, L. (2014). A signal-detectionbased diagnostic-feature-detection model of eyewitness
identification. Psychological Review, 121(2), 262-276.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the Australian Government
through the Australian Research Council, Discovery
Projects DP160101048.

References
Carlson, C. A., Gronlund, S. D., & Clark, S. E. (2008).
Lineup composition, suspect position, and the sequential
lineup advantage. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied, 14(2), 118-128.
Clark, S. E. (2012). Costs and Benefits of Eyewitness
Identification Reform: Psychological Science and Public
Policy. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(3), 238259.
Dobolyi, D. G., & Dodson, C. S. (2013). Eyewitness
confidence in simultaneous and sequential lineups: A
criterion shift account for sequential mistaken
identification overconfidence. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 19(4), 345-357.
Duncan, M. J. (2006). A signal detection model of
compound decision tasks. (Tech. Rep. No. TR2006–256).
Toronto, ON: Defence Research and Development
Canada.
Ebbesen, E. B., & Flowe, H. D. (2002). Simultaneous v.
sequential lineups: What do we really know?. Retrieved
December 20 2016 from
https://dspace.lboro.ac.uk/2134/20167
Farrell, S., & Lewandowsky, S. (2010). Computational
models as aids to better reasoning in psychology. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 19(5), 329-335.
Fife, D., Perry, C., & Gronlund, S. D. (2014). Revisiting
absolute and relative judgments in the WITNESS model.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 21(2), 479-487.
Horry, R., Palmer, M. A., & Brewer, N. (2012).
Backloading in the sequential lineup prevents withinlineup criterion shifts that undermine eyewitness
identification performance. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 18(4), 346-360.
Lindsay, R., & Wells, G. L. (1985). Improving eyewitness
identifications from lineups: Simultaneous versus
sequential lineup presentation. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 70(3), 556-564.
MacLin, O. H., MacLin, M. K., & Malpass, R. S. (2001).
Race, Arousal, Attention, Exposure, and Delay: An
Examination of Factors Moderating Face Recognition.
Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 7(1), 134-152.
MacMillan, N., Creelman., C (2005). Detection theory: A
user’s guide (2nd ed.). Mahwah, New Jersey. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Mickes, L., Flowe, H. D., & Wixted, J. T. (2012). Receiver
operating characteristic analysis of eyewitness memory:
Comparing the diagnostic accuracy of simultaneous
versus sequential lineups. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 18(4), 361-376.
Mickes, L., Wixted, J. T., & Wais, P. E. (2007). A direct
test of the unequal-variance signal detection model of
6

630

