What can Hand Movements Tell us about Audience Engagement?
Lida Theodorou (l.theodorou@qmul.ac.uk)
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, Mile End Road
London, E1 4NS

Patrick Healey (p.healey@qmul.ac.uk)
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, Mile End Road
London, E1 4NS
Abstract
Conventional seated audiences have relatively restricted opportunities for response. Perhaps the most salient is applause
but they use their hands to make other visible movements: to
fix hair, adjust glasses, scratch ears. The question we address
here is whether these apparently incidental movements may
provide systematic clues about an audience’s level of engagement with a performance. We investigate this in the context
of contemporary dance performances by analysing audience
hand movements in four performances at the London Contemporary Dance School. Hand movements were tracked using a
reflective wristband worn by each audience member. A blob
detection algorithm applied to the video recording examined
whether changes in hand movement are associated with audience arousal levels to the performance. The results show that
hands move least during the most preferred and most during
the least preferred dance pieces. We conclude that still hands
are a signal of higher levels of engagement.
Keywords: Audience; Engagement; Blob Detection; Hand
movement; Handedness; Contemporary Dance.

Introduction: Interacting with Audiences
In many live performances audiences are separated from performers; seated in the dark observing the performance. The
primary conventional opportunity for members of an audience to express their satisfaction or dissatisfaction about a
performance is through applause and/or cheering. Nonetheless, audiences have notoriously recruited other means of signalling their ongoing responses including the organised and
carefully timed use of apparently innocent activities such as
coughing (Wagener, 2012; Broth, 2011).
Our programmatic hypothesis is that audiences’ ongoing responses are part of a bi-directional system of
audience-performer communication that distinguishes live
from recorded performance. A key motivation for this hypothesis is that performers themselves distinguish between
“good” or “bad” audiences for the same performance and
between moments of engagement or “lift” and moments of
boredom in an audience (Healey, Oxley, Schober, & Welton,
2009). The question this raises is what could performers be
detecting in these situations that informs their dynamic sense
of how well a performance is going. Here, we consider an
especially restrictive case: contemporary dance. In a typical
performance the audience will be in the dark, the performers
behind bright lights and loud music accompanying the dancing. Audience behaviours are restricted by conventions on
the types of response that it is considered acceptable to display. Performers are constrained by the need to concentrate
on the physical movements required for their performance. In

contrast to live genres such as Street Performance, Stand-up
Comedy or Drama there few, if any, opportunities for direct
eye contact or verbal exchanges with the audience. Almost
the only available channel of communication between audience and performers is body movements.
One overt physical response that is visually salient and potentially detectable by dancers is audience hand movements.
Casual observation of a dance audience reveals a wide range
of ongoing hand-movements by audience members involving an apparently diverse set of activities: scratching, adjusting hair, adjusting glasses, support the chin and drinking
amongst others. The question addressed here is whether these
movements may provide a signal of audience engagement and
thereby form part of a feedback cycle between the performers
and their audience.

Measuring Audience Responses
Understanding and sensing audience responses can provide
an evaluation tool to help performance directors understand
how their work is received. Performance unfolds in time,
making the collection of data more problematic for researchers (Schubert, Vincs, & Stevens, 2009). However,
there are a growing number of studies in dance research
that use sensing technologies to examine dancer positions
in time (Calvo-Merino, Glaser, Grèzes, Passingham, & Haggard, 2005) although very little research has focused specifically on audiences (Katevas, Healey, & Harris, 2015; Gardair,
Healey, & Welton, 2011; Vincs, Stevens, & Schubert, 2010;
Healey et al., 2009).
The most obvious way that one can measure satisfaction
in audiences is from the levels of applause. Mann, Faria,
Sumpter, and Krause (2013) used a mathematical model to
quantify the role of social contagion in the starting and stopping of applause during a presentation. They found that the
rate at which new individuals start clapping is proportional
to how many people are already clapping. However, this is
a measure of response after the end of the presentation rather
than a concurrent response. An alternative approach asks participants to make explicit self-reports of their responses during a performance. Vincs et al. (2010) took this approach with
a ‘portable Audience Response Facility’ (pARF), a PDA that
records participant’s ratings of engagement during a dance
work. They found that periods of high self-reported engagement often follow choreographic surprises, and that periods
of low engagement tend to be associated with more pre-

3302

dictable dance structures (Vincs et al., 2010; Vincs, Schubert,
& Stevens, 2009). Using a post-performance methodology,
Stevens et al. (2009), explored the reactions of 472 audience
members as they watched contemporary dance by using an
Audience Response Tool (ART) that collects responses using qualitative and quantitative questionnaires. Some of the
items probed participants on their experience and enjoyment
of the performance included visual and aural cues, dancer
characteristics, movement, choreography, novelty, spatial elements, intellectual and emotional stimulation. Unfortunately,
the act of asking participants to evaluate the performance after
its end has the disadvantage of the ”peak-end” effect, which
shows that a measure taken immediately after an experience
is strongly influenced by the peak emotion and by the emotion
experienced at the end of the experience.
Two non-intrusive approaches have demonstrated connections between the movements of performers and audiences
as an element of live feedback between performers and audience. Healey et al. (2009) pioneered the use of motion capture techniques in this context by exploring the intercorrelations between patterns of head movement between a seminar
speaker and their audience during a seminar. The results of
their study indicate that head movements of the performer are
reliably triggered by head movement of audience members.
Using a detailed ethnographic approach, Gardair et al. (2011)
examined audience dynamics in a study of street performance
in Covent Garden. She explored how passers-by notice when
a street performance is happening, by first becoming watchers
and then transformed into audience members. Gardair argued
that people’s body orientations show the spaces that people
most often interact and also that people use their body torque
to express their engagement levels with the performance.

What Do Hand Movements Signal?
Although hand movements are visually salient they have a
wide variety of potential causes. It is especially challenging to interpret naturally occurring audience hand behaviour
without convergent verbal feedback. Most of the gesture literature focuses on explicitly designed co-speech gestures. Audience hand behaviour includes hand to face gestures or selftouch gestures (STG) that appear to lack overt, intentional
design and may be performed with little or no awareness
(Harrigan, Kues, Steffen, & Rosenthal, 1987). One important class of non-speech hand movements that are relevant
for audiences are self-touch gestures (STG’s). According to
Harrigan et al. (1987), 55% of STG are applied to head or
face, 8% are applied to the legs and 2% of STG are directed
to the trunk. They are thus likely to be visible at a distance.
Studies have shown that there is an increase in selftouching behaviour in stressful and fearful situations (Butzen,
Bissonnette, & McBrayer, 2005; Heaven & McBrayer, 2000)
although Ekman and Friesen (1972) suggested that STGs may
also occur when a person is relaxed. Butzen et al. (2005)
found a significant increase of STG in response to a video
about chiggers compared to another kind of video. In a study
from Heaven and McBrayer (2000) the participants listened

to texts about leeches and canaries and then had to answer
several questions. Although there were no differences between the two listening conditions there was an increase in
STG for the leeches text during the answering period. Rogels,
Roelen, and Van Meen (1990) found that children between 3
and 6 years showed more self-touch gestures while talking
about a cartoon they had just seen than while watching the
cartoon. Other studies (Grunwald, Weiss, Mueller, & Rall,
2014) hypothesise that there is a relationship between the frequency of STG and arousal. Barroso and Feld (1986) investigated this by testing the occurrence of self-touch gestures
performed with one or both hands as a function of four different auditory attention tasks. They found that with increasing
complexity and attentional demands both one and two handed
self-touch gestures increased. Handedness also appears to
play a role. Kimura (1972) showed right handed participants
perform STG’s equally often with the left and the right hand.
However, there is evidence that people use their right and left
hand for different reasons while talking. Kipp and Martin
(2009) found an association of handedness with the emotional
dimensions of arousal. In particular, they found that the right
hand is used more when experiencing anger and the left hand
when experiencing relaxed and positive feelings. According
to Roether, Omlor, and Giese (2010) the body seems asymmetric in its emotional expressivity. The left side uses higher
energy and higher amplitude for emotional movements than
the right side.
Hand behaviour and boredom is another relationship that
might help us interpret audience hand movements. According
to Kroes (2005) people experiencing boredom tend to relax
their body muscles. Bull (1978) claims that there are specific
head positions that characterise boredom such as drops head,
turns head and head lean. Bored people also tend to use their
hands to support their head or perform self-touching gestures
(rubbing or clutching face). However, Kroes (Kroes, 2005)
notes that this hand behaviour is a sign of low arousal but it
might not be a sign of dissatisfaction. According to BianchiBerthouze, Kim, and Patel (2007), boredom is mostly associated with the decrease of body movement. However, contradictory findings show that increase of movement was associated with frustration, loss of interest and boredom (Kapoor,
Burleson, & Picard, 2007), this suggests that boredom can
also correlate with episodes of high movement. In summary,
we believe that the claims in the literature about movements
and boredom are not entirely consistent and seem to depend
a lot on the social context of the activity.
Overall, the interpretation of hand gestures is problematic
however, it appears that STG are implicated in the regulation
of emotional and cognitive processes. Based on the literature
presented above we believe that in the context of contemporary dance audience hand movement might give us information about audience engagement to the performance. We try
to investigate this by first testing the general hand behaviour
patterns that evoke in an audience and then examine whether
these patterns affect the audience engagement. This paper

3303

presents some initial results relevant to audience hand motion
patterns by testing the following hypotheses. The first two
hypotheses examine whether hands are an important sign of
audience engagement that might be detectable by the dancers.
Hypothesis 1 (H1): Audience hand movements provide a
potentially salient signal of response to performers.
Hypothesis 2 (H2): If hand movements have a special status as a response signal they should diverge from other movements.
In addition, hypothesis 3 and 4 examine the relationship
of hand speed with engagement and/or boredom. In contrast
to the association of boredom with low movement described
above, we believe that in the context of a dance performance
applies the opposite. Based on this we will test the following
hypotheses:
Hypothesis 3 (H3): Less movement of hands on face signals engagement.
Hypothesis 4 (H4): More movement of hands on face signals disengagement.
These hypotheses will be tested using the methodology described below.

Performances by London Contemporary Dance
School
The study presented in this paper took place at ”ThePlace”
theater in London where four contemporary dance pieces
performed by dancers of the London Contemporary Dance
School(LCD). As part of our second study on audience responses, we filmed audiences and dancers during the performance. The performance lasted for 1 hour and 40 minutes
and consisted of 4, 20 minute dance pieces (part 1 to part
4) and a 20 minute interval between the second and the third
piece (see figure 1). Each dance was performed by LCD postgraduate students and directed by commissioned professional
choreographers.

Figure 1: Performances Part 1 to Part 4 (from left to right)
performed by LCD.

Methods

hanged from the rig facing the stage. For a synchronised double GEV camera recording we used Gecko software made by
Vision Experts operated on a Windows 10 pc. Gecko gave
us more data accuracy since it provides a timestamp on each
frame and is able to capture 45 frames per second.

Figure 2: Plan drawing of ”ThePlace’s” theatre showing
equipment setup.

Hand tracking: Reflective Wristbands
Apart from filming the audience and the dancers, the methodological aim of this study was to extract the hand (wrist)
movements of each audience member automatically. In order
to do this, we created bracelets made of 5mm reflective rope.
A small plastic bag with two reflective bracelets together with
instructions of how to wear them was placed on the arm of
each theatre seat (See figure 3). Each audience member had
to wear one wristband on each hand. The bracelets were only
visible in the video recordings because of the IR lights shooting directly on them. This was the cheapest and easiest solution we could find to do an automatic tracking and record
continuous wrist movements.

Figure 3: Front and back side of ziplock plastic bag with two
reflective wristbands and how to wear instructions (left). Blob
detection algorithm running on audience footage (right).

Equipment set-up
In order to be able to capture a big enough sample of the audience, we used two Basler ace (1280x1024px resolution) night
vision cameras. An infrared light (IR) was attached on top of
each camera so as to be able to film the audience during the
dark periods of the performance. Both cameras and IR lights
were placed on the theatre truss on top of the stage pointing
towards the part of the audience to be filmed (See figure 2).
For the filming of the dancers a JVC professional camera was

Hand and body data extraction
A blob detection algorithm made by the blobscanner processing library was applied on audience footage to track the reflective wristbands on each frame (See right image on figure
3). Blob detection is a computer vision method that is able to
detect similar regions in a digital image, such as those with
the same brightness or colour, compared to surrounding regions. In our case a blob is a region of white pixels (reflective

3304

wristbands) in the image. By applying this method on the
videos, we extracted the position x,y of each blob in the image or in other words the right and left wrist locations of each
audience member in each frame of the performance.
However, due to the complexity of the human hand movement and the limitations of the algorithm it was impossible
to get a stable continuous detection of the hands since the algorithm was unable to attach and keep the correct blob on
each hand throughout the frames. Due to this limitation, the
data was extracted first, the hand positions x,y were played
back on top of the footage and some manual work was done
to help the algorithm pinpoint the correct blob for each hand
for the whole duration of the video. By doing this we ended
up with a datafile with the x,y positions of left and right hand
of each audience member during each dance piece. In order
to be able to test the significance of the hands in the performance, we compare their behaviour with that of the rest of
the body. To measure the general upper-body movement of
the audience, we used an optical flow algorithm. In particular
we applied the algorithm on each person separately removing
the optical flow vectors of each person’s hands. This gave us
the upper-body movement of each person without the movement of the hands (See images on figure 4).

Figure 4: Captured areas for optical flow.

Results
The informal observation of the video footage showed that
there were very few overt responses in the audience; the
most salient identifiable movements were those of bringing
the hands up to the face. Overall, we extracted hand motion
data from 27 audience members (18 females and 9 males). In
order to test if audience hands produce enough movement to
be detectable by the dancers (H1), we measure the duration
of hands being up and down as well as the hand speed during
the performance. The results indicate that people have their
hands on their faces for about half of the performance (42%
of the time have their hands up compared to 58% that they
have them down) while the hands are moving faster when
they are up compared to when they are down, in a resting
position. We examine separately the case of hands to the
face by calculating the number of times each hand is moving (fix hair, adjust glasses, scratch ears) or not (hands on
chin or supporting head). We found that overall the number of times the hands are moving is approximately the same
with the times the hands are still (48% moving, 52% still).

Therefore, it appears that the audience performs enough hand
movements for the performers to detect. In order to examine
if hand movement could provide us signals of audience affective state (H2), we compare its similarity to the movement
of the upper-body. Figure 5 shows audience body movement
and hand movement for each part averaged every 1 minute.
From these two graphs, it is apparent that body and hands
behave differently throughout the performance while overall
there is a decrease of movement from part 1 to part 3 followed by a sharp increase in the movement of the hands at
the end of part 4. From these two plots, it is apparent that
audience body movement is low in part 2 compared to the
other 3 parts while hand movement seems to be lowest in part
3. In summary, these findings provide us with some evidence
that hand movement might be a significant audience response
that might be detectable by the performers and can potentially give us information regarding audience engagement to
the performance.

Figure 5: Upper-body speed (left) and hand speed (right) for
each part of the performance averaged every 1 minute.
Focusing separately on each part of the performance, we
next examine audience engagement levels by testing how
long people keep their hands up or down and how do hands
behave when they are up to the face (H3, H4). The left plot
on figure 6 shows the amount of time hands are up or down in
each part. It is apparent that people keep their hands on their
face for longer as the performance progresses from part 1 to
part 3, although that duration decreases slightly in part 4. The
right plot on figure 6 shows the number of times hands are up
(moving/not moving) for each part of the performance. From
this plot, it appears that the mobility of the hands decreases as
the performance progresses. Looking at the two plots, we see
differences between the 4 parts of the performance. In part
1, hands seem to be down for longer while when they are up
their mobility is relatively high. Overall, part 1 presents more
moving than still hands. In part 3, people have their hands up
for longer, however most of the time hands are still when they
are up. This means that in part 3 we have an increase in the
number of still hands on face. Finally, parts 2 and 4 are somewhere in between with the only difference that in part 2 hands

3305

are more likely to be found down while the opposite is true
for part 4. In summary, it seems that there is an increase in the
number of hands being on face while hands are getting stiller
as the performance progresses. This result fits with the movement of the body that also decreases from part 1 to part 3.
At the end of part 4 both body and hand speed increase. We
compared these results with audience preference levels for
each part through an online survey sent to participants with a
range of familiarities to dance. The main aim of the survey
was to ask people to watch the footage of the 4 dance pieces
and rank them in order of preference. The order of the performances was randomised for each participant. We collected
answers from 21 people (18 females and 3 males), 8 of which
were professionally connected to dance and were watching
dance more that 4 times a year. The rest were dance enthusiasts that were going to dance performances 3 to 4 times a year.
The results of the survey indicate that the 2nd part of the performance is the most preferred, 3rd part comes next while 1st
and 4th are the least preferred in that order. In comparison to
the previously mentioned results, we observe that during the
most preferred parts (part 2,3) there are more hands still on
face while in the least preferred there is a higher mobility of
the hands that gets more distinct at the second half of part 4,
very end of the performance.

Figure 6: Duration of hands being up and down for each part
of the performance (left). Number of time hands are up (Moving and Not moving) for each part of the performance (right).
An unexpected finding of this study is the different behaviour between audiences left and right hand. Overall, during the performance the left hand moves slightly faster than
the right while the right hand is more likely to be found up
on the face compared to the left. The first plot on figure 7
shows the mean speed of the left and right hand for each part
of the performance. In parts 1 and 2 the left hand seems to
move faster compare to the right while in the Part 3 and 4 is
the other way around, the speed of the right hand is slightly
higher compared to the left. Finally, the second plot on figure 7 shows the average number of times left and the right
hand were found up for each part of the performance. This
plot indicates that there is a difference between the number
of times people use their left and right hand which is getting

progressively bigger from part 1 to part 4.

Figure 7: Mean hand speed of left and right hand for each
part of the performance (left). Mean number of times left and
right hand were up during each part (right).

Discussion
The results described above provide us with some initial clues
to the importance of overt audience reactions to contemporary dance. Like Theodorou, Healey, and Smeraldi (2016),
these results show that overall, audiences have their hands up
to their faces for about half the performance while the speed
of hand movements varies a lot throughout. This suggests
that there is audience hand movements that are both frequent
and potentially detectable to the dancers. Previous studies
have shown that audience faces tend to be expressionless
during dance performances and so hands might be the part
of the body provide signals of satisfaction or dissatisfaction
(Theodorou et al., 2016). Combined with the preferences expressed in the survey, the results show that the most preferred
performances are the ones that the audience moves least while
during the least preferred performances hand movement increases and people perform more self-touching gestures. We
interpret this finding as suggesting that people become restless and this leads to more spontaneous self-touching gestures. These observations suggest that it is actually the lack of
movement that is a key signal of how engaged people are in
the performance and fidgeting and spontaneous self-touching
relate more to audiences boredom or nervousness (Healey,
Theodorou, & Woods, Forthcoming 2017). However, the ratings collected by the online survey can only capture overall
preference levels, rather than the momentary engagement of
the audience. This is something that needs to be explored in
future work by, for example, showing people shorter videos
from different parts of a performance instead of judging the
dance piece as a whole.
An unexpected finding of the study was the systematically
different behaviour of the left and right hand throughout the
performance. In particular, the results indicate that overall the
left hand moves faster compared to the right while the right
hand is more likely to be found up. This finding is opposite
to what we found in our first study which showed that people
have their left hand up more times and for longer compared
to the right hand. These different hand responses may indicate that people have a left-right asymmetry in their expres-

3306

siveness when watching dance. Kipp and Martin (2009) have
proposed that there is an association of gesture handedness
with the emotional dimensions of pleasure and arousal. In the
future we plan to examine this association further, and test the
aforementioned questions of boredom and engagement using
a more controlled methodology with recruited audience members.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) as part of the Centre for
Doctoral Training in Media and Arts Technology. The authors extend a personal thank to Peter Laycock producer of
”The Place” for letting us film the performances, as well as
Marco Cifre,Sam Wood and Petros Koutsolampros for helping with all the technical requirements.

References
Barroso, F., & Feld, J. K. (1986). Self-touching and attentional processes: The role of task difficulty, selection stage,
and sex differences. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 10(1),
51–64.
Bianchi-Berthouze, N., Kim, W. W., & Patel, D. (2007).
Does body movement engage you more in digital game
play? and why? In International conference on affective
computing and intelligent interaction (pp. 102–113).
Broth, M. (2011, June). The Theatre Performance as Interaction between Actors and Their Audience. Nottingham
French Studies, 50(2), 113–133.
Bull, P. (1978). The interpretation of posture through an
alternative methodology to role play. British Journal of
Clinical Psychology, 17(1), 1–6.
Butzen, N. D., Bissonnette, V., & McBrayer, D. (2005). Effects of modeling and topic stimulus on self-referent touching. Perceptual and motor skills, 413–420.
Calvo-Merino, B., Glaser, D. E., Grèzes, J., Passingham,
R. E., & Haggard, P. (2005, August). Action observation and acquired motor skills: an FMRI study with expert
dancers. Cerebral cortex (New York, N.Y. : 1991), 15(8),
1243–9.
Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. (1972). Hand Movements. Journal
of Communication.
Gardair, C., Healey, P. G., & Welton, M. (2011). Performing
places. Proceedings of the 8th ACM conference on Creativity and cognition - C&C ’11, 51.
Grunwald, M., Weiss, T., Mueller, S., & Rall, L. (2014,
April). EEG changes caused by spontaneous facial selftouch may represent emotion regulating processes and
working memory maintenance. Brain research, 1557, 111–
26.
Harrigan, J. a., Kues, J. R., Steffen, J. J., & Rosenthal, R.
(1987, December). Self-Touching and Impressions of Others. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 13(4),
497–512.
Healey, P. G. T., Oxley, R., Schober, M., & Welton, M.
(2009). Engaging Audiences. , 1–2.

Healey, P. G. T., Theodorou, L., & Woods, P. (Forthcoming
2017). Stillness and motion: Two hypotheses about audience engagement.
Heaven, L., & McBrayer, D. (2000). External motivators of
self-touching behavior. Perceptual and motor skills(1981),
338–342.
Kapoor, A., Burleson, W., & Picard, R. W. (2007). Automatic
prediction of frustration. Int. J. Human-Computer Studies,
65, 724–736.
Katevas, K., Healey, P. G. T., & Harris, M. T. (2015, August). Robot Comedy Lab: experimenting with the social
dynamics of live performance. Frontiers in Psychology,
6(August), 1–9.
Kimura, D. (1972). Manual activity during speaking - 1.
Right-handers*. Neuropsychologia, 45–50.
Kipp, M., & Martin, J.-C. (2009, September). Gesture and
emotion: Can basic gestural form features discriminate
emotions? 2009 3rd International Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction and Workshops,
1–8.
Kroes, S. (2005). Detecting boredom in meetings. University
of Twente, 1–5.
Mann, R. P., Faria, J., Sumpter, D. J. T., & Krause, J. (2013).
The dynamics of audience applause The dynamics of audience applause. (June).
Roether, C. L., Omlor, L., & Giese, M. A. (2010). Dynamics
of Visual Motion Processing. , 313–340.
Rogels, P. L. J. M., Roelen, E., & Van Meen, J. (1990). The
function of self-touchings, posture shifts, and motor discharges in children from 3 to 6 years of age. Perceptual
and motor skills, 1169–1178.
Schubert, E., Vincs, K., & Stevens, C. (2009). A Quantitative Approach to Analysing Reliability of Engagement
Responses to Dance.
Stevens, C. J., Schubert, E., Morris, R. H., Frear, M., Chen, J.,
Healey, S., . . . Hansen, S. (2009, September). Cognition
and the temporal arts: Investigating audience response to
dance using PDAs that record continuous data during live
performance. International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies, 67(9), 800–813.
Theodorou, L., Healey, P. G., & Smeraldi, F. (2016). Exploring audience behaviour during contemporary dance performances. In Proceedings of the 3rd international symposium
on movement and computing (p. 7).
Vincs, K., Schubert, E., & Stevens, C. (2009). Measuring Responses to Dance. Dance Dialogues: Conversations across
cultures, artforms and practices.
Vincs, K., Stevens, C., & Schubert, E. (2010). Effects of observer experience on continuous measures of engagement
with a contemporary dance work. Proceedings of the 9th
Conference of the Australasian Society for Cognitive Science, 357–361.
Wagener, A. (2012). Why do people (not) cough in concerts?
The economics of concert etiquette.

3307

