When metaphors in the mind become metaphors in the mouth:
Documenting the emergence of a new system of linguistic metaphors for time
Rose K. Hendricks ​(​rhendricks@ucsd.edu)
Benjamin K. Bergen ​(​bkbergen@ucsd.edu)

Cognitive Science, UC San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

Tyler Marghetis ​(​tmarghet@indiana.com)
Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, Bloomington

Abstract
Languages exhibit striking semantic diversity, but different
languages often share core metaphors. Conceptual Metaphor
Theory (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980) claims that universal
human experiences give rise to conceptual representations
that are then expressed in language. But languages change
slowly, making it difficult to observe implicit
conceptualization affecting linguistic convention in real
time. Here, we describe a shared conceptualization
previously absent from speech that has now become
conventionalized in linguistic metaphors. In two studies, we
document how members of the US military talk about time
using conventionalized ​lateral metaphors (e.g., ‘​push the
meeting right’ to mean ‘​move the meeting later’​). We show
that military members, unlike civilians, consider such
sentences to be acceptable—sometimes even more
acceptable than more standard phrases. Moreover, military
personnel seem unaware that these lateral metaphors are
specific to their linguistic sub-community. Our findings
suggest that implicit mental representations can become
conventionalized metaphors in language.
Keywords​: ​time; metaphor; linguistic convention; semantic change

Introduction
Every language uses metaphor (Kövecses, 2005), and many
of these metaphors appear universal or nearly universal.
Core metaphors like AFFECTION is WARMTH occur in
many languages, while the reverse, AFFECTION is COLD,
does not (Kövecses, 2010). Why? The leading explanation
is that these cross-linguistic regularities reflect universal, or
nearly universal, human experiences (e.g., Clark, 1973;
Lakoff & Johnson, 1980). For instance, since being held by
a caregiver is likely a nexus of warmth and affection, human
infants learn to associate these experiences. On this account,
recurring correlations in experience lead to mental
representations that relate the two domains. And these
representations, in turn, spill out into language, so that the

2193

same experiences come to be described similarly across the
world’s languages.
However, this is not the only way in which mental
representations and linguistic metaphors could have come
into alignment. For instance, the causal direction may have
been reversed: widespread, recurring patterns of thought
may have arisen from exposure to linguistic metaphors,
rather than the other way around (see Gibbs, 2011 for
review). Indeed, there’s substantial evidence that, at least in
the short term, exposure to linguistic metaphors primes
conceptualization (e.g., Thibodeau & Boroditsky, 2011).
In fact, there is a surprising dearth of evidence that shared
mental representations can give rise to novel linguistic
conventions. While the historical record is replete with
changes in linguistic semantics that appear, in retrospect, to
be driven by conceptualization (Sweetser, 1991), we cannot
assess the conceptual representations of historical people in
a lab. If implicit patterns of thought give rise to linguistic
conventions, we should be able to observe the emergence of
new linguistic metaphors in real time. But the pervasiveness
of core, cross-linguistic metaphors means that it’s rare to
find people who lack either the linguistic or conceptual
manifestation of an otherwise universal metaphor.
To determine whether metaphor spreads from thought to
language, we need to observe a linguistic community
beginning to use metaphorical language that aligns with
their prior conceptual representations. This would shed light
on why so many languages share linguistic and conceptual
metaphors. We believe we have found one such case.

The coupling of language and thought about time
Of all the concepts that we understand metaphorically, the
best studied is ​time​. Within a given culture or community,
individuals think and talk about time in ways that are both
stable and shared. This often involves using space to
structure their speech and understanding of time (for
reviews, see Boroditsky, 2011; Núñez & Cooperrider,
2013).
Specifically, English speakers think and speak about time
as though it were represented along the sagittal (front-back)

Metaphors in mind and mouth 2
axis. The future is ‘ahead’ and the past is ‘behind,’ and these
manners of speaking align with physical behavior. When
English speakers make decisions about events, they are
faster to respond to future events by moving forward, and
faster to respond to past events by moving backward (Sell &
Kaschak, 2011; Ulrich et al., 2012; Rinaldi et al., 2016).
They are faster to make time judgments when future-related
words are shown in front of an image of a person and past
words behind (Torralbo et al., 2006). When imagining the
future, people lean forward, and when thinking about the
past, they lean back (Miles et al., 2010). And they gesture
forward when talking about the future, but backwards when
talking about the past (Casasanto & Jasmin, 2012).
This use of the sagittal axis has been documented in many
languages around the world (Núñez & Cooperrider, 2013).
Most follow the same pattern as English, but not all: In
Aymara, past events are in front and future events behind, in
both language and gesture (Núñez & Sweetser, 2006).
Similarly, Mandarin Chinese uses vertical (up/down)
terms systematically and productively to talk about time.
Earlier events are ​up and later events are ​down​. Native
Mandarin speakers also ​think ​about time vertically, with
earlier events above later ones (Boroditsky et al., 2010;
Fuhrman et al., 2011; Miles et al., 2011; Yang & Sun,
2015).
Thus, there is often a tight coupling of the spatial
language used to talk about time and spatial ​thought ​used to
conceptualize time. There is empirical evidence that this
alignment can originate in linguistic metaphors (Hendricks
& Boroditsky, 2015). After English-speaking participants
learned metaphors that placed earlier events either above or
below later ones (i.e., ​breakfast is above dinner or ​breakfast
is below dinner​; Hendricks & Boroditsky, 2015), they then
exhibited metaphor-consistent responses on an implicit
measure of their mental space-time associations. Language
can be a formative force for mental representations.
Despite overlaps between temporal language and
temporal thought, there is not a one-to-one correspondence
between the two. In addition to their sagittal (front-back)
mental time-line, English speakers also map time to the
lateral (left-right) axis. For instance, when asked to arrange
physical depictions of sequences of events, they arrange
them from left to right (Tversky, Kugelmass & Winter,
1991; Boroditsky & Gaby, 2010). During natural speech,
they gesture to the left for earlier events and to the right for
later ones (Cooperrider & Núñez, 2009; Casasanto &
Jasmin, 2012). And English speakers are faster to indicate
that one event occurred earlier than another by responding
on their left side, and faster for later events when responding
on their right (Fuhrman & Boroditsky, 2010; Miles et al.,
2011; Weger & Pratt, 2008; Walker et al., 2014).

2194

However, these left-right mental timelines are absent from
language. English speakers can ​look ​‘back’ on the past, but
never ‘to the left.’ There is a linguistic gap, therefore, where
a widespread ​conceptual metaphor has not surfaced as a
linguistic ​metaphor. If a cognitive representation were to
leap to a linguistic representation, it would most likely first
take hold in a sub-community of English speakers who use
left-right linguistic metaphors to talk about time.

Case Study: The US Military
Anecdotal evidence from members of the authors’ own
families suggests that one community of English speakers
has started to use left-right metaphors when talking about
time: members of the United States military. According to
anecdote, one might propose to move a meeting to a later
time by asking to ‘move the meeting ​to the right.​’ If these
reports were true, then this group would provide an
opportunity to study a system of conceptual metaphors as it
takes linguistic hold in a language community. Here, in two
empirical studies, we sought to document this apparent
linguistic innovation. In particular, we aimed to understand
whether left-right linguistic metaphors are more acceptable
to members of the military than to civilians, as well as the
linguistic conventions association with these metaphors.
In Study 1, military and civilian participants rated the
acceptability of sentences about time. The sentences were
presented in four main conditions: Standard (​The meeting
was moved two days earlier, from Friday to Wednesday​),
Dynamic-Lateral (​The meeting was moved two days to the
left from Friday to Wednesday​), Static-Lateral (​The meeting
on Wednesday is two days to the left of the meeting on
Friday​), and Ungrammatical (​From the meeting was two
earlier days, Friday to Wednesday pushed​). We included
lateral metaphors in two conditions (Dynamic and Static)
because anecdotal evidence suggested that Dynamic uses
may be more acceptable than Static.
Study 2 replicated the findings from Study 1 in a new
sample of military and civilian participants. In addition, we
investigated whether military personnel are aware that these
metaphors are specific to their linguistic subcommunity.
Together, these studies create a snapshot of the early stages
of a shift from an exclusively ​cognitive representation to a
novel linguistic convention.

Study 1
In Study 1, participants rated the acceptability of sentences.
Features of the sentences allowed us to measure whether,
when, and to whom lateral (left-right) linguistic metaphors
are acceptable.

Metaphors in mind and mouth 3

Methods
Participants: Active Duty members of the US military (​n ​=
23) participated for $10, and civilian undergraduates at UC
San Diego (​n ​= 31) participated for course credit. The
military participants included 4 Army, 1 Navy, and 18 Air
Force. They included 8 Officers and 15 Enlisted members.
Materials: ​There were four types of sentences: a) Standard:
using ​earlier or ​later to reschedule; b) Dynamic-Lateral:
using ​left and ​right to reschedule; c) Static-Lateral: using
left​ and ​right​, but no rescheduling; d) Ungrammatical.
An equal number of sentences referred to events that were
a) earlier and later; b) on the timescale of hours, days, and
months; and c) required crossing a temporal boundary
(events take place in different days, weeks, or years; i.e.,
Friday to Monday) and were within a temporal boundary
(i.e., Tuesday to Friday). These additional features allowed
us to examine whether conventionality differed in these
various contexts.
Procedure: ​The study was completed on a computer.
Participants were instructed to imagine a new colleague
whose native language was not English and rate the
acceptability of sentences (​n ​= 48) uttered by this colleague,
based on how participants would normally talk at work.
Acceptability ratings used a 7 point Likert scale (1=totally
unacceptable, 7=totally acceptable). Each sentence was
presented on its own page. Participants then supplied
standard demographic information (education, age), and
military participants reported their service branch (Army,
Navy, etc.), rank, and years of service. No other measures
were collected.
Exclusions and Analyses: ​We subtracted each person’s
mean Ungrammatical rating from their mean Standard
rating. Three participants (1 military, 2 civilians) did not
rate Standard sentences at least one point higher than
Ungrammatical ones, and were eliminated. Ratings were
standardized by participant (i.e., z-scored), and then
analyzed in a linear mixed-effects model. All hierarchical
models used the maximal converging random effects
structure justified by the experimental design (Barr et al,
2013), with random intercepts and slopes for both
participants and items.

Results
Figure 1 shows military personnel and civilians’
acceptability ratings for the four sentence types. We first
verified that participants from both populations rated the
Standard phrases as most acceptable and the Ungrammatical
phrases the least acceptable, with the Lateral phrases in
between. Ratings were analyzed with a mixed-effects model
with a fixed effect of Sentence Type (Standard >
Dynamic-Lateral > Static-Lateral > Ungrammatical); we

2195

used forward difference coding to test for pairwise
differences between consecutive levels. Ratings did not
differ by timescale (i.e., hours, days, and months; ​p = .80),
so we collapsed timescales for all subsequent analyses.
Standard items were rated as more acceptable than
Dynamic-Lateral phrases (​b ​= 0.75 ± 0.14 SEM, ​t = 5.5, ​p ​<
.001), which were more acceptable than Static-Lateral
phrases (​b ​= 0.44 ± 0.10 SEM, ​t = 4.6, ​p ​< .001), which in
turn were more acceptable than Ungrammatical phrases (​b ​=
0.71 ± 0.13 SEM, ​t​ = 5.3, ​p ​< .001).
We next tested our critical prediction: That these patterns
of acceptability would differ systematically by population.
We thus added a fixed effect of population (civilian = 1,
enlisted = 2, officer = 3; centered so the mean was 0).
Standard phrases were used as a baseline. Once again, every
type of sentence (Dynamic-Lateral, Static, Ungrammatical)
was less acceptable than Standard (all ​b​s < -0.75, ​p ​< .001).
As predicted, there was no evidence that military and
civilian participants differed in their ratings of Standard
phrases (​b ​= -0.07 ± 0.08 SEM, ​t = -0.8, ​p ​= .4), nor was
there evidence that the relative unacceptability of
Ungrammatical phrases differed by population (​b ​= -0.14 ±
0.12 SEM, ​t = -1.3, ​p ​= .2). Similarly, military and civilian
participants did not differ in the acceptability of
Static-Lateral phrases, compared to Standard phrases (​b ​=
-0.14 ± 0.12 SEM, ​t​ = -1.3, ​p ​= .2).
Acceptance of Dynamic-Lateral phrases, however,
differed across populations (​b ​= 0.32 ± 0.14 SEM, ​t = 2.3, ​p
= .027). To make sense of this effect, we zoomed in on
Dynamic-Lateral items and used forward-difference coding
to compare the three populations. Civilians gave the lowest
rating to the Dynamic-Lateral items (​M ​= 0.0), while
enlisted military participants rated these items as more
acceptable (​M ​= 0.17, ​b ​= -0.22, ​p ​= .07), and military
officers rated these items as even more acceptable than
enlisted military personnel (​M ​= 0.51, ​b ​= -0.43, ​p ​< .001).

Discussion
Study 1 confirmed that a specific subset of lateral
metaphors has become conventionalized among a subculture
of American English speakers: members of the US Military.
If
this
reflected
a more general conceptual
difference—perhaps a willingness among military personnel
to think about time along a left-to-right timeline—then this
should have been reflected in increased acceptability for all
lateral expressions. Instead, military personnel were
especially accepting of lateral metaphors that used the
dynamic language of movement​, suggesting that this is a
genuine linguistic convention, subject to the quirks and
idiosyncrasies of cultural norms.

Metaphors in mind and mouth 4
in the military, and another in which they imagined all of
their colleagues were civilians. Manipulating the utterances’
context in this way allowed us to test whether military
participants were sensitive to the community-specificity of
the lateral-dynamic metaphors.
In the Sentence Completion task, participants read the
same sentences as in the Acceptability Rating task, but with
a blank in place of month (e.g., ​The meeting was moved two
months to the right, from November to ___.​) Choices
included all odd-numbered months (January, March, etc.)
and ​I don’t know​. Because of space limitations, we must
analyze these data elsewhere.
To refresh participants between these tasks, they
completed a brief “spot the differences” game, in which
they had 45 seconds to count as many small differences as
possible between two nearly identical images.
Figure 1. In Study 1, compared to civilians, military
personnel were more accepting of Dynamic-Lateral phrases
(e.g., ‘meeting was moved to the left’). There was no
difference in civilians’ and military members’ acceptance of
Static-Lateral phrases. Error bars = SEM.

Study 2
Study 2 was designed to replicate and further explore this
linguistic conventionalization. In addition, we sought to
determine whether military personnel are aware that lateral
metaphors are specific to the dialect of English spoken in
the military, and not shared with the larger civilian
population. Anecdotal evidence suggested that military
personnel might be unaware that this system of linguistic
metaphors is not shared widely among English speakers.

Methods
Participants: ​Members of the US military (n = 14)
participated for $10. Civilian undergraduates (n = 27)
participated for course credit. Military participants included
3 Army, 1 Navy, and 10 Air Force; 5 were Officers, 5 were
Enlisted, and 4 did not identify their rank.
Materials: ​Materials were identical to Study 1 with two
differences. First, based on anecdotal evidence that lateral
metaphors were commonly used with the verb ​push​, we
included items with ​push (e.g., ​pushed two months​). Second,
to reduce the total number of items, we did not vary the
timescale, since it had no effect on acceptability in Study 1.
Procedure: ​Participants completed two randomly-ordered
tasks: the Acceptability Rating task from Study 1, and a
forced choice Sentence Completion task.
The Acceptability Rating task was based on Study 1, with
one critical difference: participants completed two
randomly-ordered blocks of acceptability ratings, one in
which they were asked to imagine all their colleagues were

2196

Exclusions and Analyses ​were ​unchanged from Study 1.
No participants were excluded.

Results
As in Study 1, we first verified that participants from both
populations rated the Standard phrases as most acceptable
and the Ungrammatical phrases the least acceptable, with
the Lateral phrases in between. Once again, Standard items
were rated as more acceptable than Dynamic-Lateral
phrases (​M ​= 0.91 vs. ​M = ​0.21; ​b ​= 0.73 ± 0.14 SEM, ​t =
5.4, ​p ​< .001), which were more acceptable than
Static-Lateral phrases (​M ​= -0.10; ​b ​= 0.31 ± 0.07 SEM, ​t =
4.3, ​p ​< .001), which in turn were more acceptable than
Ungrammatical phrases (​M ​= -1.03; ​b ​= 0.83 ± 0.16 SEM, ​t
= 5.3, ​p ​< .001).
We next attempted to replicate our main finding from
Study 1: That military participants had a selective
preference for lateral metaphors, compared to civilians.
First, we replicated the finding that, overall, every type of
sentence (Dynamic-Lateral, Static-Lateral, Ungrammatical)
was rated as less acceptable than the Standard phrases (all
b​s < -0.69, ​p​s < .001). Next, we replicated our critical
finding that the populations differed in their preference for
Dynamic-Lateral phrases (​b ​= 0.57 ± 0.05 SEM, ​t = 10.6, ​p
< .001). While civilians thought the Dynamic-Lateral
phrases were far worse than the standard ones (​b = -0.96
± 0.05 SEM, ​t ​= -20.2, ​p ​< .001), for enlisted military
personnel the difference was more than half of what it was
for civilians (​b = -0.47 ± 0.08 SEM, ​t ​= -5.9, ​p ​< .001),
while for military officers the Dynamic-Lateral phrases
were actually considered to be significantly ​better ​than the
Standard ones (​b​ = 0.18 ± 0.06 SEM, ​t ​= -3.0, ​p ​< .01).
There was no evidence that the populations differed in
their judgements of Ungrammatical phrases (​p ​> .7).
However, unlike in Study 1, the populations ​did differ in

Metaphors in mind and mouth 5
their acceptance of Static-Lateral phrases (​b = -0.43 ± 0.05
SEM, ​t ​= -8.1, ​p ​< .001). As with the Dynamic-Lateral
phrases, civilians were the most dismissive (​M ​= -0.28),
followed by enlisted personnel (​M ​= 0.15), and finally
officers (​M ​= 0.43) — although note that, here, officers did
not prefer Static-Lateral phrases to the Standard phrases.
Finally, we investigated whether an utterance’s ​context ​—
whether it was uttered in a military or civilian context
— had a significant effect on its acceptability (Figure 2).
This full model replicated the findings reported above.
There were only two other significant effects. The first was
an interaction between context and population (​b = 0.18
± 0.06 SEM, ​t ​= 2.9, ​p ​< .001), driven by an ‘opposite
context’ effect: military participants thought phrases were
generally less acceptable in a civilian context, and vice
versa. This may be due to participant uncertainty about
norms in unfamiliar environments. The second was a
three-way interaction between population, context, and
Static-Lateral (vs. Standard) phrases (​b = -0.20 ± 0.09
SEM, ​t ​= 2.3, ​p ​= .02). This was driven by the fact that
officers did not exhibit the ‘opposite context’ effect for
Static-Lateral phrases — they liked them equally in both
contexts. Thus, even in a hypothetical civilian context,
military participants thought the lateral phrases were
significantly more acceptable than actual civilians did.

Figure 2. In Study 2, military personnel were again more
accepting of lateral phrases, this time for both static and
dynamic versions. This pattern was repeated both when the
phrases were uttered in a civilian context (left panel) or a
military context (right panel). In other words, military
participants thought that rescheduling a meeting ‘to the
right’ is acceptable among civilians. Error bars = SEM.

Discussion
Conventionalized linguistic structures and cultural
patterns of thought are often consistent (e.g., Boroditsky et
al., 2010; Fuhrman et al., 2011; Winter, Marghetis, and
Matlock, 2015), and prior work has provided evidence that
learning new metaphors for talking about time can create
new mental representations (Hendricks & Boroditsky,
2015). However, there is little direct evidence of the
purportedly more pervasive, reverse relationship: cultural

2197

patterns of thought creating new conventionalized linguistic
structures. In two studies, we provided evidence that one
subset of American English speakers—members of the US
military—have adopted a conventionalized system of
metaphors for expressing mental representations that are
pervasive in the minds of English speakers in general, but
otherwise absent from language. Specifically, we found that
members of the US military, especially Officers, consider
sentences containing left-right metaphors (and only these
types of sentences) as more acceptable than civilians do.
We also explored the nuances of the left-right metaphors
based on military members’ acceptability ratings for
sentences with different features. In general, military
personnel judged Dynamic-Lateral sentences — which
express an event ​moving from one time to another — to be
more acceptable than similar Static-Lateral sentences that
express the same relationship without movement. This
nuance in military members’ acceptance of left-right
metaphors is evidence that these new left-right linguistic
conventions do not merely reflect a broad association of
time with the lateral axis, but instead reflect specific
linguistic conventions.
By showing that at least one subculture of American
English speakers has conventionalized left-right linguistic
metaphors for time, we demonstrate that the relationship
between conventionalized structures in language and
patterns in thought is bidirectional: not only can language
shape mental representations, but our mental representations
can also make their way into conventionalized language.
Why have military members adopted lateral metaphors
that are absent from civilians’ language? One hint may lie in
the artifacts they use. Duty Rosters are documents that keep
track of the work assignments for each each member of a
military unit. Duty Rosters are standardized and governed
by instruction manuals (Army Regulation [AR] 220-45).
Each row represents an individual. Each column represents
a successive date, ordered from left to right. Each cell thus
indicates the task that was assigned to that individual (row)
on that day (column). Unlike a standard American calendar,
in which each row only has 7 days across, Duty Rosters
arrange days in a continuous line extending rightward,
potentially endlessly. One duty roster, for instance, had
hundreds of columns, each representing a successive day.
The current work cannot distinguish between two
explanations for how this linguistic innovation has spread.
On the one hand, new linguistic conventions could have
emerged spontaneously through the interaction with
frequently consulted artifacts like Duty Rosters in a
relatively linguistically encapsulated community. On a
complementary account, these conventions may be the
product of top-down, institutional decrees, where linguistic
decision-makers within a community—affected no doubt by

Metaphors in mind and mouth 6
the same convergence of conceptualization and material
artifacts—themselves influenced linguistic habits through
prescriptions for ways to talk about time. Future work will
continue to document the history and use of these left-right
linguistic conventions to distinguish between these two
accounts. Similarly important to explore are the cognitive
consequences of adopting lateral metaphors for time. Can
adopting lateral linguistic metaphors facilitate reasoning
about temporal change? Does it reduce miscommunication
(e.g., allowing speakers to avoid ambiguous descriptions
like ​Wednesday’s meeting was moved forward two days​)?
Or might it increase other kinds of miscommunication, for
example when English speakers communicate with Hebrew
and Arabic speakers, whose mental timelines run right to
left, counter to English speakers’ (Tversky et al., 1991)? In
sum, this work reveals a potentially fertile new way to
study the give and take between individual conceptual
metaphors and community-wide, conventionalized linguistic
structure.

Acknowledgments
We thank Steven Billington for recruitment help. RH was
supported in part by NSF GRFP Grant No. DGE-1650112.

References
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013).
Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis
testing. ​J. of Memory and Language, 68​, 255–278.
Boroditsky, L. (2011). How Languages Construct Time. In
Space, Time and Number in the Brain​. Elsevier.
Boroditsky, L., Fuhrman, O., & McCormick, K. (2010). Do
English and Mandarin speakers think about time
differently? ​Cognition, 118​(1), 123–129.
Boroditsky, L., & Gaby, A. (2010). Remembrances of
Times East.​ Psychological Science, 21​(11), 1635–1639.
Brysbaert, M. & New, B. Moving. (2009). Moving beyond
Kucera and Francis, ​Behav. Res. Meth, 41​, 977-990.
Casasanto, D., & Jasmin, K. (2012). The hands of time.
Cognitive Linguistics, 23​, 643–674.
Clark, H. H. (1973). Space, time, semantics and the child. In
T. E. Moore (Ed.), ​Cognitive development and the
acquisition of language ​. New York: Academic Press.
Cooperrider, K., & Núñez, R. (2009). Across time, across
the body. Gesture, 9, 181-206.
Fuhrman, O., McCormick, K., Chen, E., Jiang, H., Shu, D.,
Mao, S., & Boroditsky, L. (2011). How Linguistic and
Cultural Forces Shape Conceptions of Time. ​Cognitive
Science, 35​, 1305–1328.
Gibbs, R. W. (2011). Evaluating Conceptual Metaphor
Theory. ​Discourse Processes, 48​(8), 529–562.

2198

Hendricks, R. K., & Boroditsky, L. (2015). New space-time
metaphors foster new mental representations of time.
Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society​.
Kövecses, Z. (2005). Metaphor in culture: Universality and
variation. Cambridge University Press.
Kövecses, Z. (2010). Metaphor, language, and culture.
DELTA: Documentação de Estudos Em Lingüística
Teórica E Aplicada, 26​(SPE), 739–757.
Kucera, H. & Francis, W.N. (1967). ​Computational analysis
of present-day American English.​ Brown U. Press.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1980). ​Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Miles, L. K., Nind, L. K., & Macrae, C. N. (2010). Moving
Through Time. ​Psychological Science, 21​(2), 222–223.
Miles, L. K., Tan, L., Noble, G. D., Lumsden, J., & Macrae,
C. N. (2011). Can a mind have two time lines?
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 18​, 598–604.
Núñez, R. E., & Sweetser, E. (2006). With the future behind
them. ​Cognitive Science, 30​, 401–450.
Núñez, R., & Cooperrider, K. (2013). The tangle of space
and time in human cognition. ​TiCS​, 17, 220-229.
Rinaldi, L., Locati, F., Parolin, L., Bernardi, N. F., &
Girelli, L. (2016). Walking on a mental time line:
Temporal processing affects step movements along the
sagittal space. ​Cortex, 78​, 170–173.
Schutze, C. T. (1996). ​The Empirical Base of Linguistics:
Grammaticality
Judgments
and
Linguistic
Methodology.​ University of Chicago Press.
Sell, A. J., & Kaschak, M. P. (2011). Processing time shifts
affects the execution of motor responses. ​Brain and
Language​, 117, 39–44.
Sweetser, E. (1991). ​From Etymology to Pragmatics.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Thibodeau, P. H., & Boroditsky, L. (2011). Metaphors we
think with. ​PLoS One, 6(​ 2), e16782.
Torralbo, A., Santiago, J., & Lupiáñez, J. (2006). Flexible
conceptual projection of time onto spatial frames of
reference. ​Cognitive Science, 30​(4), 745–757.
Tversky, B., Kugelmass, S. and Winter, A. (1991).
Cross-cultural and developmental trends in graphic
productions. ​Cognitive Psychology, 23​, 515-557.
Ulrich, R., Eikmeier, V., de la Vega, I., Ruiz Fernández, S.,
Alex-Ruf, S., & Maienborn, C. (2012). With the past
behind and the future ahead: Back-to-front
representation of past and future sentences. Memory &
Cognition, 40​(3), 483–495.
Winter, B., Marghetis, T, Matlock, T. (2015). Of metaphors
and magnitudes. ​Cortex​, 64, 209- 224.
Yang, W., & Sun, Y. (2016). A monolingual mind can have
two time lines. ​PBR ​23, 857-864.

