Who makes use of prior knowledge in a curriculum on proportional reasoning?
Daniela Nussbaumer (daniela.nussbaumer@hfh.ch)
University of Applied Sciences of Special Needs Education, Schaffhauserstrasse 239, 8050 Zurich, Switzerland

Christian Thurn (christian.thurn@uni-konstanz.de)
Institute for Behavioral Sciences, ETH Zurich, Universitätsstrasse 41, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland
Ralph Schumacher (schumacher @ifv.gess.ethz.ch)
Institute for Behavioral Sciences, ETH Zurich, Universitätsstrasse 41, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland

Elsbeth Stern (stern@ifv.gess.ethz.ch)
Institute for Behavioral Sciences, ETH Zurich, Universitätsstrasse 41, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland
adolescence. It emerges through repeated and varied
experiences and enables mathematical terms and the
associated ideas to become connected. The understanding of
proportions is fostered by learning experiences in which
students have opportunities to explore, discuss and
experiment with situations involving proportions. Children
must undergo many informal learning opportunities before
they can gain from direct instruction on proportional
reasoning.

Abstract
Understanding proportions is a time-intensive process that
does not come cheap during late childhood and early
adolescence. It is fostered by learning experiences in which
students have opportunities to explore, discuss and
experiment with situations involving proportions. Children
must undergo many informal learning opportunities before
they can gain from direct instruction on proportional
reasoning. In this study, we aimed to determine whether
physics curricula focusing on the concept of density prepares
students for learning from a curriculum on proportional
reasoning. A 2x2 design with the factors “physics curricula”
(with, without) and “concept used to introduce proportional
reasoning” (speed, density) was applied to 253 children from
12 classrooms at the beginning of grade 5. We expected the
“density, with physics curriculum” group to outperform the
other three groups. However, only the students who scored in
the highest quartile on an intelligence measure gained from
the prior knowledge they had acquired through the physics
curricula. The results show that curricula on proportional
reasoning are worthwhile for all students in early
adolescence. However, more capable students can boost their
proportional reasoning if they have the chance to acquire
prior knowledge through a physics curriculum.

The period from late childhood to adolescence is one of
great change, not only in executive control and emotional
regulation but also in cognitive competencies. Mastering
science and mathematics competencies requires these
cognitive tools and skills, which are expected to emerge
during elementary school. For example, topics such as
fractions, decimals, or ratios, which are at the focus of
secondary school mathematics education, presuppose
proportional reasoning abilities. These abilities emerge from
extending the number concept beyond simple counting
(Siegler & Lortie-Forgues, 2014). Elementary school
children’s competencies in solving mathematical problems
addressing relations and proportions of numbers are highly
predictive for secondary school performance, even more so
than general cognitive abilities (Stern, 2009; Siegler et al.,
2012).

Keywords: proportional reasoning, prior knowledge, STEM

Theoretical Background
Proportional reasoning involves comparing ratios within or
between quantities, and it is based on the formula a/b = c/d.
The crucial step is understanding the multiplicative
relationship between the quantities, which means knowing
that increasing “a” by a certain factor requires either
multiplying “c” or “b” with the same factor or dividing “d”
by this factor. Most elementary school children erroneously
compute differences rather than ratios. Multiplicative
proportional reasoning strategies are considered a
cornerstone in the cognitive development of adolescents
because they are prerequisites for learning more advanced
mathematics and for understanding scientific concepts in
various formal domains. Moreover, proportional reasoning
supports decision making in everyday life, such as when
cooking or when evaluating sales.
As stated before, understanding proportions is a timeintensive process during late childhood and early

Broadly applicable formal reasoning skills and learning
strategies (e.g., proportional, logical and scientific reasoning
and metacognitive knowledge) result from an interaction
between brain maturation and education. Additionally,
proportional reasoning, which is considered a domaingeneral competence, emerges from an interaction of
cognitive development (stimulated by brain maturation) and
exposure to learning opportunities (Ben-Chaim, Fey,
Fitzgerald, Benedetto, & Miller, 1998). These broadly
applicable competencies can be fostered through direct
instruction, but most children also acquire them incidentally
by abstracting knowledge acquired during elementary
school. However, children vary significantly in the ease
with which they acquire these skills; these differences are
attributed to person characteristics such as intelligence and
learning opportunities. Earlier theories of cognitive
development focused on universal maturation processes and

2809

assumed that all children reach a formal reasoning stage
around puberty (Case, 1993). However, the considerable
individual differences found within age groups with regard
to formal reasoning tasks demonstrate the importance of
domain-specific knowledge. Several studies have detected
remarkable individual differences in proportional reasoning:
While some eight-year-olds already master multiplicative
strategies, some 15-year-olds still struggle, and adults with
little or no standard schooling may never master these skills
(Lawson, 1985). Thus, proportional understanding would
not suddenly appear if there were no formally or informally
acquired knowledge available upon which to build. For
example, playing board games in preschool facilitates
number-line understanding in elementary school (Siegler, &
Ramani, 2008), and the number-line competencies of
elementary school children predict later proportional
reasoning and understanding of fractions (Siegler,
Thompson, & Schneider, 2011). These and other
longitudinal intervention studies with preschool and
elementary school children have identified which learning
opportunities support children in developing proportional
reasoning competencies.
Research has rarely examined how knowledge about
proportional reasoning is represented in a broader network.
Represented as a domain-general principle, it should be
transferable to isomorphic problems in various contexts.
This kind of transferable knowledge is difficult to acquire
and requires intensive instruction (Bransford & Schwartz,
1999). In particular, guided inquiry stands out as an
effective means to train the transfer of domain-general
principles across situations and time (Chen & Klahr, 1999,
2008). Similarly, inquiry-based science and math learning
has been shown to be a successful means for developing
domain-specific content knowledge throughout preschool
(Leuchter, Saalbach, & Hardy, 2014), elementary school
(Hardy, Jonen, Möller, & Stern, 2006), and secondary
school.
A longitudinal focus in researching such a complex concept
as proportional reasoning would be optimal. However,
studies often concentrate on short-term interventions to
identify the learner characteristics and instructional factors
that affect learning outcomes. These findings do not
necessarily capture a generic understanding of proportional
reasoning that can be transferred to superficially different
but structurally isomorphic problems. Thus, unless learners
have acquired expertise, they rarely develop representations
of abstract formal structures such as domain-general
proportional reasoning (Chi & VanLehn, 2012).
Embedding a general principle such as proportional
reasoning in various contexts can support learners in
developing an abstract understanding of general principles
that can flexibly be used in novel contexts and situations
(Alfieri, Nokes-Malach, & Schunn, 2013; Gentner, 2010).

The Current Study
The current study builds on the Swiss MINT Study. (MINT
is the acronym for Mathematics, Informatics, Natural
Science, and Technology.) In this longitudinal study,
elementary school teachers were trained in implementing
physics curricula developed by a team of science education
experts (https://verlage.westermanngruppe.de/spectra/reihe/
KINTBOX). The inquiry-based curricula included four
different basic physics topics: floating & sinking, air &
atmospheric pressure, sound & spreading of sound, and
stability of bridges. Classes started in third and fourth grade.
The curricula were tailored to develop children’s domainspecific conceptual content knowledge on these four topics
(Möller, & Jonen, 2005).
In every curriculum, children engaged frequently in
experimentation to explore the different basic physics
concepts. This inquiry-based approach was accompanied by
a strong emphasis on instructional guidance and teacher-led
classroom discussion. Teachers who agreed to participate in
the study underwent four half-day trainings conducted in
small groups. In total, the four curricula encompassed 60
classroom lessons. The floating & sinking curriculum, for
instance, introduced the concepts of water displacement and
object density over 15 lessons.
The children were engaged in extensive guided
experimentation activities within and across the four
curricula, and they encountered many examples of
proportional reasoning. In the swimming and floating
curriculum, for example, they immersed pieces of different
materials with a similar size or similar materials with
different sizes into water to examine how these two
characteristics influence floating ability. Through this
inquiry-based process, children learned about the concept of
density. Therefore, through this curriculum, elementary
school children gained not only content knowledge but also
experience with regard to the domain-general concept of
proportions. None of the four curricula involved general,
direct remarks about proportional reasoning.
In this study, we want to find out whether children who
studied physics curricula that implicitly included
proportional concepts better comprehend proportional
reasoning in a subsequent teaching unit than those who
studied the traditional way. We expected that the manifold
guided experimentation activities not only fostered
children’s domain-specific content knowledge but also
helped them understand abstract mathematical concepts
such as (the domain-general principle of) proportional
reasoning. Thus, we expected a significant main effect of
“physics curricula”.
We wanted to distinguish between a more general and a
more specific effect of prior physics curricula. Therefore,
two curricula on proportional reasoning were developed:

2810

one based on the concept of speed, which was not part of the
physics curriculum, and one based on the concept of
density, which was central in the unit on floating and
sinking. The curricula on proportional reasoning were
applied either to classes that were part of the previously
described Swiss MINT study (and therefore had undergone
the physics curricula) or classes that underwent regular
science education (which usually does not include physics at
all). Thus, we expected a significant interaction between
“physics curricula” and “concept used to introduce
proportional reasoning”.
This led us to the following research questions and
hypotheses:
1. Does early science learning affect later mathematical
learning (for proportional reasoning)?
We assumed that later math learning is affected
positively (but that this effect depends on the problem
context chosen for the intervention; see next point). In
other words, we assumed that students with early
science learning understand proportions better after
receiving instruction on proportional reasoning.
2. In what way does early science learning prepare
students for future learning? Does it work more
generally or more specifically?
For the familiar problem context of density, we
expected a greater advantage; for the non-familiar
problem context of speed, we expect only marginal
group differences. We predicted that students who
underwent the physics curricula were able to link the
new information to their knowledge about physics.
In short, we predicted that children who underwent the
physics curricula and were taught proportional reasoning
with density scored highest on a transfer test on proportional
reasoning.

Method
Participants
Participants included 253 children from 12 classrooms at the
beginning of grade 5 (age: M = 10.73 years, SD = 0.55).
Participants per cell of the 2x2-design are as follows (see
below): density/without physics curricula: n = 66,
density/with physics curricula: n = 62, speed/without
physics curricula: n = 66, speed/with physics curricula: n =
59).
The children in our sample came from different regions of
Switzerland. All of them were part of the Swiss MINT
Study and either had completed all four physics themes with
the aforementioned curricula prior to the curriculum on
proportional reasoning or were part of a waiting group that
had not yet started with the physics curricula. Whole
schools rather than individual teachers volunteered to be a
part of the Swiss MINT Study (and it was not the students

who chose a particular school, educational track or
curriculum). Nevertheless, it can be assumed that teachers
(and school teams) taking part in the current study were
STEM oriented and that there were no differences between
the “waiting group” stage and the “applying the curricula”
stage. Attempts were made to minimize the differences
between the student populations by parallelizing the
catchment areas of schools at the “waiting group” stage and
the “applying the curricula” stage (rural, agglomeration, city
and average socioeconomic status of a particular area), as in
Switzerland, students are assigned to schools according to
their place of residence. Teachers were recruited through a
mailing list, and the teachers and classes participated
voluntarily during their class time. They received no
monetary compensation.
We chose fifth-grade classes for the study as this is a time in
which the development of the understanding of proportional
reasoning increases, and only towards the end of fifth grade
(that is, at the end of our intervention) is proportional
reasoning an explicit part of the official study curriculum.
Thus, we were able to test whether and to what extent
proportional reasoning can develop without formal
instruction and to what extent physics experimentation
experience additionally boosts this development.

Procedure
A 2x2 design with the factors “physics curricula” (with,
without) and “concept used to introduce proportional
reasoning” (speed, density) was applied. The curriculum on
proportional reasoning (both speed and density) consisted of
3 lessons (45 minutes each) that were based on the idea of
concreteness fading (Goldstone & Son, 2005). In the speed
group, children were faced with two cars that traveled the
same distance in different times, while in the density group,
children were shown cubes of the same size but different
weights. Afterwards, the children were faced with different
combinations of time/distance and weight/volume. The
dependent variable was a test on proportional reasoning that
was applied at the end of the curriculum (subsequently
called the transfer test, as this test consisted of untrained
word problems). To control for differential effects, a
measure of general intelligence was applied.

Material
Intervention: The intervention was designed in a way that
is scientifically proven to be most effective. With the
intervention, we followed some basic principles: We tried to
make students focus on the underlying mathematical
structure of a problem and on multiple solution and
representation strategies. We promoted the use of external
representations in learning and calculating proportions. We
explicitly compared and contrasted the different solutions
and representations (see Ziegler and Stern, 2014).
Furthermore, we tried to implement self-explanations
(Jitendra et al., 2008 on schema-based instruction). To
accomplish this, we combined direct instruction with phases

2811

Intervention: (3x45 min)
context of density or speed

problem

of working alone (vs. in pairs). Furthermore, the lessons
were based on the idea of concreteness fading (Goldstone &
Son, 2005).
Problem presentation influences task difficulty and often
determines whether a student can solve a problem (see
Boyer et al., 2008). Our participants therefore solved and
received feedback on two different problem types:
comparison problems and missing values problems (see Van
Dooren, De Bock, Hessels, Janssens, & Verschaffel, 2005).
The two problem contexts were tightly parallelized, and the
same values were used in both of them.
Pre-test, post-test and transfer test (see table 1): In a pretest, prior knowledge about the two problem contexts was
assessed, i.e., students’ knowledge on density and speed.
Additionally, the N2 subscale of a cognitive ability test
(kognitiver Fähigkeitstest, KFT; Heller & Perleth, 2000)
was administered at pre-testing. After the above-described
intervention (proportional reasoning introduced in the
context of density vs. speed), a post-test on the
understanding of proportions (very similar to the pre-test—
the same in structure as the tasks solved during the
intervention) was administered. Additionally, a transfer test
(proportion problems embedded into word problems) had to
be solved (see table 1). All participants of the 2x2 design
solved the same test versions. Both tests (post and transfer)
took place one to two days after the intervention.
Table 1: Schematic view of the experimental design
Pre-test
Post-test and transfer test
(one to two days after the
intervention)
- Physics
- Post-test: knowledge
knowledge on
on proportional
density
reasoning (in the
- Prior
same problem
understanding of
context as during the
speed
intervention)
- Transfer test:
- Cognitive ability
knowledge on
test (kognitiver
proportionality in
Fähigkeitstest,
new problem
KFT; Heller &
contexts
Perleth, 2000),
subscale N2

Results
Pre-Test
Keeping in mind our research question, “Who makes use of
prior knowledge in a curriculum on proportional
reasoning?” it was important to check whether prior
knowledge was actually still available. Indeed, this was the
case: The physics knowledge test consisting of the themes
floating & sinking revealed significantly higher knowledge
in the group with prior experience with the physics curricula
(and no significant difference between the speed vs. density
conditions). For the group with prior knowledge, the test
can be considered a long-term follow-up from the physics
curricula; the students completed the physics curricula up to

two years prior to the actual proportional reasoning
curriculum. For the group without prior experience with the
physics curricula, the test and the themes were new. For the
group with prior physics knowledge, the solution rate was
40%, whereas the solution rate of the group without prior
experience was slightly over 20%. Therefore, for the
problem context of density, we can build on the differences
in knowledge between the groups with and without physics
curriculum experience.
For further analyses, we formed subgroups; i.e., we grouped
participants into quartiles according to the results on the N2
subscale of the cognitive ability test. The four groups of the
2x2-design did not significantly differ in their level of
cognitive abilities, F(3,242) = 0.33, p = 0.8. Additionally,
when looking at each quartile separately, we find no
significant difference between the four groups of the 2x2
design. Therefore, the distribution of cognitive abilities and
quartile groups is comparable between the four groups of
the 2x2 design.
When they had no prior experience with the physics
curricula, participants of all quartiles scored similarly low,
and their scores closely overlapped. Cognitive abilities were
not reflected in the results regarding physics understanding
when physics had not yet been formally taught. However,
when the physics curricula had been applied, intelligence
differences unfolded, with the highest quartile scoring
significantly higher (47%, right) than the other quartiles (see
figure 1 and note that error bars indicate standard errors of
the mean). Thus, the cognitive ability test did its share only
in the group with prior physics instruction.

Figure 1: Results of the physics test on floating and
sinking. Left: group with prior experience with the
physics curricula (for this group, the test can be
considered a long-term, i.e., up to one year, follow-up
test). Right: group without experience with the
physics curricula. Depicted are solution rates; error
bars indicate standard errors of the mean. Q1-4 refers
to grouping participants into quartiles according to
their results on the cognitive ability test, with Q4
indicating the quartile with the highest cognitive
ability.
The test on prior knowledge about speed revealed no
difference between the groups (with/without physics
curricula) as a whole and when split into quartiles. “Speed”
was not part of the physics curricula. Prior knowledge about
speed, however, was positively correlated with participants’
results on the cognitive ability test (r = .32). Cognitively

2812

abler participants scored higher on the test of prior
knowledge about speed. See figure 2 for the differences
between the quartiles. The average solution rates were
around 50%.

found the expected positive effect of prior physics learning
for students in the highest quartile. Those in the highest
quartile who underwent the physics curricula scored higher
on the proportional reasoning transfer test than students in
the lower three quartiles (p < .05). No such effects were
found for students in the highest quartile who did not
undergo the physics curricula. In the transfer test, the
solution rates were relatively low (mean solution rate just
slightly over 20%); see figure 3. Similar distributions were
found when we only looked at the density groups without
evaluating the speed groups: The highest quartile with prior
knowledge scored significantly higher than the three lower
quartiles, and for those without prior knowledge, the
quartiles did not differ. Taken together, for the most
intelligent students, the findings corroborate the more
general hypothesis. Therefore, physics curricula can serve as
preparation for future learning of proportional reasoning.

Figure 2: Test of prior knowledge about speed. Left:
group with prior experience with the physics
curriculum. Right: group without experience with the
physics curriculum. Depicted are solution rates; error
bars indicate standard errors of the mean. Q1-4 refers
to grouping participants according to their results on
the cognitive ability test, with Q4 indicating the
quartile with the highest cognitive ability. No
difference between the groups (with/without physics
curriculum) is found. “Speed” was not part of the
physics curriculum.

Post-Test
Figure 3: Results of the proportional reasoning transfer
test by physics curriculum (with/without). Left: group
with prior experience with the physics curriculum.
Right: group without prior experience with the physics
curriculum. The transfer test consisted of entirely novel
proportional word problems. Depicted are solution
rates; error bars indicate standard errors of the mean.
Q1-4 refers to grouping participants according to their
results on the cognitive ability test, with Q4 indicating
the quartile with the highest cognitive ability.

The post-test was very similar to the pre-test and had the
same structure as the tasks solved during the intervention.
Therefore, the post-test can be viewed as a manipulation
check of the implemented proportional reasoning
curriculum. This manipulation check was positive in that
participants were able to redo tasks that were administered
during the curriculum (80% of participants solved all tasks
correctly with no mistakes, and there were no differences
between the four groups of the 2x2 design).

Transfer-Test
Coming to the core results of this study, overall, no
significant interaction was observed between groups (with
and without prior physics curricula experience) and context
of the intervention (values of the ANOVA comparing the
four cells of the 2x2 design: F(3,236) = 0.94, p = 0.42)).
Therefore, the main effect of “physics curricula” turned out
not to be significant. Additionally, the interaction between
“physics curricula” and “concept used to introduce
proportional reasoning” turned out not to be significant.

Discussion

Therefore, the findings corroborate neither the more general
nor the more specific hypothesis of a positive influence of
prior physics curricula on the learning of proportional
reasoning. This encouraged us to more closely examine
whether the subgroups possibly gained from the physics
curricula with regard to learning proportional reasoning.
Indeed, we did find effects: When grouping participants by
quartiles according to their cognitive ability measure, we

However, students scoring in the highest quartile of the
intelligence measure were able to make use of the prior
knowledge they had acquired during the physics curriculum.
We therefore conclude that intelligence differences can
unfold students’ individual potential in combination with
sufficient prior knowledge. If a child has high cognitive
ability and encounters many examples of proportional

Our results confirm what has been demonstrated many
times: Transfer does not come cheap. The study focused on
learning opportunities that foster the emergence of
consecutive competencies in related fields. Contrary to our
expectation, we did not find a general advantage of physics
learning (more precisely, density learning) for learning
proportional reasoning taught by referring to density.

2813

reasoning situations, he or she will be prepared for a
subsequent formal learning situation on proportional
reasoning. It is the combination of high intelligence and
prior experience or specific prior knowledge that leads to
the ability to exploit a learning situation better.
The results show that curricula on proportional reasoning
are worthwhile for all students in early adolescence.
However, more capable students can boost their
proportional reasoning if they have the chance to acquire
prior knowledge in a physics curriculum.
Future work could focus on the question of how physics
curricula can better support students in understanding
proportions. It is possible that introducing the abstract
structure of the mathematical concept prior to inquiry-based
instruction would have an even greater effect.

References
Alfieri, L., Nokes-Malach, T. J., & Schunn, C. D. (2013).
Learning through case comparisons: A meta-analytic
review. Educational Psychologist, 48(2), 87-113.
Ben-Chaim, D., Fey, J. T., Fitzgerald, W. M., Benedetto, C.,
& Miller, J. (1998). Proportional reasoning among 7th
grade students with different curricular experiences.
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 36(3), 247-273.
Boyer, T. W., Levine, S. C., & Huttenlocher, J. (2008).
Development of proportional reasoning: where young
children go wrong. Developmental psychology, 44(5),
1478.
Bransford, J. D., & Schwartz, D. L. (1999). Rethinking
transfer: A simple proposal with multiple implications.
Review of Research in Education, 24, 61-100.
Case, R. (1993). Theories of learning and theories of
development. Educational Psychologist, 28(3), 219-233.
Chen, Z., & Klahr, D. (1999). All other things being equal:
Acquisition and transfer of the control of variables
strategy. Child Development, 70(5), 1098-1120.
Chen, Z., & Klahr, D. (2008). Remote transfer of scientificreasoning and problem-solving strategies in children. In
R. V. Kail (Ed.), Advances in child development and
behavior (Vol. 36, pp. 419-470). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Chi, M. T. H., & VanLehn, K. A. (2012). Seeing deep
structure from the interactions of surface features.
Educational Psychologist, 47(3), 177-188.
Gentner, D. (2010). Bootstrapping the mind: Analogical
processes and symbol systems. Cognitive Science, 34,
752-775.
Goldstone, R. L., & Son, J. Y. (2005). The transfer of
scientific principles using concrete and idealized
simulations. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(1),
69-110.
Hardy, I., Jonen, A., Möller, K., & Stern, E. (2006). Effects
of instructional support within constructivist learning
environments
for
elementary
school
students'
understanding of "floating and sinking". Journal of
Educational Psychology, 98(2), 307-326.

Heller, K. A., & Perleth, C. (2000). KFT 4-12+ R kognitiver
Fähigkeitstest für 4. bis 12. Klassen, Revision. Beltz Test.
Jitendra, A. K., Star, J. R., Starosta, K., Leh, J. M., Sood, S.,
Caskie, G., ... & Mack, T. R. (2009). Improving seventh
grade students’ learning of ratio and proportion: The role
of schema-based instruction. Contemporary Educational
Psychology, 34(3), 250-264.
Lawson, A. E. (1985). A review of research on formal
reasoning and science teaching. Journal of Research in
Science Teaching, 22(7), 569-617.
Leuchter, M., Saalbach, H., & Hardy, I. (2014). Designing
science learning in the first years of schooling. An
intervention study with sequenced learning material on
the topic of 'floating and sinking'. International Journal of
Science Education, 36(10), 1751-1771.
Möller, K., & Jonen, A. (2005). Die KiNT-Boxen–Kinder
lernen Naturwissenschaft und Technik. Klassenkisten für
den Sachunterricht, 1.
See also: https://verlage.
westermanngruppe.de/spectra/artikel/A421/Die-KiNTBoxen-Klassenkisten-I-Schwimmen-und-Sinken for the
KiNT Box of swimming and floating.
Siegler, R. S., & Lortie-Forgues, H. (2014). An integrative
theory of numerical development. Child Development
Perspectives, 8(3), 144-150.
Siegler, R. S., Thompson, C. A., & Schneider, M. (2011).
An integrated theory of whole number and fraction
development. Cognitive Psychology, 62, 273-296.
Siegler, R. S., & Ramani, G. B. (2008). Playing linear
numerical board games promotes low-income children's
numerical development. Developmental science, 11(5),
655-661.
Siegler, R. S., Duncan, G. J., Davis-Kean, P. E., Duckworth,
K., Claessens, A., Engel, M., ... & Chen, M. (2012). Early
predictors of high school mathematics achievement.
Psychological science, 23(7), 691-697.
Smith, C. L. (2007). Bootstrapping processes in the
development of students' commonsense matter theories:
Using analogical mappings, thought experiments, and
learning to measure to promote conceptual restructuring.
Cognition and Instruction, 25(4), 337-398.
Stern, E. (2009). The development of mathematical
competencies: Sources of individual differences and their
developmental trajectories. In W. Schneider & M.
Bullock (Eds.), Human development from early childhood
to early adulthood: Evidence from the Munich
Longitudinal Study on the Genesis of Individual
Competencies (LOGIC) (pp. 221-236). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Van Dooren, W., De Bock, D., Hessels, A., Janssens, D., &
Verschaffel, L. (2005). Not everything is proportional:
Effects of age and problem type on propensities for
overgeneralization. Cognition and Instruction, 23(1), 5786.
Ziegler, E., & Stern, E. (2014). Delayed benefits of learning
elementary algebraic transformations through contrasted
comparisons. Learning and Instruction, 33, 131-146.

2814

