UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Culture-by-Context Analysis of Endowment Effects

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/09t0w0bb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Gobel, Matthias S.
Ong, Tiffanie
Harris, Adam J.L.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Culture-by-Context Analysis of Endowment Effects
Matthias S. Gobel (matthias.gobel.11@ucl.ac.uk)
Tiffanie Ong (tiffanieong@gmail.com)
Adam J. L. Harris (adam.harris@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology;
University College London; 26 Bedford Way, London WC1H 0AP, UK

Abstract

WTP-WTA Price Gaps: the Endowment Effect

The endowment effect describes people’s tendency to
ask for more money when selling objects than they are
willing to pay when buying these objects. Previous
research found that Asian participants showed smaller
endowment effects than Western participants. These
results were explained by culture-specific self-beliefs
being transferred onto the endowed object. Yet, Asian
self-concepts are not only more interdependent, but also
more situation-contingent than Western self-concepts.
Thus, we predicted cultural differences in endowment
effects to depend on social contexts. In two studies, we
asked participants to imagine being either the owner or
the buyer of a coffee mug, and to imagine using this mug
in either a public or private context. Assessing
participants’ monetary value of the mug, we found that
Asians showed endowment effects in private but not in
public contexts. In contrast, Westerners showed
endowment effects across both social contexts. We
discuss possible mechanisms that may underlie these
findings.
Keywords: Endowment Effect; Social Context; Culture;
Decision Making; Self-Concept

Introduction
More and more people rely on owning stock shares to
improve their income and secure their retirement. One key
aspect of successful private (and professional) trading is to
find the right moment to buy lucrative options and to sell
unprofitable shares. As with many other decisions people
face, selecting to buy or to sell relies on elaborate cognitive
processes. Researchers in the cognitive science of decision
making have provided sophisticated models to predict when
people ought to buy or to sell. Yet, most of the decisions
people make in everyday life are also influenced by social
values, norms, and expectations represented in the presence
of others (e.g., Yamagishi, Hashimoto, & Schug, 2008).
In this article, we investigate how the cultural background
of an individual and the social context of the transaction
influence decision making. We ask, is the willingness-to-pay
(WTP) when buying and the willingness-to-accept (WTA)
when selling different among East Asian and Western
individuals? Moreover, does the social context associated
with an object change its valuation by owners versus nonowners across both cultures? Providing answers to these
questions, the present research presents two experiments
demonstrating a novel interplay between culture and social
context in this area of human decision making.

One of the most prevalent topics in the decision making
literature over the last 30 years has been the gap in monetary
value between WTP and WTA (e.g., Horowitz & McConnell,
2002). The psychological phenomenon to overvalue owned
objects is known as the endowment effect (Thaler, 1980). In
a typical endowment experiment, participants are randomly
divided into non-owners versus owners of a certain object
(e.g., a coffee mug). While the former group of participants
reports the highest price they are willing to buy the nonendowed object for (WTP), the latter group indicates the
lowest price they are willing to sell the endowed object for
(WTA). While classic economic theory would expect these
two to be of similar magnitude, experimental findings have
consistently demonstrated significant price gaps between
WTP and WTA (e.g., Kahneman, Knetsch, & Thaler, 1990).
The robustness of this endowment effect has been shown with
a large variety of objects including mugs, chocolates and pens
(e.g., Kahneman et al., 1990), with young children
(Harbaugh, Krause, & Vesterlund, 2001) as well as with
chimpanzees (Brosnan et al., 2007).
Traditionally, it has been advocated that the endowment
effect is the result of loss aversion (e.g., Kahneman et al.,
1990). That is, the pain associated with the possibility of
losing an object outweighs the pleasure associated with the
possibility of gaining such an object (Kahneman & Tversky,
1979). However, more recent research has proposed that the
affective-cognitive state of merely owning an object might
underlie the endowment effect (e.g., Morewedge, Shu,
Gilbert, & Wilson, 2009). In other words, being the owner
compared to not being the owner of an object might change
how people think and feel about the object in the present
rather than it might influence the anticipated pain associated
with its loss in the future. Evidence presented in support of
this position includes findings that endowment effects
increase for objects that are closely connected to the self
(Tom, 2004), for objects that have been possessed for longer
durations (Strahilevitz & Loewenstein, 1998), and for objects
that can compensate threats to the self (Dommer &
Swaminathan, 2013). Taken together these findings are in
line with theorizing that being the owner of an object
associates the self (i.e., the cognitive representation of one’s
identity) with the object (Beggan, 1992). Through this selfobject association, the object gains social characteristics, and
implicit beliefs about the self are transferred onto the object
(Gawronski, Bodenhausen, & Becker, 2007).

2269

Endowment Effects across Cultures and Contexts
Socially shared values, norms and beliefs, that constitute an
individual’s culture, significantly impact how people think
about themselves (Markus & Kitayama, 1991). For example,
individuals from Western cultures tend to emphasize their
uniqueness and view themselves as independent from others,
whereas individuals from East Asian cultures view
themselves as interdependent and connected to the people
around them (Markus & Kitayama, 1991). As a result, East
Asians are more likely to conform to social roles (Kim &
Markus, 1999), and they tend to be more self-critical in an
attempt to fit in and fulfil other’s expectations (Kitayama,
Markus, Matsumoto, & Norasakkunkit, 1997).
If cultural beliefs affect how people view themselves, and
if endowment effects result from self-beliefs being
transferred onto the endowed object, then culture could
impact how much people value the object. Consequently, the
magnitude of the endowment effect would be different across
cultures. Empirical findings support such theorizing.
Comparing two cultural groups with divergent self-concepts,
endowment effects for coffee mugs and boxes of chocolates
were found to be greater for European than Asian Americans
(Maddux et al., 2010, Study 1). To demonstrate the causal
effect of self-concepts on the magnitude of endowment
effects, Maddux and colleagues experimentally increased the
salience of independent or interdependent self-concepts in
participants from a single culture (2010, Study 2). In an
independent-self prime condition, Chinese participants were
led to write a brief essay about their unique character and
difference from others, whereas in an interdependent-self
prime condition they wrote about their friendships and
relatedness with others. Results from the subsequent
endowment experiment revealed that Chinese participants
primed with an interdependent self-concept showed
significantly smaller endowment effects compared to those
primed with an independent self-concept (Maddux et al.,
2010, Study 2).
Another finding from the cross-cultural literature,
however, shows that in order to fulfil changing and situationspecific role expectations, East Asian self-concepts tend to be
more malleable than Western self-concepts (e.g., Choi &
Choi, 2002). For example, one study tested whether the social
presence of others would change self-descriptions among
East Asians and Westerners. Kanagawa, Cross, and Markus
(2001) asked Japanese and American participants to describe
themselves in twenty statements. While some of the
participants were left to respond alone, others responded in
the presence of their professor, another peer, or a group of
peers. Results revealed that Japanese self-descriptions varied
more across these situations than American self-descriptions.
For example, Japanese students used relatively fewer positive
self-descriptions when responding in the presence of their
professor, but relatively more positive self-descriptions when
responding alone, both compared to responding in the
presence of a peer or a group of peers. In contrast, American
students did not differ in their self-descriptions across
situations (Kanagawa et al., 2001). Another study revealed

that Korean, but not American, participants rank ordered the
importance of personality traits describing their person
differently depending on the target they expected to interact
with (Suh, 2002). Specifically, Koreans ranked modesty as
the most important self-trait when interacting with a stranger,
cheerfulness as most important when interacting with a close
friend, but cooperation as most important when interacting
with a professor (Suh, 2002).
Taken together, these studies suggest that East Asian,
more than Western self-concepts are influenced by social
contexts. By extension, it is conceivable that the value of an
object that is associated with the self, changes from one
situation to another. As reviewed earlier, for people with East
Asian cultural background, situations with divergent
audiences evoke different self-views. While a more private or
personal self is salient when being alone, a more public or
official self is salient when being in a situation with another
person. It is in the presence of others that their behavior is
most influenced by social expectations. As a consequence of
the situation-contingent nature of interdependent selfconcepts, ownership in public contexts might be less
individualistic and more shared. If possessing an object in
public contexts is less personal and more communal, then the
value of such object might be similar to that in the possession
of another person. We therefore hypothesized that among
East Asian individuals endowment effects would be absent in
public but present in private contexts. In contrast, based on
Westerners’ stable individualistic self-concepts across
situations, we predicted significant endowment effects across
contexts in these participants. While the latter prediction is in
line with the robustness of endowment effects in the decision
science literature, the former prediction highlights the
importance of conducting cross-cultural research.

Study 1
To test the possibility that social context modulates
endowment effects among individuals from Asian cultures,
we conducted a scenario study. Asian students in Great
Britain imagined being endowed (or not) with a coffee mug
in order to use it in an open plan office (public context) or at
home (private context). We predicted the absence of
endowment effects in public contexts (Hypothesis 1). In
contrast, we expected to observe endowment effects in
private contexts (Hypothesis 2).

Method
Participants. Students were approached on campus of a
London university, by one of two Asian research assistants
and asked to volunteer in a study on consumer behavior. Our
final sample consisted of 95 Asian and 16 Asian British
participants (56 females, Mage = 20.77, SDage = 2.58).
Participants completed the study in English.
Design. We employed a 2 (Endowment condition: Owner
vs. Buyer) by 2 (Social context: Public versus Private) by 2
(Coffee mug: Plain Mug versus Mercedes Mug) mixed factor
design with the latter factor manipulated within participants.

2270

Results and Discussion
Data Analysis. We applied General Linear Models (Judd,
McClelland, & Ryan, 2009) to directly test our predictions
that endowment effects would be absent in public contexts,
but present in private contexts. Thus, we transferred our twoway-factorial data into a single factor with 4 levels and
applied three planned orthogonal contrasts. The three planned
orthogonal contrasts tested for an overall effect of using the
mug in public versus private contexts (λ1), the absence of
endowment effects in public contexts (λ2), and the presence
of endowment effects in private contexts (λ3). For the
legitimacy of planned simple effect tests in the absence of
significant interaction effects see Howell (1997, p. 415). The
overall model fit was significant, F (3,107) = 6.84, p < .001,
R2 = .16. Results are illustrated in Fig. 1.
Overall Effect of Context. Overall, participants did not
value coffee mugs differently in public compared to private
contexts, λ1: b = .02, t < 1, NS, CI95% [-.38, .42].

Owner

Value of Mug (in £)

Procedure. Since previous research demonstrated that
imagining owning an object is sufficient to elucidate feelings
of ownership (e.g., Strahilevitz & Loewenstein, 1998),
participants read one of four scenarios that described a
situation in which they were to imagine either that they
owned a coffee mug or not, and that suggested they were to
use said coffee mug in a public or private context. Thus, while
half of participants were asked to imagine being the
owner/non-owner of a coffee mug and use it in their open
plan office, the other half of participants were asked to
imagine being the owner/non-owner of a coffee mug and use
it at home. Specifically, participants in the public condition
read: “Please imagine the following scenario as vividly as
possible. You start a new job after your graduation. In your
new job you work in an open plan office. Imagine further that
you are the owner (the buyer) of this mug. You can either keep
(buy) the mug and use it in your new office, where it is visible
to all your colleagues, or sell the mug and receive money for
it (or not buy the mug).” Participants in the private condition
read the same initial sentences and then: “In your new job
you work from home. Imagine further that you are the owner
(the buyer) of this mug. You can either keep (buy) the mug
and use it while you work from home, or sell the mug and
receive money for it (or not buy the mug).” They were then
asked whether they wanted to sell / buy or not sell / not buy
the mug for 20 prices ranging from £0.50 to £10 in
increments of £0.50. Participants reported their willingness
to sell / buy the mug twice: once for a plain white mug and
once for a plain white mug with a Mercedes logo. The order
in which participants saw the two mugs was counterbalanced
between participants. We included the white mug with
Mercedes logo, because previous research found that Asian
participants prefer to choose brand-name products (Kim &
Drolet, 2009). Since we did not observe any significant
differences between the two mugs, we collapsed results
across both mugs. At the end of the study, we assessed
participants’ demographic information including information
about their culture.

Buyer

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Public Context

Private Context

Fig. 1. Monetary values assigned to mugs by Asian owners and
buyers when imagining its use in an open plan office (public) or a
home office (private) in Study 1. Error bars indicate standard errors.

Public Context. Asian students did not show evidence for
endowment effects when imagining using the coffee mug in
a public context, λ2: b = .33, t = 1.43, p = .26, CI95% [-.24,
.89]. Specifically, Asian owners and buyers of a coffee mug
did not differ in the value they ascribed to the coffee mug
(MOwner = 4.42, SEMOwner = .45; and MBuyer = 3.77, SEMBuyer =
.43 respectively). Thus Hypothesis 1 was supported.
Private Context. Unlike in public contexts, Asian
students showed clear endowment effects when imagining
using the coffee mug in a private context, λ3: b = 1.24, t =
4.38, p < .001, CI95% [.68, 1.80]. Specifically, Asian owners
valued the mug significantly more than Asian buyers (MOwner
= 5.37, SEMOwner = .42, and MBuyer = 2.89, SEMBuyer = .28
respectively). Thus Hypothesis 2 was supported.
Discussion. Study 1 replicates previous research
suggesting that individuals from Asian cultures may show
reduced endowment effects (Maddux et al., 2010). However,
our results extend previous research in demonstrating that
this result can depend on the social context people are in.
Asian participants showed endowment effects in private but
not public contexts.

Study 2
Kanagawa et al. (2001) and Suh (2002) observed that selfconcepts of only East Asians not Westerners were situationspecific. Consequently, the interplay between endowment
effect and social context is not predicted for individuals from
Western cultures. While Study 2 provided a close, although
not exact, replication of Study 1, it also included both
Western (from the UK) and Asian (from Malaysia)
participants. Thus, in Study 2 we tested situation-specific
endowment effects across cultures. We predicted that in
public contexts, endowment effects would be absent among
Malaysian participants, but present among British
participants (Hypothesis 1). In contrast, in private contexts,
we predicted to observe endowment effects among both
Malaysian and British participants (Hypothesis 2).

Method
Participants. Participants came from an English speaking
university in Malaysia and a university in London, UK. As in
Study 1, they were approached on campus by research

2271

assistants of their own culture and asked to participate in a
study on consumer behavior. 156 students (90 males, 66
females) completed an endowment effect scenario
questionnaire. 83 of them self-identified as Asian who were
born and raised in Malaysia, 73 of them self-identified as
White British who were born and raised in the UK. British
participants were somewhat older (Mage = 23.63, SDage =
4.91) than Malaysian participants (Mage = 22.36, SDage =
2.58), t(102.2) = 1.96, p = .052. Samples in both cultures
completed the study in English.
Design. We employed a 2 (Endowment condition: Owner
vs. Buyer) by 2 (Social context: Public versus Private) by 2
(Culture: Malaysia versus UK) between-participants design.
Procedure. The procedure was identical to the one of
Study 1 with two exceptions. In Study 2, we used a single
Starbucks coffee mug as object, which participants imagined
owning or buying. Moreover, we used local currencies to
assess how much participants valued the mug. Malaysian
participants indicated their WTP or WTA in Malaysian
ringgit (20 prices ranging from MYR 2.50 to MYR 50 in
increments of MYR 2.50). British participants indicated their
WTP or WTA in British Pounds Sterling (20 prices ranging
from GBP 0.50 to GBP 10 in increments of GBP 0.50).
Importantly, both scales corresponded in their exchange rate
(1 GBP = 5 MYR). To facilitate cross-cultural comparison,
we analyzed absolute differences in monetary value ranging
from 1 (i.e., MYR 2.50 or GBP 0.50) to 20 (i.e., MYR 50 or
GBP 10). It is important to note that since our key hypotheses
compared within-cultural differences in the presence or
absence of endowment effects, the possibility of unequal
spending power seems unlikely to account for any observed
differences. At the end of the study, we assessed participants’
demographic information including information about their
culture and level of English proficiency.

Results and Discussion
Data Analysis. As in Study 1, we applied General Linear
Models to test our predictions. We employed seven planned
orthogonal contrasts to test whether imagining the use of
coffee mugs in public or private contexts influenced
endowment effects among British and Malaysian

Value of Mug

12

participants. Overall Effect of Context: First, we tested for an
overall effect of using the coffee mug in public or private
contexts (λ1). Then, we examined each social context
separately. Public Context: We tested for overall cultural
differences in mug value when British and Malaysian
participants imagined using the coffee mug in an open plan
office (λ2). To test Hypothesis 1, we then tested for
endowment effects in British participants (λ3) and Malaysian
participants (λ4). Private Context: Next, we tested for overall
cultural differences in mug value, when British and
Malaysian participants imagined using the coffee mug in a
home office (λ5). To test Hypothesis 2, we then tested for
endowment effects in British participants (λ6) and Malaysian
participants (λ7). The overall model fit was significant, F
(7,148) = 6.30, p < .001, R2 = .23. Results are illustrated in
Fig. 2. Since neither participants’ age nor their level of
English proficiency qualified the results, we did not include
these variables into analysis.
Overall Effect of Context. Overall, participants did not
value coffee mugs differently in public compared to private
contexts, λ1: b = -.79, t = -1.80, p = .075, CI95% [-1.65, .08].
Public Context. Overall, when imagining using the coffee
mug in an open plan office, British and Malaysian
participants valued it to a comparable extent, λ2: b = 1.09, t
= 1.70, p = .091, CI95% [-.18, 2.36]. Importantly, however,
this finding was further qualified by the following two
contrasts. While British participants showed clear
endowment effects when imagining using a coffee mug at
home (λ3), we did not observe endowment effects among the
Malaysian participants (λ4). Specifically, British owners
(MOwner = 9.56, SEMOwner = 2.19) assigned greater value to the
coffee mug than British buyers (MBuyer = 4.75, SEMBuyer =
0.92), λ3: b = 2.41, t = 2.68, p = .008, CI95% [.63, 4.18], thus
showing an endowment effect. In contrast, Malaysian
participants did not differ in the value they assigned to the
coffee mug when being its owner or buyer (MOwner = 6.47,
SEMOwner = 1.60, and MBuyer = 3.47, SEMBuyer = 0.72
respectively), λ4: b = 1.50, t = 1.64, p = .104, CI95% [-.31,
3.31], thus showing no evidence for an endowment effect.
The results of λ3 and λ4 together support Hypothesis 1.

Public Context

Private Context
Owner

8

Buyer

4
0
British

Malaysian

British

Malaysian

Fig. 2. Monetary values assigned to mugs by British and Malaysian owners and buyers when imagining its use in an open
plan office (public context) or a home office (private context) in Study 2. Error bars indicate standard errors.

2272

Private Context. Overall, when imagining using the
coffee mug in a home office, British and Malaysian
participants valued coffee mugs to a comparable extent, λ5:
b = -.60, t = -1, p = .32, CI95% [-1.77, .58]. Unlike in the
public context, this result was not qualified by the subsequent
contrasts. Both British (λ6) and Malaysian (λ7) participants
showed endowment effects when imagining using the coffee
mug at home. Specifically, British owners (MOwner = 10.81,
SEMOwner = 0.89) assigned greater value to the coffee mug
than British buyers (MBuyer = 3.26, SEMBuyer = 0.79), λ6: b =
3.78, t = 4.16, p < .001, CI95% [1.98, 5.57], thus showing an
endowment effect. Similarly, Malaysian coffee mug owners
(MOwner = 10.50, SEMOwner = 1.41) valued the coffee mug
significantly more than Malaysian coffee mug buyers (MBuyer
= 5.96, SEMBuyer = 0.59), λ7: b = 2.27, t = 2.97, p = .004,
CI95% [.76, 3.79], thus also showing an endowment effect.
The results of λ6 and λ7 together support Hypothesis 2.
Discussion. Replicating findings from Study 1, Asian
participants, who were born and raised in Malaysia, showed
no endowment effects when imagining the use of coffee mugs
in public contexts. Importantly, however, they did show clear
endowment effects when imagining the use of the same mugs
in private contexts. In contrast, the social context in which
Western participants, who were born and raised in the UK,
imagined using the mugs did not influence endowment
effects. Whether imagining the use of coffee mugs in an open
plan office or at home, British owners valued the mugs
significantly more than British buyers. Taken together, Study
2 provides evidence for the idea that social context modulates
cultural differences in endowment effects.

General Discussion
We examined the influence of social contexts on endowment
effects among East Asian and Western participants. In two
studies, we asked participants to imagine being the owner or
buyer of a coffee mug, and using this mug in either public
(open plan office) or private (home office) contexts. Study 1
found endowment effects among Asian students in private
but not public contexts. Study 2 demonstrated that when
imagining public contexts, British but not Malaysian owners
valued coffee mugs more than buyers. When imagining
private contexts, however, both British and Malaysian
owners valued coffee mugs more than buyers.
We extend previous research on cultural differences in
endowment effects. Maddux et al. (2010) demonstrated that
individuals with more independent self-concepts, typical in
Westerners, showed larger endowment effects than
individuals with interdependent self-concepts, typical in
Asians. Based on the more situation-contingent nature of
their interdependent self-concepts (Kanagawa et al., 2001;
Suh, 2002), we predicted and found that endowment effects
among Asians depended on social context. Only in private
but not in public contexts, did Asian participants show
endowment effects. In contrast, British participants showed
clear endowment effects irrespective of the social context.
What remains to be investigated by future studies is which
psychological mechanism underlies our findings.

One possibility is that mere ownership effects account for
our findings (e.g., Morewedge et al., 2009). In Asian cultures,
the subjective feeling of being or not being the owner of the
endowed object might depend on the social context. Previous
research showed that psychological rather than legal
ownership predicts endowment effects (Reb & Connolly,
2007). Psychological ownership seems at least in part to
result from being able to exert control over the object (Pierce,
Kostoca, & Dirks, 2003). Yet, while Western cultures
emphasize influence over one’s environment, Asian cultures
expect individuals to adjust to their environment (Morling,
Kitayama, & Miyamoto, 2002). This may suggest that in
Asian cultures, in spite of being the legal owner of an object,
individuals feel reduced subjective ownership for endowed
objects, at least in public contexts. Perhaps, when imagining
being endowed with an object in a private context, Asian
participants feel more confident and secure about using it,
and eventually exert more control over it. Thus, Asian
participants in our study might have felt more subjective
ownership when imagining the use of a coffee mug at home
compared to its use in an open plan office. Thus, we observed
endowment effects in private but not in public contexts.
Another possibility is that prospect theory of loss aversion
accounts for our findings (e.g., Kahneman et al., 1990).
Social context could have changed the magnitude of the
anticipated loss when giving up endowed objects in Asian
cultures. If individuals from such cultures construe
endowments as more personal in private but more communal
in public contexts, then loss aversion might predict
endowment effects to be larger in the former than in the latter
social contexts. For example, it is conceivable that imagining
the use of a coffee mug in an open plan office, where its
possession is shared, will make its loss less painful. The loss
of a more communally shared property can potentially be
compensated by a greater number of people. In contrast, loss
of personal property might be more immediate and much
more difficult to replace. Thus, a personal loss might weight
more heavy than a communal loss.
One interesting implication from construing endowment
as more personal or more communal depending on the social
context is that Asians might experience endowment effects
not only for their own property in private contexts, but also
for the property of significant others in public contexts. In
other words, to the same extent that public context reduces
the value of property that a person owns (e.g., the individual’s
coffee mug), public context might also enhance the value of
property that a significant other person owns (e.g., the
manager’s coffee mug). Indeed, recent research showed
endowment effects for objects that belonged to the mothers
of Chinese participants (Feng, Zhaoa, & Donnayc, 2013).

Conclusion
Endowment effects can impede any profitable trading
outcome. Giving advice to people about when to buy
profitable shares and when to sell unprofitable ones is a
difficult affair. The present research illustrated two important
factors that can influence people’s decision making when

2273

buying and selling. We found that both cultural background
of individuals and social context of the decision making
determined the presence or absence of endowment effects.
While Western participants showed clear endowment effects
irrespective of the social context, East Asian participants only
showed endowment effects when making the decision in
private but not when making such decision in public. A better
understanding of why Asians do not show endowment effects
in public contexts may prove important for educating
shareholders and decision researchers alike. With more
trading conducted internationally, both from home and from
offices, the practical implications of our research are of
significance well beyond the immediate academic circles.

Acknowledgments
We thank Zoya Ajani, Caitlin Fuller, Peony Shek, and Zoe
Chui for their assistance with data collection.

References
Beggan, J. (1992). On the Social Nature of Nonsocial
Perception: The Mere Ownership Effect. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 229-237.
Brosnan, S., Jones, O., Lambeth, S., Mareno, M., Richardson,
A., & Schapiro, S. (2007). Endowment Effects in
Chimpanzees. Current Biology, 17, 1704–1707.
Choi, I., & Choi, Y. (2002). Culture and Self-Concept
Flexibility. Personality and Social Psychololgy Bulletin,
28, 1508-1517.
Dommer, S., & Swaminathan, V. (2013). Explaining the
Endowment Effect through Ownership: The Role of
Identity, Gender, and Self-Threat. Journal of Consumer
Research, 39, 1034-1050.
Feng, T., Zhaoa, W., & Donnayc, G. (2013). The endowment
effect can extend from self to mother: Evidence from an
fMRI study. Behavioural Brain Research, 248, 74-79.
Gawronski, B., Bodenhausen, G., & Becker, A. (2007). I like
it, because I like myself: Associative self-anchoring and
post-decisional change of implicit evaluations. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 43, 221–232.
Harbaugh, W., Krause, K., & Vesterlund, L. (2001). Are
adults better behaved than children? Age, experience, and
the endowment effect. Economics Letters, 70, 175–181.
Horowitz, J., & McConnell, K. (2002). A Review of WTA /
WTP Studies. Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, 44, 426-447.
Howell, D. (1997). Statistical Methods for Psychology (4th
Ed. ed.). Belmont, CA: Duxbury Press.
Judd, C., McClelland, G., & Ryan, C. (2009). Data analysis:
A model comparison approach (2nd ed.). New York, NY:
Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group.
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J., & Thaler, R. (1990).
Experimental Tests of the Endowment Effect and the
Coase Theorem. Journal of Political Economy 98, 13251348.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect Theory: An
Analysis of Decision under Risk. Econometrica, 47, 263292.

Kanagawa, C., Cross, S., & Markus, H. (2001). "Who Am I?"
The Cultural Psychology of the Conceptual Self.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 90-103.
Kim, H., & Drolet, A. (2009). Express Your Social Self:
Cultural Differences in Choice of Brand-Name Versus
Generic Products. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 35, 1555-1566.
Kim, H., & Markus, H. (1999). Deviance or Uniqueness,
Harmony or Conformity? A Cultural Analysis. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 785-800.
Kitayama, S., Markus, H., Matsumoto, H., & Norasakkunkit,
V. (1997). Individual and collective processes in the
construction of the self: Self-enhancement in the United
States and self-criticism in Japan. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 72, 1245-1268.
Maddux, W., Yang, H., Falk, C., Adam, H., Adair, W., Endo,
Y., . . . Heine, S. (2010). For Whom Is Parting With
Possessions More Painful? Cultural Differences in the
Endowment Effect. Psychological Science, 21, 1910–
1917.
Markus, H., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the Self:
Implications for Cognition, Emotion, and Motivation.
Psychological Review, 98, 224-253.
Morewedge, C., Shu, L., Gilbert, D., & Wilson, T. (2009).
Bad riddance or good rubbish? Ownership and not loss
aversion causes the endowment effect. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 45, 947–951.
Morling, B., Kitayama, S., & Miyamoto, Y. (2002). Cultural
Practices Emphasize Influence in the United States and
Adjustment in Japan. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 28, 311-323.
Pierce, J., Kostoca, T., & Dirks, K. (2003). The State of
Psychological Ownership: Integrating and Extending a
Century of Research. Review of General Psychology, 7,
84–107.
Reb, J., & Connolly, T. (2007). Possession, feelings of
ownership and the endowment effect. Judgment and
Decision Making 2, 107–114.
Strahilevitz, M., & Loewenstein, G. (1998). The Effect of
Ownership History on the Valuation of Objects. Journal
of Consumer Research, 25, 276-289.
Suh, E. (2002). Culture, Identity Consistency, and Subjective
Well-Being. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 83, 1378–1391.
Thaler, R. (1980). Toward a positive Theory of Consumer
Choice. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization,
1, 39-60.
Tom, G. (2004). The Endowment–Institutional Affinity
Effect. The Journal of Psychology: Interdisciplinary and
Applied, 138, 160–170.
Yamagishi, T., Hashimoto, H., & Schug, J. (2008).
Preferences Versus Strategies as Explanations for
Culture-Specific Behavior. Psychological Science, 19,
579-784.

2274

