UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A mental model theory of set membership

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7x37w6q3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Khemlani, Sangeet
Lotstein, Max
Johnson-Laird, Phil

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A mental model theory of set membership
Sangeet Khemlani1, Max Lotstein2, and Phil Johnson-Laird3,4
sangeet.khemlani@nrl.navy.mil, mlotstein@gmail.com, phil@princeton.edu
1

US Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC 20375 USA
2
University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
3
Princeton University, Princeton NJ 08540 USA
4
New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA

Abstract

In contrast, this inference is valid:

Assertions of set membership, such as Amy is an artist,
should not be confused with those of set inclusion, such as All
artists are bohemians. Membership is not a transitive relation,
whereas inclusion is. Cognitive scientists have neglected the
topic, and so we developed a theory of inferences yielding
conclusions about membership, e.g., Amy is a bohemian, and
about non-membership, Abbie is not an artist. The theory is
implemented in a computer program, mReasoner, and it is
based on mental models. The theory predicts that inferences
that depend on a search for alternative models should be more
difficult than those that do not. An experiment corroborated
this prediction. The program contains a parameter, σ, which
determines the probability of searching for alternative models.
A search showed that its optimal value of .58 yielded a
simulation that matched the participant’s accuracy in making
inferences. We discuss the results as a step towards a unified
theory of reasoning about sets.

5. Viv is a judge.
Judges are lawyers.
Therefore, Viv is a lawyer.

Keywords: quantifiers, reasoning, sets, syllogisms.

Introduction
Quantifiers raise problems for linguists in their syntax and
semantics (e.g., Peters & Westerståhl, 2006; Steedman,
2012). And they raise problems for cognitive scientists in
their mental representation and roles in inference (e.g.,
Johnson-Laird, 2006; Oaksford & Chater, 2007; Rips,
1994). Our goal is to elucidate quantifiers by considering a
neglected topic: assertions of set membership. Consider, for
example, these three assertions:
1. Viv is a judge.
2. Judges are lawyers.
3. Judges are appointed in different ways.
Assertion (1) states that an individual is a member of a set,
and assertion (2) states that one set is included in another
set. Assertion (3) is about a set, but it states, not that it is
included in another set, but that it is a member of another
set, i.e., the set of judges is a member of the set of those
who are appointed in different ways. The difference matters
because membership is not a transitive relation. Hence, the
following inference is not valid:
4. Viv is a judge.
Judges are appointed in different ways.
Therefore, Viv is appointed in different ways.

In formal logic, the second premise is equivalent to: anyone
who is a judge is a lawyer, i.e., inclusion is defined in terms
of membership. The distinction between inferences (4) and
(5) is therefore subtle, and psychological theories need to
recognize the difference between them.
A powerful way in logic to represent the meaning of
quantifiers, such as “all judges”, is as sets of sets. This
method was popularized by Montague (see the accounts in,
e.g., Johnson-Laird, 1983; Partee, 1975; Peters &
Westerståhl, 2006). But, an alternative representation treats
quantified assertions as stating relations between sets
(Boole, 1854, Ch. XV). More recently, psychologists have
had the same idea (e.g., Ceraso & Provitera, 1971; Geurts,
2003; Johnson-Laird, 1970; Politzer, van der Henst, Luche,
& Noveck, 2006). On this account, the assertion all judges
are lawyers means that the set of judges is included in the
set of lawyers. Likewise, the assertion no judges are
inmates means that the intersection of the set of judges and
the set of inmates is empty. The advantage of this treatment
is that it readily extends to quantifiers that cannot be
captured in standard logical accounts (such as Rips, 1994).
The assertion most judges are men, contains a quantifier
“most judges” that cannot be defined using the quantifiers
of first-order predicate calculus (Barwise & Cooper, 1991).
Its relational meaning is simple: the cardinality of the
intersection of the set of judges and the set of males is
greater than the cardinality of the set of judges that are not
males (see Cohen & Nagel, 1934).
So, how do naïve individuals reason about set
membership? The aim of the present paper is to answer this
question. Our answer is based on the theory of mental
models. We accordingly begin with an outline of the theory
from which we derive one principal prediction about such
inferences. We report an experiment that corroborates this
prediction. We use a computer program, mReasoner, to
simulate performance, and show that the simulation
provides a satisfactory fit with the experimental results.
Finally, we draw some general conclusions about the
psychology of set membership.

2489

The model theory of set membership
The mental model theory – the “model” theory, for short
– applies to reasoning of many sorts, including reasoning
based on quantifiers and on sentential connectives, such as
if, or, and and (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991) and
reasoning about the subjective probability of unique events
(Khemlani, Lotstein, & Johnson-Laird, 2012). Three main
principles underlie the theory (Johnson-Laird, 2006). First,
individuals use a representation of the meanings of
assertions and their knowledge to construct mental models
of each distinct sort of possibility to which the assertions
refer. Second, mental models are iconic insofar as that is
possible, i.e., the structure of a model corresponds to the
structure of what it represents (see Peirce, 1931-1958,
especially Vol. 4). Hence, a set is represented by a set of
mental tokens in a model. Third, more models mean more
work: reasoners are likely to rely on their initial model for
most inferences, and if a particular inference requires them
to consider alternative models, it will be difficult.
Reasoners accordingly use the meaning of premises –
representations of their intensions – and their knowledge to
construct mental models – representations of their
extensions – of premises. Depending on whether a putative
conclusion holds in all, most, or some of these models, they
draw a conclusion that it is necessary, probable, or possible.
According to the model theory, logical properties such as
transitivity are emergent properties from models (e.g.,
Byrne & Johnson-Laird, 1989; Goodwin & Johnson-Laird,
2005; Huttenlocher, 1968). Consider these contrasting
examples:

is added to a representation of an individual player. This
player could be the one that is tallest, but needn’t be.
Hence, only the modal conclusion in (11) follows. This sort
of machinery seems to be a prerequisite either for
establishing the logical form of premises (pace Rips, 1994)
or their appropriate probabilistic analysis (pace Oaksford &
Chater, 2007).
Our investigation begins with two sorts of inference that
are fundamental. The first sort concerns set membership, as
in the following premises:
12. Ansel is an artist.
All artists are benefactors.
They elicit the following sort of model in which each row
represents a different individual:
Ansel

artist
artist
artist

It yields the valid conclusion: Ansel is a benefactor.
The second sort of inference concerns non-membership of
a set, such as:
13. Igor is not a benefactor.
All artists are benefactors.
They elicit the model:
Igor
artist
artist
artist

6. All the players are tall.
7. All the players are equal in height.
8. All the players are tall to varying degrees up to the
tallest.

benefactor
benefactor
benefactor

¬ benefactor
benefactor
benefactor
benefactor

where ‘¬’ denotes negation, i.e., the individual is not a
benefactor. The corresponding conclusion, Igor is not an
artist, is also valid.
According to the theory, inferences such as (12) and (13)
should be easy, because the correct response can be inferred
from the initial mental model of the premises. The theory
distinguishes such one-model inferences from multiplemodel inferences such as:

Given the further premise:
9. Ann is one of the players.
It follows from (6) that Ann is tall. But, what follows from
(7) is not that Ann is equal in height, which doesn’t make
sense, but rather that:

14. Faye is not an artist.
All artists are benefactors.

10. Ann is equal in height to the other players.
Likewise, what follows from (8) is not that Ann is tall to
varying degrees, but rather that:

The premises yield the following model:
Faye

11. Ann is tall and possibly the tallest of the players.
The challenge to theories based on formal rules of inference
or probabilistic considerations is to account for these
inferences. In contrast, they emerge from mental models of
the quantified premises. For example, a model of (8)
represents iconically the set of players as varying in height
up to the tallest. When (9) is used to update the model, Ann

¬ artist
artist
artist
artist

benefactor
benefactor
benefactor

This model yields the conclusion that Faye is not a
benefactor. However, the conclusion is invalid, because the
quantified assertion allows that benefactors may not be
artists. Reasoners can modify their initial model (Bucciarelli

2490

& Johnson-Laird, 1999; De Neys, Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle,
2003; Johnson-Laird & Hasson, 2003; Neth & JohnsonLaird, 1999) to yield a counterexample to the previous
conclusion:
Faye

¬ artist
artist
artist
artist

membership or non-membership of a set; 2. whether the
quantified premise asserted inclusion (“All”) or noninclusion (“None”) of one set within another; and 3. whether
the set referred to in the premise about the individual
matched the first or the second term in the quantified
premise (see Table 1 below for the 8 different sorts of
inference). The third variable yields two figures, as follows:

benefactor
benefactor
benefactor
benefactor

Figure 1
X is an A.
All of the As are Bs.

Such a modification calls for the additional resources of
system 2, and so many reasoners should rely on their initial
model. The theory therefore predicts that one-model
inferences should be easier than multiple-model inferences.
We now describe a study designed to test this hypothesis.

Figure 2
X is an A.
All of the Bs are As.

As Table 1 below shows, half of the inferences were onemodel inferences, and half of the inferences were multiplemodel inferences. The exploration of all permutations of the
premises yielded an inevitable confound, such that all of the
multiple-model problems were also those for which there
existed no valid, non-trivial conclusion. The eight inferences
were presented twice with different contents, and so
participants carried out 16 inferences in total. The order of
the premises was counterbalanced so that the membership
premise was presented first for half the inferences and
second for the other half. The contents were based on
common names and common nouns referring to vocations.
We devised a list of 16 pairs of such vocations, which we
assigned at random to the inferences. The inferences were
presented to each participant in a different random order.

Experiment
The experiment tested the prediction of the model theory
of set-membership inferences. A typical trial in the
experiment was:
15. Rachel is a baker.
All of the soldiers are bakers.
What, if anything, follows?
The experiment examined eight different sorts of inference.
The model theory classified four of the inferences as onemodel inferences and the other four as multiple-model
inferences.

Method
Participants. Twenty-one participants completed the study
on Mechanical Turk, an online platform hosted by
Amazon.com that distributes experimental tasks to
volunteers. Participants received monetary compensation for
taking part in the study, none of them reported having had
any training in logic, and they were all on their account
native speakers of English.
Design and materials. Each inference contained a premise
about an individual (e.g., Rachel is a baker) and a quantified
premise about all the members of a set (e.g., All of the
soldiers are bakers). The study manipulated three variables:
1. whether the premise about the individual asserted

Procedure. The study was administered using an interface
written in Ajax. The instructions stated that the task was to
decide “what conclusions, if any, must also be true” given
the truth of a pair of premises presented on the screen. On
each trial, participants read the premises, and, when ready,
they pressed a button marked “Next”, which replaced the
premises with a question, “What, if anything, follows?”
They responded by typing their answer out on a text box
provided on the screen and then clicked a button to advance
to the next inference. An independent coder classified
participants’ typed responses as falling into one of three
categories (given the schematic described earlier):
i. x is a B.
ii. x is not a B.
iii. No valid conclusion.

Set membership
premise

Monadic premise

Figure

Predicted response to
“What follows?”

Correct response

Inference type

Correct
(%)

x is an A
x is an A
x is an A
x is an A
x is not an A
x is not an A
x is not an A
x is not an A

All of the A are B
All of the B are A
None of the A are B
None of the B are A
All of the A are B
All of the B are A
None of the A are B
None of the B are A

1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2

x is a B
x is a B
x is not a B
x is not a B
x is not a B
x is not a B
x is not a B
x is not a B

x is a B
No valid conclusion
x is not a B
x is not a B
No valid conclusion
x is not a B
No valid conclusion
No valid conclusion

One-model
Multiple-model
One-model
One-model
Multiple-model
One-model
Multiple-model
Multiple-model

95%
47%
93%
88%
50%
90%
83%
66%

Table 1. The proportion of correct responses to the eight different inferences in the experiment.

2491

Results and discussion
The vast majority (99%) of participants’ responses fell into
the three categories of responses as described in the
previous section. The remaining responses were dropped
from subsequent analyses. A small portion of the responses
(9.5%) contained qualifications, e.g., a modal operator of
the form, x is possibly a B. These responses occurred only
in the case of multiple model inferences. The model theory
accordingly accounts for them: individuals construct an
initial model that supports a conclusion such as x is a B;
they envisage an alternative model, and it refutes the
conclusion; and so they weaken the conclusion to a modal
claim, x is possibly a B. An analogous phenomenon occurs
in syllogistic reasoning (e.g., Bucciarelli & Johnson-Laird,
1999). We note that theories that do not rely on
representations of possibilities fail to offer any ready
account of this phenomenon. Nevertheless, we omitted
modal responses from our analyses because it is unclear
whether they should count as easy or difficult responses.
Table 1 presents the percentage of correct responses for
the eight different inferences. The experiment corroborated
the theory’s main prediction: one-model inferences were
reliably easier than multiple-model inferences (92% vs.
51%, Wilcoxon test, z = 3.21, p = .001, Cliff’s δ = .56).
Inferences from the quantifier none of the X were easier than
those from all of the X (83% vs. 72%, Wilcoxon test, z =
2.17, p = .03, Cliff’s δ = .33). The result may reflect the
indeterminacy of all of the X are Y, which leaves open
whether or not all of the Y are X. No such indeterminacy
occurs with None of the X are Y, which implies that None of
the Y are X. Finally, we observed a marginal effect of
figure, where figure 1 inferences were easier than figure 2
inferences (73% vs. 68%, Wilcoxon test, z = 1.65, p = .10,
Cliff’s δ = .20). Analogous effects of figure occur in
syllogistic reasoning (Khemlani & Johnson-Laird, 2012).
Of the three factors manipulated in the experiment (one
vs. multiple models; all vs. none; and figure), which of them
best predicts the difficulty of the inferences? To answer this
question, we fit the data to a generalized mixed-effects
model with a binomial error distribution and a logit link
function using the lme4 package (Bates, Maechler, &
Bolker, 2012) in R (R Core Team, 2013). The model took
into account the three fixed effects described above and one
random effect, i.e., the variance in the participants’
accuracy. The only significant predictor of performance was
whether an inference required one or multiple models (b =
3.31, SE = .42, p < .0001). These results again corroborate
the model theory’s main prediction.
In general, the experiment shows that naive individuals
can make valid set membership deductions, but that they
often err in inferences that depend on multiple models.

Simulating set membership inferences
We sought to simulate the results of the experiment by
generating synthetic data from mReasoner v0.9, a unified
computational implementation of the mental model theory

of reasoning (Khemlani & Johnson-Laird, 2013), and
matching it against the dataset from the experiment. The
program implements three general systems:
a) A linguistic system for parsing premises and building up
intensional representations used in model building. This
system’s purpose is to map an assertion’s syntax to an
underlying semantics (the intension).
b) An intuitive heuristic system (System 1) for building an
initial mental model and for drawing inferences from it.
c) A deliberative system (System 2) that interrogates the
initial model to search for alternative models. This
system can manipulate and update the representations
created in System 1, and it can modify conclusions, but it
too can fall prey to systematic errors (Johnson-Laird &
Savary, 1999; Khemlani & Johnson-Laird, 2009).
System 1 does not have access to working memory, whereas
system 2 does. As a result, system 1 is faster and more
prone to err than system 2.
To simulate the non-determinism inherent in human
reasoning, mReasoner is equipped with three parameters
that govern how models are built and how the two
inferential systems are engaged (Khemlani, Trafton, &
Johnson-Laird, 2013). The first parameter stochastically
varies the size of a mental model, i.e., the number of
individuals it contains. This parameter can have no effect on
the inferences in the present experiment. The second
parameter varies the properties of the individuals in models,
e.g., in the case of All of the A are B, it affects whether or
not B’s that are not A’s occur in a model. But, this variable
can also have no effect on the present inferences (see Table
1). Hence, only the third parameter should affect them. This
parameter, σ, sets the probability of a System 2 search for
alternative models. Such a search can corroborate a putative
conclusion or else provide a counterexample to it, i.e., a
model in which the premises are true but the conclusion is
false, and evidence shows that individuals are able to
construct such counterexamples (Bucciarelli & JohnsonLaird, 1999; De Neys, Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle, 2003;
Johnson-Laird & Hasson, 2003). In general, a search for
counterexamples does not guarantee a correct response, but
for the simple inferences, such those in our experiment, the
model assumes that the search for alternative models always
yields a correct answer.
An exhaustive exploration of the parameter space yielded
an optimal σ value of .58, i.e., the system optimally modeled
the data when it engaged a search for counterexamples 58%
of the time. We generated synthetic data by running 1000
simulations of the 8 inferences. Figure 1 shows the
proportion of correct responses in the observations
(histograms with error bars) and predictions (circles) in the
study as a function of the inference. The computer model
matched the participants’ performance in the experiment
well (R2 = .75, RMSE = .11). The predictions of the
computer model were in the 99th percentile relative to

2492

Proportion correct

R² = 0.75
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
ab Aba Eab Eba Aab Aba Eab Eba
/
/
/
/
/ A
/
/
/
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
an is an is an is an ot an ot an ot an ot an
n
n
n
n
x is
x
x
x
x is
x is
x is
x is

Figure 1. Observed (histograms with error bars) and predicted
(circles) proportions of correct response for the eight different
inferences in the experiment. Error bars show 95% confidence
intervals. Black circles indicate when the predictions fell within the
confidence interval of the observed proportion of correct
responses, whereas the red circle indicates a deviation from the
prediction to the observation. The premises are abbreviated using
the conventions of Scholastic logicians: Aab = “All As are Bs”,
Eab = “No As are Bs” and likewise for Aba and Eba.

hypothetical datasets (Khemlani & Trafton, under review).
However, the model underestimated performance on one
inference (see Figure 1). When the inference was eliminated
from the analysis, the model performed optimally (R2 =
.94). The system’s inability to capture the inference may be
a result of the determinacy of None of the X are Y, which
implies that None of the Y are X. This symmetry does not
hold for All of the X are Y (see above), and it may affect
how models are initially constructed.
The computational model yielded a close fit to the data
from the study, and successfully simulated the predicted
difference between one- and multiple-model inferences.

General Discussion
Set membership is a fundamental concept in set theory and
elementary mathematics. It is also a rudimentary cognitive
behaviour in object naming (Riddoch & Humphreys, 1987)
and categorization (Murphy, 2002). Many higher order
inferences presuppose the ability to reason about
membership and non-membership. It is no accident that in
the very first Western treatise on formal logic, the Prior
Analytics, Aristotle discusses the example (70a25):
16. Pittacus is ambitious.
Ambitious men are generous.
Therefore, Pittacus is generous.
Given that the second premise refers to the set of ambitious
men, the inference is valid. Our experimental results show
that logically untrained individuals can readily make this
inference, but that they tend to make invalid inferences akin
to:
17. Pittacus is generous.
All ambitious men are generous.
Therefore, Pittacus is ambitious.

The model theory explains their performance: when the
initial model yields the correct inference, as in (16), they are
usually accurate. But, when the initial model does not yield
the correct inference, they often err. They need to engage
system 2 in a search for an alternative model. When they do
so, they tend to be correct, or they may modify their initial
conclusion to allow that it concerns only a possibility, e.g.,
Pittacus is possibly ambitious. A computer program
implementing
the
theory,
mReasoner,
replicated
participants’ data by building and searching for models in
the manner in which the theory posits.
Unlike set inclusion, membership is not a transitive
relation, and so it is critical to distinguish between them.
But, as we illustrated earlier (examples 6-8), it is not easy to
do so. It is difficult to see how theories of reasoning based
on formal rules of inference (e.g., Rips, 1994) or on
probabilistic heuristics (e.g., Oaksford & Chater, 2007) can
account for the following sort of valid inference:
18. Pat is one of the pianists.
All the pianists are virtuosi who play the Minute
Waltz in varying times down to 60 seconds.
Therefore, Pat is a virtuoso who possibly plays the
Minute Waltz in 60 seconds.
The conclusion that Pat is a virtuoso is an inference from set
inclusion, whereas the inference about the speed of her
performance is a complicated matter from the standpoint of
formal logic. Nevertheless, it emerges from an iconic
representation of the premises.
Reasoning about membership is a precursor to higher
order inference. When reasoners can make set membership
inferences about individuals, they can cope in principle with
inferences about properties (Johnson-Laird, 2006, Ch. 10;
Khemlani & Johnson-Laird, 2012). When entities are in a
set, they inherit any properties that hold for the complete
set. Indeed, given a premise asserting that a property holds
for an entire set, another premise based on almost any sort
of affirmative quantifier yields a non-trivially valid
inference, e.g.:
19. All artists are benefactors.
Most minimalists are artists.
Therefore, most minimalists are benefactors.
A corresponding model of the premises is as follows:
artist
artist
artist

benefactor
benefactor
benefactor

minimalist
minimalist

These inferences are known as “monotone increasing”
(Barwise & Cooper, 1981), and theorists have sometimes
proposed rules designed to capture them (Geurts, 2003).
Yet, they are merely emergent consequences of iconic
models. The exceptions to such inferences are quantifiers
that fix the number of members of a set (so-called “non-

2493

monotone” quantifiers, see Barwise & Cooper, 1981). The
following inference is therefore invalid:
20. All artists are benefactors.
Exactly two minimalists are artists.
Therefore, exactly two minimalists are benefactors.
The model theory predicts that naïve reasoners will
sometimes make the inference because the initial model of
the premises yields it. But, those who search for an
alternative model may find the following counterexample:
artist
artist
artist
¬ artist

benefactor
benefactor
benefactor
benefactor

minimalist
minimalist
minimalist

Hence, three minimalists could be benefactors.
In a similar way, when individuals are not members of a
set, they are not in any of its subsets, e.g.:
21. All artists are benefactors.
Most corporate raiders are not benefactors.
Therefore, most corporate raiders are not artists.
These inferences are known as “monotone decreasing”
(Barwise & Cooper, 1981). Once again, however, they are
emergent properties of iconic models.
We conclude that the model theory provides a sensible
account of reasoning that hinges on set membership, which
extends naturally to reasoning about set inclusion. It has the
advantage that particular inferences of considerable logical
complexity emerge from models of the premises. Inferences
become difficult for reasoners only when the correct
response depends on moving from the intuitions of system 1
to the deliberations of system 2 and its construction of
alternative models. People represent sets with sets of mental
tokens, and this sort of representation allows them to treat
quantified assertions in the way that Boole (1854)
advocated, i.e., as relations between sets.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a National Research
Council Research Associateship awarded to SK and by NSF
Grant No. SES 0844851 to PJL to study deductive and
probabilistic reasoning. We are grateful to Ruth Byrne,
Monica Bucciarelli, Sam Glucksberg, Adele Goldberg,
Geoffrey Goodwin, and Marco Ragni, for their helpful
comments and criticisms.

References
Barwise, J., & Cooper, R. (1981). Generalized quantifiers and natural
language. Linguistics and Philosophy, 4,159–219.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B. (2012). lme4: Linear mixed-effects
models using S4 classes. http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=lme4.
Boole, G. (1854). An investigation of the laws of thought. London:
Macmillan.
Bucciarelli, M., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1999). Strategies in syllogistic
reasoning. Cognitive Science, 23, 247-303.

Byrne, R.M.J., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1989). Spatial reasoning.
Journal of Memory and Language, 28, 564-575.
Ceraso, J., & Provitera, A. (1971). Sources of error in syllogistic
reasoning. Cognitive Psychology, 2, 400–410.
Cohen, M.R., & Nagel, E. (1934). An introduction to logic and
scientific method. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Goodwin, G., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2005). Reasoning about
relations. Psychological Review, 112, 468-493.
Geurts, B. (2003). Reasoning with quantifiers. Cognition, 86, 223–251.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & d'Ydewalle, G. (2003). Inference
suppression and semantic memory retrieval: Every counterexample
counts. Memory & Cognition, 31, 581-595.
Huttenlocher, J. (1968). Constructing spatial images: A strategy in
reasoning. Psychological Review, 75, 550–560.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1970). The interpretation of quantified
sentences. In G. B. Flores D’Arcais & W. J. M. Levelt (Eds.),
Advances in psycholinguistics (pp. 347–372). Amsterdam: NorthHolland.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1983). Mental models. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2006). How we reason. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., & Byrne, R.M.J. (1991). Deduction. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., & Hasson, U. (2003). Counterexamples in
sentential reasoning. Memory & Cognition, 31, 1105-1113.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., & Savary, F. (1999). Illusory inferences: a novel
class of erroneous deductions. Cognition, 71, 191-229.
Khemlani, S., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2009). Disjunctive illusory
inferences and how to eliminate them. Memory & Cognition, 37.
Khemlani, S., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2012). Theories of the
syllogism: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 138, 427-457.
Khemlani, S., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2013). The processes of
inference. Argument and Computation, 4, 1-20.
Khemlani, S., Trafton, J. G., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2013). Deduction
as stochastic simulation. In R. West & T. Stewart (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Cognitive
Modeling.
Khemlani, S. & Trafton, J. G. (2014). Percentile analysis for goodnessof-fit comparisons of models to data. In Proceedings of the 36th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Murphy, G.L. (2002). The big book of concepts. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2007). Bayesian rationality: The
probabilistic approach to human reasoning. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Partee, B.H. (1975). Montague grammar and transformational
grammar. Linguistic Inquiry, 6, 203-300.
Peirce CS (1931-1958). Hartshorne, C., Weiss, P., & Burks, A. (eds),
Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Peters, S., & Westerståhl, D. (2006). Quantifiers in language and
logic. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Politzer, G., van der Henst, J.B., Luche, C.D., & Noveck, I.A. (2006).
The interpretation of classically quantified sentences: A set-theoretic
approach. Cognitive Science, 30, 691–723.
Steedman, M. (2012). Taking scope: The natural semantics of
quantifiers. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
R Core Team (2013). R: A language and environment for statistical
computing. Vienna, Austria: R Foundation for Statistical
Computing. Retrieved from http://www.R-project.org.
Riddoch, M. J., & Humphreys, G. W. (1987). Object naming. In G. W.
Humphreys & M. J. Riddoch (Eds.), Visual object processing: A
cognitive neuropsychological approach (pp. 107–143). Hove:
Erlbaum.
Rips, L.J. (1994). The psychology of proof. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.

2494

