UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Social-Conceptual Map of Moral Criticism

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3sb93240

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Voiklis, John
Cusimano, Corey
Malle, Bertram

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Social-Conceptual Map of Moral Criticism
John Voiklis (john_joiklis@brown.edu)
Corey Cusimano (corey_cusimano@brown.edu)
Bertram Malle (bertram_malle@brown.edu)
Brown University, Department of Cognitive, Linguistic & Psychological Sciences
Box 1821, 190 Thayer Street, Providence, RI 02912 USA
Abstract
Moral criticism is both a social act and the result of complex
cognitive and conceptual processes. We demonstrate
consensual features of various acts of moral criticism and
locate them within a higher-order feature space. People
showed consensus in judging 28 verbs of moral criticism on
10 features, and the judgment patterns formed a twodimensional space, defined by an intensity axis and an
interpersonal engagement axis. Subsets of verbs formed welldefined clusters roughly corresponding to the four quadrants
of this space. The marker verbs of these clusters were lashing
out (intense, public), pointing the finger (mild, public),
vilifying (intense, private), and disapproving (mild, private).

test them on a representative sample of verbs. This way we
hope to chart out a map of moral criticism, even if not all
points of interest will be filled in.
We will proceed as follows. First, we derive a number of
candidate features of moral criticism from previous
psychological and sociological work (Drew, 1998; Laforest,
2009; Malle, Guglielmo, & Monroe, 2014). We then select a
set of verbs that depict acts of moral criticism and populate
the feature space of moral criticism. Next, we empirically
test how well these features explain the variability among
the set of selected verbs. Finally, we integrate our results
into a preliminary model of the space of moral criticism.

Keywords: social cognition; moral psychology; verb
semantics

Deriving Features of Moral Criticism

Introduction
What is the core of moral psychology? The literature
focuses on judgment, reasoning, and emotion—all internal
states in the social-moral perceiver. But if morality were
nothing more than a complex private state then it would be
wholly puzzling how it could serve its major function—to
regulate human behavior. So an obvious, but understudied,
question emerges: how social acts of moral criticism do the
work of regulating behavior. A “how” question naturally
subsumes many sub-questions, of which we address two:
First, what is the space of moral criticism—that is, what are
the candidate acts of moral criticism that allow people to
regulate others’ behavior (should one blame the other,
admonish, scold, or castigate him)? Second, along which
dimensions do these acts of moral criticism differ? Is it their
emotionality, deliberation, their persuasive potential?
Our approach takes seriously that almost all acts of moral
criticism are expressed in language; we therefore begin our
investigation by charting the social-conceptual space of
moral criticism: verbs that depict such criticism and the rich
implications they carry (Fillmore, 1971). Imagine
overhearing someone say “He admonished her for what she
had done.” This sentence, though seemingly cryptic, still
carries a lot of implied meaning. The choice of the verb
admonished—instead of, for example, berated—suggests a
certain intensity of the moral critic’s emotion, hints at his
relative status, intimates the severity of her bad behavior,
and conveys a certain likelihood that the two will discuss
and reconcile their differences.
In this contribution we do not aim to document the full set
of implied meanings of every possible verb of moral
criticism. Instead, we select a subset of implied features and

Blame, writes Beardsley (1979, p. 176), “has a power and
poignancy for human life unparalleled by other moral
concepts.” Indeed, blame is arguably the paradigmatic moral
criticism. Therefore, some of the fundamental properties of
blame (Malle et al., 2014) can guide us in deriving features
of moral criticism more generally.
The features we studied can be grouped into three
categories (see Table 1):
1. Features of the social act
2. Features of the underlying judgment
3. Semantic landmarks
Features of the social act. Evolved instincts for belonging,
caring, and shared experience do some of the work of
motivating individuals to behave in ways that sustain social
relations (Churchland, 2012; Deigh, 1996; Joyce, 2006; Rai
& Fiske, 2011). However, complex social life would be
impossible without norms and values for sharing and
reciprocity, self-control, and mutual recognition of rights—
all of which keep an individual’s behavior in line with
community interests (Sripada & Stich, 2006; Sunstein,
1996). This kind of cultural morality has to be taught,
learned, and enforced by community members. Praising and
blaming people for their behaviors, and occasionally
punishing them, enforces the norms and values of cultural
morality (Cushman, 2013).
This social-regulatory property of blame requires that a
moral critic actually perform a public and communicative
act (FEATURE: Public Act in Table 1). Several other features
follow from this public communication.
Moral criticism varies by whether the critic directly
addresses the norm violator or talks to others about the norm
violator (FEATURE: 2nd- vs. 3rd-Person) (Dersley & Wootton,
2000; Laforest, 2009; Traverso, 2009).

1700

Despite significant social-cognitive work, moral judgment
is often accompanied by affective states, from simple
disapproving feelings to more complex states of indignation
or outrage (Alicke, 2000; Prinz, 2006). Social acts of
criticism may then express this affective tone to different
degrees (FEATURE: Emotionality).
Thoughtfulness and emotional intensity, arising from the
judgment relative to the severity of the offense, may
determine how appropriate particular degrees of moral
criticism are—ranging between mildly disapproving of and
chastising the offender. In dealing with interpersonal
criticism and complaints, people welcome thoughtful, clear,
and constructive criticism whereas they dislike yelling and
personal attacks as expressions of disapproval (Alberts,
1989). Especially when publicly expressed, moral criticism
thus is likely to vary in its degree of social acceptability
(FEATURE: Acceptability).

Table 1: Assessed features of moral criticism and their
formulations in the study.
Features of the Social Act
Public Act
2nd vs. 3rd Person
Conversation
Reform

Was this more like a private thought
or more like a public action?
Did he act directly toward her or did
he express this to other people?
How likely is it that, right after, he and
she will talk about what happened?
Given his action, how likely is she to
improve her future behavior?

Features of the Underlying Judgment
Offense Severity
Thoughtfulness
Emotionality
Acceptability

How bad was what she [the offender]
had done?
How thoughtful or impulsive was he
in doing that?
How intense was the emotion he felt?
How socially acceptable was what he
[moral critic] did?

Semantic landmarks. Having derived a number of features
from a theory of blame, we decided to treat blame as one of
the landmarks in the space of moral criticism, comparing all
other moral action verbs to blame. As perhaps the
superordinate term of moral criticism, blame may well
occupy a center spot in the dimensions of Thoughtfulness
and Emotionality, summed into Acceptability, and appear
both as a private thought and Public Act, expressed in 2ndand 3rd-person communication.
In addition, because blame is often equated with or treated
as parallel to punishment, we added acts of punishing the
offender as the second landmark. Acts akin to punishment,
we can expect, will more often follow from Severe Offenses,
be accompanied by more Emotionality, and leave less room
for Conversation with the offender.

Semantic Landmarks
Like blame
Like punish

How similar in meaning is this
[statement] to “He blamed her for the
bad thing she had done.”?
How similar in meaning is this
[statement] to “He punished her for
the bad thing she had done”?

If the moral critic does directly address the norm violator,
behavior regulation varies as a function of whether the
criticism invites further conversation (FEATURE: Conversation) about the norm violation and its possible repair
(McGeer, 2012; McKenna, 2012; Newell & Stutman, 1991).
Finally, in response to the moral criticism violators may
intend to repair the damage to their social standing and
promise adherence to the violated norms in the future
(FEATURE: Reform) (Bennett, 2002; Walker, 2006).
Features of the underlying judgment. Moral criticism
carries at least temporary costs for the offender, be they
emotional or social (Bennett, 2002; McKenna, 2011).
Imposing such costs on another community member
demands warrant: the blamer must be able to offer grounds
for his or her act of blaming (Bergmann, 1998; Coates &
Tognazzini, 2012). Warrant lies, first and foremost, in the
offending act. Just as the law has a proportionality principle
(Engle, 2012) we expect that people’s moral criticism is
finely attuned to the severity of the offense (FEATURE:
Offense Severity) (Fillmore, 1971).
In addition, a number of social-cognitive assessments
normally enter blame (e.g., of intentionality, reasons,
knowledge; Cushman, 2008; Guglielmo, Monroe, & Malle,
2009; Shaver, 1985). If blame is grounded in such careful
assessments, moral criticism may be considered thoughtful
rather than impulsive (FEATURE: Thoughtfulness).

Hypotheses. If these derived features of moral judgment
and moral communication help characterize the greater
social-conceptual space of moral criticism1, we should
expect representative speakers of a given language to be
able to assess acts of moral criticism relative to these
features. Overhearing someone say “He [admonished,
berated, rebuked, etc.] her for the bad thing she had done”
should easily allow the person to rate the moral act for each
of the eight features: whether the specific verb (e.g., rebuke)
implies a private thought or public action, whether the
action was addressed to the violator or some third person,
whether the episode permitted continued communication,
and so on. Likewise, if not just lexicons but speakers of a
language have a differentiated vocabulary of moral
criticism, they should easily assess how similar each
considered moral verb is to acts of blaming and acts of
punishment. Most important, if the conceptual space of
moral criticism is truly a reflection of ordinary social-moral
practice, and not just the fiction of cognitive scientists, a
considerable degree of consensus must exist among people
making such assessments.
1

There are other candidate features of moral criticism we have
not yet examined in detail, including role, relationship, and
context. We reserve these complex features for a future study.

1701

Verbs of moral criticism. We tested these hypotheses by
asking participants to make inferences about twenty-eight
stimulus verbs that denote varieties of moral criticism
(henceforth MC verbs). We selected these verbs with the
goal to fully represent the social-conceptual space of moral
criticism, while avoiding rare and obsolete verbs. Roget’s
Thesaurus provided the initial set of forty verbs; these
included synonyms of the verb “blame” and their own
synonyms. The WordNet database corroborated a subset of
these synonyms. The online edition of the Oxford English
Dictionary provided one filter; based on the definitions and
contextual sentences, we excluded verbs with too many
unrelated meanings, as well as verbs outside of current and
common usage. The online database for the Corpus of
Contemporary American English (COCA) provided another
filter. This corpus contains more than 425 million words of
text from spoken dialogue, fiction, popular magazines,
newspapers, and academic texts that appeared between 1990
and 2012. Based on the COCA frequency counts for each
verb in its various tense forms (e.g. blame, blames, blamed,
blaming) and contextual sentences, we excluded infrequent
verbs and those used mainly in the passive voice. The
remaining twenty-eight verbs appear in Table 2.

Participants and Procedure
We recruited 300 fluent English speakers (female = 164,
and unreported = 2; mean age approximately 32 years)
through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. Participants were
assigned to one of ten groups (each N = 30), in which they
repeatedly responded to the same inferential question for
each of the 28 MC verbs. Each group of participants was
redirected to a different page in an external Web
application. There, all participants completed an English
competency test (a sentence-completion test based on a
standard eighth-grade literary text) and provided the
reported demographic information. Participants in each
group then received condition-specific instructions. For
example, the Emotionality inference condition was
introduced as follows (see supplemental materials Web page
for variations used in other conditions):
Please read carefully!
You will read a number of sentences that are related in
meaning to “He blamed her for what she had done.” (We
never specify exactly what she had done; just assume it
was something bad.)
We are interested in the way people interpret these
kinds of sentences. In particular, we’d like to know how
much emotional intensity is implied by these sentences
(e.g., that “He blamed her”).
Some sentences may imply that the agent (= “He”) felt
an intense emotion; some may imply that he felt no
emotion. It will depend on the specific words in the
sentence. Please read each sentence, then indicate on the
rating scale how intense the emotion was that he felt. We
will always ask you about his emotion.
Please do this task from memory -- do not look up any
of the words or phrases. It’s okay if there are some words
you are not familiar with.
In two training trials participants answered their
condition-specific question from Table 1 (e.g., for
Emotionality, “How intense was the emotion he felt?”) for
two verbs: “He [yelled at / spoke out against] her for the bad
thing she had done.” They then proceeded to answer the
same question for the 28 MC verbs on 7-point scales, with
condition-appropriate anchors (for Emotionality, “Not at all”
to “Extremely intense”).

Table 2: Commonly used verbs denoting moral criticism.
Verb
accuse
admonish
attack
berate
blame
castigate
censure
chastise
chew out
chide
condemn
criticize
denounce
disapprove

Frequency
2181
2614
1091
706
12770
397
498
809
100
959
2119
3439
957
785

Verb
find fault with
lash out at
let X have it
object to
point the finger
rebuke
reprimand
reproach
revile
scold
slander
tell X off
vilify

Frequency
182
515
333
1961
282
656
629
575
419
405
496
152
633

Method

Results

Materials
Inference Probes. The 28 MC verbs were inserted into the
[verbed] placeholder in the sentence, “He [verbed] her for
the bad thing she had done.” To probe inferences about
these verb phrases, we developed questions to which
participants responded on a seven-point rating scale. (They
could also respond “I don’t know this word/phrase.”) The
questions for each feature are displayed in Table 1.
Importantly, any given participant responded to only one
probe, for all 28 verbs. This way, any correlations between
features are not driven by participants’ hypotheses or
response biases, but by the consensual rating profiles that
independent samples of participants produced.

We organize the results around our two goals: to examine
whether people show consensus on the selected features of
moral criticism, and to characterize the social-conceptual
space of moral criticism spanned by those features.

Consensus About the Features of Moral Criticism
To assess participant consensus about the feature values
they inferred from the range of verbs we used Cronbach’s
standardized coefficient α and the average correlations of
each rater with the group ri∗N (see Table 3). The results
support show that people strongly agree on how the 28
verbs of moral criticism are arranged along each feature
dimension.
€

1702

Table 3: Social consensus of feature inferences

ri∗N

α
Features of Social Act
Public Act
0.94
2nd vs. 3rd Person
0.96
Conversation
0.84€
Reform
0.71
Features of Underlying Judgment
Offense Severity
0.93
Thoughtfulness
0.94
Emotionality
0.95
Social Acceptability
0.97
Semantic Landmarks
Like Blame
0.91
Like Punish
0.95

0.58
0.63
0.36
0.21
0.53
0.59
0.63
0.79
0.51
0.63

The Feature Space of Moral Criticism
We had identified four features of moral criticism as social
acts and four features of underlying moral judgments,
complemented by two semantic landmarks. If this set of 10
variables at least partially constitutes the social-conceptual
space of moral criticism we should be able to recover
dimensions of this space from a principal components
analysis of the verb ! feature correlation matrix. That is,
we are looking to capture the higher-order properties that
account for systematic differences among MC verbs.

Figure 1. How inferred features constitute the first two
principal components of the moral criticism feature space.
Two features seem rather distinct from the rest: Reform
formed its own component, perhaps because it was too
difficult a judgment to make without information about the
offender or the specific offending act. In addition, the
semantic landmark Like Blame loaded modestly on the
Intensity component but would have formed its own
component in a four-factor solution. Perhaps features such
as status, role, and relationship (which were not assessed
here), determine more precisely whether an act of moral
criticism is “like blame.”

Table 4: Principal components of inferred features
Features
Emotionality
Acceptable
Severity
Conversation
Punish
Blame
Public
ThirdPers
Thoughtful
Reform

PC 1
0.91
-0.90
0.87
-0.78
0.69
-0.44
-0.50

PC 2

PC 3

Kinds of Moral Criticism in the Feature Space
0.43
0.47
0.84
-0.80
-0.69

0.43
-0.30
0.92

Note: Varimax rotated solution; loadings < 0.30 not shown
Three components accounted for 78% of the variance.
We see in Table 4 and Figure 1 that the first and strongest
component unites the four judgment features with the
similarity to punishment. We label this the “Intensity”
dimension of moral criticism, anchored on the high end by
acts that respond to severe offenses and come with strong
emotions and on the opposing end by acts that are socially
acceptable and have potential for further conversation. The
second component captures the interpersonal nature of acts
of criticism—whether they are public and directed at the
offender or more private, perhaps even just in thought.

Now that we have established a feature space that is
primarily defined by judgment intensity and interpersonal
address, we can plot the 28 MC verbs within this feature
space and subject the underlying “factor scores” to
clustering algorithms (Reynolds, Richards, Iglesia, &
Rayward-Smith, 2006). Four clusters emerged repeatedly
when partitioning around four to six medoids2, and they
corresponded well to the four quadrants defined by the twocomponent feature space (see Figure 2): intense acts to the
person’s face (attack, lash out, berate), intense acts in the
person’s absence (revile, vilify, slander), milder acts to the
person’s face (accuse, criticize, blame), and milder acts in
the person’s absence (disapprove, find fault, object to). The
remaining verbs, near the center of the plot, made up a large
residual cluster, exhibiting no clear differentiation given the
current set of features. Once more, additional features such
as context, role, or relationship might provide further
differentiation.
2

Medoids are the set of MC verbs that minimized the sum of the
dissimilarities between each verb and its closest representative
verb.

1703

expressed, but also based on more sloppy information
processing? Do public acts of moral criticism come with
stronger warrant because the costs of false accusations are
higher than in private condemnation? Finally, does the twodimensionality of social acts of moral criticism also apply to
nonverbal expressions? Do certain gestures and facial
expressions “code for” the social prototypes we have
identified? How exactly does a social perceiver of a certain
gesture detect that another person is not just blaming an
offender, but actually denouncing him?

Figure 2. Verbs of moral criticism plotted within the first
two principal components of the feature space.

Discussion
In the present paper, we report on our progress towards two
sub-goals of understanding how social acts of moral
criticism do the work of regulating behavior: discovering
consensual features of such acts and locating the acts within
a higher-order feature space of moral criticism. We isolated
four reliable features of moral criticism as a social act, four
reliable features of the judgments underlying moral
criticism, and two semantic landmarks of moral criticism. A
principal components analysis on these 10 variables (applied
to the 28 verbs of moral criticism) yielded two major
dimensions of morally critical acts: their intensity and their
interpersonal engagement.
Within this two-dimensional feature space we then
mapped the various verbs of moral criticism and identified
four clusters with well-differentiated feature patterns. The
clustered verbs formed roughly a 2 ! 2 classification of
prototypes of moral criticism: intense vs. mild criticism that
is either directed publicly at the offender or kept largely
private. The marker verbs (medoids) of these prototypes are
lashing out (intense, public), vilifying (intense, private),
pointing the finger (mild, public), and disapproving (mild,
private).
Implications for moral psychology. The results reported
here represent an initial step towards bridging the gap
between the internal judgments of moral perceivers and
their regulatory influence over other people’s behavior. We
have provided an existence proof for an accessible and
coherent representation of social acts of moral criticism.
Future research can build on this foundation and examine in
more detail whether the different types of moral criticism
are grounded in distinct information processing. For
example, is lashing out at someone not only more intensely

Implications for artificial moral agents. Whatever the
promise of studying nonverbal moral expressions, language
remains the dominant interface for social moral interactions
in human communities. Our present study is part of a larger
project on the necessary ingredients of a “moral robot,” and
the verbal channel of expression will also be paramount for
any near-term artificial moral agent. The moral competence
of a robotic car, for example, will have to involve producing
and comprehending verbal exchanges with passengers about
norm-violating behaviors by the operator and other drivers.
A robotic partner in police patrolling will have to be able to
detect potential norm violations and express those
observations to its human partner. A search-and-rescue
robot that needs to decide whether to save a crying baby or a
screaming adult would ideally later explain to its supervisor
why it made its decision; and depending on those “reasons,”
the supervisor may need to make an adjustment to the
robot’s “value system.” Learning verbs of moral criticism
may be a small ingredient in designing such a morally
competent robot, but understanding and representing the
underlying social-conceptual space of such verbs will be
essential.

Conclusion
The present research illustrates, we hope, the strength of a
broad cognitive-science approach to morality: using tools
and ideas from linguistics, psychology, and statistics to
consider simultaneously both mental and social processes,
both how people talk about the world and how they
conceptualize the world, and both as individual information
processors and as members of complex social communities.

Acknowledgments
This project was supported by a grant from the Office of
Naval Research, No. N00014-13-1-0269. The opinions
expressed here are our own and do not necessarily reflect
the views of ONR.

References
Alberts, J. K. (1989). A descriptive taxonomy of couples’
complaint interactions. Southern Communication Journal,
54, 125–143.
Alicke, M. D. (2000). Culpable control and the psychology
of blame. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 556–574.
Beardsley, E. L. (1979). Blaming. Philosophia, 8, 573–583.

1704

Bennett, C. (2002). The varieties of retributive experience.
The Philosophical Quarterly, 52, 145–163.
Bergmann, J. R. (1998). Introduction: Morality in discourse.
Research on Language & Social Interaction, 31, 279–294.
Boehm, C. (1999). Hierarchy in the forest: The evolution of
egalitarian behavior. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Churchland, P. S. (2012). Braintrust: What neuroscience
tells us about morality. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Coates, D. J., & Tognazzini, N. A. (2012). The contours of
blame. In D. J. Coates & N. A. Tognazzini (Eds.), Blame:
Its nature and norms (pp. 3–26). New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Cushman, F. (2008). Crime and punishment: Distinguishing
the roles of causal and intentional analyses in moral
judgment. Cognition, 108, 353–380.
Cushman, F. (2013). The functional design of punishment
and the psychology of learning. In R. Joyce, K. Sterelny,
B. Calcott, & B. Fraser (Eds.), Psychological and
environmental foundations of cooperation., Signaling,
commitment and emotion (Vol. 2). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Deigh, Jo. (1996). Morality and personal relations. The
sources of moral agency (pp. 1–17). New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press.
Dersley, I., & Wootton, A. (2000). Complaint sequences
within antagonistic argument. Research on Language and
Social Interaction, 33, 375–406.
Drew, P. (1998). Complaints about transgressions and
misconduct. Research on Language & Social Interaction,
31, 295–325.
Engle, E. (2012). The history of the general principle of
proportionality: An overview. Dartmouth Law Journal,
10, 1–11.
Fillmore, C. J. (1971). Verbs of judging: An exercise in
semantic description. In C. Fillmore J. & D. T.
Langendoen (Eds.), Studies in Linguistic Semantics (pp.
272–289). New York, NY: Holt, Rinehard and Winston.
Guglielmo, S., Monroe, A. E., & Malle, B. F. (2009). At the
heart of morality lies folk psychology. Inquiry: An
Interdisciplinary Journal of Philosophy, 52, 449–466.
Joyce, R. (2006). The evolution of morality. MIT Press.
Laforest, M. (2009). Complaining in front of a witness:
Aspects of blaming others for their behaviour in multiparty family interactions. Journal of Pragmatics, 41,
2452–2464.
Malle, B. F., Guglielmo, S., & Monroe, A. E. (2014). A
theory of blame. Psychological Inquiry.
McGeer, V. (2012). Civilizing blame. Blame: Its nature and
norms (pp. 162–188). New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
McKenna, M. (2011). Conversation and responsibility. New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
McKenna, M. (2012). Directed blame and conversation.
Blame: Its nature and norms (pp. 119–140). New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.

Newell, S. E., & Stutman, R. K. (1991). The episodic nature
of social confrontation. In J. A. Anderson (Ed.),
Communication yearbook (Vol. 14, pp. 359–413).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Prinz, J. (2006). The emotional basis of moral judgments.
Philosophical Explorations, 9, 29–43.
Rai, T. S., & Fiske, A. P. (2011). Moral psychology is
relationship regulation: Moral motives for unity,
hierarchy, equality, and proportionality. Psychological
Review, 118, 57–75.
Reynolds, A. P., Richards, G., Iglesia, B. de la, & RaywardSmith, V. J. (2006). Clustering rules: A comparison of
partitioning and hierarchical clustering algorithms.
Journal of Mathematical Modelling and Algorithms, 5,
475–504.
Shaver, K. G. (1985). The attribution of blame: Causality,
responsibility, and blameworthiness. New York: Springer
Verlag.
Sripada, C. S., & Stich, S. (2006). A framework for the
psychology of norms. In P. Carruthers, S. Laurence, & S.
Stich (Eds.), The innate mind (Volume 2: Culture and
cognition) (pp. 280–301). New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Sunstein, C. R. (1996). Social norms and social roles.
Columbia Law Review, 96, 903–968.
Traverso, V. (2009). The dilemmas of third-party
complaints in conversation between friends. Journal of
Pragmatics, 41, 2385–2399.
Walker, M. U. (2006). Moral repair: Reconstructing moral
relations after wrongdoing. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.

1705

