UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Tentative Role for FOXP2 in the Evolution of Dual Processing Modes and Generative
Abilities

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4kn9d3db

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Chrusch, Courtney
Gabora, LIane

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Tentative Role for FOXP2 in the Evolution of Dual Processing Modes and
Generative Abilities
Courtney Chrusch (courtney_chrusch@hotmail.com) and Liane Gabora (liane.gabora@ubc.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia
Arts Building, 333 University Way, Kelowna BC, V1V 1V7, CANADA
Abstract
It has been suggested that the origins of cognitive modernity in
the Middle/Upper Paleolithic following the appearance of
anatomically modern humans was due to the onset of dual
processing or contextual focus (CF), the ability to shift
between different modes of thought: an explicit mode
conducive to logical problem solving, and an implicit mode
conducive to free-association and breaking out of a rut.
Mathematical and computational models of CF supported this
hypothesis, showing that CF is conducive to making creative
connections by placing concepts in new contexts. This paper
proposes that CF was made possible by mutation of the
FOXP2 gene in the Paleolithic. FOXP2, once thought to be the
“language gene”, turned out not to be uniquely associated with
language. In its modern form FOXP2 enabled fine-tuning of
the neurological mechanisms underlying the capacity to shift
between processing modes by varying the size of the activated
region of memory.
Keywords: Associative thought; Contextual focus; Creativity;
Divergent thought; Dual process; FOXP2; Human evolution;
Language evolution; Paleolithic; Neural basis of language

Introduction
The realization that FOXP2 was not the “language gene”
generated much-needed sober discussion about the
simplicity of single-gene explanations of complex traits.
However, if one finds a relatively simple explanation that is
consistent with a wealth of data from multiple disciplines, it
is parsimonious to start with that and see if it needs to be
modified or elaborated. We suggest that while FOXP2 is not
the ‘language gene’ it may have a broad but well-defined
impact on cognition. This paper synthesizes genetic,
neurological, cognitive, and anthropological research into an
integrated account of the cognitive changes underlying
behavioral modernity, including language, came about.
Specifically, we propose that it enabled the onset of
contextual focus—the ability to shift between explicit /
analytic and implicit / associative modes of thought—which
paved the way for not just language, but a range of cognitive
abilities considered by anthropologists to be diagnostic of
behavioral modernity.
First we place the discussion in its historical context by
reviewing both the studies that implicated the FOXP2 gene
in the evolutionary origins of language, and the evidence that
caused this connection to come into question. Second, we
review anthropological and archaeological evidence that the
coming into prominence of creative and cognitive abilities
(including but not limited to those that involve language)
coincides with the evolutionary origins of FOXP2. Third, we

review literature on dual processing theories and generative
abilities. Finally, we synthesize these literatures in a new
explanation of the role of FOXP2 in language specifically
and cognitive development more generally.

The Search for a Genetic Basis for Language
FOXP2 is a transcription gene on chromosome 7 (ReimersKipping et al., 2011). It regulates the activity of other genes
that play a role in the development and function of the brain
(Fisher & Ridley, 2013; Kovas & Plomin, 2006). It is
associated with proper functioning of the motor cortex, the
striatum, and the cerebellum, which controls fine motor
skills (Liegeois, Morgan, Connelly, & Vargha-Khadem,
2011). It was proposed that the FOXP2 gene plays an
important role in language acquisition when a mutation in
this gene was associated with language impairment in a
British Family known as the KE Family (Lai, Fisher, Hurst,
Vargha-Khadem, & Monaco, 2001). Approximately half the
members of this family, across several generations, exhibited
verbal dyspraxia and severe difficulty in controlling the
orofacial muscles required for speech articulation
(Lalmansingh, Karmakar, Jin, & Nagaich, 2012). The family
was diagnosed with Specific Language Impairment: a
signiﬁcant deﬁcit in language development that exists
despite adequate educational opportunity and normal
nonverbal intelligence (Lai et al., 2001; Morgan, 2013).
Those affected by SLI show deﬁcits to the articulation of
speech sounds, verbal expression, comprehension of speech,
and have trouble controlling the movement and sequencing
of orofacial muscles resulting in deficits in fluent speech.
Transcript sequencing showed that a mutation of FOXP2
widespread in the KE family results in language deficiencies
(Lai et al., 2001). FOXP2 thus became prematurely referred
to as the “language gene” (Bickerton, 2007).
However, from the start there was question concerning its
involvement in language because as a transcription gene it
only has an indirect effect on neural structure or behavior
(Bickerton, 2007; Reimers-Kipping et al., 2011). Moreover,
although FOXP2 is involved in motor control and learning,
there ae indications that it has a role in other abilities that do
not involve language (Kurt, Fisher, & Ehret, 2012). Indeed,
the KE Family demonstrated minor non-verbal disabilities
such as lack of cognitive fluidity, and below-average IQ (Lai
et al., 2001). It was concluded that the neurological basis of
deficits associated with FOXP2 lie in the structural and
functional abnormalities of cortico-striatal and corticocerebellar circuitries of the brain, which are important for
learning, memory, and motor control, not language
exclusively.

499

Language is likely a polygenic trait (Chabris et al., 2012;
see Kovas & Plomin, 2006). It is difficult to identify all the
genes that contribute to an ability as complex as language;
this is the problem of “missing heritability” (Manolio et al.,
2009). Moreover, a gene such as FOXP2 may be pleiotropic
in its effects, i.e., it may affect multiple traits (Kovas &
Plomin, 2006). Nevertheless, it is well established that a
small change or perturbation can percolate through a system
resulting in massive, large-scale changes, a phenomenon
known as self-organized criticality (Bak, Tang, &
Wiesenfeld, 1987). Self-organized criticality plays an
important role in gene expression, particularly in the case of
regulatory genes (Kauffman, 1993). This makes it worth at
least considering the possibility that FOXP2 plays a role in
cognition that extends beyond its role in language and yet is
nonetheless clear-cut and identifiable.

Imitation and the Evolution of Language
Evidence that FOXP2 is actively transcribed in brain areas
where mirror neurons are present led to the hypothesis that
FOXP2 made language possible through its effect on the
capacity to imitate (Corballis, 2004a). Two simple forms of
imitation are: (1) onomatopoeia, in which a speaker refers to
something by making a sound that phonetically resembles it
(e.g., referring to the sound made by a frog as “ribbit”), and
(2) interjections, which may have begun with sounds such as
the smacking of the mouth and lips during hunger. It has
long been thought that onomatopoeia and interjections paved
the way for more complex vocalizations (Chomsky, 1975;
Farrar, 1866). The idea that imitation precipitated language
was strengthened by findings that mirror neurons play a key
role in language development (Arbib, 2011). However, the
role of mirror neurons is controversial and the evidence for
transcription of FOXP2 in areas where they are present is
disputed. Moreover, in order to imitate the language of
others there must already be others who are using language.
Therefore, if FOXP2 played a role in the origin of language
this is not fully accounted for by the mediating role of
imitation. Moreover, the hypothesis that FOXP2 affects
language by way of its effect on imitation does not explain
the existence of defects associated with FOXP2 mentioned
earlier that involve neither language nor imitation. Finally,
imitation, but not grammatical, syntactically rich language,
is seen in other species. In short, FOXP2 does not appear to
affect language solely through its effect on imitation.

The Cultural Explosion of the Middle-Upper
Paleolithic
FOXP2 underwent accelerated evolution approximately
200,000 years ago (Corballis, 2004b; Lai et al., 2001).
Within the last 200,000 years it underwent at least two
human-speciﬁc mutations (Morgan, 2013; Lai et al., 2001).
This corresponds to the appearance of anatomically modern
humans in the fossil record between 200,000 and 100,000
years ago (Lai et al., 2001). It has been proposed that the
appearance of anatomically modern humans was due to
amino acid substitutions that differentiate the human FOXP2

gene from that of chimpanzees (Enard et al., 2002; Zhang et
al., 2002). At least one FOXP2 mutation occurred within the
last 100,000 years (Lai et al., 2001). This aligns FOXP2
change with the onset of behavioral modernity including
complex language. Anatomical modernity preceded
behavioral modernity; Leakey (1984) writes of anatomically
modern human populations in the Middle East with little in
the way of culture, and concludes, “The link between
anatomy and behavior therefore seems to break” (p. 95).
The origin of complex language is widely associated with
what Mithen (1998) refers to as the ‘big bang’ of human
culture. The European archaeological record provides
extensive evidence of an unparalleled cultural transition
occurred between 60,000 and 30,000 years ago, at the onset
of the Upper Paleolithic. Considering it “evidence of the
modern human mind at work,” Leakey (1984:93-94)
describes this period as “unlike previous eras, when stasis
dominated, ... [with] change being measured in millennia
rather than hundreds of millennia.” This period exhibits
more innovation than in the previous six million years of
human evolution (Mithen, 1998). It marks the beginnings of
traits considered diagnostic of behavioral modernity,
including a more organized, strategic, season-specific style
of hunting involving specific animals at specific sites,
elaborate burial sites indicative of ritual and religion,
evidence of dance, magic, and totemism, colonization of
Australia, and replacement of Levallois tool technology by
blade cores in the Near East. In Europe, complex hearths and
art appeared, including cave paintings of animals, decorated
tools and pottery, bone and antler tools with engraved
designs, ivory statues of animals and sea shells, and personal
decoration such as beads, pendants, and perforated animal
teeth, many of which may have indicated social status.
Whether this period was a genuine revolution culminating
in behavioral modernity is hotly debated because claims to
this effect are based on the European Paleolithic record, and
largely exclude the African record (Fisher & Ridley, 2013).
Many artifacts associated with a rapid transition to
behavioral modernity 40-50,000 years ago in Europe are
found in the African Middle Stone Age tens of thousands of
years earlier, which pushes the cultural transition more
closely into alignment with the transition to anatomical
modernity and the associated changes to FOXP2. What is
clear is that modern behavior appeared in Africa between
100,000 to 50,000 years ago, and spread, resulting in
displacement of the Neanderthals in Europe (Fisher &
Ridley, 2013). From this point on there was only one
hominid species: modern Homo sapiens. Despite a lack of
overall increase in cranial capacity, the prefrontal cortex, and
more particularly the orbitofrontal region, increased
significantly in size, in what was most likely a time of major
neural reorganization (Morgan, 2013).
Thus, a period of significant FOXP2 evolution overlaps
with both the transition to anatomical modernity and the
cultural transition of the Middle-Upper Paleolithic. This
suggests that that FOXP2 may have played a role in the
onset of modern human cognitive abilities.

500

Contextual Focus as Explanation for the
Creative Explosion
We have seen evidence that FOXP2 plays a role in the
evolution of complex cognitive abilities including language
but this relationship is not solely mediated through its effects
on the capacity for imitation. We now provide the necessary
background to consider an alternative scenario.
It has been proposed that the Paleolithic transition reflects
fine-tuning of the capacity to subconsciously shift between
different modes of thought (Gabora, 2003 Gabora &
Kaufman, 2010; Gabora & Kitto, 2013). The ability to shift
between different modes was referred to as contextual focus
(CF) because it requires the ability to focus or defocus
attention in response to the context or situation one is in. CF
is in some ways similar to the notion of dual processing,
according to which we use explicit cognition for conscious
analysis of the task at hand, and implicit cognition for free
association and quick ‘gut’ responses (Evans, 2008;
Frankish, 2011; Nosek, 2007; Willingham & GoedertEschmann, 1999). The creativity literature makes a similar
distinction between (1) divergent or associative processes
during idea generation, while (2) convergent or analytic
processes
predominate
during
the
refinement,
implementation, and testing of an idea (Finke, Ward, &
Smith, 1992). Associative thought maps onto implicit
cognition, while analytic thought maps onto explicit
cognition (see Sowden, Pringle, & Gabora, in press, for a
comparison and discussion of the relationship dual
processing theory and dual theories of creativity).
The proposal then is that the onset of CF in the Paleolithic
was made possible through fine-tuning of the biochemical
mechanisms underlying the capacity to shift between these
modes, depending on the situation, by varying the specificity
of the activated memory region (Gabora, 2003). Defocused
attention, by diffusely activating a wide region of memory,
is conducive to associative thought; it enables obscure (but
potentially relevant) aspects of the situation to come into
play. It is useful for the generation of new connections when
one is stuck in a rut. Focused attention is conducive to
analytic thought; memory activation is constrained enough
to hone in and perform logical mental operations on the most
clearly relevant aspects. It is reasonable that one or more
genes would have been involved in the fine-tuning of the
biochemical mechanisms underlying the capacity to
subconsciously shift between these two processing modes.
Regions consisting of many cell assemblies participate in the
encoding of more memories than regions containing few.

Formal Models of Contextual Focus
The hypothesis that CF is responsible for the burst of
innovation in the Paleolithic is supported by formal models
of CF. A mathematical model of CF was developed (Gabora
& Aerts, 2009), and a version of this model was consistent
with experimental data from a study in which participants
were asked to rate the typicality of exemplars of a concept
for different contexts (Veloz, Gabora, Eyjolfson, & Aerts,
2011). Introducing measures of state robustness and context

relevance, the modeled showed that a shift to a more
associative processing mode (by varying the exemplar
typicality threshold) is accompanied by changes in the
relevance of different contexts, such that seemingly atypical
states of the concept can become typical states. This result is
important because viewing a familiar concept from a new
context and thereby making new connections is the essence
of creativity; it underlies not just the generativity of
language but the characteristically human ability to adapt old
ways to new circumstances.
The effect of CF at the level of society was investigated
using a computational model of cultural evolution consisting
of an artificial society of neural-network based agents that
invent and imitate ideas for cultural outputs. CF was
introduced into an artificial society by giving agents the
capacity to shift between different processing modes
depending on the effectiveness of their current cultural
output (Gabora & Firouzi, 2012). The fitness of cultural
outputs was significantly higher with CF than without it, as
shown in Figure 1. The diversity, or number of cultural
outputs, showed the typical pattern of an increase as the
space of possibilities is explored followed by a decrease as
agents converge on the fittest outputs. However, with CF,
this occurs more quickly, and although early in a run
diversity is lower with CF (because agents more quickly
hone in on superior cultural outputs) in the long run diversity
is higher, as shown in Figure 2 (because a greater number of
superior cultural outputs are found). Together, Figures 1 and
2 show that the onset of CF provides a computationally
feasible explanation for how the increased utility and variety
of artifacts in the Middle/Upper Paleolithic came about.

The Neurological Basis of Contextual Focus
To see why the onset of CF could reasonably be attributed to
fine-tuning at the neurological level and give rise to a
Paleolithic burst of creativity we need to examine the
features of associative memory that allow creative
connections to be made. The notion that diffuse activation is
conducive to associative thought while activation of a
narrow receptive field is conducive to analytic thought is
consistent with the architecture of associative memory
(Gabora, 2000; Gabora & Ranjan, 2012). Memories are
encoded in neurons that are sensitive to ranges (or values) of
microfeatures (Churchland & Sejnowski, 1992). Each
neuron responds maximally to a particular microfeature and
responds to a lesser extent to related microfeatures, an
organization referred to as coarse coding (Hubel & Wiesel,
1965). An item in memory is distributed across cell
assemblies that contain many neurons; each neuron
participates in the storage of many items (Hinton,
McClelland, & Rumelhart, 1986). Memory is also content
addressable: there is a systematic relationship between the
content of a representation and the neurons where it gets
encoded. Thus representations that get encoded in
overlapping regions of memory share features, and
representations can be evoked by stimuli that are similar or
“resonant” in some (perhaps context-specific) way (Hinton,

501

McClelland, & Rumelhart, 1986; Marr, 1969).

sorts of items in one’s environment might be viewed as a
potential tool depending on what one wants to accomplish.
Once it was possible to shift between these modes of
thought, cognitive processes requiring either analytic
thought, associative thought or both could be carried out
more effectively, and indeed the fruits of one mode of
thought could become ingredients for the other mode,
thereby facilitating the forging of a richly integrated internal
model of the world. Hence we propose that the Paleolithic
transition reflects a mutation to FOXP2 that caused finetuning of the capacity to spontaneously shift between
associative and analytic modes depending on the situation by
varying the specificity of the activated memory region.

The Evolutionary Origins of Contextual Focus
Figure 1. The mean fitness of cultural outputs generated by
agents in a computational model of cultural evolution was
higher in agents with CF (those with the ability to shift
between different processing modes).

Figure 2. Figure 1. The diversity of cultural outputs
generated by agents with CF increases more quickly and
stabilizes at a higher value than for agents without CF.
These properties of associative memory—distributed
representation, coarse coding, and content addressability—
make possible both the capacity to stay on task during
analytic thought, and the forging of unusual yet relevant
connections during associative thought (Gabora, 2000;
Gabora & Ranjan, 2012). Each thought may activate more or
fewer cell assemblies depending on the nature of the task at
hand. Focused attention is conducive to analytic thought
because memory activation is constrained enough to zero-in
and specifically operate on the most defining properties.
Defocused attention, by diffusely activating a diversity of
memory locations, is conducive to associative thought;
obscure (but potentially relevant) properties of the situation
come into play. Thus while in an analytic mode of thought
the concept TOOL might only activate a hand axe, the most
commonly used tool, in an associative mode of thought, all

We now present our argument for how FOXP2 made
possible the explosion of creativity and onset of language in
the Middle / Upper Paleolithic. Amino acid substitutions that
differentiate the human genome FOXP2 gene from that of
chimpanzees led to the appearance of anatomically modern
humans. This genetic modification changed the functioning
of neurons in the basal ganglia that contribute to cognitive
flexibility. These neurons show greater synaptic plasticity
and dendrite length in humans compared to chimpanzees.
These changes enhanced the efficiency of neural corticobasal ganglia circuits in the human brain. It enabled
individuals to modulate the degree of cognitive flexibility by
spontaneously adjusting how much detail of any given
thought or experience impact associative memory. Humans
became able to shift between focused and defocused modes
of attention, and thereby engage in CF. By tuning one’s
mode of thought in response to the needs of the present
moment, CF allowed information to be processed at different
degrees of granularity, and from different perspectives.
It is thus by way of CF that hominids became able to
combine words into an infinite variety of sentences, to
spontaneously change the direction of abstract thought, and
to adapt behavior to changing circumstances. Individuals
could engage in analytic thought as a default, but switch to
associative thought when they were stuck, or when they
wanted to express themselves or produce outputs that were
aesthetically satisfying. Associative thought enabled them to
connect ideas in new ways, resulting in creative ideas. These
new mental combinations resulted in advanced tools,
elaborate burials, and many forms of art and jewelry.

Creativity, Evolution, ADHD, and Schizophrenia
Further support for the proposal that FOXP2 played a role in
the creative explosion of the Paleolithic and the onset of
complex language comes from the literature on
schizophrenia and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD). Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
is a common psychiatric disorder with symptoms of
inattention, hyperactivity, and/or impulsivity that occurs in
approximately 4–5% of children and persists into adulthood
in at least 30% of patients diagnosed during infancy (Ribases
et al., 2012). Genes that contribute to the acquisition of

502

reading and spelling skills and play a role in speech and
language are strong candidates to be involved in both ADHD
and learning problems. FOXP2 affects activity of the
corticobasal ganglia circuits known to contribute to ADHD
(Ribases et al., 2012).
Schizophrenia is a serious mental disorder characterized
by delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, catatonia,
paranoia, keen interest in religion, emotional flattening, and
creativity. Hallucinations may take the form of verbal
running commentary, or multiple voices conversing with
each other. There is evidence that neural connections that
predispose one to schizophrenia contribute to creativity
(Cropley & Sikand, 1973). Genes that affect the dorsolateral
prefrontal and orbitofrontal cortices differently individuals
with schizophrenia exhibit positive selection for differential
expression between humans and chimpanzees (Morgan,
2013). Moreover, a polymorphism in FOXP2 can cause
language deficits in patients with schizophrenia, suggesting
that increased risk of schizophrenia is the price Homo
sapiens pay for language and creativity (Sanjuan, Tolosa,
Dagnall, Molto, & de Frutos, 2010). Moreover,
schizophrenia is sometimes associated with both language
impairment and above-average creativity (Kuttner Lorincz,
& Swan, 1967). These findings suggest that the creative
explosion of the Middle-Upper Paleolithic including the
onset of complex language may have indirectly selected for
genes involved in schizophrenia.

Discussion
The overall thread of our argument is synthesized in Figure
3. We propose that a form of FOXP2 that evolved during the
Paleolithic was responsible for the neurological
underpinnings of the ability to shift between associative and
analytic modes of thought. This enabled hominids to process
information at multiple levels of detail and from different
perspectives. It generated a need to think through and
communicate complex thoughts. This brought selective
pressure for the capacity to express oneself, thereby creating
an environment conducive to the emergence of complex
language including recursion, grammar, word inflections,
syntactical structure, and comprehension.
The proposal is consistent with findings that FOXP2 is
associated with cognitive abilities that do not involve
language, and with findings that non-language creative
abilities arose at approximately the same time as complex
language. The argument is also consistent with the view that
what is at the core of our uniquely human cognitive abilities
is the capacity to place things in context, or see things from
different perspectives (Gabora & Kaufman, 2010). This
enables us to put our own spin on the inventions of others,
modifying them to suit our own needs and tastes, leading to
new innovations that build cumulatively on previous ones. It
permits us to modify thoughts, impressions, and attitudes by
thinking about them in the context of each other, and
weaving them into an integrated structure that defines who
we are in relation to the world. Our compunction to put our
own spin on the ideas and inventions of others results in

accumulative cultural change, referred to as the ratchet effect
(Tomasello, Kruger, & Ratner, 1993).

Figure 1: Schematic illustration of the proposed relationship
between FOXP2, language, and contextual focus.
The picture presented here is speculative and incomplete.
Likely other genes play a role in the capacity for CF, and
other cognitive mechanisms are involved. Future research
will aim at developing means of testing the hypothesis, and
elucidating the neural mechanisms by which FOXP2 could
enable a shift between different modes of thought during
different phases of problem solving and other creative tasks.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful for funding to the second author from the
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada and the Flemish Fund for Scientific Research,
Belgium, and to Simon Tseng who made the graphs.

References
Arbib, M. A. (2011). From mirror neurons to complex
imitation in the evolution of language and tool-use.
Annual Review of Anthropology, 40, 257-273.
Bak, P., Tang, C., & Weisenfeld, K. (1988). Self-organized
criticality. Physical Review 38, 364.
Bickerton, D. (2007). Language evolution: a brief guide for
linguists. The Evolution of Language, 117, 510-526.
Chabris (2012). Most reported genetic associations with
general intelligence are probably false positives.
Psychological Science, 23, 1314-23.
Chomsky, N. (1975). Reﬂections on Language. Pantheon.
Churchland, P. & Sejnowski, T. (1992). The computational
brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

503

Corballis, M. (2004a). FOXP2 and the mirror system. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 95–96.
Corballis, M. (2004b). The origins of modernity: was
autonomous speech the critical factor? Psychological
Review, 111, 543-552.
Cropley, A., & Sikand, J. (1973). Creativity and
schizophrenia. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 40, 462-468.
Enard, W., Przeworski, M., Fisher, S., Lai, C., Weibe, V., &
Kitano, T. (2002). Molecular evolution of FOXP2, a gene
involved in speech and language. Nature, 418, 869-872.
Evans, J. (2008). Dual-process accounts of reasoning,
judgment and social cognition. Annual Review of
Psychology, 59, 255-278.
Farrar, F. W. (1866). On the origin of language: chapters on
language. Anthropological Review, 4, 153-143.
Finke, R., Ward, T., & Smith, S. (1992). Creative cognition:
Theory, research and application. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Fisher, S.E., & Fidley, M. (2013). Culture, genes, and the
human revolution. Science, 340(6135), 929-930.
Frankish, K. (2011). Dual-process and dual-system theories
of reasoning. Philosophy Compass, 10, 914-926.
Gabora, L. (2000). Toward a theory of creative inklings. In
R. Ascott, (Ed.) Art, Technology, and Consciousness (pp.
159-164) Bristol, UK: Intellect Press.
Gabora, L. (2003). Contextual focus: A cognitive
explanation for the cultural transition of the Middle/Upper
Paleolithic. In Proceedings Annual Meeting Cognitive
Science Society. Hillsdale NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Gabora, L., & Aerts, D. (2009). A model of the emergence
and evolution of integrated worldviews. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 53, 434-451.
Gabora, L., & Kaufman, S. (2010). Evolutionary
perspectives on creativity. In J. Kaufman & R. Sternberg
(Eds.) The Cambridge Handbook of Creativity. Cambridge
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Gabora, L. & Ranjan, A. (2013). How creative ideas emerge
in a distributed, content-addressable memory. In O.
Vartanian, Bristol, & J. Kaufman (Eds.) The neuroscience
of creativity (pp. 19-43). Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Guilford, J. P. (1950). Creativity. American Psychologist, 5,
444-454.
Hinton, G., McClelland, J., & Rumelhart, D. (1986).
Distributed representations. In D. Rumelhart, J.
McClelland, & PDP Research Group (Eds.), Parallel
distributed processing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hubel, D. & Wiesel, T. (1965). Receptive fields and
functional architecture in two non-straite visual areas of
the cat. Journal of Neurophysiology, 28, 229-289.
Kauffman, S. (1993). Origins of order, Oxford Univ Press.
Kova, Y. & Polmin, R. (2006). Generalist genes:
implications for the cognitive sciences. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 10, 198-203.
Kurt, S., Fisher, S., & Ehret, G. (2012). FOXP2 mutations
impair auditory-motor association learning. PloS One, 7,
1-5.

Kuttner R. E., Lorincz, A. B., & Swan, D. A. (1967). The
schizophrenia gene and social evolution. Psychological
Reports, 20, 407-412.
Lai, C., Fisher, S., Hurst, J., Vargha-Khadem, F., & Monaco,
A. (2001). A forkhead-domain gene is mutated in a severe
speech and language disorder. Nature, 413, 519-523.
Leakey, R. (1984). The origins of humankind. New York:
Science Masters Basic Books.
Liegois, F., Morgan, A. Connelly, A., & Vargha-Khadem, F.
(2011). Endophenotypes of FOXP2: dysfunction within
the human articulatory network. Official Journal of the
European Pediatric Neurology Society, 15, 283-288.
Marr, D. A. (1969). Theory of the cerebellar cortex. Journal
of Physiology, 202, 437-470.
Mithen, S. (1996). Ethnobiology and the evolution of the
human mind. Journal of the Royal Anthropological
Institute, 12, S45-S61.
Morgan, A. (2013). Speech-language pathology insights into
genetics and neuroscience: Beyond surface behaviour.
International Journal of Speech-Language Pathology,
15(3), 245-254.
Nosek, B. A. (2007). Implicit-explicit relations. Current
Directions in Psychology Science, 16, 65-69.
Reimers-Kipping, S., Hevers, W., Paabo, S., & Enard, W.
(2011). Humanized Foxp2 specifically affects corticobasal ganglia circuits. Neuroscience, 175, 75-84.
Ribasés, M., Sánchez-Mora, C., Ramos-Quiroga, J. A.,
Bosch, R., Gómez, N., Nogueira, M., & Bayés, M. (2012).
An association study of sequence variants in the forkhead
box P2 (FOXP2) gene and adulthood attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder in two European samples.
Psychiatric Genetics, 22(4), 155-160.
Runco, M. (1991). The evaluative, valuative, and divergent
thinking of children. Journal of Creative Behavior, 25,
311-319l.
Sanjuan, J., Tolossa, A., Dagnall, A., Molto, M. D., & de
Frutos, R. (2010). FOXP2 and schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Research, 117, 452.
Sowden, P., Pringle, A., & Gabora, L. (in press). The
shifting sands of creative thinking: Connections to dual
process theory. Thinking & Reasoning.
Tomasello, M., Kruger, A. C., & Ratner, H. H. (1993).
Cultural learning. Behavioral Sciences, 16, 495-552.
Veloz, T., Gabora, L., Eyjolfson, M., & Aerts, D. (2011). A
model of the shifting relationship between concepts and
contexts in different modes of thought. Proc Int
Symposium on Quantum Interaction. Aberdeen, UK.
Wayland, M., Khaitovich, P., Ryan, M., Paabo, S. & Bahn,
S. (2006). The molecular basis of cognitive impairment on
schizophrenia:
evidence
from
comparative
transcriptomics. Schizophrenia Research, 81, 17-27.
Willingham, D. B., & Goedert-Eschmann, K. (1999). The
relations between implicit and explicit learning: evidence
for parallel development. Psychology Science, 6, 531-534.

504

