UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Achievement goals, observed behaviors, and performance: Testing a mediation model in a
college classroom

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/39v9j3zz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Richey, J. Elizabeth
Nokes-Malach, Timothy J.
Wallace, Aleza

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Achievement Goals, Observed Behaviors, and Performance:
Testing a Mediation Model in a College Classroom
J. Elizabeth Richey (jes1235@pitt.edu)
Timothy J. Nokes-Malach (nokes@pitt.edu)
Aleza Wallace (alw112@pitt.edu)
Department of Psychology, Learning Research and Development Center, 3939 O’Hara St.
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA

Abstract

Achievement goals

Achievement goals have been examined extensively in
relationship to self-reported learning behaviors and
achievement, yet very little work has observed the behaviors
through which achievement goals might influence learning
and performance. We collected fine-grained behavioral data
to assess students’ activities throughout the semester in a
college psychology course, and then used one learning
behavior, access to course outlines, to explain the relationship
between self-reported achievement goals and grades. Results
suggest that downloading course outlines partially mediates
the relationship between goals and grades. Identifying how
goals influence achievement through observable behaviors
contributes to the theoretical understanding of achievement
goals while also suggesting practical implications for
instructors.

We base our current work on Elliot and colleagues’ 2 x 2
achievement goal framework, which proposes four
distinct goals based on two dimensions: definition
(mastery or performance) and valence (approach and
avoidance) (Elliot & McGregor, 2001; Elliot &
Murayama, 2008). Mastery goals are defined by an
absolute or intrapersonal standard, meaning achievement
is compared against the standard of what it is possible to
learn or what the learner knows. Performance goals are
defined by a normative standard, meaning achievement is
compared against what others learn or demonstrate.
Approach goals focus on attaining positive outcomes
while avoidance goals focus on evading negative
outcomes. Past research has investigated the relationships
between the four resulting goals (see Table 1 for
examples) and a variety of performance outcomes as well
as self-reported behaviors and attitudes, which we discuss
in greater detail below.

Keywords: achievement goals; instruction; learning;
motivation; performance

Introduction
Past work examining students’ achievement goals has
produced robust theories regarding the ways goals
influence students’ motivations, feelings, behaviors, and
achievement outcomes (Dweck, 1986; Ames & Archer,
1988; Elliot & McGregor, 2001; Harackiewicz, Barron,
Tauer, & Elliot, 2002). The vast majority of work testing
these theories had relied on self-reported data to capture
potential correlates and mediators for the relationship
between goals and performance outcomes.
While many self-reported measures of strategies and
behaviors have been shown to be reliable (Elliot,
McGregor, & Gable, 1999; Elliot & McGregor, 2001),
there are problems with relying exclusively on selfreported data to explain how achievement goals influence
achievement (Fulmer & Frijters, 2009). Critically,
students tend to have difficulty thinking about or
assessing their own cognitions and strategies, suggesting
their self-reports may not accurately reflect their
behaviors (Metcalfe, Eich, & Castel, 2010). We propose
that an important next step for achievement goal theory is
to explore the use of behavioral data to better understand
how goals impact performance outcomes.

Achievement goals and achievement outcomes Many
studies have related achievement goals to achievement
outcomes in laboratory and classroom settings, using
measures such as grades and test performance (e.g.,
Belenky & Nokes-Malach, 2012; Harackiewicz et al.,
2002). Some consistent patterns between achievement
goals and outcomes have emerged from these studies,
although there are also a large number of inconsistencies
that likely stem from differences in how goals are framed
(Hulleman, Schrager, Boddman, & Harackiewicz, 2010).
At a broad level, mastery-avoidance and performanceavoidance goals are most often negatively associated with
achievement or not correlated with achievement at all
(Hulleman et al., 2010; Linnenbrink-Garcia, Tyson, &
Patall, 2008; but see Richey & Nokes-Malach, 2013, for
an example of mastery-avoidance goals positively
predicting achievement). On the other hand, masteryapproach and performance-approach goals are most
frequently associated with positive outcomes or not
associated with outcomes at all (Hulleman et al., 2010;
Linnenbrink-Garcia, Tyson, & Patall, 2008). In a review
of approximately 90 studies, Linnenbrink-Garcia, Tyson,
and Patall (2008) found that mastery-approach and
performance-approach goals were positively associated

1293

with performance in 40 percent of all studies, negatively
associated with performance in about 5 percent of studies,
and not associated with performance in the rest.
While achievement goals are frequently found to
predict achievement outcomes, this relationship is not
generally hypothesized to be a direct one. In other words,
simply having a mastery-approach goal should not
directly improve one’s test performance; rather, it is
hypothesized that having a mastery-approach goal
changes the way learners feel about a task and the
behaviors they engage in during learning (Elliot,
McGregor, & Gable, 1999). This, in turn, should affect
performance. To understand the link between goals and
performance outcomes, researchers must examine the
behaviors hypothesized to mediate the relationship. Past
work has taken two main approaches: assessing selfreported attitudes and behaviors, and much less
frequently, measuring observed behaviors.

otherwise inaccurate) reflections of their actual behaviors.
These errors in self-reporting could explain why
achievement outcomes frequently fail to meet
expectations based on self-reported behaviors associated
with mastery-approach goals. Critically, all of the
findings discussed in this section rely exclusively on selfreported behaviors. We now turn to work that has
examined how achievement goals relate to observed
behaviors.
Achievement goals and observed behaviors While the
reliability of many of the measures used to capture selfreported strategies and behaviors have been well
documented, there are also a number of problems with
relying exclusively on self-reported data to explain how
goals influence outcomes (Fulmer & Frijters, 2009). For
example, students tend to demonstrate poor metacognitive
awareness, suggesting they have difficulty thinking about
or assessing their own cognitions (Metcalfe, Teal, &
Alan, 2010). Past work has shown that self-report data
collected through surveys and interviews often are not
consistent with observed behaviors (Elliott, 2004).
To better understand the processes that could explain
how goals influence outcomes, these relationships must
be validated with observed behaviors. A smaller number
of studies have examined achievement goals in relation to
behavioral outcomes other than performance, including
subsequent course choices (Harackiewicz et al., 2002),
diversity of course selection (Durik, Lovejoy, & Johnson,
2009), verbalizations during the task (Elliott & Dweck,
1988), academic cheating in a laboratory setting (Niiya,
Ballantyne, North, & Crocker, 2008), pro-social and
antisocial behaviors (Sage & Kavussanu, 2007), careless
behaviors (Hershkovitz, Wuxon, Baker, Gobert, & Sao
Pedro, 2011), and collaborative behaviors (Harris, Yuill,
& Luckin, 2008). These studies provide a critical step
toward understanding the direct behavioral effects of
different achievement goals, but most do not relate
behaviors to achievement or test whether behaviors
mediate the relationship between achievement goals and
achievement outcomes.
We know of only a handful of studies that have
attempted to explain the relationship between goals and
achievement outcomes using observed behaviors (e.g.,
Schoor & Bannert, 2011; Sins, van Joolingen,
Savelsbergh, & van Hout-Wolters, 2008). Sins et al.
(2008) used chat files of student dyads performing a
computer-based modeling task to assess frequencies of
deep processing (e.g., analyzing with a reference to
knowledge) and surface processing (e.g., analyzing
without a reference to knowledge), and then related those
behaviors to self-reported mastery-approach and
performance-avoidance goals. They found that dyads’
deep processing behaviors mediated the relationship
between mastery-approach goals and achievement on the
task. Critically, they also found little consistency between
log files of students’ behaviors and their self-reported

Achievement goals and self-reported behaviors To
better understand how achievement goals might influence
performance outcomes, many researchers have examined
self-reported learning strategies and behaviors (Ames &
Archer, 1988; Elliot, McGregor, & Gable, 1999;
Middleton & Midgley, 1997). Mastery-approach goals
have been positively associated with productive behaviors
including deep processing, effort, persistence, task
absorption, instrumental help-seeking, and even the
percentage of hours students reported studying the
weekend before an exam, while they have been negatively
associated
with
self-reported
behaviors
like
procrastination and studying the day of an exam (Elliot,
McGregor, & Gable, 1999; Howell & Watson, 2007;
McGregor & Elliot, 2002; Roussel, Elliot, & Feltman,
2011). Performance-avoidance goals have been positively
associated with unproductive behaviors like surface
processing and disorganization, and negatively associated
with productive behaviors like deep processing, task
absorption, and help-seeking (Elliot, McGregor, & Gable,
1999; McGregor & Elliot, 2002; Roussel, Elliot, &
Feltman, 2011).
Mastery-avoidance and performance-approach goals
have produced less clear-cut patterns. Mastery-avoidance
goals have been positively associated with some
productive self-reported behaviors, such as help-seeking,
but also less productive behaviors like procrastination
(Howell & Watson, 2007; Roussel, Elliot, & Feltman,
2011). Similarly, performance-approach goals have been
positively associated with productive behaviors such as
effort, persistence, and studying in advance, but also less
productive behaviors like surface processing (Elliot,
McGregor, & Gable, 1999; McGregor & Elliot, 2002).
Given the consistently positive behaviors associated
with mastery-approach goals, one would expect them to
predict positive achievement outcomes more consistently
than they do. One possible explanation is that the
behaviors students report engaging in are idealized (or

1294

behaviors, further calling into question the validity of
self-reported behaviors.

prerequisite, consisted primarily of upperclassmen (3
freshmen, 43 sophomores, 88 juniors, 57 seniors) and had
slightly more psychology majors (106 students) than nonmajors (85 students). Students completed all activities as
part of the course.

The Present Study
To examine whether students’ observed behaviors could
explain the relationship between goals and achievement
outcomes, we analyzed fine-grained behavioral data
collected through online learning software for a college
psychology lecture course. Specifically, we recorded the
frequency with which students downloaded lecture
outlines before each class. We chose this behavior
because outline use was not a direct component of
students’ final grades, meaning a correlation between
outline access and grades would not simply be a product
of the way grades were calculated. Outlines were a
prominent tool for studying, and because a new outline
was posted for each lecture, they served as a measure of
behavior across the entire semester.
We hypothesized that students would view outlines as a
tool for pursuing achievement goals, either as a way to
gain better understanding of the material or to perform
well on the exam. Given that outline use was optional and
did not directly affect grades, we tentatively predicted that
students would more strongly view outlines as a tool for
mastering course material, and that outline access would
be predicted by students’ mastery-approach goals.
Although performance-approach goals are frequently
associated with grades, the instructor of the course in the
current study was particularly focused on students’
conceptual understanding of materials. Since deep
processing
facilitates
conceptual
understanding
(Koedinger, Corbett, & Perfetti, 2012) and only masteryapproach goals have been positively associated with selfreported deep processing, we hypothesized that masteryapproach goals would predict final grades as much as or
more than performance-approach goals (Senko,
Hulleman, & Harackiewicz, 2011). We also predicted that
students’ outline access would positively predict final
grades, and that outline access would mediate the
relationship between goals and grades.

Materials
Our measures of goals, behaviors, and outcomes came
from three sources, respectively: questionnaires
measuring self-reported achievement goals; Blackboard,
an online learning management system through which
students accessed all materials for the course; and final
grades. We discuss the details of each measure below.
Achievement goals questionnaire Achievement goals
were measured using Elliot and Murayama’s (2008)
Achievement Goals Questionnaire-Revised (AGQ-R),
which consists of 12 items to which students respond on a
7-point Likert scale. Three items target each of the four
constructs of mastery approach, mastery avoidance,
performance approach, and performance avoidance (see
Table 1 for examples). All four subscales were found to
be reliable (mastery approach, α = .92, mastery
avoidance, α = .88, performance approach, α = .95, and
performance avoidance, α = .94).
Outline access Students’ access of lecture outlines was
tracked through Blackboard. Outlines contained main
ideas for each lecture, with blanks for students to fill in
during class. The instructor emphasized that outlines were
an optional resource that could provide scaffolding for
taking notes during lectures; however, students’ outline
access had no direct impact on grades. Students were
given outlines on the first day of class to introduce them
to the resource, but after the first day they could only
access outlines through Blackboard. A total of 24 outlines
were posted throughout the course, and each student was
assigned a score that ranged from zero to 24 based on the
number of outlines accessed.
Course grades Final grades were based on performance
on three non-cumulative exams (20 percent each), two
short papers (10 percent each), and activity points
awarded for daily attendance and several homework
assignments throughout the semester (20 percent). Each
exam consisted of 33 multiple-choice questions, with the
majority of questions targeting conceptual knowledge
(i.e., requiring students to understand a theory, concept, or

Methods
Participants
Data were collected from 191 college students (137
women, 54 men) enrolled in a cognitive psychology
course at an urban, public university. The course, which
was required for all psychology majors and had one

Table 1: Example survey questions from the AGQ-R
Avoidance

Definition

Approach

Mastery

My goal is to learn as much as possible.

My aim is to avoid learning less than I possibly could.

Performance

My goal is to perform better than other
students.

My goal is to avoid performing poorly compared to
others.

1295

phenomenon) and applied knowledge (i.e., requiring
students to use knowledge of concepts or theories to
reason about a novel scenario). To assess prior knowledge
a 20-question pretest was administered on the second day
of class. Eight questions focused on knowledge of
research methods while 12 questions focused on cognitive
psychology content and were similar in design to exam
questions, with four questions targeting content from each
of the three exams. Students completed the pretest in class
for activity credit and were not given feedback on their
scores.

performance was strongly correlated with final grade,
r(182) = .23, p < .01. We therefore include pretest scores
in all models to control for the effect of prior knowledge
on grades.
A multivariate regression analysis predicting final
grades with students’ average AGQ-R ratings and holding
pretest scores constant explained 8.2% of the variance as
indexed by the adjusted R2 statistic, F(5,162) = 3.99, p <
.01. Within the model, mastery approach and pretest score
positively predicted final grades (Table 2).
Table 2: AGQ-R ratings predicting final grades

Procedure
Achievement goal
Mastery approach
Mastery avoidance
Performance approach
Performance avoidance
Pretest score
*p < .05

Data were collected over the course of 24 lectures during
the fall semester. The three non-cumulative exams were
spaced evenly throughout the course. The achievement
goal questionnaires were administered immediately
before each exam as a part of a larger motivation and
study strategy survey. Each time, the surveys were posted
to Blackboard. Students were told to print them, complete
them at home after they had finished studying, and turn
them in immediately before the exam. Students received
extra credit for completing the surveys. For each exam,
roughly 90 percent of students turned in a questionnaire.
The goals used in all analyses were averaged across the
three time points, reflecting students’ average level of
endorsement of each goal across the course of the
semester. Forty-two students were missing one of the
three questionnaires; to avoid losing a large portion of
students who could potentially have different goals and
behaviors from those who turned in all three surveys, we
included the 42 students by averaging across the two goal
surveys they completed 1. An additional 11 students were
excluded for missing at least two of the three surveys.
Outlines were generally posted two to three days before
class, and we examined outline access data from the time
each outline was posted through the day of the relevant
lecture.

B
1.55
-.81
.68
-.34
9.46

SE B
.67
.66
.83
.82
3.75

β
.26*
-.14
.15
-.10
.19*

Goals and outline access
We then examined whether students’ achievement goals
predicted their study behaviors, measured by the
frequency with which they accessed lecture outlines
through the day of the relevant lecture. Students accessed
a mean of 15.14 outlines (SD = 8.44) out of the 24 posted,
and access ranged from zero to 24. A multivariate
regression analysis predicting the number of outlines
students accessed with their average AGQ-R ratings and
controlling for pretest explained 7.6% of the variance as
indexed by the adjusted R2 statistic, F(5,162) = 3.76, p <
.01. Within the model, mastery approach was a
significant, positive predictor of outline access (Table 3).
Table 3: AGQ-R ratings predicting outline access
Achievement goal
Mastery approach
Mastery avoidance
Performance approach
Performance avoidance
Pretest score
*p < .05

Results
Analyses focused on the predictive value of students’
responses on the AGQ-R for outline access behaviors
during the semester as well as final grades. We then tested
a mediation model to see whether behaviors explained a
significant part of the relationship between self-reported
goals and performance outcomes.

B
2.75
-1.16
.19
.71
-6.74

SE B
.88
.86
1.10
1.09
4.94

β
.36*
-.15
.03
.12
-.10

Testing the meditation model
Since models using achievement goals to predict outline
access and final grades were significant, we tested a
mediation model to see whether introducing outline
access into the model of goals predicting grades
significantly decreased the predictive value of goals. We
focus our results on mastery approach, as this was the
only achievement goal to predict both grades and outline
access, but we continued to include all four goals and
pretest scores in our model.

Goals, pretest, and final grades
We examined whether students’ achievement goals
predicted their final grades. To determine whether pretest
should be included in our models predicting outcomes
with goals, we first assessed whether pretest scores were
related to final grades. Analyses also showed that pretest
1

Analyses of only the 140 students who completed all three
surveys produced the same general findings and mediation
model reported here.

1296

The addition of outline access frequency resulted in a
final model that explained 15.9% of the variance as
indexed by the adjusted R2 statistic, F(6,161) = 6.26, p <
.01, and it accounted for significantly more variance than
the model using only goals and pretest, F(1,161) = 15.77,
p < .01. In this model the predictive value of pretest score
remained significant, β = .22, p < .01, and outline access
was significant, β = .30, p < .01. The mastery-approach
goal effect was reduced in size and no longer significant,
β = .16, p = .16, suggesting that the direct effect of
mastery-approach goals on final grade was partially
mediated through frequency of outline access (Figure 1).
A Sobel test showed a significant mediation effect of
outline access, z = 2.46, p < .01. As previously reported,
the other conditions of mediation were also met: masteryapproach goals were a significant predictor in outline
access and final grade, holding other goals and pretest
score constant, and outline access was a significant
predictor of final grade while controlling for all goals and
pretest score.

goals should relate to productive learning behaviors and
successful outcomes. Senko, Hulleman, and Harackiewicz
(2011) suggest the reason mastery-approach goals do not
consistently predict achievement may be a misalignment
between idealized learning behaviors and actual testing
measures, such that less ideal behaviors like surface
processing are actually beneficial for the kinds of shallow
assessments many students encounter in academic
contexts. Mastery-approach goals may have been more
important in this sample because the instructor
emphasized deeply understanding the material and
structured exams and final grades to target deep,
conceptual learning. Future work should compare class
objectives, exams and grading structures to see if the
content targeted on exams and the factors weighted for
final grades explain whether mastery-approach or
performance-approach goals are better predictors of
achievement.
An open question concerns how students viewed the
outlines, and what their frequency of outline access
indicates. It could be that the act of downloading outlines
itself (and then, presumably, using them to take notes in
class) directly improves understanding and thus improves
exam performance and final grades. Alternatively, it may
be that outline access is a behavioral indicator of some
other important construct such as organization or the use
of resources. If this were the case, we would not expect
outline access to mediate the relationship between goals
and outcomes, unless that relationship were mediated by
the attitude or learning strategy that was actually being
measured with outline access. It would be informative to
ask students about their beliefs regarding the outlines and
how (or if) they believed they could be useful.
In addition to validating hypotheses previously
supported using self-reported data, this sort of
investigation can provide fruitful information for
instructors. It may be that certain study strategies and
behaviors show stronger relationships to achievement
outcomes than others, suggesting that instructors should
focus their attention on facilitating students’ uses of those
tools. It may also suggest multiple pathways to success,
which could inform instructors of the different kinds of
tools most useful to students based on their goals.

Figure 1: Standardized regression coefficients for the
relationship between mastery-approach goals and final
grade as mediated by outline access. The standardized
regression coefficient between mastery-approach goals
and grades controlling for outline access is in parentheses.
Model holds constant all other goals and pretest score.
*p < .05

Discussion
This work provides a first step in using behavioral data
collected in a classroom setting to explain the relationship
between achievement goals and achievement. Much of
achievement goal theory has been based on relationships
found between goals, behaviors, and achievement
outcomes, but behaviors have been measured primarily
through self-report questionnaires in classroom settings.
Past work has provided a strong theoretical foundation
that now must be validated using observed behavioral
measures. This study is one of the first to show that
behavioral data can mediate the relationship between
achievement goals and outcomes in the classroom, and
future work should continue to explore other behaviors
thought to mediate this relationship. The outline access
data demonstrate the rich opportunities for collecting
behavioral data that online learning management systems
now afford instructors and researchers (see also Bernacki,
Aleven, & Nokes-Malach, 2013).
Unlike much prior work, these results are consistent
with theory-driven predictions that mastery-approach

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Grant SBE00354420
from the National Science Foundation to the Pittsburgh
Science of Learning Center (http://www.learnlab.org).

References
Ames, C., & Archer, J. (1988). Achievement goals in the
classroom: Students’ learning strategies and motivation
processes. Journal of Educational Psychology, 80, 260–
267.
Belenky, D. M., & Nokes-Malach, T. J. (2012).
Motivation and transfer: the role of mastery-approach

1297

goals in preparation for future learning. Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 21, 399-432.
Bernacki, M. L., Nokes-Malach, T. J., & Aleven, V.
(2013). Fine-grained assessment of motivation over
long periods of learning with an intelligent tutoring
system: Methodology, advantages, and preliminary
results. In R. Azevedo and V. Aleven (Eds.),
International handbook of metacognition and learning
technologies. Berlin: Springer.
Durik, A. M., Lovejoy, C. M., & Johnson, S. J. (2009). A
longitudinal study of achievement goals for college in
general: Predicting cumulative GPA and diversity in
course
selection.
Contemporary
Educational
Psychology, 34, 113–119.
Dweck, C. S. (1986). Motivational processes affect
learning. American Psychologist, 41, 1040–1048.
Elliott, E., & Dweck, C. S. (1988). Goals: An approach to
motivation and achievement. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 54, 5-12.
Elliot, A. J., & McGregor, H. A. (2001). A 2 x 2
achievement goal framework. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 80, 501–519.
Elliot, A.J., McGregor, H.A., & Gable, S.L. (1999).
Achievement goals, study strategies, and exam
performance: A mediational analysis. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 91, 549–563.
Elliot, A. J. & Murayama, K. (2008). On the measurement
of achievement goals: Critique, illustration, and
application. Journal
of
Educational
Psychology, 100, 613-628.
Elliott, A. J. (2004). Multimethod approaches in
educational research. International Journal of
Disability, Development & Education, 51, 135–149.
Fulmer, S. M., & Frijters, J. C. (2009). A review of selfreport and alternative approaches in the measurement
of student motivation. Educational Psychology Review,
21, 219-246.
Harackiewicz, J. M., Barron, K. E., Tauer, J. M., & Elliot,
A. J. (2002). Predicting success in college: A
longitudinal study of achievement goals and ability
measures as predictors of interest and performance
from freshman year through graduation. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 94, 562–575.
Harris, A., Yuill, N., & Luckin, R. (2008). The influence
of context-specific and dispositional achievement goals
on children’s paired collaborative interaction. British
Journal of Educational Psychology, 78, 355–374.
San Pedro, M. O. C. Z., Rodrigo, M. M. T., & d Baker, R.
S. (2011). The relationship between carelessness and
affect in a Cognitive Tutor. In Affective Computing and
Intelligent Interaction (pp. 306-315). Springer Berlin
Heidelberg.
Howell, A. J, & Watson, D. C. (2007). Procrastination:
Associations with achievement goal orientation and
learning strategies. Personality and Individual
Differences, 43, 167–178.

Hulleman, C. S., Schrager, S. M., Bodmann, S. M., &
Harackiewicz, J. M. (2010). A meta-analytic review of
achievement goal measures: Different labels for the
same constructs or different constructs with similar
labels? Psychological Bulletin, 136, 422-449.
Koedinger, K. R., Corbett, A. T., & Perfetti, C. (2012).
The
knowledge-learning-instruction
framework:
bridging the science-practice chasm to enhance robust
student learning. Cognitive Science, 36(5), 757–98.
Linnenbrink-Garcia, L., Tyson, D.F., & Patall, E.A.
(2008). When are achievement goal orientations
beneficial for academic achievement? A closer look at
moderating factors. International Review of Social
Psychology, 21, 19–70.
McGregor, H. A., & Elliot, A. J. (2002). Achievement
goals as predictors of achievement-relevant processes
prior to task engagement. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 94, 381–395.
Metcalfe, J., Eich, T. S., & Castel, A. D. (2010).
Metacognition of agency across the lifespan. Cognition,
116, 267–282
Middleton, M. J., & Midgley, C. (1997). Avoiding the
demonstration of lack of ability: An underexplored
aspect of goal theory. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 89, 710-718.
Niiya, Y., Ballantyne, R., North, M. S., & Crocker, J.
(2008). Gender, contingencies of self-worth, and
achievement goals as predictors of academic cheating
in a controlled laboratory setting. Basic and Applied
Social Psychology, 30, 76–83.
Richey, J. E., & Nokes-Malach, T. J. (2013). How much
is too much? Learning and motivation effects of adding
instructional explanations to worked examples.
Learning and Instruction, 25, 104-124.
Roussel, P., Elliot, A. J., & Feltman, R. (2011). The
influence of achievement goals and social goals on
help-seeking from peers in an academic context.
Learning and Instruction, 21, 394-402.
Sage, L., & Kavussanu, M. (2007). The effects of goal
involvement on moral behavior in an experimentally
manipulated competitive setting. Journal of Sport and
Exercise Psychology, 29, 190–207.
Schoor, C., & Bannert, M. (2011). Motivation in a
computer-supported collaborative learning scenario and
its impact on learning activities and knowledge
acquisition. Learning and Instruction, 21(4), 560-573.
Senko, C., Hulleman, C. S., & Harackiewicz, J. M.
(2011). Achievement goal theory at the crossroads: Old
controversies,
current
challenges,
and
new
directions. Educational Psychologist, 46, 26-47.
Sins, P. H. M., van Joolingen, W. R., Savelsbergh, E. R.,
& van Hout-Wolters, B. (2008). Motivation and
performance within a collaborative computer-based
modeling task: relations between students’ achievement
goal orientation, self-efficacy, cognitive processing, and
achievement. Contemporary Educational Psychology,
33, 58–77.

1298

