UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Adults' Eye Tracking Search Profiles and Analogy Difficulty

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4040s062

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Glady, Yannick
French, Bob
Thibaut, Jean-Pierre

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Adults' Eye Tracking Search Profiles and Analogy Difficulty
Yannick Glady, Robert French, & Jean-Pierre Thibaut
{yannick.glady, jean-pierre.thibaut, robert.french}@u-bourgogne.fr
LEAD-CNRS, UMR 5022, University of Burgundy, Pôle AAFE – Esplanade Erasme
21065 DIJON. FRANCE

which elements should be put into correspondence (e.g.,
Falkenhaimer, Forbus, & Gentner, 1989). In A:B::C:D
paradigm, one would systematically compare the two pairs
and would tend to align A with C and look for a D (or Ds) to
be aligned with B.
By contrast, “projection-first” models (e.g., LISA,
Hummel & Holyoak, 1997) begin by projecting information
from the base pair (i.e., the A:B pair in the A:B::C:D
paradigm) and, then, try to find matches corresponding to
them in the target pair (i.e., the C:Ds). They predict more
attention to the A:B pair and more A-B transitions first and,
later in the trial, more attention to C and Target and more
CTarget transitions, whereas alignment-first would be more
consistent with a larger number of AC and BD transitions
from the start of the trial.
Other resolution strategies which have features in
common with the projection-first, alignment-first distinction
have been described, such as the constructive matching
versus eliminative matching distinction (Bethell-Fox,
Lohman & Snow, 1984; Thibaut, 1991). In the constructive
matching strategy, participants concentrate on the first part
of the problem before studying the second part or the
solution set, which is analogous to the projection-first. In the
eliminative strategy, the source and the target are compared
until the best option is selected in the solution set. This
strategy makes no strong prediction on the time course of a
trial since participants successive elimination could be done
by projections or alignments. In any case, all these strategies
rely on multiple, successive comparisons which must be
coordinated.
Though valuable to decide between these different
conceptions of information processing while reasoning,
there are only a small number of eye tracking studies
involving analogy-making (e.g., Bethell-Fox, 1982; Gordon
& Moser, 2007; Thibaut et al., 2011). Gordon and Moser
(2007) used scene analogies from Richland, Morrison and
Holyoak (2006 ; Markman & Gentner, 1994) in which
participants had to point which item in a scene had the same
role as an item pointed to by the experimenter in the other
scene (e.g. pointing to a boy chasing a girl, if the
experimenter pointed to a dog chasing a cat). They found
that adults initially focused on the “actor-patient” pair in the
source image (i.e., a dog chasing a cat, which is analogous
to our A and B terms) and then looked for the solution in the
target image (a second actor-patient pair, e.g., a girl chasing
a boy, analogous to our C and D terms). This is consistent
with the constructive view or the projection-first
conceptions (study A:B then C:D).

Abstract
We study analogical reasoning in adults using an eye tracking
methodology. In previous experiments, we studied the time
course of analogy-making, looking at proportion of looking
times and transitions. The main purpose of the present
experiment is to test whether adults would adapt their search
strategies to the difficulty of the analogical problems (Easy
vs. Difficult problems). Difficult problems might have an
impact on participants' visual strategies used by participants
(Bethell-Fox et al., 1984) Looking-time durations and the
number of key item-to-item transitions confirmed differences
between the two conditions. We discuss the results in terms of
conceptions of analogical reasoning.
Keywords: Analogical reasoning; eye tracking; strategies

Introduction
Analogical reasoning is a central feature of human cognition
(Gentner & Holyoak, 1997; Holyoak, 2012). It involves the
transfer of relations from a source domain to a target domain
which is more or less distant. Analogical reasoning has been
extensively studied from adult experimental, developmental
and modeling perspectives and several general models have
been proposed in order to characterize this form of
reasoning in both children and adults (see French 2002;
Gentner & Forbus, 2011, Holyoak, 2012, for reviews).
In the present paper, we will concentrate on the temporal
organization of the search for a solution in adults, using eye
tracking data. We will compare “Easy” trials with
“Difficult” trials and study how participants adapt
themselves to the constraint of these two types of problems.
In eye tracking studies, it has been shown that the amount of
attention paid to a particular item and the gaze-fixation are
highly correlated (Deubel & Schneider, 1996; He & Kowler,
1992). There is a correlation between the fixation time
associated with a given item and its informativeness
(Nodine, Carmody, & Kundel, 1978). All of this argues in
favor of using eye tracking technology to study analogymaking strategies.
Existing models of analogy make different predictions
regarding how and when participants focus on and compare
stimuli. Gentner and Forbus (2011) distinguish “align-first”
models from “projection-first” models. Markman and
Gentner (1993) propose an “alignment-first” conception in
which one first aligns the stimuli that compose the base and
the target domains. From the comparisons of local elements,
of local and global structures from both sides, one derives

535

Bethell-Fox et al. (1984) used an A:B::C:D task, with
easy and difficult geometrical analogies which had the same
topography as our analogies (see below). They found that
participants with less "fluid intelligence" relied more on the
elimination of implausible answers, i.e. had more transitions
within pictures in the solution set. Interestingly, difficult
items elicited more saccades back to A and B, i.e., more
time spent on the A:B pair of the problem before looking to
alternatives. Participants also looked at the alternatives more
often than in simple trials. The authors also found that when
participants first looked at the correct answer, they later
tended to look at a lower number of alternatives than when
it was an incorrect answer that was first looked at. This is a
clue of a constructive approach. If participants looked less at
other options when their first look was for the correct
answer, this means that they had already constructed a
solution for the A:B pair which allowed them to recognize
that the correct solution was correct.
Thibaut et al. (2011) conducted a developmental study
with A:B::C:D semantic analogies and found key
differences between adults and children in the temporal
organization of their respective search profiles. First, adults
focused on the A:B pair at the beginning of the trial, paying
less or no attention to C and to stimuli in the solution set.
Later they focused on C and the Target, which they
compared with the semantically related distractor. At the
end of the trial, the Target was their sole focus of attention.
By contrast, children organized their search around C which
they actively focused on during the entire trial. At the very
beginning of the trial they paid more attention to C and B.
They began looking at the Target and the semantic distractor
earlier than in the adults’ case. Thus, the main differences
between children and adults were that children focused on C
and B at the beginning of a trial, compared to A and B for
adults. Also, the Target and the semantic distractor were
focused on earlier by children than by adults. Results
showed that children organized their search around C and
paid less attention to A and B when necessary. Overall,
adults behaved in a projection-first way (or constructive)
whereas children followed neither a projection-first (or
constructive) strategy nor an alignment-first strategy. They
seemed to behave as if they organized their search around C.
Overall the available data suggest that adults are using the
projection-first (constructive) strategy, i.e., more fixations
at the actor-patient pair in the source image in scene
analogies (Gordon & Moser, 2007), first fixations at the A:B
pair, and AB transitions (Thibaut et al., 2011) and more
fixations towards the A:B pair in difficult rather than in easy
problems, or fewer saccades towards incorrect alternatives
when the first saccade was towards the correct answer
(Bethell-Fox et al., 1984).

analogies with semantically related distractors and
manipulate the difficulty of the problem.
Bethell-Fox et al. (1984) used perceptual analogies which
were defined around a finite set of perceptual dimensions
which were easy to identify. Their difficult trials were
composed around more dimensions than easy trials.
Distractors were more similar to the solution (e.g., one
transformation) than in easy trials (e.g., two
transformations). Hence, difficulty had to do with perceptual
complexity in their study. As mentioned above, their results
seem to indicate that their particpiants behaved according to
the projection-first (constructive) strategy, starting with A-B
rather than according to an alignment-first strategy (see
Gentner & Forbus, 2011).
Here, we manipulate another type of difficulty in order to
test its consequences on the strategy used by participants.
Easy trials were trials in which the relation between A and
B, and C and T was more obvious, according to a control
group, than in difficult trials. An example of Easy trial is
cow:milk::hen:? in which the solution, “egg”, is
straightforward. An example of difficult trials is
violence:activity::gloom:? in which the relation between
violence and activity (i.e., violence is a negative type of
activity) is not obvious, and the solution (“mood”) is
difficult to find. Note that in Thibaut et al. (2011), adults
only saw easy problems that could also be solved by 6-yearolds, but difficult trials are needed. Indeed, in terms of the
search for a solution, difficulty is related to the semantic
space that has to be explored. The general idea is that
Difficult trials are defined around a much broader, more
open space than Easy trials (see Thibaut et al. 2010b, for a
discussion of the notion of semantic space and its role in
analogies). Difficult trials should also elicit lower scores,
more distractor errors, and longer reaction times than Easy
trials.
Several hypotheses can be made regarding the time course
of the trials in the different difficulty cases. First, difficult
problems might elicit more alignments, either AC transitions
or BT transitions, than Easy problems because participants
would look more carefully at which stimuli are equivalent in
the two pairs, because this correspondence would be more
difficult to establish.
Second, it might also be the case that fixations towards A
and B or AB transitions might be less dominant in the
beginning of the trial because less obvious relations would
elicit a more systematic exploration of the target pair and the
solution set in order to find new solutions.
Third, Rattermann and Gentner (1998) proposed that
object matches are processed before relational matches,
even in the adult case. Gordon and Moser (2007) found no
evidence of these object matches primacy in their eye
tracking data: relational matches appeared before object
matches (i.e., matches involving similar objects in both
scenes such as two cats. By definition, these object matches
were not relational matches). In our study, the analogous
matches to the object matches used by Gordon and Moser
were the semantic distractors. The Rattermann and

Goals and Rationale
The objective of the present experiment was to test whether
adults’ strategies would be influenced by the difficulty of
the analogy problems. We thus will use A:B::C:D semantic

536

Gentner’s (1998) view would predict that in Difficult trials,
participants would have higher rates of transitions involving
distractors (e.g., CSemantic distractors [CSemDis]
transitions) at the beginning of the trial because the
relational matches would not be straightforward. In general,
this is because Difficult trials are less obvious and
participants are considering more options in a more open
semantic space, or first consider obvious associations such
as C with distractors.
A fourth prediction is that participants might have to rerepresent the A:B pair after seeing the solution set in
Difficult trials more than in the Easy trials. This view would
be compatible with higher rates of fixation on A and B, and
of AB saccades in Difficult trials at the end of the trials than
in Easy trials. In sum, Difficult trials might generate
differences in the temporal organization of the search.

Procedure
Test sessions took place in an experimental room at the
University of Burgundy. Each participant was tested
individually.
After the eye tracker was calibrated, participants were
tested in the analogical reasoning task. Participants were
shown the eight words and were given the following
instructions during the first training trial: “Here are two
words [pointing to A and B]. They go together well. Can
you see why these two [A and B] go together?” Once the
participant had given a relation linking A and B, the
experimenter confirmed it (if it was correct) or corrected it
(in case of an irrelevant relation for the solution of the
problem) and continued: “OK! Do you see this one
[pointing to C]? What you have to do is to find in these five
words [pointing to the solution set] the one that goes with
this one [C] in the same way as this one [B] goes with this
one [A]. So, if these two [A and B] go together because
[giving the relation between A and B], which one goes with
this one [C] in the same way?” When participants had given
an answer, the experimenter asked them to justify their
answer and gave a feedback. In case of an error and/or bad
justification, the trial was explained in terms of the relations
linking A and B on one side, and C and T on the other.
Instruction and feedback were not given during test trials.
Eye tracking data were recorded when the presentation of
the problem started and stopped when an answer was given.

Methods
Participants
Participants were 20 students at the University of Burgundy
(M=23.8 years; SD=4.2; from 17 to 35 years). They
participated voluntarily and ignored the experiment
rationale.

Materials
The task consisted in 22 trials (2 training trials and 20 test
trials) of a verbal A:B::C:D task. The test trials were ten
Difficult trials and ten Easy trials. The two training trials
were displayed before the 20 test trials. The order of
presentation of the test trials was random.
Each trial was composed of eight words written in black
ink on a white background, corresponding to the A, B, and
C terms of the analogical problems, and five potential
solutions. The solution set was composed of the Target (T),
two related-to-C distractors (SemDis), and two unrelated
distractors (UnDis). Each word was presented in a black
frame (220x220 pixels). The A, B and C terms were
presented in a row at the top of the screen along with an
empty black frame (for the picked up stimulus), and the 5
words composing the solution set were displayed in a row at
the bottom of the screen (See Figure 1).
The trials difficulty was assessed by 12 university
students. They were asked to solve the different problems
and to evaluate the difficulty of the problem on a 1-7 scale.
Difficult trials were rated significantly higher (M=3.9;
SD=.4; range of 3.5 to 4.6) than Easy trials (M=1.2; SD=.1;
from 1.1 to 1.3; two-sample related t-test: t(22)=23.2;
p<.001; η²p=.961).
The task was presented on a Tobii T120 eye tracker
(resolution: 1024x768) with an E-Prime (version 2.8.0.22)
experiment embedded in a Tobii Studio (version 2.1.12)
procedure to record participants’ eye movements. Data were
analyzed using a Statistica 8 software.

Figure 1: Example of the display used in the experiment.

Results
Before we come to the analysis of the time course of
fixations towards objects and saccades (transitions) between
object, we must first check that Difficult trials were more
difficult than Easy trials. Data show that it was the case.
Indeed, the mean rate of correct answers was significantly
lower in Difficult than in Easy problems (t(19)=4.9; p<.001;
η²p=.558)); all errors were semantic distractor choices.
Difficult trials were also significantly slower than Easy trials
(t(19)=9.92; p<.001; η²p=.838).

537

except UnDis and only marginally significantly from B,
whereas C and Target, were significantly higher than others
and did not differ one from the other. The comparison
between Easy and Difficult trials revealed more A fixations
in the Difficult trials.
In Slice 3, in both Easy and Difficult problems, not
surprisingly, the proportion of looking times was higher for
T than any other stimuli. In Difficult problems, the UnDis
were significantly less looked at than B and C. The
comparison between Difficult and Easy trials revealed lower
proportions of gazes at T in Difficult trials than in Easy
trials, and more C in Difficult than in Easy trials. This
makes sense: in Easy trials, participants do not need to
check the other options and look confidently at the solution
whereas in Difficult trials, checking both T and C is
important to be sure that one has the correct solution.

Eye Movement Analysis
We rejected trials in which more than 50% of the gaze time
was not recorded. With this criterion, two trials were
discarded from the data set. In the analyses, we used
percentage of total looking times and of total number of
saccades for comparisons.
In order to compare Easy and Difficult trials, we analyze
the proportion of fixations and of transitions and focused on
the distribution of key fixations and saccades in the trial
(i.e., for example, fixations towards A or B fixations, or AB
saccades, hereafter “transitions”) which might differ in the
two types of trial. To test our hypotheses, we divided all
trials in three equal slices (i.e., 1/3 of the total length of the
trial), in order to capture differences in the temporal
dynamics of Easy and Difficult trials.
Fixations Among others we will be looking for the time
course of fixations towards A and B, especially in the first
slice. We will also focus on the difference between Difficult
and Easy trials in each slice.
A three-way repeated measure ANOVA, with Type of
Stimulus (A, B, C, T, SemDis, UnDis), Condition (Easy,
Difficult) and Slice (first, middle, and last) as within-subject
factors, was used to assess the temporal dynamics of rates of
fixations on the distractors and the source domain (Figure
2).
The most important result was the significant interaction
between the three factors (F(8,152)=25.3; p<.001; η²p=.571).
Tukey HSD on individual slices revealed the following
pattern. Slice 1 had the same pattern for Difficult and Easy
trials, that is higher rates of B than all the other stimulus
types, of A than all the others, except B, of C than any item
in the solution set. Thus, there were more gazes at the A:B
pair, followed by C gazes. Comparison between Difficult
and Easy trials showed, for Easy trials, significantly higher
proportions of A, B fixations, and lower proportions of C
and SemDis fixations and marginally significantly lower
fixations for Target. This suggests that Difficult trials were
recognized quite early as “not obvious” which led
participants to start to explore the solution set earlier than in
the Easy trial case, which is consistent with our second
hypothesis. The high proportions of A and B fixations in
both conditions confirms previous data showing that
participants first analyze the A:B pair even though this is
less pronounced in the Difficult condition.

Figure 2: Mean percentage of fixation of each Type of
Stimulus in first middle and last slice in Easy and Difficult
trials (error bars represent SEM).
Transitions We also analyzed the transitions (saccades)
between stimuli. Transitions tell us which stimuli are
compared at a given moment of time. We focused on a
subset of 8 transitions which have meaning (see Thibaut et
al. 2011; Thibaut & French, submitted). The subset was
composed of AB, CT(arget), AC, BT, BC, and also
CSemDis, CUnDis, and TSemDis. The first four transitions
are crucial to determining whether participants follow
projection-first, constructive strategies (AB then CTarget),
or alignment-first strategies (AC and BT) or a combination
of both, depending on the moment of the trial. The last three
transitions refer to comparisons between C and the solution
set and between the two items which are semantically
related to C (See Thibaut et al. 2011; Thibaut & French,
submitted, for discussion of these transitions). We ran a
three-way repeated-measure ANOVA with Transitions (AB,
CT, AC, BT, BC, CSemDis, CUnDis, TSemDis), Slice
(first, middle, last), and Condition (Easy, Difficult) as
within-subject factors. The most important result was the
significant interaction between these three factors, Type of
Transition, Condition and Slice, F(14,266)=13.13; p<.0001;
η²p=.409 (see Figure 3)
A posteriori comparisons (Tukey HSD) revealed that, in
the first slice, there were higher rates of AB and BC

For Slice 2, in Difficult problems, the only significant
difference was between C and the unrelated distractors.
Thus, the fixations were rather evenly distributed in the
Difficult trials which suggests that participants
systematically explored the entire set of stimuli before
coming up with a solution. In Easy problems, the pattern
was less even. A was significantly lower than all the others

538

transitions than all the other transition types, and of AB than
BC transitions for both Easy and Difficult problems. The
only significant difference between Easy and Difficult trials
was that there were higher rates of AB transitions in the
Easy problems. In the second slice, in the Difficult trials,
there were significantly higher rates of AB transitions than
other transitions types, of BC than AC, BT and CUnDis. In
the Easy trials, there were higher rates of AB than CT, AC,
BT and TSemDis transitions, of BC than all the other types
and of CSemDis than CT, AC, BT, and TSemDis, and of
CUnDis than AC and BT. The comparison between
Difficult and Easy problems revealed a significantly higher
percentage of AB transitions in Difficult problems and
significantly higher percentages of BC and CSemDis
transitions in the Easy problems.

Discussion
By comparison with previous eye tracking studies, our paper
extends them using analogies involving words rather than
images. Bethell-Fox et al. (1984) used analogies defined
around perceptual dimensions, whereas both Gordon and
Moser (2007) and Thibaut et al. (2011) used pictures of
objects and scenes.
The first purpose was to assess whether and under which
circumstances participants tended to use project-first or
align-first strategies (see introduction). Data confirmed the
studies described above showing that there were higher rates
of AB and CT saccades in participants' patterns of visual
search than of AC and BT saccades. This confirms that,
overall, participants mostly infer the relation between the
pictures in the A:B pair (AB saccades) and apply it to the Csolution set (CT saccades). Results showed that both Easy
and Difficult problems did not elicit AC or BT comparisons,
i.e. alignments. A priori, it could have been argued that
Difficult trials would require more alignments than Easy
problems (Markman & Gentner, 1993). As will be seen in
the next paragraph, Difficult and Easy trials differed in other
ways.
The second purpose was to assess the impact of trial
difficulty on the time course of the search for a solution. Our
hypothesis was that adults would attend more to distractors,
in Difficult trials, because the relation between A and B
would not give an immediate obvious solution. This would
lead participants to check the other part of the problem in
order to find possible relations that would be applied to the
AB pair. Hence, participants might have to re-represent the
source domain more often later in the trial in Difficult than
in Easy trials. Overall this hypothesis was confirmed by the
data. In Difficult trials, in the first slice, participants
evaluate a large set of possible solutions and are less
focused on the source pair. Their orientation toward the
solution space during the first slice is confirmed by their
higher rate of fixation on T, SemDis, and UnDis, by
comparison with Easy trials. In the second slice, participants
made more AB saccades, which suggests that they made
more returns to the source domain than in the Easy trials
(see Bethell-Fox et al., 1984 for similar results). Also, they
spent more or less the same time on all the stimuli for
Difficult trials which was not the case in Easy trials in
which there were more positive or negative peaks. This even
distribution is the indication that the solution was not
obvious. Maybe participants were trying various hypotheses
or had no real hypothesis, or tried to re-represent the relation
between A and B after the test of their first hypothesis at the
light of what was found in the solution set. However, in
Bethell-Fox et al. terms (1984), this is consistent with the
idea that at this stage no response had been eliminated, even
the non semantically related distractors (UnDis). This was
confirmed in the third slice. Interestingly, the lower
proportion of T fixations and the higher proportion of
fixations at C in Difficult trials make sense since checking
both T and C is important to be sure that T is the correct
solution, which is not the case in Easy trials.

Figure 3: Mean percentage of each type of saccade in each
slice in Easy and Difficult trials (error bars represent SEM).
In the third slice, in Difficult trials, there were higher
rates of AB than all the other types except TSemDis, of
TSemDis than AC, BT, CSemDis and CUnDis, of BC than
AC and of CSemDis than AC. In Easy trials, there were
higher percentages of TSemDis than any other types, of AB
than AC, BC, CSemDis and CUnDis, and lower rates of AC
than CT, BC and BT. Comparing Difficult and Easy trials
revealed significantly higher rates of AB and CSemDis
transitions in the Difficult trials. Most likely participants
tried to re-represent the relation between A and B after
looking at the solution set because they did not find the
solution at first glance.
To summarize, results showed that gazes at A and B and
AB transitions dominated in both types of trials at the
beginning of the trials. Progressively, participants studied
the solution set together with C. There were higher
percentages of AB transitions in the first slice of the Easy
than in the Difficult trials. The reverse pattern was true in
the second and third slices. This suggests that more
comparisons and redescriptions were necessary in the
Difficult case. Importantly there were virtually no AC
transitions in the three slices. The same was true for BT
transitions except in the third slices in which there were
more of them than AC and CSemDis transitions.

539

Third, we wanted to study the role of Distractors in both
conditions. Rattermann and Gentner (1998) proposed that
object matches are processed before relational matches,
even in the adult case. Gordon and Moser (2007) found no
evidence of this object matches primacy in their eye
tracking data. They showed that relational matches appeared
before object matches. Our data provide no conclusive
evidence in one direction or the other. Looking times and
transitions involving the Target and the SemDis were
equivalent in the first slice. Participants looked at both
possibilities in the beginning of the trial, particularly in the
Difficult condition.
A fourth prediction was that participants might have to rerepresent the A:B pair after seeing the solution set in
Difficult trials more than in the Easy trials. This is
compatible with the larger fixation percentages on A and B,
and the larger rate of AB saccades in Difficult trials than in
Easy trials at the end of the trials. This is also consistent
with the idea that participants were still trying to test
interpretations of the A:B pair at the end of the trial. To
what extent this is a true re-representation is an open
question. It might also be, at the end of the continuum that
participants came back to A:B to check whether the
interpretation they chose before was correct.
In conclusion, the trials difficulty influenced performance
and the time course of the trial, even though the easy and the
difficult shared the same global shape. More generally, the
time course of our verbal analogies was similar to previous
results. Difficult trials generated more explorations of the
distractors and of the A:B pair.

Glady, Y., French, R. M., and Thibaut, J. P. (2013). Visual
strategies in analogical reasoning development: A new
method for classifying scanpaths. Proceedings of the
Thirty-fifth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society, 23982403.
Glady, Y., Thibaut, J. P., and French, R. M. (2012).
Explaining children’s failure in analogy making tasks: A
problem of focus of attention? Proceedings of the Thirtyfourth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society, 384-389.
Gordon, P. C., & Moser, S. (2007). Insight into analogies:
Evidence from eye movements. Visual Cognition, 15(1),
20–35.
Goswami, U. & Brown, A.L. (1990). Higher-order structure
and relational reasoning: Contrasting analogical and
thematic relations. Cognition, 36, 207-226.
He, P., & Kowler, E. (1992). The role of saccades in the
perception of texture patterns. Vision Research, 32(11),
2151–2163.
Holyoak, K. J. (2012). Analogy and relational reasoning. In
K. J. Holyoak & R. G. Morrison (Eds.), The Oxford
handbook of thinking and reasoning. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: A theory of analogical access
and mapping. Psychological Review, 104(3), 427.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993). Structural
alignment during similarity comparisons. Cognitive
Psychology, 25(4), 431-467.
Nodine, C. E., Carmody, D. P., & Kundel, H. L. (1978).
Searching for Nina. In J. Senders, D. F. Fisher, & R.
Monty (Eds.), Eye movements and the higher
psychological functions. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rattermann, M. J., & Gentner, D. (1998). More evidence for
a relational shift in the development of analogy:
Children's performance on a causal-mapping task.
Cognitive Development, 13(4), 453-478.
Richland, L. E., Morrison, R. G., & Holyoak, K. J. (2006).
Children’s development of analogical reasoning: Insights
from scene analogy problems. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 94(3), 249-273.
Thibaut, J.-P. (1991). Récurrence et variation des attributs
dans la formation de concepts. Doctoral dissertation,
University of Liège, Liège.
Thibaut, J.-P., French, R. M., Missault, A., Gérard, Y., &
Glady, Y. (2011). In the eyes of the beholder: What eyetracking reveals about analogy-making strategies in
children and adults. Proceedings of the Thirty-third
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
453–458).
Thibaut, J. P., French, R., & Vezneva, M. (2010). Cognitive
load and semantic analogies: Searching semantic space.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 17(4), 569-574.

Acknowledgements
This research has been supported by a Fondation Fyssen
grant awarded to the first author, a French ANR Grant 10BLAN-1908-01, ANAFONEX to the third author, a joint
ANR-ESRC grant 10-056 GETPIMA to the second author,
and a grant from the Conseil Regional de Bourgogne to the
first and the third authors.

References
Bethell-Fox, C. E., Lohman, D. F., & Snow, R. E. (1984).
Adaptive reasoning: Componential and eye movement
analysis of geometric analogy performance. Intelligence,
8, 205-238.
Deubel, H., & Schneider, W. (1996). Saccade target
selection and object recognition: Evidence for a common
attentional mechanism. Vision Research, 36, 1827–1837.
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1989). The
structure-mapping engine: Algorithm and examples.
Artificial Intelligence, 41(1), 1-63.
Gentner, D., & Smith, L. (2012). Analogical reasoning.
Encyclopedia of human behavior (2nd ed., Vol. 1).
Elsevier Inc.
Gentner, D., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Reasoning and
learning
by
analogy:
Introduction.
American
Psychologist, 52(1), 32.

540

