UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Advanced Learning Chinese Characters Strategy Based on the Characteristics of Component
and Character Frequency

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/30f8m7s7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Wang, Chung-Ching
Wei, Ming-Liang
Chang, Yu-Lin
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Advanced Learning Chinese Characters Method Based on the Characteristics of
Component and Character Frequency
Chung-Ching Wang (stanleyccwang1987@gmail.com), Ming-Liang Wei(N26011623@mail.ncku.edu.tw)
Department of Electrical Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan

Yu-Lin Chang (gtyulin@gmail.com), Hsueh-Chih Chen(chcjyh@ntnu.edu.tw)
Department of Educational Psychology and Counselling, National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, Taiwan

Yi-Ling Chung (lydia193@gmail.com), Jon-Fan Hu(jfhu@mail.ncku.edu.tw)
Department of Psychology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan
Abstract
Chinese has been recognized as one of most major languages
in the world, and it is evident that more and more people are interested in understanding or using Chinese. Thus, developing
an efficient approach for learning Chinese characters is considered as an important issue. Certain previous studies have
suggested various methods to learning Chinese characters for
the purpose of showing students how to read Chinese characters. In Chinese, the components can offer learners phonological and morphological meanings similar to the prefixes and
suffixes in English, and character frequency provides learners
a character list which can be widely used in daily life. However, very few studies have considered integrating the characteristics of component and character frequency. In this study,
we have developed an effective and systematic approach for
learning Chinese characters based on both components and
character frequency. The purpose of the study is to propose
a traditional Chinese character learning metric and to present
a method for learning only a few components and then the resulting reading of more high frequency characters made up of
these components. Combining components and character frequency advantages, it can present an effective, systematic and
rapid mechanism for learning traditional Chinese characters.
Keywords: Learning Chinese; Character frequency; Components.

Background
Chinese is a popular and widely used language in the world,
and it is quite difficult and complicated to read and write Chinese characters. In the field of Chinese character recognition research, previous studies have actively involved Chinese
character encoding strategies(Hayes, 1988), and character
recognition strategies, such as meaning recognition(Everson,
1998), orthographic effect(Lin, 2000), and the reading
process(Ke, 1998). These studies have contributed many approaches to improve Chinese character recognition. Also,
when learning Chinese characters, one can assume that characters that correctly match phonetic and orthographic patterns are easier to absorb(Ellis & Beaton, 1993). Moreover,
numerous studies have offered well developed strategies for
learning Chinese characters by using radicals or components.
These studies have briefly indicated that the internal component structure of a Chinese character helps learners to clearly
remember that character(Taft & Chung, 1999). Since components are the unit of characters and because they can consist
of many distinct characters, even the characteristics of a component can provide its meaning, phonological and morphological, because characters have the meaning of their internal

components. Consequently, learners are able to readily and
rapidly recognize and write characters by using components.
For example, 木(pin-yin: mu4, meaning: tree) is a component, and two 木(tree) can compose 林(pin-yin: lin2, meaning: wood) and three 木(tree) can constitute 森(pin-yin: sen1,
meaning: forest). Obviously, we are able to readily figure out
their meanings due to such processes. Hence, most cognitive strategies frequently use components to teach students
of Chinese how to read characters(Shen, 2004). In addition,
many studies have extensively exploited strategies related to
character frequency because humans are sensitive to the frequencies of events in their daily life and remember these
things correctly (Ellis, 2002). Therefore, character frequency
can help learners memorize characters correctly and can also
contribute to retention. However, only using this strategy
to learn Chinese is not suitable. Most Chinese characters
characterized by high frequency have intricate construction,
such as 謝 謝(meaning: thank you) and 對 不 起(meaning:
sorry). Beside, frequency is also an important factor with
respect to education. Previous studies have the impact of
high frequency characters on learning Chinese characters for
beginners(Wang, Hung, Chang, & Chen, 2008), and found the
learners could learn approximately 700 high frequency characters with ease. Therefore, the present study presumes that
most learners are able to absorb high frequency characters effectively.
A recent study used character network construction
to establish an efficient strategy for learning Chinese
characters(Yan, Fan, Di, Havlin, & Wu, 2013). This strategy exploits the network of Chinese characters in a hierarchical structure and the weight of the network nodes to develop
a Chinese character metric called distributed node weight
(DNW). However, the character network of the DNW strategy merely considers associations between characters and
character frequency. Actually, a component can be made
up of many distinctive characters, but most of these are not
high frequency characters. Reviewing the DNW strategy, it
is suggested that characters having high frequency that are
also composed of many components that constitute high frequency characters should be learned first.
In this study, we have tightly integrated the component and
character frequency characteristics in order to develop an ap-

3067

proach for creating a character order for learning traditional
Chinese. Different from the above studies, the present approach has effectively exploited the components that compose high frequency characters and the characters having high
frequency and high frequency components in order to construct a metric for generating an optimal Chinese character
learning order. The proposed approach indicates that if characters are ordered based on the metric, learners will be able
to learn simple construction and more significant characters
first. As a result, the approach is expected to provide an effective and systematic order for learning Chinese characters.
That is, by simply learning a few components, students of
Chinese can read more characters with high frequency. The
present study has been designed to create a Chinese character
learning order designed to enable learners to read character
expeditiously and systematically.

Method
Material. In this study, our approach was constructed based
on the data components and character frequency data for the
collected Chinese characters. We retrieved character data for
the format of character pairs and their components to generate
component data from Beijing Normal University(Yan et al.,
2013), and character frequency from the combined character
frequency list of both classical and modern Chinese(Jun Da,
2005).
Component Data. Components are parts that comprise
characters and are associated with Chinese character
acquisition(Shen & Ke, 2007). They have not only their own
definitions, but also their own unique pronunciation and orthography. For the purpose of this study, 3,910 traditional
Chinese characters and 310 traditional Chinese components
were retrieved. By mapping these characters into their components, we are capable of obtaining information about the
associations between characters and components.
Character Frequency Data. Character frequency significantly affects the ability to read and identify characters because learners are sensitive to the frequencies of characters
seen on a daily basis (Ellis, 2002). We gathered the frequencies of 3,910 characters from the combined character frequency list of classical and modern Chinese(Jun Da, 2005).
From this list, we were able to receive information regarding
token frequencies of characters and character frequency.
Metric. The metric is a simple construction considering
character components and characters with token frequencies.
The method for this metric is to pick components that can
compose many characters and to calculate the scores of these
components. Furthermore, component scores are regularly
used by rigorously selecting characters providing high token
frequencies and high component scores. Use of this metric can generate an effective learning character order, and
it can help beginners to study characters possessing components with high token frequencies first. The procedure for
the approach is calculating the Component Score(COS) and

then computing the Character Score(CHS), accordingly obtaining the list of Chinese characters as sorted by Character
Score(CHS) from high to low frequency.
Component Score. We developed a metric (eq.1) to calculate the Component Score(COS). Here i represents the component, j represents the character, m represents the largest
number of components, which is decomposed by the most
complicated character j, and having component i as part of its
components, and the largest number is 9. k ranges from 0 (a
character consists of a unique component and includes component i) to m(a character consists of m different components
and includes component i), f j represents the token frequency
of character j which is at k level. The symbol n represents that
all characters at level k consist of n components. An example
of a character 非 (pin-yin: fei1, meaning: not) is given in Table 1. At level 1, one character 非, one component and then
f j is 214873, n is 1, k is 0, so the level 1 score is 5.33. At
level 2, with nine characters and ten components, ∑ log( f j ) is
32.745, n is 10, k is 1, so the level 2 score is 1.64. At level
3, with 2 characters and 5 components, ∑ log( f j ) is 9.056, n
is 5, k is 2, so the level 3 score is 0.264. At level 4, with 2
characters and 5 components, ∑ log( f j ) is 5.185, n is 5, k is
3, so the level 4 score is 0.13. The total character score is
7.364. The purpose of the COS is to pick component i which
can comprise high token frequencies of characters with a few
components, thus lowering n and leading to a higher score.
Moreover, the aim of parameter 2 is to decrease scores that
are at a higher level, in that characters at higher levels represent very intricate structures. In this manner, a component
with a higher score means that it can consist of high token
frequencies and characters with a simple structure and few
components.
m

COS(i) =

∑ log( f j )
× 2−k
n
k=0

∑

(1)

Character Score. The Character Score(CHS) metric (eq.2)
contains the token frequency of character j, COS of components which constitute character j and the number of components. Here, u represents the number of components which
comprise character j, and f j represents the token frequency
of character j.
CHS( j) = f j ×

∑ COS(i)
u

(2)

The purpose of the Character Score (CHS) is to pick a character with high token frequency which is composed of components with a high COS score. By calculating the character
score (CHS), we are able to clearly determine which characters have high token frequencies and include components
with a structure consisting of many characters that also have
high token frequencies and simple construction. Therefore,
these two metrics, COS and CHS, generate a valid, comprehensive and rapid method for learning Chinese characters.

3068

Table 1: Characters are composed of 非, TF means token
frequency.
log(TF)
5.332
3.251
4.959
4.211
4.802
3.486
3.711
0.602
4.508
3.217
4.669
0.602
1.204
3.981

Components
非
言,非
四,非
艸,非
手,非
彳,非
口,非
車,非
心,非
一,非
牛,口,非
人,弋,非
糸,人,弋,非
歹,人,弋,非

Level
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
4
4

Results
Comparing the CHS method with other approaches from a
more specific perspective, we evaluated the three learning
methods, the CHS method, DNW(Yan et al., 2013) and their
learning method of character frequency by using the component cost of learning characters and accumulating character
usage frequency. From the component cost of learning characters perspective as shown in Figure 1, we directly observed
that the CHS learning order can cost less for components and
will also result in the ability to learn more characters. Although the DNW learning order exhibited satisfactory performance, it appears to cost more components than CHS to learn
more characters. Additionally, the learning order of usage
frequency only considers usage frequency, but not the cost
of components. For instance, when learners learn 300 characters, they need to learn 149 components using DNW, but
need to learn only 129 components using CHS.

Number of component

TF
214873
1781
90904
16263
63402
3060
5143
4
32183
1647
46625
4
16
9562

200

100

CHS
DNW
Frequency

0
0

1,000

2,000

3,000

4,000

Number of character
Figure 1: Learning efficiency comparison for different learning methods: character score (CHS), distributed node weight
(DNW), and the usage frequency of characters (Frequency).
This figure illustrates the component cost for learning characters.

Accumulated character frequency

Characters
非
誹
罪
菲
排
徘
啡
輩
悲
韭
靠
韱
纖
殲

300

1
0.8
0.6
0.4

CHS
DNW
Frequency

0.2
0
0

1,000

2,000

3,000

4,000

Number of character
Table 2: Top 10 characters in CHS, DNW, Freqency
Rank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

CHS
的
人
一
以
來
有
是
他
個
和

DNW
人
一
口
的
日
白
土
又
言
勺

Freqency
的
一
不
是
了
人
在
有
我
他

According to the accumulating character usage frequency
perspective as shown in Figure 2, we can see that the CHS

Figure 2: Evaluated three methods (CHS, DNW, Frequency)
with accumulated character frequency.

learning order has almost the same excellent performance as
that of the DNW strategy, and we can also see that it is even
better than DNW. The architecture of the DNW strategy was
constructed based on a hierarchical node weighted network,
and the DNW score is calculated by the usage frequencies
that are the node weights. Therefore, a component including
many characters at higher layers and at lower layers may lead
to a higher calculated score using the DNW strategy. As an illustrative result, two methods have very close curves. Doubtless, the method of usage frequency has better performance
in this measure. Actually, for learning characters made up

3069

of 80% accumulating character usage frequency, learners use
216 components to learn 841 characters in order to achieve
80% accumulating character usage frequency using CHS, but
they need to learn 238 components to learn 867 characters to
accomplish this task using the DNW strategy.
In addition, we compared three methods by using the results for the top 10 characters, as shown in Table 2. For
the CHS method, we can clearly see that there are 5 characters 人(pinyin: ren2, meaning: people), 以(pin-yin: yi3,
meaning: use), 來(pin-yin: lai2, meaning: come), 個(pinyin: ge4, meaning: a measure word), 他(pin-yin: ta1, meaning: he) which are composed using人. Moreover,的(pin-yin:
de, meaning: of) and 是(pin-yin: shi4, meaning: is) are made
up of 日(pin-yin: ri4, meaning: sun). Furthermore, 口(pinyin: kou3, meaning: mouth) composed 個 and 和(pin-yin:
he2, meaning: and). In addition, these 10 characters have
high usage frequency. However, there are two groups in the
DNW strategy. First, 日, 的 and 白(pin-yin: bai2, meaning:
white) have the same component, 日. Second, 口 and 言(pinyin: yan2, meaning: speak) have the same component, 口,
yet other characters do not group with common components.
In the case of the characters in the usage frequency learning order, although these characters exhibit high frequency,
they have almost no association with each other. These three
different measures clearly and graphically demonstrated that
CHS is an effective and systematic learning method.

Discussion and Conclusion
In this study, we developed an effective learning method and
demonstrated the advantages of thoroughly integrating component and character frequency, respectively. Advantages
of the use of components is that they not only present their
meaning but also their morphological information. This can
help students learn Chinese characters easily and in greater
number. Examples of this would be our top 10 characters
人 and 來; 來 is composed of 人 and 木; the morphological meaning is that two people are walking to a tree, so the
meaning of 來 is ’to come’. Also, a component that can be
used to compose many characters having high frequency and
simple construction should be learned first. Regarding the
merits of character frequency, literature has been found that
character frequency can provide value with regard to utilization. In the case of learners, learning high frequency characters can help them read characters that are used in the daily
life quickly. The present approach of the study also suggests that learning a few components and then reading more
high frequency characters can generate an effective, systematic and rapid method for learning traditional Chinese characters. Furthermore, for the purpose of examining the effectiveness of the approach proposed in the present study, we
are planning a series of teaching experiments to be conducted
in real classrooms for enhancing Chinese learners’ reading
comprehension in the near future. Nowadays, textbooks for
learning traditional Chinese characters are edited by various
publishing companies in Taiwan, but the learning content of

these textbooks is disorganized and difficult to use due to nonassociative arrangements of characters in articles intended for
students of Chinese. Consequently, most students feel confused with regard to recognizing most Chinese characters,
which leads to inefficient learning. We anticipate that the
approach presented in the study can be applied to improve
the quality of Chinese textbooks or learning materials for the
purpose of optimal learning in a systematic and meaningful
manner. Also the approach may be used to design on-line
materials and to customize or personalize Chinese character
learning lists for learners who already possessed certain limited knowledge of Chinese characters and expect to extend
their ability to read Chinese characters.

Acknowledgments
This research is partially supported by the ’Aim for the
Top University Project’ of National Taiwan Normal University (NTNU), sponsored by the Ministry of Education, Taiwan,R.O.C. and the ’International Research-Intensive Center of Excellence Program’ of NTNU and National Science
Council, Taiwan, R.O.C. under Grant no. NSC 103-2911-I003-301.

References
Ellis, N. (2002). Frequency effects in language processing.
Studies in second language acquisition, 24(2), 143–188.
Ellis, N., & Beaton, A. (1993). Factors affecting the learning
of foreign language vocabulary: Imagery keyword mediators and phonological short-term memory. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 46(3), 533–558.
Everson, M. E. (1998). Word recognition among learners of
chinese as a foreign language: Investigating the relationship between naming and knowing. The Modern Language
Journal, 82(2), 194–204.
Hayes, E. B. (1988). Encoding strategies used by native
and non-native readers of chinese mandarin. The Modern
Language Journal, 72(2), 188–195.
Ke, C. (1998). Effects of strategies on the learning of chinese characters among foreign language students. JournalChinese Language Teachers Assocation, 33, 93–111.
Lin, Y. (2000). Vocabulary acquisition and learning chinese
as a foreign language. Journal-Chinese Language Teachers
Assocation, 35(1), 85–108.
Shen, H. H. (2004). Level of cognitive processing: Effects on
character learning among non-native learners of chinese as
a foreign language. Language and Education, 18(2), 167–
182.
Shen, H. H., & Ke, C. (2007). Radical awareness and word
acquisition among nonnative learners of chinese. The Modern Language Journal, 91(1), 97–111.
Taft, M., & Chung, K. (1999). Using radicals in teaching chinese characters to second language learners. Psychologia,
42(4), 243–251.
Wang, C. C., Hung, L. Y., Chang, Y. W., & Chen, H. F.
(2008). Number of characters school students know from

3070

grade 1 to 9. Journal of Educational Psychology, 39(4),
555–568.
Yan, X.-Y., Fan, Y., Di, Z., Havlin, S., & Wu, J. (2013).
Efficient learning strategy of chinese characters based on
network approach. ArXiv Preprint:1303.1599.

3071

