UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An Electrophysiological Study on Intra- and Inter-modal Duration Discrimination: Effects of
Performance Level

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8ds6z1nv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Hasuo, Emi
Gontier, Emilie
Mitsudo, Takako
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An Electrophysiological Study on Intra- and Inter-modal Duration Discrimination:
Effects of Performance Level
Emi Hasuo (hasuo@ neurophy.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp)
Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University/Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku,
Fukuoka, 812-8582 Japan

Emilie Gontier (emilie.gontier.1@ulaval.ca)
Laboratoire de Recherche en Psychologie de la Perception, Université Laval, 2325 rue des Bibliothèques, Québec,
Québec, G1V 0A6, Canada

Takako Mitsudo (mitsudo@cog.inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp)
Faculty of Information Science and Electrical Engineering, Kyushu University, 744, Motooka, Nishi-ku,
Fukuoka, 819-0395

Yoshitaka Nakajima (nakajima@design.kyushu-u.ac.jp)
Faculty of Design, Kyushu University, 4-9-1 Shiobaru, Minami-ku,
Fukuoka, 815-8540, Japan

Shozo Tobimatsu (tobi@neurophy.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp)
Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku,
Fukuoka, 812-8582 Japan

Simon Grondin (Simon.Grondin@psy.ulaval.ca)
Laboratoire de Recherche en Psychologie de la Perception, Université Laval, 2325 rue des Bibliothèques, Québec,
Québec, G1V 0A6, Canada
perception of time. However, there is no sensory organ
specialized for perceiving time, and the brain needs to
process and integrate the temporal information delivered
from multiple sensory modalities. How the brain processes
temporal information from different sensory inputs and
whether or not there is a central clock mechanism for time
perception has been one of the fundamental questions in
time perception studies (e.g., Grondin, 2010; Mauk &
Buonomano, 2004).
When two brief signals are presented successively, they
can mark an empty time interval in between. A time interval
marked by signals of the same sensory modality is called an
"intra-modal" interval whereas an interval marked by
signals from different sensory modalities is called an “intermodal” interval. Generally, sensitivity to time is better
(which can be seen as lower discrimination threshold and/or
less variability) for auditory than for visual signals (Grondin,
1993), and inter-modal intervals are much more difficult to
discriminate than intra-modal intervals (Grondin &
Rousseau, 1991).
Gontier et al. (2013) investigated the brain activity related
to such modality differences in duration discrimination
using electroencephalography. Auditory (A) and visual (V)
signals were used to mark the beginning and the end of the
time intervals, and there were four modality conditions: AA,
VV (intra-modal conditions), AV, and VA (inter-modal
conditions). They recorded the event-related potentials
(ERPs) while the participants categorized the presented time
intervals as either ‘short’ or ‘long’; they should respond

Abstract
Duration discrimination is severely impaired when the
duration markers are delivered from different sensory
modalities (inter-modal) instead of from the same
modality (intra-modal). The present study examined the
brain activity related to this impairment using eventrelated potentials. Durations were marked either by two
auditory signals (AA) or by an auditory and a visual
signal (AV), and there were two levels of
discrimination difficulty (easy and difficult). A negative
component (contingent negative variation) which
appeared between the two markers at fronto-central
sites and is said to be related to time perception, was
larger for AA than for AV, and was not influenced by
discrimination difficulty. A principal component
analysis showed that the first and the third principal
component captured differences in brain activity
patterns between sensory modalities and difficulties,
whereas the second principal component could reflect
brain activity related to time perception in general,
regardless of the modalities.
Keywords: Time perception; modality; event-related
potentials; contingent negative variation; principal component
analysis

Introduction
Many activities in our everyday life, for example, speaking,
playing sports, and enjoying music, require precise

589

short for the 450-ms interval and long for the 550-ms
interval. One of the focuses in their ERP analyses was on a
negative component, Contingent Negative Variation (CNV)
(Walter et al., 1964), which had been studied in relation to
time perception (e.g., Macar & Vidal, 2009). Results
showed that the amplitude of the CNV that was recorded at
fronto-central electrodes increased significantly from 250
ms until the end of the 550-ms interval in the AA conditions,
while no significant change in the time course of this
component was observed for the other three modality
conditions.
One possibility for the increase in the CNV amplitude
only for the AA interval was that this increase in the CNV
reflected a processing in the brain that is specific to auditory
time perception. However, there was another possibility that
this increase was related to the difficulty of the task; the
performance in the behavioral task was much better for the
AA condition compared to the other three modality
conditions, and better for intra-modal than for inter-modal
conditions. It is possible that the increase in the CNV
amplitude simply reflected the easiness to judge the duration
in the AA condition.
In the present study, we tried to clarify this issue by
examining how the difficulty to discriminate duration
influences the time course of CNV. We focused on the AA
and AV modalities, which showed highest and lowest
performance, respectively, in the behavioral results of
Gontier et al. (2013), and prepared an easy condition and a
difficult condition for both modality conditions. If the
increase in the CNV amplitude was due to the easiness to
discriminate durations, this increase should be smaller for
the difficult conditions than for the easy conditions,
regardless of the modalities. Alternatively, if the CNV
increase reflected activity specific to auditory intra-modal
time perception, the increase in CNV amplitude should
appear only for the AA conditions, regardless of the
difficulty. Furthermore, we tried to analyze the activity
recorded at all electrodes on the scalp and to look into
whether there was a common activity for all modality and
difficulty conditions by conducting a principal component
analysis.

Figure 1: Schematic representation of the experimental
paradigm. After the presentation of the stimuli, S1 and S2,
and the fixation point, a visual instruction asked the
participants to indicate whether the interval corresponded to
the short or the long interval by pressing a button.
easy conditions, because the stimuli for these two conditions
are physically the same.

Participants
Fourteen right-handed employees or students at Laval
University (4 men, 10 women, with a mean age of 26 years;
ranged between 20-40 years), took part in this experiment 1.

Stimuli
An empty black circle (diameter: 1 cm) with white
surrounds (1 mm, contrast 100%) displayed at the center of
a 14-inch CRT monitor (refresh rate: 60 Hz) was used as the
fixation point (0.95° of visual angle). The visual stimulus
was a 33-ms flash (filled white circle on black background)
with the same size and position as the fixation point. The
auditory stimulus was a 33-ms sound (1 kHz pure tone
burst) including a rise and a fall time of 5 ms that were
raised-cosine shaped. Sounds were presented binaurally at
80 dB SPL via speakers placed on each side of the computer
screen.

Procedure

Methods

The interval to be discriminated was a silent duration
(empty duration) between two stimuli, S1 and S2 in this
order. S1 was always an auditory stimulus while S2 was
either auditory (AA; intra-modal) or visual (AV; intermodal). There were two possible durations for the time
interval; for the AA-difficult condition (AA-d), these
intervals were 450 or 467 ms; for the AA-easy condition
(AA-e), 450 or 550 ms; for the AV-difficult condition (AV-

The stimuli and task were the same as in Gontier et al.
(2013), except for the combination of modalities and the
durations to be discriminated. In the present experiment, we
focused on the AA and AV modalities, and the difficulty of
discrimination was manipulated by varying the longer
duration while fixing the shorter duration (AA: 450/467 and
450/550; AV: 450/550 and 450/800; the combination of
shorter/longer durations is indicated in milliseconds). When
the difference between the two durations is small,
discrimination would be difficult. When the difference is
large, discrimination would be easy. By keeping the shorter
duration fixed, the brain activity to the 450-ms intervals
could be compared directly between the difficult and the

1 Data of two more participants were collected, but excluded
from analyses because the percentage of correct responses in their
behavioral data was lower for the easy condition than for the
difficult condition. This exclusion was made for safety because the
purpose of the study was to examine the effects of discrimination
difficulty on the brain activity.

590

d), 450 or 550 ms; and for the AV-easy condition (AV-e),
450 or 800 m (Figure 1). These durations were determined
by a pilot experiment, which was conducted to find the
duration combinations that would have correct responses of
above 80 % for the easy condition and around 60 % for the
difficult condition. The task for the participants was to
respond whether the presented time interval was the short
one or the long one by pressing the button “1” or “2”
respectively with their dominant (right) hand. In the practice
blocks, participants received feedback after each response
indicating whether the presented interval was short or long.
In the experimental blocks, there was no feedback.
The experiment consisted of four sessions corresponding
to the four modality-difficulty conditions. The order of the
four sessions was counterbalanced over participants and the
participants knew in advance what stimuli would delimit the
interval. Each session was divided into four experimental
blocks of 50 trials (25 short and 25 long intervals presented
in a randomized order within each block) and was preceded
by a practice block of 10 trials.

Figure 2: Percentages of correct responses. Error bars
indicate standard errors.

Results and Discussion
Behavioral Data

ERP Recordings
Scalp voltages were continuously recorded using a 32channel Geodesic Sensor Net, connected to a DC-coupled
32-channel, high input impedance amplifier (NetAmps 300
TM, Electrical Geodesics, Inc., Eugene, OR). The net was
adjusted so that the electrodes were correctly located
according to the 10/20 system. EEG signals were recorded
relative to a vertex reference electrode (Cz).
The EEG data were analyzed offline using Net Station 4.3
software (Electrical Geodesic Inc.) and digitally low-pass
filtered at 30 Hz. The continuous EEG was segmented into
epochs starting 200 ms prior to the onset of S1 and ending at
1 s after S2. The 200-ms prestimulus served as the baseline.
After the segmentation, artifact detection was conducted
with Net Station’s artifact detection tool, which
automatically detected eye blinks, eye movements and
marked bad channels in the input file. A channel with more
than 100 μV between its minimum and maximum amplitude
values for a given segment was identified as a bad channel
for that segment. A channel was marked as bad throughout
the entire recording if it was marked bad for more than 10%
of the segments. Segments with eye-blink (> ± 100 μV),
eye-movement (> ± 55 μV) or with more than 5 bad
channels were excluded from further analyses. In the
remaining segments, signal from rejected electrodes was
replaced using the “bad channel replacement” algorithm in
Net Station 4.3, which interpolates the signal of a bad
channel from the signals of remaining channels using
spherical splines. A baseline correction was applied and the
average waveforms were re-referenced to averaged mastoids.

591

Figure 2 shows the percentage of correct responses. The
performance was better for the easy condition than the
difficult condition for both modalities, as expected. The
performance of the easy condition was better in the AA
condition than the AV condition.
A two-way ANOVA (2 modalities × 2 difficulties) was
performed on the percentages of correct responses, and the
main effects of modalities and difficulties, as well as their
interaction were significant (F [1, 13] = 4.736, p = .049, ηp2
= .267; F [1, 13] = 698.087, p < .001, ηp2 = .982; F [1, 13] =
29.813, p < .001, ηp2 = .696, respectively). Ryan’s post-hoc
test revealed that the effect of the modalities was significant
in the easy condition (p < .001), but not in the difficult
condition (p = .152). The effect of the difficulty was
significant in both modalities (p < .001).
The behavioral results were similar to those obtained in
previous studies (Gontier et al., 2013; Grondin & Rousseau,
1991), and the effects of difficulty appeared as expected.

ERP Data
Figure 3 shows the ERP waveforms for the short duration
(450 ms), and Figure 4 the long duration (467 [AA-d], 550
[AA-e, AV-d], and 800 ms [AV-d]). In all conditions, there
was an early negative component, N1, which peaked in
amplitude at around 100 ms, and a following positive
component, P2, which peaked at around 180 ms after the
presentation of S1 (the auditory signal which marked the
beginning of the interval to be discriminated). For both
components, highest amplitudes appeared at midline frontal,
central and parietal electrodes. These early waves were
followed by a negative component, the Contingent Negative
Variation (CNV), which developed mainly at fronto-central
and parietal electrodes. After the CNV, N1 and P2 appeared
after the presentation of S2 (which marked the end of the
interval). The CNV amplitude seemed to increase until S2

at medial fronto-central electrodes grouping (Fz/FCz/Cz).
None of the main effects were significant (p > .05), but the
interaction between modalities and temporal windows was
significant (F [3, 39] = 3.291, p = .030, ηp2 = .202), and
Ryan’s post-hoc test showed that the effect of temporal
windows was significant in the AA modality (p = .040),
with significant difference between tw1 and tw4 (p = .004),
but not in the AV modality (p = .652). Other interactions
were not significant (p > .05).
A four-way ANOVA (2 modalities × 2 difficulties × 4
temporal windows × 2 lateralities) was performed at the
lateral fronto-central electrode grouping (F3/C3 and F4/C4).
The main effect of the temporal windows was significant (F
[3, 39] = 3.756, p = .018, ηp2 = .224), and Ryan’s post-hoc
test showed significant difference between tw1 and tw4 (p
= .001). Other main effects and interactions were not
significant (p > .05). The absence of the interaction between
modalities and temporal windows suggested that the
difference in the increase of CNV between modalities was
limited to the medial electrodes.
The increase in CNV amplitude for AA intervals and its
absence for AV intervals, which appeared at medial frontocentral electrodes, were in line with Gontier et al. (2013).
The discrimination level did not influence the CNV
amplitude significantly. It seemed that the increases in CNV
observed only for AA intervals in the present results and in
Gontier et al. (2013) were not caused by the easiness to
judge the durations. It is possible that the time course of the
CNV at the fronto-central sites reflects a processing that is
specific to intra-modal auditory intervals.

Figure 3: ERP activities recorded at Fz and Pz electrodes
during the short interval.
for the AA intervals but not for the AV intervals (Figures 3
and 4).
CNV time course analysis To examine the increase in the
CNV and to compare the CNVs between the two modalities
and the two difficulty levels, we calculated the mean CNV
amplitude over successive temporal windows of 48 ms each,
for the short duration which was the same (i.e. 450 ms) for
all modality and difficulty conditions; the component was
divided into 4 temporal windows (tw1: 250-298, tw2: 300348, tw3: 350-398, tw4: 400-448 [ms]). We looked at the
CNV time course on the left (F3/C3), right (F4/C4) and
medial (Fz/FCz/Cz) fronto-central electrodes grouping, as in
Gontier et al. (2013).
A three-way ANOVA (2 modalities × 2 difficulties × 4
temporal windows) was carried out on the CNV amplitudes

Principal Component Analysis To analyze the activity
patterns of all electrodes throughout the segmented epoch,
we applied a principal component analysis (a spatial PCA,
as described in Picton et al., 2000) to the grand-averaged

Figure 5: The time course of component scores (a, b) and
the topography of component coefficients (c) of the first
principal component.

Figure 4: ERP activities recorded at Fz and Pz electrodes
during the long interval.

592

data of all participants at all 29 electrodes for all conditions.
29 components were obtained from the analysis, and we
decided to focus on the first three principal components
whose eigenvalues were above 1. Figures 5-7 show the
component scores and component coefficients of the first,
second, and the third principal component, respectively. In
each figure, the component scores are shown in two ways:
aligned at the onset of S1 (a) and at the onset of S2 (b).
The first principal component showed frontal distribution,
and the component coefficients were high in a wide area to
Cz (Figure 5c). The coefficients for the second principal
component were in opposite directions for the frontal polar
sites (around Nz and Fpz) and the central sites (around FCz)
(Figure 6c). The third principal component showed
distribution at parieto-occipital regions with a peak in
component coefficients at around Pz (Figure 7c).
The component scores of the first principal component
showed peaks at about 100 and 200 ms after the S1 onset for
all conditions (Figure 5a), which seemed to be related to the
N1 and P2 to S1. Substantial differences between conditions
began to appear after these peaks, and component scores
increased for AV conditions while they decreased for AA
conditions, resembling the CNV component. The decrease
in the AA modality was larger for the easy conditions (the
light blue lines in Figure 5a) than for the difficult conditions
(the red lines in Figure 5a). To see whether these tendencies
were statistically significant, we calculated the component
scores for each participant’s data using the component
coefficients obtained from the grand-averaged data. Then, as
in the CNV time course analysis, these component scores
were divided into 4 temporal windows (tw1:250-298, tw2:
300-348, tw3: 350-398, tw4: 400-448 [ms]), and submitted
to a four-way ANOVA (2 modalities × 2 difficulties × 2
duration × 4 temporal windows). None of the main effects
were significant (p > .05), but the interaction between
modalities and temporal windows was significant (F [3, 39]
= 19.270, p < .001, ηp2 = .597), and Ryan’s post-hoc test
showed that the effect of modalities was significant at tw4.
The interaction between difficulties and temporal windows
was also significant (F [3, 39] = 5.543, p = .003, ηp2 = .299).
Ryan’s post-hoc test for this interaction did not show
significant effects. Other interactions were not significant (p
> .05).
The component scores for the second principal
component showed a similar time course for all conditions
until the presentation of S2 (Figure 6a). This was supported
by the four-way ANOVA (2 modalities × 2 difficulties × 2
duration × 4 temporal windows) conducted with the same
temporal windows as the first principal component analysis
(described in the previous paragraph), which showed a
significant main effect of the temporal windows (F [3, 39] =
19.254, p < .001, ηp2 = .597) and no other significant main
or interaction effects. It was surprising that the component
scores showed such similarity for all conditions despite the
diversity in the ERP waveforms. It is possible that this
principal component, which appeared after extracting the
large activities related to the sensory stimuli and

discrimination difficulties as the first principal component,
reflects the brain activity for purely temporal processing.
When the time course of the component scores were
examined aligned at the onset of S2 (Figure 6b), there
seemed to be a small peak at around 200 ms after the onset
of S2, and the scores after this peak showed a decrease in a
similar pattern for all conditions. However, the decrease
seemed slightly faster for the shorter durations, especially in
the AA conditions (compare the solid and the dotted lines in
Figure 6b). As we did with the component scores after S1,
we divided the component scores from 250 ms to 998 ms
after the onset of S2 into 15 temporal windows of 48 ms
each, and conducted a four-way ANOVA (2 modalities × 2
difficulties × 2 duration × 15 temporal windows). The main
effect of temporal windows was significant (F [14, 182] =
44.696, p < .001, ηp2 = .775). Other main effects were not
significant (p > .05). The interaction between modalities and
duration was significant (F [1, 13] = 6.443, p = .025, ηp2
= .331), and Ryan’s post-hoc test showed that the effect of
duration was significant only with the AA conditions (p
< .05) and not with the AV conditions (p > .05). The
interactions between difficulties and temporal windows and
between duration and temporal windows were also
significant (F [14, 182] = 3.366, p < .001, ηp2 = .206; F [14,
182] = 4.584, p < .001, ηp2 = .261 respectively), and for the
latter interaction, Ryan’s post-hoc test revealed that the
effect of duration was significant at tw10-tw15, which
corresponds to 700 to 998 ms after the onset of S2 (p < .05).
Other interactions were not significant (p > .05).
The component scores for the third principal component
showed peaks at around 100-200 ms after the onset of S2
for the AV conditions (Figure 7b). These peaks seemed to
be related to the visual processing, since S2 was a visual
stimulus in the AV conditions. There was also a slow peak
at around 300 to 500 ms for the easy conditions in the AA

Figure 6: The time course of component scores (a, b) and
the topography of component coefficients (c) of the second
principal component.

593

activities specific to and common to intra- and inter-modal
duration perception.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the three reviewers for their
valuable comments on the earlier version of the manuscript.
Special thanks to Félix Désautels, Noémie de la Sablonnière,
and Vincent Laflamme for their help in data collection, to
Naruhito Hironaga and Takuya Kishida for precious help in
data analysis, and to Pierre-Emmanuel Michon from the
Consortium d'imagerie en neurosciences et santé mentale de
Québec (CINQ). This research was made possible by a
research grant awarded to SG by the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Council of Canada, and to EH by the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science (25-6091).
Figure 7: The time course of component scores (a, b) and
the topography of component coefficients (c) of the third
principal component.

References
Gontier, E., Hasuo, E., Mitsudo, T., & Grondin, S. (2013).
EEG investigations of duration discrimination: The
intermodal effect is induced by an attentional bias. PLoS
ONE, 8, e74073.
Grondin, S. (1993). Duration discrimination of empty and
filled intervals marked by auditory and visual signals.
Perception & Psychophysics, 54, 383-394.
Grondin, S. (2010). Timing and time perception: A review
of recent behavioural and neuroscience findings and
theoretical directions. Attention, Perception &
Psychophysics, 72, 561-582.
Grondin, S. & Rousseau, R. (1991). Judging the relative
duration of multimodal short empty time intervals.
Perception & Psychophysics, 49, 245-256.
Macar, F. & Vidal, F. (2009). Timing processes: an outline
of behavioural and neural indices not systematically
considered in timing models. Canadian Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 63, 227-239.
Mauk, M. D. & Buonomano, D. V. (2004). The neural basis
of temporal processing. Annual Review of Neuroscience,
27, 307-340.
Picton, T.W., Bentin, S., Berg, P., Donchin, E., Hillyard,
S.A., Johnson, R., Miller, G.A., Ritter, W., Ruchkin, D.S.,
Rugg, M.D. & Taylor, M.J. (2000). Guidelines for using
human event-related potentials to study cognition:
Recording
standards
and
publication
criteria.
Psychophysiology, 37, 127-152.
Walter, W. G., Cooper, R., Aldridge, V. J., McCallum, W.
C. & Winter, A. L. (1964). Contingent negative variation:
an electric sign of sensorimotor association and
expectancy in the human brain. Nature, 203, 380-384.

modality after the onset of S2 (the light blue lines in Figure
7b). This slow peak was much smaller in the difficult
conditions of the AA modality (the red lines in Figure 7b).
This was supported by the three-way ANOVA (2 difficulties
× 2 duration × 4 temporal windows) conducted with 4
temporal windows of 48 ms each dividing the component
scores between 300-498 ms from the onset of S2. The main
effect of the difficulties was significant (F [1, 13] = 7.104, p
= .019, ηp2 = .353), while the other main effects and
interactions were not significant (p > .05). These analyses
suggest that this peak could be related to the easiness to
judge duration in the auditory modality.
Summarizing the results of the principal component
analysis, the difference between the easy and the difficult
condition in the AA modality seemed to have appeared at
frontal polar sites after the N1/P2 peaks to S1 (as the first
principal component, Figure 5), and at parieto-occipital sites
at around 300-500 ms after the onset of S2 (as the third
principal component, Figure 7). The second principal
component, which had opposite tendencies for the frontal
polar sites and the central sites, showed similar time course
in the component scores for all conditions until the
presentation of S2, possibly reflecting a common activity
related to the temporal processing independent of the
sensory modality (Figure 6).

Conclusions
The present study confirmed that the increase in CNV
appeared only for auditory intra-modal (AA) interval, as in
Gontier et al. (2013), and that this component at frontocentral sites was not influenced by the difficulty to
discriminate duration. A principal component analysis of the
data from all the electrodes seemed to separate brain

594

