UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Analyzing the Effect of Team Structure on Team Performance: An Experimental and
Computational Approach

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9zb6f6p8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Sio, Ut Na
Kotovsky, Kenneth
Cagan, Jonathan

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Analyzing the Effect of Team Structure on Team Performance:
An Experimental and Computational Approach
Ut Na Sio and Kenneth Kotovsky
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Jonathan Cagan
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract
This paper investigates how team structure impacts team
information processing and how this affects team resilience to
change. Teams in three different subgrouping structures:
homogeneous, heterogeneous, or no-clustering, were instructed
to make decisions in which they had to evaluate different
companies and pick the best one. Each member was told to
evaluate the companies in a different way, creating teams with
diverse perspectives. Partway through the experiment the
problem evaluation criteria changed, but teams were not
informed of the change, only whether their choice was correct.
Teams with homogeneous-clustering were less capable than the
other two types of teams in making use of multiple preferences
and in dealing with changes. A similar effect was also found in
computational simulations built from a PDP model. We suggest
that heterogeneous-clustering can weaken members’ ownership
and confirmation biases while no-clustering ensures a free flow
of information, with both able to enhance team performance.
Keywords: Team Structure; Team Diversity; Decision-Making;
Computational Modeling

Introduction
Tasks organizations face usually require a breadth and depth
of knowledge rarely found in one single individual, and
bringing different experts to work together is viewed as one
way for organizations to maintain a competitive edge. Yet,
team diversity studies (van Knippenberg & Schippers, 2007)
revealed that cognitive heterogeneity does not always
enhance team performance, depending on the quality of the
team information processing. In this study, we look at how
team structure affects the information processing within a
diverse team, and in turn impacts performance, in particular
in dynamic situations.
Teams have been characterized as information processors,
and the information processing involves activities that
happen within and among the minds of team members The
team-level processing involves the sharing of information
between members, while the individual-level processing
involves individuals’ evaluation and interpretation of the
information shared by the others (Hinsz, Tindale, &
Vollrath, 1997). Cognitive heterogeneity between members
seems to affect these information processes positively and
negatively. Diversity provokes social categorization that
may damage team cohesion and information sharing.
Individuals often place themselves and others into distinct

subgroups based upon similarities between them (e.g., age,
gender, educational background, and value). They tend to
favor in-group members over out-group members. This
intergroup bias may inhibit information sharing between
dissimilar members (Cronin & Weingart, 2007). On the
other hand, diversity helps reduce several informationprocessing biases. Individuals usually display an ownership
bias, considering their own knowledge as more valid than
those held by others. They tend to search and accept
information supporting their preference than information
opposing it. This is called confirmation bias (Nickerson,
1998). The presence of diverse preferences could make
members wonder about the accuracy of their responses and
lower their confidence in the task, making them more open
to different perspectives. Teams having members from
varied disciplines are less subject to these cognitive biases
than homogeneous teams (Schulz-Hardt, Jochims, & Frey,
2002).
Team diversity research has focused on identifying under
what conditions cognitive diversity is beneficial to team
functioning and when it will become a disadvantage.
Previously examined factors include the degree of diversity
(Dahlin, Weingart, & Hinds, 2005), team size (Thornburg,
1991), and the presence of a leader (Kearney & Gebert,
2009). If team performance is a function of the range and
depth of the information shared and processed within the
team (Hinsz et al., 1997), then modifying the intra-team
communication ties (e.g., who talks to whom, or who gives
information to whom) should impact team performance.
Only a few studies addressing this issue have been reported
(Katz, Lazer, Arrow, & Contractor, 2004), and they mainly
compared a centralized (i.e., decisions were made by a
leader and information was sent upwards to the leader) and
decentralized (i.e., having several individuals responsible
for making decisions) structure, showing that a
decentralized structure is beneficial when the tasks are novel
and difficult. However, even in a decentralized team, there
are still numbers of communication patterns a team could
adopt, and each of them may impact the team differently.
For example, creating communication ties between
members from different backgrounds should promote crossdomain information sharing. Embracing the communication
ties based upon homophily may result in in-group members
validating each other, and making them more fixated on

1437

their own view. In this study, we compare the effect of
communication pattern (i.e., team structure) on the
performance of diverse and decentralized teams.
Most past studies examined how teams behave in a static
task environment, e.g., solving a hidden-profile task (Lu,
Yuan, & McLeod, 2012). In a hidden-profile task, teams are
asked to select one of several alternatives. Information
supporting a less desirable alternative is shared by everyone,
and information favoring the better alternative is known to
individual team members. The optimal choice can be
discovered when members share and consider all the unique
information. Estimating the importance of each piece of
information is not needed because they are all equally
weighted. But, in reality, teams often have to face situations
in which some factors are more influential than others, and
also situations where their importance changes over time.
For example, organizations have to anticipate and react to
the constant change in consumer preferences in order to
remain competitive. In this study, we examine what types of
team structure can help teams excel in dynamic situations.
Three structures: homogeneous-clustering, heterogeneousclustering, and no-clustering, are compared.
In a homogeneous-clustered team, members with similar
functional background work together as a subgroup. Team
members’ subgroup identity should be strong because of the
high similarity between subgroup members. This may
inhibit cross-subgroup information sharing. Also, working
with like-minded members should strengthen individuals’
confidence on their own perspective and make them more
reluctant to change their own views. In a heterogeneousclustered team, members from different functional
backgrounds form a subgroup to work together. Because of
the low cognitive similarity within a subgroup, team
members should have low subgroup identity. The presence
of different perspectives within a subgroup should also
make team members question if they have done the task
correctly thus lowering their confidence. This should reduce
individuals’ ownership and confirmation bias. Within a noclustering team, there is no subgroup. Members of this team
should have the lowest subgroup identity. This should
facilitate information sharing. We predict that the noclustering and heterogeneous-clustered teams would process
the information more objectively and be less fixated on their
own preference, as compared with the homogeneousclustered team. Therefore, they should be better in making
decisions and adapting to the change.
To verify the proposed impact of no-clustering and
heterogeneous-clustering structures on team functioning, we
examine team performance in the presence and the absence
of a majority preference. When there is no majority
preference within the team, knowing each other’s
perspective is the key for making a correct decision. The
absence of any subgroup in a no-clustering team should
create an optimal structure for information sharing, and
therefore this team should excel in this situation. When
there is a majority (but incorrect) preference, a correct
decision can be made only if the team members have an

unbiased evaluation on each preference, independent of
whether or not it is majority-preferred. Members of the
heterogeneous-clustered teams should display lower
ownership bias, as compared to those in the other two
teams. They should be more likely to evaluate each
preference objectively and thus overcome the majority.
We introduce an experiment and computational
simulations to examine the impact of these team structures
on team performance. The experimental study is first
presented followed by the computational modeling.

Experimental Study
Method
Participants: 120 participants (F = 52, M = 68, mean age =
22.69 years, SD = 5.53) were recruited and randomly
assigned in groups of four to take part in this study, creating
10 groups within each of the three team structures, differing
in the type of subgroups: Homogeneous, Heterogeneous, or
No-clustering. The mean number of females in each team
was 1.73 (SD = 1.01), and there was no significant
difference across the three team structures, p = .312.
Differing perspectives: Each group had to work as a team
to make some investment decisions. There were twenty
decision-making trials. In each trial, groups had to evaluate
the profiles of three companies and pick the best one to
invest in, on the basis of company performance and industry
trends. Two members were assigned to evaluate the choices
based on company performance, and the other two were
assigned to focus on industry trends. At the beginning of the
study, members were given a unique scoring matrix
showing them what parts of the company profile they
should focus on and how a company can be assessed based
on the relevant information.
Members studying the same domain of information used
similar scoring matrices and had similar preferences.
Members in different domains evaluated the companies
using different criteria and usually had diverse preferences.
Team structure: groups were randomly assigned to one of
these
three
structures:
homogeneous-clustering,
heterogeneous-clustering, and no-clustering. In a
homogeneous-clustered team, participants directed to study
the same domain of information formed a subgroup. They
had to first give a score, ranging from 1 (the worst) to 6 (the
best), to each company, and then discuss them with the
other subgroup member to learn each other’s preference.
The whole group would then have a discussion and pick the
overall best company to invest in. The heterogeneousclustered teams followed a similar decision-making
procedure except that the heterogeneous subgroups were
made up of one participant in each of the two domains.
Members in a no-clustering team had to first finish the
scoring alone, and then tell each other their preference
followed by a team discussion.

1438

Change of task conditions: In each trial, the correct
company to invest in was the company with the highest total
score, which was the weighted sum of the scores on both
company performance and industry trends. For the first 10
trials, the scores on industry trends received a weight of 2
while the scores on company performance received a weight
of 1. For the second 10 trials, the scores on company
performance received a weight of 2 while the scores on
industry trends received a weight of 1. The change between
trials 10 and 11 occurred without any indication to
participants, and was only learned by the participants
through feedback on the accuracy of their choices over time.
To perform well, groups had to first learn that they should
rely more heavily on industry trends in making the
decisions. After the change, teams had to be able to notice
that industry trends were no longer driving the correct
decision, and company performance was now important.
Majority condition: The 20 decision-making trials could
be divided into two types: Absence (12 trials) and presence
(8 trials) of a majority preference.
Absence of a majority preference: In these trials, among
the three companies presented, one had relatively good
performance, one was in a relatively good industry, and one
was average in both domains. Participants directed towards
company performance would give high score to the first
company, and those directed toward industry trends would
give a high score to the second one. This generated two
initial preferences, each favored by two participants,
creating a 2 vs. 2 situation (2-2 trial).
The evaluations on the two domains were not equally
weighted, and the outstanding company in the heavily
weighted domain usually had the highest overall score
except in one case: When participants in the more important
domain did not have a strong preference (i.e., all companies
got average/low scores) and the alternative company was
highly preferred (getting a score of 5 or 6) by participants in
the less important domain, the alternative company would
then have the highest overall score. To make a correct
choice, teams had to figure out which domain was more
important, and consider the preference of all members.
Presence of a majority preference: In these trials, the
company profiles were scripted in a way that there was no
single clear choice for members studying the same domain
of information and they would give a high score to different
companies. This resulted in them preferring different
companies. There were only three companies to choose,
thus one member studying company performance and one
member studying industry trends would prefer the same
company, creating a 2 vs. 1 vs. 1 situation (2-1-1 trial). We
had scripted the company profiles in a way that the overall
score of the majority-preferred company was only the
second best, and the best company was the one preferred by
the other member in the more important domain. A correct
decision can be made only if the teams do not conform to
the majority and can consider the evaluation provided by
each member objectively.

Although members in the same domain preferred different
companies initially, we had scripted the company profiles to
ensure similar scoring between members in the same
domain, and a bigger disparity between the evaluations
based on different domains of information.
Procedures: Prior to the main study, participants were
given five minutes to study the folder containing the
evaluation guidelines. After that, they were told that some of
them would evaluate the companies on the basis of company
performance, and some would evaluate the companies on
the basis of industry trends. They were also told that the
evaluations on company performance and industry trends
were not equally important, and it was up to them to figure
out which domain deserved the most weight when trying to
arrive at the correct decision.
Participants would then have to complete three practice
trials. The company profiles in the practice trials were
scripted so that all participants would pick the same
company as the best one, and that company was also the
correct choice. This insured that participants could not
create immediate perception of one participant or factor
being more important than the others.
In each trial, participants were given a maximum of three
minutes to finish the scoring and make the individual or
subgroup decision. Then, they had another three minutes to
converse with the others and make a final decision.
Feedback was provided after each trial, indicating whether
they picked the best, second best, or the worst company.
Groups were randomly assigned to solve the 20 trials in
one of the two presentation orders. In each order, the 2-2
and 2-1-1 trials were intermixed randomly.

Results
Two teams were excluded from the analysis because of low
scoring accuracy (one team member had less than 60%).
The mean accuracy on scoring was 93.71% (SD = 8.32).
Only trials on which all four members had made the correct
initial decision were included in the analysis. This
eliminated 19.66% of the data, which were evenly
distributed across the three conditions, before and after
change, p = .98. Performance in each trial was assessed in a
3-point scale (0: pick the worst company, 1: pick the second
best company, 2: pick the best company).
Team performance: The 20 decision-making trials were
divided into 4 equal blocks, representing the early and late
trials, presented before and after the change. An ANOVA on
team performance with Block (1st, 2nd, 3rd, or 4th Block) as a
within-subject factor and Team (homogeneous-clustering,
heterogeneous-clustering, or no-clustering) as a betweensubjects factor was conducted. No main effect for Team was
found, F(2, 24) = 2.31, p = .12. A significant quadratic
effect for the interaction between Block and Team was
reported, F(2, 24) = 4.35, p = .02, implying that the Team
effect was more significant in some blocks than the others.
One-way ANOVAs were conducted as the following-up
analyses to compare the performance among the three teams

1439

Team Performance
(0: worst, 2: best)

in each block. A significant Team effect was found in the 1st
block, F(2, 24) = 5.53, p = .01, and the 4th block, F(2, 25) =
3.98, p = .03. In both blocks, the no-clustering and
heterogeneous-clustered teams performed better than the
homogeneous-clustered team, all p < .05. No difference was
found between the no-clustering and heterogeneousclustered teams, p > .80. The performance differences in the
1st block suggest that the homogeneous-clustered teams
were slower than the other teams in figuring out the way in
combining different perspectives. All teams were impaired
by the change to the same degree, as indicated by the nonsignificant Team effect in the 3rd block. The significant
Team effect in the 4th block supports that the heterogeneousclustered and no-clustering teams were more capable in
adapting to the change. There was a significant Block effect,
F(1, 24) = 9.35, p = .01, revealing that the performance on
the last block was better than on all the previous blocks, all
p < .05. This can be attributed to the learning effect and the
successful recovering from change in the heterogeneousclustered and no-clustering teams (see Figure 1).
No-Clustering

Homogeneous-Clustering
Change

2
1.5
1
0.5
0

Trial 1-5

Trial 6-10

Heterogeneous-Clustering

Trial 11-15

Trial 16-20

Error bar: +/- 1 SE

Figure 1. Team performance by block and team structure.

Team Performance
(0: worst, 2: best)

Majority condition: To test if there is a differential effect
of team structure on 2-2 and 2-1-1 trials, a 2 (Trial: 2-2 or 21-1) x 3 (Team: homogeneous-clustering, heterogeneousclustering, or no-clustering) ANOVA on team performance
was conducted. There was a significant Trial effect, F(2, 25)
= 25.89, p < .001, that the 2-1-1 trials were more difficult
than the 2-2 trials. A main effect for Team was found, F(2,
25) = 3.46, p = .05, showing that the no-clustering and
heterogeneous-clustered teams performed better than the
homogeneous-clustered teams. There was an interaction
between Team and Trial, F(2, 25) = 3.65, p = .04. For 2-2
trials, the no-clustering teams performed significantly better
than the homogeneous-clustered teams, p = .02. A
performance drop for 2-1-1 trials was found in the
homogeneous-clustered, p = .02, and no-clustering teams, p
= .001. The heterogeneous-clustered teams maintained
robust performance and outperformed the other two teams,
all p < 0.05, in the 2-1-1 trials (see Figure 2).
No-Clustering

2

Homogeneous-Clustering

Heterogeneous-Clustering

1.5
1
0.5
0
2-1-1 Trial

2-2 Trial

Error bar: +/- 1 SE

Figure 2. Team performance by trial type and team structure.

Discussion
We examine the effect of team structure on team decisionmaking in a dynamic environment. The no-clustering and
heterogeneous-clustered teams made better decisions and
were more adaptive to the change, as compared with the
homogeneous-clustered teams. The interaction between
team structure and trial type implies that the heterogeneousclustering and no-clustering structures are suited for
different decision-making situations.
Because of the functional similarity between participants
in the homogeneous subgroup, they should confirm and
validate each other’s perspective. Thus, they may overrate
and fixate on their own preference, making them less able to
adjust their decision-making strategy and adapt to the
change. As expected, the homogeneous-clustered teams
were not as effective as the no-clustering and
heterogeneous-clustered teams in learning how to make the
optimal decision and in adapting to the change. The
heterogeneous-clustered and no-clustering teams displayed
similar overall performance.
The differing performance of the no-clustering and
heterogeneous-clustered teams for the 2-2 and 2-1-1 trials
suggests that these two structures may facilitate different
types of information processing. Solving a 2-2 trial relies on
knowing and combining all the evaluation with the correct
weight. The no-clustering structure allowing a free flow of
information may account for the outperformance of the noclustering team in solving these trials, as compared with the
homogeneous-clustered teams. A heterogeneous-clustering
structure allowing dissimilar members to share ideas should
prevent members overrating their own view. Members
should therefore be able to evaluate each perspective
objectively. Thus, these teams performed better than the
others in solving the 2-1-1 trials.
One may argue that the task-specific team effect could be
explained without proposing any information processing
difference between the three teams. In a 2-2 trial, the initial
choice of two members was also the correct answer of the
trial. In a 2-1-1 trial, only one member’s initial choice was
the correct answer. From a probabilistic perspective, the
chance of choosing the correct answer from the initial
choices was 50% for a 2-2 trial and 25% for a 2-1-1 trial,
and thus there was a performance drop for the 2-1-1 trials.
However, this explanation fails to account for the interaction
effect between team structure and trial type.
In sum, our findings suggest that team structure could
affect the flow of information within a team, and this would
impact team decision-making. In this study, the team
structure only affected the flow of information at the initial
decision-making stage. Team members could learn each
other’s preference during the team discussion. But, this still
cannot attenuate the effect of team structure, suggesting that
information received during individuals’ preference
formation could strongly impact team decision-making. To
further validate this claim, we implement three neural
networks (Rumelhart & McClelland, 1986) to model the
effect of team structure on team decision-making.

1440

Computational Modeling
Method
Three multi-layer neural network models with supervised
learning were constructed. Each model consisted of 4 nodes
in the input layer, 4 nodes in the hidden layer, and 1 node in
the output layer.
Differing perspectives: In the behavioral study, teams were
composed of four members. Each member had a unique
evaluation on the three alternatives (i.e., company A, B, C).
To represent this, each node in the input layer, Ii, receives
the evaluation scores based on the scoring matrix used by
Member i, i = 1, 2, 3, 4, as the input. There are three units in
each node, each storing the score of one company.

Changing task conditions: Two sets of training trials (10
pre-change trials and 10 post-change trials) were prepared.
Multiple cycles of training were usually needed for a PDP
model to learn the task. In this study, each model was first
trained using the pre-trial training set for 200 cycles. Then,
the models were trained on the post-change trials for another
200 cycles. The change of the training set represents the
change in the task environment. The scores of the
companies in each trial and the method for choosing the
overall best one were same as those in the behavioral study.

Team structure: There are feedforward connections
between adjacent layers and lateral connections within the
hidden layer in each model. The three models differ in the
interconnectivity between the input and hidden layers,
representing the homogeneous-clustering, heterogeneousclustering, and no-clustering structures (see Figure 3).

Model performance: The output produced by the network
was compared with the target output. The target output is (1,
0, 0) if company A is the best, (0, 1, 0) if company B is the
best, or (0, 0, 1) if company C is the best. The error
generated, i.e., the difference between the output and the
target, is propagated backwards through the network for
adjustments of the present weights in a direction to
minimize the error. This is similar to the role of feedback in
the behavioral study. Models were trained using Doug’s
Momentum with learning rate = .05 and momentum = 0.1.

Hidden layer (H)

1

2

3

4

Homogeneous

1

3

2

4

Heterogeneous

1

Input layer (I)
2

3

4

No-clustering

connection weight fixed at 1
initial connection weight = 1

Figure 3. The architecture of the models.
In all three models, each input node, Ii, has a corresponding
node, Hi, i = 1, 2, 3, 4, in the hidden layer, and activation is
sent from the input node to that hidden node with
connection weight fixed at 1. The positive weight reflects
individuals’ ownership bias towards their own perspective.
In the homogeneous-clustered model, in addition to
receiving activation from its corresponding input node, each
hidden node also receives activation from another input
node that carries the evaluation from another member
studying the same domain of information. This represents
the homogeneous-clustering structure that members
studying the same domain of information formed a
subgroup and exchange perspectives. The initial connection
weight between them is 0 to reflect individuals’ neutral
preference to others’ evaluation at the beginning. To
represent teams with heterogeneous-clustering, each hidden
node in the heterogeneous-clustered model receives
activation from its corresponding node (weighted fixed at 1)
and another input node that carries the evaluation from a
member studying another domain of information (initial
weight = 0). In the no-clustering model, each hidden node
receives activation from its corresponding input node
(weight fixed at 1) and all other input nodes (initial weight =
0). This captures the no-clustering structure in that each
member learned the preference of other members after
finishing the scoring.

Results
Examining the level of error and its rate of decline over time
indicates how well a model does in learning the task. Figure
4 presents the error of the three models when learning the
pre- and post-change trials. The heterogeneous-clustered
and no-clustering models demonstrated a steeper decline in
error initially, as compared with the homogeneous-clustered
model. Yet, such differences become less significant over
time. All models were impaired by the change of the
training set, indicated by the significant increase in error
immediately after the change. All models demonstrated a
decrease in error after the first few cycles of training. But
the homogeneous-clustered model showed no further
improvement after that. Only the heterogeneous-clustered
and no-clustering models continued to improve, showing a
rapid and effective response to the changed conditions.

1441

30

Change

20

Error

Output layer

	  

Group discussion: To simulate the team discussion that
members can talk to and influence each other, nodes in the
hidden layer are fully-connected with each other allowing
them to inhibit or excite each other. The lateral connection
weights defining the influence of one node on another are
all set at 0 initially, reflecting individuals’ neutral preference
to each other at the beginning.

No-Clustering
Homogeneous-Clustering
Heterogeneous-Clustering

10
0
20

60 100 140 180 220 260 300 340 380

Cycle of Training

Figure 4. Computational model performance.

could facilitate the use of multiple perspectives to make
decisions and to deal with changes. Our findings have
significant implications theoretically and practically. On a
practical level, organizations often bring experts from
different areas to work on a specific project. Identifying
factors that most effectively leverage diversity is essential
for enhancing the performance of work teams. On a
theoretical level, past studies were often limited to
examining teams with minimal structure performing tasks in
static task environments. We extend the current body of
research by exploring the link between team structure, team
diversity, and decision-making in changing environments.

Discussion
The computational simulations mirror the experimental
findings that the heterogeneous-clustered and no-clustering
teams performed better than the homogeneous-clustered
teams in decision-making and adapting to the change, and
that they perform at about the same level as each other.
The memory capacity of a model is proportional to the
number of connections (Rumelhart & McClelland, 1986).
The no-clustering model has more interlayer connections, as
compared with the two models, and this may explain the
good performance of the no-clustering model. It is important
to note that the heterogeneous-clustered model having fewer
interlayer connections performed as well as the noclustering model. It had lower error than the homogeneousclustered model, even though they have the same number of
connections. Having connections that allow nodes to receive
information about different perspectives seems to be the key
factor in enhancing the model performance in this study.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by AFOSR Grant FA9550-121-0374.

References

General Discussion
The behavioral and computational results converge to
support that arranging teams into different structures, which
embrace different intra-group communication ties, impacts
team decision-making. The heterogeneous-clustered and noclustering teams were more capable that the homogeneousclustered teams in making use of multiple perspectives and
in adapting to changes. The differing performance of the
three teams for the 2-2 and 2-1-1 trials suggest that the
heterogeneous-clustering and no-clustering structures have
different positive impact on team information processing.
We suggest that heterogeneous-clustering would reduce
individuals’ ownership bias, allowing for a more objective
evaluation on the information they received. The noclustering structure would facilitate information sharing by
inhibiting social categorization. Homogeneous-clustering
would increase members’ subgroup identity and confidence
to their own preferences, making them less open to
alternative perspectives and less flexible in dealing with
change. In line with this, Minson & Mueller (2012) revealed
that individuals who made decisions collaboratively were
more confident in their decisions than were those who made
decisions alone. The greater confidence level may make
individuals more reluctant to revise their initial decisions.
Our findings suggest that assigning members who disagree
with each other to work together during the formation of
their initial preference can avoid over-confidence.
Our studies focus on decision-making in small teams.
When team size increases, it is time consuming to ensure
that members have learned each other’s perspective. It is
also cognitively demanding for members to digest all the
perspectives. Although clustering a team could limit the
flow of information, it could prevent overtaxing individuals’
cognitive capacity. Differences between no-clustering and
heterogeneous-clustering, which are beyond those found in
the present study, may emerge in larger teams.
In sum, our studies revealed that, for teams with different
perspectives, heterogeneous-clustering and no-clustering

Cronin, M. A. & Weingart, L. R. (2007). Representational
gaps, information processing, and conflict in functionally
diverse teams. Academy of Management Review, 32, 761773.
Dahlin, K., Weingart, L, & Hinds, P. (2006). Team diversity
and information use. Academy of Management Journal,
48, 1107-1123.
Hinsz, V. B., Tindale, R. S., & Vollrath, D. A. (1997). The
emerging conceptualization of groups as information
processors. Psychological Bulletin, 121,43–64.
Katz, N., Lazer, D., Arrow, H., & Contractor, N. (2004).
Network theory and small groups. Small Group Research,
35, 307-332.
Kearney, E. & Gebert, D. (2009). Managing diversity and
enhancing team outcomes: the promise transformational
leadership. Journal of Applied Psychology, 94(1), 77-89.
Lu, L., Yuan, Y., & McLeod, P. L. (2012). Twenty-five
years of hidden profile studies: A meta-analysis.
Personality and Social Psychology Review. 16,54-75
Rumelhart, D. E., & McClelland, J. L. (1986). Parallel
distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure
of cognition. Volume I. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Minson, J. A., & Mueller, J. S. (2012). The cost of
collaboration: Why joint decision making exacerbates
rejection of outside information. Psychological Science,
23, 219-224.
Nickerson, R. S. (1998). Confirmation bias: a ubiquitous
phenomenon in many guises. Review of General
Psychology, 2(2), 175-220.
Schulz-Hardt, S., Jochims, M. & Frey, D.(2002). Productive
conflict in group decision making: Genuine and contrived
dissent as strategies to counteract biased information
seeking. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 88(2), 563-586
Thornburg, T. H. (1991). Group size & member diversity
influence on creative Performance. Journal of Creative
Beahvior, 25(4), 324-333.
van Knippenberg, D. & Schippers, M.C. (2007). Work
group diversity. Annual Review of Psychology, 58, 515-541.

1442

