UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Analogical transfer of intentions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4rq246m1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Shahbazyan, Luiza
Petkov, Georgi
Gurova, Lilia

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Analogical transfer of intentions
Luiza Shahbazyan (l.shahbazyan@gmail.com)
Georgi Petkov (gpetkov@cogs.nbu.bg)
Lilia Gurova (lgurova@nbu.bg)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology
New Bulgarian University
21 Montevideo Str., Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

present by establishing similarities with the past (Penn,
Holyoak, & Povellini, 2008; Baldwin, 2002; Heusmann,
1998; Dodge, 2006). Their views diverge, however, when it
comes to the mechanisms that enable us to accomplish such
inferences. Surprisingly, little empirical evidence has been
accumulated so far that might help to resolve the debate.
The next section highlights what the main controversy is
about.

Abstract
Humans are exceptionally good at inferring the intentions
behind particular behavior even when the situation is complex
or the context is completely new. In this paper we explore the
hypothesis that a kind of analogical transfer from past
experience to present situations plays an important role in the
process of attributing intentions to ambiguous actions. The
participants in our experiment were presented with two
stories, the latter containing an ambiguous action. They were
asked to evaluate how plausible was that the actor in the
second story had a particular intention, either positive, or
negative, or neutral. We found that the participants rated
higher the plausibility of a negative intention when the
preceding story was relationally similar and its actor
manifested negative intentions. The attribution of intention to
the ambiguous action was not different from that in the
control condition when the preceding story was dissimilar or
perceptually similar, or when its actor manifested positive
intentions. These findings suggest that an analogical transfer
of intentions does play a role in the attribution of intentions to
ambiguous actions but the effect is limited to the attribution
of negative intentions.
Keywords: relational similarity; analogical
understanding intentions; hostile attribution bias

Controversies over understanding intentions

transfer;

Introduction
Imagine that you are working on submitting a joint
project with several partners. Just before the deadline, one
of the partners, an ex-colleague of yours, calls to apologize
that her organization won’t be able to participate due to
some legal issues. The withdrawal seriously damages the
structure of the proposal and you are not sure whether there
will be enough time to negotiate a new partnership or
rewrite the framework. And the situation has left you
wondering: Did she do it on purpose to sabotage your
efforts? Or was it just an unhappy incidence? Or maybe she
stepped back in order to protect your project?
We engage in such kind of reasoning on a daily basis and
the attributions made have a significant impact on how we
encode, interpret, and respond to social events (Baldwin &
Baird, 2001; Dodge, 2006). Although we often deal with
situations that are novel or ambiguous with regard to the
intentions of the actors, it is fascinating that intentional
understanding is typically fast, effortless and, to a great
extent, reliable. Many researchers subscribe to the view that
this is possible due to the generativity of our knowledge
system that allows us to infer unavailable aspects of the

Within the social information processing paradigm (Crick
& Dodge, 1994), researchers have taken for granted that
understanding intentions depends on previous knowledge
and past experience (Crick & Dodge, 1994; Huesmann,
1998; Dodge, 2006). Huesmann (1998), for example, argued
that attributing benign or hostile intentions to others’ actions
depends on how elaborated and easily accessed in memory
are the hostile and the benign scenarios (schemas) about this
type of situation. Such knowledge structures support the
inference of missing information that is not available
directly from the information input (Burks, Laird, Dodge,
Pettit, & Bates, 1999). Consistently, findings from social
and developmental research have shown that experience of
peer victimization (Yeung & Leadbeater, 2007) and abuse
during childhood (Dodge, Bates, & Pettit, 1990) are
associated with the tendency to attribute hostile intentions to
ambiguous actions, the so called hostile attribution bias
(HAB). It was demonstrated as well that negatively-oriented
social knowledge predicts over-attribution of hostile
intentions (Burks et al., 1999; Dodge, Laird, Lochman, &
Zelli, 2002).
According to Penn and his collaborators (Penn &
Povinelli, 2007; Penn et al., 2008), however, the mapping of
incoming information to perceptually similar1 scenarios
cannot explain the sophisticated intentional attribution that
humans are capable of. Drawing on the latest findings about
how humans and primates understand intentions, they
further insisted that “reading” mental states requires an
1
The term “perceptual similarity” is defined here as “similarity
between attributes” and it is used as a synonym of “superficial
similarity”. Perceptual similarity is usually contrasted with
relational similarity, which is defined as “similarity between
higher-order relations” and which is used in this paper as a
synonym of “structural similarity”.

2907

ability to reinterpret perceptual information in terms of
higher-order relational structures coupled with an ability to
use this knowledge in drawing inferences about the causal
relations between the observable actions and the
unobservable mental states that allegedly caused the actions.
A similar view, based on their observations of infants and
young children, was presented by Baldwin and Baird
(2001).
Several studies tried to induce attribution biases by an
experimental manipulation of mood by means of perceived
social rejection (Dodge and Somberg, 1987), frustration
(Orobio de Castro, Slot, Bosch, Koops, and Veerman,
2003), and violent video games (Bushman & Anderson,
2002; Kirsh, 1998). In these studies, however, the effect of
mood is not disentangled from other possible effects,
including the direct or mediating effects of structural
similarity between the present and past situations.
To the best of our knowledge, Graham and Hudley (1994)
were the only ones who tried to differentiate effects
triggered by negativity from those exerted by the activation
of some relational constructs. In their experiment
participants were randomly assigned to three conditions and
asked to memorize several sentences. The sentences differed
across conditions and contained information about a
negative intentional outcome of an event, a negative
unintentional outcome of an event and a neutral event
without causal information. Presumably, the sentences
containing negative intentional outcome primed the causal
relation between the negative outcome and the hostile
intent. In agreement with this expectation, the participants in
this condition tended to rate the ambiguous intentions of the
actor in another situation as more hostile than the
participants in the control condition. However, the authors
themselves confessed that even in the intentional condition
the priming could be result of the activation of a negative
trait, mood or other perceptually similar information. Also,
Graham and Hudley did not provide information about was
there any significant difference between the control and the
unintentional condition. Without such information one
cannot say whether the source of the priming influence is
perceptual or relational (causal) as stated in their article.

experimental work so far has been focused on the deliberate
and conscious use of analogy. In a typical study people are
asked to solve a problem by inferring the solution from a
relationally similar situation. For instance, Gick & Holyoak,
(1980, 1983) wanted their subjects to solve Duncker’s
radiation problem, providing them with the solution of a
relationally similar military problem. They did found that
significantly more people solved Duncker’s problem when
they were given the military situation as a base from where
they could transfer the solution
Research in the past decade has demonstrated, however,
that analogical reasoning is not always volitional. It has
been shown, for instance, that the perception of a piece of
information can be altered by relationally similar
information presented beforehand even when participants
have not been explicitly instructed to do so (Blanchette &
Dunbar, 2002; Kokinov, Feldman & Petkov, 2009).
Similarly, Day and Gentner (2007) demonstrated that
analogical transfer can occur in situations where there are no
specific instruction to make analogies. The participants in
their experiments were asked to read texts and answer
questions about them. The critical manipulation was that
some texts contained two passages that were relationally
similar (analogous). The participants’ answers to the
questions referring to an ambiguous passage revealed that
some inferences from the relationally similar passage were
spontaneously made.
However, like in Graham and Hudley’s study (1994), in
Day and Gentner’s experiments the initial and the final
passages shared both perceptual and relational similarity.
This leaves unclear whether the effect will persist without
such a strong overlap (Gentner & Smith, 2012). Although
these results are not conclusive, they have formed a very
promising line of research led by the idea that the analogical
transfer based on relational similarity may be the sought
inferential process that makes use of existing knowledge to
resolve problems such as the attribution of intentions to
ambiguous actions. To further explore this idea we designed
an experiment in which we tried to disentangle the effects of
perceptual and relational (structural) similarity.

Insights from research on analogy making

The present study aims to test the hypothesis that a
relational similarity between two situations would prompt
participants to make particular inferences about the
unknown intent of the actor in the later situation.
In order to disentangle the effects of negativity,
perceptual and relational similarity, we varied 7 base stories
in a between subject design to test the effect of two factors:
similarity between the base and the target story (relational,
perceptual, no similarity) and the ending of the base story
(happy-ending, sad-ending). The degrees of relational and
perceptual similarity were determined by expert ratings
following the definitions of Gentner (1983).
The four conditions of most interest are the ones that
involve relational and perceptual similarity. In accordance
with the findings of Day & Gentner (2007) and Graham and

Present study
The role of perceptual and relational similarity in
reasoning about causal relations has been studied
extensively in the literature on analogy making. It has been
proposed that a good analogy reveals the common structure
of two situations and thus it makes possible further
inferences, which is its main utility (Gentner, 1983). This
view is consistent with the conceptualization of the
processing mechanism for understanding mental states,
articulated by theorists such as Penn and colleagues (2008),
Baldwin (2002), and Barnes and Thagard (1997) in the
context of empathy.
Because of its recognized generative nature, analogy has
often been linked to scientific discovery and problem
solving (Holyoak, Gentner, & Kokinov, 2001). Most

2908

Hudley (1994), we expected that “relational similarity,
happy-ending” condition will bring to higher ratings of the
positive intention than the “no similarity, happy-ending”
condition, and, respectively, the “relational similarity, sadending” condition will bring to higher ratings of the
negative intention than the “no similarity, sad-ending”
condition.
It is important to stress that, unlike Day & Gentner’s and
Graham and Hudley’s studies, in our study there is no
overlap between perceptual and relational similarity in the
relationally similar conditions, according to the ratings
collected before the study from four experts, familiar with
Gentner’s (1983) definition.

Method
Participants
191 young adults (Mean age=20, SD=3.5) participated in
the study. Seven of them were excluded because some of
their responses were missing or inconsistent.

Materials and procedure
We used a paradigm similar to the one used by Blanchette
and Dunbar (2002) and Day and Gentner (2007).
Participants were presented first with a story, which was
expected to serve as a “base” for an analogy, and later they
were presented with another story, a “target”, that missed
information about the actors’ intention which could be
completed by analogical transfer from the “base”. The
participants were instructed to read the first story and
remember it for future recall. When the second, ambiguous
story was introduced, the participants were asked to rate
how plausible it was that the actor had any of three
intentions: positive, negative and neutral. In order to prevent
the participants from guessing what the objective of the
study was, they were instructed that the ratings of the
second story were meant for another experiment and that it
was included to separate temporally the encoding of the first
story from its recall.
Similarly to the study of Graham and Hudley (1994), we
devised the target story in a way that allows different
interpretations of the actor’s intention and asked participants
to rate the plausibility of each of them on a 7-point Likert
scale. In order to properly assess the influence of both the
sad- and the happy-ending stories, the social situation
presented in the target story was neutral, so that the
intention was open to three interpretations: positive,
negative and neutral.
Table 1 presents a sample of the materials: the target story
and the stories used in the sad-ending experimental
conditions.
In order to construct relationally similar stories, we
followed the convention that a mappable system of
interconnected relationships must exist between the two
stories (Gentner, 1983). To insure that the relational and
perceptual (attributional) similarity do not overlap, the base
story in the relational similarity conditions contains animals

and animal-like actions that differ from the human
characters and human-like actions in the target story, so that
“the individual attributes must be left behind in the
mapping” (Gentner, 1983, p. 161).
Table 1: Sample stimuli: the target story and the three
sad-ending base stories. The happy-ending stories differed
only in the last sentence.
Target story:
You met a boy from another school and you became friends despite he
was older than you. You were hanging out together and you slept over his
family’s house several times. You also liked his friends, though they
teased you sometimes for being a baby because your parents gave you a
curfew. To prove them wrong, sometimes you stayed later than you were
allowed. One evening your parents got very angry and forbid you to meet
your friend. You went to your room, explained the situation to him over
Facebook and he advised you to stay at his place for some time in order to
stress your parents, so that they could change their attitudes towards you.

Base 1: Relational similarity, sad-ending
Once upon a time people bred bear cubs in pens and sheared them like
sheep to knit warm sweaters. The pens were guarded by dogs, so that the
cubs didn’t get away or got eaten by wolves. One day the wolves sent
messengers to go to the cubs to make peace. The wolves said that they
really empathize with the cubs that they are wild animals who have to live
in captivity, guarded by dogs. The wolves promised they won’t hurt the
cubs and offered an escape plan in which several wolves would distract
the dogs, while the cubs escaped from the back of the pen. The cubs
agreed immediately, because they were tired of being kept against their
will. In the morning, the cubs waited for the dogs to start chasing several
wolves, left from the back door of the pen and started running.
Immediately, the rest of the wolves attacked and killed them all.

Base 2: Perceptual similarity, sad-ending
Ivo has a birthday and he is wondering how to celebrate it. He wants to
gather all his friends, but he knows that his parents would never give him
that much money. He shared the concerns with a few friends and one of
them invited him to organize a party at his grandfather’s summer house in
a nearby village, where the guests can sleep over. Ivo needs only to buy
some food and drinks. He agreed it means that he can invite the entire
class. The next day, an invitation has been sent out on Facebook and all
classmates confirmed. The next day everybody was supposed to come to
the bus station, so that they can travel together to the summer house, but
only half of the confirmed guests arrived. Ivo felt very miserable, but his
friends convinced him to celebrate after all. Several days after that Ivo
realizes that some of his classmates deliberately confirmed although they
knew that they would not come in order to ruin his birthday party.

Base 3: No similarity, sad-ending
Due to heavy rainfall a landslide was activated in a mountainous road.
Tons of mud poured on the road blocking traffic. Special teams were
immediately sent to the place of the accident to clean and strengthen the
road. Some time before dawn onе of the workers noticed that a redish
metal object is buried under the slurry of rock and mud. Together with
several other workers, he tried to dig out the mysterious object, but the
task was very dangerous due to the instability of the slope. Soon, it
became clear that the object is a car. After several hours of digging the
workers found out that the driver of the car was dead. He was identified as
an 82 years old man from the nearby village. The autopsy showed that he
died from heart attack, probably shocked by the landslide.

In both relational and perceptual similarity conditions the
stories contained a causal relation between the intention of
some characters of the story and their actions towards the
main character. However, in the perceptual similarity
conditions the base stories do not share a system of
interconnected relationships with the target story, unlike in
the relational similarity conditions, but only common
attributes. The stimuli were rated by members of our lab,

2909

who are aware of Gentner’s (1983) definition of similarity
but are naïve as to what is the objective of the study.
According to the averaged ratings of 4 experts on a 7-point
Likert scale, the relational similarity in the relational
similarity condition is 5, while the perceptual similarity is 1.
Consistently, the perceptual similarity in the perceptual
similarity condition is 6.25, while the relational similarity is
3. No intentional information was included in the base
stories in the no similarity conditions, including the control
condition.
The gender of the characters of the stories, when
applicable, was congruent with the gender of the participant.
For example, the word “boy” in the target story (Table 1)
was changed with “girl” for the females. All seven versions
were distributed randomly among participants. Participants
read one of 7 different base stories but always viewed one
and the same story as a target. The stories were presented in
a 3-page paper-and-pencil form. The first page contained the
instruction for reading and memorizing the base story
followed by the story itself. On the second page there were
instructions for reading the story and rating the plausibility
of any of the intentions followed by the story itself and the
three intentions to rate on a 7-point Likert scale from 1 – “I
would never consider it” to 7 – “I would definitely consider
it”. The participants were explicitly asked to imagine that
they were the main character in the story. On the third page
there was instruction for participants to write down their
recollection of the base story.
Participants were instructed to work on the tasks
according to the timing provided by the researcher. They
were presented with a cover story and invited to start with
the first task. The time limit for the reading of the base story
was 2 minutes. Then, the researcher instructed participants
to proceed to page 2 to rate the intentions of the character in
the target story. After another 2 minutes, participants were
instructed to proceed to page 3 in order to write down what
they remember from the first story at their own pace. After
the end of the study, the participants were debriefed and
invited to ask questions.

similarity and ending in the ratings of the negative intention,
F(2, 159) = 3.396, p = 0.036.
Second, we performed separate t-tests, comparing each of
the groups with the control one. There were significant
differences only for the relational, sad-ending condition:
t(50) = -3.075, p = 0.003 for the judgments of the positive
outcome and t(50) = 2.531, p = 0.015 for the judgments of
the negative outcome.
In addition, we analyzed only the ratings of the negative
intention if preceded by sad-ending story (relational,
perceptual, no similarity). The one-way ANOVA shows
significant difference among groups: F (2, 77) = 3.876, p =
0.025. According to the post-hoc test, the difference was
between the relational and the no similarity group (p =
0.007), whereas the perceptual similarity group did not
differ from the other two (see Figure 1).
These results support the hypothesis that reading a sadending base story that is relationally similar to the target
story will produce significantly higher rating of the
plausibility for a negative intention than reading a sadending but dissimilar base story or a neutral story.
Consistently, it produced significantly lower rating for a
positive intention than reading a neutral story. However, we
failed to replicate the previous findings suggesting that
perceptually similar information and the negativity of the
story on its own could induce attribution bias (Dodge and
Somberg, 1987; Orobio de Castro, et. al., 2003; Bushman &
Anderson; Kirsh, 1998).

Results
There were 7 groups and 3 dependent variables: mean
rating of the positive intention, mean rating of the negative
intention and mean rating of the neutral intention. All means
are presented in Table 2.
First, we performed three ANOVA analyses, for
participant’s rating of each of the three intentions: positive,
negative and neutral. All three ANOVA analyses used two
independent variables – the type of similarity between the
base and the target story (relational, perceptual, no
similarity), and the type of ending of the base story (happyending, sad-ending). The control group was excluded from
this analysis because it had a neutral (neither happy not sad)
ending. There were no main effects or interactions observed
in the pattern of ratings of the positive and neutral
intentions. There was significant interaction between

Figure 1: Ratings of the negative intention by similarity
only for the sad-ending conditions.

Discussion
A number of theorists suggested that intentional
understanding must involve some kind of inductive
mechanism which draws on the similarity between new
situations and past experiences based on higher-order,
nonobvious relations. In accordance with this approach, we
demonstrated that an analogical transfer from a sad-ending
story resulted in higher ratings of the negative intentions
and lower ratings of the positive intentions attributed to an
ambiguous action. It is important to stress that this result
could not be reduced to the effect of negativity of the ending

2910

Table 2. Mean ratings (standard deviations) of intentions by type and condition.

Positive
intention
Negative
intention
Neutral
intention

Relational,
happyending
2.66 (1.56)

Relational,
sad-ending

Perceptual,
sad-ending

No similarity,
happy-ending

1.88* (1.34)

Perceptual,
happyending
2.66 (1.88)

3.00 (1.85)

4.66 (1.97)

5.81* (1.44)

4.41 (2.15)

3.66 (1.95)

3.96 (2.13)

4.03 (2.53)

or perceptual similarity because no such effects were
observed in the other conditions (perceptual similarity, no
similarity and control).
Our results contribute also to current analogy research by
showing that analogical transfer based on relational
similarity plays a role in understanding new situations, even
without explicit instructions.
Given the very low rate of spontaneous use of analogies in
studies using tasks like Duncker’s radiation problem, results
like these are a bit surprising. For instance, Day and Gentner
(2007) suggested that surface (or perceptual) similarity is,
probably, necessary for a nondeliberative analogical transfer
to take place. Our findings show that maybe this is not
always the case. On the contrary, it seems that only
relational similarity has impact on the analogical transfer
that prompt attributing negative intentions. We should
admit, however that the reported here results are not entirely
conclusive because no significant difference was established
between the effects of the “perceptual similarity, sadending” condition and the “relational similarity, sad-ending”
condition.
The fact that our experiment failed to replicate the effect
of perceptual similarity and negativity (sad-ending) needs to
be further explored. One explanation for this might be that
the effects obtained by Day & Gentner (2007) and Graham
and Hudley (1994) are in fact produced by the relational
similarity. Thus, alternative explanations of their findings in
terms of negativity or perceptual similarity can be ruled out.
This explanation, however, is not applicable to other
pieces of research where a hostile attribution bias was
successfully induced by exposing participants to negative
situation. It could be that a single presentation of a negative
material is much weaker manipulation than the ones used in
the mentioned studies of hostile attribution bias. In the study
of Dodge and Somberg (1987), for example, negativity was
induced by explicit peer rejection, which might be much
more manipulative for the participants than the hypothetical
low-arousal situations which we used. In a similar way,
Bushman and Anderson (2002) and Kirsch (1998)
successfully induced over-attribution of negative intentions
by giving their participants to play violent video games, all
of which (except one) were rated appropriate for people
aged 18 and over due to the extreme violence (strong
language) as rated by PEGI (http://www.pegi.info).
The fact that the manipulation of negativity, which we
used, is rather weak might be able also to explain why the

2.78 (1.69)

No
similarity,
sad-ending
2.69 (1.59)

Control
(no similarity,
neutral ending)
3.27 (1.87)

4.93 (2.09)

5.11 (1.78)

4.35 (2.10)

4.62 (1.97)

3.36 (1.77)

3.37 (1.98)

3.54 (2.04)

3.38 (1.96)

effect of relational similarity was found only on the ratings
of the negative intentions. On the other hand, however,
nobody (to the best of our knowledge) has demonstrated so
far experimental manipulation of positive attribution bias.
Having that in mind, we may guess that the significant
effects of analogical transfer of negative intentions which
we observed is a kind of a joint effect of the general
preference towards negative interpretations and the
experimental manipulation (the sad-ending relationally
similar base story) which we made.
The demonstrated asymmetry between the effects exerted
by the happy-ending and the sad-ending story bases is in
line with the findings that negative emotions, anxiety in
particular, enhance relational encoding (Hristova &
Kokinov, 2011). It could be that in the sad-ending condition,
by asking participants to imagine that they are the main
character in the story, we had increased their level of
negative arousal. As a result, they had become more
sensitive to the relations in the base story and thus encoded
them better. The latter allowed them to see the relational
similarity and, drawing on it, to make inferences about the
target story. Further analysis of the memory task could shed
light on this issue.
The results of our study which we reported in this paper
do not allow choosing between the different explanations
which we sketched here. Further research is needed to
assess in a more systematic way the influence of ending,
whether happy or sad, of the base stories by controlling for
the level of arousal and relational encoding.
Although preliminary, the results of the present study
extend our current understanding of intentions in several
ways. First, it was demonstrated that no overlap between
perceptual and relational similarity is necessary for people
to spontaneously use analogical transfer to infer unknown
properties of the situation. Second, it was demonstrated that
structural-analogical transfer interplays with one of the core
social cognitive functions: understanding other’s intentions.
In a way, we provided the first empirical evidence
supporting the hypothesis that understanding intentional
mental states may involve an inferential process based on
transfer of higher-order relational information.
Several limitations of the study are worth mentioning.
First, it could not be convincingly stated that the obtained
effects are not stimulus specific. Further replications with
additional sets of stimuli have to be made to ensure that the
results are reliably established. Besides, additional controls

2911

should be introduced in order to reveal the source of the
asymmetry between the ratings of the positive and the
negative intentions. More sensitive measures such as RTs
could be employed to further explore the pattern of
influence of perceptual and relational similarity on the
understanding intentions. We believe these are important
issues to advance and important tracks for further research
to follow.

References
Baldwin, D. A. & Baird, J. A. (2001). Discerning
intentions in dynamic human action. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 5, 171-178.
Baldwin, D. A. (2002). The rise of intentional
understanding: Analogies to the ontogenesis of language. In
T. Givon & B. Malle (Eds.). The evolution of language out
of prelanguage. Typological studies in language.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Barnes, A. & Thagard, P. (1997). Empathy and analogy.
Dialogue: Canadian Philosophical Review , 36, 705-720.
Blanchette I., & Dunbar K. (2002). Representational
change and analogy: How analogical inferences alter
representations. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28, 672–685.
Burks, V. S., Laird, R. D., Dodge, A., Pettit, G. S., &
Bates, J. E. (1999). Knowledge structures, social
information processing and children’s aggressive behavior.
Social Development, 8 , 220–236.
Bushman, B. J., & Anderson, C. A. (2002). Violent video
games and hostile expectations: A test of the general
aggression model. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 12, 1679–1686.
Crick, N. R., & Dodge, K. A. (1994). A review and
reformulation of social information-processing mechanisms
in children’s social adjustment. Psychological Bulletin, 115,
74–101.
Day S., & Gentner, D. (2007). Nonintentional analogical
inference in text comprehension. Memory and Cognition,
35, 39–49.
Dodge, K. A. (2006). Translational science in action:
Hostile attributional style and the development of
aggressive behavior problems. Development and
Psychopathology, 18, 791-814.
Dodge, K. A., & Somberg, D. R. (1987). Hostile
attributional bias among aggressive boys are exacerbated
under conditions of threat to the self. Child Development,
58, 213–224.
Dodge, K. A., Bates, J. E., & Pettit, B. S. (1990).
Mechanisms in the cycle of violence. Science, 250, 16781683.
Dodge, K. A., Laird, R., Lochman, J. E., & Zelli, A.
(2002). Multidimensional latent-construct analysis of
children's social information processing patterns:
Correlations with aggressive behavior problems.
Psychological Assessment, 14, 60-73.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.

Gentner, D., & Smith, L. A. (2013). Analogical learning
and reasoning. In D. Reisberg (Ed.), The Oxford handbook
of Cognitive Psychology. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical
problem solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 306-355.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction
and analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Graham, S., & Hudley, C. (1994). Attributions of
aggressive and nonaggressive African American male early
adolescents: A study of construct accessibility.
Developmental Psychology, 30, 365- 373.
Holyoak, K. J., Gentner, D., & Kokinov, B. N. (2001).
Introduction: the place of analogy in cognition. In D.
Gentner, K. J. Holyoak, & B. N. Kokinov (Eds.), The
analogical mind: Perspectives from cognitive science.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hristova, P., Kokinov, B. (2011). Anxiety Fosters
Relational Encoding. In: B. Kokinov, A, Karmiloff-Smith,
& N. Nersessian, (Eds.): European Perspectives on
Cognitive Science. Sofia: NBU Press.
Huesmann, L. R. (1998). The role of social information
processing and cognitive schema in the acquisition and
maintenance of habitual aggressive behavior. In R. G. Geen
& E. Donnerstein (Eds.), Human Aggression: Theories,
Research, and Implications for Policy. New York:
Academic Press.
Kirsh, S. J. (1998). Seeing the world through Mortal
Kombat-colored glasses: Violent video games and the
development of a short-term hostile attribution bias.
Childhood , 5 ,177–184.
Kokinov, B., Feldman, V., & Petkov, G. (2009). Analogymaking automatically produces false memories in the both
situations. In: B. Kokinov, K. Holyoak, & D. Gentner,
(Eds.). New Frontiers in Analogy Research. Sofia: NBU
Press.
Orobio de Castro, B., Slot, N. W., Bosch, J. D., Koops,
W., & Veerman, J. W. (2003). Negative affect exacerbates
hostile attributions of intent in highly aggressive boys.
Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 32,
57-66.
Penn, D. C. & Povinelli, D. J. (2007). On the lack of
evidence that non-human animals possess anything remotely
resembling a “theory of mind.” Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society B, 362, 731–44.
Penn, D. C., Holyoak, K. J., & Povinelli, D. J. (2008).
Darwin's mistake: Explaining the discontinuity between
human and nonhuman minds. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 31, 109-129.
Yeung, R., & Leadbeater, B. (2007). Does hostile
attributional bias for relational provocations mediate the
short-term association between relational victimization and
aggression in preadolescence? Journal of Youth and
Adolescence, 36, 973-983.

2912

