UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Applying Math onto Mechanism: Investigating the Relationship Between Mechanistic and
Mathematical Understanding

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5dr524wn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Liu, Allison
Schunn, Christian

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Applying Math onto Mechanism: Investigating the Relationship Between
Mechanistic and Mathematical Understanding
Allison S. Liu (asl36@pitt.edu)
Department of Psychology, 3939 O’Hara Street
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Christian D. Schunn (schunn@pitt.edu)
Department of Psychology, 3939 O’Hara Street
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

activities organized such that they are productive of regular
changes from start or set-up to finish or termination conditions,” describing regular relationships between entities and
the effects of activities on these entities. Similarly, mathematics involves understanding the relationships between
quantities and the effects of operations on these quantities.
We propose that the use of a concrete manipulative makes it
more likely for students to discover and understand the
mechanisms that exist within that manipulative. Mathematics can then be mapped onto the mechanism (e.g., via structure mapping; Gentner, 1983), which provides a perceptual
basis for abstract mathematical concepts while emphasizing
the regularity of mathematics (Figure 1).

Abstract
Manipulatives are commonly used to provide concrete bases
for abstract mathematical concepts. However, it is unclear
when concrete experiences benefit abstract thinking. We investigated whether understanding a manipulative’s mechanism would affect mathematical use and understanding. Participants completed a robotics task that could be solved with
either mathematical or non-mathematical strategies. Participants with higher mechanistic understanding were more likely
to utilize complex mathematical strategies during the task,
and understood the mathematical relationships within the robot better than participants with lower mechanistic understanding. The study provides evidence for a relationship between mechanistic and mathematical understanding, suggesting that mechanistic manipulatives, upon which mathematics
can be applied, may foster mathematical understanding.
Keywords: mathematical understanding; mechanistic understanding; concreteness; manipulatives

Introduction
Mathematical proficiency is increasingly important for success in today’s world. A popular strategy for promoting
mathematical understanding is the use of manipulatives
(e.g., blocks or fraction bars), which are intended to ground
abstract mathematical concepts onto concrete experiences
(Bruner, 1966). It is an interesting, if not counterintuitive,
notion that concrete experiences should support abstract
concepts; however, it remains unclear as to when concrete
manipulatives improve abstract mathematical understanding. Many studies have found positive learning benefits
from using manipulatives when compared to other types of
instruction (e.g., Cass, Cates, Smith, & Jackson, 2003; Martin & Schwartz, 2005), but many have found no benefit, or
even adverse effects (e.g., McNeil, Uttal, Jarvin, & Sternberg, 2009). In her review of 60 studies comparing manipulative instruction to other instructional types, Sowell (1989)
found a large range of negative and positive effect sizes,
though she concluded that mathematics achievement could
be improved through concrete manipulative use.
Concrete manipulatives may be most beneficial for abstract mathematical learning when mathematics can be directly applied onto the manipulative. A manipulative’s
mechanism may be one way in which mathematics can be
applied onto a manipulative. Mechanisms, as defined by
Machamer, Darden, and Craver (2000), are “entities and

Figure 1. Proposed relationship between concreteness and
math understanding.
In the current study, we tested whether students who understood the mechanism of a concrete manipulative would
show greater mathematical understanding during a task using that manipulative. We used a robotics task, as robotics
has been used to successfully improve mathematics performance (e.g., Petre & Price, 2004; Silk, 2011), and is a rich
domain for integrating mathematics with other STEM domains. Our manipulative was the widely-used LEGO NXT
robot, whose mechanism consists of three primary parts: the
brick, which holds the robot’s programs; the motors, which
rotate depending on the program’s input; and the wheels,
which rotate when the motors rotate. Importantly, the motor
and wheels are also proportionally related: one motor rotation will always cause the same number of wheel rotations,
which will always cause the robot to travel the same distance. Initially, we manipulated participants’ mechanistic
understanding by providing a mechanistic or nonmechanistic explanation of the robot’s functions. However,
some participants who received the mechanistic explanation
did not recognize the robot’s causal mechanism, and vice
versa. Because a stronger manipulation would likely affect

863

more than mechanistic understanding alone, we elected to
use a correlational study to investigate the relationship between mechanistic and mathematical understanding.
We expected that participants who understood the causal
mechanism between the robot’s motors and wheels would
be more likely to understand the robot’s quantitative relationships and utilize mathematics based on these relationships. To test these hypotheses, participants were asked to
navigate their robot through a maze, and to create a generalizable strategy that could navigate differently-sized robots
through the same maze. Though non-mathematical methods
(e.g., guessing and checking) could be used to navigate the
maze, participants needed to use proportional reasoning to
fulfill the strategy portion of the task. Thus, we hypothesized that: 1) Participants with high mechanistic understanding would use more frequent and more complex mathematics in their maze navigation strategies than participants with
low mechanistic understanding; 2) Participants with high
mechanistic understanding would show greater understanding of the quantitative relationships that exist within the
robot than participants with low mechanistic understanding;
and 3) Participants with greater understanding of the robot’s
quantitative relationships would be the same participants
who use more frequent and more complex strategies during
the maze navigation task. In addition, it is possible that participants with higher mechanistic understanding attend to
proportionally relevant parts of the robot (e.g., the motors
and wheels) more than those with lower mechanistic understanding, or that participants need to visualize the robot’s
mechanism before they can mathematically utilize their
mechanistic understanding. Thus, we also explored participants’ attention toward the robot and their spatial visualization ability as potential factors in the relationship between
mechanistic and mathematical understanding.

robot which direction to move and the number of times to
rotate its motor during each movement (e.g., forward(100),
backward(150), turnRight(50), turnLeft(30)). Participants
were asked to navigate their robot through a maze (see Figure 2), and to create a strategy that could navigate other robots with differently sized wheels through the same maze,
without relying on guess-and-check methods. They were
also given a tape measure to measure the maze or robot,
though there was no requirement to use the tool. Participants
had 30 minutes to complete the task. After creating their
initial strategy (on average, after 26 minutes), participants
were granted an additional 30 minutes to revise their initial
strategy, with a recommendation to include a mathematical
formula. They were also given access to a set of smaller
robot wheels and were allowed to switch the smaller and
larger wheels at will. Two raters coded participants’ initial
and final strategies based on the type of mathematization
used (codes shown in Table 1), with Kappa = 1.0. The first
two strategy types do not explicitly use mathematics, though
prior research suggests that the Plausible Guesstimation
strategy is a foundation upon which more sophisticated
mathematical strategies can be built (Nouyvanisvong,
1999). The two later mathematical strategies are both relevant to the task, but only the last one can fully solve the
task.

Start

Methods
Participants

Finish

Participants consisted of 50 undergraduate students recruited through our Psychology department’s subject pool. Students majoring in robotics-related or math-heavy majors
were not eligible to participate in the study.

Figure 2. The maze used in the navigation task.

Materials

Math Understanding Questionnaire The questionnaire
consisted of eight open-ended questions about how the robot’s motor rotations, wheel rotations, and distances are
quantitatively related (e.g., “Are the number of wheel rotations related to the distance that the robot moves forward?”).
Each response was scored for the number of accurate mathematical relationships included in the answer, such that a
higher score signified greater quantitative understanding
(with a maximum score of 16 points). The Cronbach’s alpha
(α) for this questionnaire was 0.64, suggesting that an understanding of each of the robot’s mathematical relationships was not strongly dependent on one another. However,
the overall alpha is sufficiently high to justify analysis as
one overall construct.

Mechanistic Understanding Assessment Participants were
asked two open-ended questions about how the robot functioned: “Please explain the process that the robot goes
through to move, starting from its motor rotating” and
“Please draw a diagram of the process”. Participants were
placed into the High Mechanistic group if they indicated, in
at least one of the two questions, that the robot’s motor rotations caused the robot’s wheels to rotate (i.e., they recognized the fundamental causal mechanism that powers the
robot), and the Low Mechanistic group if they could not.
Maze Task Participants learned to program a robot using a
C-based language called ROBOTC. Commands told the

864

a math formula in their strategy) and final strategies. Table 2
shows the percentage of participants in each group who created each type of initial and final strategy (i.e., Guessing,
Plausible Guesstimation, Specific Proportional, and General
Proportional).
We examined whether the frequency of mathematical
strategies (i.e., the proportion of strategies coded as either
Specific Proportional or General Proportional, as opposed to
Guessing or Plausible Guesstimation) differed between
groups. For initial strategies, individuals with higher mechanistic understanding were somewhat more likely to use
mathematical strategies prior to any prompting to use mathematics: 49% of High Mechanistic participants used a mathematical strategy, as compared to 21% of Low Mechanistic
participants [X2 (1, N = 50) = 3.74, p = .053]. After an experimenter recommended the use of a mathematical strategy, individuals with higher mechanistic understanding generated more mathematical strategies than individuals with
lower mechanistic understanding: 77% of High Mechanistic
participants used a mathematical strategy, as compared to
48% of Low Mechanistic participants [X2 (1, N = 50) = 4.74,
p = .029].
To examine the two groups’ strategy complexity, we
more finely compared the mathematizations used in participants’ initial and final strategies (with Guessing being the
least complex strategy possible, and General Proportional
being the most complex strategy possible). For initial strategies, the High Mechanistic group (mean rank = 29.4) was
more likely to create complex strategies than the Low
Mechanistic group (mean rank = 19.1) [Mann-Whitney U:
U = 173.5, p = .012, r = .36]. For final strategies, the High
Mechanistic group (mean rank = 30.7) was more likely to
create complex strategies than the Low Mechanistic group
(mean rank = 17.0) [U = 133.0, p = .001, r = .48]. Overall,
participants with higher mechanistic understanding created
strategies that were more mathematically complex (and consequently more accurate), while participants with lower
mechanistic understanding relied on simpler guessing or
estimation strategies.

Robot Drawing Task To determine the features of the robot to which participants attended during the task, participants were asked to draw the robot they had programmed
from memory, including the most important parts of the
robot in their drawing. A second drawing task, to control for
drawing ability differences across participants, was also
given with the same instructions, except that participants
could look at the robot as a reference while they drew. Both
memory and control drawings were coded for the number of
accurately drawn wheels and the number of motors included
in the drawings (proportionally-relevant features), and
whether or not the drawing included a detailed depiction of
the robot’s screen (a proportionally-irrelevant feature).
Paper Folding Test This test (Ekstrom, French, Harman, &
Dermen, 1976) measures spatial visualization ability. A
series of pictures depicts one to three folds made in a piece
of paper, and the final picture shows a hole punched into the
paper. Participants selected which of five options illustrated
the reopened piece of paper. The test consisted of two parts
with 10 questions each (α = 0.84).
Motivation Questionnaire As a control variable, participants answered nine questions about their level of motivation during the maze task, building upon theories and
measures of engagement (the Intrinsic Motivation Inventory, e.g., Ryan, 1982) and achievement goals (Elliot &
Church, 1997). Three questions involved the participants’
level of engagement (α = 0.91), three questions involved the
participants’ level of performance-approach goals (α =
0.86), and three questions involved participants’ level of
mastery-approach goals (α = 0.80). Participants were asked
to rate their agreement with each statement on a scale of 1
(Strongly disagree) to 7 (Strongly agree).

Procedure
Participants first completed the Paper Folding test. Next, an
experimenter gave a brief, verbal introduction to the LEGO
NXT robot. Participants then began the maze task, which
was introduced as a programming task and included basic
programming instructions. Afterwards, participants were
given time to revise their initial strategy while working with
a robot with smaller-sized wheels. After the maze task, participants were given the Robot Drawing and Control Drawing tasks. They then filled out the Motivation, Mechanism
Understanding, and Math Understanding questionnaires.

Math Understanding Questionnaire
The High Mechanistic group (M = 5.52, SD = 2.42) had
significantly higher scores on the Math Understanding
Questionnaire than the Low Mechanistic group (M = 3.32,
SD = 2.36) [t(48) = -3.15, p = .003, d = .92], showing greater understanding of the quantitative relationships that exist
within the robot. Participants’ scores on the questionnaire
also positively correlated with the complexity of their final
maze strategy [r(50) = .375, p = .007], indicating that participants who created more mathematically complex strategies
in the maze task were those who possessed greater understanding of the quantitative relationships within the robot.

Results
Based on the Mechanistic Understanding Questionnaire, 31
participants were placed in the High Mechanistic group, and
19 participants were placed in the Low Mechanistic group.

Robot Drawing Tasks
There were no differences between groups for the number of
wheels included (controlling for the number of wheels in
control drawings) [F(1, 47) = .055, p = .82, ηp2 = .001] or

Maze Strategies
Analyses were computed separately for initial strategies
(completed before an experimenter recommended the use of

865

the number of motors included (controlling for the number
of motors included in control drawings) [F(1, 47) = .30, p =
.59, ηp2 = .006]. Similarly, no differences were found in the
likelihood of including screen details in the drawing [X2 (1,
N = 50) = .42, p = .52]. In addition, no correlations existed
between Math Relationship Understanding Questionnaire
score and the number of wheels [r(50) = .075, p = .61], the
number of motors [r(50) = .15, p = .29], or whether the
screen was included [r(50) = .17, p = .24] in drawings.
Thus, both level of mechanistic understanding and level of
mathematical understanding appeared unrelated to level of
attention toward basic features of the robot.

Controlling for Individual Differences

Figure 3. Mean scores on the Motivation Questionnaire.

Spatial Ability There were no significant correlations between participants’ scores on the Paper Folding Test and
their initial strategy complexity [r(50) = .23, p = .10] or
their final strategy complexity [r(50) = .23, p = .11]. There
was no correlation between Paper Folding Test score and
Math Relationship Understanding Questionnaire score
[r(50) = .21, p = .14]. Thus, spatial visualization ability did
not appear to factor into participants’ ability to effectively
mathematize their understanding of the robot’s mechanism.

Discussion
The current study investigated whether understanding the
mechanism of a robot would be associated with higher frequency and complexity of mathematics used in a robotics
task, and increased understanding of the mathematical relationships within the robot. We found that participants who
understood the robot’s mechanism showed greater understanding of the robot’s quantitative relationships. Furthermore, these participants were more likely to use math when
navigating the robot through a maze, and were able to use
more complex mathematizations for the task. We also found
that higher mechanistic understanding was associated with
greater engagement in the robotics task, which was not explained by higher mathematical understanding or better performance on the task, suggesting that mechanistic understanding per se may play a motivational role as well. The
shared regularities between mechanism and mathematics
may have allowed mathematics to be readily applied to the
robot, encouraging mathematical use and understanding.
We found no association between participants’ mechanistic understanding and their attention to details: both groups
were equally likely to include proportionally relevant and
irrelevant parts of the robot in drawings, suggesting that
they recognized and encoded the parts of the mechanism.
Thus, attention to mechanistic details is insufficient for discovering mechanistic and mathematical relationships. It is
possible that the High Mechanistic group primarily differed
from the Low Mechanistic group in the importance placed
on the robot’s functional mechanism (as opposed to the individual static parts of the mechanism), which may consequently have influenced whether they mentioned the motorwheel relationship when asked about the mechanism (see
Schwank, 1993).
Spatial visualization ability also did not correlate with
mechanistic understanding, mathematical use, or mathematical understanding. This result appears to contradict previous findings that spatial ability correlates with accuracy on
mechanistic reasoning problems (Hegarty & Sims, 1994).
However, research by Schwartz and Black (1996) suggests
that people initially use mental simulations and mechanistic
reasoning until a suitable rule is discovered, at which point

Motivation The High Mechanistic group reported significantly higher engagement during the robotics task (M =
5.69, SD = 1.04) than the Low Mechanistic group (M =
4.58, SD = 1.70) [t(26) = -2.56, p = .016, d = .79]. There
were no differences in reported levels of mastery goals
[t(48) = -.97, p = .34, d = .28] or performance goals [t(47) =
-.30, p = .76, d = .08] (Figure 3). However, level of engagement did not explain the relationship found between
mechanistic understanding and strategy complexity or
mathematical understanding: after controlling for engagement, the main effect of mechanistic understanding level
was still significant for initial maze strategy [F(1, 47) =
5.41, p = .024, ηp2 = .10], final maze strategy [F(1, 47) =
11.6, p = .001, ηp2 = .20], and Math Relationship Understanding Questionnaire score [F(1, 47) = 6.41, p = .015, ηp2
= .12]. To determine whether the creation of more successful maze strategies or better understanding of the robot’s
mathematical relationships explained increased engagement
during the robots tasks, we conducted three ANCOVAs on
engagement, using initial maze strategy complexity, final
maze strategy complexity, and Math Relationship Understanding Questionnaire scores as covariates, respectively. In
all three tests, the main effect of level of mechanistic understanding remained significant [initial: F(1, 47) = 6.0, p =
.018, ηp2 = .11; final: F(1, 47) = 4.70, p = .035, ηp2 = .09;
math understanding: F(1, 47) = 4.84, p = .033, ηp2 = .09],
while main effects of initial strategy, final strategy, and
math understanding were not. Therefore, level of mechanistic understanding related to differences in engagement, but
engagement itself was not directly related to task performance or greater mathematical understanding of the robot.

866

people shift toward rule-based reasoning instead. In the current study’s robotics task, participants’ mechanistic understanding may have initially helped them to discover the proportional relationship between the robot’s motor rotations
and distance movements. Once that relationship was found,
participants may have stopped relying on mechanistic reasoning and shifted to other non-mechanistic strategies, such
as rule-based reasoning, allowing them to avoid simulations
of the motor-wheel relationship. Because participants would
not have to rely as heavily on visualization of the mechanism, spatial ability may have played less of a role, explaining the lack of correlation between spatial ability and our
mechanism and mathematical understanding measures.

proceed as they generate their mathematical strategies. Such
data would also provide additional information about
whether there are differences between students who begin
with mechanistic or mathematical understanding in creating
their strategies.

The Mechanism Underlying the Mechanistic and
Mathematical Understanding Relationship
A second open question involves how mechanistic and
mathematical understanding affect one another. One possibility is that mechanistic understanding allows students to
integrate mechanistic details into their mental representation
of a situation. These representations can be used in mental
simulations during mathematical problem solving; however,
this is unlikely, as we found no correlation between spatial
visualization ability and mathematical understanding.
Mechanistic understanding may also lead to the priming of a
specific math schema, such that a student will always know
which mathematical procedure to use in a given mechanistic
situation. As a slight alternative, mechanistic understanding
may instead prime multiple plausible math schemas. Students may be able to use the results predicted by their mechanistic schema to verify which mathematics schema is correct (i.e., which mathematical schema also leads to the same
result as the mechanistic schema). Future work can help to
distinguish the cognitive mechanism underlying the connection between mechanistic and mathematical understanding.

The Direction of the Mechanistic and Mathematical
Understanding Relationship
Although the current study posited that increased mechanistic understanding would lead to greater mathematical understanding, it was not possible to conclusively test the direction of this relationship due to the correlational nature of the
study. Mathematical studies often focus on the direction of
concrete experiences to abstract mathematics, but the alternative exists that mathematical understanding may lead to
increased mechanistic understanding. Indeed, previous research has suggested that mathematics can be used to make
sense of concrete experiences (e.g., Martin & Schwartz,
2005; Schwartz, Martin, & Pfaffman, 2005; Sherin, 1996).
In our study, participants may have used their mechanistic
understanding to generate mathematical strategies and inform their mathematical understanding of the robot (i.e.,
mechanism to math); or, they may have first discovered the
mathematical patterns between their inputted motor rotations and the robot’s traveled distance and used that to conceptualize the robot’s mechanism (i.e., math to mechanism);
or, there may have been a constant conversation between
mechanism understanding and mathematical understanding,
where discoveries about mechanistic and/or mathematical
patterns were used to inform and revise their understanding
of the other (i.e., a reciprocal mechanism and math relationship). This directionality question could be answered with
future studies investigating the steps through which students

In sum, the current study shows that mechanistic understanding is associated with greater mathematical understanding and use. Teaching mathematics with mechanistic
manipulatives may provide several mathematical benefits,
including increased use and complexity of mathematical
strategies. Grounding mathematical concepts in concrete
mechanisms and taking advantage of the regularities in both
mechanical and mathematical systems allows students to see
the applicability of mathematics in concrete situations, ultimately leading to a better understanding of both mechanism
and mathematics, and the connections between the two.

Table 1: Codes used for the maze navigation task.
Code
Non-Math:
Guessing
Non-Math:
Plausible
guesstimation

Math: Specific
proportional

Description
Participant created a guess-andcheck strategy with no clear
basis for guessed numbers
Participant created a guess-andcheck strategy; guessed numbers
were estimated using some
situational basis
Participant created a strategy
utilizing proportional
reasoning; values were specific
to their robot

Example
“Go straight direction, forward(100). turnLeft(28), 28 is still too
large to turn, 100 is too long. Go straight like first step, but the
length is a little shorter, forward(100).”
“Guess + test was my main strategy. After I learned that it took
the robot 150 (approx.) motor rotations to go one straight
stretch of the maze + 30 (approx.) motor rotations to make a
turn in the maze, I just entered in the numbers in the computer
until finally the robot got through the maze.”
“It is 0.1 inch per motor-rotation. […] Measure the distance for
each straight trait which is divided by 0.1 to get the number of
motor-rotations for each straight trait.”

867

Math: General
proportional

Participant created a strategy
utilizing proportional
reasoning that could be
generalized to other robots

“Start off with a given value for motor rotations (R1) and measure the distance the robot travelled for that number of rotations
(D1). Measure the distance you would like the robot to travel to
reach its intended destination (D2). Calculate the number of
rotations it will take the robot to travel this distance using the
formula R1/R2 = D1/D2.”

Table 2: Percentage of participants using each strategy type.

Strategy
Initial
Final

Mechanistic Level
High Mechanistic
Low Mechanistic
High Mechanistic
Low Mechanistic

Guessing
16%
42%
0%
26%

Plausible
Guesstimation
35%
37%
23%
26%

Specific
Proportional
26%
21%
29%
42%

General
Proportional
23%
0%
48%
6%

problems and informal strategies. Doctoral dissertation,
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University.
Petre, M., & Price, B. (2004). Using robotics to motivate
‘back-door’ learning. Education and Information
Technology, 9, 147-158.
Ryan, R. M. (1982). Control and information in the
intrapersonal sphere: An extension of cognitive evaluation
theory. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 43,
450-461.
Schwank, I. (1993). On the analysis of cognitive structures
in algorithmic thinking. Journal of Mathematical
Behavior, 12, 209-231.
Schwartz, D. L., & Black, J. B. (1996). Shuttling between
depictive models and abstract rules: Induction and
fallback. Cognitive Science, 20, 457-497.
Schwartz, D. L., Martin, T., & Pfaffman, J. (2005). How
mathematics propels the development of physical
knowledge. Journal of Cognition and Development, 6, 6588.
Sherin, B. (1996). The symbolic basis of physical intuition:
A study of two symbol systems in physics instruction.
Doctoral dissertation, Department of Education, University of California, Berkeley.
Silk, E. M. (2011). Resources for learning robots:
Environments and framings connecting math in robotics.
Doctoral dissertation, School of Education, University of
Pittsburgh.
Sowell, E. J. (1989). Effects of manipulative materials in
mathematics instruction. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 20, 498-505.

Acknowledgments
The project described was supported by Award Number
T32GM081760 from the National Institute of General
Medical Sciences. The content is solely the responsibility of
the authors and does not necessarily represent the official
views of the National Institute of General Medical Sciences
or the National Institute of Health.

References
Bruner, J. S. (1966). Toward a theory of instruction.
Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Cass, M., Cates, D., Smith, M., & Jackson, C. (2003).
Effects of manipulative instruction on solving area and
perimeter problems by students with learning disabilities.
Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 18, 112-120.
Ekstrom, R. B., French, J. W., Harman, H. H., & Dermen,
D. (1976). Manual for kit of factor-referenced cognitive
tests. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service.
Elliot, A. J., & Church, M. A. (1997). A hierarchical model
of approach and avoidance achievement motivation.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 218232.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Hegarty, M., & Sims, V. K. (1994). Individual differences
in mental animation during mechanical reasoning.
Memory and Cognition, 22, 411-430.
Machamer, P., Darden, L., & Craver, C. (2000). Thinking
about mechanisms. Philosophy of Science, 67, 1-25.
Martin, T., & Schwartz, D. L. (2005). Physically distributed
learning: Adapting and reinterpreting physical
environments in the development of fraction concepts.
Cognitive Science, 29, 587-625.
McNeil, N. M., Uttal, D. H., Jarvin, L., & Sternberg, R. J.
(2009). Should you show me the money? Concrete
objects both hurt and help performance on mathematics
problems. Learning and Instruction, 19, 171-184.
Nhouyvanisvong, A. (1999). Enhancing mathematical
competence and understanding: Using open-ended

868

