UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Are You Lying to Me? Exploring Children’s Nonverbal Cues to Deception

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4x83g0gs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Serras Pereira, Mariana
Postma, Eric
Shahid, Suleman
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Are You Lying to Me? Exploring Children’s Nonverbal Cues to Deception
Mariana Serras Pereira (M.SerrasPereira@uvt.nl)
Eric Postma (E.O.Postma@uvt.nl)
Suleman Shahid (S.Shahid@uvt.nl)
Marc Swerts (M.G.J.Swerts@uvt.nl)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Tilburg University, The Netherlands

important that the lies that are investigated are natural and
spontaneous, and in that way representative of the behaviour
children exhibit in their normal social contexts, which
would render acted versions of lies less suitable for research
purposes. To introduce our own approach to detecting
nonverbal cues in children’s expressions, we first describe
previous studies into deceptive behavior of children, then
review previous findings of nonverbal correlates of lying
behavior and then say a few words about methods to
(automatically) detect lies. We then embark on a description
of our own study, which consists of a specific elicitation
paradigm, a perception study, and a variety of (automated)
detection methods.

Abstract
The present study investigates how easily it can be detected
whether a child is being truthful or not, and explores the cue
validity of a child’s body movement for such type of
classification. To achieve this, we introduce a combination of
methods, in particular a perception test, and an automated
body movement analysis. Film fragments from truthful and
deceptive children were shown to human judges who were
given the task to decide whether the recorded child was being
truthful or not. Results reveal that judges are able to reliably
and accurately distinguish truthful clips from lying clips. The
automated movement analysis revealed a positive correlation
between the amount of movement in a child and the
perception of lies, i.e., the more movement the children
exhibited during a clip, the higher the chance that the clip was
perceived as a lie.

Children’s Lying Behaviour

Keywords: Lying; Deception; Children; Nonverbal Cues;
Body Movement; Automatic Analysis.

Introduction
A question which has intrigued many generations of
researchers is whether and how one is able to detect if a
conversation partner is being truthful about the things he or
she is claiming, or not. Apart from criminal and juridical
reasons, this question has been deemed relevant for
educational and developmental purposes as well.
Accordingly, this has led to a series of studies into childspecific aspects of deceptive behavior (Fu et al., 2012;
Ruffman et al., 2012; Talwar &Crossman, 2011; Talwar &
Lee, 2002a, 2002b). Obviously, one could think of many
situations in which parents, caregivers, or teachers would
find it useful to know whether or not a specific child is
trying to deceive them, even when these may mostly relate
to innocent issues like a broken window, a stolen cookie or
a fight with another child. In particular, there has been a
specific interest in nonverbal features (such as specific
facial expressions or eye gaze patterns) that children could
possibly display when they are telling a lie. However, as we
will show below, in a review of the literature, the evidence
regarding the usefulness of such nonverbal features as
markers of deceptive behavior is quite inconclusive.
The variability in reported results could partly be due to
(1) the kinds of features that have been investigated in terms
of their cue value and (2) the techniques that have been used
to detect such features. Moreover, it would also seem

Previous research (Lewis, Stanger, & Sullivan, 1989;
Talwar & Lee, 2002b) suggests that children are quite good
manipulators of their nonverbal behavior when lying, which
makes the discrimination between truth-tellers and lie-tellers
very difficult to accomplish. Most studies report that
children’s lies can be detected around chance level,
comparable to what has been claimed for adults (Edelstein,
Luten, Ekman, & Goodman, 2006; Bond & DePaulo,
2006).
There is evidence that children start lying from a very
young age as early as 2½ years old (Newton, Reddy, &
Bull, 2000), and according to Talwar & Lee (2002b) lietellers between 3 and 7 years old are almost
indistinguishable from truth-tellers. Nevertheless, some
studies suggest that lie-tellers tend to exhibit slightly more
positive nonverbal behaviours, such as smiles, relaxed and
confident facial expressions, and a positive tone of voice,
which is also congruent with the findings from Lewis,
Stranger & Sullivan (1989). In addition, earlier work also
suggests (e.g. Feldman, 1979) that children have a poor
control on their nonverbal behavior.
The extent to which children display nonverbal cues could
be related to the kind of lie and to the circumstances under
which these are told. In earlier work ( Swerts, 2012; Swerts,
van Doorenmalen, & Verhoofstad, 2013), it was reported
that children tend to leak more cues to deception when they
are more aware of their deceptive attempt: for example,
children’s second attempts to lie (after having been told to
repeat a previous lie) revealed more nonverbal cues in their

2901

facial expressions when compared to their first attempts.
These findings, according to the authors, might be explained
by the ironic effect of lying which states that lying becomes
more difficult and most likely less successful, if a person
becomes more conscious about his or her behaviour when
trying to intentionally produce a deceiving message.

Nonverbal Cues to Lying
Even though lie detection appears to be a challenging task to
human judges, many people share the intuition that there are
specific nonverbal cues that may reveal whether a person is
truthful or not (Bond, 2012).
Most of the literature suggests that possible cues to
deception are often in the face. It has been claimed that one
can sometimes distinguish truth-tellers from deceptivetellers on the basis of particular micro-expressions, such as
minor cues in the mouth or eye region (Ekman, 2009;
Swerts et al., 2013). However, by their very nature, such
micro-expressions are so subtle in nature, and last only a
few milliseconds that they might escape a person’s
attention, so that deception detection tends to be a very
difficult task.
Furthermore, Mann et al. (2013) argue that eye gaze can
also be a cue for deception. According to this study, liars
showed more eye contact deliberately than truth tellers,
whereas gaze aversion did not differ between truth tellers
and lie-tellers. Moreover, others (DePaulo et al., 2003)
report that deception detection can be based in specific areas
of the mouth, such as: pressed lips when reporting a lie, and
certain types and frequencies of smiles.
In addition, a number of researchers suggested looking at
body movement as a source for lying detection but there are
some contradictory statements about the usefulness of body
movement. On the one hand, some literature states that
when lying, people tend to constrain their movements, even
though it is unclear whether these restrictions are related to
strategic overcompensations (DePaulo, 1988), or to avoid
deception leakage cues (Burgoon, 2005). In a similar vein,
Eapen et al. (2010) measured the continuous body
movement of people in spontaneous lying situations, and
found that those who decided to lie showed significantly
reduced bodily movement. On the other hand, using a
dynamical systems perspective, Duran et al. (2013) report
the existence of continuous fluctuations of movement in the
upper face, and moderately in the arms during a deceptive
circumstance, which can be discriminated by dynamical
properties of less stability, but larger complexity. Although,
these distinctions are presented in the upper face, this study
failed to find a significant difference in the total amount of
movement between a deceptive and truthful condition.

Lie Detection Methods
Given these alleged cues to deception, there have been
several attempts in the literature to develop methods for
deception detection, where most methods have tried to use
information from the human face (Ekman, 2009; Swerts et
al., 2013).

Many of these approaches are based on, the Facial Action
Code System (FACS) (Ekman & Friesen, 1976), known as
the reference method for detecting facial movement and
expressions, which has also been applied for detecting facial
cues to deception (ten Brinke, Porter, & Baker, 2012). As a
manual method, FACS is very complex to apply since it
demands trained coders, and is also very time consuming.
Fortunately, due to technology development, currently
automated measures are being used to help researchers to
understand and detect lies more efficiently. For instance, the
Computer Expression Recognition Toolbox (CERT)
(Littlewort et al., 2011) based on FACS, is able to detect
facial movements and microexpressions that can possibly be
associated with nonverbal correlates of deception. In the
future, such methods could be combined with what has been
achieved via automated analysis of verbal cues (Benus et al.,
2006) and gestures (Hillman, Vrij, & Mann, 2012) as
potential sources for lying detection. Finally, several studies
(Ding et al., 2013; Kozel et al., 2005) investigated whether
deception detection could be achieved by measuring brain
activity during lying. However, these methods are quite
intrusive, and not suitable for all contexts, especially when
dealing with specific types of data.
In sum, considerable work is currently being done on the
development of efficient automated methods to detect
deception, but there is still a tendency to discard the body as
a source of possible nonverbal cues. However, automated
movement analysis is starting to be used for this purpose as
well (Duran et al., 2013; Eapen et al., 2010). The
inconsistency regarding the relevance of certain cues to
deception might be explained by the use of different
detection methods. Therefore, a new holistic approach to
look into nonverbal cues of deception is proposed below.

Data Collection
Paradigm for Eliciting Lies
In order to elicit deception in young participants, we used a
child-friendly procedure, which naturally induces truthful
and deceptive statements from children. Inspired by
previous work (Talwar & Lee, 2002a, 2002b; Talwar &
Crossman, 2011), we developed a specific game, “Guess
what I have behind the back?” which was presented to a
child participant as a game in which an adult person
(experimenter) had to guess what kind of object (fruit or
animal) the child participant was hiding behind its back.
This was achieved by a series of 9 simple questions (is it a
fruit or an animal? What is its color?, etc.) asked by the
adult, and answered by the child. After the series of
questions, the experimenter had to make a guess about what
object the child was hiding. In the truthful condition, the
child that hid the object replied to the questions about the
object in a truthful way (truthful condition). In the two
subsequent lying conditions, the child was encouraged to lie
(by giving incorrect answers about the object, such as:
saying that the object was orange when it was red) when
answering the questions about the object. In order to achieve

2902

this, a confederate (another adult who was also present in
the room) in between sessions prompted the child to lie in
order to win the game and get a present as a reward. The
arguments given by the confederate to elicit the lie were that
the experimenter thought and said out loud that she was the
best in this game. The confederate did this when the
experimenter was absent, because she had to leave the room
with an excuse (to pick up a phone call, or to pick up the
next child that would play the game). The game was played
twice in the deceptive condition, the only difference being
that during the first lying condition the experimenter lost the
game (after the final question) and guessed the object
wrongly; while in the second lying condition, despite what
the child described, the experimenter guessed the object
correctly. The reason for having two lying conditions was
inspired by previous results that children’s second attempts
of deceiving might reveal more nonverbal cues (Swerts et
al., 2013). Each object (banana, apple, dog and a giraffe)
was attributed to a specific box, so that the experimenter
always knew what was inside the box (even when the child
was not aware that the experimenter in fact had this
knowledge).

Participants
Forty-two Portuguese children aged between 6 and 7
(M=6.38) years old enrolled in the 1st year of primary
school participated. Two of the participants (a boy and girl)
were removed from the sample because they refused to
deceive the experimenter.

Procedure
Each game session lasted for about 30 minutes (depending
on how wordy or fast a specific child was), and consisted of
5 distinctive moments: 1) Briefing, 2) Warming-up; 3)
Truthful condition, 4) Lying conditions and 5) Debriefing.
In the first phase (briefing), the experimenter explained the
game to the children. In the warming-up, the experimenter
played the game with the child, but in this case the roles
were inverted: the experimenter picked an object and hid it
behind her back. Then, the child had to ask questions about
the object until the child was able to guess what the object
was. After this training session, the actual experiment
started (phase 3 and 4). First, the child played in the truthful
condition, and then in the two lying conditions (see above).
The session ended with a short debriefing in which a small
reward was given. All the children enjoyed the game, and
engaged easily (without any suspicion) on the lies.

Materials
The games were recorded in high definition (HD) color
using an HD video camera. Only the child was recorded
(frontal view), while the experimenter, who was positioned
next to the camera, was not recorded. Children were
standing upright (Figure 1), against a white wall, to assure
that all body movements were captured during the game
play. The sessions with the children lasted between 52
seconds and 2.30 minutes.

Figure 1: The figure displays three different children
playing the game during the experiment. The recordings
catch all body movements.

Perception Test
A perception test was set up in order to explore whether
judges would be able to guess whether the recorded children
were saying the truth or were lying to the experimenter,
based on their nonverbal behavior. From the 40 children,
fragments of 30 children were selected for the perception
test. For each child, we selected its responses to two
consecutive questions (“is it a fruit or an animal?”and
“what is the size of it?”) in the three elicitation conditions,
leading to a total of 90 clips. Ten children were not
included in the perception test because they took more than
20 seconds in replying to the above-mentioned questions.
Finally, the clips (without sound) were presented in a
randomized order to small groups, consisting of 2-3
participants.

Participants
Twenty undergraduate students, between 18 and 25 years
old (M=22.2, 15 women and 5 men), were recruited from
the online subject pool system from the School of
Humanities of Tilburg University. Students participated for
a course credit.

Procedure
Upon arrival in the lab, each group was informed about the
aim of the perception test. Every participant also received a
questionnaire for rating each clip. The questionnaire
consisted of two simple questions– 1) Is this child lying?
(yes/no); and 2).If you said “yes”, where did you base your
decision on? (feet/legs/shoulders/face/other, please specify).
When responding to the second question, multiple answers
were allowed. The perception test was administered as a
Keynote presentation on an iMac. The perception test
consisted of two phases – the warming-up phase in which 3
test clips (different from the ones used in the actual
experiment) were shown and the respective part of the
questionnaire was completed. After this the actual

2903

perception test started, in which 90 clips were presented and
the respective questionnaire was individually answered.
After each clip, there was a gap of 10 to 15 seconds, which
participants used to rate the clip. Each session was grouppaced, and lasted between 30 to 40 minutes.

Results

Mean

The following results refer to the first question of the
questionnaire – Is this child lying? (yes/no). For each clip,
we first computed the percentage of times it had been
classified as being deceptive by the judges. In an ideal
situation with perfect classification results, this would give a
response of 0 for clips of the truthful condition, and 100 for
the two lying conditions. A one-sample t-test on these
average scores revealed that they differed significantly from
chance level (50%). In particular, the test showed that the
scores were significantly below 50% for the truthful
condition (t(19)=-2.27, p= .05), and above 50% for the two
lying conditions( for the ly1, t(19)=5.01, p=.05; and for ly2
t(19)=3.91, p=.05).
In addition, a Repeated Measures Anova was conducted
to compare the percentages of lie responses in each of the 3
conditions (Tc, Ly1 and Ly2). The analysis revealed a main
effect of condition (F (2,38)=38.804, p< .001). Posthoc
pairwise comparisons using the Bonferroni method showed
that Ly1 (M=0.628, SD=0.114) and Ly2 (M=0.613, SD=
0,129) are significantly different from the Tc (M=0.430,
SD=0.138, but not between themselves (Ly1 vs. Ly2).
These results are depicted in Figure 2.
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

*
*
63%

61%

Lying 1

Lying 2

43%

Truthful

Figure 2: Frequency of lie responses for each of the 3
conditions (Tc, Ly1 and Ly2).
The goal of the second question- If you said “yes”, where
did you base your decision on? (feet/legs/shoulders/face/
other, please specify), was to understand which part(s) of
the body judges thought to be meaningful for deciding
whether a child is lying or not. The relative frequency for
each of the reported areas of the body was calculated for all
the lying clips and perceived lies (the ones that actually
were truthful but were reported by the judge as a lie).
Results show that participants report that the face (75.62%)

is the best indicator of a lie, but feet (33.40%) and legs
(30.35%) also seem to play a significant role, while
shoulders (16.63%) and other (12.71%) have less significant
impact. Note that these observations are based on an overall
analysis of the child data, even though it is clear that there
idiosyncratic differences between the participants (e.g. with
some children being more expressive than others).

Analysis of Nonverbal Cues
When looking into the video sequences, and also based on
what participants from the perception test reported, it seems
that children tend to exhibit more nonverbal cues (more
movement) in the deceptive conditions. In order to
understand this phenomena and based on these empirical
facts, three different types of analysis – automated
movement analysis, correlation analysis and comparative
analysis of the automated movement analysis- were
performed.

Automated Movement Analysis
In order to estimate the amount of movement in the video
sequences and to identify which areas of the body show
those nonverbal cues, a frame-differencing method was
used. In this automated method, the absolute changes of
(grey-level) pixel values in all pairs of subsequent frames
are recorded and averaged per pixel over the entire video
sequence yielding for each video a heat map showing the
averaged changes during the sequence (see Figure 3). A heat
map is a visual representation in which numerical values, in
this context average pixel changes, are represented by
colours that are easily associated with an increasing
quantity. In our case, the colours reflect increasing
temperatures ranging from black/brown (low), via yellow
(intermediate) to white (high).
The video dataset used in the perception test was
submitted to an automated computer analysis. In total there
were 30 participants, resulting in 3 x 30 videos matrix. Each
triplet consists of one video per condition: truthful (Tc), first
lying (Ly1), and second lying (Ly2). The videos were
cropped in order to retain the central region showing the
interviewed child. The original size of 1920 x 1080 pixels
was reduced to the central region of 801 x 1080 pixels. In
three cases, small additional portions were removed due to
movements caused by the experimenter and assistant.
In addition, to suppress spurious motions due to
illumination compensation in the video camera, pixel
changes were thresholded. The threshold value was set at a
fixed value of 25 (absolute pixel-change range: 0-255). All
change values smaller than the threshold were set to zero. A
visual assessment of all heat maps revealed that this
thresholding effectively removed the spurious motions for
all videos.
The estimated total movement is expressed in the absolute
pixel change, which is obtained by taking the average of the
average pixel change maps. Figure 3 displays two heat maps
of the average pixel changes obtained for a truthful (left)
and a deceptive sequence (right). The maps show the outline

2904

of the body of a girl, brighter colours indicate larger changes
during the video, and therefore more movement. The first
image (left side) is a truthful sequence whereas the right
side corresponds to a lying sequence. For the truthful
condition, is possible to observe that the movements occur
mainly on the upper part of the body and the head, while the
lying video shows that the movements mainly occur on the
head, face and feet. Her feet are brighter reflecting their
frequent movements during the video sequence.

Figure 3: Illustration of the heat maps showing the outline
of the body of a girl obtained for a truthful (left) and a
deceptive (right) sequence. The unit of measure is the
average pixel change, meaning that brighter colours indicate
larger changes during the video, i.e., more movement.

Results
To assess the relation between the percentages of lie
responses of the judges (from the perception test) in each of
the 3 conditions and the amount of movement estimated by
the frame-differencing method, a Pearson correlation
analysis was performed. According to this analysis, there is
a statistically significant correlation (r=0.354, n=90, p <
.001) between these variables suggesting that the more
movement there is in a clip, the more likely it is that a clip is
perceived as lie.
Note that this first test did not specify whether a specific
clip was in fact a lie or not. A Wilcoxon signed rank test of
the automated movement results for each condition (Tc, Ly1
and Ly2) was performed to assess whether these movement
scores could distinguish each of the conditions. The
comparison between the truthful and the first lying
condition shows that the pairwise differences are not
statistical significant (Z= -0.48, p= .61, r=209). However,
the results obtained by comparing the truthful and second
deceptive conditions show a much clearer pattern, which
suggests predominance of movement in the second
deceptive condition, confirmed by the Wilcoxon signed rank
test revealing the difference to be significant (Z= -2,56, p=
.01, r= 108).

Discussion and Conclusion
Our research has led to a number of interesting results. First,
it is noteworthy to point out that in our perception test,
participants were able to distinguish truthful clips from
lying clips above chance level, which contradicts most of
the literature findings (Bond & Depaulo, 2006; Edelstein,
Luten, Ekman, & Goodman, 2006). Maybe this could be
partly due to the fact that the lies were very naturally
elicited in a playful manner so that children were more
expressive than in other social contexts.
In addition, our new method appeared to be very effective.
The automated movement analysis revealed that there is a
positive correlation between the amount of movement and
the perception of lies, i.e., the more movement the children
exhibited during a clip, the higher is the chance that the clip
is perceived as a lie. This result contradicts the argument
that people tend to constraint their movements, and show
less body motion when lying, as reported by previous
studies (Burgoon, 2005; DePaulo, 1988; Duran et al., 2013;
Eapen et al., 2010). Moreover, the visualization through
heat maps also point towards the same direction of the
reported body regions in which the judges (from the
perception test) think they base their decision, when
deciding whether a clip is truth or a lie. The face (75.62%)
is the most reported region but the feet (33.40%) and legs
(30.35%) also seem to play a significant role. In future
work, we will try out more focused automated analyses in
order to o quantify the amount of movement in various body
parts (face, feet and legs).
Lastly, the method suggests an interesting difference in
nonverbal behavior between the children’s first and second
attempt to produce a lie. While the amount of movement
appears not be distinct from the one in the truthful condition
during the first attempt, there does appear to a difference
during the second attempt. This effect appears to be in line
with earlier finding (Swerts et al. 2013) that a child’s
awareness of the fact that it is producing a lie leads to the
ironic fact that it becomes harder to hide nonverbal cues to
deception: they tend to leak more cues because of the irony
effect.
In conclusion, and according to these preliminary results,
we can state that this new paradigm appears to elicit
deception in an efficient way, and yields the emergence of
nonverbal cues in the body. Contrary to what most of the
research states, it seems that body movement is a good
source for the detection of deception, though more
elaborated analyses are needed. Accordingly, we plan to
conduct a more systematic automated analysis of the body
regions in which these cues seem to emerge, and a
systematic analysis of facial expressions. Finally, note that
the child participants in our study were Portuguese, whereas
the judges were Dutch. In the future, it would be nice to
explore whether there are any crosscultural differences in
the expression and detection of deception.

2905

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank all the children, parents and staff
from colégio O Parque, in particular to Marta Vilarinho
Pereira for all the support. We thank Marta Barahona Maia
for playing the role of the confederate and for all the
logistical help.

References
Benus, S., Enos, F., Hirschberg, J., Shriberg, E.,
International, S. R. I., & Park, M. (2006). Pauses in
Deceptive Speech. In ISCA 3rd International Conference
on Speech Prosody (pp. 2–5).
Bond, C. F., & Depaulo, B. M. (2006). Accuracy of
Deception Judgements. Personality and Social
Psychology Review, 10(3), 214–234.
Bond, G. D. (2012). Focus on basic cognitive mechanisms
and strategies in deception research (and remand custody
of “wizards” to Harry Potter movies). Journal of Applied
Research in Memory and Cognition, 1(2), 128–130.
Burgoon, J. K. (2005). The Future of Motivated Deception
and Its Detection. , 29, 1, 49-95. Communication
Yearbook..
DePaulo, Bella M. (1988). Nonverbal aspects of deception.
Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 12(3), 153–161.
DePaulo, Bella M., Lindsay, J. J., Malone, B. E.,
Muhlenbruck, L., Charlton, K., & Cooper, H. (2003).
Cues to deception. Psychological Bulletin, 129(1), 74–
118.
Ding, X. P., Gao, X., Fu, G., & Lee, K. (2013). Neural
correlates of spontaneous deception: A functional nearinfrared spectroscopy (fNIRS)study. Neuropsychologia,
51(4), 704–712.
Duran, N. D., Dale, R., Kello, C. T., Street, C. N. H., &
Richardson, D. C. (2013). Exploring the movement
dynamics of deception. Frontiers in psychology, 4, 140.
Eapen, N. M., Baron, S., Street, C. N. H., & Richardson, D.
C. (2010). The Bodily Movements of Liars. In 33rd
Annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Edelstein, R. S., Luten, T. L., Ekman, P., & Goodman, G. S.
(2006). Detecting lies in children and adults. Law and
Human Behavior, 30, 1, 1-10. Law and Human Behavior,
30(1), 1–10.
Ekman, P. (2009). Lie catching and micro expressions. In In
The philosophy of deception (pp. 118–138).
Ekman, Paul ; Friesen, W. (1976). Measu ring Facial
Movement *. Environmental Psychology and Nonverbal
Behaviour, 1(1), 56–75.
Feldman, R. S. (1979). Detection of Deception in Adults
and Children via Facial Expressions. Child development,
350–355.
Fu, G., Evans, A. D., Xu, F., & Lee, K. (2012). Young
children can tell strategic lies after committing a
transgression. Journal of experimental child psychology,
113(1), 147–58.
Hillman, J., Vrij, A., & Mann, S. (2012). Um … they were
wearing …: The effect of deception on specific hand

gestures. Legal and Criminological Psychology, 17(2),
336–345.
Kozel, F. A., Johnson, K. a, Mu, Q., Grenesko, E. L., Laken,
S. J., & George, M. S. (2005). Detecting deception using
functional magnetic resonance imaging. Biological
psychiatry, 58(8), 605–13.
Lewis, M., Stanger, C., & Sullivan, M. W. (1989).
Deception in 3-year-olds. Developmental Psychology,
25(3), 439–443.
Littlewort, G., Whitehill, J., Wu, T., Fasel, I., Frank, M.,
Movellan, J., & Bartlett, M. (2011). The computer
expression recognition toolbox (CERT). Face and
Gesture 2011, 298–305.
Mann, S., Ewens, S., Shaw, D., Vrij, A., Leal, S., &
Hillman, J. (2013). Lying Eyes: Why Liars Seek
Deliberate Eye Contact. Psychiatry, Psychology and Law,
20(3), 452–461.
Newton, P., Reddy, V., & Bull, R. (2000). Children’s
everyday deception and performance on false-belief tasks.
British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 18(2),
297–
Popliger, M., Talwar, V., & Crossman, A. (2011).
Predictors of children’s prosocial lie-telling: Motivation,
socialization variables, and moral understanding. Journal
of experimental child psychology, 110(3), 373–92.
Ruffman, T., Murray, J., Halberstadt, J., & Vater, T. (2012).
Age-related differences in deception. Psychology and
aging, 27(3), 543–9.
Swerts, M. (2012). Let’s lie together: Co-presence effects on
children's deceptive skills. In Proceedings of the EACL
workshop on computational approaches to deception
detection (pp. 55–62). Avignon: E. Fitzpatrick, B.
Bachenko, & T. Fornaciari (Eds.).
Swerts, M., van Doorenmalen, A., & Verhoofstad, L.
(2013). Detecting cues to deception from children’s facial
expressions: On the effectiveness of two visual
manipulation techniques. Journal of Phonetics, 41(5),
359–368.
Talwar, V., & Crossman, A. (2011). From little white lies to
filthy liars: the evolution of honesty and deception I. The
Paradox of Lies. Advances in Child Development and
Behavior (1st ed., Vol. 40, pp. 139–179). .
Talwar, V., & Lee, K. (2002a). Emergence of White-Lie
Telling in Children Between 3 and 7 Years of Age.
Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 48(2), 160–181.
Talwar, V., & Lee, K. (2002b). Development of lying to
conceal a transgression: Children’s control of expressive
behaviour during verbal deception. International Journal
of Behavioral Development, 26(5), 436–444.
Ten Brinke, L., Porter, S., & Baker, A. (2012). Darwin the
detective: Observable facial muscle contractions reveal
emotional high-stakes lies. Evolution and Human
Behavior, 33(4), 411–416.

2906

