UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Are Fractions Natural Numbers, Too?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/38g7n1pz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Matthews, Percival
Chesney, Dana
McNeil, Nicole

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Are Fractions Natural Numbers, Too?
Percival G. Matthews (pmatthews@wisc.edu)
Department of Educational Psychology, 1025 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA

Dana L. Chesney (dlchesney@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, 1835 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210 USA

Nicole M. McNeil (nmcneil@nd.edu)
Department of Psychology, 118 Haggar Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA
Abstract

Some mathematical objects now seem very intuitive
only because their structure is well adapted to our brain
architecture. On the other hand, a great many children
find fractions very difficult to learn because their
cortical machinery resists such a counterintuitive
concept (p. 7).
Such accounts argue that the cognitive system for
processing number, the approximate number system (ANS),
is fundamentally designed to deal with discrete numerosities
that map onto whole number values. Therefore, according to
innate constraints theorists, fractions and rational number
concepts are difficult because they lack an intuitive basis
and must instead be built from systems originally developed
to support whole number understanding.
Recently, Siegler and colleagues have sounded the call for
researchers to reexamine the nature of fractional quantities,
calling for a more integrated theory of numerical
understanding that is inclusive of both natural numbers and
fractions, rather than merely treating fractional values as an
educational construct (Siegler, Fazio, Bailey, & Zhou,
2013). The present work seeks to answer that call. Contrary
to the innate constraints hypothesis, here we put forward a
cognitive primitives hypothesis for fraction magnitude
processing. Emerging data from developmental psychology
and neuroscience suggest that an intuitive (perhaps native)
perceptually based cognitive system for grounding fraction
knowledge may indeed exist. This cognitive system seems
to represent and process amodal magnitudes of nonsymbolic ratios (such as the relative length of two lines).
For instance, Vallentin and Nieder (2008) trained adult
humans and monkeys on match-to-sample tasks using ratios
between pairs of line segments. Monkeys and humans
similarly performed far better than chance (85.5%), showing
considerable sensitivity to fractional magnitudes. Moreover,
using single-celled recordings, Vallentin and Nieder also
found individual neurons that responded specifically to
these visuospatial ratios constructed of line segments (e.g. a
neuron that responded to ¼ in various instantiations). Other
work has similarly demonstrated abilities of human infants,
children, and adults to process nonsymbolic ratio
magnitudes (e.g., Boyer & Levine, 2012; Jacob & Nieder,
2009; McCrink & Wynn, 2007; Sophian, 2000).

This study presents evidence in favor of a cognitive primitives
hypothesis for processing fraction magnitudes. This account
holds that humans have perceptual access to fractional
magnitudes and that this may be used to support symbolic
fraction knowledge. In speeded cross-format comparisons,
participants picked the larger of two stimuli, which were
either symbolic fractions or nonsymbolic ratios composed of
pairs of dot arrays or pairs of circles. Participants
demonstrated distance effects across formats, demonstrating
that they could compare analog fractional magnitudes
independently of the particular formats in which they were
presented. These results pose a challenge to innate constraints
accounts that argue that human cortical structures are illsuited for processing fractions. These results may have
important implications both for theorizing about the nature of
human number sense and for optimizing instruction of
fractional concepts.
Keywords: fractions; distance effects; number sense;
numerical magnitude representations

Are Fractions Natural Numbers, Too?
What is so natural about natural numbers? At first glance,
designating the counting numbers as ‘natural’ makes
intuitive sense. Indeed, the natural numbers seem to play an
important role in counting and numerical cognition more
generally (see Noël, 2005). This "obvious intuition" may
obscure the possibility that natural numbers are not alone in
their ‘naturalness'. Here, we offer evidence that people may
find fractional number values to be similarly intuitive.

A Cognitive Primitives Account of Ratio Processing
The proposition that fractional values may be intuitive
might seem at odds with the fact that children often have
considerable difficulties understanding symbolic fractions
(e.g., Ni & Zhou, 2005). Many have argued that these well
documented difficulties with fractions stem from innate
constraints on the human cognitive architecture (e.g.,
Bonato, Fabbri, Umiltà, & Zorzi, 2007; Dehaene, 1997;
Feigenson, Dehaene, & Spelke, 2004). Dehaene (1997)
cogently summed up the gist of such innate constraints
accounts when he wrote,

982

It remains a question whether symbolic fractions and
nonsymbolic ratios actually access the same analog
magnitude code. To date, there is no evidence
demonstrating a link between this sensitivity to the
magnitudes of nonsymbolic ratios and the acquired
understanding for magnitudes of symbolic fractions; no
research has shown that symbolic and nonsymbolic methods
of presenting the same values converge to engage the same
cognitive architecture for magnitude representation. We
aimed to fill this gap by asking if cross-format comparisons
of various fractional values (i.e. ratios composed of dots or
circles vs. traditional fraction symbols) demonstrate distance
effects. The distance effect – the phenomenon whereby error
rates and reaction times vary inversely with increasing
distance between the magnitudes of stimuli to be compared
– is considered to be a hallmark of analog magnitude
representation (Moyer & Landauer, 1967; Nieder, 2005;
Schneider & Siegler, 2010; Sekuler & Mierkiewicz, 1977).
For example, adult participants are faster and more accurate
when choosing the larger digit in a forced choice of 2 vs. 9
compared to choosing the larger of 8 vs. 9. The existence of
distance effects is generally taken to indicate an intuitive
understanding of the magnitude of a given class of numbers.
Until recently, numerical distance effects were primarily
investigated using symbolic whole numbers or their
nonsymbolic analogs – numerosities. However, several
recent studies have shown that human adults do indeed
exhibit distance effects when comparing symbolic fractions
(Jacob & Nieder, 2009; Kallai & Tzelgov, 2009, 2012;
Meert, Grégoire, & Noël, 2010; Meert, Grégoire, Seron, &
Noël, 2012; Schneider & Siegler, 2010; Siegler, Thompson,
& Schneider, 2011). Critically, the cognitive primitives
account predicts that different formats for fraction
magnitudes should still converge on a single amodal
representation of magnitude (cf. Balci & Gallistel, 2006).
This account therefore predicts that there should be crossformat distance effects for comparing fractional magnitudes.
With this experiment, we set out to test this key prediction.
Currently, no studies have definitively shown distance
effects using fractional stimuli across nonsymbolic and
symbolic formats. Doing so would demonstrate that people
can process and compare analog fractional magnitudes
independently of their particular formats.

The current experiment investigated the existence of
distance effects using cross-format magnitude comparison
tasks. In speeded tasks, participants picked the larger of two
stimuli, which were either symbolic fractions or
nonsymbolic ratios composed of pairs of dot arrays or pairs
of circles. We predicted that we would find distance effects
for cross-format comparisons similar to those typically
found for within-format comparisons (Halberda &
Feigenson, 2008; Moyer & Landauer, 1967; Odic, Libertus,
Feigenson, & Halberda, 2013), indicating that participants
have intuitive perceptual access to fractional magnitudes.

Method
Participants
55 undergraduate students at the University of Notre Dame
participated for course credit (33 female; ages 18-22).

Materials and Design
All training and testing stimuli were presented on
computers. Participants completed comparison tasks using
paired ratios in different formats. There were three different
stimulus formats: Arabic fractions, nonsymbolic dot ratios,
and nonsymbolic circle ratios (see Figure 1). For each crossformat pairing, 98 comparison trials were created by taking
all possible permutations of ratios corresponding to the
magnitudes .2, .3, .4, .5, .6, .7, and .8 across stimulus pairs.
Table 1 lists of all stimuli involved (described below).
Arabic Ratios Each symbolic stimulus was a fraction
composed of an Arabic numerator and denominator
separated by a fraction bar. Numerals for a given component
were approximately 48.5 mm tall. We chose simple proper
fractions because prior work has suggested that adult
participants might have easily accessible analog
representations of their values (Schneider & Siegler, 2010;
but see Bonato et al., 2007 for an alternative take).
Dot Array Ratios Each stimulus was composed of a pair of
dot arrays separated by a bar in the middle to form a nonsymbolic ratio (Figure 1, Table 1). Non-symbolic
numerosity arrays were composed of black dots on a white
background. Displays were constructed controlling dot
surface area so that all arrays had the same total surface area
regardless of dot numerosity. However, individual dot size
varied both within and between arrays, such that the size of
a given dot did not precisely correlate with array
numerosity. These controls mirror those that have been used
in previous studies of numerosity perception (Hurewitz,
Gelman, & Schnitzer, 2006; Xu, Spelke, & Goddard, 2005)
To ensure that participants could not use computational
procedures to estimate the ratios between these arrays, the
smallest numerosity displayed in any given array was 40.
This ensured that fast enumeration techniques, such as
subitizing, could not be employed given the rapid stimulus
presentation time (500ms, see Revkin, Piazza, Izard, Cohen,
& Dehaene, 2008).

Table 1: Magnitudes and Components of Ratio Stimuli
Ratio
Dots
Circle
Symbolic
Value
(mm/mm)
.2
40/200
28/62
2/10
.3
60/200
34/62
3/10
.4
80/200
39/62
4/10
.5
100/200
44/62
5/10
.6
120/200
48/62
6/10
.7
140/200
52/62
7/10
.8
160/200
56/62
8/10
Note. Circle stimuli are listed in terms of diameter lengths
of the numerators and denominators. Area ratios correspond
to the ratios of the squares of these diameters.

983

Circle Ratios Each stimulus was composed of a pair of
circles separated by a horizontal bar to form a fraction
(Figure 1, Table 1). Circles with 62.3mm diameters served
as denominators for all stimuli. Numerator diameters varied
to form the different area ratios.
X

2
10

250$ms$
500$ms$

a)

b)

2010). Summary score regressions predicted mean error
rates and median reaction times from inter-stimulus distance
for each of the three combinations of stimulus pairings. We
calculated distance for each comparison problem by
subtracting the magnitude of the smaller stimulus from that
of the larger stimulus. The logarithm of this distance
(henceforth, log distance) was used as the independent
variable in both error and reaction time regressions. Trials
for which the distance was zero (e.g. the Arabic 3/10 vs.
60/200 dots) actually had no unique correct answers, so they
were not included in the analysis. This analysis resulted in
six data points per regression – one for each of the six
possible distances (.1, .2, .3, .4, .5, and .6).
The second set of analyses was conducted using all raw
data points instead of summary scores. These analyses were
conducted to confirm that effects seen in summary score
analyses were not artifacts of data loss inherent to collapsing
aggregate data into summary indicators. In these
regressions, we separately predicted error rate and RT from
log distance. This analysis allowed additional controls to
check for the symmetry of effects, so regressions included
dummy coded control variables indicating a) whether the
larger stimulus was presented on the left or on the right and
b) which of stimulus types compared (e.g. dots or circles)
was presented on the left. These controls, which are lost
when we collapse across variables to create means and
medians for summary score analysis, can provide insight
into potential biases in participant behavior due to different
aspects of task structure. Trials with RTs in excess of 4 SD
above the mean were excluded from both RT and accuracy
analyses, resulting in removal of < 0.6% of data points for
each of the three types of comparisons. Only correct trials
were included for RT analyses. All reported regression
coefficients are standardized.

Which proportion was
greater?
Left
(Press F)

Right
(Press J)

Figure 1: a) Sample symbolic, dot, and circle stimuli, each
corresponding to the value of 4/10. b) A sample Arabic
fraction vs. dot ratio comparison trial.

Procedure
Participants were presented with three blocks of
comparison trials. Each block was composed wholly of
trials of a particular cross-format pairing (i.e., Circle-Dot,
Circle-Arabic, or Dot-Arabic). Block presentation order was
randomized. Each block was organized identically so that
participants first saw instructions, then received two practice
trials, and then performed the experimental trials. Each
participant completed all tasks in one hour-long session that
also included other comparison experiments, including
within-format versions of the comparisons described herein.
Due to the current focus on cross-format distance effects, as
well as space concerns, these tasks are not detailed in this
report.
Instructions asked to participants decide which of two
ratios was greater in magnitude. For circle stimuli,
participants were specifically told to estimate “the ratios
between circle areas or how much room each circle takes up
on the screen.” For dot arrays, they were told to estimate the
“ratio of the number of dots on top to the number of dots on
bottom.” They were also told arrays would flash too briefly
to count or to use calculations, so they should “just try to
feel out the ratio instead of applying a formula.”
For each trial, a fixation cross appeared in the center of
the screen for 250ms. The fixation cross was immediately
followed by comparison stimuli, which were presented for
500ms. Once the stimuli disappeared, a prompt asked
participants to indicate via keypress which ratio was greater
– ‘f’ for the ratio on the left and ‘j’ if for the one on the right
(see Figure 1). Participants saw 98 test trials in each crossformat block (one trial for each combination of stimulus
pairs) for a total of 294 trials.

Summary Analyses
At the summary level, the log distance between fraction
stimuli explained at least 98% of the variance in mean error
rates and at least 83% of the variance in median RTs across
all three types of comparisons (Table 2). Moreover
standardized coefficients were large, indicating that a
standard deviation decrease in logdistance led to nearly a
standard deviation increase in errors and RTs for each of the
comparison types. Consistent with our regression results,
the graphs in Figure 2 show that both RTs and error rates
decreased logarithmically as the distances between
comparison stimuli increased. These distance effects closely
paralleled those found by Schneider and Siegler (2010) for
purely symbolic fraction comparisons.

Results

Raw Data Analyses

We conducted two separate analyses for each of the three
types of cross-format pairings (Arabic vs. Circle, Arabic vs.
Dot, and Circle vs. Dot) to check for distance effects. The
first analysis used summary scores of central tendency,
paralleling analyses in previous research (e.g., Kallai &
Tzelgov, 2009; Meert et al., 2012; Schneider & Siegler,

Arabic Vs. Circle Stimuli The mean error rate for Arabic
vs. Circle stimuli pooled across all trials was 17%, (SD =
38%), indicating that individuals were largely accurate
when making comparisons across the two formats (see
Table 2 for a summary of all raw data analyses). Log

984

distance between stimuli was the only significant predictor
of error rates (standardized β = -.29, p < .01). Mean error
rates decreased from 32% to 2% as inter-stimulus distance
increased from .1 to .6 (see Figure 2). There was no effect
for which type of stimulus (circle or Arabic) was on the left
(β = .01, p = .42) or for which side displayed larger
fractional value (β = .01, p = .48). Similarly, log distance
was the only significant predictor of RT, with RT also
decreasing
logarithmically
as
distance
increased
(standardized β = -.19, p < .01).

Table 2: Summary and Raw Data Analyses
Summary Analyses
Mean
Median
Errors
RT
Arabic vs. Circle
Data Points
Adj R2
β log distance
β large left
β Arabic left
Arabic vs. Dot
Data Points
Adj R2
β log distance
β large left
β Arabic left
Circle vs. Dot
Data Points
Adj R2

a)

β log distance
β large left
β Circles left

d)

Raw Data Analyses
Error
RT
Rate

6
.98
-.99**
n/a
n/a

6
.99
-.99**
n/a
n/a

4595
.08
-.29**
.01
.01

3810
.04
-.19**
.02
-.02

6
.98
-.99**
n/a
n/a

6
.83
-.93**
n/a
n/a

4593
.07
-.25**
-.07**
-.02

3439
.01
-.10**
-.06**
.01

6
.98
-.99**
n/a
n/a

6
.92
-.97**
n/a
n/a

4609
.09
-.29**
-.02
.00

3651
.01
-.10**
.02
.01

Note. All coefficients are standardized. Measures denoted
n/a were unavailable for summary analyses do to collapsing
across trials. ** p < .01

b)

e)

c)

f)

Despite this bias, standardized regression coefficients
indicate that the effect size for log distance was more than
three times as large the effects due to this bias. There was no
effect for which type of stimulus (dot or Arabic) was
displayed on the left (β = -.02, p = .23).
When RT data were analyzed, there was a significant
effect of log distance, with RT decreasing as distance
increased (β = -.10, p < .01). As with error analysis, there
was an unanticipated effect for the side on which the large
stimulus appeared (β = -.06, p < .01). Participants responded
51ms faster on average when the larger stimulus was on the
left rather than the right. This left side bias, seen for both
RT and error, may simply have been due to participants
scanning the display from left to right. However, further
study is needed to determine the cause of this effect.
Nevertheless, the effect size for log distance was twice as
large as the effect of side bias. There was no effect for
which type of stimulus (dot or Arabic) was displayed on the
left (β = .01, p =.86).

Figure 2: Graphs depict summary level data. Left panels
(a, b, and c) show mean error rate as a function distance, and
bottom panels (d, e, and f) show RT as a function of
distance for the three types of cross-format comparisons.
Error bars indicate standard error.
Arabic Vs. Dot Stimuli The mean error rate for Arabic vs.
Dot stimuli pooled across all trials was 25% (SD = 44%)
indicating that individuals were largely accurate on
comparisons across the different formats. There was a
significant effect of log distance, with errors decreasing as
distance increased (standardized β = -.25, p < .01). Mean
error rates decreased from 39% to 10% as inter-stimulus
distance increased from .1 to .6 (Figure 2). There was also
an unanticipated effect for the side on which the large
stimulus appeared (β = -.07, p < .01). For Arabic vs. Dot
ratio comparisons, participants were on average 6% more
accurate when the larger stimulus was presented on the left
compared to when the larger stimulus was on the right.

Circle Vs. Dot Stimuli The mean error rate for Circle vs.
Dot stimuli pooled across all trials was 21%, indicating that
participants were mostly accurate on comparisons across the
two formats (SD = 41%.). As with the other stimulus
pairings, there was a significant effect of log distance such
that errors decreased as log distance increased (β = -.29, p <
.01). Mean error rates decreased from 37% to 5% as interstimulus distance increased from .1 to .6 (see Figure 2).
There were no effects for where the larger stimulus
appeared (β = -.02, p = .22) or which type was on the left (β
= .00, p = .84). There was also a significant effect of log
distance on RT, with times decreasing as log distance
increased (β = -.10, p < .01).

985

Discussion

suggest that the process used in judgments of differences in
magnitude between [ratio values] is the same as, or
analogous to, the process involved in judgments of
inequality for physical continua” (p. 1520).
These results pose an important challenge to accounts that
argue that basal human cognitive architectures are
incompatible with fractions concepts (e.g., Dehaene, 1997;
Feigenson et al., 2004). Considered in concert with other
recent findings, our evidence suggests that humans may
have an intuitive “sense” of ratio magnitudes that may be as
compatible with our cortical machinery as is the “sense” of
natural number. Just as the ANS allows us to perceive the
magnitudes of discrete numerosities, this ratio sense
provides humans with an intuitive feel for non-integer
magnitudes. One important implication is that nonsymbolic
ratios may function as cognitive primitives for supporting
rational number concepts.
This work takes an important step toward advancing the
cognitive primitive hypothesis, particularly in terms of
describing some aspects of the human perception of ratio
magnitudes. It also raises more questions for future
research. One set of questions regard the nature of the link
between ratio perception and the pedagogical process. For
instance, Dehaene’s (2007) charge about the incompatibility
of neural structure with fractions was centrally concerned
with the fact that learners often find it quite difficult to gain
a correct understanding of symbolic fractions. If, as our
results and others suggest, people come equipped to process
fractional values, why do people – particularly novice
learners – have such difficulties with symbolic fractions?
We suggest that these difficulties may result because the
most common methods of teaching do not optimally engage
the intuitive ratio processing system. For instance, the
majority of current educational initiatives teach fractions as
a sort of equipartitioning or equal sharing process that taps
counting skills and understanding of whole-number
magnitudes (e.g., Empson, 1999). It may be that these
processes encourage counting and thereby discourage use of
the ratio processing system. Indeed, past work has shown
that young children perform worse on ratio matching tasks
when partitioned, countable stimuli are used than when
continuous stimuli are used (e.g., Boyer & Levine, 2012).
It remains to be shown how we can best leverage this
perceptual appreciation for fractions to promote learning
about fractional symbols. Siegler and colleagues (Siegler et.
al, 2011; Siegler et al., 2013) have shown that an
appreciation for fraction magnitudes is a crucial determinant
of math achievement. It may be that the optimal way to
foster such an appreciation is to use nonsymbolic ratio
exemplars to inform learners about the magnitudes of
symbolic fractions. By using perceptual exemplars that
convey meaning about magnitude, we might eventually
come to teach what a fraction like 1/3 represents in much
the same way that we teach about what 4 represents. The
current experiment did not address these questions of
pedagogy because it focused on the performance of adults
already conversant with conventional symbols for

Analyses using both summary measures and raw
disaggregated data points consistently found distance effects
both for error rates and reaction times for all three types of
cross format comparisons. The full analysis of raw data
points showed that distances persisted as significant
predictors of performance, over and above noise due to
individual differences. Thus, it seems that participants could
access intuitive analog representations of fractional
magnitudes, regardless of the format in which they were
presented. Indeed, for both Arabic vs. Circle and Circle vs.
Dot comparisons, distance was the only significant predictor
of performance, and for Arabic vs. Dot comparisons,
distance effects were two to three times larger than effects
due to the (unanticipated and currently unexplained) 'large
left' presentation bias.
This is the first study demonstrating such distance effects
for fractional magnitudes across different notational
formats. Participants completed these tasks both with
stimuli composed of discrete non-symbolic numerosities
(dot arrays) and with stimuli composed of continuous
magnitudes (circle areas). Together, these performances
provide evidence of flexible and accurate processing of
nonsymbolic fractional magnitudes in ways similar to ANS
processing of discrete numerosities.
Two potential concerns regarding this interpretation are a)
the possibility that participants may have used conscious
computation to convert the stimuli to a common format and
b) that use of constant denominators within a particular
stimulus format may have allowed participants to make
comparisons solely using the numerators. However we were
able to ameliorate these concerns to some extent by
examining data from within-format comparison tasks run in
the same experimental sessions as the cross-format tasks.
First, cross-format comparisons on average took only 126ms
longer than within-format comparisons using the same
stimuli: differences ranged from 20ms (Dot-Circle: M =
478ms, SD= 378ms; Dot-Dot: M = 458ms, SD = 388ms), to
247ms longer (Arabic-Dot: M = 627ms, SD = 525ms;
Arabic-Arabic: M = 375ms, SD = 335ms). These
differences, though statistically significant, are substantively
negligible as 126ms─or even 247ms─is insufficient time for
computational conversions. Indeed, these RT differences are
much less than the ~400ms conversion costs that have been
reported for similar paradigms contrasting symbolic and
non-symbolic whole number magnitudes (Lyons, Ansari, &
Beilock, 2012). Second, RTs on within-format trials using
matching denominators did not differ from those using nonmatching denominators. Finally, preliminary results of a
study we have run using varying denominators replicate the
current findings.
These cross-format distance effects indicate that
processing of ratio magnitudes bears the same signature that
is typically found when other perceptual stimuli are used in
comparison tasks. Our conclusions, accordingly, parallel
those of Moyer & Landauer (1967) upon finding distance
effects among Arabic numerals: “These results strongly

986

representing fractions, rather than that of novices. It does,
however, open up a large space for future inquiry. For
instance, are distance effects for visuospatial or symbolic
fractions related to fraction knowledge test performance?
How do these cross-format distance effects develop with
age and experience? Answering this developmental question
will be pivotal to evaluating whether or not the abilities
examined in these experiments represent core competencies;
it will determine how ‘primitive’ these cognitive primitives
actually are. These and other questions await investigation.
More generally, research foregrounding our abilities to
perceive ratios per se is in its infancy, and there remain
many miles to go before we can draw conclusions about
whether this sense of proportion is truly on par with – or
perhaps even primary to – the sense for natural number that
has been much more thoroughly investigated. What is
certain, however, is that the study of ratio perception is full
of possibilities. One such possibility is that fractions may be
just as natural as natural numbers.

components interrupt the processing of the whole: The
case of fractions. Acta Psychologica, 139, 358–369.
Lyons, I. M., Ansari, D., & Beilock, S. L. (2012). Symbolic
estrangement: Evidence against a strong association
between numerical symbols and the quantities they
represent. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
141, 635-641.
McCrink, K., & Wynn, K. (2007). Ratio abstraction by 6month-old infants. Psychological science, 18, 740–745.
Meert, G., Grégoire, J., & Noël, M.-P. (2010). Comparing
5/7 and 2/9: Adults can do it by accessing the magnitude
of the whole fractions. Acta Psychologica, 135, 284–292.
Meert, G., Grégoire, J., Seron, X., & Noël, M.-P. (2012).
The mental representation of the magnitude of symbolic
and nonsymbolic ratios in adults. The Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 65, 702–724.
Moyer, R.S., & Landauer, T.K. (1967). Time required for
judgements of numerical inequality. Nature, 215, 1519–
1520.
Ni, Y., & Zhou, Y.-D. (2005). Teaching and Learning
Fraction and Rational Numbers: The Origins and
Implications of Whole Number Bias. Educational
Psychologist, 40, 27–52.
Nieder, A. (2005). Counting on neurons: the neurobiology
of numerical competence. Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
6, 177–190.
Noël, M.-P. (2005). Finger gnosia: a predictor of numerical
abilities in children? Child Neuropsychology, 11, 413–
430.
Odic, D., Libertus, M. E., Feigenson, L., & Halberda, J.
(2013). Developmental change in the acuity of
approximate number and area representations.
Developmental Psychology, 49, 1103–1112.
Revkin, S. K., Piazza, M., Izard, V., Cohen, L., & Dehaene,
S. (2008). Does Subitizing Reflect Numerical Estimation?
Psychological Science, 19, 607–614.
Schneider, M., & Siegler, R. S. (2010). Representations of
the magnitudes of fractions. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 36,
1227–1238.
Sekuler, R., & Mierkiewicz, D. (1977). Children’s
Judgments of Numerical Inequality. Child Development,
48, 630–633.
Siegler, R. S., Fazio, L. K., Bailey, D. H., & Zhou, X.
(2013). Fractions: the new frontier for theories of
numerical development. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17,
13–19.
Siegler, R. S., Thompson, C. A., & Schneider, M. (2011).
An integrated theory of whole number and fractions
development. Cognitive Psychology, 62, 273–296.
Sophian, C. (2000). Perceptions of proportionality in young
children: matching spatial ratios. Cognition, 75, 145–170.
Vallentin, D., & Nieder, A. (2008). Behavioral and
Prefrontal Representation of Spatial Proportions in the
Monkey. Current Biology, 18, 1420–1425.
Xu, F., Spelke, E. S., & Goddard, S. (2005). Number sense
in human infants. Developmental Science, 8, 88–101.

Acknowledgments
This research was partially supported by the Moreau
Academic Diversity Postdoctoral Fellowship Program of the
University of Notre Dame. We thank Michael Villano for
his help in stimuli construction.

References
Bonato, M., Fabbri, S., Umiltà, C., & Zorzi, M. (2007). The
mental representation of numerical fractions: Real or
integer? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 33, 1410–1419.
Boyer, T. W., & Levine, S. C. (2012). Child proportional
scaling: Is 1/3 = 2/6 = 3/9 = 4/12? Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 111, 516–533.
Dehaene, S. (1997). The number sense. Oxford University
Press, New York.
Empson, S. B. (1999). Equal Sharing and Shared Meaning:
The Development of Fraction Concepts in a First-Grade
Classroom. Cognition and Instruction, 17, 283–342.
Feigenson, L., Dehaene, S., & Spelke, E. (2004). Core
systems of number. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 307–
314.
Halberda, J., & Feigenson, L. (2008). Developmental
change in the acuity of the “number sense”: The
approximate number system in 3-, 4-, 5-, and 6-year-olds
and adults. Developmental Psychology, 44, 1457–1465.
Hurewitz, F., Gelman, R., & Schnitzer, B. (2006).
Sometimes area counts more than number. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 103, 19599–19604.
Jacob, S. N., & Nieder, A. (2009). Tuning to non-­‐symbolic
proportions in the human frontoparietal cortex. European
Journal of Neuroscience, 30, 1432–1442.
Kallai, A. Y., & Tzelgov, J. (2009). A generalized fraction:
An entity smaller than one on the mental number line.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 35, 1845–1864.
Kallai, A. Y., & Tzelgov, J. (2012). When meaningful

987

