UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Assessing the time course of the influence of featural, distributional and spatial
representations during reading

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8p62f18q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Guerra, Ernesto
Huetting, Falk
Knoeferle, Pia

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Assessing the time course of the influence of featural, distributional and
spatial representations during reading
Ernesto Guerra1,2 (ernesto.guerra@mpi.nl)
Falk Huettig2 (falk.huettig@mpi.nl)
Pia Knoeferle1 (knoeferl@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de)
1

Cognitive Interaction Technology Excellence Cluster and Department of Linguistics,
Bielefeld University, Inspiration I, 33615, Bielefeld, Germany
2

Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Wundtlaan 1,
Nijmegen, 6525 XD, The Netherlands

Abstract
What does semantic similarity between two concepts mean?
How could we measure it? The way in which semantic
similarity is calculated might differ depending on the
theoretical notion of semantic representation. In an eyetracking reading experiment, we investigated whether two
widely used semantic similarity measures (based on featural
or distributional representations) have distinctive effects on
sentence reading times. In other words, we explored whether
these measures of semantic similarity differ qualitatively. In
addition, we examined whether visually perceived spatial
distance interacts with either or both of these measures. Our
results showed that the effect of featural and distributional
representations on reading times can differ both in direction
and in its time course. Moreover, both featural and
distributional information interacted with spatial distance, yet
in different sentence regions and reading measures. We
conclude that featural and distributional representations are
distinct components of semantic representation.
Keywords: semantic similarity, featural representations,
distributional representations, spatial distance, eye tracking,
reading.

Introduction
In the context of semantic representation of concepts, two
perspectives have dominated research in the cognitive
sciences. On one view, semantic representation is based on
the perceived physical characteristics of objects (e.g., shape,
color, etc.), but also the functional knowledge gained
through direct interaction with them (e.g., is-edible, used-tocut, etc., see Cree & McRae, 2003; McClelland & Rogers,
2003; McRae & Boisvert, 1998; McRae, de Sa, &
Seidenberg, 1997; McRae et al., 2005; Rogers &
McClelland, 2004, 2008; Vigliocco et al, 2004). For
example, the word sheep refers to something that bleats, is
covered with soft wool, is white or brown, has four legs, and
eats grass. This sort of information is generally acquired
through the senses. To put it in Andrews and colleagues‟
words (see Andrews, Vigliocco & Vinson, 2005, 2007,
2009), this kind of representational information can be
described as extra-linguistic, featural and experiential. We
will refer to this sort of data as featural representations for
the rest of the paper.

On a different view, semantic representation can be
captured by examining the statistical dependencies between
words across corpora of spoken and written language. Such
corpora could include novels, essays, or articles from
newspapers and scientific journals, but also transcribed
spoken conversations. Latent semantic indexing (LSI, see
Deerwester, Dumais, Landauer, Furnas, Harshman, 1990;
Landauer & Dumais, 1997), for instance, is a method that
reduces the dimensionality of a language corpus by
decomposing each text in a frequency matrix, or textdocument. In this model, the statistics are derived by a
decomposition of the term frequencies in each of texts.
Thus, this data can be described as intra-linguistic,
disembodied and distributional, as we will refer to it for the
rest of the paper.
Indeed, both distributional and featural representations
alone can produce models of semantic representation
capable of accounting for human behavioral data (McRae et
al., 1997; Landauer & Dumais, 1997; Lund & Burgess,
1996; Vigliocco et al., 2004). For instance, McRae et al.
(1997) used feature-based similarity cosines to predict a
number of human behavioral responses such as reaction
times and similarity ratings. Similarly, Landauer and
Dumais (1997) used distributional similarity cosines to
predict performance both of non-native speakers in an
English synonym test and of native speakers in a wordsorting task. Such studies, however, have concentrated on
one of these sources of information, often neglecting the
other.
More recently, evidence from machine learning has
showed that models integrating both featural and
distributional information can outperform featural- or
distributional-only models (Andrews et al., 2005, 2007,
2009). For instance, Andrews et al. (2007) trained three
Bayesian models using either a combination of both featural
and distributional representations, or featural or
distributional representations alone. The three models were
then compared on their predictive power in modeling human
data from three semantic tasks; word association norms
from, reaction times from a lexical priming experiment, and
picture-word interference latencies. Overall, the combined
model was the best predictor of human performance in the
three tasks.

2309

Andrews and colleagues advocate that featural and
distributional representations are both critical for language
acquisition and that both contribute to different aspects of
semantic representation. Moreover, they argue that theories
of semantic representation that exclude either of these two
types of representations in favor of the other, would be
inevitably limited in their scope (see Andrews et al., 2009:
p. 466). Featural representations can be thought to
contribute to semantic representation via direct interaction
with things in the environment. For instance, a sheep is
known to bleat, to be soft, white and to have four legs, all
attributes perceptible through the senses. A clear limitation
of featural representations, however, is that they can only be
acquired for concepts that have a perceptible referent in the
physical world. Concepts like peace or war are difficult to
describe in terms of perceptible features (but see Kousta et
al., 2011 for a focus on introspective information).
Distributional representations, in turn, do not distinguish
between levels of concreteness of concepts, equally treating
sheep and war as vectors in a matrix. On the other hand,
distributional representations from current linguistic corpora
focus on the statistical patterns of words in a linguistic
context and cannot say anything about the physical world.
Thus, featural and distributional representations alone can
only provide limited insight into semantic representations.
Against this background, it seems plausible to argue that
featural and distributional representations are in fact
qualitatively different. Semantic priming and picture-word
interference experiments can indeed provide measures of
human behavior related to semantic similarity. However,
response times in such tasks cannot reveal potential
differences in the time course with which featural and
distributional representations come into play during online
semantic interpretation. Furthermore, if these two kinds of
representations are qualitatively distinct, it is likely that they
distinctively interact with other cues such as spatial distance
(see, Casasanto, 2008; Guerra & Knoeferle, 2012). We
examined these two questions using eye tracking.

turn can further our understanding about the different
components (e.g., featural, distributional, visuo-perceptual)
that contribute to semantic representation and processing.

Method
Participants Twenty-eight native speakers of German with
normal or corrected-to-normal vision were recruited to take
part in the experiment. None of them learnt a second
language before age six. They all gave informed consent
and received a monetary compensation of six euros for
participating.
Materials and Design We constructed 60 German
sentences, expressing either similarity (1) or difference (2)
between two concrete nouns. Words that differed between
the two versions of an item were matched for frequency and
length. A translated example item is presented below
(critical regions in bold font).
(1) „A goatNP1 andcoord. a sheepNP2 areVP1 indeedADV
similarADJ, arguedVP2 the teacherNP3‟.
(2) „A ratNP1 andcoord. a sheepNP2 areVP1 indeedADV
differentADJ, arguedVP2 the teacherNP3‟.
Spatial distance was introduced into the design by
presenting two playing cards in a visual context preceding
each sentence. On critical trial, the two cards moved either
close together or far apart. We combined each level of
similarity (similar vs. different) and spatial distance (close
vs. far) in a 2 x 2 within-subjects within-items Latin square
design. This resulted in four experimental conditions,
namely, Close-Similar, Far-Similar, Close-Dissimilar, and
Far-Dissimilar. Each participant saw one condition of each
item, and the same number of items per condition.

The present study
The purpose of the present research is two-folded; first, we
examined the time course of the effects of featural and
distributional representations during real-time sentence
interpretation, and, second, we examined whether these
semantic similarity measures interact with spatial distance.
The second question is based on recent evidence from eye
movements during reading showing that spatial distance
between objects (far vs. close) modulated online semantic
interpretation of sentences expressing similarity (or
difference) between abstract nouns (Guerra & Knoeferle,
2012).
Contrasting with those results, we first need to establish
whether spatial distance could in fact interact with sentences
expressing similarity between concrete nouns. Extending
previous findings from abstract- to concrete-noun
comparison would allow us to further investigate the kind of
similarity that can interact with spatial distance, which in

Figure 1: Schematic representation of an experimental trial.
Procedure Before the eye-tracking experiment, the
experimenter performed a 9-point calibration procedure.
Next, participants completed ten practice trials. After

2310

practice, the experimenter re-calibrated the eye tracker and
the experiment started. Figure 1 depicts an example
experimental trial. On each trial, participants inspected a
visual context with two playing cards that moved to
different positions and turned around after three seconds,
showing two nouns that appeared in the ensuing sentence.
Subsequently, participants read a sentence and made a
sensibility judgment. Finally, they verified whether a picture
of two playing cards matched or mismatched the two
playing cards presented before the sentence.

influence of our two similarity measures (based on featural
versus distributional representations) on reading times, and
assessed how these two measures interact with spatial
information.

Data Analysis 1
Based on previous findings (see Guerra & Knoeferle, 2012),
we defined three critical regions in the sentences (i.e., the
NP2, ADJ and the VP2). Before computing reading
measures, we removed all fixations longer than 1200 or
shorter than 80 ms (cf. Sturt, Keller, & Dubey, 2010).
Subsequently, we calculated three reading measures for
each critical sentence. First-pass reading time was defined
as the sum of all fixations from first entering a region until
moving to another region. Regression path duration was
defined as the sum of all fixations from first entering a
region until moving to the right of that region. Finally, total
reading time was defined as the sum of all fixations in a
region during the trial (see Rayner, 1998). We analyzed the
log-transformed reading measures using a “maximal” linear
mixed effects regression (LMER; see Barr et al., 2013)
including random intercepts for participants and items, and
random slopes for the fixed effects (i.e., similarity, spatial
distance) and their interaction.

Results
Data analysis revealed no reliable effects at the NP2 region
(all p-values > 0.1) but a reliable main effect of spatial
distance emerged at the ADV region (p < .03). More
importantly, reliable interaction effects between spatial
distance and similarity emerged in first-pass reading times
(p < 0.004) and regression path duration (p < .03) at the VP2
region. Additionally, a reliable main effect of similarity
emerged in this region in total reading times (p = .01).
Figure 2 presents the pattern of interaction for first-pass
reading times and regression path duration for VP2.

Figure 2: Mean first-pass reading time (on the left) and
regression path duration (on the right) in milliseconds for
the VP2 region as a function of sentence type (similar vs.
dissimilar) and spatial distance (light-gray bars and darkgrey bars represent close and far conditions, respectively).
Error bars represent standard errors of the mean.

Data Analysis 2
We performed latent semantic indexing (LSI, see
Deerwester et al., 1990; Landauer & Dumais, 1997) for each
noun of the 60 concrete-noun triplets (e.g., goat, rat, sheep).
A corpus of 20,000 Wikipedia articles in German was used
to train our set of triplets. From that initial corpus, a number
of 1,618 articles contained words from our item set and was
used to calculate LSI vectors of length (K) 10,000.
Similarity between the LSI vectors representing the words
was calculated by means of the cosine similarity of the LSI
vectors. Additionally, for a subset of our items (N=37) we
obtained comparable cosine values between concrete nouns
from feature-based similarity norms (McRae et al., 2005).
Figure 3 presents the correlation between featural and
distrubutional cosine values.

Discussion
Previous findings showed that spatial distance could rapidly
interact with the interpretation of semantic similarity
between abstract nouns (e.g., war, peace) as reflected by
sentence reading times (Guerra & Knoeferle, 2012). In the
present study, we extended these results from abstract to
concrete nouns. As can be seen in Figure 2, first-pass and
regression path reading times were longer for sentences
expressing similarity between concrete nouns when
preceded by a visual context with objects far apart (vs. close
together), while reading times for sentences expressing
dissimilarity were longer when preceded by object close
together (vs. far apart). We thus replicated the previouslyobserved interaction effects. Next, we evaluated the

2311

Figure 3: Pearson correlation between featural (McRae et
al., 2005) and distributional (LSI) cosine values

Figure 4: Scatter plots of the LMER model residuals for four reading measures where statistically significant effects of
distributional or featural representations were observed. On the y-axis, the reading time residuals from the LMER models
are plotted. The x-axis plots the cosine values based on distributional representations (graphs on the left), and based on
featural representations (graphs on the right). Panel A. depicts the main effect of the distributional factor on first-pass
reading times at the NP2 region for both the far and the close conditions. Panel B. shows the main effect of the featural
factor on regression path duration at the NP2 region for both spatial distance conditions. Panel C. presents the interaction
effect between distributional factor and spatial distance in total reading times at the NP2 region. Panel D. shows the
interaction effect between the featural factor and spatial distance in total reading times at the VP2 region.
The effect of distributional and featural representations on
log-transformed reading times, and their interaction with
spatial distance, was evaluated on the subset of items for
which we had both similarity cosine values using LMER
models. Such models included, for each reading measure
and critical region, distributional and featural cosines values
as fixed effects and their interaction with spatial distance.
Following the “maximal” logic, we also included random
intercepts for participants and items, and random slopes for
the fixed effects and their interaction.

Results
At the NP2 region, the LMER analysis revealed reliable
main effects of distributional representations in first-pass
and an interaction with spatial distance in total reading times
(all ps < 0.03). Moreover, main effects of featural
representations were marginal in first-pass (p = 0.05) and
statistically significant in regression path (p = 0.03). No
effects of distributional or featural representations emerged
at the ADJ region (all ps > 0.1).
By contrast, at the VP2 region, reliable interaction effects
between spatial distance and featural similarity emerged in

first-pass, regression path (both p-values < 0.003) and total
reading times (p < 0.05), in addition to reliable main effects
of distance in first-pass and regression path (both p-values <
0.03). Yet, no interaction between spatial distance and
distributional similarity emerged in this region. Figure 4
illustrates the influence of distributional and featural
representations, and their interaction with spatial distance,
on sentence reading times.

Discussion
In our second analysis, we examined whether featural and
distributional representations had a distinctive signature on
reading times for sentences expressing either similarity or
difference between two concrete nouns, and moreover,
whether they interact with spatial distance.
The results of the LMER showed that both featural and
distributional representations have an early (at the NP2 in
first-pass and regression path, respectively) but distinctive
influence on reading times. As it can be seen when
comparing panels A and B in Figure 4, reading times were
positively correlated with the cosine values based on
distributional representations (A), but negatively correlated

2312

with the cosine values based on featural representations (B).
Moreover, the results showed reliable interaction effects
between spatial distance and both featural and distributional
representations. Yet, such effects emerged in different
sentences regions and different measures; distributional
representations interacted with spatial distance only in a late
reading measure (i.e., total times) while we observed a
pervasive interaction effect at the VP2 region between
spatial distance and featural representations in early and late
reading measures.
Compared to the contrasting main effects of these
semantic similarity measures on reading times at the NP2
region, any reliable interaction effects followed the same
pattern for both kinds of similarity measures. Overall,
reading times increased as the cosine values (or the degree
of association between words) increased, however this main
effect was significantly reduced when sentences were
preceded by objects close together compared to far apart.
These findings are in coherence with the results from
Analysis 1, and with previously reported interaction effects
between spatial distance and semantic similarity during
sentence comprehension (see Guerra & Knoeferle, 2012).

General Discussion
One major goal for the cognitive sciences is to elucidate the
nature of human semantic representations. We described
two main ways of measuring semantic similarity, and briefly
discussed how, in most cases, each of them has been used to
understand semantic representation in isolation. Indeed,
both cosines based on statistical patterns of words among
words (the distributional tradition) and cosines based on
concepts features (the featural tradition) are good predictors
of human-based behavioral data (see, e.g., Landauer &
Dumais, 1997; McRae et al. 1997). However, recent
computational-modeling evidence showed that the
combination of both kinds of representations has better
predictive power compared those using either of them (e.g.,
Andrews et al., 2007).
We examined whether featural and distributional
representations have qualitatively different effects in the
context of sentence comprehension. Participants‟ eye
movements were recorded as they read sentences expressing
similarity (or dissimilarity) between two concrete nouns. In
addition, two objects either far apart or close together
preceded each critical item sentence. In two planned
analyses, we assessed the effects of featural, distributional,
and spatial information respectively on sentences reading
times.
The first analysis showed that spatial distance between
objects in the visual context modulated sentence-reading
times as a function of sentence meaning. This replicated
previously-reported effects of spatial distance on reading
times and extended them to concrete (rather than abstract)
nouns. The second analysis revealed distinctive effect
patterns of featural and distributional representations on
reading times. At an early sentence region (i.e., NP2) and in
early measures, both featural and distributional similarity

cosines affected reading times significantly. Interestingly,
these effects had opposite directionality: The stronger the
association based on distributional representations, the
longer the reading times; the stronger the association based
on featural representations, the shorter the reading times.
Qualitative differences between featural and distributional
representations can thus be captured using online measures
with fine temporal resolution. In addition to the early main
effects, interaction effects between distance and both
semantic similarity measures emerged in the reading times.
While their time course was different for featural and
distributional representations, the direction of the effect was
the same. Spatial distance modulated the effect of
distributional representations at the NP2 in a late measure
(i.e., total times); in turn, it modulated the effect of featural
representations at the VP2 region in early and late measures.
Overall then, featural and distributional representations
have distinct effects on semantic processing. In agreement
with the proposal by Andrews and colleagues, our results
suggest that these two indexes of semantic similarity are in
fact qualitatively different. The outcome of our experiment
offers two main contributions. First, our study examined the
fine-grained time course of the effects of these two distinct
similarity measures. In doing so, we showed that these
measures can rapidly (e.g., in first-pass) and incrementally
(as the sentence unfolds) index semantic interpretation.
Moreover, examining these effects in the context of
sentence reading provides a further evaluation of the
influence of these measures on human semantic processing.
Second, our study enabled further investigation of the
relation between semantic similarity and spatial distance.
Moving from abstract to concrete nouns permitted us to
evaluate whether spatial distance modulated the effects of
either or both featural and distributional information on
reading times. In this regard, the interaction patterns
observed in Data Analysis 1 were largely driven by the
overlap of features between the two concrete concepts,
rather than the statistical dependencies between the two
words in corpora. However, the reliable interaction effect
observed at the NP2 region in total reading times, suggests
that spatial distance can also interact with distributional
information although in later measures compared to featural
representations.
A limitation of the present study is that the feature-based
similarity cosines were obtained from a norming study
conducted in English (McRae et al., 2005), while the
language of the reading experiment was German. Future
research should address this open issue, either by collecting
feature-norms from German speakers or by conducting a
similar eye-tracking reading study in English. We chose
McRae‟s norms, since it included a larger number of our set
of word pairs compared to other existing semantic features
norms (cf. Vinson & Vigliocco, 2008). Moreover, while the
present results contribute to the understanding of semantic
representations, we are at this stage hesitant to speculate on
the directionality of these early effects and its explanation.

2313

Future research should further explore the consistency of
these patterns.

Conclusion
In sum, the results from the present study offer a number of
new insights into the role of featural, distributional and
spatial information for the semantic interpretation of
similarity. First, we extended previous results on spatial
distance-similarity interactions from abstract nouns to
concrete nouns. Second, based on our results, it is clear that
both featural and distributional representations index rapid
and incremental effects during sentence processing. Third,
such effects were qualitatively distinct, both in terms of
their time course and directionality. Finally, we
demonstrated that both representational sources can interact
with spatial information, but that their interactions differ in
the time course.
In conclusion, our results support the idea that these two
similarity measures represent qualitatively different aspects
of semantic representation and that models that combine
both representational sources can reveal their differential
influence on human semantic interpretation.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the Cognitive Interaction
Technology Excellence Cluster (CITEC, German Research
Foundation, PK) and by a PhD scholarship awarded to EG
by the Ministry of Education, Government of Chile. We
thank John McCrae and Phillip Cimiano at the Semantic
Computing Group (CITEC, Bielefeld University) for their
valuable help in calculating the Latent Semantic Indexation
for our training set and Clara Matheus at the Language and
Cognition Lab (Bielefeld University) for matching our
German nouns to the similarity norms of the English nouns.

References
Andrews, M., Vigliocco, G., & Vinson, D. (2005). The role
of attributional and distributional information in semantic
representation. Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 127–132). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Andrews, M., Vigliocco, G., & Vinson, D. (2007).
Evaluating the contribution of intra-linguistic and extralinguistic data to the structure of human semantic
representations. Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 767-772). Austin,
TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Andrews, M., Vigliocco, G., & Vinson, D. (2009).
Integrating experiential and distributional data to learn
semantic representations. Psychl Review, 116, 463-498.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013).
Random-effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis
testing: Keep it maximal. JML, 68, 255-278.
Casasanto, D. (2008) Similarity and proximity: When does
close in space mean close in mind. Memory and
Cognition, 36, 1047-1056.

Cree, G. S., & McRae, K. (2003). Analyzing the factors
underlying the structure and computation of the meaning
of chipmunk, cherry, chisel, cheese, and cello (and many
other such concrete nouns). JEP: General, 132, 163-201.
Deerwester, S. C., Dumais, S. T., Landauer, T. K., Furnas,
G. W., & Harshman, R. A. (1990). Indexing by latent
semantic analysis. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science, 41, 391-407.
Guerra, E., & Knoeferle, P. (2012). Abstract language
comprehension is incrementally modulated by nonreferential spatial information: evidence from eyetracking. Proceedings of the 34th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1620–1625). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Kousta, S. T., Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D. P., Andrews, M., &
Del Campo, E. (2011). The representation of abstract
words: why emotion matters. JEP: General, 140, 14-34.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to
Plato's problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of
acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review, 104, 211-240.
Lund, K., & Burgess, C. (1996). Producing highdimensional semantic spaces from lexical co-occurrence.
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers,
28, 203-208.
McClelland, J. L., & Rogers, T. T. (2003). The parallel
distributed processing approach to semantic cognition.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4, 310-322.
McRae, K., & Boisvert, S. (1998). Automatic semantic
similarity priming. JEP: LMC, 24, 558-572.
McRae, K., Cree, G., Seidenberg, M., & McNorgan, C.
(2005). Semantic feature production norms for a large set
of living and nonliving things. Behavior Research
Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 37, 547-559
McRae, K., de Sa, V. R., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1997). On
the nature and scope of featural representations of word
meaning. JEP: General, 126, 99-130.
Rayner, K. (1998). Eye movements in reading and
information processing: 20 years of research.
Psychological Bulletin, 124, 372-422.
Rogers, T. T., & McClelland, J. L. (2004). Semantic
cognition: A parallel distributed processing approach.
The MIT Press.
Rogers, T. T., & McClelland, J. L. (2008). Précis of
semantic cognition: A parallel distributed processing
approach. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 31, 689-749.
Sturt, P., Keller, F., & Dubey, A. (2010). Syntactic priming
in comprehension: Parallelism effects with and without
coordination. JML, 62, 333-351.
Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D. P., Lewis, W., & Garrett, M. F.
(2004). Representing the meanings of object and action
words: The featural and unitary semantic space
hypothesis. Cognitive Psychology, 48, 422-488.
Vinson, D. P., & Vigliocco, G. (2008). Semantic feature
production norms for a large set of objects and events.
Behavior Research Methods, 40, 183-190.

2314

