UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Beat gestures facilitate speech production

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8pw1x0sx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Lucero, Che
Zaharchuk, Holly
Casasanto, Daniel

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Beat gestures facilitate speech production
Ché Lucero
Holly Zaharchuk
Daniel Casasanto
(chelucero@uchicago.edu) (hzaharchuk@uchicago.edu) (casasanto@uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Chicago
5848 S. University Ave, Chicago, IL 60637 USA
Abstract

Beat gestures are simple, stereotyped, and repetitive
movements. They contrast, therefore, with iconic gestures,
which are often novel, elaborated, and complex. These
differences mean that beat gestures should be less
cognitively taxing for the speaker. Simply moving the hands
could raise the activation level of a sought-for word
(Butterworth & Hadar 1989; Ravizza, 2003; Alibali &
Hostetter 2007), irrespective of the form of the movement.
Thus, beats might provide a benefit to the speaker at
minimal cost.
How can we test whether beat gestures facilitate speech
production? Studies seeking evidence that gesturing benefits
speech production have primarily relied on gestureprevention paradigms. Typically, participants perform a
language production task while their gestures are restricted
by sitting on their hands (e.g. Hostetter, Alibali, & Kita,
2007), holding an item (e.g. Frick-Horbury & Guttentag,
1998), having their hands restrained (e.g. Pine, Bird, & Kirk
2007), or are simply instructed not to gesture (e.g. Graham
& Heywood, 1975). Performance in the gesture-prevented
condition is then compared to a naturalistic condition in
which no secondary task interfering with gesture is required.
Performance on language production tasks usually worsens
when gestures are prevented (but see Beattie & Coughlan
1999).
Can data from gesture prevention studies provide
evidence that gestures facilitate speech production? Not
really. The only inference they can license is that preventing
gestures can impair speaking. Gesture prevention conditions
are generally less natural than free-gesture conditions, so
any observed speech impairment could result from the
presence of unnatural task demands, and not from the
absence of gesture. More fundamentally, it is not possible
even in principle to show that gesturing benefits speaking
on the basis of gesture prevention; gestures must be
produced, and their impact on speech measured.
In order to test for a causal influence of gesture on speech
production, a treatment condition in which gesturing is
required must be compared with a control condition in
which participants are allowed to behave naturally,
gesturing or not gesturing at will. In gesture prevention
paradigms, the relative naturalness of the conditions works
in favor of the hypothesis that gesturing benefits speech, and
is therefore a potential source of Type I error (i.e., false
positive results). By contrast, when gestures are required the
relative naturalness of the conditions works against the
hypothesis that gesturing benefits speech.

Does gesturing help speakers find the right words? According
to several theories of speech-gesture relationships, iconic
gestures should facilitate speech production, but beat gestures
should not. Here we tested the effects of gesturing on word
production in two experiments. Participants produced lowfrequency words from their definitions while instructed to
perform beat gestures, iconic gestures, or while not given any
instructions about gesturing (baseline condition). Compared
to baseline, participants were faster to produce the target
words while performing beat gestures, bimanually or with
their left hand alone, but they were slower to produce the
target words when instructed to perform iconic gestures.
Results provide the first evidence that beat gestures can help
speakers produce words. This benefit may arise from the fact
that gestures are motor actions, rather than from any special
properties of gestures, per se.
Keywords: Speech production; Beat gesture; Iconic gesture.

Introduction
Does gesturing help speakers produce words? Studies
addressing this question have tended to focus on iconic
gestures, gestures that use the hands to depict some aspect
of the referent of the words they accompany (McNeill,
1992). For example, drawing a circle in the air could help
speakers produce the word “carousel,” either by crossmodal priming of the word’s form (Krauss, 1998), by
helping speakers formulate a pre-verbal message (DeRuiter,
2000), by packaging their thoughts for speech (Alibali, Kita,
& Young, 2000), or by helping them maintain a mental
image of the word’s referent during lexical search (Wesp,
Hesse, Keutmann, & Wheateon, 2001).
Unlike iconic gestures, which are taken to be meaningful
and believed to benefit speech production, beat gestures
which often mark prosodic peaks in speech are taken to be
meaningless (i.e., non-referential). They are not depictive,
so they cannot contribute to word production in any of the
ways that iconics are proposed to help. Some theorists have
expressly denied any role for beat gestures in producing
words, suggesting that they “do not seem to be involved in
lexical search” or other stages of speech production (Krauss
& Hadar, 1999).
Yet, beat gestures are ubiquitous, they are often produced
when speakers are searching for words, and they have been
found to occur as often as iconic gestures during successful
resolution of tip-of-the-tongue states (Beattie & Coughlan,
1999). We propose that beat gestures could facilitate word
production.

898

Here we evaluated the effects of required gesturing on
word production to test the long-standing proposal that
iconic gestures facilitate speech, and also to test our
proposal that beat gestures can help speakers find the right
words. In Experiment 1, we assigned participants to perform
iconic gestures and beat gestures during a word-naming
task, and compared performance in these conditions to
performance in a naturalistic control condition in which
participants received no instructions about gesturing. To
preview our results, only beat gestures facilitated word
production relative to control. In Experiment 2, we
compared word production during bimanual beats, righthand beats, and left-hand beats against word production in
the naturalistic control condition, to investigate the
mechanism by which beats facilitate word production.

recorded their gestures as well as the computer screen. The
IRB approved recording, and all participants consented to
recording beforehand.
Procedure Word definitions were presented to participants
one at a time, in 3 blocks of 30 words each. Each block
constituted one of the gesture-instruction conditions, and
contained one word list. The assignment of word lists to
conditions, and the order of the conditions, were
counterbalanced across participants. The order of items
within a wordlist was randomized for each participant.
Participants were instructed to say aloud the target word
that matched the definition. At the start of each trial a blank
screen appeared for one second, after which a white fixation
cross appeared for two seconds. A word definition in white
text 15-point font replaced the fixation cross, and remained
until the end of the trial. After eleven seconds, a hint
appeared below the definition consisting of the first few
letters of the word. After fifteen seconds from definition
onset, the trial ended and a new trial began. Participants
could hit the spacebar to end the trial if they produced a
response before it timed out.
In the Iconic Gesture condition, participants were asked to
depict the word with their hands as they searched their
memory for a word that matched the definition. In the Beat
Gesture condition, participants were asked to perform a
repetitive bimanual beat gesture. In the No Gesture
Instruction condition, no reference to gesturing was made.
Videos were played after the instructions to demonstrate
the types of gestures required in the Iconic and Beat gesture
conditions. For Iconic gestures, videos demonstrating a
pantomime (i.e., hammering for the word “hammer”), a
depictive gesture (i.e., tracing and arch in the air for the
word “arch”), and a metaphoric gesture (i.e., a rightward
sweep of the right hand for the word “future”) played, with
the target words appearing at the top of the videos. For Beat
gestures a video demonstrated a repeated, rhythmic
bimanual palm-up-open hand gesture (cf. Müller, 2004).
Before each block participants received written
instructions, saw one trial demonstrated by the
experimenter, and then performed one practice trial
themselves. If the participant expressed confusion or
performed inappropriately, the experimenter triggered two
more practice trials. All participants displayed a good
understanding of the task by the end of the practice trials.

Experiment 1: Does gesturing help speakers
produce words?
Experiment 1 tested whether assigning participants to make
beat gestures or iconic gestures facilitated their word
production relative to a baseline condition in which gestures
were neither required nor inhibited. According to previous
theories (Krauss, 1998; DeRuiter, 2000; Alibali et al.,
2000), gestures help speakers find words by virtue of a
resemblance between the form of the gestures and the form
of the words’ referents; therefore, only iconic gestures
should help. Alternatively, if gestures help speakers simply
through movement – which increases arousal or raises the
activation level of the sought-for word – then both iconics
and beats should be potentially helpful. On this proposal,
beats could be even more helpful than iconics because
producing beats is perhaps less cognitively taxing than
producing iconics.

Method
Participants Participants (N=38) from the New School
community in New York City participated for payment.
Two participants were excluded prior to analysis, one for
having severe difficulties with speech production and social
interaction during greeting and consent,, and the other for
not following instructions. Data from the remaining 36
participants were analyzed.
Materials We created three lists of thirty word definitions.
Each item defined a low-frequency, highly concrete and
highly imageable word (e.g., tomahawk). Words and their
norms were drawn from two published databases (Coltheart,
1981; Paivio, Yuille, & Madigan, 1968). The majority of
words had a Thorndike-Lorge written frequency of less than
10 instances per million, concreteness ratings above 5, and
imageability ratings above 5 on a scale of 1 to 7. Due to an
error, two lists had one item that was displayed twice for the
first 17 participants. When the error was discovered, the
duplicate items were replaced. Only the first presentation of
the duplicated item was analyzed. Materials were presented
on a 27-inch iMac in 1024x768 resolution using a custom
python script. A camcorder visible to the participants

Results and Discussion
Reaction Times (RTs) were defined as the latency between
the appearance of a definition at the start of a trial and the
successful production of the target word, disregarding any
disfluencies (i.e., fillers, false starts). Only words produced
before the hint was given were coded as successful. RT
coding was done manually by one of the experimenters
using the ELAN software package (Brugman & Russel,
2004). Sixty successful trials (twenty from each of the three
conditions) were selected at random for recoding by a
second coder, who was blind to the experimental

899

significantly slower than in the Beat condition (χ2(1)=25.3,
p=.01).
Whereas iconic gestures impaired the production of
correct definitions relative the No Instruction baseline
condition, beat gestures facilitated word production. The
beneficial effect of beats, which cannot be attributed to a
speed-accuracy tradeoff, was found despite the fact that the
beat gesture condition was arguably less natural and more
demanding (i.e., a dual-task condition) compared to the
baseline condition.
We tested for a Condition by Block interaction to confirm
that the effect of gesturing on RTs did not depend on the
order in which participants performed the three blocks
(χ 2(4)<1, ns.).

hypotheses. Inter-coder reliability was high (r=.92, p=.01).
On approximately 1% of trials in the gesture conditions,
participants did not produce a gesture. To be maximally
conservative these trials were included, since their inclusion
works against our ability to detect an effect of the gesture
conditions.
Analyses of both experiments used linear and logistic
mixed-effects regressions with the lme4 package (R Core
Team, 2013). We used likelihood ratio tests (LRTs) to test
for fixed effects, with post-hoc contrasts performed on
subsets of the data. Omnibus analyses of RT in Experiment
2 failed to converge when including random intercepts and
Condition slopes for Subject and Item. We simplified the
random effects structure of the omnibus analyses by
dropping the correlation between the random intercept and
random Condition slope for Subject (Barr, Levy, Scheepers,
& Tily, 2013, p. 45). All other analyses included random
intercepts and Condition slopes for Subject and Item.

Experiment 2: How does beat gesturing help
speakers produce words?
Why did beat gesturing help speakers produce definitions in
Experiment 1? We conducted Experiment 2 to evaluate
three possibilities, all of which follow from Kinsbourne’s
(1973) theory of activation overflow: when activity in one
brain area is increased, activity in connectively “nearby”
(often ipsilateral) areas may also be increased, even if these
areas are functionally unrelated.
Like performing other motor actions, performing beat
gestures requires an increase in activity in the brain’s motor
system, which could result in an increase in overall brain
activity, thus raising the activation level of any brain areas
involved in retrieving the sought-for word. We call this first
possibility the Global Activation Hypothesis.
Alternatively, because moving one hand selectively
increases activation in the contralateral hemisphere, it is
possible that activation in one hemisphere or the other,
alone, could facilitate word production. Language is
generally lateralized to the left hemisphere; perhaps beating
with the right hand increases activity in left hemisphere
language circuits. We call this second possibility the Left
Hemisphere Activation Hypothesis.
Finally, the right hemisphere has been implicated in
processing difficult language (e.g., Yang, Edens, Simpson,
& Krawczyk, 2009). Producing low-frequency words from
their definitions could rely on right-hemisphere circuits for
retrieving distant semantic associations (Goldstein, Revivo,
Kreitler, & Metuki, 2010), and beat gesturing with the left
hand could increase activity in these circuits. We call this
third possibility the Right Hemisphere Activation
Hypothesis.
The Global Activation Hypothesis would be supported if
bimanual gesturing were found to facilitate word production
(compared to baseline) more than gesturing with either
hand, alone. The Left Hemisphere Activation Hypothesis
would be supported if beating with the right hand produced
the fastest RTs, and the Right Hemisphere Activation
Hypothesis would be supported if beating with the left hand
produced the fastest RTs.

Figure 1: Results of Experiment 1. Mean RTs to generate
target words when participants were instructed to produce
beat gestures (left), iconic gestures (right), or were given no
gesture instructions (middle). Error bars show SEM
corrected for within-subject comparisons (Morey, 2008).
Accuracy The percentage of correct trials did not differ
across conditions (Beat: 65% ±1%; No Instruction: 54%
±2%; Iconic: 65% ±2%; χ2(2)=1.1, p=.58). Errors are SEM
corrected for within-subject comparisons (Morey, 2008).
Reaction Times We analyzed RTs only for successful trials,
defined as trials for which the participant produced the
target word without first receiving a hint. RTs differed
significantly across the three conditions (χ2(2)=22.1, p=.01;
fig. 1). Target words were produced faster in the Beat
condition than in the No-Instruction condition (χ2(1)=4.4,
p=.04). By contrast, targets were produced slower in the
Iconic condition than in the No-Instruction condition
(χ2(1)=8.5, p=.01). RTs in the Iconic condition were also

900

Method

Reaction Times RTs differed significantly across the four
conditions (χ2(3)=97.1, p=.01). Target words were produced
faster in the Bimanual beat condition than in the NoInstruction condition, replicating this novel finding from
Experiment 1 (χ2(1)=4.7, p=.03). RTs in the Bimanual beat
condition were also faster than in the Right-hand condition
(χ2(1)=4.0, p=.04). RTs in the Left-hand beat condition
were indistinguishable from RTs in the Bimanual condition
(χ2(1)=.2, p=.68), and were marginally faster than in the
No-Instruction condition (χ2(1)=2.8, p=.09) and the Righthand beat condition (χ2(1)=2.2, p=.13). RTs in the Righthand beat condition were indistinguishable from RTs in the
No-Instruction condition (χ2(1)<1, ns.). No block by
condition interaction was found (χ2(19)<1, ns.)
To summarize, bimanual beats facilitated word
production compared to both right-hand beats and the
naturalistic control condition. The effect of left-hand beats
was indistinguishable from the effect of bimanual beats.
RTs to produce words in the left-hand beat condition were
marginally faster than in both the right-hand beat and the
control conditions. RTs in the right-hand beat condition
were no faster than the naturalistic control condition. This
pattern of results supports the Right Hemisphere hypothesis.

Participants Participants (N=34) were recruited from the
University of Chicago community.Two participants were
left-handed. Two participants were excluded prior to
analysis, one for showing signs of developmental
abnormality, and the other due to a failure of the recording
equipment. Data from the remaining 32 participants were
analyzed.
Materials We used the materials from Experiment 1, and
added a new 30-item wordlist constructed with the same
sources and criteria.
Procedure The Experiment 2 procedure was similar to
Experiment 1, with the following changes. There were four
blocks, four conditions, and four wordlists. The four gesture
instruction conditions were No Gesture Instruction,
Bimanual Beat, Right Hand Beat, and Left Hand Beat.
Counterbalancing was done with orthogonal Latin squares.
This provided sixteen unique condition/wordlist orders,
each of which was used twice across the thirty-two
participants.

General Discussion
Does gesturing help speakers find the right words? When
presented with a definition of a low-frequency word,
participants instructed to perform beat gestures either
bimanually (Experiments 1 & 2) or with their left hand
(Experiment 2) produced the target word more quickly than
when they had no gesture instructions. When instructed to
produce iconic gestures, speakers were slower to produce
words than when instructed to beat or when given no
instructions to gesture (Experiment 1). These results provide
no support for the proposal that iconic gestures help
speakers find words, but provide the first evidence that beat
gestures can facilitate word production, even when
compared to a naturalistic baseline condition.

Why did beat gestures help?
The benefit of producing beat gestures appears to be driven
by the left hand more than the right. This may have to do
with activation of the right cerebral hemisphere. The right
hemisphere is reported to be involved in abstract semantic
processing (Beeman et al, 1994), creative thinking
(Razumnikova, 2007), and understanding novel metaphors
(Bottini et al, 1994). Right hemisphere involvement has also
been implicated in the processing of definition-like
sentences (Yang et al, 2009). Thus, left-hand beat gestures
might help speakers produce target words given their
definitions because moving the left hand increases neural
activity in the right hemisphere.
Beat gestures might cause speakers to find words more
quickly simply because they are motor actions: not because
they are gestures, per se. Bimanual tapping was found to
help participants find words relative to baseline task in

Figure 2: Results of Experiment 2. Mean RTs to generate
target words when participants were instructed to produce
beat gestures bimanually, with the left hand, with the right
hand, or were given no gesture instructions. Error bars show
SEM corrected for within-subject comparisons (Morey,
2008).

Results and Discussion
Accuracy The percentage of correct trials did not differ
across conditions (Bimanual: 68% ±2%; Left: 69% ±2%;
Right: 68% ±2%; No Instruction: 73% ±2%; χ2(3)=2.1,
p=.56). Errors are SEM corrected for within-subject
comparisons (Morey, 2008).

901

which movements were inhibited (Ravizza, 2003).
Squeezing a ball with the left hand (but not the right) has
been reported to increase divergent thinking and creativity
(Goldstein, et al., 2010). Our results are compatible with
these previous studies showing that simple repetitive motor
actions can have cognitive benefits.

access using the tip‐of‐the‐tongue phenomenon. British
Journal of Psychology, 90(1), 35-56.
Beeman, M., Friedman, R. B., Grafman, J., Perez, E.,
Diamond, S., & Lindsay, M. B. (1994). Summation
priming and coarse semantic coding in the right
hemisphere. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 6(1), 2645.
Bottini, G., Corcoran, R., Sterzi, R., Paulesu, E., Schenone,
P., Scarpa, P., & Frith, D. (1994). The role of the right
hemisphere in the interpretation of figurative aspects of
language A positron emission tomography activation
study. Brain, 117(6), 1241-1253.
Bowden, E. M., & Beeman, M. J. (1998). Getting the right
idea: Semantic activation in the right hemisphere may
help solve insight problems. Psychological Science, 9(6),
435-440.
Brugman, H., & Russel, A. (2004, May). Annotating Multimedia/Multi-modal Resources with ELAN. In LREC.
Butterworth, B., & Hadar, U. (1989). Gesture, speech, and
computational stages: A reply to McNeill. Psychological
Review, 96, 168-174
Coltheart, M. (1981). The MRC psycholinguistic database.
The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
33(4), 497-505.
De Ruiter, J. (2000). The production of gesture and speech.
Language and Gesture (pp. 284–311). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press
Hostetter, A. B., & Alibali, M. W. (2007). Raise your hand
if you’re spatial: Relations between verbal and spatial
skills and gesture production. Gesture, 7(1), 73-95.
Hostetter, A. B., Alibali, M. W., & Kita, S. (2007). Does
sitting on your hands make you bite your tongue? The
effects of gesture prohibition on speech during motor
descriptions. In Proceedings of the 29th annual meeting
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1097-1102).
Mawhah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Frick-Horbury, D., & Guttentag, R. E. (1998). The effects of
restricting hand gesture production on lexical retrieval
and free recall. The American Journal of Psychology, 4362.
Goldstein, A., Revivo, K., Kreitler, M., & Metuki, N.
(2010). Unilateral muscle contractions enhance creative
thinking. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 17(6), 895899.
Graham, J. A., & Heywood, S. (1975). The effects of
elimination of hand gestures and of verbal codability on
speech performance. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 5(2), 189-195.
Kinsbourne, M. (1973). The control of attention by
interaction between the cerebral hemispheres. In S.
Kornblum (Ed.), Attention and Performance IV. New
York: Academic Press.
Krauss, R. M. (1998). Why do we gesture when we speak?.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 7(2), 54-60.
Krauss, R. M., & Hadar, U. (1999). The role of speechrelated arm/hand gestures in word retrieval. Gesture,
speech, and sign, 93-116.

Why didn’t iconic gestures help?
Why did instructing participants to gesture iconically slow
them down? Like gesture prevention tasks, gesture
induction tasks impose a dual-task penalty. The finding that
required iconic gestures slow speakers down should not be
interpreted to mean that spontaneous iconic gestures
necessarily have the same effect. Spontaneous iconic
gestures may impose fewer costs on speakers than required
gestures do. Several previous studies have been interpreted
as showing that spontaneous iconic gestures benefit the
speaker (Alibali et al, 2000; Krauss, 1998; DeRuiter, 2000;
Wesp et al, 2001), as well as the listener (Yap, So, Yap,
Tan, & Teoh, 2011). No previous study has compared
speech production during iconic gesturing to production
during a naturalistic baseline task during which gestures
were neither required nor inhibited; as such, it remains an
open question whether, and under what circumstances,
iconic gestures help speakers speak.

Conclusions
Beat gestures – even artificially imposed beat gestures – can
help speakers produce low-frequency words. This benefit
appears to depend more on left-hand beats than on righthand beats, possibly because performing gestures (and
presumably performing other motor actions) with the left
hand potentiates right-hemisphere circuits involved in
difficult language processing. There may be multiple
mechanisms by which gestures of different types influence
speech production. Gestures serve communicative functions,
but more fundamentally, they are a kind of motor action.
The effect of beat gestures on speech production may arise
from broad principles of motor action and neural
connectivity that are not peculiar to gesture.

Acknowledgments
Research was funded by a James S. McDonnell Foundation
Scholar Award (#220020236; http://www.jsmf.org) to D.C.

References
Alibali, M. W., Kita, S., & Young, A. J. (2000). Gesture and
the process of speech production: We think, therefore we
gesture. Language and Cognitive Processes, 15(6), 593613.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013).
Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis
testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and
Language, 68(3), 255-278.
Beattie, G., & Coughlan, J. (1999). An experimental
investigation of the role of iconic gestures in lexical

902

McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and mind: What gestures reveal
about thought. University of Chicago Press.
Morey, R. D. (2008). Confidence intervals from normalized
data: A correction to Cousineau (2005). Tutorials in
Quantitative Methods for Psychology, 4(2), 61-64.
Müller, C. (2004). Forms and uses of the Palm Up Open
Hand: A case of a gesture family. In C. Müller & R.
Posner (Eds.), The semantics and pragmatics of everyday
gestures, Berlin: Weidler Verlag.
Paivio, A., Yuille, J. C., & Madigan, S. A. (1968).
Concreteness, imagery, and meaningfulness values for
925 nouns. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 76(1p2),
1.
Pine, K. J., Bird, H., & Kirk, E. (2007). The effects of
prohibiting gestures on children's lexical retrieval ability.
Developmental Science, 10(6), 747-754.
R Core Team. (2013). R: A language and environment for
statistical computing [Computer software manual].
Vienna, Austria. Available from http://www.Rproject.org/
Ravizza, S. (2003). Movement and lexical access: Do
noniconic gestures aid in retrieval? Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 10(3), 610-615.
Razumnikova, O. M. (2007). Creativity related cortex
activity in the remote associates task. Brain research
bulletin, 73(1), 96-102.
Wesp, R., Hesse, J., Keutmann, D., & Wheaton, K. (2001).
Gestures maintain spatial imagery. The American journal
of Psychology, 114, 591-600.
Yang, F. G., Edens, J., Simpson, C., & Krawczyk, D. C.
(2009). Differences in task demands influence the
hemispheric lateralization and neural correlates of
metaphor. Brain and Language, 111(2), 114-124.
Yap, D. F., So, W. C., Melvin Yap, J. M., Tan, Y. Q., &
Teoh, R. L. S. (2011). Iconic gestures prime words.
Cognitive Science, 35(1), 171-183.

903

