UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Beliefs about Experiencing and Destroying Art

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1x62j824

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Marsh, Jessecae
Hick, Darren

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Beliefs about Experiencing and Destroying Art
Jessecae K. Marsh (jem311@lehigh.edu)
Department of Psychology, 17 Memorial Drive East
Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA

Darren H. Hick (darrenhick@hotmail.com)
Department of Philosophy, Texas Tech University
Lubbock, TX 79409-3092 USA
Abstract

painting is of necessity a singular thing. This view, as such,
carries the implication that, so long as there are multiple
extant instances, destroying any particular copy of a novel—
even the original manuscript—does no harm to the work of
literature itself, while destroying an original painting results
in the non-existence of the work regardless of how many
accurate replicas exist. This assumption generally rests on
the view that the ontology of art is grounded in artistic
practice: how we (both artists and audiences, experts and
laymen) go about referring to, treating, distinguishing,
interpreting, and evaluating works. In essence, on this view,
paintings are singular things and novels allow for multiple
genuine instances because this is how we treat them
(Thomasson, 2005; Davies, 2004; Dodd, 2007; Hick, 2013).
Working from the assumption that any given painting is—
if only as a matter of practice—a singular concrete object, a
related question in aesthetics is, does one need to be in the
physical presence of that painting in order to experience it?
Although a widely-accepted view is that knowledge about
an artwork’s aesthetic properties cannot be transmitted by
testimony or mere description of the work (Sibley, 1959,
1974; Tormey, 1973; Wollheim, 1980), there is less
agreement about whether (or to what degree) one could
experience a work from an accurate replica (as in a copy of
Michelangelo’s sculpture, David) or representation (as in a
photograph of the Mona Lisa). Some (Lessing, 1965;
Beardsley, 1983; Currie, 1991) suggest that if substitution of
a replica for the original would not affect appreciation of the
work—as, it is argued, would be the case if the copy looked
exactly like the original—then the replica would indeed be a
genuine instance of that work, just as each accurate copy of
a novel is a genuine instance of that novel. In essence, on
this view, we could experience a work just as well through a
forgery. Others (Budd, 2003; Livingston, 2003) suggest that
aesthetic surrogates—prints, photographs, etc.—may serve
to offer greater or lesser degrees of access to the original as
a matter of aesthetic experience and knowledge. Still others
(Goodman, 1976; Eaton, 2001) at least seem to suggest that
only direct experience of the original work will serve.

Based in current debates in aesthetics, we examined whether
people’s beliefs match philosophers’ arguments that an
original painting or carved sculpture possesses a privileged
nature when compared with originals in other types of art. We
tested whether participants believe the destruction of an
original art piece has different consequences on the ability to
experience that piece if the art is visual, literary, or musical
(Experiment 1). In Experiment 2 we explored how different
forms of destruction varied whether people believe an art
piece still exists and the perceived quality of an experience
with the piece. In summary, we demonstrated that people
have a more lax view of how art can be experienced than is
assumed by most philosophers, but share an intuition that the
original form of a work of visual art has a unique nature.
Keywords: philosophy of art; ontology; concepts.

Introduction
In November of 2013, the painting "Three Studies of Lucian
Freud" by Francis Bacon sold for a reported $142.4 million
at auction. One may ask why would this single instance of a
piece of art be valued so highly? In a practical sense, one
could own a copy of the piece and be able to experience it
without having to pay such a high price. Is the experience of
this work in its original form so fundamentally different
than experiencing it in any other way to justify its sale
price? In this paper we explore this issue by combining
discussion from both the philosophy of art literature as well
as research from the psychology literature. In the following
we first outline the philosophical approach to understanding
the experience and nature of art. We then discuss the
psychological research that speaks to this issue.

Philosophical Issues in the Experience of Art
Ontology is the area of philosophy concerned with the
fundamental nature of things, and kinds of things, asking
centrally what makes a thing the thing that it is, and what
distinguishes one kind of thing from another kind of thing.
Within the subarea of philosophy known as aesthetics,
questions about ontology are directed towards art objects
(e.g., paintings, poems, plays, and works of music). A
standard assumption in the ontology of art is that works of
literature (e.g., poems, novels) and music are repeatable
entities, while paintings and carved sculptures are not.
(Goodman, 1976; Davies, 2006) That is, on this view, a
novel may exist in multiple genuine instances, while a

Psychological Understanding of Art
What can the psychological literature contribute to these
philosophical debates about the nature of art? Newman and
Bloom (2012) explored elements related to this issue in
research that measured people’s valuations of original
pieces of visual art. They found that people put a much

970

lower value on copies of art pieces, even if they are virtually
identical to an original piece. Newman and Bloom explain
their findings by the idea that value for works of art is
determined by 1) the belief the art came about through a
unique creative performance and 2) the level of contact the
original piece had with the creator that would allow some
element of the creator to be bestowed on the piece. In short,
a famous creator creating an object in a unique instance is
what makes the object valued. In this way, the valuation of a
piece of art is likened to a process of artistic contagion.
The idea of original works having special status in some
part because of how they came into being fits with a larger
literature that demonstrates that people care about how
something becomes a member of a category. People have
strong predjudices against genetically modified foods which
are believed to have become what they are through
“unnatural” routes (Rozin et al., 2004; Tenbült, de Vries,
Dreezens, & Martijn, 2005). Lab-made diamonds that are
identical in chemical structure to naturally mined diamonds
sell for much lower prices than their natural equivalents
(Scott & Yelowitz, 2010). Even children will refuse
identical copies of their own toys in preference to the
originals (Hood & Bloom, 2008). All of these findings can
be attributed to the idea that people put greater value on
things that seem to be the essential, naturally occuring
version of the item in question.
Newman and Bloom’s findings dovetail with the idea of
visual artworks being singular instances and help provide
some explanation of such work’s value. However, this idea
of how value is attached should not differentiate literary and
musical works from the visual arts. Just as Monet may have
intensely interacted with an art work he was creating, so
would Shakespeare have intensely interacted with an
original manuscript or Beethoven with an original
monograph of a score. From this contagion account we
would expect an original literary or musical work produced
by the hand of its creator to be as privileged as a painting or
sculpture.

In Experiment 1 we tested whether people believe that the
original instance of an artwork is privileged, and what they
believe is required for a piece of art to no longer exist such
that others could not experience it. In Experiment 2 we
further explore this issue by investigating more specifically
what people believe would be the quality of experiencing a
piece of art after steps had been taken to destroy the work.
Through these two experiments we can gain a better idea of
how people view art in relation to the questions of ontology
asked within philosophy. Given the view that ontology
depends upon artistic practice, with practice grounded in our
conceptions of art, these matters are especially relevant to
philosophical debate.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we examined people’s beliefs about what
measures would need to be taken to destroy a piece of art so
that others could not experience it. Participants rated visual,
literary, and musical art forms. If the ability to experience a
work were tied more directly to experiencing the original
piece for visual art than other forms, then people would be
more likely to endorse destroying an original piece as the
key to destroying the work itself for visual art.

Methods
Participants Sixty-two participants recruited through
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk participated for payment.
Materials We selected seven artworks that represented
varying types of art and would have some familiarity to a
lay participant audience. Two works were visual art forms,
namely a painting (Leonardo Da Vinci’s Mona Lisa) and a
sculpture (Michelangelo’s David). Three works were
literary forms, including a novel (Charles Dickens’s A Tale
of Two Cities), a play (William Shakespeare’s Romeo and
Juliet), and a poem (Dylan Thomas’s “Do not go gentle into
that good night”). Two works were musical forms, including
a classical music piece (George Frideric Handel’s Messiah)
and a popular music piece (The Beatles’ “Hey Jude”). These
works represent the divide between expectations of what
might be believed to be true of visual art forms as opposed
to literary and musical art forms, as well as introduce
variability within a type of art form (e.g., including literary
types that vary in their reproducibility without the written
text). We additionally asked participants about an
installation piece (The Gates by Christo and Jeanne-Claude)
but do not discuss the data here because of the different
nature of questions that had to be structured for this work.
For each work we developed a set of options that
described how the piece could be destroyed that increased in
the complexity involved in destroying the piece. Example
descriptions can be seen in Table 1. The simplest level of
destruction (Original) described destroying the original
piece (e.g., painting, manuscript, sheet music). The next
level (Physical Copies) described destroying the original
plus any printed, painted, or sculpted copies of the original
piece. The next level (Digital Copies) described destroying

Overview of Experiments
In the following, we tested laypeople’s beliefs about the
nature of different art forms and what it means to experience
those art forms. Specifically, we explored whether people
act as if only visual art forms exist as singular genuine
instances or whether people treat originals in literary and
musical art forms as similarly privileged. To test this, we
used a paradigm of describing pieces of art as having been
destroyed. We then asked participants about their beliefs of
whether, and the extent to which, that piece of art could still
be experienced. We tested this across visual, literary, and
musical forms of art. If participants conceived of visual art
works as being identical only with their originals, then any
destruction of the original work should presumably hamper
the experience of the work as compared with other forms. If
however, people do not see visual art as any different from
other forms, then we would not expect to see such
differences across art types.

971

Table 1: Destruction options from Experiment 1.
Method of
Destruction
Original
Physical
copies
Digital
copies
Memories

Visual art form
You would need to destroy the original painting
made by Da Vinci.
You would need to destroy the original painting
and all painted copies that have been made of the
work.
You would need to destroy the original painting,
all painted copies that have been made of the
work, and all accurate photographs and video
that have been taken of the piece.
You would need to destroy the original painting,
all painted copies that have been made of the
work, all accurate photographs and video that
have been taken of the piece, and the memories
of anyone who has memorized what the painting
looks like.

the original, all physical copies, as well as all photographs,
videos, and electronic copies of the piece. Finally, the most
thorough level of destruction (Memories) described
destroying the original, all copies physical and digital, as
well as the memories of anyone who had experienced the
piece. These four options allow us to test progressively
stricter conceptions of what is entailed in destroying a work
of art, while covering the different ways in which a piece of
art could be prevented from being experienced.

Literary art form
You would need to destroy the original manuscript
written by Dickens.
You would need to destroy the original manuscript
and all printed copies that have been made of the text.
You would need to destroy the original manuscript, all
printed copies that have been made of the text, and all
accurate electronic copies that have been made of the
text.
You would need to destroy the original manuscript, all
printed copies of the text, all accurate electronic
copies that have been made of the text, and the
memories of anyone who has memorized the text.

presents the percentage of participants who chose each
option type in each form. As can be seen from the table, the
most often chosen answer for each art type was the
Memories option. To explore these data statistically, we
utilized the Generalized Estimating Equations (GEE)
procedure, which allowed us to account for the repeated and
correlated nature of our data. We explored responses to the
four possible methods of destruction show in Table 1. We
recoded our data to represent a binary response structure.
Selection of a given method being sufficient for destruction
was coded as a 1 (e.g., yes this method is sufficient) and not
endorsing this method was coded as 0 (e.g., this method is
not sufficient). As such, instead of each participant having
one choice for an art piece, each participant was given a
separate dummy coded response for each of the four
destruction options for that art piece. We further grouped
responses to the different art pieces into two groups: visual
pieces (painting and sculpture) and nonvisual pieces (all
other art forms). For the GEE analysis, we used a binary
logistic link function to statistically model choice as a
nested, repeated measures dependent variable, as a function
of Destruction Option and Art Type. This structure will
allow us to look at main effects of Destruction Option and
Art Type, as well as the interaction between these two
variables.
We found a main effect of Destruction Option (χ2(3)=
60.7, p<.001) and Art Type (χ2(1)=13.7, p<.001), as well as
a significant interaction, χ2(3)=13.3, p=.004. We explored
the interaction through follow up pairwise comparisons
using a sequential Bonferroni correction. The Original
option was chosen more often in visual art pieces (M=.10)
than in nonvisual pieces (M=.03, p=.036). There was no
difference across art types in choice of the Printed option
(visual: M=.07; nonvisual: M=.06; p=.58) and the Digital
option (visual: M=.18; nonvisual: M=.13; p=.29). The
Memory option was chosen more often in nonvisual pieces
(M=.62) than visual pieces (M=.51; p=.016).

Procedure Participants began the experiment by reading a
passage that asked them to imagine themselves as an evil
villain who was attempting to destroy pieces of art so that
no one could ever experience those works again.
Participants then were presented with the name of a specific
work and asked to imagine that they were attempting to
destroy the piece “so that the work no longer existed,
preventing anyone from having any new experience of it”.
Following this description, participants were presented with
a multiple-choice list from which they could select what
steps they believed was entailed in destroying the work. The
first four choice options described the four levels of Table 1.
Three additional options were presented that allowed
participants to choose that 1) there is no way to destroy the
piece, 2) they do not know how one could destroy the piece,
and 3) another option that allowed them to fill in their own
idea of how to destroy the piece. These last three options
were added to ensure that participants did not feel forced
into choosing one of our four target options of interest.
Each work appeared on its own screen of the experiment.
The order of art pieces was randomized for each participant.
Participants rated all art forms. The multiple-choice options
were presented in the order shown in Table 2. All
participants completed the experiment at their own pace
through the Qualtrics Survey Software environment.

Results
We first explored our data to see what destruction options
were most often chosen for the different art forms. Table 2

972

Table 2: Percentage of participants who chose each destruction option by art form in Experiment 1.

4.8

Classical
Music
1.6

Popular
Music
0

6.5

3.2

9.7

6.5

14.5

12.9

12.9

14.5

11.3

46.8

62.9

58.1

64.5

58.1

64.5

4.8

9.7

14.5

8.1

9.7

9.7

4.8

6.5

1.6

3.2

4.8

3.2

4.8

0

1.6

3.2

3.2

1.6

3.2

3.2

Painting

Sculpture

Novel

Play

Poem

Original

9.7

11.3

4.8

1.6

Physical Copies

4.8

9.7

3.2

Digital Copies

16.1

19.4

Memories

54.8

No way to destroy

9.7

Don't know how to destroy
Other

they may be willing to endorse pieces of art as still existing
despite being described as destroyed as long as they still
exist in someone’s memories. Second, do people
differentiate the quality of an experience of a piece of art
depending on whether they are interacting with an original
piece versus copies or another person’s memories? If
original pieces do play a unique role in our experiences of
art, then we would expect ratings of the experience of a
piece to decrease over our destruction manipulation.

Discussion
Our results demonstrate that there is some assumed
privileged nature for original pieces of visual art. This was
evidenced by more frequent choices of the Original option
in the visual art forms than others. More importantly, our
results demonstrate that, in the minds of participants,
destroying a piece of art is more complicated than just
destroying the original work. First, a majority of participants
are endorsing that to truly destroy any work of art, you must
actually destroy the memories of people who have
experienced it previously. Where this may not be surprising
for a work that, like literature or music, may be memorized,
the result for visual art is surprising, suggesting that people
could believe that, at least to some extent, such a work can
be experienced through mere testimony. This interestingly
suggests an almost transitive quality to the experience of art:
if you have experienced the Mona Lisa then you will be able
to share your experience with others through recollections,
thereby allowing others to experience that work.
Interestingly, this also suggests that a piece of art may be
seen to exist beyond its actual destruction as long as there
are people who remember the piece. While this claim is
extremely speculative, it deserves further exploration.
In Experiment 1 we did not specify what exactly we
meant by experience and rather left that distinction to
participants. Presumably, the actual experience of a piece of
art can vary greatly in its quality. For example, seeing the
actual David sculpture should be a higher quality experience
of that piece than viewing a photo of the sculpture. Do
people agree with this assumption? That is, do people think
experiencing copies or transitive experiences of a piece of
art are equally good experiences of the work as seeing the
original piece? We explore these questions in Experiment 2.

Methods
Participants Thirty-two participants recruited from
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk participated for payment.
Materials and Procedure In Experiment 2 we used the
same art pieces and destruction options that were created for
Experiment 1 to create our materials. Participants read
passages that described each art piece from Experiment 1
and different ways that the piece had been destroyed,
mapped onto the four options of Table 1. For each piece
participants first read that the original artwork had been
destroyed, but physical and digital copies still existed, as
well as people’s memories of the piece. After reading this
description, participants answered yes or no to the question
“Would you say this piece of art still exists?”. Following the
existence question, participants were then asked to rate “to
what extent could you experience this piece of art” on a 0 (It
is not at all possible for you to experience this piece of art)
to 100 (You would be able to fully experience this piece as
if you were looking at it yourself) scale.1 After making these
two ratings, participants moved on to a new screen that
asked them to imagine they now learned that not only was
the original painting destroyed, but so were all physical
copies, but not digital copies or memories. Participants
again made the existence and experience ratings. This
procedure was repeated with the level of destruction further
increased in each description (original, physical, and digital
copies destroyed, and then original, physical copies, digital
copies, and memories destroyed). As such, participants
judged the existence of a piece and the ability to experience
the piece after increasing levels of destruction.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2 we further explored people’s perceptions of
the experience of pieces of art and the privileged status of
original works in different art forms. We examined two
questions specifically. First, do people believe that a piece
of art still exists in some sense after it has been destroyed as
described in the destruction methods of Experiment 1? If
people believe that art is truly a transitive experience, then

1

973

The wording for these anchors was adjusted by art form type.

Table 3: Percentage of participants who endorsed the art form as existing and mean experience ratings in Experiment 2.
Original	  

Physical Copies

Memories	  

Digital Copies

%

M (SD)

%

M (SD)

%

M (SD)

%

M (SD)

Painting

62.5

73.8 (29.6)

59.4

57.8 (31.0)

34.4

23.6 (27.2)

15.6

9.44 (25.0)

Sculpture

53.1

67.5 (28.9)

56.3

56.6 (26.3)

37.5

21.3 (20.9)

15.6

9.41 (21.0)

Novel

96.9

91.1 (16.1)

90.6

81.5 (26.2)

34.4

28.1 (26.4)

15.6

6.97 (15.6)

Play

100

92.8 (13.7)

90.6

82.6 (24.5)

43.8

35.8 (34.8)

15.6

12.6 (28.1)

Poem

100

93.0 (14.1)

90.6

83.7 (21.4)

56.3

42.0 (34.1)

12.5

8.38 (20.5)

Classical Music

96.9

87.7 (19.7)

87.5

84.3 (22.5)

43.8

31.6 (26.6)

12.5

6.97 (16.3)

Popular Music

100

92.8 (14.3)

100

88.8 (16.7)

56.3

36.7 (31.0)

15.6

9.03 (22.0)

The presentation order of the art forms was randomized
for each participant. Participants completed ratings for all
art forms. The experiment was self-paced and administered
through the Qualtrics Survey Software.

Experience of an Art Piece Next, we examined whether
participants felt that the quality of experiencing a piece of
art decreased as the level of destruction increased. To
examine this, we again conducted a GEE analysis. Instead
of conducting this over binary responses, we conducted the
analysis over the continuous experience ratings as nested,
repeated dependent variables. We used an identity link
function and included Art Type and Destruction Level as
within subjects factors in the model. We found a main effect
of Destruction Level (χ2(3)= 219.93, p<.001) and Art Type
(χ2(1)=19.47, p<.001), as well as a significant interaction,
χ2(3)=37.07, p<.001. We used follow up comparisons with
sequential Bonferroni correction to explore the interaction.
As can be seen in Table 3, the ability to experience a piece
of art decreases as more thorough levels of destruction are
inflicted on the piece. This trend was supported by our
follow up comparisons. For both visual and nonvisual
pieces of art, the ability for someone to experience a piece
was greatest when only the original was destroyed, followed
by the printed copies, followed by the digital copies, and
finally followed by memories. The differences between each
level for both art types were all significant, all ps<.001.
Next, we compared the ability to experience a piece at
each level of destruction across visual and nonvisual art
types. We found that when the original work was destroyed,
visual art pieces (M=70.6) were significantly less likely to
be perceived as being able to be experienced than nonvisual
pieces (M=91.5, p<.001). The same was true when printed
copies (visual: M=57.2; nonvisual: M=84.2; p<.001) and
digital copies (visual: M=22.4; nonvisual: M=34.8; p=.001)
were destroyed. Visual (M=9.42) and nonvisual pieces
(M=8.79) were equally able to be experienced when
memories of the pieces were destroyed, p=.79.

Results and Discussion
Existence of an Art Piece Our first question of interest is
whether participants were endorsing that the different art
forms existed after being destroyed by the different methods
we described. Table 3 presents the percentage of
participants who believed a work existed at each level of
destruction. While for the non-visual art pieces, nearly
100% of the subjects reported the work still existed after the
destruction of the original work, a much lower percentage
endorsed a visual piece as still existing. The binary nature of
participant data allowed us to use the same GEE analysis
and follow up tests as in Experiment 1, allowing a test for a
main effect of Art Type (visual vs. nonvisual) and
Destruction Level, as well as the interaction of the two
variables. We found a main effect of Destruction Level
(χ2(3)=48.6, p<.001) and Art Type (χ2(1)=16.3, p<.001), as
well as a significant interaction, χ2(3)=33.9, p<.001. Follow
up comparisons found that when the original work was
destroyed, visual art pieces (M=.58) were significantly less
likely to still be believed to exist than nonvisual pieces
(M=.99, p<.001). The same was true when printed copies
(visual: M=.58; nonvisual: M=.92; p<.001) and digital
copies (visual: M=.36; nonvisual: M=.47; p=.042) were
destroyed. Visual (M=.16) and nonvisual pieces (M=.14)
were equally likely to be believed to still exist when
memories of the pieces were destroyed, p=.69.
In short, these results suggest as in Experiment 1 that
participants have different expectations for visual and
nonvisual pieces of art of what can destroy that piece.
Interestingly, roughly 16% of people believed most pieces
of art still existed if they were removed from people’s
memories. Who responded this way depended on the art
piece, in that only one participant said that every art piece
still existed when memories of the piece were destroyed. In
other words, a small percentage of people believed that art
pieces still existed after memories of the pieces were
destroyed, but those people varied by art piece.

General Discussion
In two experiments, we demonstrated that the way people
believe pieces of art to exist in the world has interesting
parallels and departures from philosophical theory. In
Experiment 1 we demonstrated that people have a much
higher tolerance for the idea that people can experience art
indirectly than is contended by many philosophers. Across
Experiment 1 and 2 we found that the original work in

974

Acknowledgments

visual pieces of art do seem to hold a privileged status. For
example, in Experiment 2 a much lower percentage of
people were willing to say that a painting or sculpture still
existed when its original form was destroyed than a literary
or musical work. This finding seems to suggest that
laypeople see literary and musical works as having multiple
genuine instances. However, it should be pointed out that
more than half of the participants in Experiment 2 were still
willing to say the Mona Lisa existed after the destruction of
the original piece. For philosophers, this is an especially
significant outcome. If ontology of art is in fact grounded in
artistic practice, and laypeople conceive of presumptively
singular works like paintings and carved sculptures as
surviving the destruction of their originals, then such a view
either needs to be accounted for in our best ontological
theories, or else somehow explained away.
What do our results suggest for people’s conceptions of
the art domain? For one, our results suggest that the idea of
creator contagion postulated by Newman and Bloom (2012)
is not sufficient to bestow special status on an original piece
of art. We have demonstrated that literary and musical
works that should have the same hands-on interaction with
their creators are not equally special in how they can be
destroyed or experienced. While this contagion mechanism
still seems an important element of the value of original
pieces of art, a more complete picture must account for
differences we found across art forms.
Second, we seem to have evidence that individual pieces
of art exist beyond their physical structure. While this may
be easier to understand for a poem that could be memorized
and recited, it is harder to imagine what it means for a
painting to still exist when its physical form and visual
representations of that form are destroyed. People may
believe a famous artwork becomes a type of public shared
experience allowing it to persist outside its physical form. It
is an interesting avenue for future research to test whether
non-famous artworks have this same status (does a child’s
drawing still exist after it is eaten by the family dog?).
Questions concerning art’s existence have interesting
implications for thinking about our representations of other
domains. What could make works of art exist past their
physical destruction is that these works are recognized as
special members of categories. For example, in the category
of paintings, the Mona Lisa is a recognized special member.
Does this mean that in any type of category, recognizing a
given member gives it some type of special status? For
example, Shamu is a recognized special example of the
category orca. Does this mean that people think Shamu still
exists even after her death? It is an interesting question for
categorization research to investigate how special members
of categories function within their categories.
In conclusion, we provide a first look at how different art
forms are viewed by laypeople in relation to their existence
and how they are experienced. While our investigation does
not answer the philosophical debate about the nature of
different kinds of artworks, it does inform the reality of the
experience of art for everyday people.

Funding was provided by Lehigh University research funds
given to the first author.

References
Beardsley, M. C. (1983). Notes on forgery. In D. Dutton
(Ed.), The forger’s art: Forgery and the philosophy of art.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Budd, M (2003). The acquaintance principle. British
Journal of Aesthetics, 43, 386-392.
Currie, G (1991). An ontology of art. London: Macmillan.
Davies, D. (2004). Art as performance. Malden, MA:
Blackwell.
Davies, S. (2006). The philosophy of art. Malden, MA:
Blackwell.
Dodd, J. (2007). Works of music: An essay in ontology.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Eaton, M. M. (2001). Merit, aesthetic and ethical. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Goodman, N (1976). Languages of art: An approach to a
theory of symbols, 2nd edition. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Hick, D. H. (2013). Ontology and the challenge of literary
appropriation. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 71,
155-165.
Hood, B. M., & Bloom, P. (2008). Children prefer certain
individuals over perfect duplicates. Cognition, 106, 455462.
Lessing, A (1965). What is wrong with a forgery? Journal
of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 23, 461-471.
Livingston, P (2003). On an apparent truism in aesthetics.
British Journal of Aesthetics, 43, 260-278.
Newman, G. E., & Bloom, P. (2012). Art and authenticity:
The importance of originals in judgments of
value. Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology:
General, 141, 558-569.
Rozin, P., Spranca, M., Krieger, Z., Neuhaus, R., Surillo,
D., Swerdlin, A., & Wood, K. (2004). Preference for
natural: Instrumental and ideational/moral motivations,
and the contrast between foods and medicines. Appetite,
43, 147-154.
Scott, F., & Yelowitz, A. (2010). Pricing anomalies in the
market for diamonds: Evidence of conformist behavior.
Economic Inquiry, 48, 353-368.
Sibley, F. (1959). Aesthetic concepts. The Philosophical
Review, 68, 421-450.
Sibley, F (1974). Particularity, art and evaluation.
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supp. Vol. 48, 121.
Tenbült, P., de Vries, N. K., Dreezens, E., & Martijn, C.
(2005). Perceived naturalness and acceptance of
genetically modified food. Appetite, 45, 47-50.
Thomasson, A. (2005). The ontology of art and knowledge
in aesthetics. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 63,
221-229.
Tormey, A. (1973). Critical judgments, Theoria, 39, 35–49.
Wollheim, R. (1980). Art and its objects. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

975

