UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Benefits of Variation Increase with Preparation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9931813j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Braithwaite, David
Goldstone, Robert

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Benefits of Variation Increase with Preparation
David W. Braithwaite (baixiwei@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Indiana University, 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Robert L. Goldstone (rgoldsto@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychology, Indiana University, 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

An additional consideration more specific to abstract concepts is that similarity between examples can lead to overspecified concept representations, while variation can avoid
this pitfall. Similar examples are likely to share superficial
features in addition to their common, constitutive structure.
Learners may then incorporate these superficial features as
part of the learned concept, limiting their ability to extend the
concept to novel instances that do not share the same features,
a phenomenon known as conservative generalization (Medin
& Ross, 1989). Varied examples, by contrast, are likely to
share few or no superficial features. Concepts learned from
such examples would include only the relevant underlying
structure and, therefore, would generalize more easily to
novel cases. Indeed, several studies have found that abstract
concepts learned from varied rather than similar examples are
more easily extended to novel instances (Chen & Mo, 2004;
Day, Goldstone, & Hills, 2010).
However, variation among examples also has potential
drawbacks. Too much variation might prevent learners from
discerning what the examples have in common with each
other, preventing them from learning the underlying concept
at all. By contrast, if the examples are similar – that is, share
some surface features in addition to underlying structure –
then correspondences between their surface features may be
easy for learners to notice. These correspondences can serve
as scaffolding, allowing learners to notice their shared underlying structure, a phenomenon known as progressive alignment (Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996). Consistent with this
view, some studies have found that abstract concepts are acquired more easily if similar, rather than varied, examples are
presented initially (Elio & Anderson, 1984; Kotovsky &
Gentner, 1996). These results dovetail with studies on perceptual category learning that have shown slower category
learning from varied, relative to similar, examples (Hahn et
al., 2005).
Thus, varied and similar examples may each offer potential
benefits for abstract concept learning. The relative strengths
of their benefits may depend on an additional factor: learners’
predisposition, and ability, to attend to the structural relations
present in the examples. On the one hand, learners who attend to structural relations might easily ignore superficial
commonalities between examples. On this account, attention
to relations would reduce the risk of conservative generalization, a potential drawback of similar examples, and would
thereby increase the relative benefits of similar examples. On
the other hand, learners who can easily attend to structural

Abstract
Abstract concepts are characterized by their underlying structure rather than superficial features. Variation in the examples
used to teach abstract concepts can draw attention towards
shared structure and away from superficial detail, but too much
variation can inhibit learning. The present study tested the possibility that increasing attention to underlying structural relations could alleviate the latter difficulty and thereby increase
the benefits of varied examples. Participants were trained with
either varied or similar examples of a mathematical concept,
and were then tested on their ability to apply the concept to new
cases. Before training, some participants received pretraining
aimed at increasing attention to the structural relations underlying the concept. The relative advantage of varied over similar examples was increased among participants who received
the pretraining. Thus, preparation that promotes attention to
the relations underlying abstract concepts can increase the benefits of learning from varied examples.
Keywords: variation; concept learning; conservative generalization; progressive alignment; prior knowledge; mathematics.

Background
Abstract concepts – that is, concepts characterized by underlying structure rather than by surface similarities among
their members – are pervasive in human thought and language (Gentner & Kurtz, 2005). Such concepts play a particularly prominent role in formal education. Examples include
functions in mathematics, forces in physics, supply and demand in economics, and natural selection in biology. The
power of such concepts comes from their ability to capture
deep commonalities across superficially dissimilar situations.
Thus, a key goal for instruction is to enable learners to extend
such concepts to a wide range of instances, which may differ
substantially from studied examples.
Evidence suggests that learning concepts from highly varied examples can help to achieve this goal. Most directly,
variation in studied examples increases the chance that a
novel instance will resemble a studied example. Also, exposure to varied examples can increase the range of variation
associated with the concept. Both of these considerations
suggest that learning from varied, relative to similar, examples would allow concepts to be extended to a wider range of
novel instances, a prediction confirmed by numerous studies
of category learning (Hahn, Bailey, & Elvin, 2005; Posner &
Keele, 1968).

230

relations might be able to notice when different examples
share a common structure, even if those examples differ with
respect to superficial features. On this account, attention to
structure would reduce a potential obstacle to learning from
varied examples, and thereby increase the relative benefits of
such examples.
Research investigating interactions of prior knowledge and
variation among examples on concept learning offers some
evidence favoring the second possibility. In particular, several studies have found relatively greater benefits of similar
examples for less knowledgeable learners, and of varied examples for more knowledgeable learners (Braithwaite &
Goldstone, 2012, under review; Guo, Yang, & Ding, 2013).
For example, Braithwaite and Goldstone (under review)
found that university students who had previously studied a
mathematical concept learned the concept better from varied
than from similar examples, while those without such experience showed the opposite trend. Learners with more prior
knowledge may resemble domain experts by paying more attention to relevant structural relations (Chi, Feltovich, &
Glaser, 1981). Similarly, learners with less prior knowledge
may resemble domain novices by paying relatively little attention to relevant structural relations. Thus, the results of
Braithwaite and Goldstone (under review) can be interpreted
as showing a positive relationship between attention to structure and the relative benefits of varied examples. Conversely,
these results can also be interpreted as showing greater need
for the scaffolding offered by superficial similarities between
examples among learners less disposed, or able, to attend to

structural relations. A similar account has been offered for
the “expertise reversal effect,” in which less knowledgeable
learners show greater benefits of scaffolding during instruction (Kalyuga, Ayres, Chandler, & Sweller, 2003).
While the findings mentioned above (Braithwaite &
Goldstone, 2012, under review; Guo et al., 2013) are consistent with the possibility that attention to structural relations
increases the relative benefits of varied examples, this interpretation is open to debate because it relies on prior
knowledge as a proxy for attention to relations. Additionally,
prior knowledge was observed rather than manipulated in
these studies, preventing any strong causal inference involving effects of that variable. The goal of the present study is
to investigate the interactions of attention to structural relations and variation among examples more directly, by manipulating both within the same experiment. For the reasons described above, we predicted that manipulations intended to
increase attention to structure would also increase the relative
benefits of varied over similar examples.

Method
The concept employed for the study was the mathematical
concept of Sampling with Replacement (SWR). SWR describes any situation in which, for each element of one set
termed “selections,” one element of another set termed “alternatives” is chosen. Examples of such situations are shown
in Table 1.

Table 1. Examples of sampling with replacement (SWR) problems, with solutions. Example text is abbreviated.
Story Type
People
Choosing
Objects
(PCO)

Example
A group of friends is eating at a restaurant. Each person
chooses a meal from the menu. In how many different ways
can the friends choose their meals, if there are 5 friends and
6 meals?

Selections
friends

Alternatives
meals

Solution
65

Objects Selected in
Sequence
(OSS)

A piano student, when bored, plays random melodies on the
piano. Each melody is the same number of notes long, and
uses only keys from a fixed set of keys. How many different
melodies are possible, if there are 4 keys in the set and 7
notes in each melody?

notes in each
melody

keys in the
set

47

Objects Assigned to
Places
(OAPlc)

A homeowner is going to repaint several rooms in her house.
She chooses one color of paint for the living room, one for the
dining room, one for the family room, and so on. In how
many different ways can she paint the rooms, if there are 8
rooms and 3 colors?

rooms

colors

38

Categories
Assigned to
Events
(CAE)

An FBI agent is investigating several paranormal events. She
must write a report classifying each event into a category
such as Possession, Haunting, Werewolf, etc. In how many
different ways can she write her report, if there are 9 categories and 4 paranormal events?

paranormal
events

categories

94

Objects Assigned to
People
(OAPpl)

An aging king plans to divide his lands among his heirs. Each
province of the kingdom will be assigned to one of his many
children. In how many different ways can the provinces be
assigned, if there are 5 provinces and 7 children?

provinces

children

75

231

Participants in the study were required to determine how
many different outcomes were possible in a variety of different SWR situations, where an outcome constitutes a particular choice of one alternative for each of the selections. The
number of outcomes in any SWR situation is given by a simple formula: (number of alternatives)(number of selections), which
was given to participants. To apply this formula to a particular situation requires one to correctly identify which elements of the situation fill the roles of selections and alternatives. Table 1 shows the correct identification of selections
and alternatives, and the consequent instantiation of the formula, for each of several examples of SWR. As the Table
illustrates, there is little superficial similarity between the elements filling a given role in different examples of SWR. For
this reason, SWR meets our definition of an abstract concept.
The study employed a pretest-pretraining-training-posttest
design. During the pretest, participants solved a number of
SWR problems. During the pretraining, participants learned
about the structural relations underlying SWR problems,
without learning how to solve them. In the training section,
participants learned how actually to solve SWR problems.
Participants in the two experimental conditions (graphical
and verbal, detailed below) received both pretraining and
training, while those in the control condition skipped the pretraining and received only training. In both experimental and
control conditions, the level of variation between examples
shown during training and, where applicable, pretraining was
manipulated between subjects. Finally, after completing the
training, participants solved more SWR problems as a posttest. Improvement in performance from pretest to posttest
served as a measure of participants’ learning from the instruction and practice they received.

ries Assigned to Events (CAE), and Objects Assigned to People (OAPpl). One example of each story type is shown in
Table 1. Two problems were created for each story type except OAPpl, for which four problems were created, yielding
a total of 12 problems. These problems were divided into two
sets of 6 problems each, each set containing two OAPpl problems and one problem of each other type. For each participant, one problem set was selected randomly to serve as pretest, with the other serving as posttest.
12 additional problems were created for use as pretraining
and training examples. These problems were all based on the
PCO and OSS story types, and included 6 problems of each
type. Each participant was exposed to only 6 of the 12 examples, selected as follows. First, participants were assigned
randomly to receive either similar or varied examples. Participants who received similar examples were shown all 6 examples of one type and no examples of the other type. Participants who received varied examples were shown 3 randomly-selected examples of each type in alternating sequence. The story type of the first example (and, for the similar examples case, for all subsequent examples) was determined randomly for each participant as either PCO or OSS.
Because only PCO and OSS problems were employed during training, while participants were tested on problems of all
5 types, the test afforded a measure of knowledge transfer,
i.e. ability to solve SWR problems embedded in situations
quite different from those studied during training. For participants who studied PCO problems during training, the OAPpl
problems afforded a particularly stringent measure of transfer, because the PCO and OAPpl story types were crossmapped (Gentner & Toupin, 1986) relative to each other. In
particular, in PCO problems, the role of selections is filled by
people, but in OAPpl problems, people instead fill the role of
alternatives. Thus, we expected OAPpl problems to be particularly challenging for participants who were exposed to
PCO problems during training.

Participants
Participants were N=215 Indiana University undergraduate
students who participated in partial fulfilment of a course requirement. Participants were assigned randomly to one of
three pretraining conditions: verbal pretraining (N=73),
graphical pretraining (N=71), or control, i.e. no pretraining
(N=71). Within each pretraining condition, participants were
assigned randomly to receive either varied or similar examples (verbal pretraining: N=37 similar and N=36 varied,
graphical pretraining: N=36 similar and N=35 varied, control: N=36 similar and N=35 varied).

Procedure
The experiment was conducted through a web-based computer interface1, with each participant working in a cubicle at
a separate computer. Participants first completed the pretest.
For each problem in the pretest, two variations were presented which differed mainly with respect to the specific
numbers in the problem; these variations were used to decrease the likelihood of obtaining a perfect score by guessing.
Participants had to answer each problem by choosing between two responses, one of which was “xy” and the other
“yx,” where x and y were the two numbers mentioned in the
problem statement. Participants answered the problems one
at a time in a fixed order, and no feedback was given.
After the pretest, participants in the experimental conditions began the pretraining section. First, they read a brief
exposition describing the common structure shared by all

Materials
12 SWR story problems were created for use in the pretest
and posttest. The problems were based on five story types,
which differed in terms of the types of story elements that
filled the roles of alternatives and selections. The types were:
People Choosing Objects (PCO), Objects Selected in Sequence (OSS), Objects Assigned to Places (OAPlc), Catego-

1 A demonstration version of the experiment may be viewed at
https://perceptsconcepts.psych.indiana.edu/experiments/dwb/scmvar06/demo.html.

232

SWR problems. They were then presented with the 6 pretraining/training examples, selected as described under Materials, one at a time. For each example, participants chose
between two descriptions of the problem structure, and were
required to explain their answer (Figure 1). In the verbal pretraining condition, the descriptions involved a sentence template of the form “For EACH of the ___, ONE of the ___ is
chosen,” and participants had to choose which problem element belonged in each blank (Figure 1A). In the graphical
pretraining condition, the descriptions involved a diagram resembling a combination lock, and participants had to choose
which problem element corresponded to the lock tumblers
and which to the different options on each tumbler (Figure
1B). Feedback was given after each response, and after completing each of the 6 examples separately, participants reviewed them all together.

After the training, participants completed the posttest,
which was administered in the same way as the pretest.

Results
Training Performance
Although we were mainly interested in effects of pretraining and training on test performance, performance during
training was also analyzed. Average accuracy for the training
examples was 79.1%. A 3 (pretraining condition: control,
graphical, or verbal)×2 (level of variation: similar or varied)
ANOVA found a significant effect of pretraining condition
on training accuracy, F(2,209)=6.34, p=.002. Average training accuracy by pretraining condition is shown in Figure 2.
Accuracy was higher in the graphical (86.9%) than in the verbal (77.8%) and control (72.5%) conditions. Pairwise t-tests
with a Holm correction for multiple comparisons confirmed
that graphical differed significantly from control, p=.002, and
marginally significantly from verbal, p=.053. Accuracy in
the verbal and control conditions did not differ significantly,
p=.187. No effect of variation or interaction of variation with
pretraining condition was found, ps>.35.

(A)

(B)

Figure 2: Training accuracy by pretraining condition. Here
and elsewhere, error bars represent standard errors.
Figure 1: Pretraining interface. (A) Verbal, (B) Graphical.

Test Performance

After the pretraining section – or, for participants in the
control condition, after the pretest – participants began the
training section. They first read a passage explaining how to
solve SWR problems. This passage presented the general
formula for SWR problems, and emphasized that to instantiate the formula, one must identify the problem elements playing the roles of selections and alternatives. Participants were
then presented with the 6 example problems one at a time.
For each problem, participants chose between two responses
of the form “xy,” just as in the pretest. Feedback was given
after each response, and after completing each of the 6 examples separately, participants reviewed them all together. Finally, participants were asked to describe, in open-response
format, the general method of solving SWR problems, and
how to determine which problem elements played the roles
of selections and alternatives.

Average accuracy was 58.5% on the pretest and 67.4% on the
posttest. Both pretest and posttest scores were significantly
higher than chance, i.e. 50.0%, t(214)=7.04, p<.001 for the
pretest and t(214)=12.68, p<.001 for the posttest.
Accuracy scores for the pretest and posttest were submitted
to a mixed ANOVA with test section (pretest or posttest) and
story type (PCO, OSS, OAPlc, CAE, or OAPpl) as withinsubjects factors, and pretraining condition, level of variation,
and story type of the first training example (PCO or OSS) as
between-subjects factors. A significant effect of test section
confirmed that test scores improved from pretest to posttest,
F(1,203)=59.58, p<.001.
Neither the main effect of pretraining condition nor that of
training condition was significant, nor did either of these factors interact significantly with test section, ps>.15. Thus,
none of the pretraining conditions, nor either of the training

233

Figure 3: Change in test score from pretest to posttest, by
pretraining and training condition.

Figure 4. Change in test score from pretest to posttest, by
story type.

conditions, led to greater overall improvement at posttest.
However, critically, a significant 3-way interaction between
pretraining condition, training condition, and test section was
found, F(2,203)=3.46, p=.033. As shown in Figure 3, in the
verbal pretraining condition, participants who received varied examples showed more improvement at posttest than
those who received similar examples (varied: 17.4%, similar:
7.0%). However, this trend was absent, or even reversed, in
the graphical (varied: 8.8%, similar: 10.9%) and control (varied: 1.9%, similar: 7.4%) conditions. To better understand
this interaction, change in accuracy from pretest to posttest
was compared between the similar and varied conditions separately for each of the pretraining conditions. These comparisons revealed a significant advantage of varied over similar
examples in the verbal pretraining condition, t(70.85)=2.07,
p=.042, and no difference between varied and similar examples in the other two pretraining conditions, ps>.10.
The main effect of story type and its interaction with test
section were also significant, F(4,836)=64.54, p<.001 for the
main effect and F(4,836)=5.64, p<.001 for the interaction.
Pretest and posttest scores for each story type are shown in
Figure 4. Scores improved at posttest on problems from both
of the story types used during training (PCO: 16%, OSS:
13%) as well as two of the novel story types not seen in any
version of the training (OAPlc: 10%, CAE: 17%). However,
for the OAPpl problems, participants showed lower accuracy
at posttest (-2%). This decrement in accuracy was driven by
participants whose first training example belonged to the
cross-mapped story type, PCO, as confirmed by a significant
3-way interaction of section and story type with story type of
the first training example, F(4,812)=3.45, p=.008. Other significant effects (interactions of pretraining with story type, of
these two factors with first training example, and of level of
variation and first training example with test section) do not
bear on the research questions and so are omitted for brevity.

than similar examples, while this effect was absent, and
tended to reverse, in the control condition. This finding supports the hypothesis that greater attention to structural relations increases benefits of variation by enabling learners
more easily to perceive structure shared by disparate examples. The alternate possibility mentioned in the Introduction,
that such attention could improve the relative benefits of similar examples by helping learners to ignore superficial commonalities among such examples, was not supported.
This result may elucidate the interpretation of previous
studies finding greater benefits of variation among learners
with greater prior domain knowledge (Braithwaite &
Goldstone, 2012, under review; Guo et al., 2013). In particular, the present findings are consistent with the possibility
that such interactions of prior knowledge and variation are
mediated by effects of prior knowledge on attention to structural relations, with more knowledgeable learners being better able to attend to such relations and therefore better able to
profit from varied examples. Learners with less prior
knowledge, conversely, can profit more from similar examples. Superficial similarities among examples can serve a
scaffolding function, drawing attention to structural correspondences that would not otherwise be evident (Kotovsky &
Gentner, 1996).
Verbal pretraining had the predicted effect of increasing
the relative benefits of varied examples, while graphical pretraining did not. The effectiveness of verbal pretraining in
this regard is, perhaps, not surprising. Several studies have
found that exposure to relational terminology can increase attention to relational structure (Loewenstein & Gentner,
2005). However, the utility of diagrams for promoting analogical transfer in several prior studies (Catrambone, Craig,
& Nersessian, 2006) suggests that under some circumstances,
diagrams can have the same effect. Why, then, did graphical
pretraining in the present study not lead to an advantage of
varied over similar examples?
One possibility is that the combination lock diagrams were
hard to understand or unsuitable for the task. However, the

Discussion
Participants who received verbal pretraining showed more
improvement at posttest following training with varied rather

234

fact that graphical pretraining increased training accuracy relative to verbal pretraining or control argues against this possibility. A more plausible alternative is that the diagrams
served as a crutch, rather than as a scaffold for learning. The
diagrams may have been transparent enough that participants
could easily perform the pretraining and training tasks without deeply processing the structure represented by the diagrams. Thus, the diagrams might facilitate performance during training but not produce a lasting increase in attention to
underlying structure, and thus not increase the benefits of varied examples. While admittedly speculative, this account fits
into a larger body of research indicating that facilitating task
performance may not always promote the analytical mindset
required for some kinds of learning, such as generalization
and transfer of abstract concepts (Oppenheimer, 2008).
Our findings have practical implications for instruction in
abstract concepts in fields such as mathematics and science.
Differences in the effects of variation depending on learners’
prior knowledge suggest that, when selecting illustrative examples, educators should take the differing needs of individual learners into consideration. However, preparing different
sets of examples for different students might be impractical
or undesirable for many reasons. The present results imply
that it may be possible to prepare all learners to benefit from
highly varied examples, regardless of prior knowledge,
through instruction that focuses attention on relevant structural relations. Of course, implementation of such preparatory instruction requires time and resources. Whether the potential benefits would justify the costs is an important question to be addressed by future research.
The instructional implications of our findings echo those of
proposals in educational psychology asserting that formal instruction can be more effective if learners are first prepared
for it by learning about the critical features or dimensions involved in the domain (Schwartz & Martin, 2004). However,
while these proposals emphasize discovery of these features
or dimensions through exploration of contrasting cases, our
approach was to provide an explicit framework which could
increase the salience of the underlying structure. Whether
appropriate instructional manipulations could lead learners to
discover such structure for themselves, and whether such an
approach would yield advantages over explicit scaffolding,
are also promising areas for future research.

143). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Catrambone, R., Craig, D. L., & Nersessian, N. J. (2006).
The role of perceptually represented structure in
analogical problem solving. Memory & Cognition, 34(5),
1126–32.
Chen, Z., & Mo, L. (2004). Schema induction in problem
solving: A multidimensional analysis. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 30(3), 583–600.
Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P. J., & Glaser, R. (1981).
Categorization and representation of physics problems by
experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5(2), 121–152.
Day, S. B., Goldstone, R. L., & Hills, T. (2010). The effects
of similarity and individual differences on comparison
and transfer. Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 465–470). Portland,
Oregon: Cognitive Science Society.
Elio, R., & Anderson, J. R. (1984). The effects of
information order and learning mode on schema
abstraction. Memory & Cognition, 12(1), 20–30.
Gentner, D., & Kurtz, K. J. (2005). Relational categories. In
W. K. Ahn, R. L. Goldstone, B. C. Love, A. B. Markman,
& P. W. Wolff (Eds.), Categorization Inside and Outside
the Laboratory. Washington, DC: APA.
Gentner, D., & Toupin, C. (1986). Systematicity and surface
similarity in the development of analogy. Cognitive
Science, 10(3), 277–300.
Guo, J., Yang, L., & Ding, Y. (2013). Effects of example
variability and prior knowledge in how students learn to
solve equations. European Journal of Psychology of
Education, March.
Hahn, U., Bailey, T. M., & Elvin, L. B. C. (2005). Effects of
category diversity on learning, memory, and
generalization. Memory & Cognition, 33(2), 289–302.
Kalyuga, S., Ayres, P., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (2003).
The expertise reversal effect. Educational Psychologist,
38(1), 23–31.
Kotovsky, L., & Gentner, D. (1996). Comparison and
categorization in the development of relational similarity.
Child Development, 67(6), 2797–2822.
Loewenstein, J., & Gentner, D. (2005). Relational language
and the development of relational mapping. Cognitive
Psychology.
Medin, D. L., & Ross, B. H. (1989). The specific character
of abstract thought: Categorization, problem-solving, and
induction. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), Advances in the
psychology of human intelligence, Vol. 5. Hillsdale, N.J.:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Oppenheimer, D. M. (2008). The secret life of fluency.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12(6), 237–41.
Posner, M. I., & Keele, S. W. (1968). On the genesis of
abstract ideas. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 77(3,
pt 1), 353–363.
Schwartz, D. L., & Martin, T. (2004). Inventing to prepare
for future learning: The hidden efficiency of encouraging
original student production in statistics instruction.
Cognition and Instruction, 22(2), 129–184.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by National Science
Foundation REESE Grant No. 0910218 and Department of
Education IES Grant No. R305A1100060.

References
Braithwaite, D. W., & Goldstone, R. L. (under review).
Effects of variation and prior knowledge on abstract
concept learning. Cognition and Instruction.
Braithwaite, D. W., & Goldstone, R. L. (2012). Inducing
mathematical concepts from specific examples: The role
of schema-level variation. Proceedings of the 34th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 138–

235

