UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Betting on Transitivity in an Economic Setting

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5qt6q7vx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Hebelmann, Dennis
Von Sydow, Momme

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Betting on Transitivity in an Economic Setting
Dennis Hebbelmann (Dennis.Hebbelmann@psychologie.uni-heidelberg.de)
Momme von Sydow (Momme.von-Sydow@uni-heidelberg.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Heidelberg, Hauptstr. 47
69117 Heidelberg, Germany

Abstract
Theories of causal reasoning and learning often implicitly
assume that the structural implications of causal models and
empirical evidence are consistent. However, for probabilistic
causal relations this may not be the case. Mismatches
between structural implications and empirical evidence may
lead to distortions of empirical evidence. Previous work has
shown that people may use the generative causal relations A
→ B and B → C to infer a positive relation between events A
and C, despite data showing that these events are actually
independent (von Sydow et al., 2009, 2010). Here we used an
economic trial-by-trial learning scenario to investigate how
transitive reasoning in intransitive situations with even
negatively related distal events may relate to betting behavior.
Experiment 1 shows that transitive reasoning does affect not
only probability estimates but betting as well. Experiment 2
shows that the effect remains stable even after repeated
betting and feedback.
Keywords: causal induction, transitivity, Markov condition,
betting, economic reasoning, coherence-based induction

Transitive Reasoning
in Probabilistic Causal Chains
Causal model theory and causal Bayes nets (Pearl, 2000;
Sloman, 2005; Spirtes, Glymour, & Scheines, 2001;
Waldmann, 1996; Waldmann, Cheng, Hagmayer, &
Blaisdell, 2008) build on the assumption of the Markov
condition, stating that any node in a causal model is
conditionally independent of all upstream nodes, given its
parents (Hausman & Woodward, 1999; Spohn, 2001). This
entails transitivity in causal chains: If A causes B, and B
causes C, then A causes C (via B). If in a probabilistic causal
chain the Markov condition holds, then the strength of the
global relation A → C can be infered from the strength of
the local relations A → B and B → C, which means that
transitivity holds: When using the causal strength estimate
ΔP (ΔPAB = P(B|A) – P(B|¬A); Jenkins & Ward, 1965), the
global ΔP can be calculated by multiplying all local ΔPs
that make up the causal chain (e.g., ΔPAC = ΔPAB * ΔPBC). It
is therefore not necessary to observe the global relation
directly.
Related research on transitive reasoning in the induction
of causal chains has shown that people assume a transitive
causal relation based on integrating single causal links (Ahn
& Dennis, 2000; Baetu & Baker, 2009). This research
corroborated the hypothesis that people reasoned
transitively even if no information on the distal event was
shown.
Subsequent research started to investigate intransitive
chains (von Sydow, Meder, & Hagmayer, 2009; von Sydow,

Meder, Hagmayer, & Waldmann, 2010). This allows
bringing bottom-up evidence (correspondence) and topdown inferences based on the structural assumptions about
causal models (coherence) into conflict.
They suggest a causal coherence hypothesis that
coherence-based induction may distort bottom-up evidence
about causal relations considerably if the bottom-up data do
violate the structural assumptions of Bayes Nets. People are
taken, at least by default, to assume a modular integration of
single causal relations into larger causal networks, for
instance implying transitivity in causal chains. This is
predicted even when evidence to the contrary is available,
but people may give up this default belief if the mismatch
between coherence-based induction and correspondencebased induction gets very evident.
Intransitive chains are at odds with structural implications
of Bayes Nets and involve a violation of the Markov
condition. In the philosophical debate it has been put into
question whether all causal relations necessarily adhere to
the Markov condition and, as a consequence, whether chains
need to be transitive (Cartwright 2001, 2006; Sober & Steel,
2012). However, even strict advocates of the Markov
condition have pointed out that on the level of our actually
used categories causal chains may not adhere to the Markov
condition (Hausman & Woodward, 1999; Spohn, 2001). For
instance, this may be the case if a category is the product of
mixing subclasses for which different causal relations hold.
Von Sydow et al. (2009, 2010) showed in several formats
(overview format, trial-by-trial format) that participants may
infer the relation A → C from A → B and B → C, even if
this is not warranted by the data presented to them: In the
materials used, A → B and B → C were positive, while A
and C were statistically independent from each other (ΔPAB
= ΔPBC = .5, ΔPAC = 0). Participants in accordance with the
causal coherence hypothesis still judged A → C in line with
transitivity if they were presented with A → B and B → C
first. This effect remained stable even when participants
were able to directly assess the data about A → C. However,
in many regards the boundary conditions of the causal
coherence hypothesis need further exploration. For instance
it is not clear whether people continue to infer a positive
distal causal relation from positive local relations if it is
clearly negative or if they completely switch to bottom-up
induction due to the obvious mismatch.

Causal Reasoning and Decision Making
We here transfer the idea of the causal coherence hypothesis
and intransitive chains to the field of decision making.

2339

It has recently increasingly been emphasized that valid
human decision making involves causal reasoning, because
it allows for accurate predictions and effective interventions
in an agent’s environment. It has been shown that if an
intervention changes a causal system, people base their
decisions on their causal beliefs and assess utilities not only
based on previously observed contingencies but on causal
inferences (Hagmayer & Meder, 2013, cf. Hagmayer &
Sloman, 2009). The same should be the case in betting tasks
investigated here. When asked to bet on the occurrence of
an event people should take their knowledge about the
presence or absence of possible causes into account.
However, we here investigate non-transitive causal chains
to test the causal coherence hypothesis. Although betting
may also reduce the coherence-based distortion of evidence,
we predict that people’s bets on the occurrence of a possible
effect are informed by both bottom-up learning and topdown inferences based on the assumption of transitivity,
two sources of information that contradict each other in this
case. Their betting may either correspond to their
probability judgments (probability matching; cf. Vulkan,
2000) or to an optimal exploitation of their given probability
judgment: If optimizers use bottom-up induction and realize
the negative distal relation they should put all stakes on the
negative prediction, if they use a top-down approach to infer
the distal relation, they should put all stakes on the positive
prediction.

Goals and Hypotheses
In the two experiments presented here we investigated the
influence of causal coherence on people’s decision making
in an environment where transitivity is violated. We further
examined whether causal coherence still affects participants’ judgments if the distal events in the chain are not
only independent of each other, but their relation even runs
contrary to the assumption of transitivity (a negative global
relation when transitivity suggests a positive one and vice
versa). In an economic trial by trial learning scenario
participants first observed co-occurrences of four events in a
non-transitive causal chain and afterwards judged the
statistical relations between events.
In Experiment 1 we hypothesized that the causal
coherence should not only influence participants’ judgments
of the global relation but also the amount of money bet in
line with a transitive causal model, thereby performing
worse than a control group in which causal coherence
should not have an effect.
In Experiment 2 we examined whether this effect remains
stable after repeated betting on the global relation.

multi-experiment session. Participants received 6€ / hour or
course credit for taking part in the experiment.

Material and Procedure
Participants were told to observe individual companies and
their development during learning blocks with each trial
representing an individual company (cf. von Sydow et al.,
2009). Each company’s development consisted of four
events represented by four pictures (Figure 1): Each
company either buys or does not buy stocks of a second
company (A vs. ¬A), then rises or falls on a general
performance index (B vs. ¬B), is positively or negatively
evaluated by the Economist (C vs. ¬C), and in the end either
increases or decreases in stock market value (D vs. ¬D). The
instruction stressed the temporal order of the events, which
is a known cue inducing causal structure (Lagnado &
Sloman, 2006). However, we neither suggested that the
chain is transitive nor that specific relations were positive or
negative.
The local relations between all four events were positive
(ΔPAB = ΔPBC = ΔPCD = .5), while the global relation A → D
was negative (ΔPAD = -.5). Figure 2 illustrates the
contingencies shown to the participants. Each of the four
events occurred with a probability of P = .5 (dark shaded
segments in Figure 2). Combining four events (and their
negations) results in 16 possible trial types. Figure 2 shows
all types of trials used in Experiment 1. Trial type 1, for
instance, consisted of A, ¬B, ¬C, and ¬D etc. (Segment 1 in
the circles of Figure 2). Each of the eight types of trials was
used twice in each of the learning blocks. There were 12
learning blocks, resulting in 196 learning trials.

Figure 1: Exemplary trial representing one company (A, B,
¬C, ¬D).

Experiment 1: Betting Biases in Learning
Relations
Participants
We tested 84 participants (50 female, age M = 23.6) who
were recruited at the University of Heidelberg as part of a

2340

Figure 2: Structure of statistical relations between events A,
B, C, and D.

The experiment consisted of learning and testing blocks.
Before each learning block participants were instructed
which relation to focus on and were tested on only this
relation afterwards. Each learning block consisted of the
same 16 trials in randomized order, regardless of condition;
therefore participants did not differ in the learning material
presented to them. Each trial was 4 seconds long with each
picture being presented for 1 second. Participants started
each trial by clicking a “Next” button on the screen.
In each test phase participants judged the relation they
had focused on during the preceding learning trial on a 21point scale ranging from -100, indicating a deterministic
negative relation (e.g.: “If a company is positively evaluated
then its stock market value will always decrease”), to 100,
indicating a deterministic positive relation (e.g.: “If a
company is positively evaluated then its stock market value
will always increase”), with a middle point of 0, indicating
statistical independence.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of three
conditions which only differed in learning instructions and
testing (Figure 3): Participants in the local only condition
only focused (and were only tested) on the local relations A
→ B, B → C and C → D. Participants in the local + global
condition were tested on both the local relations and the
global relation A → D. In the global only condition participants were only instructed to focus on the global relation.

Results
Estimates of the Global Relation We expected participants
in the local only group to judge A → D to be positive, in
line with the transitivity assumption, even though they could
have seen the negative relation during 196 trials. We further
predicted the global only group to judge A → D to be
strongly negative, in line with the data. As the local + global
group’s estimates should be informed by both bottom-up
learning and top-down inferences we expected their
estimates to fall between the other two groups. Figure 4
shows participants’ mean estimates of the global relation A
→ D, with a positive value indicating a positive relation and
vice versa. A one-way ANOVA comparing the groups mean
estimates confirms this hypothesis1: We found a significant
main effect of condition, F(2, 81)= 23.99, p < .001.
Participants in the local only group judged A → D to be
positive, M = 36.2, SD = 29.4, the global only group judged
it to be negative, M = -27.6, SD = 37.8, with the local +
global group falling between the other two, M = 5.2, SD =
34.2. A Bonferroni-corrected post-hoc comparison of group
means revealed significant differences between all three
groups, ps < .01.
Note that the local only group’s estimates are even
considerably higher than predicted by a perfectly transitive
inference (which would correspond to an estimate of +12 on
our scale). The global only group’s mean estimate is closer
to the estimate predicted by bottom-up processing alone
(corresponding to -50 on our scale).

Figure 3: Temporal structure of Experiment 1.
After the learning blocks and the test blocks all participants rated the perceived relation A → D on the same 21point scale again. They were then told that they would see
one more company drawn randomly from the ones they had
seen so far during the experiment. This time they only saw
the company’s buying decision (A or ¬A). They could then
bet 100 cents on the development of the company’s stock
market value (D vs. ¬D). Participants could split their
money between the two options and would win the amount
of money they bet on the right outcome. The outcome was
shown afterwards and participants were paid the amount of
money they had won on top of their usual reimbursement.
After the betting trial all participants rated the local
relations one last time.

Figure 4: Mean estimates for A → D.
Betting on the Global Relation To compare participants’
betting performances we first calculated how much money
each participant bet on the most likely outcome given the
information about A vs. ¬A (ideal bet), i.e. if participants
saw an instance of A, their ideal bet would be the amount
they bet on ¬D (and for ¬A vice versa). Figure 5 shows
participants’ mean ideal bets by condition. A one-way
ANOVA with the ideal bet as the dependent variable again
1
Although normal distribution was violated within conditions
we still report the results of parametric tests as they have proven to
be robust against this deviation. In all cases analyses using nonparametric tests led to comparable results to those reported.

2341

showed a significant main effect of condition, F(2, 81) =
9.73, p < .001. The local only group bet significantly less
money on the ideal bet, M = 32.1, SD = 27.1, than the global
only group, M = 66.6, SD = 29.2, with the local + global
group falling between the two, M = 51.5, SD = 30.4 (Figure
5). A Bonferroni-corrected post-hoc comparison of group
means revealed a significant difference between the local
only group and the other two, ps < .05, but not between the
local + global and the global only group, p = .15.

observed bets suggest a sort of probability matching
reflecting participants’ beliefs about the probabilities of D
vs. ¬D given A vs. ¬A.

Experiment 2: Repeated Betting
Participants
We tested 94 participants (67 female, age M = 23.3) who
were recruited at the University of Heidelberg as part of a
multi-experiment session. Participants received 6€ / hour or
course credit for taking part in the experiment.

Material and Procedure

Figure 5: Mean ideal bets in ct on D vs. ¬D.

Discussion
In the first experiment we could replicate and expand von
Sydow et al.’s (2010) findings. Participants stick with their
assumptions of transitivity even if they are presented with
strongly contradicting evidence during a total of 196 learning trials. However, the results in the local + global group
show that this assumption is not impervious to experience:
Participants’ mean judgments near the point of statistical independence may either reflect an averaging of top-down assumptions and bottom-up data collection or participants’
confusion about the true nature of the relation. In any case
the judgment differed considerably from the value predicted
by bottom-up data alone. Transitive interpretations must
have had a strong impact on participants’ estimates.
In the local only group participants’ estimates of A → D
were considerably higher than predicted by an inference
purely based on transitivity. People may not use an as finegrained scale to convey that there is a positive relation than
is suggested by a fully parameterized Bayesian model.
Alternatively, this deviation may be linked to previously
found deviations from the Markov condition in experimental
paradigms not directly assessing transitive reasoning, but
showing too positive relations in functioning chains (Rehder
& Burnett, 2005).
The results of the betting trial show that participants’
assumptions of transitivity not only influence their
judgments but also their decision making in a betting task:
Participants in the local only group were willing to bet most
of their money in line with the belief that A → D is positive.
Participants in the global only group accurately judged A →
D to be negative and bet most of their money accordingly,
leading to more money bet on the most likely outcome. The

Experiment 2 followed a structure similar to Experiment 1
(Figure 3), with each testing phase replaced by one betting
trial as described in Experiment 1. Repeated betting on A →
D should incentivize accurate learning even more, therefore
putting the causal coherence hypothesis to a stronger test.
Each phase of Experiment 1 in which participants judged
the relation A → B was replaced by a betting trial where
participants saw A or ¬A and were asked to bet on B vs. ¬B,
etc. In each betting trial participants bet 100 points they
could split between the two possible outcomes. Participants
won the amount of points they bet on the right outcome and
received immediate feedback about the points they won. At
the end of the experiment participants were paid up to 3 €
on top of their usual reimbursement depending on how
many points they had collected.
Participants were again randomly assigned to either the
local only, local + global, or global only group, analogously
to the design of Experiment 1. At the end of the experiment
participants judged the local relations and the global relation
on the same scale as used in Experiment 1.
Due to the naturalistic material used in Experiment 1
participants might have had prior beliefs about A → D being
positive. Their responses in the local only group may
therefore not indicate transitive reasoning but rather
participants’ resorting to prior beliefs in the absence of
further knowledge. To control for the effect of a general
tendency to judge A → D positively we counterbalanced
between participants whether A → B was positive or
negative (ΔPAB = .5 vs. ΔPAB = -.5). With A → B being
negative and the other local relations remaining positive, A
→ D was positive, ΔPAD = .5, but the transitive top-down
prediction is negative for this relation. In both cases we
expected participants in the local only group and the local +
global group to bet in line with transitivity.

Results
Estimates of the Global Relation If ΔPAB = -.5
participants’ answers were reverse coded. We expected
participants in the local only group to judge A → D in line
with the assumption of transitivity, as predicted by the
causal coherence hypothesis. The global only group should
judge A → D in line with the data presented during learning
trials (represented by negative values in Figure 7). We
expected the local + global group’s estimates to fall between

2342

the two other conditions as they should be driven by both
top-down assumptions and bottom-up learning. A one-way
ANOVA comparing the groups’ mean estimates confirms
this hypothesis: We found a significant main effect of
condition, F(2, 91)= 4.96, p < .01. Participants in the local
only group judged A → D to be positive, M = 8.4, SD =
38.7, the global only group judged it to be negative, M = 25.5, SD = 52.4, with the local + global group falling
between the other two, M = -8.1, SD = 34.0 (Figure 7). A
post-hoc comparison of group means revealed significant
differences between all three groups, ps < .01.

Discussion
Experiment 2 replicates and extends the findings of
Experiment 1. Even after betting on A → D three times (and
receiving feedback about their performance) the local +
global group failed to perform substantially better than the
local only group during betting trials, showing that the
tendency to bet in line with transitivity is hard to overcome,
even if it consistently leads to non-optimal outcomes. This
was also reflected in participants’ judgment of A → D.
Again the local + global group’s betting behavior might also
reflect confusion about the nature of A → D, because betting
50 points on both results in each bet would be the safest bet
that ensures to win at least half of the possible amount of
money.

General Discussion

Figure 6: Mean estimates for A → D.
Betting on the Global Relation Again all participants bet
on A → D after the last learning block. To compare
participants’ betting performances we first calculated how
much money each participant bet on the most likely
outcome given the information about A vs. ¬A. A one-way
ANOVA again showed a significant main effect of
condition, F(2, 91) = 18.9, p < .001 (Figure 6). The local
only group bet significantly less money on the ideal bet, M
= 43.5, SD = 19.5, than the global only group, M = 78.5, SD
= 24.0, with the local + global group falling between the
two, M = 52.7, SD = 25.9. A post-hoc comparison of group
means revealed a significant difference between the global
only group and the other two, ps < .001, but not between the
local only and the local + global group, p = .12.

Figure 7: Mean ideal bets on D vs. ¬D.

In two studies we found compelling evidence that the causal
coherence hypothesis seems to generalize to decision
making in an economic context, even when using
incentivized repeated betting tasks. Additionally we found
that the causal coherence hypothesis holds not only for
intransitive chains where the distal events are independent
of each other, but also when the global relation strongly
contradicts transitive inferences. In both experiments global
relations were strongly negative (positive) while transitivity
suggested a positive (negative) relation. All three groups
differed considerably in their estimates of the global
relations, showing that both sources of information,
correspondence and coherence, play an important role in
judging causal relations.
In Experiment 1 participants of the local only group
performed significantly worse in a one-shot bet on A → D,
even though they had the chance to learn about A → D in a
total of 196 trials.
Experiment 2 demonstrates this tendency’s strength and
stability: Even after repeated betting trials that led to
consistently bad results for betting on transitivity,
participants in the local + global group still performed
significantly worse than the global only group, showing no
improvement over the four betting trials.
Similar research on pseudocontingencies has likewise
previously shown effects of people distorting contingencies
(Fiedler, Freytag, & Meiser, 2009). However, pseudocontingencies are usually explained based on the matching
of two skewed distributions. This factor is excluded here,
since we did not use skewed distributions for the single
events (P(A) = P(B) = P(C) = P(D) = .5). Hence the
postulated coherence-based inference effects cannot be
explained by traditional explanations of pseudocontingencies and seem to add another explanation to those
based on skewed distributions.
In any case, the results suggest that judgments as well as
bets about distal relations in a potential causal chain can be
distorted in the direction implied by transitive inferences
even if transitivity is violated when sequentially inducing
several local relations. Depending on the conditions, we
found strong distortions in the judgments and bets largely

2343

coherent with top-down inferences, even if direct bottom-up
inferences now went into an opposed direction while people
in almost 200 trials saw evidence for this relation.
Further research should address whether this is also true
for situations in which participants can actively intervene,
e.g. suggesting a company to buy or not buy (A vs. ¬A) in
order to achieve rising or falling stock prices (D vs. ¬D).
Active engagement in causal systems may both ensure
participants’ engagement in the task and effective encoding
of predictions and outcomes of their decisions, eventually
overcoming the assumption of transitivity in cases where it
is invalid.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Shirin Betzler, Julia Folz, Alina Greis,
Kamala Grothe, Vera Hampel, Antonia Lange, and
Alexander Wendt for their valuable work during data
collection. We would also like to thank anonymous
reviewers for helpful comments and suggestions. This
research was supported by the grant Sy 111/2-1 to Momme
von Sydow from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG) as part of the priority program New Frameworks of
Rationality (SPP 1516) as well as the DFG grant FI294/23-1
to Klaus Fiedler.

References
Ahn, W., & Dennis, M. (2000). Induction of causal chains.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Second Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 19–24). Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, NJ: Mahwah.
Baetu, I., & Baker, A. G. (2009). Human judgments of
positive and negative causal chains. Journal Of
Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes,
35(2), 153-168.
Cartwright, N. (2001). What is Wrong with Bayes Nets?
The Monist, 84, 242-264.
Cartwright, N. (2006). From metaphysics to method:
comments on manipulability and the causal Markov
condition. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science,
57, 197-218.
Cheng, P. W. (1997). From covariation to causation: A
causal power theory. Psychological Review, 104, 367405.
Fiedler, K., Freytag, P., & Meiser, T. (2009).
Pseudocontingencies: An integrative account of an
intriguing cognitive illusion. Psychological Review,
116(1), 187-206.
Hagmayer, Y., & Meder, B. (2013). Repeated causal
decision making. Journal Of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, And Cognition, 39(1), 33-50.
Hagmayer, Y. A., & Sloman, S. A. (2009). People conceive
of their choices as intervention. Journal Of Experimental
Psychology: General, 13822-38.Hausman, D., &
Woodward, J. (1999) Independence, Invariance, and the
Causal Markov Condition, British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science, 50, 521-583.

Jenkins, H. M., & Ward, W. C. (1965). Judgment of
contingency between responses and outcomes.
Psychological Monographs: General and Applied, 79, 117.
Lagnado, D. A. & & Sloman, S. A. (2006). Time as a Guide
to Cause. Journal of Experimental Psychology, Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 32, 451-460.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality: Models, Reasoning, and
Inference. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Rehder, B., & Burnett, R. C. (2005). Feature inference and
the causal structure of categories. Cognitive Psychology,
50, 264 –314.
Sloman, S. (2005). Causal Models. How People Think about
the World and Its Alternatives. Cambridge, MA: Oxford
University Press.
Sober, E. & Steel, M. (2012). Screening-Off and Causal
Incompleteness: A No-Go Theorem. The British Journal
for the Philosophy of Science, 64, 1-38.
Spirtes, P., Glymour, C., & Scheines, R. (2001), Causation,
Prediction, and Search. 2nd edition. New York: SpringerVerlag.
Spohn, W. (2001), Bayesian Nets Are All There Is To
Causal Dependence (pp. 157-172), in: M.C. Galavotti, P.
Suppes, and D. costantini (eds.), Stochastic Dependence
and Causality, CSLI Publications, Stanford.
von Sydow, M., Meder, B., & Hagmayer, Y. (2009). A
Transitivity Heuristic of Probabilistic Causal Reasoning.
In Proceedings of the Thirty-First Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 803-808). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
von Sydow, M., Meder, B., Hagmayer, Y. & Waldmann, M.
R. (2010). How Causal Reasoning Can Bias Empirical
Evidence. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2087-2092). Austin,
TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Vulkan, N. (2000). An economist's perspective on
probability matching. Journal of Economic Surveys, 14,
101-118.
Waldmann, M. R. (1996). Knowledge-based causal
induction. In D. R. Shanks, K. J. Holyoak, & D. L. Medin
(Eds.), The psychology of learning and motivation, Vol.
34: Causal learning (pp. 47-88). San Diego: Academic
Press.
Waldmann, M. R., Cheng, P. W., Hagmayer, Y., &
Blaisdell, A. P. (2008). Causal learning in rats and
humans: a minimal rational model. In N. Chater, & M.
Oaksford (Eds.), The probabilistic mind. Prospects for
Bayesian Cognitive Science (pp. 453-484). Oxford:
University Press.

2344

