UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Beyond Naive Cue Combination: Salience and Social Cues in Early Word Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/44c682kk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Yurovsky, Daniel
Frank, Michael

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Beyond Naı̈ve Cue Combination:
Salience and Social Cues in Early Word Learning
Daniel Yurovsky

Michael C. Frank

yurovsky@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

mcfrank@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Abstract
Children learn their earliest words through social interaction,
but it is unknown how much they use social information. Some
theories argue that word learning is fundamentally social from
its outset, with even the youngest infants understanding intentions and using them to infer a social partner’s target of reference. In contrast, other theories argue that early word learning is largely a perceptual process in which young children
map words onto salient objects. One way of unifying these accounts is to model word learning as weighted cue-combination
in which children attend to many potential cues to reference,
but only gradually learn the correct weight to assign each cue
(Hollich, Hirsh-Pasek, & Golinkoff, 2000). We test 3 predictions of a naı̈ve cue-combination account and show each to be
incorrect. Thus, while aspects of this unifying account are correct, it must be amended to capture the dynamics of children’s
behavior across differing referential situations.
Keywords: Language acquisition, word learning, attention,
social cues, cognitive development

Introduction
How do children learn the meanings of their first words? Infants are situated in a social system from their first day of
life, and some theories argue that they leverage this social
information from the very outset of word learning (Bloom
& Markson, 1998). For instance, infants follow direction of
gaze by 6-months (D’Entremont, Hains, & Muir, 1997), and
are more likely to do so in the presence of other communicative signals (Senju, Csibra, & Johnson, 2008). Individual differences in children’s gaze-following predict differences in
vocabulary development (Brooks & Meltzoff, 2008). In addition, infants appear to be representing others’ beliefs, and
these representations affect their expectations by 12-months
of age (Vouloumanos, Onishi, & Pogue, 2012). Infants are
thus tuned to social cues and could in principle already use
these cues from the outset of word learning.1
Yet some competing theories argue that early word learning is primarily a perceptual process (Vygotsky, 1978) and
that infants learn words by mapping them onto salient objects in their learning environments (Smith, 2000). Indeed, early child-directed naming events are characterized by
multi-modal synchrony: mothers move the objects they label
in temporal synchrony with the labels they speak (Gogate,
Bahrick, & Watson, 2000), and the degree of synchrony predicts mapping for young infants (Gogate, Bolzani, & Betancourt, 2006).
1 For

convenience we refer to “word-object mapping” and “word
learning” interchangeably, but acknowledge that referential mapping
is only part of simple object-noun learning (the current case study).
Generalization is unaddressed here.

To unify these views, Golinkoff and Hirsh-Pasek (2006)
proposed the Emergentist Coalition Model. From this perspective, children are sensitive to a coalition of cues-toreference: both perceptual cues like visual salience and temporal synchrony, and social cues like eye-gaze and pointing.
To determine the referent of a speaker’s utterance, children
combine all of the available cues. However, the weights assigned these cues are not fixed; they change over the course
of development as children learn which cues are the best predictors of reference. Early on, children are biased to assign
high weight to perceptual cues, but as they learn that social
cues are better predictors, they gradually weigh them more.
Support for a developmental cue-combination account
comes from studies that pit perceptual salience against social information (e.g., speaker gaze) at different developmental ages. When social gaze conflicts with perceptual salience,
10-month-old infants show no evidence of attending to gaze
(Pruden, Hirsh-Pasek, Golinkoff, & Hennon, 2006). Although 10-month-old infants may be able to follow gaze,
they appear to weigh it significantly less than object salience
in mapping words to objects. Under similar conditions, 12and 15-month-olds fail to learn any mappings (Hollich et al.,
2000; Houston-Price, Plunkett, & Duffy, 2006). By 19- and
24-months, however, toddlers learn labels for objects cued by
gaze even in the presence of salient competitors (Moore, Angelopoulos, & Bennett, 1999; Hollich et al., 2000).
Weighted cue-combination is an intuitive, computationally
simple model of the process of change in early word learning (Frank, Tenenbaum, & Fernald, 2013), and it is consistent with properties of our perceptual system (Ernst & Banks,
2002; Jacobs, 2002). Within and across modalities, adults
weigh cues in proportion to their predictive power, combining them as predicted by ideal observer models. Yet, in the
domain of early word learning, a number of its detailed predictions remain untested.
Using eye-tracking to measure early word learning from
social information, we test three predictions of the cuecombination model of developmental change:
1. Developmental change is due to re-weighting across cues,
2. Cue weights drive attention during learning, and
3. Perceptual cues decrease in weight across development.
Two experiments show that none of these predictions are correct. Thus, while cue-combination captures important insights about early word learning, a naı̈ve version of this account is insufficient.

1826

a

b

c

Figure 1: Example learning trials from Experiments 1 and 2. In Experiment 1 (a), the speaker turned towards one of the
equally-salient toys and labeled it three times over the course of ∼10 seconds. In Experiment 2, the speaker produced the same
social cues and the same label as in Experiment 1, but the target object was either the more perceptually salient toy (b), or
the less perceptually salient toy (c). These manipulations allowed us to measure the contributions of both salience and social
information to word-object mapping.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 was designed to measure the development
of children’s ability to follow and learn from social gaze
in the absence of competing salience cues. A naı̈ve cuecombination account, in which developmental changes in
cue use result from learning their relative predictive weights,
makes a null prediction: children’s responses should not
change significantly across development when only one cue
is available.
Children’s eye movements were tracked while they
watched a series of naturalistic word-learning videos. In each,
children saw a speaker seated at a table between two novel
toys. She greeted them, and then turned towards one of the
toys and labeled it three times in a short monologue. After
these learning trials, children were tested for their knowledge
of the referent for the new word using the preferential looking
procedure. In addition, to measure children’s processing abilities for familiar words, similar test trials were administered
with known items.

Method
Stimulus Norming. Thirty-eight adults on Amazon Mechanical Turk were shown toys two at a time from a set of
10. For each pair, they were asked to pick the toy they would
rather play with. Each participant made 20 choices, with toys
sampled at random, producing 7.6 responses for each pair of
toys. Based on these responses, we selected the two toys that
were best balanced against each other (see Figure 1a).
Participants. Parents and their 1–4 year-old children were
invited to participate in a short language learning study during
their visit to the San Jose Children’s Discovery museum. In
total, we collected demographic and experimental data from
269 children, 122 of whom were excluded for one or more of
the following reasons: abnormal developmental issues (N =
27), failure to calibrate (N = 58), and less than 75% exposure
to English (N = 36). The final sample consisted of 27 1–1.5
year olds (9 girls), 19 1.5–2 year olds (7 girls), 38 2–2.5 year
olds (13 girls), 26 2.5–3 year olds (10 girls), 15 4–3.5 year
olds (9 girls), and 22 3.5–4 year olds (11 girls).

Stimuli and Design. The experiment consisted of two
kinds of trials designed to measure both how children allocate their attention while learning from a social partner,
and what word-object mapping information they extract from
these learning events. Learning trials were 12s video clips
in which a speaker first greeted the the child, and then turned
towards one of the two toys on the screen, labeling it three
times in a short monologue (Figure 1a). On the first learning trial, for example, the speaker said “Hi there! It’s a modi.
Look at the modi. What a nice modi.”
On each test trial, children saw two objects—one on each
side of the screen—and heard a short audio clip of the speaker
from the learning trials asking them to find a target object.
Each test trial was 7s long, and the target label was heard
at 2.75s. On Familiar test trials, both the target and competitor were common objects familiar to young children (e.g.
book vs. dog). On Novel and Mutual Exclusivity (ME) test
trials, children saw both of the toys from the previous learning trials, and were asked to find either the previously named
toy (modi), or were asked about a novel label (dax). These
ME trials were designed as a strong test of mapping formation; looking to the correct target on Novel trials could result
from familiarity or preference rather than mapping. However,
correct performance on both Novel and ME trials could only
result from knowledge of the specific label used in training.
Finally, the experiment contained two calibration checks:
short videos in which small dancing stars appeared in four
places on the screen. These checks allowed us to adjust initial
calibration settings when they were imprecise (for details, see
Frank, Vul, & Saxe, 2012).
Procedure. The eye-tracker was first calibrated for each
child using a 2-point calibration. Next, children saw four
learning trials in which the speaker looked at one of two toys
on the screen and labeled it three times. Finally, children saw
all of the test trials, in which their knowledge of both familiar
and novel word-object mappings was tested. Two calibration checks (described above) were embedded in the learning
phase. The entire experiment consisted of 4 learning trials, 8
Familiar, 6 Novel, and 6 ME test trials.

1827

Data Analysis. Children’s eye movements during both
learning and testing were analyzed using a Regions of Interest
(ROI) approach. Bounding-box ROIs were drawn by a human
coder for the speaker’s face (learning trials) and for the two
objects (learning and test trials). Children’s calibrations were
adjusted by fitting a robust linear regression for their fixations relative to known locations on calibration check videos.
These regressions were used to transform eye movements for
all learning and test trials (Frank et al., 2012).
Children’s learning and test behaviors were quantified by
measuring their proportion of looking to each ROI on each
trial. To ensure that proportions were representative, individual test trials were excluded from analysis if eye gaze data
was missing for more than half of their duration. To compute
age-group looking proportions, proportions were computed
first for each individual trial, averaged at the individual-child
level, and then averaged across children.
Window-of-analysis selection began by coding the point of
disambiguation for each trial. This was the onset of the target
label for test trials, and the rotation of the speaker’s head for
learning trials. The window for each trial began 1s after this
point of disambiguation to allow children of all ages enough
time to process and continued out to 3s after this point on both
learning and test trials. To quantify learning with standard
analyses, we aggregated these patterns of looking over time
to compute proportion of target looking on each test trial.

Prop. Looks to ROI

1.0

0.4
Target
0.2
Competitor
1.5

2

2.5

3

Age(years)

3.5

Figure 2: Proportion of children’s looking the target toy, competitor toy, and the speaker’s face during learning in Experiment 1. Children of all ages spent the majority of the learning trials looking at the speaker’s face. Disengaging from the
face and fixating the target increased across development. Error bars indicate 95% confidence interval computed by nonparametric bootstrap.

Older children were better at disengaging from social
stimuli. Children were successful at attending to and following the speaker’s social gaze even from the youngest ages
measured. Children of all ages spent more time looking at the
target than at the competitor during learning trials (smallest
t(23) = 3.20, p < .01; Figure 3). However, for all age groups,
looks to both target and competitor made up the minority of
children’s dwell times. Instead, children in all age groups
spent more than 50% of their time attending to the speaker’s
face (Figure 2).2 Thus, the primary driver of developmental change was not stronger discrimination between the target
and competitor (predicted by greater social cue weights), but
rather improved ability to disengage from the speaker’s face.
Developmental change was not primarily due to reweighting. In line with the naı̈ve cue combination account,
attention due to the social cue during learning carried forward
to correct mapping at test. Analyses of test trials showed
broad success on Familiar, Novel, and ME trials across development. The 1–1.5 year-olds trended towards significance
on familiar trials (t(26) = 1.65, p = .11), and were nonat

Face

1

In Experiment 1, we address two predictions of naı̈ve cue
combination: how cues affect attention during learning, and
how weights change across development.

available

0.6

0.0

Results.

2 All
data and code for analysis
http://github.com/dyurovsky/ATT-WORD.

0.8

significantly in the correct direction on Novel and ME trials. At all other ages, children looked to the target at abovechance levels on all test trials (smallest t(17) = 2.10, p = .05).
However, children’s abilities both to follow social cues during learning trials and to find the correct target on test trials
improved across development. To quantify this improvement,
we fit a mixed effects logistic regression to the data (Jaeger,
2008). This analysis revealed significant improvement across
age (β = .61, z = 4.03, p < .001), as well as a significant
significant effect of Learning as compared to Novel trials
(β = 1.18, z = 3.11, p < .01). No other effects or interactions approached significance. Figure 3 shows proportion of
looking all kinds of trials at all ages.
Thus, across development, children improved in learning
from the social cue, even when it was the only cue available.
This suggests that relative re-weighting across cues is not the
only driver of improved word learning.

Discussion
Together, these results provide evidence both of early competence in the use of social gaze to determine the target of
a speaker’s reference, as well as improvement across development. Further, improvements in gaze-following also paralleled improvements in both finding the referents of these
novel words on subsequent test trials, and also finding the
referents of familiar words (Figure 3).
These results thus provide support for one key claim of the
developmental cue-combination account: children are sensitive to social cues quite early. Young children could assign
small—but non-zero—weight to social cues, and then grad-

1828

Learning

Familiar

Novel

ME

periment 2 were mismatched. For children in the Salient condition, the target was the more interesting toy, and the competitor the less interesting toy. In the Non-Salient condition,
the identities of the toys were switched—the target was the
less salient toy. Experiment 2 allowed us to investigate children’s use of social cues to learn new words both social cues
and salience indicate the same referent, and when they are in
competition (as in Hollich et al., 2000; Pruden et al., 2006).

1.0

Prop. Looks to Target vs. Competitor

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

Method

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

1

1.5

Age(years)

2

2.5

3

3.5

Figure 3: Proportion of time children fixated the correct target on each type of test trial in Experiment 1. Children improved on all measures across development. Each dot indicates one half-year age group and each line represents a 95%
confidence interval computed by non-parametric bootstrap. A
proportion of .5 indicates chance performance.
ually assign them more credibility over development. However, the results also provide evidence against the prediction
that cues drive attention, and that developmental change is
due to relative re-weighting for two reasons. First, children of
all ages found the speaker’s face highly engaging, and spent
the majority of their time fixating it rather than the referents
on learning trials. The primary behavioral development was
the ability to disengage from the speaker’s face. Second, children showed gradual improvement in fixating the target during both learning and test trials well into their fourth year.
This data could be consistent with a modified version of
the cue-combination account in which cues change in both
their absolute and relative weights due to learning. However,
while children undeniably encounter naming events in their
third and fourth years, it seems unlikely that the process of
learning the cue validity of social gaze would extend over
such a long period of time.
In Experiment 2 we manipulated the relative salience of the
target and competitor objects children learned about. This allowed us to measure how salience affects children’s looking
during both learning and test, providing a test of all three predictions of the naı̈ve cue-combination account.

Participants. Participants were recruited from the floor of
the San Jose Children’s Discovery museum as in Experiment
1. For Experiment 2, we focused on the three youngest age
groups. In the Salience condition, demographic and experimental data were collected from 117 children, 52 of whom
were excluded for one or more of the following reasons: abnormal developmental issues (N = 13), failure to calibrate
(N = 25), less than 75% exposure to English (N = 33), and
inattentiveness (N = 2). The final sample consisted of 22 11.5 year olds (11 girls), 21 1.5-2 year olds (10 girls), 19 2-2.5
year olds (9 girls). In the Non-Salience condition, data were
collected from 126 children, 71 of whom were excluded for
one or more of the following reasons: abnormal developmental issues (N = 9), failure to calibrate (N = 26), and less than
75% exposure to English (N = 36). The final sample consisted of 26 1-1.5 year olds (13 girls), 25 1.5-2 year olds (11
girls), 15 2-2.5 year olds (4 girls).
Stimuli, Design, and Procedure. Experimental stimuli
were identical to those in Experiment 1, except that the identities of the novel toys were changed and new videos were
recorded. The procedure, including the order of the trials,
was identical.

Results and Discussion
To determine the effect of perceptual salience on word learning, we compared children’s looking in the Salient and NonSalient conditions not only to each other, but also to the Balanced condition tested in Experiment 1.

Table 1: Mixed-effects Regression Coefficients Predicting
Looking Behavior in Experiments 1 and 2.
Predictor
Intercept
Age (yrs)
Familiar
Salient
NonSalient
Learning
ME
Salient*Learn
NonSal*Learn
Sal*ME
NonSal*ME

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was identical to Experiment 1 in all respects except for the identity of the novel toys that served as the target
and competitor. In contrast to Experiment 1, in which the two
toys were balanced in their visual salience, the two toys in Ex-

1829

Value (SE)
-.65 (.63)
.42 (.27)
1.55 (.73)
.96 (.48)
-.97 (.37)
1.55 (.73)
-.29 (.36)
-.03 (.84)
1.09 (.65)
-2.28 (.61)
1.67 (.54)

t-value
-1.04
1.58
2.13
1.98
-2.63
2.13
-.80
-.035
-1.65
-3.73
3.07

Sig.
p = .3
p = .11
p < .05
p < .05
p < .01
p < .05
p = .42
p = .97
p = .85
p = −.09
p < .01

*
*
**
*

.
**

1.0
0.9

0.7
0.6
0.5

Learning

Balanced
Salient
NonSalient

0.8

0.4
0.3

0.9
0.8

Salient

0.7

Balanced

0.6

NonSalient

Novel

Prop. Looks to Target

1.0

0.5
0.4
0.3
1.0
0.9
0.8
NonSalient

0.6

Balanced
Salient

0.5

ME

0.7

0.4
0.3
1

1.5

Age(years)

2

Figure 4: Proportion of time children fixated the correct target
on Learning and Test trials in Experiments 1 (three youngest
age groups) and 2. Salience had the predicted effect on looking behavior at test, but relatively little during learning. Each
dot indicates one half-year age group and each error bar represents a 95% confidence interval computed by non-parametric
bootstrap. A proportion of .5 indicates chance performance.

Perceptual salience did not drive attention during learning. In contrast to the prediction of the naı̈ve cuecombination account, children’s looking behavior during
learning trials was not significantly affected by the salience
of the target and competitor (Figure 4, top). As in Experiment 1, children of all ages spent the more time looking at
the target than the competitor, but looking time to both made
up the minority of their dwell time; children spent the majority of learning trials looking at the speaker’s face.
This null-result could be due to the toys being too similar in
their salience, making this a weak test of the cue-combination
model. However, salience exerted a strong effect on test

trials—children in all age groups were strongly attracted to
the salient object. When the target referent was salient, children at all ages looked at it for the majority of the window of
analysis on Novel test trials (smallest t(19) = 2.96, p < .01).
When the target was non-salient, no age group look showed
evidence of learning on Novel test trials (largest t(13) = 1.46,
p = .17). Mutual-exclusivity (ME) trials showed the opposite pattern. When the target referent was salient, children in
the two younger age groups looked at the correct referent on
ME trials (the competitor) at below chance levels (smallest
t(20) = −2.29, p < .05). In the Non-Salient condition, even
the youngest children looked at the correct referent on ME trials at above chance levels (smallest t(22) = 4.51, p < .001).
Figure 4 (middle and bottom) shows looking behavior at test
in both Experiments 1 and 2.
Perceptual cues did not decrease in weight across development. The effect of perceptual cues at test did not appear
to change across development. We fit a mixed-effects logistic regression to the data from both experiments to determine
how age and experimental condition impacted looking behavior during both learning and test. After controlling for performance on Familiar trials, this regression showed a significant
effect of condition, and an interaction between trial type and
condition. Children looked more to the salient object at test
regardless of whether it was the target or competitor, and significantly more at the target during learning trials regardless
of whether it was salient. However, none of these factors interacted with age (Table 1).
Developmental change was not due to re-weighting across
cues. Together with the t-tests above, this analysis suggests
that children are not relatively re-weighing salience and social cues over the course of development. While salience certainly plays a role in directing looking behavior, it does not
appear to play a role during learning itself. However, salience
has a strong effect during test. In the absence of any social information, salience directs children’s attention in a way that
does not appear to change over early development.

Conclusion
Is children’s early word-object mapping fundamentally social, or is it mostly driven by perceptual processes? A
weighted cue-combination account provides a simple framework to unify social and perceptual factors in early word
learning (Hollich et al., 2000; Frank et al., 2013). Under this
kind of account, perceptual cues are weighed higher in early
learning, while social cues gradually gain weight as children learn their predictive power across early naming events.
We tested this account in two word-learning experiments and
found that its predictions were inconsistent with the data.
Although a cue-combination account would predict that
developmental change is largely driven by the relative reweighting of cues, our data showed little evidence of this
(contra prediction 1). Instead, developmental changes during learning appeared to be driven by disengagement from

1830

the social stimulus, not disengagement from the perceptually salient target (contra prediction 2). Finally, perceptual
salience exerted its effects mostly at test, and did so consistently across early development instead of declining in weight
(contra prediction 3).
Learning a new word relies on processes that work at multiple time-scales: children need to identify a speaker’s referent in-the-moment, encode a mapping between the label and
referent, recall multiple labeling events and integrate across
them, and use their learned mappings to identify the object in
novel contexts (McMurray, Horst, & Samuelson, 2012; Yu &
Smith, 2012). Naı̈ve cue-combination is too simple a model
because it does not distinguish among these component problems. In these experiments, for instance, children used different cues to identify a speaker’s referent and to find it in a novel
test context. Building a more satisfying model of the development of word learning will require integrating the cues children use to identify referents with an understanding of how
these cues interact with attentional control, memory, and the
conversational contexts in which naming occurs (Frank et al.,
2013; Yurovsky, Wade, & Frank, 2013).

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Janelle Klaas for collecting the data, and
to all of the members of the Language and Cognition Lab for
their feedback on this project. In addition, we thank the parents, children, and staff at the San Jose Children’s Discovery
Museum for supporting us in collecting developmental data.
This work was supported by NIH NRSA F32HD075577 to
DY as well as grants from the Merck Scholars Foundation
and the Stanford Center Health Research Initiative to MCF.

References
Bloom, P., & Markson, L. (1998). Capacities underlying
word learning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2, 67–73.
Brooks, R., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2008). Infant gaze following and pointing predict accelerated vocabulary growth
through two years of age: a longitudinal, growth curve
modeling study. Journal of Child Language, 35, 207–
220.
D’Entremont, B., Hains, S. M. J., & Muir, D. W. (1997). A
Demonstration of Gaze Following in 3- to 6-Month-Olds.
Infant Behavior and Development, 20, 569–572.
Ernst, M. O., & Banks, M. S. (2002). Humans integrate visual and haptic information in a statistically optimal fashion. Nature, 415(6870), 429–433.
Frank, M. C., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Fernald, A. (2013). Social
and discourse contributions to the determination of reference in cross-situational word learning. Language Learning and Development, 9(1), 1–24.
Frank, M. C., Vul, E., & Saxe, R. (2012). Measuring the development of social attention using free-viewing. Infancy,
17, 355–375.
Gogate, L. J., Bahrick, L. E., & Watson, J. D. (2000). A study
of multimodal motherese: The role of temporal synchrony

between verbal labels and gestures. Child Development,
71, 878–94.
Gogate, L. J., Bolzani, L. H., & Betancourt, E. A. (2006). Attention to Maternal Multimodal Naming by 6- to 8-MonthOld Infants and Learning of Word-Object Relations. Infancy, 9, 259–289.
Golinkoff, R. M., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (2006). Baby Wordsmith: From Associationist to Social Sophisticate. Psychological Science, 15, 30–34.
Hollich, G. J., Hirsh-Pasek, K., & Golinkoff, R. M. (2000).
Breaking the Language Barrier: An Emergentist Coalition
Model for the Origins of Word Learning. Monographs of
the Society of Research in Child Development.
Houston-Price, C., Plunkett, K., & Duffy, H. (2006). The use
of social and salience cues in early word learning. Journal
of experimental child psychology, 95, 27–55.
Jacobs, R. A. (2002). What determines visual cue reliability?
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6(8), 345–350.
Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Categorical data analysis: Away from
ANOVAs (transformation or not) and towards logit mixed
models. Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 434–446.
McMurray, B., Horst, J. S., & Samuelson, L. K. (2012). Word
learning emerges from the interaction of online referent selection and slow associative learning. Psychological Review, 119, 831–877.
Moore, C., Angelopoulos, M., & Bennett, P. (1999). Word
learning in the context of referential and salience cues. Developmental psychology, 35, 60–8.
Pruden, S. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R. M., & Hennon,
E. A. (2006). The birth of words: Ten-month-olds learn
words through perceptual salience. Child Development, 77,
266–280.
Senju, A., Csibra, G., & Johnson, M. H. (2008). Understanding the referential nature of looking: infants’ preference for
object-directed gaze. Cognition, 108, 303–19.
Smith, L. B. (2000). How to learn words: An associative
crane. In R. M. Golinkoff & K. Hirsh-Pasek (Eds.), Breaking the Word Learning Barrier (pp. 51–80). Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Vouloumanos, A., Onishi, K. H., & Pogue, A. (2012).
Twelve-month-old infants recognize that speech can communicate unobservable intentions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(32), 12933–12937.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind and society: The development of
higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2012). Modeling cross-situational
word-referent learning: Prior questions. Psychological Review, 119, 21–39.
Yurovsky, D., Wade, A., & Frank, M. C. (2013). Online processing of speech and social information in early
word learning. In M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, &
I. Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th annual conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 1641–1646).
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.

1831

