UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Bias in Spatial Memory: Prototypes or Relational Categories?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8g5506jp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Crawford, L. Elizabeth
Landy, David
Presson, Amanda

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Bias in Spatial Memory: Prototypes or Relational Categories?
L. Elizabeth Crawford (lcrawfor@richmond.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Richmond, 28 Westhampton Way
Richmond, VA 23173 USA

David Landy (dlandy@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, Indiana University,
1101 E. 10th St., Bloomington IN 47405 USA

Amanda N. Presson (Nicole.Presson@richmond.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Richmond, 28 Westhampton Way
Richmond, VA 23173 USA

Abstract
Two experiments examined participants’ use of independent
and relational category structures in a spatial memory task.
When estimating the locations of dots presented on a
rectangular display, many participants appeared to divide the
space into left and right relational categories, biasing
estimates away from the center of the screen and toward the
outer edges, in contrast to prior work showing biases toward
centrally located prototypes. More participants showed this
relational pattern at short interstimulus intervals than at long
ones. The results suggest that participants flexibly make use
of different types of spatial structure under different task
demands. Keywords: spatial memory; categorization.

Introduction
Categories profoundly affect our interpretation of situations.
But how are categories constructed, and how do particular
situations impact this construction? Recent studies
distinguish between categories defined in isolation and those
that are defined in relation to other categories (see ChinParker & Ross, 2004; Genter & Kurtz, 2005; Goldstone,
1996; Yamauchi & Markman, 1998). This distinction
between relational and non-relational category structures
comes out of the literature on categories of objects. To our
knowledge, there has been little discussion of this issue in
the spatial domain, despite the large literature on spatial
category effects. Thus it is not known what factors might
influence the kinds of category structure people use to
organize space. To the extent that categories of objects and
of space serve similar functions, the distinction between
relational and independent categories may emerge in the
spatial domain as well.
Research on categories of objects has shown that when a
category is construed as independent, the category center is
generally treated as the prototype, leading to fast, accurate
classification and high typicality ratings for central values
(e.g., Goldstone, 1996; Posner & Keele, 1968; Rosch,
1975). However, when categories are established in a
contrasting relation to one another, the values that show
advantages in classification and higher typicality ratings
tend to be more extreme than the central values (e.g., Atran,
1999; Barsalou, 1985; Goldstone, Steyvers, & Rogosky,
2003; Davis & Love, 2010). That is, the best exemplars of
contrasting categories are idealized caricatures that

exaggerate the differences between the categories, rather
than the most typical values. These different category
structures have also been shown to influence how individual
category members are remembered. When items within a
single category vary along a continuous dimension such as
size or hue, estimates of individual items are biased toward
the central value of the presented set (e.g., Huttenlocher,
Hedges, & Vevea, 2000), but when that set is divided into
two distinct categories, estimates may be biased away from
the value corresponding to the category boundary
(Goldstone, 1995, but see also Sailor & Antoine, 2005).
Patterns of bias in estimates have also been used to
investigate categorization in the spatial domain. A common
finding is that when participants reproduce the location of a
stimulus within a bounded spatial frame, their location
estimates are systematically biased toward some locations
and away from others. A prominent model explains these
biases as category effects that arise during reconstructive
memory (Huttenlocher, Hedges, & Duncan, 1991). In a
process likened to Bayesian estimation, the model posits
that people use the category information as a prior
distribution in order to adjust for the inexactness of finegrained memory, leading to systematic biases toward the
center of the prior distribution. As predicted by this account,
when fine-grained memory is worsened by adding a delay,
bias becomes more extreme, suggesting that the category is
given more weight during memory reconstruction. This
model offers an account of the large literature on how
categories influence memories of stimulus features and
suggests that bias in estimates can reveal the category
structure that people impose on space.
The categories that are revealed by bias in spatial memory
tend to be consistent across many variations in experiment
procedures. In general, estimates are biased away from
outer edges and internal axes of symmetry and toward
centrally located prototypes. For example, within a circle,
estimates are biased toward the centers of mass of the four
quadrants bounded by the horizontal and vertical axes of
symmetry (Huttenlocher, et al., 1991; Huttenlocher, Hedges,
Corrigan, & Crawford, 2004). Stretching the circle along
one dimension so that it becomes an ellipse moves the
prototypes accordingly (Wedell, Fitting, & Allen, 2007).
Stimuli within a rectangular frame, such as sandbox or a
rectangle drawn on paper (Huttenlocher, Newcombe, &

2091

Sandberg, 1994), or shown on a computer screen (Crawford
& Duffy, 2010) are shifted away from the rectangle’s outer
edges and away from the midpoint, suggesting that the
categories used are the left and right halves of the
rectangle.1
A primary goal of the current work is to explore whether
the distinction between relational and independent category
structure can inform our understanding of spatial categories.
Based on studies of object categories, these two category
structures would be expected to produce different bias
patterns in memory for the locations within a rectangle. An
independent construal would divide the rectangle into two
subregions, place prototypes at the center of each region,
and lead estimates to be biased toward those two prototypes
and away from the outer edges and internal boundary.
Alternatively, a purely relational approach to dividing the
rectangle would lead to overall outward bias, as items on the
left would be estimated as further leftward and items on the
right as further rightward. This would be comparable to the
caricature effect by Goldstone (1995) in work on hue
estimates. Prior studies that have tested memory for
locations within a rectangular frame have been interpreted
as supporting assimilation toward prototypes, but
examination of aggregate data seems to show something in
between. For example, data reported by Crawford & Duffy
(2010) show a pattern of estimates that is similar to what the
prototype account would predict, but with greater bias away
from the center than would be predicted if estimates were
biased toward centrally located prototypes.
Another goal for this work is to examine the possibility
that participants might take different approaches (or a
combination of approaches) to structuring a given space.
Rather than combining participants and fitting their
collective data, which presumes that the collective well
represents individuals, we model individual participants
separately. We also examine factors that may encourage the
use of relational versus independent category structures,
such as the time between stimulus presentation and
response. Experiment 1 examines whether people’s reliance
on relational or independent categories depends on how
long they must hold a stimulus in memory. Finding
especially strong evidence of relational coding at short
intervals, Experiment 2 replicates the finding and examines
whether a certain aspect of our response methodology may
have contributed to that result.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants 51 undergraduates at the University of
Richmond participated in exchange for course credit.

Procedure Participants were seated in front of a computer
with a 21” (diagonal) display set to resolution of 1920 by
1080 pixels. On each trial, they viewed a white dot (12
pixels diameter) on a black background for 900 ms. The dot
was followed by an interstimulus interval, during which the
screen went gray. Then the screen went black again and a
response dot appeared near the top of the screen in its
horizontal center. Using the mouse, participants moved the
response dot to the location where they remembered seeing
the stimulus dot and then clicked to register their response.
There were 90 unique stimulus dots, all at the same central
vertical position (540) and evenly spaced across the
horizontal dimension of the screen approximately every 21
pixels.
Each dot was shown twice, once with an
interstimulus interval of 300 ms and once with an interval of
3000 ms, for a total of 180 trials. Trial order was
randomized for each participant.

Results and Discussion
Models. Errors more than three standard deviations from the
mean by participant were culled. Data from each participant
and each time delay was fitted separately, using two models.
The first model instantiated a simple version of the category
adjustment model, assuming two symmetrically located
categories with Gaussian distributions. The distance of the
prototypes from the screen center and the variance in the
prototypes was fitted to the data as free parameters, as was
the relative weighting of input from memory and the
categories. The second model was intended to capture the
relational comparison account: bias is assumed to linearly
increase with distance from a centrally located boundary.
Although truncation at the edges is predicted in both
models, neither model included this as a factor directly.
Resulting model fits were obtained using the R function
optim (R Development Core Team, 2008); since the models
were not nested, they cannot be compared using a likelihood
ratio test. We compared them using BIC; each participant’s
data was then summarized with two values: the best fitting
model at 300ms, and the best-fitting model at 3000ms.
Results.
The overall pattern of bias is shown in Figure 1 for each
interstimulus interval. Positive values indicate rightward
bias and negative values leftward bias.
At 300 ms, the relational model was a better fit than the
prototype model for 66% of participants. At 3000ms, only
49% were better fit by the relational model, a significant
shift by McNemar’s test (p~0.03). Space precludes the
display of the per-subject data, but Figure 2 displays the
mean bias of participants who were better fit by each model,
for each interstimulus interval, and Figure 3 displays data
from two participants who illustrate each the two different
strategies.

1
Although a different pattern is found in young children
(Huttenlocher et al., 1994)

2092

.
The overall pattern shows bias outward much more than
inward, and looks like caricature effect found in work on
contrasting categories of objects (Goldstone, 1995). This
suggests that many participants are coding location as left or
right of center. Indeed, if we assumed participants were all
biasing toward some shared prototype, that prototype would
have to be located off of the screen’s edges at short delays
to account for the observed pattern.
This extreme outward bias is especially pronounced at the
shorter delays.
This differs from prior work (e.g.,
Huttenlocher et al., 1991) that has shown similar bias forms
that are more extreme for longer delays. Here we find that
the bias changes qualitatively. It appears that types of
boundaries, perceptible and subjectively imposed, operate
differently.

Figure 1: Mean bias at each ISI. Positive bias indicates a
rightward shift in memory, negative bias a leftward shift.

Experiment 2

Figure 2: Mean bias at each delay for those best fit by
each model.

The results of Experiment 1 show a much stronger outward
bias than has been found in previous studies of immediate
spatial memory. This raises the question of which
methodological differences might give rise to the difference
in results. Experiment 2 examines one possible factor: the
starting location of the response dot. In Experiment 1, the
response dot appeared horizontally centered near the top of
the screen. It is possible that this contributed to the
observed effects by imposing an immediate relational
structure on the task and by increasing the salience of the
screen’s horizontal center.
A variety of different responses have been used in
previous studies of category effects on spatial memory.
Some used a digital stylus (Huttenlocher, et al., 1991) or
pencil and paper versions of this task (Crawford & Duffy,
2010). In versions that have used a computer mouse, the
response dot has been implemented in several ways –
sometimes appearing at the center of the bounded region
(Wedell et al., 2007; Huttenlocher, Hedges, Corrigan
Crawford), sometimes it appears outside of the bounded
region (Sampaio & Wang, 2009), and sometimes at a
random location within the bounded space (Crawford &
Duffy, 2010). To our knowledge no studies have examined
what effect the starting location of the response dot might
have on spatial memory. In study two, we manipulated the
location of the response dot to examine whether estimates
might be affected by an initial relational comparison
between the stimulus dot and response dot locations.

Method
Participants Twenty four undergraduates at the University
of Richmond who participated in exchange for course credit.

Figure 3: Estimates from two participants to illustrate the
relational and prototype patterns of bias

Procedure The materials and stimulus distribution were the
same as in Experiment 1. All 180 trials used the short
(300ms) interstimulus interval. On each trial, the response
dot appeared near the top of the screen and either in the
center of the left half of the screen (480 pixels from the left

2093

edge) or in the center of the right half of the screen (1440
pixels from the left edge). Each stimulus dot was shown
twice, once followed by the left response dot and once with
the right. Order of trials was randomized.

Results and Discussion
The same two models used in Experiment 1 were fitted to
individual participant’s responses in Experiment 2, with one
difference. In order to investigate the influence of the cursor
position, the models were each assigned a parameter that
shifted the effective midpoint in the direction of the cursor.
The prototypes were then placed proportionally
symmetrically around this midpoint (say, 40% of the way
from the estimated midpoint to the screen edges on both
sides, although this might not be the same physical
distance). For simplicity, the midpoint bias was assumed to
be symmetric for trials on which the cursor was on the left
or on the right.
Replicating Experiment 1, estimates were strongly biased
away from the screen’s center, even for stimuli near the
outer boundaries of the display, and the relational model
was the better-fitting model (by a BIC criterion) for 21 of 24
participants (83%). In addition, data from all participants,
presented in Figure 4, indicated a bias in estimates due to
cursor position, especially in the region between the cursors,
for which categorical information (left vs. right) would be
predicted to differ depending on cursor position. To
evaluate this influence, we analyzed the fitted shift of the
category boundary away from the midpoint in response to
the cursor position for each participant (excluding the
participants fit by the category adjustment model did not
impact the conclusions reached here). The mean of these
parameters was estimated with a bootstrap procedure (using
10,000 replications via the boot package; the data were
significantly non-normal by a Shapiro-Wilks test, W=0.8,
p~0.0004). The 95% confidence interval on the mean
excluded zero (CI=[1.25%, 23.8%]), indicating that the
apparent midpoint was shifted in the direction of the starting
cursor position, but not shifted all the way out to the starting
cursory position, as would be expected if the starting
position alone produced the outward bias. This observed
shift reveals an additive effect of biasing away from the
screen’s center and biasing away from the starting cursor
value, although it is not clear if these effects combine within
a trial or if different relational structures apply from trial to
trial. To our knowledge, this is the first study to show that
the starting position of the response cursor influences
estimates of spatial location. The findings suggest that,
although placing the response dot at the screen’s center may
have contributed to the outward bias found in Experiment 1,
it does not fully account for it.

Figure 4. Bias for each of the response dot’s starting
locations.

General Discussion
We report two experiments showing that, when estimating
the locations of horizontally distributed objects in a
rectangular display, a substantial number of participants
produce biases outward from the center, such that items on
the left are remembered as having appeared further leftward
than they were and items on the right as further rightward.
For these participants, estimates effectively exaggerate the
distance between stimuli on the left versus the right, an
effect comparable to biases observed in memory for nonspatial object attributes when a contrasting relation exists
between two adjacent categories (Goldstone, 1995). In
addition, the results indicate that more participants show
this relational pattern at short time delays (300 ms) than
long ones (3000 ms). Finally, we find that estimates are
affected by the response dot starting location, but this effect
does not account for the general outward bias we observed.
We used a modeling strategy that classifies individual
participants according to whether they are better fit by a
relational or prototype strategy. This approach does not tell
us how well the data from each participant was fitted, and
some participants’ estimates were not well described by

2094

either model. What the approach provides is compelling
evidence that combining participants and fitting their
collective data misses an important aspect of behavior by
obscuring the fact that individuals apply different strategies
to the task. Collapsing across these strategies can lead
researchers to draw conclusions about cognition that do not
actually apply to individual minds. Had we collapsed across
participants, we likely would have concluded that
participants bias toward prototypes and that the prototype
locations depend on ISI. Instead, our analysis shows that
many participants are not well described by a prototype
model at all, and that very few fit a prototype account when
time delays are especially short. This suggests that rather
than taking a single, fixed approach to spatial
categorization, participants may fluidly switch strategy
under different task demands.
It is not clear why a relational strategy might dominate at
shorter time delays. Huttenlocher and colleagues (e.g.,
Huttenlocher et al., 1991; Crawford, Huttenlocher, &
Engebretson, 2000) have argued that because longer delays
increase memory uncertainty, people should (and do) give
more weight to category-level information. However in the
present case, the delay manipulation has a different effect: it
leads people to adopt different category structures. Building
on the idea from Huttenlocher’s category effects model that
people rely on category structure to reduce variability of
estimates, we suggest that when uncertainty is low (i.e., at
short delays), the vertical axis of symmetry may provide a
coarse and adequate preliminary structure, and that only as
memory becomes more uncertain do other structural
elements (i.e., outer boundaries, centrally located
prototypes) provide enough additional information to be
worth using.
A possible interpretation of the results would be that the
time delays differentially tap into perception and memory,
and that the caricature effect we’ve shown is due to
perceptual processes. However, this is untenable because if
the bias operates in perception, it should affect both the
stimulus and response dots (cf., Firestone & Scholl, 2014).
In that case, the biases would cancel out, leading to
unbiased reports.
Given that many prior studies have described spatial
memory as being biased toward category prototypes, it is
striking that our results show such a strong relational
pattern. In addition to the participant-level modeling
employed here, our study introduced additional variations –
we used a larger screen than other computerized tasks have
used, distributed the dots in a horizontal row rather than
across the whole screen, and did not draw a bounded shape
on the screen but allowed the computer screen itself to
provide the boundaries. It is not yet clear which of these
factors, individually or in combination, may explain our
findings. By establishing a situation that produces a
caricature-like pattern of results in the spatial domain, the
present study suggests several avenues for future research.
The present study raises questions about the nature of
spatial category boundaries. As noted above, the stimuli

shown here were presented on a large rectangular computer
display but not within a geometric shape drawn on the
screen. The screen’s edges might be expected to have
powerful effects on memory because they necessarily
constrain the possible locations of the stimuli, which cannot
appear off of the screen. It is striking that the center of the
screen, which is not marked by any perceptible features and
provides no necessary constraints on possible dot position,
appears to have a much more pronounced effect on memory
than do the readily perceptible and functionally necessary
screen edges.
We return to the opening questions that motivated these
studies: how do people construct categories? When external
structure supports either prototype-like categories or
relational categories, how do people choose which construal
to employ? This study provides initial evidence that people
adopt different approaches to categorizing the same spatial
display, and demonstrates one factor, the amount of time a
stimulus is held in memory, that influences which strategy is
used. This suggests that representational structures may
themselves be highly tuned to the situation at hand.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a grant to the first author from
the University of Richmond Faculty Research Committee.
We thank Dylan Vavra for help with data collection and
Elyssa Twedt for helpful comments on the manuscript.

References
Atran, S. (1999). Itzaj Maya folkbiological taxonomy. In
D.L. Medin & S. Atran (Eds.), Folkbiology. Cambridge,
MA:MIT Press.
Barsalou, L.W. (1985). Ideals, central tendency, and
frequency of instantiation as determinants of graded
structure in categories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11, 629–
649.
Chin-Parker, S., & Ross, B.H. (2004). Diagnosticity and
prototypicality in category learning: A comparison of
inference learning and classification learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 30, 216-226.
Crawford, L. E. & Duffy, S. E. (2010). Sequence effects in
estimating spatial location. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 17, 725-730.
Crawford, L. E., Huttenlocher, J., & Engebretson, P. H.
(2000). Category effects on estimates of stimuli:
perception or reconstruction? Psychological Science, 11,
280-284.
Davis, T., & Love, B.C. (2010). Memory for category
information is idealized through contrast with competing
options. Psychological Science, 21, 234-242.
Firestone, C., & Scholl, B. (2014). “Top-down” effects
where none should be found: The El Greco fallacy in
perception research. Psychological Science, 25, 38-46.

2095

Gentner , D. Kurtz , K.J. (2005). Relational categories. In A.
Woo-Kyoung (Ed.), Categorization inside and outside the
laboratory, pp. 151-175. American Psychological
Association
Goldstone, R. L. (1995). Effects of categorization on color
perception. Psychological Science, 6, 298-304.
Goldstone, R. L. (1996). Isolated and interrelated concepts
Memory & Cognition,24, 608-628.
Goldstone, R.L., Steyvers, M., & Rofosky, B.J. (2003).
Conceptual interrelatedness and caricatures. Memory &
Cognition, 31, 169–180.
Huttenlocher J, Hedges, L.V., Corrigan B, & Crawford LE.
(2004). Spatial categories and the estimation of location.
Cognition, 93,75-97.
Huttenlocher J, Hedges, L.V., Duncan, S. (1991).
Categories and particulars: prototype effects in estimating
spatial location. Psychological Review, 98, 352-76.
Huttenlocher, J., Newcombe, N., Sandberg, E. H. (1994).
The coding of spatial location in young children.
Cognitive Psychology, 27, 115-147.
Posner, M. I., & Keele, S. W. (1968). On the genesis of
abstract ideas. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 77,
353-363.

R Development Core Team (2008). R: A language and
environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. ISBN 3-90005107-0, URL http://www.R-project.org.
Rosch, E. (1975). Cognitive representations of semantic
categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception & Performance, 1, 303-322.
Sailor, K. M., & Antoine, M. (2005). Is memory for
stimulus magnitude Bayesian? Memory & Cognition, 33,
840-851.
Sampaio, C., & Wang, R. F. (2009). Category-based errors
and the accessibility of unbiased spatial memories: A
retrieval model. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 35, 1331-1337.
Wedell, D. H., Fitting, S., & Allen, G. L. (2007). Shape
effects on memory for location. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 14, 681-686.
Werner, S., & Diedrichsen, J. (2002). The time course of
spatial memory distortions. Memory & Cognition, 30,
718-730.
Yamauchi, T., & Markman, A. B. (1998). Category
learning by inference and classification. Journal of
Memory and Language 39, 124-149.

2096

