UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Black boxes: Hypothesis testing via indirect perceptual evidence

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5m22n4gn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Siegel, Max
Magid, Rachel
Tenenbaum, Josh
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Black boxes: Hypothesis testing via indirect perceptual evidence
Max H. Siegel, Rachel Magid, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Laura E. Schulz
{maxs, rwmagid, jbt, lschulz}@mit.edu
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
Abstract
Studies of children’s causal learning typically provide learners
with clear evidence for direct causal relations, e.g., a machine
that activates when a toy is placed upon it. But causal systems
in the real world often present indirect perceptual evidence
generated by interactions between hidden variables: Consider
a child trying to figure out what’s inside a box by shaking it.
We propose that effective learning and exploration depend on
being able to interpret evidence through the lens of intuitive
theories – theories of both the physical world and one’s own
perceptual apparatus – to imagine how one’s actions might
change the state of the world and what kinds of changes would
be most perceptually discriminable. We present three studies
exploring these capacities in young children, and suggest how
they could support powerful and sophisticated inferences about
hidden causes.

In science, much of the evidence we get for causal relationships is indirect: we cannot observe the activation of neurons or the presence of microorganisms directly so we develop sophisticated technologies to detect neural activation
from blood flow, or the presence of microorganisms from the
amount of dissolved oxygen. This kind of inference is not restricted to scientific practice. Even in everyday life, there are
many cases where we have to infer unobserved causes from
indirect evidence. We see a curtain move and infer the cat behind it, we hear dripping and worry that the faucet is leaking.
These are very ordinary examples, ones that might be accessible even to small children, but they suggest an extraordinary
capacity: the ability to reason backwards from new evidence
to probable unobserved causes of the data.
While there is a wealth of research on children’s causal
reasoning, the majority of studies has focused on childrens
inferences about direct causal relationships: observed blocks
that do (or do not) light up machines, levers that do (or do not)
activate toys, etc (Gopnik, Sobel, Schulz, & Glymour, 2001;
Gopnik & Sobel, 2000). Moreover, although there is some
work outlining childrens ability to infer unobserved causes
from patterns of evidence (Kushnir & Gopnik, 2005; Schulz
& Sommerville, 2006; Schulz, Goodman, Tenenbaum, &
Jenkins, 2008), in such cases children were asked about arbitrary causes and what is at stake is simply childrens ability to
detect conditions under which a latent variable might explain
the pattern of evidence. Here we ask a different question: Do
children’s intuitive theories support these inferences in cases
where the mapping from causes to effects is unspecified and
complex?
One way of investigating unfamiliar scenarios is to take
actions designed to reduce uncertainty. We can pull back
the curtain, we can use more powerful tools as they’re developed. Cook, Goodman, and Schulz (2011) demonstrated
that children preferentially select more informative interventions when exploring a new causal domain; and there is more

generally a rich literature on active learning and information
selection in adult human cognition (Oaksford & Chater, 1994;
Tsividis, Gershman, Tenenbaum, & Schulz, 2014).
We aim to investigate a complementary question. People
(scientists or otherwise) are never able to directly observe
data that most informs the questions they actually want answered, for good reasons: the equipment is too expensive, the
cat (or is it?) runs away as we approach. What scientists (and
other people too) actually do is more pragmatic. We know
our tools, eyes, ears, or electron microscopes; and we know
how they sense and transform the objects we’re interested in
studying. Answering questions thus requires us to select not
only the right tests, but data that would yield informative results given the right test.
We are especially interested in what learners decide to investigate in situations where evidence is richly perceptual
and interpretation involves intuitive theories of the physical
world, because these are closest to the ways young children
most naturally explore their surroundings. Our focus here is
on physical interactions between objects that generate sound,
and on what we need to know, both about these physical
events and our abilities to perceive them, in order to learn
about objects from the sounds they produce. We take sound
as a case study because children have expectations about how
objects interact to produce auditory signals, because these interactions produce nontrivial evidence (so that there is clearly
some work to be done in interpretation), and finally because
of the intuitive, everyday quality of perceptual inferences.
A rubber ball shaken inside a closed box will sound different than a glass marble. Two rubber balls will sound different
from either; five glass marbles will sound more different still.
A novel object that looks pointy or feels hard to the touch
will sound different from one that looks rounded or feels soft.
How do we know these things? One might think that these
examples can be explained as consequences of cross-modal
perception and memory. We have experienced seeing a faucet
drip while also hearing it. We have all shaken a wrapped
present to find out what might be inside. However, we do
not always have access to information in multiple modalities,
and in these cases we are still able to reason about the causes
of various sounds. Indeed, the combinatorial explosion that
accompanies real-world perception suggests that reasoning
from indirect evidence requires sophisticated and subtle capabilities which are far more powerful than those commonly
assumed.
We follow in a research tradition that highlights how
people use mental models and theories about the world to
generate predictions, which are used to interpret new data
(Tenenbaum, Kemp, Griffiths, & Goodman, 2011). But we

1425

suggest that learners also have intuitive models of the psychophysical properties of evidence - we know what, given
the constraints of our senses and our world knowledge, we
can know via perception. In particular, children and adults
know when patterns of perceptual data are more or less discriminable, and they use this knowledge to guide their exploration of the world.
In the experiments to follow, we test children’s ability to make
indirect perceptual inferences; to use these judgments when
interpreting ambiguous evidence; and to exploit their ”intuitive psychophysics” to predict and evaluate the quality of
data, even before encountering it.
In a preliminary investigation, we considered how learners interpret auditory cues to determine their (unseen) causes.
We examined whether 3- to 6-year-olds can determine the
kind of hidden object that generates the sound they heard,
whether they can infer the number of identical hidden objects
that produce the percept, and we discuss several additional
experiments that control for low-level confounds but are also
of independent interest. Study 1 probed children’s use of
indirect acoustic cues to reason about what’s not perceived:
can children evaluate the diagnosticity (or discriminability)
of evidence when inferring hidden causes? Specifically, we
tested whether participants choose more discriminable evidence over less, both when evaluating differences in kind and
in number of objects. Finally, Study 2 investigated whether
children can make these judgments predictively, even without
observing the effects of hidden causes. We hypothesize that
learners can imagine possible patterns of evidence and choose
the most distinctive data set, without needing any perceptual
access to distinguishing evidence.

Box-Shaking Game
We used a simple paradigm which we will call the “boxshaking game”. The basic schema is as follows. Children
were shown two objects (or two sets of objects) and told that
each would be hidden in a box and shaken several times, and
that they’d be asked to choose which box had each object
based on the sounds they heard (they also saw the way the
box was shaken). We hid everyday objects like bean bags and
plastic balls, and also sets of marbles.

(a) Object Identity
In the first version of the box-shaking game, the experimenter showed children (N = 16; mean: 3 years, 11 months)
a pair of boxes, identical except for color. The objects that
we hid and shook were a bean bag and a plastic ball; the
ball was weighted to match the mass of the bean bag. The
experimenter produced the objects to be shaken and briefly
described their properties. Children chose which object they
preferred and then the experimenter then explained the task:
“I’m going to put each one of these things in a different box,
and then shake each box! Then we’ll listen and try to figure
out which box has your favorite thing in it. Do you want to
help me figure out which box has your favorite thing in it?”
The objects and box were then hidden by an occluding screen,

Box-Shaking Game
a

b; d

c

Study 1

a

b

Study 2

Figure 1: Illustration of methods. In the preliminary boxshaking game, we placed the objects on the left and right
sides in different boxes and shook them. Children identified (a) their preferred object; (b) the box with fewer or more
marbles; (c) the box with the blanket; and (d) the box with
more marbles under a different box manipulation that controlled for loudness. In Study 1(a-b), we placed one object (target or distractor) from each side (left=Unambiguous,
right=Ambiguous in figure) in a different box, then shook
each box. The target objects were shiny pencils and colorful marbles, and the other objects were distractors. Children
picked a box to find a target object. In Study 2, we asked children to choose which box to shake before receiving any data,
requiring them to imagine which stimulus set (left or right)
was more discriminable.
after which each object was hidden in a different box and the
occluder finally removed. After reminding participants of the
task, each box was shaken for several seconds (five shakes).
The experimenter then asked, “Which box has your favorite
thing in it?” In this task, all of the children chose the box that
contained their preferred ball.

(b) Number of Objects
We next tested whether preschoolers can perceive the quantity of hidden objects from indirect evidence. Children listened to two boxes shaken, one with 2 marbles and one with
8 marbles, and were asked to identify which box had a few

1426

***	  

***	  

**	  

**	  

(d) Diverse Cues

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

(a) Preferred object

(b) # of marbles

(c) Blanket

(d) # of marbles
(shaken/rocked)

Figure 2: Results of preliminary box-shaking task (figure label corresponds to experiment heading) - number of children
choosing the indicated box. (a) Box containing preferred
object. (b) Box containing more or less marbles. (c) Box
containing felt (blanket). (d) Box containing more marbles
(rolling/shaking contrast). ∗∗ = p < .01, ∗ ∗ ∗ = p < .001 via
binomial test
(or many) marbles. Children, (N = 16, mean: 3 years, 11
months) were shown two identical black boxes with detachable lids (preloaded with 2 and 8 marbles) along with a set of
2 marbles and a set of 8 marbles each placed in a translucent
cylindrical tube. We also used a puppet, ”Bunny”, who expressed a preference for either a few (2) marbles or a lot (8)
of marbles, counterbalanced across participants. Next, the
experimenter showed the children the two closed boxes and
explained that one box had a few marbles and one box had
a lot of marbles. The experimenter shook each box for approximate 5 seconds before asking, “Which box does Bunny
want to open?” All sixteen children identified the correct box
based on Bunny’s preference.

(c) Level
Children could be performing the number discrimination
task by using a simple heuristic: higher sound level means
more objects. This rule indeed holds for the case we’ve considered above. But this rule fails in many cases, for example
when a piece of soft material is added to a box (dampening
the sound of other objects). The next experiment conducted
as part of the box-shaking games rules out simple heuristicbased accounts, and also demonstrates the productivity and
flexibility of these perceptual judgments.
To test whether children are able to reason flexibly about
the contents of boxes from indirect evidence, we first asked
children to identify which of two boxes had a felt blanket
inside it, along with other objects. The felt dampened the
sound; if children succeed nonetheless, we can conclude that
a level heuristic does not account for participant’s judgments.
Participants (N = 16; mean: 4 years, 10 months) chose the
correct box more often than chance (p < .01 by two-tailed
binomial test). This result suggests that the ability to make
judgments about quantity based on indirect evidence does not
depend on cross-modal mapping between more items in the
visual domain and a louder sound in the auditory domain.

All of the previous experiments in the box-shaking game
used the same physical manipulation, namely up-and-down
box-shaking, for all contrasts. Is it possible that this simplifies children’s task, by allowing them to focus in on some single dimension of sound (number of collisions, for example)?
To address this hypothesis, we again asked children to identify which of the boxes contained more marbles, but shook
only the box with 2 marbles and gently rocked the box with 8
marbles, producing sounds very different in quality. Children
(N =16, mean: 4 years, 11 months) interpreted the perceptual
results of these different manipulations and recovered information about the quantity of marbles inside the boxes in this
case as well. Gentle rocking and vigorous shaking produce
very different sounds even with equal numbers of marbles,
but 14 of the 16 children successfully discounted the physical motion to choose the box with more marbles (p < .01 by
two-tailed binomial test). The perception of numerosity from
sound may not therefore be attributed to simple heuristics – it
must incorporate some intuitive knowledge of the physics of
objects.
The results of the box-shaking game, in its various forms,
established that children can test hypotheses using evidence
that is very different in kind than that typically used in developmental studies, in several ways. First, the perceptual
data that children received were natural sounds, which are
interesting because they seem both harder and easier to interpret - real perceptual data is ambiguous and variable, unlike preferred developmental stimuli. However, real data is
strongly tied to real-world processes, so it may be easier to
interpret than the arbitrary causal associations found in other
work. Second, as we didn’t preview to participants the sounds
produced by our box-shaking game, their success implies that
they must have access to task-relevant memories (what each
object sounds like when shaken) or to the means to generate
such data (we suggest via mental simulation).

Study 1
In the box-shaking game, we demonstrated that children readily draw inferences about physical properties of hidden objects based on indirect, perceptual evidence. We next considered whether children intuitively grasp the relative ambiguity
of perceptual data, and how this knowledge informs their decisions. Suppose you have a black box that contains either a
shiny pencil or a normal pencil. If you shake the box, you
would hear the sound of a hard, light object hitting the walls,
but you wouldn’t know exactly what was inside the box. But
suppose you have another box that contains either a shiny
pencil or a cotton ball, and you hear the same sound; you
would be certain that the box contained the pencil. If you had
a choice between these two boxes in front of you (knowing
what could be inside and hearing, in both cases, a hard light
object) and you wanted the shiny pencil, which box would
you choose to open? Intuitively, of course, you would choose
the box that had either the shiny pencil or the cotton ball. But

1427

to judge that this box would give you a better chance of getting the shiny pencil, you must understand what each object
would sound like when shaken inside a box, and you must
reason both about what you heard and about what you didn’t.
You must also compare the probability of obtaining the desired object from each box. In Study 1, we put children in
exactly this situation to investigate whether they understand
that what they hear can be more or less informative depending
on what they didn’t perceive.

Experiment 1(a): Object Kind
Participants We tested twenty-four preschoolers (mean: 4
years, 7 months; range: 3 years, 1 month - 6 years, 2 months)
visiting the children’s museum.
Materials We used the same two boxes from our preliminary investigations, two pencils with holographic coating as
target stimuli, and one standard pencil and a small, cottonfilled fabric cushion as distractor stimuli.

Figure 3: Results of Studies 1 & 2 - children’s preference for
Unambiguous boxes containing (Expt 1(a)) pencils and (Expt
1(b)) marbles, and their predictive judgments (Study 2).

Procedure The setting and instructions were similar to
those described earlier. Children were first shown two pairs
of objects, each of which consisted of a target and a distractor
stimulus. The target stimulus (i.e., shiny pencil) was identical
across both pairs, and was more desirable than either distractor. The distractor in one pair (Ambiguous pair) was an object that would sound very similar to the target when shaken
inside a box (i.e., a standard No. 2 pencil). The distractor
in the other pair (Unambiguous pair) was chosen such that
it would sound very different from the target (i.e., a pillow).
After introducing the objects in each pair, the experimenter
asked children what their favorite object is in each pair. In
order for the task to measure children’s sensitivity to ambiguity, it was important that children have a preference for the
target object in both pairs; we inferred learners’ sensitivity
to ambiguity by presenting evidence that was consistent with
the (identical) target objects being in both boxes, and if children preferred one of the distractor objects, they might simply
choose the box it might be in. Therefore, we dropped and replaced children who preferred the distractor object in either
pair. After children picked their favorite (target) objects, the
experimenter then told children that he would take just one of
the objects from each pair and hide it in each of the two boxes,
and that they could choose a box and take its contents home.
After the objects were hidden, he reminded children about
what could be inside each box (e.g., ”Remember, inside this
box, there could be a cool shiny pencil or the pillow”). The
experimenter then shook each box twice, after which children
picked a box and collected its contents.

target object (because if it didn’t, a different sound would
have been produced), whereas the Ambiguous box may have
contained either the target or distractor object (the shiny pencil or the yellow pencil).

Experiment 1(b): Number of Objects
Participants Sixteen children (mean: 4 years, 6 months;
range: 3 years, 1 month 5 years, 9 months) were recruited
from the museum.
Materials We used the colored boxes described above. We
used four different sets of marbles: two sets of 8 marbles, of
all different colors, one set of 2 white marbles, and one set
of 6 white marbles. The four sets of marbles were placed
in clear tubes, with the top sealed using packing tape. We
printed out cartoon versions of the marble tubes as a memory
cue. Finally, the bunny puppet (Bunny) from the box-shaking
game was used as a confederate.

Results and Discussion Before the objects were hidden,
the experimenter asked children which object in each pair was
their favorite. Therefore, we only included and analyzed data
from the 16 children who preferred the target objects (shiny
pencils) in both pairs. Thirteen of sixteen children correctly
selected the Unambiguous box (p < .05 by two-tailed binomial test). The results of this experiment suggest that children
understand that the Unambiguous pair box had to contain the

Procedure The study began with a warm-up task, similar to
the basic object-identification box-shaking game, except that
after the child identified his/her preferred object, Bunny expressed a preference for the other object. After hiding and
shaking each box, children were given a sticker for successfully choosing the box containing their previous choice. Next,
the experimenter displayed the four tubes, filled as described
above. Bunny expressed a preference for white marbles,
touching the appropriate tubes and exclaiming, “White marbles! I love these white marbles!” Next, the experimenter indicated the two tubes containing 8 colorful marbles and said,
”See these marbles of different colors? For this game, these
are yours! You’re going to try to find your marbles.” Next,
children were introduced to the hiding game, and told that
one tube of marbles would be hidden inside each box. For the
Ambiguous box, the possible contents were 6 white marbles
or 8 colorful marbles; for the Unambiguous box, the possible
contents were 2 white marbles or 8 colorful marbles. Be-

1428

fore hiding the marbles, the experimenter familiarized children with pictures depicting the possible contents of the two
boxes (shown in Figure 1). The experimenter then hid 8 marbles inside each box. After removing the screen, the experimenter reminded children about the boxes’ possible contents
by pointing to the cartoon pictures, (e.g., “Remember, in this
box there could be your marbles (indicate picture of child’s 8
marbles) or there could be Bunny’s marbles (indicate picture
of Bunny’s 2 marbles (less ambiguous) or Bunny’s 6 marbles
(Ambiguous).” The experimenter shook both boxes twice. Finally, children were asked, “Which box do you want to open
to find your marbles?”
Results and Discussion Fifteen of the sixteen children
(p < .001 by two-tailed binomial test) chose the less ambiguous box, confirming and extending the results of Experiment
1(a). Critically, children heard identical evidence from both
boxes, so they must have taken into account information other
than the sounds they heard when choosing which box to open.
What sort of reasoning might support these judgments? Our
account is simple but sufficient. After hearing the results of
shaking each box, children imagine (mentally simulate) the
sound that they would have heard had the boxes contained
either the target or each of the distractors.

Study 2
We demonstrated above that children are able to use knowledge of their own perceptual capabilities to prune hypotheses,
distinguishing informative sets of data from less informative
ones. Our results revealed that children interpret equivalent
percepts differently depending on what else they might have
heard. Thus children use the outcomes of mental queries to
interpret real evidence. But if learners are able to imagine alternative data, they shouldn’t need to hear any evidence; they
should be able to imagine the perceptual results of each intervention on each object, and in this way design an appropriate
experiment before any actual manipulation is performed.
We modified Study 1 so that children reported their choice
before they heard any relevant perceptual data. Children were
presented with the game and told that they could choose the
set of objects (which were more or less ambiguous when
shaken) to play with. We therefore tested whether children
can predict which set of data they’d be able to discriminate.
Participants Another 16 children (mean: 4 years, 9
months; range: 3 years, 9 months 6 years, 0 months) were recruited from the museum. An additional 17 other participants
were replaced because they preferred the distractor objects,
because of experimenter error, because of language difficulties, or because they chose not to complete the study.
Materials We used the black boxes and pencils from Experiment 1(a) as well as an ordinary cotton ball.
Procedure The study began with a warmup task, identical
to the object-identification game. Next, children were told
they would play another hiding game where they could keep
the object inside the box that they chose. As in Experiment

1(a), children were shown two sets of objects and were asked
to choose their favorite object from each pair. The Ambiguous pair of objects consisted of a shiny pencil and a yellow
pencil, and the Unambiguous pair consisted of a shiny pencil
and a cotton ball. Once children picked their favorite objects
from each pair, the experimenter said, “This game is special
because you get to choose what I hide. I could hide this shiny
pencil (from Ambiguous pair) in one box and this boring pencil (from Ambiguous pair) in the other box, and you’ll listen
to me shake each box. Or I could hide this shiny pencil (from
Unambiguous pair) in one box and this piece of fuzz (cotton
ball) in the other box, and you’ll listen to me shake each box.
Which set of things do you want me to hide?”
Results and Discussion Thirteen of sixteen children asked
the experimenter to hide the Unambiguous pair (p < .05 by
two-tailed binomial test). Recall that we proposed mental
simulation as a way to know what shaken objects would
sound like, had they been shaken. In light of children’s successes in Study 1, we also noted that this simulation account
should predict that children can make the same judgments
even before hearing any relevant sounds. The results of Study
2 thus confirm this prediction, giving evidence that simulation is indeed a good candidate for explaining the remarkable
perceptual achievements necessary for solving these tasks.

Discussion and Conclusions
In three studies, we investigated how children discover hidden
causal structure in the world by reasoning about what they
can perceive. In the preliminary box-shaking game, children
made accurate inferences about hidden causes from perceptual evidence that required nontrivial interpretation, inferring
the nature and quantities of objects inside a box from diverse
forms of sound data. After verifying childrens ability to identify a variety of items based on only their sounds, we considered whether children can use their mental models of physics
and perception to assess the discriminability of different sets
of evidence. In Study 1, children distinguished evidence that
was more or less likely to be informative about a box’s contents, even though the evidence they heard was perceptually
identical. In Study 2, we showed that children design novel
informative experiments, evaluating what which data should
be tested given a hypothetical tool (box shaking).
These results contribute to a long-running debate on how,
and to what extent, children or adults effectively learn about
the world like scientists do (Gopnik et al., 2004; Schulz,
2012; Chen & Klahr, 1999). Going back to J. S. Mill, it has
often been proposed that experiments (either formal or informal) should be designed by a process of deductive reasoning,
where the causal structure of the experimental setup (which
variables might possibly influence each other) suggests which
interventions to perform. This syntactic view (e.g. the ”control of variables strategy” (Chen & Klahr, 1999)) indeed can
qualitatively describe some behavioral and cognitive aspects
of human learning. But it also leaves out several key issues that our work aims to address. Variables are rarely di-

1429

rectly accessible, so we must figure out ways to get at them,
whether through microscopes or sounds made by shaking objects in boxes. If learners understand the way that their instruments work, they can work backwards from measurements to
causes, but this means solving a nontrivial and non-obvious
problem (as children did in our box-shaking game). Also,
the strength of the causal relation between variables matters.
Thus knowing whether variables are confounded in a logical
sense is not enough, as the result of the intervention in our
study (and of interventions in the world) can produce confounded results – each box in Study 1 produced a sound that
could possibly have been made by either of its possible contents. If children had been unable to reason about the evidence produced if the other object or set of marbles been inside the box instead, they would have chosen boxes at chance.
Yet children overwhelmingly picked the box whose evidence,
based on its possible contents, was more discriminable.
Taken together with Cook et al. (2011), the results of the
current study make a strong case for children as rational experimenters. Simply put, children know when and how to
carry out actions that effectively answer questions. Children
learn about the world by intervening on their physical surroundings and perceiving outcomes filtered through extrinsic
(the box, for example) and intrinsic (their own senses) intermediaries. Such learning is therefore contingent on knowing
what sort of interventions will produce informative data, and
what sort of data are informative with respect to specific interventions. Future work might investigate how an ”intuitive
psychophysics – a mental model of one’s own perceptual capacities – guides childrens spontaneous exploration and experimentation. But what are these capacities? How do learners, children and scientists alike, know what they can perceive? We hypothesized that children can use their intuitive
physical theories along with an ”intuitive psychophysics” to
simulate the rich perceptual evidence that would result from
an intervention like shaking or rolling a box, to filter observed
evidence through their own ability to interpret it, and to plan
interventions guided by their understanding of these abilities.
In other words, people are able to simulate and imagine the
world’s dynamics and their own perceptual grasp of the same.
The experimental evidence presented here points to a
mostly unexplored capacity of even young learners, and we
have included the makings of a potential explanatory theory.
Future work aims to cash out these intuitions in a formal
modeling framework encompassing both the perceptual and
metacognitive aspects of the abilities demonstrated here.
Children, and probably scientists too, interpret data and
evaluate candidate experiments through a process of inference to the best explanation where probabilistic inferences
about one’s measurement or perceptual apparatus go hand-inhand with inferences about the world’s hidden causal structure. We argue that the capacities studied here may be at the
heart of how we come to know what we know.

Acknowledgments
We thank the Boston Children’s Museum as well as the families who volunteered to participate in our studies. (Very
many) thanks also to Hyowon Gweon and Julie Kim; additionally, three anonymous reviewers provided helpful comments. This material is based upon work supported by the
Center for Brains, Minds, and Machines (CBMM), funded by
NSF STC award CCF-1231216 and was funded by a National
Science Foundation Career Award (#0744213) to LS.

References
Chen, Z., & Klahr, D. (1999). All other things being equal:
Acquisition and transfer of the control of variables strategy.
Child development, 70(5), 1098–1120.
Cook, C., Goodman, N. D., & Schulz, L. E. (2011). Where
science starts: Spontaneous experiments in preschoolers
exploratory play. Cognition, 120(3), 341–349.
Gopnik, A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D. M., Schulz, L. E., Kushnir, T., & Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal learning
in children: causal maps and bayes nets. Psychological
review, 111(1), 3.
Gopnik, A., & Sobel, D. M. (2000). Detecting blickets: How
young children use information about novel causal powers
in categorization and induction. Child development, 71(5),
1205–1222.
Gopnik, A., Sobel, D. M., Schulz, L. E., & Glymour, C.
(2001). Causal learning mechanisms in very young children: two-, three-, and four-year-olds infer causal relations
from patterns of variation and covariation. Developmental
psychology, 37(5), 620.
Kushnir, T., & Gopnik, A. (2005). Young children infer
causal strength from probabilities and interventions. Psychological Science, 16(9), 678–683.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (1994). A rational analysis of
the selection task as optimal data selection. Psychological
Review, 101(4), 608.
Schulz, L. E. (2012). The origins of inquiry: inductive inference and exploration in early childhood. Trends in cognitive sciences, 16(7), 382–389.
Schulz, L. E., Goodman, N. D., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Jenkins,
A. C. (2008). Going beyond the evidence: Abstract laws
and preschoolers responses to anomalous data. Cognition,
109(2), 211–223.
Schulz, L. E., & Sommerville, J. (2006). God does not play
dice: Causal determinism and preschoolers’ causal inferences. Child development, 77(2), 427–442.
Tenenbaum, J. B., Kemp, C., Griffiths, T. L., & Goodman,
N. D. (2011). How to grow a mind: Statistics, structure,
and abstraction. science, 331(6022), 1279–1285.
Tsividis, P., Gershman, S. J., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Schulz,
L. E. (2014). Information selection in noisy environments
with large action spaces. In Proceedings of the thirty-sixth
annual conference of the cognitive science society.

1430

