UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Can Formal Non-monotonic Systems Properly Describe Human Reasoning?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/921558fg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Kuhnmuench, Gregory
Ragni, Marco

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Can Formal Non-monotonic Systems Properly Describe Human Reasoning?
Gregory Kuhnmünch (gregory@cognition.uni.freiburg.de)
Department of cognitive Science, Friedrichstraße 50, 79098 Freiburg, Germany

Marco Ragni (ragni@cognition.uni.freiburg.de)
Department of cognitive Science, Friedrichstraße 50, 79098 Freiburg, Germany

Abstract
Monotonic (logical) reasoning makes the strong claim that an
inference cannot be contradicted by future information; an
assumption contrary to everyday life experience. This
assumption is relaxed in non-monotonic reasoning. However,
there are only few formal non-monotonic theories of
reasoning that have inspired psychological theory-building.
Can formal systems such as cumulative logic (system C) or
preferential logic (system P), developed in philosophy and
artificial intelligence, predict human non-monotonic
inferences? Previous investigations have mainly used
probabilistic representations of these systems and it remains
unclear whether participants make the same inferences based
on a qualitative description. We describe a different
methodological approach and report related experimental
findings that run counter to current approaches to human nonmonotonic reasoning. Implications of our proposed method
are discussed.
Keywords: human rationality; non-monotonic reasoning;
belief revision; decision experiment; systems C, CL, and P

Introduction
Non-monotonic reasoning (NMR) is important for artificial
intelligence (AI), but indispensable for everyday human
reasoning. When we derive new information, we are often
aware of the fact that information acquired later on can
contradict previous conclusions or existing knowledge.
Therefore, we are forced to resolve the contradiction to an
extent that allows us to act efficiently in the world. This
holds for rules of deontic reasoning, too: In what
circumstances am I allowed to cross a red traffic light? In
daily life we have to deal with exceptions from otherwise
predominantly valid rules (Do not cross when the traffic
light is red). Other domains are naïve psychology and theory
of mind: Our initial assumptions about another's thoughts,
emotions, or motives require revision once we have made
new inconsistent observations of that person's behavior.
Hence, everyday thinking is often non-monotonic (Pollock,
2008, only abstract available) – it requires NMR and dealing
with exceptions. Similarly, expert systems or databases in
AI might have to address such problems and therefore,
classical designs are augmented by NMR-capabilities. Let
us define a logic as non-monotonic if the set of (logical)
conclusions from a theory (or knowledge base) is not
necessarily preserved when new information is added to the
theory. Previous conclusions or premises (declarative
knowledge) might be retracted, similarly to belief revision

(cp. Kraus, Lehmann & Magidor, 1990). Retraction means
that their validity is lost – they are removed because their
correctness is not warranted any more.
As a central result of psychological research take Byrne's
(1989) suppression task: New knowledge about alternatively
sufficient or additionally necessary premises can modulate
validity of conclusions w.r.t. propositional logic. How could
a theory describe human NMR? There are formal (non)monotonic systems from AI (e.g., Kraus et al., 1990) and
psychology (e.g., Pfeifer & Kleiter, 2005) that describe
which conclusions can be derived under differing rationality
assumptions. In AI, these assumptions are derived from
logic; in psychology the standard is typically laymen's
performance. Humans deviate from propositional logic (e.g.,
in the suppression task) and, more generally, conditional
reasoning. Nonetheless, there are many other logics and
there is a claim according to which non-montonic logics can
(substantially) describe these findings (Dietz, Hölldobler, &
Ragni, 2012; Stenning & van Lambalgen, 2006; 2008).
Many other proponents investigate NMR systems:
Benferhat, Bonnefon and Da Silva Neves, 2005; Elio and
Pelletier (1997); Ford (2004), only to name a few.
Table 1: Rules of propositional logic and of systems C, CL,
and P. OR and D are only valid in system P; LP is only valid
in CL. Refl is reflexivity, SupCl is supraclassicality.
System

Rules

Propositional
Logic
C (Cumulative)

P + MT, CP, TT, EHD

CL
(Cumul.+Loop)
P (Preferential)
Extensions of P

Refl, LLE, RW, CT, CM; EV;
AND, MPC, SupCl
C + Loop
C + OR, S (= HHD), D (proof by case)
DR, RM etc.

As we cannot describe the properties of all existing
systems, we will focus on (i) three systems relevant for our
experiment, that is systems C, CL, and P and (ii) the
following rules: Loop (LP), Left Logical Equivalence
(LLE), Right Weakening (RW), Cut (CT), Equivalence
(EV), AND (AND), Modus Ponens in the Conclusion
(MPC), Contraposition (CP), Transitivity (TT), OR (OR),
Proof by Case (D), Disjunctive Rationality (DR), Rational

1222

Monotonicity (RM), Monotonicity (MT), Cautious
Monotonicity (CM), Easy half of deduction (EHD), and S
(S).Table 1 shows which rules are comprised by systems C,
CL, and P, and central rules of propositional logic.
Please note that monotonicity (MT) and transitivity (TT)
are valid in propositional logic, but not in C, CL or P. Due
to monotonicity, propositional logic does not allow for
NMR. Read α |~ β as ―If α then normally β;‖ α → β and α
|= β as ―If α then β.‖ The symbol ―˅‖ is inclusive logical
―or‖ and ―˄‖ is logical ―and‖. Please note that α |= β implies
α |~ β but not vice versa. Classically, inferences are
presented by an inference scheme, consider the
monotonicity inference:
Monotonicity (MT)
| = α → β , β |~ γ
α |~ γ
Read the formula above as ―If α then β‖ and ―if β then
normally ,‖ then conclude ―if α then normally .‖ Other
relevant rules are TT, CM and OR:
Transitivity (TT)
α |~ β ,β |~ γ
α |~ γ

Cautious Monotonicity (CM)
α |~ β , α |~ γ
α ˄ β |~ γ
OR
α |~ γ , β |~ γ
α ˅ β |~ γ

The remaining formulae and the complete experimental
tasks can be found on the website1. System P (e.g., Kraus et
al., 1990) contains "inference rules that are widely accepted
as being the minimal set for any ―reasonable‖ nonmonotonic reasoning system" (Ford, 2004, p. 94).Pfeifer
and Kleiter (2005) investigated three rules of P and their
findings support system P. To clarify our methodological
approach to NMR, some key aspects should be addressed:
We propose (a) investigating a comprehensive set of the
rules that are warranted (valid) within each of the systems,
and (b) including rules of monotonic logic (as did Pfeifer &
Kleiter, 2006; e.g. MT and TT). Such an approach yields a
more comprehensive picture of human (non-)monotonic
reasoning and it shows more precisely how NMR deviates
from propositional logic.
Research on content effects shows the importance of
declarative knowledge in many fields of human reasoning
(see Beller & Spada, 2003), e.g., in the causal domain
(Kuhnmünch & Beller, 2005). If content-related knowledge
supports conclusions intended by experimenters, its effects
are facilitating, otherwise they are rather inhibitory. With
facilitating content effects, conclusions can be derived by
mere recall. In this case, there is no need for a deliberate
reasoning process. The question is whether NMR can be
demonstrated with naïve reasoners beyond content effects.
1

http://webexperiment.iig.uni-freiburg.de/system.zip

Do reasoners possess this abstract competency when
contents and knowledge are minimal? Abstracted scenarios
are well-suited to this end. For instance, Benferhat et al.
(2005) described new life forms in the Arctic Ocean. In such
scenarios only general biological knowledge can be brought
to bear, nothing specific is said regarding the life form. Such
abstracted scenarios imply minimal knowledge, but as
opposed to completely abstract material, they still use
concrete (and thus imaginable) propositions. To illustrate
the distinction: If (a is x) then (a is y) is abstract, whereas If
the figure is red then the figure is square is an abstracted
version.
NMR is psychologistic – a measure of correctness does
not depend on formal standards, but on laymen's
performance (see Pelletier and Elio, 2005). As a
consequence, empirical data from ordinary people is the
very data that a formal non-monotonic logic must cover.
Formal standards do not, however, become obsolete – they
can serve as a frame of reference to determine differences
between formal and human NMR. Of course, formal
theories are rather an inspiration for a psychological theory.
For example, they do not take restrictions of working
memory into account, but a cognitive model can (cp.
Stenning & van Lambalgen, 2008).
Regarding our hypotheses, the first refers to the new
materials we used: Keywords like normally trigger nonmonotonic reasoning patterns with abstracted tasks. That is,
conclusions licensed by unwarranted rules such as MT and
EHD should be drawn less frequently than those of rules
warranted by the three systems. Furthermore, in line with
Pfeifer and Kleiter (2005), we expect system P to yield
better results than C and CL (frequency of rule use).
Second, the transitivity rule (TT) is so familiar that it is
expected to be applied nearly automatically by most
participants. Finally, we expect difficulties to understand the
scope of negation with the term normally: Statements of the
form A is not normally green and A normally is not green
are considered equivalent. The reason for this expectation is
that in everyday life, not normally green is rarely used and
thus it might be confused with normally not green (at least
this holds for the German formulations nicht normalerweise
grün and normalerweise nicht grün).

Method
Materials
Inference Tasks Instructions and formulation of tasks were
optimized in two pre-tests. The main finding was that a
conditional task format (premises like If the figure is
circular, then it is green) was harder to comprehend. Hence,
we removed the conditionals for the main test and used an
equivalent relational description.
In addition to the rules mentioned in the introduction,
some equivalent reformulations of rules were used to see
whether the form of premises makes a difference: Modus

1223

Ponens in the Conclusion (MPC'), Contraposition (CP'),
Disjunctive Rationality (DR'), Monotonicity (MT'), Rational
Monotonicity (RM', RM''), and Easy Half of Deduction
(EHD'). Neither supraclassicality (SupCl) nor reflexivity
(Refl) were tested, as they belong to each of the systems C,
P, and CL. Each task comprised a set of premises and two
main answer options: (i) Yes, there is a conclusion that
applies with certainty and (ii) No, nothing can be concluded
with certainty. If participants ticked yes, then they had to
mark the conclusion in the "building set" printed directly
below. The set consisted of all figures and properties that
appeared in the premises. A translated sample task for rule
Monotonicity (MT) looks like this:
Premises:
The green figures are normally checkered.
The circular figures are normally green.
Is there a conclusion that applies with certainty if you
assume that the premises are true?
□ Yes, this conclusion applies with certainty (check
exactly one box per column):
□

The
circular

□ The green

□ circular
figures
are

in each
case
□ normally
□

□ green

The
□ checkered
checkered
□ No, nothing can be concluded with certainty.

□

Instructions for Inference Tasks First, the main answer
options and use of the building set were explained to
participants; if they chose yes as a main answer option, they
had to tick it. In each row of tick boxes within the building
set, exactly one tick was required. Otherwise they had to
tick the other main answer option no. A concrete sample
that dealt with health conditions and mental fitness
followed. Participants were instructed not to repeat any
premise as answer and to provide the most informative
conclusion. The latter requirement was to ensure that among
alternative conclusions warranted by a system, the one with
the most new information was marked in the building set.
Finally, participants were informed that the following tasks
combine certain properties of figures:
Shape: square, circular, triangular,…
Color: violet, green, blue,...
Filling: shaded, checkered, filled in...
Any combination of shape, color, and filling is possible,
as well as further instances of these properties (ellipses).
Therefore, the instruction did not establish a closed world
with a restricted set of properties. For example, with a
closed world limited to two shapes, the absence of one
shape would justify inferring the other. To foster

participants' imagination with these rather abstract tasks,
they were given a fictional scenario: ―Imagine you are a
visitor at a factory observing the properties of produced
artifacts.‖
Additional Task A second type of task examined the
perceived semantics of negations in four rules:
(1) The circular figures are not normally green.
(2) The circular figures normally are not green.
(3) The circular figures are not in each case green.
(4) The circular figures are, in each case, not green.
Participants were asked Which of these statements are
equivalent? In a table-like format, they had to tick
equivalent pairs or omit ticks whenever they supposed there
was no equivalence. By making no ticks, they could indicate
that they thought there is no equivalent pair at all.

Design
We used a within-participant design in order to assess
individual answering patterns across tasks. Participants
received questionnaires that were the same except for the
ordering of tasks: We used nine orders of tasks for
balancing. Task orders were generated randomly, except
that groups of very similar tasks did not appear on
consecutive pages of the questionnaire, but were always
separated by at least one task not belonging to that group.
This is due to the fact that premises of these tasks were
similar and in pretesting, some participants erroneously
thought these tasks were identical. This led some of them to
simply repeat the former inference or to omit the task. The
groups of similar tasks were: (a) LP, RW, MT, MT', TT (b)
LP, LLE, EV (c) MPC, MPC', EHD, EHD', S. Each order
ended with tasks RM''-RM, as pretesting had shown very
low frequencies of warranted answers with these tasks (RM:
16.67%, RM'': 0%). Hence, these tasks seemed particularly
problematic for participants and we mused that they might
influence consecutive tasks to a higher degree than others.
In order to avoid monotony and carry-over effects, half of
the tasks comprised the object properties square-violetshaded and the other half circular-green-checkered. The
additional task always came last for all participants.

Participants
Participants were informed about the experiment by flyers
on the campus of the University of Freiburg. Altogether, 31
persons filled out the questionnaire, five of them were
excluded as they did not fulfill the requirements: They had
participated in the pretest and only informed experimenters
after debriefing. Some had expert knowledge in
propositional logic. The remaining 26 participants fulfilled
the sampling requirements, among them 21 women and five
men. They were all native German speakers. Mean age was

1224

System C
System CL
System P
Variants and
additional rules

Figure 1: Relative frequencies of warranted conclusions by rule and formal systems by rules (see legend)
24.31 years (SD = 5.57). All of them were students of the
University of Freiburg (Germany). Their average number of
college semesters was 5.36 (SD = 5.71).

Procedure
Participants filled out the printed questionnaire in a quiet
room in small groups of no more than five persons. First
they worked on the inference tasks; then on the additional
task. They could ask the experimenter questions if an
instruction was unclear. Materials were presented in
German. On average, they took about 45 minutes to fill out
the questionnaire (excluding a short briefing and
debriefing). For compensation, they received course credits
or seven Euros.

we determined whether there was a significant difference
between warranted and unwarranted conclusions for each
rule. Only the AND-rule yielded such a result in favor of the
conclusions (testing against an equal distribution, twotailed, p = .029). CM, Loop and MPC' on the other hand
were significantly more often divergent from the warranted
conclusions (n = 24, p = .007; n = 24, p = .029; n = 24, p =
.001, respectively).The remaining rules failed to reach
significance in either direction (p > 0.064 in each case), half
of the reasoners drew the warranted conclusion, the others
did not. Notably, the OR-rule with 70.83% was closest to
the result of AND (73.08%). On average, 58.45% of the
answers were in accord with systems C, CL, and P; the
remaining answers were divergent from the rules' formal
predictions.

Results
Comparison of Systems C, CL, and P
Order Effects
A logit-loglinear analysis was conducted with the variable
task positions within the questionnaire as a factor and the
dichotomous dependent variable warranted vs. unwarranted
conclusion according to the rule. The factor could be
removed from the model without significant loss of fit
(χ²(21) = 19.446, p = 0.557).

Frequencies of Conclusions
Altogether, out of 26 (participants) * 24 (rules per
questionnaire) = 624 answers, 614 were included into
analyses (with ten answers missing or ambiguous). For the
included answers, we calculated the proportion of warranted
conclusions per rule (w.r.t. the systems of formal
reasoning). Figure 1 shows the results. Using binomial tests

Systems can be compared by adding up frequencies for all
conclusions warranted by a system (cp. the introduction):
Conclusions in accord with a system score one; one is also
scored when participants avoided a conclusion that is in
disaccord with a system. All other answers yielded a zero
scoring and did not contribute to the overall sum. The sums
were 354 (C), 342 (CL), 349 (P). A χ²-Test yielded no
significant differences between the three systems (χ²(2) =
0.209, p > .05). The result is unchanged when the sums are
normalized by the number of rules in support of each single
system. Notably, the maximal number of rules answered in
accord with each single system was 18 (C: two participants,
CL and P by the same participant). A second way to look at
the results is to focus on the three rules that differentiate the
systems, namely D, LP and OR. Binomial tests showed that
a significant proportion of answers diverged from the LP

1225

rule, n = 26, p < .05 (two-tailed binomial test). As reported
before, the D- and OR-rules did not reach significance.

Transitivity Fallacy
The TT rule (unwarranted by any NMR-system) was used
by 46.15% of participants. A binomial test did not reach
significance, n = 26, p > .05. Thus, about half of the
participants used this rule whereas the others refrained from
any conclusion or rarely concluded something that deviated
from the rule´s conclusion.

Shift of Scope with Negation
We turn to the four rules of the additional task (see materials
section). Rules 1 and 2 tested whether participants
differentiate between not normally x and normally not x.
Twenty of 26 participants were in favor of an equivalence
between rules 1 and 2, p < .01, two-tailed binomial test. We
also used two-tailed binomial tests for the remaining
comparisons with equal distributions: The corresponding
variation in negation using in each case instead of normally
yielded the opposite result: Twenty-five out of 26 answers
denied an equivalence of not in each case x (rule 3) and in
each case not x (rule 4), p < 0.01. Most participants (16 out
of 26) stated that not normally x is equivalent to not in each
case x, but the difference between these rules 1 and 3 was
not significant, p > .05. Similarly, 15 out of 26 answers state
an equivalence between normally not x and not in each case
x (rules 2 and 3, p > .05). Finally, 24 of 26 participants
denied an equivalence between normally not x (rule 2) and
in each case not x (rule 4), a significant result, p < .001.

Discussion
The challenge of the reported experiment was to activate the
non-monotonic mode of reasoning within our participants
using only keywords like normally. Our materials did so:
An average of 58.45% of answers was in accord with the
three systems. Nonetheless, some rules of propositional
logic seem to be too familiar to not be used. Accordingly
and in line with expectations, the transitivity (TT) rule was
used in 46.15% of cases although it is not compatible with
the three tested non-monotonic systems. The use of such
unwarranted rules might have happened for an additional
reason: We used abstracted scenarios (geometric figures,
their fillings and colors in a factory's production), that is
exceptions might not have been salient enough in all tasks.
For a comprehensive study of rule systems, this was the
method of choice, though: We were not interested in content
effects that facilitate or inhibit reasoning with exceptions;
rather, the research question focused on whether NMR
exists as a competence beyond content effects — in a
similar fashion as naïve reasoners can apply modus ponens
and to a lesser degree modus tollens with abstract
conditionals, e.g. in the Wason selection task. Our
participants could certainly have imagined more concrete
scenarios in order to solve the tasks, but with up to three

premises per rule and the variety of figure properties
mentioned therein, this is not easy. In follow-up
experiments we intend to integrate the question of whether
content effects trigger different modes of NMR. Contentrelated and rather (domain-)general aspects should be
disentangled experimentally, otherwise competencies
related to contents and to reasoning become mixed up
(Beller & Spada, 2003; Kuhnmünch & Beller, 2005).
Two main results show the overall lack of support for any
of the formal systems tested. Comparison of the whole set of
rules (24) bore no advantage for any of the systems C, CL or
P. On the other hand, there is much overlap of C and CL
(only rule LP differentiating between them) and both
overlap largely with P. As an alternative, the three rules D,
LP and OR can be used to differentiate between the systems.
As LP was rarely applied in the experiment, systems C and
P remain the ones with the best fit for about two thirds of
the answers (cp. Figure 1).
Certainly, attempts to corroborate some of the formal
systems always need to focus on the subset of tasks that
allows for a differentiation of accounts. This can tempt
researchers not to examine whether participants conform
with other aspects (rules) of a system or with propositional
logic. However, we examined a more comprehensive set of
rules, including rules not compatible with any of the
systems (e.g., monotonicity).With fewer rules, discrepancies
from a system's norm are less likely to be discovered.
Although system P so far has more empirical support than C
or CL, our results demonstrate that it does not surpass
system C. Only system CL seems inappropriate as it
postulates the LP-rule that was used rarely (26.92%).
The substantial proportion of unwarranted rules used for
the conclusions also shows that human reasoning is indeed
flexible and manifold – the same participants gave nonmonotonic and monotonic answers. We agree with Stenning
and van Lambalgen (2005) that rather the whole process of
task interpretation and reasoning must be considered.
Interpretation determines whether a non-monotonic
reasoning process is activated or not. In the light of our
results, descriptively more suitable and more flexible
systems beyond pure formal systems are needed to describe
the bandwidth of human NMR. As system P is sometimes
considered the minimal set of rules that can describe human
NMR and our participants applied only some of the rules,
system O is a candidate. It comprises fewer rules and might
be augmented by additional rules independently of the
rather rigid set of rules adopted by formal systems. This
liberal attitude towards rule systems might not be licensed
by formal logics, but is absolutely permissible if the
objective is a model of human reasoning. Then, even human
inconsistencies should be modeled.
The additional task demonstrated a strong ambivalence of
negations in materials framed in natural language.
Therefore, it should be considered whether a disambiguation
is possible by modifying materials or by training

1226

participants regarding the intended meaning. Another view
on these results is closed world reasoning (e.g., Stenning &
van Lambalgen, 2008, p. 36ff), in the sense of regarding the
properties named in the task as the complete set of
possibilities, that is all figures have either the one property
or the other, but not a third.
Our questionnaire discouraged participants from adopting
such a view, though: Remember that the instruction named
three geometric forms, three colors, and three fillings for
objects. Furthermore, ellipses after these properties made
clear that there might be more instances. The rules (tasks)
used only two properties of each triplet; hence, the
instruction did not suggest a closed world. Nevertheless,
some participants could have adopted this interpretation,
which would justify equivalences such as not green means
violet. Rules like
(1) The circular figures are not normally green.
(2) The circular figures normally are not green.
might then be interpreted and transformed first: normally
are not green (2) means normally are violet. And not
normally green (1) means rarely green which yields
normally violet by the assumption that the violet and green
objects sum up to 100% of the geometric figures (another
way to apply the closed world). As a result, we get:
(1) The circular figures normally are violet.
(2) The circular figures normally are violet.
From this perspective, the scope shift with negation might
be justified and not be seen as a failure to correctly interpret
the scope of negation. We believe these conflicting
explanations deserve further investigation due to their
importance for NMR-tasks.
An equivalence of normally (rules 1 & 2) and in each
case (rules 3 and 4) cannot be explained by a closed world,
though. There seems to be a different semantic
understanding: Either both terms are taken by participants to
mean exactly 50% of the cases or they are both taken to
mean the same numerical majority of the cases (e.g., 80%).
The methodology we used – a rich set of rules and
analysis beyond a few differentiating rules – is suggested as
a complementary paradigm to shed more light on the
appropriateness of formal systems as approximations of
human NMR. All accounts should be enriched by systematic
empirical research regarding content effects and closed
world reasoning and task interpretation in a broader sense,
and most importantly to let reasoners generate conclusions
instead of simply verifying given conclusions. Disentangling these aspects is essential for the development of
valid psychological accounts of human NMR – probably as
essential as it has proven for human monotonic reasoning.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Laura Schumacher, Julia Grzimek,
Ivanessa Mirastschijski, and Mathis Tometten for their
valuable help with data collection and raw data extraction.
Mathis Tometten and Antonia Becher helped with data

analysis and the manuscript. In particular, we would like to
thank Dr. Stefan Wölfl for his invaluable help in generating
hypotheses, formal aspects, experimental materials, and indepth discussions. This work was supported by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) as part of the priority
program New Frameworks of Rationality (SPP 1516, project
Models of human non-monotonic reasoning).

References
Beller, S., & Spada, H. (2003). The logic of content effects
in prepositional reasoning: The case of conditional
reasoning with a point of view. Thinking &
Reasoning, 9(4), 335-378.
Benferhat, S., Bonnefon, J. F., & da Silva Neves, R. (2005).
An overview of possibilistic handling of default
reasoning, with experimental studies. Synthese, 146(1-2),
53-70.
Byrne, R. M. (1989). Suppressing valid inferences with
conditionals. Cognition, 31(1), 61-83.
Dietz, E. A., Hölldobler, S., & Ragni, M. (2012). A
Computational Approach to the Suppression Task. In
Proceedings of the 34th Cognitive Science Conference.
Elio, R., & Pelletier, F. (1997). Belief change as
propositional update. Cognitive Science, 21(4), 419-460.
Ford, M. (2004). System LS: A Three-Tiered
Nonmonotonic
Reasoning
System. Computational
Intelligence, 20(1), 89-108.
Kraus, S., Lehmann, D., & Magidor, M. (1990).
Nonmonotonic reasoning, preferential models and
cumulative logics. Artificial intelligence, 44(1), 167-207.
Kuhnmünch, G., & Beller, S. (2005). Distinguishing
Between Causes and Enabling Conditions: Through
Mental
Models
or
Linguistic
Cues? Cognitive
Science, 29(6), 1077-1090.
Pelletier, F. J., & Elio, R. (2005). The case for psychologism
in default and inheritance reasoning. Synthese, 146(1-2),
7-35.
Pfeifer, N., & Kleiter, G. D. (2005). Towards a mental
probability logic. Psychologica Belgica, 45(1), 71-99.
Pfeifer, N. & Kleiter, G. D. (2006). Is human reasoning
about nonmonotonic conditionals probabilistically
coherent? In Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on
Uncertainty Processing (p. 138–150). Mikulov (Czech
Republic).
Pollock, J. L. (2008). Defeasible reasoning. In J. E. Adler,
L. J. Rips (Eds.), Reasoning: Studies of human inference
and its foundations. New York, NY US: Cambridge
University Press.
Stenning, K., & van Lambalgen, M. (2005). Semantic
Interpretation as Computation in Nonmonotonic Logic:
The Real Meaning of the Suppression Task. Cognitive
Science, 29(6), 919-960.
Stenning, K., & van Lambalgen, M. (2008). Human
reasoning and cognititve science. MIT Press.

1227

