UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Causal Supersession

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2g17x56p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Kominsky, Jonathan
Phillips, Jonathan
Gerstenberg, Tobias
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Causal Supersession
Jonathan F. Kominsky1 (jonathan.kominsky@yale.edu), Jonathan Phillips1 (jonathan.phillips@yale.edu),
Tobias Gerstenberg2 (tger@mit.edu), David Lagnado3 (d.lagnado@ucl.ac.uk)
Joshua Knobe1 (joshua.knobe@yale.edu),
1

2

Yale University, 2 Hillhouse Ave, New Haven, CT 06520, USA
MIT, Building 46-4053, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
3
University College London, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, UK
Abstract

Recent work has suggested that, rather than being about
morality specifically, these effects are rooted in the
normality of an agent’s actions, that is, how much they
diverge from moral or statistical norms (Halpern &
Hitchcock, in press; Hitchcock & Knobe, 2009). However,
most of the experimental work to date has focused on how
the normality of an agent’s actions affects that agent’s own
causality, not anyone else’s. The present experiments aim
to demonstrate and explore causal supersession.

When agents violate norms, they are typically judged to
be more of a cause of resulting outcomes. In this study,
we suggest that norm violations also reduce the causality
of other agents, a novel phenomenon we refer to as
“causal supersession.” We propose and test a
counterfactual reasoning model of this phenomenon in
three experiments. Experiment 1 shows that causal
judgments of one actor are reduced when another actor
violates moral norms, even when the outcome in question
is neutral. Experiment 2 shows that this causal
supersession effect is dependent on a particular event
structure, following a prediction of our counterfactual
model. Experiment 3 demonstrates that causal
supersession can occur with violation of non-moral
norms.

The novelty of causal supersession
We suggest that causal supersession provides novel insight
into causal reasoning, but first we wish to acknowledge
another explanation for the phenomenon from an existing
well-supported motivational theory (Alicke, 2000). It is
already known that people’s causal judgments can be
impacted by motivational factors. Notably, recent work has
found that people’s judgments are often distorted by
“excuse validation” (Turri & Blouw, in press), the
motivation to not assign causality for bad outcomes to
individuals whom we do not feel are blameworthy. For
example, if a driver is speeding because of an accelerator
malfunction and gets into a lethal accident, we might be
inclined to exculpate the driver as a cause of the accident
because her actions are blameless. We do not wish to say
that a blameless individual is the cause of a blameworthy
outcome. This basic idea could then be used to explain
causal supersession. If one agent does something morally
wrong and is therefore seen as the one who is to blame for
the outcome, people will be motivated to find some way to
conclude that all other agents are not to blame, and they
will therefore conclude that those other agents did not cause
the outcome.
This explanation draws on claims that have already
received extensive support in the existing empirical
literature (Alicke, 2000), and we do not mean to call the
empirical claims into question here. Instead, we will
suggest that causal supersession provides evidence for a
different process that goes beyond what has been
demonstrated in existing work.

Keywords: Causal reasoning; Counterfactuals; Morality;
Supersession

Introduction
In the 1870 case of Carter v. Towne, the court faced an
intriguing question. The defendant sold gunpowder to a
child. The child’s mother and aunt hid the gunpowder, but
in a location that they knew the child could find and access.
The child found the gunpowder and was injured. The court
found that the defendant could not be considered to be the
cause of the child’s injuries, because of the negligence of
the mother and aunt (Hart & Honoré, 1985, pp. 281-282).
This case leaves us with an interesting puzzle about
causal reasoning. The question before the court was not
whether the mother and aunt caused the outcome; it was
whether the defendant caused the outcome. Yet the court
determined that the fact that the actions of the mother and
aunt were negligent had some effect on the causal
relationship between the defendant’s actions and the
outcome. What we find here is somewhat counter-intuitive:
the defendant’s responsibility for the outcome is being
affected not by anything that the defendant himself did, but
by someone else’s actions! This suggests a broader
phenomenon: the causality of one agent may be affected
not only by the moral status of their own actions, but by the
moral status of others’ actions. We refer to this as “causal
supersession.”
It is well-established that moral judgments can affect
causal judgments. Previous research has shown that when
an agent acts in a way that is judged to be morally wrong,
that agent is seen as more causal (e.g., Alicke 1992).

A counterfactual account of causal supersession
We propose an account of the supersession effect based on
counterfactual reasoning. Independent of any motivational
factors, we will argue that counterfactual reasoning affects
causal judgment in these cases, and that norm violations
influence counterfactual reasoning. This account follows

761

from two key claims. First, counterfactual reasoning affects
causal judgment. Second, moral valence affects
counterfactual reasoning.

Moral valence and counterfactuals
We noted above that a relationship could be considered
“sensitive” to the extent that it would not have held if the
background circumstances had been slightly different. Yet,
there will always be some way that the background
circumstances could have been different such that
sufficiency would no longer hold. (For example, suppose
that someone said: “The rock only happened to be
sufficient to break the bottle because the bottle wasn’t
covered in a steel casing. If it had been, the rock would not
have been sufficient.”) But not all counterfactuals are
treated equally. Even if this counterfactual claim is correct,
there seems to be some important sense in which it is
irrelevant – not even worth thinking about. If we want to
understand the notion of sensitivity, we need to say a little
bit more about this issue, providing a sense of how to
determine whether a given counterfactual is relevant.
Drawing on the substantial body of research on
counterfactual reasoning (for reviews, see Byrne 2005;
Kahneman & Miller, 1986), we will focus here on two
principal findings. First, studies show that likelihood
judgments play a role in people’s intuitions about which
counterfactuals are relevant and which are not (Byrne,
2005; Kahneman & Tversky, 1982). When something
unlikely occurs, people tend to regard as relevant
counterfactuals that involve something more likely
occurring. Second, studies show that moral judgments can
influence people’s intuitions about the relevance of
counterfactuals (McCloy & Byrne, 2000; N’gbala &
Branscombe, 1995). When an agent performs a morally bad
action, people tend to regard as relevant counterfactuals
that involve the agent doing something morally neutral.
To unify these two findings, we can say that people’s
intuitions about the relevance of counterfactuals are
affected by violations of norms (Hitchcock & Knobe,
2009). In some cases, an event is seen as unlikely (and
hence violates a statistical norm); in other cases, an event is
seen as morally wrong (and hence violates a moral norm).
Thus, we can formulate a more general principle, which
should apply across both types of norm violation. The
general principle is: when an event in the actual world is
perceived as violating a norm, people tend to regard as
relevant counterfactuals in which the norm-violating event
is replaced by a norm-abiding event.

Counterfactual reasoning and causal judgment
Previous work on counterfactuals and causal judgment has
suggested that people regard an event as a cause of the
outcome when it satisfies two conditions, necessity and
sufficiency (e.g., Woodward, 2006). Take the causal
relationship “A caused B”. Roughly speaking, this
relationship would have the following necessity and
sufficiency conditions:
Necessity: If A had not occurred, B would not have
occurred.
Sufficiency: If A occurs, B occurs.
Our focus here will be on the second of these conditions –
sufficiency – and on the role it plays in ordinary causal
cognition.
Woodward (2006) defines a property he calls sensitivity
to characterize the robustness with which a condition is
satisfied. The sufficiency of a cause is ‘sensitive’ if it
would cease to hold if the background conditions were even
slightly different. By contrast, a condition is ‘insensitive’ if
it would continue to hold even if the background conditions
were substantially different. Woodward argues that when
the sufficiency condition is highly sensitive, people will
show some reluctance to attribute causation.
To give a more concrete example, Woodward describes a
case in which Billy tells Suzy that if she scratches her nose,
he will throw a rock at a bottle. She does, he throws the
rock at the bottle, and it breaks. Looking at the causal
relationship between the rock hitting the bottle and the
bottle breaking, the sufficiency counterfactual (“If the rock
were to hit the bottle, the bottle would break”) is very
insensitive, as the rock hitting the bottle will cause the
bottle to break under many circumstances. By contrast,
looking at the causal link between Suzy scratching her nose
and the bottle breaking, the sufficiency counterfactual (“If
Suzy were to scratch her nose, the bottle would break”) is
quite sensitive, because any number of small changes to the
background conditions would render Suzy’s action no
longer sufficient. Thus, the account predicts that people are
less likely to agree with the statement: “Suzy’s action
caused the bottle to break.”
This claim about the importance of sufficiency is the first
piece of our account of causal supersession. In the case of
Carter v. Towne, for example, the defendant’s action was
only sufficient to bring about the outcome because the
mother and aunt happened to act negligently. If the mother
and aunt had not acted negligently, then even if the
defendant had performed exactly the same action, the
outcome would not have come about. It is for this reason,
we claim, that people are somewhat disinclined to regard
the action as fully causal. Certain facts about the child’s
guardians make the relationship between the defendant and
the outcome sensitive.

The complete counterfactual account
Combining these two ideas yields a counterfactual account
of causal supersession. Take the causal claim “The
defendant selling gunpowder to the child caused the child’s
injuries.” The sufficiency condition for this claim reads as
follows: “If the defendant sells gunpowder to the child,
then the child is injured.” Now suppose that sufficiency
only holds because the mother and aunt negligently hid the
gunpowder where the child could find it. Since this act
violates a norm, people will tend to regard as highly
relevant the possibility in which the gunpowder is put
somewhere that the child could not get it. In that
possibility, the defendant’s action would not have been

762

sufficient, so the negligent actions of the mother and aunt
make the defendant’s sufficiency more sensitive. Thus, the
defendant is regarded as less of a cause of the outcome, or
in other words, is superseded.
Putting this point more abstractly: When an actor does
something that violates a norm, it makes the possibility that
they did not do that thing very relevant. If the sufficiency
condition is not met in those possibilities, the sufficiency of
the causal link between that actor and the outcome becomes
sensitive. Because the sufficiency of that causal link is
sensitive, the second actor is seen as less of a cause of the
outcome.

*
*

Predictions of the counterfactual account
The first novel prediction of the counterfactual account is
that causal supersession should occur even for completely
neutral outcomes. This goes beyond, but does not
contradict, motivational accounts. While you may be
motivated to blame someone even in the absence of a bad
outcome, such blame cannot be justified by insisting that
the agent caused some neutral outcome. Similarly, saying
that an agent did not cause a neutral outcome would not
help to exonerate her from blame. Rather, one might well
be motivated to find some way of justifying the claim that
the agent is not blameworthy. Existing work on
motivational biases in causal cognition has used precisely
this logic to show that certain effects are indeed the product
of motivation (Alicke, Rose & Bloom, 2011). In contrast,
the counterfactual account does not require that the
outcome be bad in order for supersession to occur. From
the standpoint of the counterfactual account, the only thing
that matters is the (ab)normality of what the superseding
actor did.
The second prediction is not about when supersession
should occur, but rather when it should not. The
counterfactual account does not treat the assignment of
causality to different actors as a zero-sum game. Our
account predicts that supersession should only occur when
the sufficiency of the superseded actor is threatened. More
concretely, if one agent violates a norm, we suggest that
people consider the possibility in which that agent did not
act. If the other agent is still sufficient even if the first does
not act, then the wrongness of the first agent’s actions
should not affect the judged causality of the second (see the
introduction to Experiment 2 for further details).
Finally, the third prediction is that supersession should
arise for any norm violation, not just for violations of moral
norms. The key thing that moral valence is doing in the
counterfactual account is making certain counterfactual
possibilities more relevant, and those possibilities make the
sufficiency of the superseded actor sensitive. Since
violations of statistical norms also make people regard
counterfactual possibilities as more relevant (Kahneman &
Tversky, 1982), violations of these purely statistical norms
should yield similar supersession effects.
We test each of these predictions in turn in Experiments
1 through 3.

Figure 1: Mean agreement ratings as a function of agent and
valence of the varied agent’s actions. * = p<.05 Error bars indicate
bootstrapped 95% CI.

Experiment 1
In the first experiment, we wanted to demonstrate causal
supersession for events with neutral outcomes. We
constructed a scenario with two agents. One agent, whom
we will call the “fixed” agent, always acted in the same
way. Her actions were always morally neutral. The second
agent, whom we will call the “varied” agent, acted
differently depending on condition. We manipulated the
varied agent’s actions on two dimensions: intent (intending
to bring about the specific outcome vs. not intending to
bring about the specific outcome) and moral valence
(morally neutral vs. morally wrong).
The counterfactual account predicts that the fixed agent
should be seen as less causal when the varied agent’s
actions are morally wrong, compared to when the varied
agent’s actions are morally neutral, since both are necessary
to bring about the outcome. Motivational accounts do not
make this prediction, since assigning greater causal
responsibility for a neutral outcome does not help to justify
blaming or exonerating from blame. We made no specific
predictions about the impact of intentionality with regard to
the supersession effect, but since existing research has
found an impact of intentionality on causal cognition
(Lombrozo, 2010) it was included in this initial
investigation as a potentially informative factor.

Methods
Participants 120 participants were recruited via Amazon
Mechanical Turk and paid $0.20 each for completing the
two-question survey.
Materials and procedure. Four vignettes1 were created
featuring a varied agent (Bill) and fixed agent (Bill’s Wife).
All vignettes started with the fixed agent finding the left
side of a specific paired set of bookends at an antique store.
1

All vignettes
http://goo.gl/9tiM4i

763

are

available

in

full

online:

The varied agent then acquired the right-side bookend for
the paired set. The varied agent’s actions were manipulated
along two dimensions, the moral wrongness of his actions
(buying the right-side bookend from a friend vs. stealing it),
and whether he intended to bring about the outcome
(intended to get a matching bookend vs. intended to get any
right-side bookend). This created a 2x2 design, which was
run between-subjects. In all conditions, participants were
asked to rate on a 1-7 scale how much they agreed with
each of the two sentences: “Bill’s wife caused them to
possess the paired set of bookends” (the fixed agent) and
“Bill caused them to possess the paired set of bookends”
(the varied agent), 1 being “Disagree” and 7 being “Agree”.
The two questions were presented in random order.

view, any increase due to a norm violation must decrease
the judged causality of other agents. There is evidence
against the notion of zero-sum causal judgments in
previous work (Lagnado, Gerstenberg, & Zultan, 2013), but
also in our results. We examined the effect of norm
violations on the summed causal ratings of the fixed and
varied actors in this experiment. A zero-sum account
predicts that there should be no difference between
conditions, but in fact the sum of the two causal ratings was
higher in the non-violation condition (M = 9.75, SD = 2.57)
than the violation condition (M = 8.67, SD = 2.65), F(1,
113) = 4.93, p = .026.

Results and discussion
The results of Experiment 1 can be found in Fig. 1,
collapsed across the levels of intention. We conducted
separate 2 (intent) X 2 (moral valence) ANOVAs for the
fixed and varied agents. For the varied agent, there was
only a main effect of moral valence, with agreement ratings
being higher when the varied agent’s actions were morally
wrong (M = 5.68, SD = 1.81) than when they were not (M
= 5.00, SD = 1.75), F(1, 116) = 4.18, p = .04, ηp2 = .04.
For the fixed agent, there was also a main effect of moral
valence, with lower agreement ratings when the varied
agent’s actions were morally wrong (M = 3.02, SD = 1.98)
than when they were not (M = 4.78, SD = 1.74), F(1, 113) =
26.74, p < .001, ηp2 = .19.
There was also a main effect of intent, with higher
agreement ratings when the varied agent intended the
specific outcome (M = 4.26, SD = 1.98) than when he did
not (M = 3.52, SD = 2.08), F(1, 113) = 4.60, p = .03, ηp2 =
.04. While we did not specifically predict this, Lombrozo
(2010) suggested that when an action is intentional rather
than accidental, the counterfactual possibility that it does
not occur seems less likely. Following from this, if people
are less willing to consider the counterfactual possibility
that the varied agent did not act, it becomes more important
to the outcome whether the fixed agent acted or not,
making them seem more causal. Regardless, our primary
interest was in the causal supersession effect, and in that
light this effect is largely irrelevant as there was no
interaction between intent and moral valence, F(1, 113) =
.15, p > .5.
In short, we demonstrated the causal supersession effect,
with the causality of one agent affected by the normative
status of another’s actions. In addition to being the first
experimental demonstration of causal supersession (to our
knowledge), it confirmed one of the key predictions of the
counterfactual account: Even when the outcome was
something as trivial and morally neutral as possessing a
paired set of bookends, causal supersession occurred. This
confirms the first prediction of our counterfactual model,
and goes beyond the predictions of motivational accounts.
Readers may wonder if these causal judgments are a
zero-sum game, which would account for supersession
without appealing to counterfactual reasoning. Under this

The counterfactual account predicts that A will only
supersede B if A’s action makes B’s sufficiency more
sensitive. However, in situations where B’s sufficiency is
independent of A, there should be no causal supersession.
Take a concrete example: Suppose that Billy and Suzy
work together in the same office. Suzy is supposed to come
in at 9 AM, whereas Billy has specifically been told not to
come in at that time. The office has a motion detector, and
the motion detector will be set off if it detects two or more
people entering the room. Both Suzy and Billy arrive at
9am the next day, and the motion detector goes off. This
case has the same basic structure as those examined in
Experiment 1, and the counterfactual theory predicts that
the scenario should produce the same supersession effect.
Since Billy’s action is bad, the possibility in which he
doesn’t act will be seen as highly relevant. Then, since
Suzy’s act would not be sufficient for the outcome in that
possibility, her causality becomes more sensitive.
But now consider a slightly modified version of the case.
What if, instead, the motion detector will be set off if it
detects one or more people entering the room? In this case,
either Suzy or Billy would be sufficient to bring about the
outcome. Since Billy’s action is bad, the possibility in
which he doesn’t act is seen as highly relevant. However,
even in that possibility, Suzy’s action is sufficient to bring
about the outcome. Thus, we predict that Suzy’s causality
should be unaffected by Billy’s actions if either individual
action is sufficient to bring about the outcome.
The difference between these two scenarios comes down
to a difference in their causal structures. In the first case,
the causal structure is conjunctive, as the outcome requires
the actions of both agents. In the second case, where we do
not predict causal supersession, the causal structure is
disjunctive, that is, the outcome can be generated by either
agent (or both).
More abstractly, if the varied agent’s actions are morally
wrong, the possibility that the varied agent does not act
becomes more relevant. However, if in that possibility the
fixed agent can still bring about the outcome on her own,
then her sufficiency is unaffected, and according to the
counterfactual account, she should not be superseded.
We tested this prediction directly in Experiment 2 by
manipulating the event structure such that the scenario was
either disjunctive or conjunctive. We predicted that there

Experiment 2

764

supersession effect in the conjunctive condition, with lower
agreement ratings for the fixed agent when the varied
agent’s actions were morally wrong (M = 2.46, SD = 1.87)
than when they were not (M = 4.11, SD = 1.80), t(112) =
4.79, p < .001. However, in the disjunctive condition, there
was no such supersession effect. Agreement ratings did not
differ when the varied agent’s actions were immoral (M =
4.53, SD = 1.76) or neutral (M = 4.62, SD = 1.54), t(118) =
.32, p = .7.
These results support the predictions of our
counterfactual account of causal supersession: Causal
supersession occurs only when the actions of one agent
affect the sufficiency of the other agent’s action.

*

Figure 2: Mean agreement ratings as a function of causal
structure and valence of the superseding actor’s action.
* = p < .05 Error bars indicate bootstrapped 95% CI.

Experiment 3
In Experiment 3, we aim to replicate the influence of
causal structure on supersession and test another prediction
of the counterfactual account. As discussed in the
introduction, moral valence is just one example of a
violation of norms. Any violation of norms, even nonmoral ones, by the varied agent should make the specific
possibility that those actions do not occur more relevant.
Thus, according to the counterfactual account, we should
also see causal supersession even when an event is seen as
violating a purely statistical norm.

would be a causal supersession effect in the conjunctive
scenario but not in the disjunctive scenario.

Methods
Participants 240 participants were recruited via Amazon
Mechanical Turk and paid $0.20 each for completing the
two-question survey.
Materials and procedure We used the vignettes described
above with Suzy as the fixed and Billy as the varied actor.
These vignettes were manipulated along two dimensions.
First, as in previous experiments, we manipulated the moral
valence of the varied agent’s actions, such that they were
either neutral or wrong. Second, we manipulated the causal
structure such that both the fixed and varied agent’s actions
were required to bring about the outcome (conjunctive), or
either agent alone could bring about the outcome
(disjunctive). In all conditions, participants were asked how
much they agreed with the statement “Suzy caused the
motion detector to go off”, using the same 1-7 scale as in
previous experiments. Following this, they were asked to
complete a comprehension check: “Who was supposed to
show up at 9am?” They could choose “Billy”, “Suzy”, or
“Both of them.”

Methods
Participants 120 participants were recruited via Amazon
Mechanical Turk and paid $0.20 each for completing the
two-question survey.
Materials and procedure Experiment 3 followed the
structure of Experiment 2 very closely, but with different
content. The relevant outcome concerned a person named
Alex winning a game that required a coin flip and a die roll
of certain values. The fixed and varied factors were not
agents’ actions, but events that had different probabilities.
The fixed event was a coin-flip, while the varied event was
rolling two six-sided dice. The coin-flip was always a 50/50
chance, and therefore either result could be seen as
normative, and the coin always came up heads. We
manipulated the likelihood of the varied event by changing
the minimum value of the dice roll required for Alex to win
the game – higher than 2 (very likely) or higher than 11
(very unlikely). We also manipulated the event structure,
such that both the coin flip and the die roll were necessary
for Alex to win (conjunctive), or either one alone was
sufficient (disjunctive). Participants were then asked how
much they agreed with the statement, “Alex won because
of the coin flip”, on a 1-7 scale. They were additionally
asked two comprehension check questions: “What did Alex
need to roll higher than in order to win?” and “Which was
more likely, that he would get heads on the coin flip or roll
high enough on the dice roll?”

Results and discussion
We excluded nine participants who failed the
comprehension check, leaving 231 for analysis. Fig. 2
shows participants’ mean agreement ratings as a function of
the moral valence of the varied agent and the causal
structure of the situation.
A 2 (moral valence) x 2 (causal structure) ANOVA
revealed main effects of moral valence F(1, 230) = 14.67, p
< .001, ηp2 = .06, and causal structure, F(1, 230) = 31.768,
p < .001, ηp2 = .12, as well as a significant interaction
between the two, F(1, 230) = 11.58, p = .001, ηp2 = .05.
Further analyses looked at the conjunctive and disjunctive
structures separately. As predicted, there was a significant

765

consider counterfactual possibilities in which those
violations do not occur, and whether the sufficiency of
other causal relationships hold in those possibilities can
affect causal judgments for the actual world.
On the theory proposed here, the phenomenon of causal
supersession should not be regarded as specific to norm
violations. Anything that leads people to focus on particular
counterfactual possibilities can, in principle, bring about the
supersession effect. Indeed, one could use the supersession
effect to test when particular counterfactuals are being
considered. Causal supersession is a phenomenon of causal
reasoning more generally, and a rich topic for further
inquiry.

*

Figure 3: Mean agreement ratings as a function of the causal
structure and the probability of the superseding event.
* = p < .05 Error bars indicate bootstrapped 95% CI.

Acknowledgments
TG was supported by the Center for Minds, Brains and
Machines (CBMM), funded by NSF STC award CCF1231216. DL supported by ESRC grant RES-062330004.
The authors would like to thank Scott Shapiro for his
contributions to the early stages of the project.

Results and discussion
13 participants were excluded for having failed to correctly
answer the comprehension questions, leaving 107 for
analysis. Results for the remaining participants are
displayed in Fig. 3. We conducted a 2 (likelihood) x 2
(causal structure) ANOVA. There was a main effect of
likelihood, F(1, 106) = 11.29, p = .001, ηp2 = .096, no main
effect of causal structure, F(1, 106) = 1.10, p = .30, but
critically there was once again an interaction between the
two, F(1, 106) = 15.79, p < .001, ηp2 = .13. As in
Experiment 3, further analyses revealed that there was a
supersession effect only in the conjunctive scenario. In the
conjunctive condition, the coin flip was seen as less causal
when the dice roll was unlikely (M = 2.88, SD = 1.31) than
when it was likely (M = 5.19, SD = 1.40), t(56) = 6.42, p <
.001. However, in the disjunctive condition, the coin flip
was equally causal when the die roll was unlikely (M =
4.46, SD = 1.79) and likely (M = 4.27, SD = 2.01), t(50) =
-.36, p = .7.

References
Alicke, M. D. (1992). Culpable causation. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 63, 368-378.
Alicke, M. D. (2000). Culpable control and the psychology of
blame. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 556-74.
Alicke, M. D., Rose, D., & Bloom, D. (2011). Causation, norm
violation, and culpable control. Journal of Philosophy, 108,
670-696.
Byrne, R. M. (2005). The rational imagination: How people
create alternatives to reality. The MIT Press.
Halpern, J., & Hitchcock, C. (in press). Graded causation and
defaults. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science.
Hart, H. L. A., & Honoré, T. (1985). Causation in the law.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hitchcock, C., & Knobe, J. (2009). Cause and norm. Journal of
Philosophy, 11, 587-612.
Kahneman, D. and D. Miller (1986), Norm theory: Comparing
reality to its alternatives, Psychological Review 80: 136-153.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1982). The simulation heuristic. In
D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Lagnado, D. A., Gerstenberg, T., & Zultan, R. (2013). Causal
responsibility and counterfactuals. Cognitive Science, 37(6),
1036-73.
Lombrozo, T. (2010). Causal-explanatory pluralism: How
intentions, functions, and mechanisms influence causal
ascriptions. Cognitive Psychology, 61, 303-32.
McCloy, R., & Byrne, R. M. (2000). Counterfactual thinking
about controllable events. Memory & Cognition, 28, 10711078.
N’gbala, A., & Branscombe, N. R. (1995). Mental simulation and
causal attribution: When simulating an event does not affect
fault assignment. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
31, 139-162.
Turri, J., & Blouw, P. (in press). Excuse validation: A study in
rule-breaking. Philosophical Studies.
Woodward, J. (2006). Sensitive and insensitive causation. The
Philosophical Review, 115, 1-50.

General Discussion
In three experiments, we demonstrated the novel
phenomenon of causal supersession. Experiment 1 showed
that supersession occurs regardless of the valence of the
outcome, and that abnormal actions can be superseded.
Experiment 2 provided evidence for a counterfactual
account by manipulating causal structure, and demonstrated
that causal supersession does not occur when the event is
disjunctive. Experiment 3 replicated these results and
further demonstrated that any violation of normality, even
non-moral violations, can lead to a causal supersession
effect.
Taken together, these studies provide strong evidence for
the claim that the normality of one cause’s action can
influence the perceived causality of another cause. They
also suggest that this phenomenon is best understood in
terms of the impact of normality on the availability of
different counterfactuals. Norm violations lead people to

766

