UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Causation, Force, and the Sense of Touch

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0pp4g5zn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Wolff, Phillip
Ritter, Samuel
Holmes, Kevin

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Causation, Force, and the Sense of Touch
Phillip Wolff (pwolff@emory.edu)
Department of Psychology, 36 Eagle Row
Atlanta, GA 30322 USA

Samuel Ritter (swritter@Princeton.edu)
Department of Psychology, Green Hall
Princeton, NJ 08540 USA

Kevin J. Holmes (kjholmes@berkeley.edu)
Department of Linguistics, 1203 Dwinelle Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

relevant today because they continue to be used in defense of
probabilistic accounts of causation (e.g., Cheng, 1997; Cheng
& Novick, 1991, 1992).
In this paper, we report a set of findings that addresses
Hume’s main criticism against force accounts of causation:
specifically, that forces cannot be linked to internal or
external sensory impressions. The criticism certainly holds in
the case of the visual modality. However, once we consider
the potential contributions of other senses, in particular touch,
it becomes clear that people’s sensory experience is not as
deficient as Hume (and many modern theorists) have
claimed. According to what we will call the causal force
hypothesis, people’s mental representation of causation is
based on the feeling of force as understood through the sense
of touch (see Fales, 1990; White, 2012).

Abstract
It is widely acknowledged that causation entails more than
spatial-temporal contiguity or correlation, but efforts to specify
that extra component of experience have been elusive. In this
paper, we argue that the representation of causal relations is
based on the feeling of force as understood through the sense
of touch. Grounding causation in people’s sense of touch
allows us to address long-standing challenges that have been
raised against force-based approaches to causation. In support
of our proposal, we report a series of experiments showing that
the perception of causation is associated with the notion of
force, as indicated by changes in people’s sensitivity to a
physical force acting against their hand. We also show that
when people associate correlations with force, they view those
correlations as causal. Implications for understanding the
origins of causal knowledge are discussed.
Keywords: Causation; Causal perception; Force Perception;
Haptics; Causal Induction; Abstract Concepts

Perception of forces

Introduction
Several recent theories of causation have proposed that the
mental representation of causation is based on the notion of
force (Copley & Harley, 2014; Fales, 1990; Gärdenfors,
2000; Mumford & Anjum, 2011; Hubbard & Ruppel, 2014;
White, 2012; Warglien, Gärdenfors, Westera, 2012; Wolff,
2007; Wolff, et al. 2010). These theories have provided
explanations of how causal relations might be recognized
from a single occurrence of an event (Ahn & Kalish, 2000;
Bigelow, Ellis, & Pargetter, 1988; Wolff, 2007) as well as
how different kinds of causal relationships might be related
to one another (Talmy, 1988; see also Wolff, 2007; Wolff, et
al., 2010). Despite these successes, there has been strong
criticism of force-based accounts of causation (Cheng, 1997;
Cheng & Novick, 1992; Schulz, Kushnir, & Gopnik, 2007;
Woodward, 2007; Sloman, Barbey, & Hotalling, 2009).
Arguably the most fundamental of these criticisms was
initially made by Hume (1748/1975). He pointed out that the
notion of force could not be linked to any internal or external
sensory impression and that, therefore, forces could not be
the basis for our mental representation of causation. He noted
that after many repetitions of conjunctions of objects or
events, people could develop an expectation that gives rise to
a sense of power or force, but that this sense only emerged
from statistical regularities, which were the only legitimate
bases for inducing causation. Hume’s arguments remain

Several lines of research have established that people are
able to represent forces. These studies have shown that
people are skilled at perceiving forces from the environment
when those forces impinge directly on the skin. For example,
Wheat, Salo, and Goodwin (2004) found a nearly linear
relationship between participants’ estimates of a force acting
on their fingers and the actual magnitude of the force.
Panarese and Edin (2011) found that people are quite good at
discriminating the direction of forces applied to the index
finger. Of particular relevance to the induction of causation,
several neuroimaging studies have reported evidence for the
encoding of forces even in the absence of physical contact.
For example, Keysers et al. (2004) observed activity in the
somatosensory cortex not only when people were touched
directly on their legs, but also when they observed other
people being touched on their legs. Even more impressively,
activity in the somatosensory cortex was observed when
participants observed one inanimate object touch another
inanimate object. Keysers et al.’s (2004) findings have been
replicated and extended in several other studies (see
Blakemore, Bristow, et al., 2005; Ebisch, et al., 2008).
Indeed, the representation of forces through the visual
modality is revealed in common everyday tasks. Many of us,
for example, have had the experience of reaching for a
suitcase or box and over-lifting it because we thought it was
full when, in fact, it was empty. Such events presumably

1784

occur because we estimate the weight of the suitcase, a type
of force, before we lift it, and when we estimate wrongly, we
generate greater-than-necessary forces. Clearly, the
somatosensory system plays a role in the representation of
forces in the physical world. It may also play a role in the
representation of more abstract kinds of forces. For example,
Lee and Schnall (2014) found that people with a low personal
sense of power perceived loaded boxes as heavier than people
with a high personal sense of power. These findings suggest
that the somatosensory system may factor into the
representation of abstract forces.

force condition but not in the auditory and visual control
conditions, the overall pattern of results would suggest that
the effect of seeing a causal event is specific to the
somatosensory modality. In sum, the main prediction was
that people would be faster to detect a force after seeing a
causal than a noncausal event, but that no such difference
would be found in the control conditions.

Testing the link between causation and force
According to the causal force
hypothesis, people represent the
notion of causation in terms of
forces. The hypothesis implies
that “seeing” forces might prime
feeling forces; specifically, if
people induce causation based
on forces, seeing causal events
may make them more sensitive
Figure
1.
Haptic
to forces applied against their
controller device.
body. This prediction was tested
using a haptic controller device
(see Fig. 1). A haptic controller is essentially a small robotic
arm that can be pushed around like a mouse, but unlike a
mouse, it can also push back. In the following experiments,
we programmed the haptic controller to generate a small
force against people’s hands after they watched causal and
noncausal events, and measured how long it took for them to
feel the force.

Experiment 1
This experiment investigated whether seeing physical
causation would prime feeling a force. Participants viewed
either causal or non-causal events. In the causal event, one
marble hit another and made it roll. In the non-causal event,
one marble rolled across a surface without hitting another
marble. If causation is based on force, then people should be
faster to detect a force after watching the causal than the noncausal event. On its own, such a result would offer only
modest support for the causal force hypothesis because the
effect could be due to rather uninteresting reasons. In
particular, the effect could arise if the causal events were
better predictors of the onset of the force than the non-causal
events. Alternatively, the causal events could be more
interesting than the non-causal events, hence increasing
people’s arousal level and ultimately speeding their response
time. We included two additional conditions to control for
such possibilities. Specifically, two other groups of
participants were asked to detect an auditory or visual signal
rather than a force. These control conditions are important
because if priming is observed in the force condition and it is
due to uninteresting reasons such as predictability or arousal
level, then similar effects should be observed in the visual
and auditory conditions. In contrast, if there is an effect in the

Figure 2. Frames from causal (left) and non-causal (right)
animations used in Experiments 1.

Method
Participants Ninety-three Emory University undergraduates
participated for course credit or payment. Three participants
were excluded for high error rates (> 25%) as determined by
the criteria described below. Ultimately, the force, auditory,
and visual conditions included 30 participants each.
Equipment and Materials The animations used in this
experiment were rendered in the 3D animation package
Autodesk 3D Studio Max (see Figure 2). The movements of
the marbles were calculated using the physics simulator
MasFX so as to resemble actual collisions (sample
animations
can
be
found
at
http://psychology.emory.edu/cognition/wolff/animations.html).
The
causal and non-causal animations were exactly the same in
duration and in the path traveled by the marbles. The haptic
controller device was made by Novint Technologies. The
controller had a small button on its hand grip that allowed
people to indicate when they felt a force. The controller was
programmed using widely available C++ libraries,
specifically using the H3D API.
Procedure In all three conditions, participants held the haptic
controller while they watched each animation played 4 times.
The first three times, the animations played at different
speeds, randomly chosen, such that they lasted 540, 1440,
2340, or 3240 ms. The animation was played several times in
order to “build up” the sense of force. The fourth time the
animation played, it lasted an intermediate amount of time,
1800 ms. At the end of the animation, the last frame was
paused, and the haptic controller moved 100, 200, 300, 400,
or 500 ms after the onset of the last frame of the animation.
The exact moment when the controller moved was varied to
discourage pressing the button on the basis of prediction
rather than actual movement. Participants in the force
condition were instructed to press the button on the controller
as soon as they felt it move, whereas participants in the
auditory and visual conditions were instructed to press the
button as soon as they heard or saw the auditory or visual

1785

Results and discussion
In this and the following experiments, reaction times less than
100 ms or greater than 2.5 standard deviations from an
individual participant’s mean were excluded. If the total
number of excluded RTs exceeded 25% of the trials, the
participant’s data was not included in the analyses. On the
basis of this criterion, the data from 3 participants were
excluded from further analysis.
The results support the hypothesis that seeing a causal event
affects people’s sensitivity to a physical force. A mixed
factors ANOVA indicated a significant interaction between
event type (causal, non-causal) and signal type (force, sound,
visual), thus showing that the time to detect a force after
watching a causal versus a non-causal animation differed
across the three conditions, F(2,87) = 4.51, p = .014, η2 =
.094. Most importantly, as shown in Figure 3 and supported
by planned comparisons, people were faster to report feeling
a force after watching a causal (M = 334 ms; SE = 20) than
non-causal animation (M = 349 ms; SE = 23), t(29) = -2.964,
p = .006, d = .54. Further planned comparisons provided no
evidence that seeing causal versus noncausal animations had
an impact on the time to detect an auditory, t(29) = -0.68, p =
.946, or visual stimulus, t(29) = -.592, p = .558, suggesting
that the effect found in the force condition cannot be
explained as due to greater predictability of the signal or
greater arousal in the causal than the non-causal condition.
Rather, the overall pattern of results suggests that when
people saw a collision event, they inferred a force, which
affected their speed to respond to an actual physical force
acting against their hand. Of less central interest, the ANOVA
also indicated significant main effects of event type (causal,
non-causal), F(1,87) = 6.51, p = .012, η2 = .07, and signal
type (force, sound, visual), F(2,87) = 7.04, p = .001, η2 = .139.

375

RT (+SEM) (ms)

signal. Onset of the force, sound, or visual signal was varied
so that participants could not predict exactly when to press
the button. The force generated by the controller was very
small, specifically an impulse of 1.5 Newtons for 20 ms,
which, phenomenologically, produced a very faint
impression on the hand, but clearly above the sensory
threshold for touch. It is likely that the impulse generated by
the haptic controller lasted longer than 20 ms due to the
effects of inertia on the haptic controller’s arms. The auditory
signal was an electronic “ding” that played for 20 ms.
Because the signal was not followed by an auditory mask, the
impression created by the sound lasted longer than 20 ms.
The visual signal was a small black dot, 5 mm in diameter. It
appeared 5 mm immediately above the marble that came to a
stop at the end of the animation. The dot remained on the
screen for 20 ms. As with the auditory signal, no mask
followed the dot, so the impact of the visual signal lasted
longer than 20 ms. There were 20 practice trials, half causal
and half non-causal, and 40 experimental trials, half causal
and half non-causal.

Causal
Non-causal
325

275

225

Force

Sound

Visual

Stimulus Type

Figure 3. Results from Experiment 1.

Experiments 2 - 4
The main goal in Experiments 2-4 was to determine whether
the effects observed in Experiment 1 would extend beyond
collision events. The methods and predictions in these
experiments were exactly the same as in Experiment 1, but
the kinds of causal events people saw were different. In
Experiment 2, the causal animation showed a marble rolling
into a glass and breaking it, whereas the noncausal animation
simply showed a marble rolling across the table. The goal of
this experiment was to examine whether forces are felt for
changes of state as well as for changes in location. In
Experiment 3, the causal animation involved flipping a
switch and a light turning on, while the noncausal animation
involved simply flipping a switch. Turning on a light is
another type of change-of-state event but one in which the
underlying mechanism is hidden. Of interest in this
experiment was whether force effects might be observed even
in the absence of direct physical contact. In Experiment 4,
the animations depicted social causation. The causal
animation showed a person directing another to change
direction, while the noncausal animation simply showed a
person running. Here the question concerned whether seeing
social causation would prime a feeling of force.

Method
Participants Emory University undergraduates participated
for course credit or payment. Ninety-three participated in
Experiment 2, 95 in Experiment 3, and 97 in Experiment 4.
Materials Two frames from the causal animations used in
Experiments 2-4 are shown in Figure 4. As in Experiment 1,
the animations were run at different speeds and lasted 540,
1440, 2340, or 3240 ms.

Results and discussion
Three, five, and seven participants were excluded in
Experiments 2 -4 due to missed trials in excess of 25%.
The results from Experiments 2-4 provide further support
for the hypothesis that people conceptualize causation in
terms of forces. Mixed ANOVAs indicated a significant
interaction between event type (causal, non-causal) and

1786

Table 1
Difference in RT to indicate a force, sound or visual signal
after watching a causal versus a non-causal animation in
Experiments 1 – 4 in milliseconds with associated pooled SE’s
Stimulus type
Force
Sound
Visual
Exper. 1: Realistic coll.
Exper. 2: Shattering
Exper. 3: Turning on light
Exper. 4: Social directing

-14.81 (5.0)
-9.67 (3.43)
-13.10 (4.62)
-12.50 (5.39)

0.213 (3.10)
-1.56 (2.87)
-.007 (3.79)
1.30 (3.92)

-1.69 (2.87)
1.46 (2.92)
-1.70 (3.11)
-1.68 (2.6)

watching a change-of-state primed people’s sense of force.
The results from Experiment 3 imply that the connection
between force and causation is present even in situations in
which the mechanism is invisible. The results from
Experiment 4 suggest that people conceptualize social
influence in terms of forces, which might help explain the
existence of phrases such as peer pressure and social force.
Of secondary interest, the main effect of event type was
significant in Experiment 3, F(1,87) = 4.86, p = .03, η2 = .053,
and Experiment 4, F(1,87) = 10.52, p < .001, η2 = .195, but
beyond that, no other main effects in Experiments 2-4 were
significant.

Experiment 5

Figure 4. Two frames from the causal animations used in
Experiments 2, 3, and 4.

signal type (force, sound, visual) in Experiment 2, F(2,87) =
3.48, p = .035, η2 = .074, Experiment 3, F(2,87) = 3.38, p =
.039, η2 = .072, and Experiment 4, F(2,87) = 3.093, p = .05,
η2 = .066. These interactions imply that the difference in
speed to detect a signal after watching causal versus noncausal events differed across the different types of signals.
Specifically, planned comparisons indicated that people were
faster to report feeling a force after watching a causal than a
non-causal animation in Experiment 2, t(29) = -2.82, p =
.009, d = .51, Experiment 3, t(29) = -2.85, p = .008, d = .52,
and Experiment 4, t(29) = -2.32, p = .028, d = .42, just as
predicted by the causal force hypothesis. Further, additional
planned comparisons provided no evidence for differences in
people’s responses to auditory or visual signals in
Experiment 2, t(29) = -.545, p = .59, t(29) = .499, p = .621,
Experiment 3, t(29) = -.002, p = .999, t(29) = -.545, p = .59,
or Experiment 4, t(29) = 0.33, p = .742, t(29) = -.647, p =
.523, The lack of difference when responding to auditory and
visual signals implies that the differences found in response
to forces were not due to uninteresting factors such as greater
predictability or arousal. Further, the lack of difference in the
auditory and visual conditions, in contrast to the difference
observed in the force condition, suggests that causal events
are uniquely associated with the sense of touch.
The full pattern of RT differences is shown in Table 1,
which also includes the results from Experiment 1. As can be
seen, the pattern was the same across all experiments. The
results from Experiments 2-4 suggest that the impression of
force is not limited to changes of location. In Experiment 2,

In all of the scenarios examined so far, the causation was
concrete enough that it could be represented in an animation.
In many cases of causation, however, the nature of causation
is more abstract, as when we say Tax cuts cause economic
growth or Competition prevents inflation. The results from
Experiment 3 and 4, in particular, support the notion that
when people see possible cases of causation, they can sense
a force, even when the mechanism is unclear or hidden. If
people can infer forces in the absence of clear mechanisms,
then they may be willing to infer forces merely on the basis
of correlational information. Indeed, what may lead people to
infer causation from correlation is the impression that forces
may be behind the correlation. This possibility was examined
in Experiment 5.

Method
Participants Seventy-two Emory University undergraduates
participated for course credit or payment.
Materials The materials were animations that looked like the
display in Figure 5. The left and right circles in the display
will be referred to as the “cause” (C) and “effect” (E),
respectively. In 50% of the trials, the cause turned solid; 1.5
seconds later, the effect turned solid. In 20% of the trials, the
cause did not turn solid, but the effect did. Finally, in the
remaining 30% of trials, neither circle turned solid. Based on
these frequencies, the probability of the effect given the
cause, P(E|C), equaled 1, and the probability of the effect
given the absence of the cause, P(E|¬C), equaled .4. These
probabilities entail that the probability of the effect given the
cause is greater than the probability of the effect in the

1787

Figure 5. In cause trials (left), both the “cause” and “effect”
circles changed color. In non-cause trials, only the “effect” circle
(middle) or neither circle (right) changed color.

absence of the cause, that is, P(E|C) > P(E|¬C). Thus, the
effect correlated positively with the cause.
Procedure As in the previous experiments, participants saw
each trial/animation replayed four times in a row. At the end
of the fourth animation, participants pressed a button when
they felt the haptic controller move. At the end of all of the
trials, participants were asked several questions. First, they
were asked whether it seemed that the circle on the left
sometimes caused the circle on the right to change color.
They were also asked to estimate the percentage of time the
circle on the right changed when the circle on the left
changed, thus providing an estimate of P(E|C), and to
estimate the percentage of time the circle on the right changed
when the circle on the left did NOT change, providing an
estimate of P(E|¬C). Higher estimates for P(E|C) than for
P(E|¬C) would imply that participants noticed the correlation
between the cause and effect.
Of central importance, half of the participants were given
information about the mechanism linking the cause and
effect. Specifically, they were told, “The light on the left is
linked to the one on the right through a long sequence of
circuits.” The remaining participants were simply told that
they would see a series of animations. It was expected that
participants given the mechanism information would tend to
infer a causal relationship between the circles, while the
remaining participants would not. Of central interest was
whether inferring a causal relationship between the circles
would affect people’s sensitivity to forces.

Results and Discussion
The data from 9 participants were excluded due to large
numbers of missed trials (> 25%).
The results indicate that the correlations sometimes gave
rise to impressions of force. As predicted, participants’
estimates of the probability of the effect given the cause,
P(E|C), was significantly greater than their estimates of the
probability of the effect in the absence of the cause, P(E|¬C),
in both the mechanism, t(35) = 3.96, p < .001, and nomechanism conditions, t(35) = 5.04, p < .001, and there was
no evidence that the difference in probability estimates in the
mechanism condition (MP(E|C) = 72.5.13; MP(E|¬C) = 45.0; D =
27.5) differed from the difference in probability estimates in
the no-mechanism condition (MP(E|C) = 65.14; MP(E|¬C) =
39.69; D = 25.44), F(1,70) = .057, p = .811. Thus, the results
showed that participants noticed the correlation in both the
mechanism and non-mechanism conditions and to the same
degree.

A second major prediction was also borne out: participants
endorsed the statement that the first circle seemed to cause
the second circle to change more often in the mechanism
condition (M = 81%) than in the no-mechanism condition (M
= 47%), t(66) = 3.10, p = .003. The question, then, is what
makes a correlation seem causal? As it turns out, participants
indicated feeling a force faster after seeing causal trails (i.e.,
when both circles changed color) than non-causation trials
(i.e., when only one or none changed color) in both the
mechanism, t(35) = -6.39, p < .001 (Ms = 348.6 vs. 388) and
no-mechanism condition, t(35) = -3.1, p < .001 (Ms = 373.5
vs. 388), but the size of the priming interacted with condition.
Specifically, the difference in speed was larger in the
mechanism condition than in the no-mechanism condition,
F(1,70) = 4.87, p = .031, η2 = .065, indicating that there was
a greater sensitivity to forces in the condition in which causal
inferences were more common.
Interestingly, dividing the participants in the no-mechanism
condition according to whether they viewed the two circles
as causally connected revealed that sensitivity to force was
much greater in those who reported feeling there was a causal
connection (Ms = 356 vs. 383, D = -26.67 ms), t(16)= 3.78, p
< .01, than in those who did not feel there was a causal
connection (Ms = 388.62 vs. 392.1; D = -3.5 ms), t(18)=.655,
p = .521. This implies that the significant effect of force in
the no-mechanism condition was driven by participants who
inferred causation between the circles. The results paint a
clear picture: most of the participants detected a correlation,
but only some of those participants interpreted the correlation
as causal. Those who interpreted the correlation as causal also
experienced a sense of force.

General Discussion
The results support the causal force hypothesis—the
proposal that the mental representation of causation is
associated with the notion of force. In Experiments 1-2, the
causal events involved collisions in which one object exerted
forces on another. The key finding from these experiments
was that seeing causation primed feeling a force. In
Experiment 3, people felt forces in response to watching
someone turn on a light, suggesting that forces are felt even
when the chain of physical interactions is largely hidden. In
Experiment 4, seeing a person direct another person triggered
a sense of force, indicating that the causal force hypothesis
extends beyond the physical realm to social interactions. The
results from Experiment 5 provided further evidence for the
connection between causation and forces in showing that
feelings of force may play a key role in people’s
interpretations of correlations: in the absence of force, a
correlation was just a correlation.
A connection between causation and forces has been
observed in at least two other recent studies. In both White
(2011) and Hubbard and Ruppel (2013), participants
provided ratings of causation and force for a wide range of
billiard-ball-type events. The overall finding from these
studies was that causation and force ratings mostly followed

1788

one another. One situation in which they diverged was when
an object A hit an object B and B did not move (Hubbard &
Ruppel, 2013). People were willing to give high ratings of
force, but were unwilling to say that A caused B to move.
This result demonstrates that forces are not sufficient for
causation, but it might still be the case that forces are
necessary for causation.
The results from Experiment 4 fit nicely with those of Lee
and Schnall (2014), who found a link between social power
and weight perception. In their experiments, people with
lower levels of social power judged the weight of boxes as
heavier than those who had higher levels of social power.
Together with our results, these findings suggest that people
conceptualize social forces in a manner analogous to the way
they conceptualize physical forces.
The two sets of findings also point to the potential role of
force in the representation of various other kinds of abstract
concepts. For example, the notion of justice seems to be
based on the idea of restoring or maintaining balance, a
concept that might be tied to the notion of force. Thus, in
addition to playing a key role in the concept of causation, the
results suggest how the sense of touch may play a
foundational role in the representation of other key concepts
in higher-order cognition, and how such concepts might
ultimately be grounded in perceptual experience.

Acknowledgments
We thank Tyler Brown, Ted Guio, and Lee Kugelmann for
their assistance with stimulus preparation and data collection.

References
Ahn, W., & Kalish, C. W. (2000). The role of mechanism
beliefs in causal reasoning. In F. C. Keil & R.Wilson
(Eds.), Explanation and cognition (pp. 199–225).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bigelow, J., Ellis, B., & Pargetter, R. (1988). Forces.
Philosophy of Science, 55, 614–630.
Blakemore, S. J., Bristow, D., Bird, G., Frith, C., & Ward, J.
(2005). Somatosensory activations during the observation
of touch and a case of vision-touch synaesthesia. Brain,
128, 1571–1583.
Cheng, P. W., & Novick, L. R. (1992). Covariation in natural
causal induction. Psychological Review, 99, 365–382.
Cheng, P. W. (1997). From covariation to causation: A causal
power theory. Psychological Review, 104, 367–405.
Copley, B. & Harley, H. (2014). Force dynamics for events:
Reifying causation in event structure. In. B. Copley, F.
Martin, & N. Duffield (Eds.), Forces in Grammatical
Structures. Forces in grammatical structures: Causation
between linguistics and philosophy.
Ebisch, S. J.H., Perrucci, M. G., Ferretti, A., Del Gratta, C.,
Romani, G. L., & Gallese, V. (2008). The sense of touch:
embodied simulation in a visuotactile mirroring
mechanism for observed animate or inanimate touch.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20, 1611–1623.

Fales, E. (1990). Causation and universals. London: Routledge.

Gardenfors, P. (2000). Conceptual Spaces: The Geometry of
Thought, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hubbard, T. L. & Ruppel, S. E. (2014). Ratings of causality
and force in launching and shattering. Visual Cognition,
21, 987 – 1009.
Hume, D. (1748/1975). Enquiry concerning human
understanding. In L. A. Selby- Bigge (Ed.), Enquiries
concerning human understanding and concerning the
principles of morals, 3rd ed., revised by P. H. Nidditch.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Keysers, C., Wicker, B., Gazzola, V., Anton, J., Fogassi, L., &
Gallese, V. (2004). A touching sight: SII/PV activation
during the observation and experience of touch.
Neuron, 42, 335–346.
Lee, E. H., & Schnall, S. (2014). The influence of social
power on weight perception. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General. In press.
Mumford, S., & Anjum, R. (2011). Getting causes from
powers. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Panarese, A., & Edin, B. B. (2011). Human ability to
discriminate direction of three-dimensional force
stimuli applied to the finger pad. J. of Neurophys., 105,
541–547.
Schulz, L., Kushnir, T., & Gopnik, A. (2007). Learning from
doing: intervention and causal inference. In A. Gopnick,
& L. Schulz (Eds.), Causal learning: Psychology,
philosophy, and computation (pp. 67–85). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Sloman, S.A., Barbey, A.K. and Hotaling, J. 2009: A
causalmodel theory of themeaning of cause, enable, and
prevent. Cognitive Science, 33, 21–50.
Talmy, L. (1988). Force dynamics in language and cognition.
Cognitive Science, 12, 49–100.
Warglien, M., Gardenfors, P. & Westera, M. (2012). Event
structure, conceptual spaces and the semantics of
verbs’, Theoretical linguistics, 38, 159-193.
Wheat, H. E., Salo, L. M., & Goodwin, A. W. (2004). Human
ability to scale and discriminate forces typical of those
occurring during grasp and manipulation. The Journal
of Neuroscience, 24, 3394–3401.
White, P. A. (2011). Visual impressions of force exerted by
one object on another when objects do not come into
contact. Visual Cognition, 19, 340 – 366.
White, P. A. (2012). The experience of force: the role of
haptic experience of forces in visual perception of object
motion and interactions, mental simulation, and motionrelated judgments. Psychological Bulletin, 138, 589–615.
Woodward, James (2007). Interventionist theories of
causation in psychological perspective. In A. Gopnik &
L. Schulz (Eds.), Causal learning: Psychology, Philosophy,
and Computation. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 17 - 36.
Wolff, P. (2007). Representing causation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 136, 82–111.
Wolff, P., Barbey, A. K., & Hausknecht, M. (2010). For want
of a nail: how absences cause events. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 139, 191–221.

1789

