UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Choice Deferral in Models of Preference Accumulation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5ns2n3d2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Author
Bhatia, Sudeep

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Choice Deferral in Models of Preference Accumulation
Sudeep Bhatia (s.bhatia@warwick.ac.uk)
Behavioral Science Group, Warwick Business School, University of Warwick
Coventry, United Kingdom

attribute values are sampled sequentially and stochastically
over the time course of the decision process. The values of
these attributes are accumulated into preferences, and
decisions are made when preferences cross a fixed
threshold. Recently Jessup, Veinott, Todd and Busemeyer
(2009) have assumed that choice is deferred within a DFT
model, if the decision is not made by a certain time. They
have shown that this time constraint based extension to DFT
can explain the observed increase in deferral with size of the
choice set1.
While Jessup et al. provide a number of valuable
insights regarding the psychological basis of choice deferral,
they do not attempt to explain its relationship with option
conflict and option desirability, or the effect of choice
deferral on the choice probability of extreme options and on
the incidence of the attraction and compromise effects.
In this paper we imbed Jessup et al.’s (2009) time
constraint mechanism, in the associative accumulation
model (AAM) (Bhatia, 2013). AAM is a sequential
sampling and accumulation theory of preference, which
assumes that the probability of sampling a particular
attribute depends on the composition of the choice set.
AAM is able to explain conflict and alignability effects,
effects relating to extreme options, and predict the
emergence of the attraction and compromise effects. For this
reason, AAM is a suitable framework with which to study
the many diverse findings regarding deferred choice. Using
the choice options and parameter values assumed in Bhatia
(2013) we show that AAM, when combined with a deferral
based time constraint, provides a comprehensive
explanation for all of the deferral effects described above.

Abstract
This paper models choice deferral using a sequential sampling
and accumulation theory of preferential choice. It assumes
that choice options are accepted or rejected if accumulators
reach an upper or lower threshold, and that choice is deferred
if these thresholds are not crossed by a fixed time. The
proposed model can explain a wide range of findings
regarding the determinants and consequences of choice
deferral, including the relationship of deferral with choice
option conflict, choice option desirability, choice option
extremity, and the attraction and compromise effects.
Keywords: Choice deferral, Decision making, Sequential
sampling, Associative accumulation, Context effects

Introduction
Cognitive models of preferential choice focus largely on
predicting choice probabilities, decision times, and their
dependence on task related factors such as decoy options,
reference points, and anchors (Bhatia, 2013; Busemeyer &
Townsend, 1993; Johnson & Busemeyer, 2005; Roe,
Busemeyer & Townsend, 2001; Krajbich, Armel & Rangel,
2010; Rangel & Hare, 2010; Trueblood, Brown, &
Heathcote, in press; Usher & McClelland, 2004). Largely
absent from this is a comprehensive approach to modeling
choice deferral, that is, the decision not to make any choice
whatsoever (Gourville & Soman, 2005; Dhar, 1997; Dhar &
Simonson, 2003; Iyengar & Lepper, 2000; Tversky &
Shafir, 1992). The failure to decide is a fundamental feature
of everyday decision making and formally studying its
occurrence can provide many important insights regarding
the cognitive underpinnings of the choice process.
The past two decades have seen considerable empirical
work outlining the determinants of choice deferral, and the
consequences of allowing choice to be deferred. This work
has established that the likelihood of choice deferral
increases (paradoxically) with the size of the decision set:
Adding choice options that are in conflict (i.e. are
unalignable) with the options in the existing set, or that are
equally desirable to the options in the existing set, can
reduce the probability of making a choice (Dhar, 1997;
Gourville & Soman, 2005; Tversky & Shafir, 1992).
Additionally, the ability to defer choice has been shown to
increase the choice probability of extreme options,
compared to all-average options, and to increase the
incidence of the attraction effect, but decrease the incidence
of the compromise effect (Dhar & Simonson, 2003).
There has been some theoretical work attempting to
explain deferral using decision field theory (DFT)
(Busemeyer & Townsend, 1993, Roe et al., 2001). DFT is a
dynamic model of preferential choice, which assumes that

Associative Accumulation Model
In multi-attribute choice tasks, decision makers are
asked to choose between two or more options defined on a
number of different attributes. An example of such a task is
a choice between two cars, each of which differs on
attributes such as mileage, cost, fuel efficiency and so on.

1

Jessup et al. also consider a number of other methods to model
choice deferral. Many of these alternate methods are unable to
predict the increase in deferral probability with the size of the
choice set. Additionally Busemeyer, Johnson & Jessup (2006)
present an alternate model of deferral. This model assumes that the
possibility of choice deferral is processed as just another choice
option, and that choice is deferred when this option is chosen.
Busemeyer et al.’s (2006) model can explain deferral’s relationship
with the attraction and compromise effect, but cannot, however,
capture the observed increase in deferral with set size (see Jessup
et al., 2009).

194

parameter ε. If attribute j is sampled at time t, then the
preference for option i can be written as:

The associative accumulation model (Bhatia, 2013) is a
sequential sampling and accumulation theory of decision
making that models behavior in multi-attribute choice tasks.
AAM assumes that attributes are sampled stochastically,
and accumulated over time, into preferences. Decisions are
made when the preference for a choice option crosses an
upper acceptance threshold, or a lower rejection threshold.
Unlike alternate sequential sampling theories of preferential
choice (Roe et al., 2001; Krajbich et al., 2010; Trueblood et
al., in press; Usher & McClelland, 2004), AAM also
assumes that associative relations between the available
options and the attributes at play in the decision, determine
the sampling probabilities of the attributes. For example,
AAM assumes that decision makers are more likely to think
about attributes associated with cars when they are
deliberating between cars, than when they are deliberating
between other options (such as computers or clothes).
While attending to attributes associated with the
available options seems to be efficient, it can lead to certain
types of irrationality. Particularly, adding or removing
options from the available choice set can alter attribute
sampling probabilities and subsequently reverse choice.
This dependence between choice, and the options that are
available in the decision, allows AAM to explain a large
range of findings regarding choice set dependence, such as
the attraction and compromise effects, alignability and
conflict effects, less is more effects, and reference point
effects (see Bhatia, 2013 for more details).
We can represent an available option as a vector of M
attributes, xi = (xi1, xi2,… xiM). AAM assumes that the
associative connection between a choice option, i, and an
attribute, j, is simply equal to the amount of the attribute in
the choice alternative, xij. The probability of sampling an
attribute is given by the relative strength of association of
the attribute with the choice set. For an attribute j, in a
choice set with N available options, this sampling
probability can be written as

Finally, upper and lower thresholds determine both the
option that is chosen, and the time at which the decision is
made. If an option crosses the upper threshold Q then the
option is accepted, and if an option crosses the lower
threshold R then the option is eliminated from the decision.
In choices where deferral is not allowed, the decision
terminates once some option has crossed Q or all but one
option have crossed R.
What happens when the decision maker is allowed to
defer choice? As in Jessup et al. (2009) we assume that
choice is deferred if a time constraint T is crossed without
the decision having been made at an earlier time period.
Hence in choices with the possibility of deferral, some
option is chosen if it crosses Q before T, or if all other
options cross R before T, and choice is deferred if either of
these two events do not happen before T.
According to this framework, the probability of
deferring choice can be changed by altering the speed at
which preferences accumulate upwards (towards Q) or
downwards (towards R) in the decision task, with faster
upward or downward accumulation leading to reduced
deferral. Additionally, allowing for the possibility of choice
deferral can disproportionally alter the choice probabilities
of available options, if the preferences for these options
increase at different rates. The next two sections will show
how the time dynamics of preference accumulation in AAM
relate to these two determinants of deferral. Simulations will
use model parameters specified in Bhatia (2013).
Particularly. we will set d = 0.8, σ = 0.05, a0 = 10, Ui(0) = 0
for all i, Vj(xij) = xij0.5 for all j. Additionally, we will assume
that Q = 10, R = -10 and l = 0.01 (for simplicity, the
simulations in Bhatia (2013) did not involve decision
thresholds or inhibition, but these variables are necessary to
study deferral). Finally, we will set the deferral time
constraint T = 10, to be used when deferral is available in
the choice task. Each simulation will be repeated 10,000
times, and displayed responses will be averaged over these
trials. Choice options used in Bhatia (2013) will be the basis
of these simulations. These will be described in the coming
sections.

Here a0 is a constant that determines the strength of the
associative bias. As a0 increases, the associative bias in
AAM is reduced. At a0 = ∞, each attribute is equally likely
to be sampled, and decisions are choice set independent.
Overall, the above equation implies that an attribute is more
likely to be sampled from if many options score highly on
that attribute.
Once an attribute is sampled, AAM assumes that its
value in every available option is calculated and added to
the preferences for the options. The value of attribute j in
alternative i can be written as Vj(xij), where Vj is a positive
and increasing function if the attribute is desirable.
Preferences are also subject to gradual leakage, captured by
parameter d, lateral inhibition, captured by parameter l, and
a zero mean noise with standard deviation σ, captured by

Determinants of Choice Deferral
Conflict
Choice options are considered to be alignable if they
overlap significantly on most of their attributes. Conflicting
options, in contrast, are those that do not overlap on their
attributes. Tversky and Shafir (1992) have found that
increasing the conflict (i.e. reducing the alignability)
between the options in a choice set increases the probability
of choice deferral. Particularly, with the choice options
represented in Figure 1, Tversky and Shafir found that the

195

probability of deferral in the set {x1, x3}, is lower than in the
set {x1, x4} (see also Figure 1 in Tversky & Shafir, 1992).
AAM equipped with a deferral time constraint can
explain this effect. Recall that AAM assumes that attribute
attention is proportional to the association of the attributes
with the available options. Attributes that are present in
multiple options are also associated with multiple options,
and thus receive a higher attentional weight (see Bhatia,
2013 for a discussion). In choices between two low-conflict
options, as in the set {x1, x3} in Figure 1, the common
attribute, attribute 1, is highly likely to be sampled. This
means that the preference for option x1 --the most desirable
alternative-- increases and crosses a threshold quickly, and
that choice is subsequently unlikely to be deferred.
When a low-conflict option is replaced with an equally
desirable high-conflict option, however, there is dispersion
in the sampling probabilities of the underlying attributes, as
attributes associated with the novel, high-conflict option are
now more likely to be sampled. Thus, in our example, if x3
is replaced with x4, decision makers are more likely to
sample attribute 2. This reduces the rate of accumulation for
all choice options (including the most desirable option, x1)
increasing the probability that thresholds are not crossed by
the deferral time constraint.
Consider, for example, the choice options used in Bhatia
(2013): x1 = (7, 3), x3 = (6.5, 2.5) and x4 = (2.5, 6.5). When
we implement our model with the parameters listed in the
previous section, we find that the sampling probability of
attribute 1 in the set {x1, x3} is 0.60, whereas the sampling
probability of attribute 1 in the set {x1, x4} is 0.50.
Subsequently the expected increase in the preference for x1,
in each time period, in the set {x1, x3}, is 2.28, whereas the
equivalent increase in preference in the set {x1, x4} is 2.18.
As a result of this x1 is less likely to cross the threshold
before the time constraint in the set {x1, x4} compared to the
set {x1, x3}, and choice is deferred 81.9% of the time in the
set {x1, x3} but 91.6% of the time in the set {x1, x4}.

a continuous variable. Nonetheless, the mechanism used to
explain Tversky and Shafir’s (1992) results also explains
Gourville and Soman’s (2005) results. In settings where
available options have multiple common attributes, these
attributes are especially likely to be sampled, increasing the
rate of preferences accumulation for all available options,
and reducing choice deferral. The opposite happens when
the available options have mostly unique attributes.
As a demonstration, let us randomly generate choice
options xi and xi’, and explore the relationship between the
conflict between these options and the deferral probability
from the set {xi, xi’}. We consider a four attribute setting in
which the probability of each option having any given
attribute is 0.5. This probability is independent across
attributes and across alternatives. Additionally, xij = 10
specifies that option xi contains attribute j, and xij = 0
specifies that option xi does not contain attribute j (with
identical values for option xi’). We randomly generate 100
such choice sets, and simulate our model on these sets
10,000 times to generate a deferral probability. Conflict is
specified using the negative cosine similarity of the
available options, which is equal to -[xi·xi’]/[||xi||·||xi’||].
Regressing simulated deferral probability on this metric of
conflict (assuming a linear model, censored at 0 and 1), we
find that the effect on conflict is significantly positive (β =
0.57, p < 0.01), with higher conflict leading to higher
deferral. This validates the insight presented in this section.
Desirability
An alternative cause of choice deferral is explored by
Dhar (1997), who finds that the addition of desirable options
to a choice set consisting of a single option, can lead to an
increased deferral probability, independently of the conflict
between the choice options. When the sets are represented
as in Figure 1, this implies that the probability of deferral in
the set {x1} is lower than in the choice set {x1, x2}.

Figure 1. Choice options commonly used to study choice deferral.

Figure 2. The difference in deferral probability between the set {x1, x2} and
the set {x1}, as a function of lateral inhibition.

Related empirical results have been documented by
Gourville and Soman (2005). Unlike Tversky and Shafir
(1992), however, Gourville and Soman use options defined
on more than two attributes, with each attribute being a
binary variable (attribute present or not present) rather than

This is explained by AAM using lateral inhibition. With
inhibition, strong preferences for one option reduce the
preferences for other options. When there are multiple
desirable options in the choice set, this inhibitory effect is
fairly strong, and the speed of preference accumulation for

196

all options is low. This lead to deferral as choice thresholds
are unlikely to be crossed by the time constraint T.
However, when there is only one available option, inhibition
does not play any role in the decision process. Hence the
speed of accumulation for the available option is high, and a
threshold is more likely to be crossed before T, resulting in
low deferral. Indeed, with the choice options used in Bhatia
(2013), x1 = (7, 3) and x2 = (3, 7), we find that choice is
deferred 85.3% of the time in the set {x1, x2}, but only
75.4% of the time in the set {x1}.
To further explore the relationship of lateral inhibition
with desirability and choice deferral, consider Figure 2.
Figure 2 presents the difference in deferral probability
between the set {x1, x2} and the set {x1}, as a function of
lateral inhibition. We set x1 = (7, 3) and x2 = (3, 7), and
inhibition is varied in increments of 0.001 from 0 to 0.05.
The desirability deferral effect emerges for positive values
of the deferral probability difference. Observe that the
probability of deferral is increasing in lateral inhibition, and
the desirability effect is obtained for all l > 0.005. For l <
0.005, the addition of x2 to the choice set reduces deferral
probability. This happens because two noisy accumulators
are more likely to randomly cross a threshold than one noisy
accumulator, when inhibition is too weak to significantly
reduce their rate of accumulation.

the extreme option is particularly strong. Hence the extreme
option is highly likely to be chosen early on in the decision
process. As time progresses preferences asymptote towards
the total weighted value of their attributes. Due to concave
valuation functions, all-average options have higher total
attribute values, and are subsequently more likely to be
selected later on in the decision process.
Now, allowing for deferral creates a bias in favor of the
options that are highly preferred early on in the choice
process. This happens as these options are likely to cross the
choice thresholds prior to the deferral time constraint.
Choice options that only increase in preference as time
progresses, on the other hand, are unlikely to be selected in
the presence of the deferral. As a result of this, we observe
a lower choice probability for all-average options in the
presence of deferral, compared to when deferral is not
allowed. Setting x5 = (5, 5) and x6 = (10, 0), as in Bhatia
(2013), we find that x5 is selected 37.1% of the time and x6
is selected 62.9% of the time in the absence of deferral. In
contrast, x6 is selected 100% of the time whenever a choice
is made, in the presence of deferral.

Consequences of Choice Deferral
Extreme options
The above section discussed how the probability of
deferral is affected by the composition of the choice set.
Here we study how allowing for the possibility of deferral
can alter the choice probabilities of the options in the choice
set. This has been empirically examined by Dhar and
Simonson (2003) who found that allowing for deferral
disproportionally reduces the choice probability of an allaverage option, compared to an extreme option. When
choices are represented as in Figure 1, this implies that the
probability of choosing the all-average option x5 over the
extreme option x6 is lower when decision makers are
allowed to defer choice, relative to when deferral is not a
possibility.
AAM captures this effect using both the associative
relationship between the choice options and the attributes,
and the stochastic sequential sampling of attributes.
Attention towards an attribute is proportional to its
association with the choice set. Subsequently, the extreme
option’s primary attribute (attribute 1 in Figure 1), which is
also associated with the all-average option, is more likely to
be sampled compared to the second attribute (attribute 2 in
Figure 1), which is associated with the all-average option
but not with the extreme option. This creates a bias in favor
of the extreme option (see Bhatia, 2013, for an extensive
discussion of this bias). Now, stochastic sequential sampling
introduces time dependence in the accumulation of
preference. At earlier time periods, when few attributes have
been sampled, preferences are more sensitive to the
attributes that are sampled, and the attentional bias favoring

Figure 3. Relative choice probability of choosing all-average option (x5)
and probability of deferral, as a function of deferral time constraint (T).

To further explore the relationship between deferral and
decision time, consider Figure 3. The vertical axis in Figure
3 presents the relative choice proportion of x5 = (5, 5)
compared x6 = (10, 0), P[x5]/(P[x5] + P[x6]), where P[xi] is
the proportion of times that xi is chosen in the simulations.
The vertical axis also presents the probability of deferral,
which is 1 – (P[x5] + P[x6]). The horizontal axis represents
the deferral time constraint T. As T is increased, decision
makers have more time to make their choice, and the
relative choice proportion of x5 increases. After T = 15, we
find that this proportion stabilizes at around 0.4, and the
probability of deferral similarly stabilizes at 0 (and choice
probabilities with deferral allowed are the same as choice
probabilities in the absence of deferral). Note that choice
proportions for T < 5 are not displayed, as neither of the
options are chosen for these values of T, choice is deferred
100% of the time, and the relative choice proportion is not
defined (this is also the case for T < 8 in Figures 4 and 5).
Context Effects

197

Another effect of allowing deferral relates to the
attraction and compromise effect. The attraction effect is the
finding that the relative choice probability of an option
increases with the introduction of a novel option (a decoy),
that it, but not its competitor, dominates (i.e. is better than
on all attributes) (Huber, Payne & Puto, 1982). Similarly,
the compromise effect refers to the finding that the relative
choice probability of an option increases with the addition
of a decoy that makes the option appear as a compromise
(Simonson, 1989). In Figure 1, the attraction effect is
described by the higher choice probability of x1 relative to
x2 from the set {x1, x2, x3} compared to the set {x1, x2},
whereas the compromise effect is described by the higher
choice probability of x1 relative to x2 from the set {x1, x2,
x6} compared to the set {x1, x2}.
Dhar and Simonson (2003) found that that allowing for
the possibility of deferral increases the attraction effect but
reduces the compromise effect. Particularly, the relative
choice probability of x1 vs. x2 from the set {x1, x2, x3} minus
the same probability from the set {x1, x2} is higher in the
presence of deferral, whereas the relative choice probability
of x1 vs. x2 from the set {x1, x2, x6} minus the same
probability from the set {x1, x2} is lower in the presence of
deferral.

With the compromise effect, however, it is the extreme
novel option that is strongest on the most sampled attribute
in the presence of the decoy (attribute 1). This extreme
option disproportionality competes with the compromise
option, reducing its choice probability. As in with the allaverage and extreme options in the above section, this
competitive effect happens only at early time periods. As a
result of this, the compromise effect is weakened at early
time periods, and is thus less likely to emerge when deferral
is a possibility.
Indeed, taking the choice options used in Bhatia (2013),
x1 = (7, 3), x2 = (3, 7), x3 = (6.5, 2.5) and x6 = (10, 0), we
find that that the relative choice probability of x1 over x2,
P[x1]/(P[x1] + P[x2]), from the set {x1, x2, x3}, is 0.71 in the
presence of deferral, but only 0.59 in the absence of
deferral. This shows that the attraction effect increases in
the presence of deferral. In contrast the relative choice
probability of x1 over x2, P[x1]/(P[x1] + P[x2]) from the set
{x1, x2, x6}, is 0 in the presence of deferral, but 0.6 in the
absence of deferral. Thus the compromise effect decreases
(and in fact vanishes) in the presence of deferral. Note the
choice shares of x1 and x2 from the set {x1, x2}, are equal
both with and without deferral, as these options are identical
on symmetric attributes.

Figure 4. Relative choice probability x1 and probability of deferral,
as a function of deferral time constraint (T), for attraction effect.

Figure 5. Relative choice probability x1 and probability of deferral,
as a function of deferral time constraint (T), for compromise effect.

AAM generates the attraction and compromise effects
because of associative attentional weights: The addition of
the novel option increases the attention towards its primary
attribute, subsequently biasing choice in favor of the initial
options that are strongest on this attribute (see Bhatia,
2013). Sequential sampling imposes time dependence,
leading to a higher increase in the preferences for options
that are strongest on the most sampled attribute, early on in
the decision process. With the attraction effect, the presence
of the decoy increases the sampling probability of the
dominant option’s primary attribute (attribute 1 in Figure 1),
making this option seem especially desirable at early
periods. The dominant option is thus more likely than its
competitor to cross the choice thresholds before the deferral
time constraint than it is to do so at later time periods. This
leads to a higher attraction effect in the presence of deferral.

Figures 4 and 5 describe this finding in more detail.
These figures model the effect of the deferral time constraint
on P[x1]/(P[x1] + P[x2]) in the presence of the decoy, for the
attraction and compromise effects respectively. As the
choice probability of x1in the absence of the decoy is 0.5
(the two core options are symmetric on identical attributes),
values on the vertical axis that are higher than 0.5
correspond to decoy effects.
Note that we find that the strength of the attraction
decoy effect decreases and the strength of the compromise
decoy effect increases with increase in the deferral time
constraint. While the attraction effect is always predicted to
emerge (regardless of the value of this constraint), the
compromise effect actually reverses when the time
constraint is especially low. Ultimately both the attraction
and compromise effects emerge for a large enough deferral

198

time constraint. For these values, the probability of deferral
is zero and corresponding choice probabilities displayed in
Figures 4 and 5 are equal to choice probabilities in the
absence of deferral.

References
Bhatia, S. (2013). Associations and the accumulation of
preference. Psychological Review, 120(3), 522-543.
Busemeyer, J. R., Johnson, J. G., & Jessup, R. K. (2006).
Preferences constructed from dynamic micro-processing
mechanisms. The Construction of Preference, 220-234.
Busemeyer, J. R., & Townsend, J. T. (1993). Decision field
theory: A dynamic-cognitive approach to decision
making in an uncertain environment. Psychological
Review, 100(3), 432-459.
Dhar, R. (1997). Consumer preference for a no-choice
option. Journal of Consumer Research, 24(2), 215-231.
Dhar, R., & Simonson, I. (2003). The effect of forced choice
on choice.Journal of Marketing Research, 146-160.
Gourville, J. T., & Soman, D. (2005). Overchoice and
assortment type: When and why variety
backfires. Marketing science, 24(3), 382-395.
Huber, J, Payne, J. W., & Puto, C. (1982). Adding
asymmetrically dominated alternatives: Violations of
regularity and the similarity hypothesis. The Journal of
Consumer Research, 9(1), 90-98.
Iyengar, S. S., & Lepper, M. R. (2000). When choice is
demotivating: Can one desire too much of a good
thing?. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 79(6), 995.
Jessup, R. K., Veinott, E. S., Todd, P. M., & Busemeyer, J.
R. (2009). Leaving the store empty‐handed: Testing
explanations for the too‐much‐choice effect using
decision field theory. Psychology and Marketing, 26(3),
299-320.
Johnson, J. G. & Busemeyer, J. R. (2005). A dynamic,
stochastic, computational model of preference reversal
phenomena. Psychological Review, 112(4), 841-861.
Krajbich, I., Armel, C., & Rangel, A. (2010). Visual
fixations and the computation and comparison of value
in simple choice. Nature Neuroscience, 13(10), 12921298.
Rangel, A., & Hare, T. (2010). Neural computations
associated with goal-directed choice. Current Opinion in
Neurobiology, 20(2), 262-270.
Roe, R. M., Busemeyer, J. R., & Townsend, J. T. (2001).
Multialternative decision field theory : A dynamic
connectionist model of decision making. Psychological
Review, 108(2), 370-392.
Simonson, I. (1989). Choice based on reasons: The case of
attraction and compromise effects. The Journal of
Consumer Research, 16(2), 158–174.
Trueblood, J. S., Brown, S. D., & Heathcote, A. (in press).
The multi-attribute linear ballistic accumulator model of
context effects in multi-alternative choice. Psychological
Review.
Tversky, A., & Shafir, E. (1992). Choice under conflict: The
dynamics of deferred decision. Psychological
Science, 3(6), 358-361.
Usher, M., & McClelland, J. L. (2004). Loss aversion and
inhibition in dynamical models of multialternative
choice. Psychological Review, 111(3), 757-69.

Discussion and Conclusion
Sequential sampling and accumulation theories of
preferential choice assume that attributes are attended to at
random, and accumulated over time, into preferences. The
associative accumulation model adds to this approach by
assuming that attribute attention is a function of the
association of the attribute with the available choice options.
In this paper, we extended AAM by assuming that choice is
deferred if a threshold is not crossed by a prefixed time
constraint, a mechanism initially proposed by Jessup et al.
(2009). We show that this mechanism provides a
compressive explanation for a large range of behavioral
findings regarding the causes and consequences of choice
deferral.
The proposed mechanism is able to explain these
findings, due to the relationship between deferral and
decision time. Deferral, for example, depends on the speed
of preference accumulation. Increasing the conflict in a
choice set or adding options that are highly desirable to a
choice set reduces the speed of preference accumulation,
and thus increases the probability of deferral. Likewise, the
possibility of deferral creates a bias in favor of choice
options that are preferable at the start of the decision
process. Allowing for deferral can systematically increase
the choice probabilities of these options, generating a higher
choice probability for extreme options compared to allaverage options, an increased incidence of the attraction
effect, and a decreased incidence of the compromise effect.
The proposed model also makes a number of novel
predictions. For example, it predicts that deliberation times
should be lower in the presence of deferral than in the
absence of deferral, and that the time taken to defer choice
should be higher than the time taken to choose one of the
available options, in the presence of deferral. Additional,
novel assumptions can be derived by examining the
relationship between the various effects and decision times.
Previous work has attempted to explain deferral using
conflict, preference uncertainty, and increased difficulty, but
it is not clear how these mechanisms can explain all of the
effects discussed in this paper (much less the entire range of
behavioral effects explained by AAM and related theories).
The time constraint mechanism, in contrast, is a
parsimonious and intuitive, but analytically sound way to
model deferral. It draws upon the strengths of sequential
sampling models, which are particularly useful for studying
the time dependencies in the decision process. Future work
should try to incorporate other findings in preferential
choice within this framework, so as to generate a more
comprehensive cognitive theory with which decision
making can be studied.

199

