UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognitive Reflection Predicts Science Understanding

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4t79p8pj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Shtulman, Andrew
McCallum, Kate

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cognitive Reflection Predicts Science Understanding
Andrew Shtulman (shtulman@oxy.edu)
Department of Psychology, Occidental College
1600 Campus Road, Los Angeles, CA 90041

Kate McCallum (kate.e.mccallum@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Sam Houston State University
1901 Avenue I, Huntsville, TX 77341

Abstract
Understanding scientific theories like evolution by natural
selection, classical mechanics, or plate tectonics requires
knowledge restructuring at the level of individual concepts, or
conceptual change. Here, we investigate the role of cognitive
reflection (Frederick, 2005) in achieving conceptual change.
College undergraduates (n = 184) were administered a 45question survey probing their understanding of six domains of
science requiring conceptual change – astronomy, evolution,
geology, mechanics, perception, and thermodynamics – as
well as (a) their ability to analyze covariation-based data, (b)
their understanding of the nature of science (NOS), and (c)
their disposition towards cognitive reflection. Cognitive
reflection was a significant predictor of science understanding
in all domains, as well as an independent predictor, explaining
significantly more variance in science understanding than that
explained by covariation analysis ability and NOS
understanding combined. These results suggest that cognitive
reflection may be a prerequisite for changing certain cognitive
structures, namely, concepts and theories.
Keywords: conceptual change, science education, CRT

Introduction
Scientific discoveries come in two forms: those that can be
understood in terms of a pre-existing paradigm and those
that require the adoption of a new paradigm altogether. A
prime example is the difference between the discovery of
Neptune and the discovery of heliocentrism. Neptune was
predicted to exist many decades before it was discovered, on
account of certain unexplained perturbations in the orbit of
Uranus. Nineteenth century astronomers thus sought
observational confirmation of an eighth planet with the
same basic properties as those of the seven planets already
known to exist (Littmann, 2004). Neptune’s existence was
thus readily assimilated into astronomers’ preexisting model
of the solar system. That model itself, however, was hard
won, as astronomers prior to Copernicus typically
subscribed to geocentric models of planetary motion.
Accepting the sun as the center of planetary motion required
revision of the most basic astronomical assumptions of the
time, including the causes of celestial motion and the very
ontology of celestial objects (Kuhn, 1957).
Parallel to scientific discovery, the process of learning
scientific concepts also comes in two forms: learning that
can be accomplished in terms of one’s preexisting concepts,
termed knowledge enrichment, and learning that requires the
adoption of new concepts via the revision or restructuring of
one’s preexisting concepts, termed conceptual change

(Carey, 2009; Shtulman, 2009; Vosniadou, 1994). In
biology, for instance, learning the traits of an unfamiliar
animal would constitute knowledge enrichment, whereas
learning how novel traits emerge through the process of
natural selection would constitute conceptual change
(Shtulman, 2006). In physics, learning that objects fall with
an acceleration of 9.8 m/s2 would constitute knowledge
enrichment, whereas learning that weight is a relational
property between an object and a gravitational field (as
opposed to an intrinsic property of the object itself) would
constitute conceptual change (Halloun & Hestenes, 1985).
Thus, a primary challenge facing science educators across
different levels of schooling and different domains of
science is helping students achieve conceptual change. To
meet this challenge, many researchers have devised
curricula that are informed by research on students’
preconceptions (or misconceptions) within a domain and
that explicitly aim to bridge the gap between those
preconceptions and a correct, scientific understanding of the
domain. This approach has been adopted with great success
in domains ranging from microbiology (Ah et al., 2008) to
evolution (Shtulman & Calabi, 2012) to thermodynamics
(Slotta & Chi, 2006) to material science (Smith, 2007).
Another, less common approach is to identify domaingeneral factors – i.e., skills, abilities, or dispositions – that
correlate with science understanding across a variety of
domains in the hopes of addressing those factors prior to, or
during, instruction (e.g., Kloos, 2007; Zaitchik, Iqbal, &
Carey, 2014). This approach is not only for pedagogically
informative but is also theoretically informative, as
correlations between domain-general competencies and
domain-specific knowledge shed light on how that
knowledge is represented in the mind and by what
mechanisms it might be acquired or changed.
In the current study, we sought to determine whether the
ability to achieve conceptual change across various domains
of science is correlated with a disposition towards cognitive
reflection, or a disposition towards deliberating on one’s
reasoning prior to accepting the first answer or solution that
pops into one’s mind. Cognitive reflection was first
measured, as an independent construct, by Frederick (2005).
Frederick’s “Cognitive Reflection Test,” or CRT, consists
of three items like the following: “In a lake, there is a patch
of lily pads. Every day, the patch doubles in size. If it takes
48 days for the patch to cover the entire lake, how long
would it take for the patch to cover half of the lake?” The
correct answer is 47, given that the lily pads must have

2937

covered half the lake one day prior to covering the entire
lake, but the question is designed to elicit an intuitive
response of 24, derived simply by dividing 48 in half. In
general, the items on the CRT are designed to elicit an
intuitive, yet erroneous, response that is readily recognized
as erroneous upon further reflection. At issue is whether one
engages in that reflection or simply “goes with their gut.”
The CRT has been shown to be a strong predictor of
many conceptually independent forms of reasoning,
including syllogistic reasoning, Bayesian reasoning, causal
reasoning, covariation detection, and temporal discounting
(Frederick, 2005; Toplak, West, & Stanovich, 2011).
Reflective responses to CRT items predict accurate or
normative patterns of reasoning, whereas intuitive responses
predict inaccurate or fallacious patterns of reasoning. Here,
we sought to determine whether reflective responses predict
evidence of science understanding and intuitive responses
predict a lack thereof. In particular, we sought to determine
whether reflective responses predict science understanding
in domains for which conceptual change has been
implicated as a prerequisite to understanding, i.e., the
domains of astronomy, evolution, geology, mechanics,
perception, and thermodynamics. Our rationale for targeting
knowledge acquired through conceptual change is that
conceptual change is a protracted and hard-won cognitive
achievement (Carey, 2009), and, as such, may require a fair
amount of cognitive reflection to complete.
In addition to cognitive reflection, we measured two other
forms of reasoning arguably associated with science
understanding: the ability to analyze covariation-based data
(Fugelsang & Thompson, 2003; Smedslund, 1963) and an
understanding of the nature of science, or NOS, as a method
of inquiry (Carey, Evans, Honda, Jay, & Unger, 1989;
Lederman, Abd-El-Khalick, Bell, & Schwartz, 2002). We
expected all three factors – cognitive reflection, covariation
analysis, and NOS understanding – to correlate with science
understanding, as each constitutes a unique form of
reasoning potentially important to the acquisition of
domain-specific knowledge, but we hypothesized that
cognitive reflection would be (a) a stronger predictor of
science understanding and (b) an independent predictor,
explaining variance in science understanding above and
beyond that explained by the other two factors. Both
hypotheses were confirmed, as described below.

Method
Participants
The participants were 184 undergraduates at Occidental
College who were recruited from psychology courses and
compensated with course credit. The majority (71%) were
female, and they reported having completed an average of
4.0 college-level math and science courses (SD = 4.2).

Procedure
Participants answered 45 questions in a survey administered
via MediaLab v2012 software. The questions were broken

into nine blocks of five questions each. The first six blocks
assessed participants’ understanding of various concepts
within the domains of astronomy, evolution, geology,
mechanics, perception, and thermodynamics (one block per
domain). The last three blocks covered more domaingeneral forms of reasoning: covariation analysis, NOS
understanding, and cognitive reflection. Questions were
selected from preexisting instruments in the science
education and cognitive psychology literatures and had thus
been vetted for validity and reliability in prior research.
The ordering of the blocks was randomized across
participants, as was the ordering of the questions within
each block, with the stipulation that the six blocks of
domain-specific questions were administered before the
three blocks of domain-general questions. One final block of
questions was used to collect demographic information from
participants, namely, gender, class standing, major, and
number of college-level math and science courses taken
(referred to henceforth as STEM courses).
Participants selected one of several multiple-choice
options for all questions except those on the CRT, for which
they entered a numerical value instead. Each multiplechoice question was, in turn, followed by a prompt to
provide an explanation. We requested explanations mainly
to discourage participants from making their selections at
random, and the explanation data are not analyzed here.
Accuracy was gauged by multiple-choice responses alone
(or, in the case of the CRT, participants’ numerical entries).

Astronomy Understanding
While most college-educated adults know that the moon
orbits the Earth and that the Earth orbits the sun, few
understand how those orbits give rise to astronomical
phenomena like the tides, the seasons, or the phases of the
moon (Trundle, Atwood, & Christopher, 2007; Tsai &
Chang, 2005). We probed participants’ understanding of
such phenomena with questions like the following: “The
Earth’s shadow on the moon is responsible for which of the
following phenomena? (a) A lunar eclipse; (b) A crescent
moon; (c) A new moon; (d) All of the above.” The correct
response is (a); however, most participants (69%) chose (b),
(c), or (d), symptomatic of a misunderstanding of the role of
the observer’s perspective in our perception of the moon’s
degree of illumination.

Evolution Understanding
Most adults construe evolution not as a selection-based
process but as an entire population holistically transforming
over time, with each generation somehow guaranteed to be
born with the traits they need in order to survive (Bishop &
Anderson, 1990; Shtulman, 2006; Shtulman & Calabi,
2013). We probed for this alternative, need-based view of
evolution with such questions as: “Imagine that biologists
discover a new species of woodpecker that lives in isolation
on a secluded island. These woodpeckers have, on average,
a 1.0 inch beak, and their only food source is a tree-dwelling
insect that lives, on average, 1.5 inches under the tree bark.

2938

Compared to its parents, the offspring of any two
woodpeckers should develop which of the following traits?
(a) A longer beak; (b) A shorter beak; (c) Either a longer
beak or a shorter beak; neither is more likely.” The correct
answer is (c), since parent-offspring differences are random
and unpredictable, but most participants (65%) chose (a),
endorsing the idea that offspring will be born more adapted
to the environment than their parents were at birth.

Geology Understanding
The Earth is a dynamic system of interacting processes, but
most students view the Earth as an inert object.
Consequently, they have difficulty appreciating the causes
of geological phenomena, like earthquakes and volcanoes,
as well as changes to the Earth that occur over a geologic
time scale (Libarkin, Anderson, Dahl, Beilfuss, Boone, &
Kurdziel, 2005; Trend, 2000). We assessed students’
understanding of geologic systems and geologic time with
such questions as: “Where are tectonic plates located? (a) At
the Earth’s surface; (b) At the Earth’s core; (c) Between the
Earth’s surface and the Earth’s core; (d) Different plates are
located at different positions within the Earth.” The correct
answer is (a), but most participants (62%) chose (b), (c), or
(d), reflecting the misconception that there is a discontinuity
between the seemingly static ground we stand on and the
dynamic components of the Earth’s structure.

waves reflected off an object and into the eye, but around
half of the sample (52%) chose (a), seemingly treating color
as an intrinsic property of the object itself.

Thermodynamics Understanding
Heat is an emergent property of kinetic energy at the
molecular level, but many adults do not view heat as energy.
Rather, they view heat as a kind of immaterial substance
that passes from one object to another. On this view, heat is
seen as trappable, containable, non-additive (like
temperature), and fundamentally distinct from coldness
(Clark, 2006; Wiser & Amin, 2001). To probe for this
alternative, substance-based views of heat, we asked
questions like the following: “An ice cube is placed inside
the pocket of a thick coat and left at room temperature over
night. Compared to an ice cube on an open counter, the ice
cube in the coat will do what? (a) Melt faster; (b) Melt
slower; (c) Melt at the same rate.” The correct answer is (b),
because the coat would insulate the ice from the ambient
heat of the room, but most participants (63%) chose (a) or
(c), reasoning either that coats are intrinsically warm or that
coats trap heat but not cold.

Cognitive Reflection

The concept of inertia plays no role in the average adult’s
understanding of object motion. Motion and rest are seen as
fundamentally distinct states, with motion implying the
presence of a force and rest implying the absence of one.
Indeed, forces are conceptualized not as acting on objects
but as imparted to objects – i.e., as an internal impetus
propelling objects forward or upward until dissipated
(Halloun & Hestenes, 1985; McCloskey, 1983). To tap into
this alternative, impetus-based view of motion, we asked
questions like the following: “A ball is thrown into the air.
What forces act on the ball on its way up? (a) Its weight,
vertically downward; (b) A force that maintains the ball’s
motion, vertically upward; (c) Both of the above; (d)
Neither of the above.” The correct answer is (a), but most
participants (55%) chose (c), ostensibly reasoning that
upward motion requires an upward “force” or impetus.

Frederick’s (2005) Cognitive Reflection Task (CRT),
described above, was administered with one modification:
two additional items were included so that the range of
possible scores was equivalent across sections (0 to 5). The
additional items were: (1) “A house contains a living room
and a den that are perfectly square. The living room has 4
times the square footage of the den. If the walls in the den
are 10 feet long, how long are the walls in the living room?”
and (2) “A store owner reduced the price of a $100 pair of
shoes by 10 percent. A week later, he reduced the price of
the shoes by another 10 percent. How much do the shoes
cost now?” For item 1, 59% of participants provided the
correct, reflective response of 20, and 26% provided the
incorrect, intuitive response of 40. For item 2, 80% provided
the correct, reflective response of 81, and 11% provided the
incorrect, intuitive response of 80. Preliminary analyses
revealed that our 5-item CRT (henceforth referred to as the
“CRT-5”) was a stronger predictor of science understanding
than the original 3-item CRT across all six domains, so we
retained the two new items in our final analyses.

Perception Understanding

Covariation Analysis

Colors and sounds are typically conceived of as intrinsic
properties of the environment, whereas, in reality, they are
relational properties between the environment and the
perceiver (Mazens & Lautrey, 2003; Eaton, Anderson, &
Smith, 1984). We assessed participants’ understanding of
the relational aspects of perception with questions like the
following: “Red objects are perceived as red rather than blue
because they do what? (a) Absorb more red light than blue
light; (b) Reflect more red light than blue light; (c) Both
absorb and reflect more red light than blue light.” The
correct answer is (b), because color is the perception of light

Determining whether a correlation can be inferred from
covariation-based data is a notoriously difficult task,
particularly when the data are at odds with prior beliefs
about whether the candidate variables are causally related
(Fugelsang & Thompson, 2003; Smedslund, 1963). We
assessed participants’ ability to analyze covariation-based
data with questions like the following: “Imagine you are a
scientist who is trying to determine the cause of a recent
increase in lung cancer. You hypothesize that the lung
cancer may be due to taking a new type of iron supplement.
To test this hypothesis, you investigate 10 patients who took

Mechanics Understanding

2939

the new iron supplement and 50 patients who did not and
discover that 8 of the 10 patients who took the supplement
developed lung cancer and 8 of the 50 patients who did not
take the supplement developed lung cancer. Which of the
following can be inferred from these data? (a) There is a
strong relationship between lung cancer and the new iron
supplement; (b) There is a weak relationship between lung
cancer and the new iron supplement; (c) There is no
relationship between lung cancer and the new iron
supplement.” The correct answer is (a); however, around
half of the sample (47%) chose (b) or (c), presumably
swayed by the correspondence in absolute frequencies
across conditions (8 vs. 8) despite vast difference in relative
frequencies (0.80 vs. 0.16).

Nature of Science Understanding
In addition to measuring participants’ understanding of
specific science concepts, we also measured their
understanding of science as a method of inquiry (Carey et
al., 1989; Lederman et al., 2002). Our questions covered the
nature of an experiment, the nature of a theory, the role of
empirical data in testing scientific claims, and the role of
inference in generating scientific knowledge. A sample
question is as follows: “Which of the following best
describes the nature of a scientific theory? (a) A well
supported explanation; (b) A well educated guess; (c) A
well documented finding; (d) A well respected assumption;
(e) An irrefutable idea.” The correct answer is (a), given that
theories are more explanatory than descriptive and are well
substantiated but not irrefutable. However, a substantial
minority (34%) chose one of the alternative options.

Results

Table 1: Mean scores on each section of the survey, plus the
proportion of participants who scored 0-2 vs. 3-5.
Section
Astronomy
Evolution
Geology
Mechanics
Perception
Thermodynamics
CRT-5
COVAR
NOS

M
2.1
2.1
2.1
1.8
2.0
2.8
2.6
3.3
2.5

SD
1.1
1.3
1.4
1.2
0.9
1.1
1.5
1.1
1.0

Scored 0-2
.65
.64
.60
.77
.74
.39
.46
.24
.54

Scored 3-5
.35
.36
.40
.23
.26
.61
.54
.76
.46

Correlational analyses confirmed this observation. Of the 15
pairwise correlations between the six domains, 11 were
significant. Furthermore, a factor analysis of composite
scores for each domain yielded a one-factor solution (at an
Eigenvalue threshold of 1.0), implying that participants’
understanding of science across a variety of domains was
determined, in part, by a single underlying disposition.
Below we attempt to characterize that disposition by
comparing participants’ scores on the domain-specific
measures of science understanding to their scores on the
tasks measuring more domain-general forms of reasoning.

Predictors of Science Understanding
Correlations between participants’ science understanding
scores and their scores on the CRT-5, their scores on the
covariation analysis task (abbreviated COVAR), and their
scores on the NOS understanding task are displayed in
Table 2. While all three sets of correlations were positive
and generally significant, the set pertaining to CRT-5 scores
were larger and more consistent than the other two.

Scores by Section
Each section of the survey consisted of five questions, the
answers to which were scored as either correct (1) or
incorrect (0). Total scores therefore ranged from 0 to 5, with
mean scores and standard deviations displayed in Table 1.
Also displayed in Table 1 are the proportion of participants
who answered more questions incorrectly than correctly
(thus earning a score between 0 and 2) and the proportion
who answered more questions correctly than incorrectly
(thus earning a score between 3 and 5).
Scores on the six sections measuring science
understanding differed significantly by domain (F(5,915) =
19.18, p < .001). Nevertheless, Bonferroni comparisons
revealed that this effect was driven entirely by the difference
between the thermodynamics section and all other sections.
With the exception of the thermodynamics section, most
participants answered most questions incorrectly. There
was, however, a sizeable minority in each domain who
showed evidence of having achieved conceptual change,
and this minority tended to be comprised of the same
participants across domains. In other words, participants
who scored high in one domain tended to score high in other
domains as well.

Table 2: Correlations between CRT-5 scores, COVAR
scores, NOS scores, and science understanding. *p < .05,
**p < .01
Section
Astronomy
Evolution
Geology
Mechanics
Perception
Thermodynamics

CRT-5
.16*
.35**
.35**
.27**
.24**
.30**

COVAR
.10
.26**
.16*
.13
.03
.12

NOS
.08
.22**
.26**
.09
.17*
.16*

To determine whether CRT-5 scores were an independent
predictor of science understanding, we regressed the total
number of science questions answered correctly (M = 12.8,
SD = 4.2, range = 3 to 27) against CRT-5 scores in a
hierarchical regression. In the first step of the regression, we
entered demographic variables, namely, gender (coded “0”
for female and “1” for male) and number of prior STEM
courses. In the second step, we entered COVAR scores and
NOS scores. In the third and final step, we entered CRT-5
scores. The results of this analysis are displayed in Table 3.

2940

As predicted, COVAR scores and NOS scores explained
significantly more variance than that explained by the
demographic variables, and CRT-5 scores explained
significantly more variance than that explained by COVAR
scores and NOS scores (plus the demographic variables).
Indeed, in the final model, CRT-5 scores emerged as the
strongest predictor, explaining nearly twice as much
variance in science understanding than that explained by the
next strongest predictor, gender (β = .36 vs. β = .19).
Table 3: Regression analysis of composite science
understanding scores by gender, STEM courses, COVAR
score, NOS score, and CRT-5 score. *p < .05, **p < .01
Model
1
2

3

Factor
Gender
STEM
Gender
STEM
COVAR
NOS
Gender
STEM
COVAR
NOS
CRT-5

Beta
.26
.22
.21
.21
.18
.23
.19
.16
.09
.13
.36

t value
3.66**
3.28**
3.12**
3.21**
2.65**
3.41**
2.96**
2.48*
1.33
2.07*
5.25**

R2
.13

F change
13.26**

.22

12.51**

.32

17.00**

Table 4: Mean differences in response type to the CRT-5
(reflective – intuitive) across domains.
Section
Astronomy
Evolution
Geology
Mechanics
Perception
Thermodynamics

Low scorers
0.6
0.4
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.1

High scorers
1.5
2.0
1.8
2.5
1.6
1.5

Discussion

Reflective vs. Intuitive Responses
The CRT-5 scores entered into the above analyses were
based on correct, reflective responses only, but incorrect
response are informative as well when those response
indicate a reliance on intuition (e.g., an answer of “24 days”
to the lily pad question). On average, participants produced
reflective responses 57% of the time and intuitive responses
27% of the time. The remaining 16% were either irrelevant
(e.g., “the square root of 48”) or incomplete (e.g., “not sure;
math is hard”).
Intuitive responses were negatively correlated with
composite science understanding scores (r(182) = .37, p <
.001). Moreover, the difference between intuitive and
reflective responding varied systematically by science
understanding, as shown in Table 4. For each domain, we
separated participants who earned a score of 0 to 2 (“low
scorers”) from those who earned a score of 3 to 5 (“high
scorers”) and compared the difference in reflective and
intuitive responses provided. In all six domains, that
difference was smaller for low scorers than for high scorers.
We confirmed the reliability of this effect with repeatedmeasures analyses of variance (ANOVA) in which CRT-5
response type (intuitive vs. reflective) was analyzed within
participants and science understanding (low vs. high) was
analyzed between participants. As expected, the interaction
between CRT-5 response type and science understanding
was significant in all six domains (all F’s > 4.0, all p’s <
.05). In other words, the degree to which participants relied
on reflection over intuition was positively associated with
science understanding across a variety of domains.

Understanding complex scientific concepts often requires
the restructuring of our earlier, intuitive conceptions – a
process known as conceptual change. Here, we investigated
domain-general correlates of one’s likelihood of having
made conceptual change across six different domains of
science: astronomy, evolution, geology, mechanics,
perception, and thermodynamics. While the ability to
analyze covariation-based data and an understanding of the
nature of science (as a method of inquiry) were both
significant predictors of science understanding, neither was
as strong a predictor as one’s disposition towards cognitive
reflection. In fact, cognitive reflection explained more
variance in science understanding than that explained by
gender, prior STEM coursework, covariation analysis
ability, and NOS understanding combined.
These findings have important implications from both
theoretical and pedagogical perspectives. Theoretically, they
imply that cognitive reflection may be a prerequisite for
changing certain cognitive structures, namely, concepts. All
of us reason through our concepts, but we likely vary in
how often we reason about our concepts, and it is this
tendency – the tendency to reason about one’s concepts –
that may underlie the shared variance between CRT scores
and science understanding. Scoring highly on the CRT, after
all, requires more than just inhibiting an intuitive response;
it also requires the conceptual insight that one’s intuition is,
in fact, wrong. Pedagogically, these findings imply that
instructors could use the CRT as a diagnostic for
determining who is likely to profit from instruction and who
is not. Indeed, students who are low in cognitive reflection
may actually benefit from different kinds of instruction than
those who are high in cognitive reflection.
That said, we must acknowledge that these findings do
not provide evidence of a causal relation between cognitive
reflection and science understanding. While the results are
consistent with the possibility that cognitive reflection
facilitates science learning, they are also consistent with the
possibility that cognitive reflection and science
understanding are linked by some unmeasured variable, e.g.,
the quality of one’s prior education or the adequacy of one’s
test-taking ability. It is also possible that learning complex
scientific concepts increases one’s disposition towards
cognitive reflection. Future research should therefore
investigate the relation between cognitive reflection and
science learning directly, either through prospective studies

2941

of the impact of cognitive reflection on achievement in
science classes or through interventions designed to increase
cognitive reflection. Such research could help determine not
only the causal direction of the observed relations but also
which aspects of cognitive reflection—e.g., inhibition,
inconsistency detection, comprehension monitoring (see
Zaitchik et al., 2014)—covary with science understanding.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the National Science Foundation for
supporting this research via grant DRL-0953384 awarded to
Andrew Shtulman. We would also like to thank Samuel
Boland, Kelsey Harrington, Jai Levin, and Sharang Tickoo
for their assistance with data collection and data analysis.

References
Au, T. K. F., Chan, C. K. K., Chan, T. K., Cheung, M. W.
L., Ho, J. Y. S., & Ip, G. W. M. (2008). Folkbiology
meets microbiology: A study of conceptual and
behavioral change. Cognitive Psychology, 57, 1-19.
Bishop, B. & Anderson, C.A. (1990). Student conceptions
of natural selection and its role in evolution. Journal of
Research in Science Teaching, 27, 415-427.
Carey, S. (2009). The origin of concepts. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Carey, S., Evans, R., Honda, M., Jay, E., & Unger, C.
(1989). An experiment is when you try and see if it
works: A study of junior high school students’
understanding of the construction of scientific knowledge.
International Journal of Science Education, 11, 514-529.
Clark, D. B. (2006). Longitudinal conceptual change in
students’ understanding of thermal equilibrium: An
examination
of
the
process
of
conceptual
restructuring. Cognition and Instruction, 24, 467-563.
Eaton, J. F., Anderson, C. W., & Smith, E. L. (1984).
Students’ misconceptions interfere with science learning:
Case studies of fifth-grade students. The Elementary
School Journal, 84, 365-379.
Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive reflection and decision
making. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19, 25-42.
Fugelsang, J. A., & Thompson, V. A. (2003). A dualprocess model of belief and evidence interactions in
causal reasoning. Memory & Cognition, 31, 800-815.
Halloun, I. A., & Hestenes, D. (1985). Common sense
concepts about motion. American Journal of Physics, 53,
1056-1065.
Kloos, H. (2007). Interlinking physical beliefs: Children’s
bias toward logical congruence. Cognition, 103, 227-252.
Kuhn, T. S. (1957). The Copernican Revolution.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lederman, N. G., Abd-El-Khalick, F., Bell, R. L., &
Schwartz, R. S. (2002). Views of nature of science
questionnaire: Toward valid and meaningful assessment
of learners’ conceptions of nature of science. Journal of
Research in Science Teaching, 39, 497-521.
Libarkin, J. C., Anderson, S. W., Dahl, J., Beilfuss, M.,
Boone, W., & Kurdziel, J. P. (2005). Qualitative analysis

of college students' ideas about the Earth. Journal of
Geoscience Education, 53, 17-26.
Littmann, M. (2004). Planets beyond: Discovering the outer
solar system. New York: Dover.
Mazens, K., & Lautrey, J. (2003). Conceptual change in
physics:
children’s
naive
representations
of
sound. Cognitive Development, 18, 159-176.
McCloskey, M. (1983). Naïve theories of motion. In D.
Gentner & A. Stevens (Eds.), Mental models, Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Shtulman, A. (2006). Qualitative differences between naïve
and scientific theories of evolution. Cognitive Psychology,
52, 170-194.
Shtulman, A. (2009). Rethinking the role of resubsumption
in conceptual change. Educational Psychologist, 44, 4147.
Shtulman, A., & Calabi, P. (2012). Cognitive constraints on
the understanding and acceptance of evolution. In K. S.
Rosengren, S. Brem, E. M. Evans, & G. Sinatra (Eds.),
Evolution Challenges (pp. 47-65). Cambridge, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Shtulman, A., & Calabi, P. (2013). Tuition vs. intuition:
Effects of instruction on naive theories of evolution.
Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 59, 141-167.
Slotta, J. D., & Chi, M. T. H. (2006). Helping students
understand challenging topics in science through ontology
training. Cognition and Instruction, 24, 261-289.
Smedslund, J. (1963). The concept of correlation in adults.
Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 4, 165-173.
Smith, C. L. (2007). Bootstrapping processes in the
development of students’ commonsense matter theories.
Cognition and Instruction, 25, 337-398.
Toplak, M. E., West, R. F., & Stanovich, K. E. (2011). The
Cognitive Reflection Test as a predictor of performance
on heuristics-and-biases tasks. Memory & Cognition, 39,
1275-1289.
Trend, R. (2000). Conceptions of geological time among
primary teacher trainees, with reference to their
engagement with geoscience, history, and science.
International Journal of Science Education, 22, 539-555.
Trundle, K. C., Atwood, R. K., & Christopher, J. E. (2007).
A longitudinal study of conceptual change: Pre-service
elementary teachers' conceptions of moon phases. Journal
of Research in Science Teaching, 44, 303-326.
Tsai, C. C., & Chang, C. Y. (2005). Lasting effects of
instruction guided by the conflict map: Experimental
study of learning about the causes of the seasons. Journal
of Research in Science Teaching, 42, 1089-1111.
Vosniadou, S. (1994). Capturing and modeling the process
of conceptual change. Learning and Instruction, 4, 45-69.
Wiser, M., & Amin, T. (2001). Is heat hot? Inducing
conceptual change by integrating everyday and scientific
perspectives on thermal phenomena. Learning and
Instruction, 11, 331-355.
Zaitchik, D., Iqbal, Y., & Carey, S. (2014). The effect of
executive function on biological reasoning in young
children. Child Development, 85, 160-175.

2942

