UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Comparing Accounts of Psychomotor Vigilance Impairment Due to Sleep Loss

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0jd0d525

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Walsh, Matthew
Gunzelmann, Glenn
Van Dongen, Hans

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Comparing Accounts of Psychomotor Vigilance Impairment Due to Sleep Loss
Matthew M. Walsh (mmw188@gmail.com)
Glenn Gunzelmann (glenn.gunzelmann@us.af.mil)
Air Force Research Laboratory, 2620 Q Street, Building 852
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, OH 45433

Hans P. A. Van Dongen (hvd@wsu.edu)
Washington State University Spokane, Sleep and Performance Research Center, P.O. Box 1495
Spokane, WA 99210
Abstract
The effects of fatigue on cognitive processing are not fully
understood. Computational modeling research has led to two
distinct accounts of fatigue, and specifically its effects on
psychomotor vigilance performance, which are both
supported by empirical findings. The first account is based on
ACT-R and posits that fatigue increases the probability of
microlapses. A biomathmatical model of fatigue modulates
this probability. The second account is based on a diffusion
model and posits that fatigue decreases the drift rate of the
diffusion process. The same biomathematical model of
fatigue is used to control the drift rate parameter. We compare
the models’ predicted reaction time distributions to one
another and to human data in a psychomotor vigilance
performance task. Though they embody entirely different
modeling approaches and different levels of abstraction, the
accounts generate equivalent predictions and capture the
detrimental effects of fatigue through mechanisms that have
similar theoretical interpretations. In both accounts, fatigue
effectively increases the contribution of noise to cognitive
processing and decreases neural inhibition. This unexpected
convergence supports a more general account of how sleep
deprivation impairs psychomotor vigilance performance
through degradation of the quality of cognitive processing.
Keywords: ACT-R; biomathematical model of fatigue;
cognitive processing; diffusion model; leaky accumulator;
local sleep.

Introduction
In this paper, we use computational models to study the
effects of fatigue from sleep loss on cognition. More than
20% of the population systematically obtains insufficient
sleep (Hublin et al., 2001). The societal cost of fatigue from
sleep loss, in terms of property damage, lost human capital,
injury, and death runs in the billions of dollars annually.
Fatigue increases the risk of transportation accidents,
physicians make more mistakes when tired, and fatigue has
contributed to major industrial accidents (Dinges, 1995).
This topic is relevant and important from a cognitive
science perspective as well. Computational models play a
central role in cognitive science. Yet most models assume
that the cognitive system and its various components
operate effectively. This assumption is not valid when
individuals are fatigued (Jackson et al., 2013). Representing
the effects of behavioral moderators such as fatigue in
cognitive models remains a critical challenge for basic and
applied research.

Psychomotor Vigilance Deficits from Fatigue
We focus our attention on one of the most extensively
studied aspects of fatigue due to sleep loss, that is, deficits
in psychomotor vigilance performance. This is well
captured by the psychomotor vigilance test (PVT), a 10minute simple reaction time task in which stimuli are
presented with random inter-trial intervals ranging from 2 to
10 seconds (Lim & Dinges, 2008). Participants monitor a
display for the presentation of a stimulus, after which they
respond as fast as possible. Performance impairment on the
PVT demonstrates a hallmark effect of fatigue on cognition,
namely increased performance instability. That is, the
distribution of reaction times on the PVT, which has a long
right tail even at baseline, becomes increasingly skewed to
the right with greater fatigue.
When PVT results are reported, responses are typically
divided among three categories: false starts occur before or
within 150 ms of stimulus presentation, alert responses
occur from 150 to 500 ms of the stimulus, and lapses occur
after 500 ms of the stimulus. Fatigue due to sleep loss leads
to three general behavioral changes in PVT performance.
First, alert responses slow. Second, lapses occur more often.
Third, participants commit more false starts. These
outcomes of the PVT are highly replicable and predictable
(Lim & Dinges, 2008).

Computational Models of Fatigue
Several classes of models have been proposed to account for
the cognitive effects of fatigue. First, biomathematical
models of fatigue predict cognitive performance based on
changes in alertness over the course of hours and days (Fig.
1). Recent instantiations of these models are based on the
two-process model of sleep regulation (Borbély &
Achermann, 1999), in which fatigue increases with time
awake (homeostatic process) and is modulated by time of
day (circadian process). Model outputs are typically scaled
to human performance data to predict response speed and/or
accuracy. Although these models can accurately predict
performance impairments, they are silent with respect to the
effects of fatigue on specific cognitive components.
The second class of models uses cognitive architectures to
study how fatigue affects components of cognition.
Cognitive architectures specify foundational information
processing mechanisms. Gunzelmann et al. (2009b)

1742

provided an account of how the temporal dynamics of
fatigue, as controlled by a biomathematical model, may
impact specific information processing mechanisms in
ACT-R. The integrated approach captured PVT reaction
time distributions in sleep deprivation experiments and
predicted performance in other tasks, too (e.g., Gunzelmann,
Byrne, Gluck, & Moore, 2009; Gunzelmann Moore,
Salvucci, & Gluck, 2011).
The final class of models is based on a diffusion process
representing the internal flow of information during
cognitive task performance. The diffusion model accounts
for performance on simple and two-alternative forced choice
reaction time tasks (Ratcliff & McKoon, 2008; Ratcliff &
Van Dongen, 2011). By varying parameter values in the
diffusion model, researchers have reproduced the effects of
various experiment manipulations on choice accuracy and
response time distributions (e.g., Ratcliff & McKoon, 2008).
Ratcliff and Van Dongen (2011) showed that the temporal
dynamics of fatigue may be seen as affecting a composite
diffusion model parameter, drift rate divided by drift rate
variability. This approach captured PVT reaction time
distributions in sleep deprivation experiments and predicted
performance in other decision tasks, too.

Research Approach
Our primary goal is to develop and compare an ACT-R
model and a diffusion model that simulate the processes
involved in performing the PVT. We compare these models
because they are the only published models predicting the
complete distribution of reaction times in this task, yet they
represent different levels of abstraction and connect with
different aspects of the underlying neurobiology (Van
Dongen et al., 2011). By comparing these models, we seek
to develop a general account of fatigue not tied to a single
modeling formalism.
The ACT-R model is based on Gunzelmann et al.
(2009b). We describe a version that has been updated for the
latest release of ACT-R. Dynamic parameters are
constrained using the output of a biomathematical model of
fatigue (McCauley et al., 2013). The diffusion model is
based on Ratcliff and Van Dongen (2011). We augment
their model with a leaky accumulator to capture data that
fall beyond its original scope. Additionally, we constrain
dynamic parameters of the diffusion model with the same
biomathematical model of fatigue. We use the empirical

Fatigue

30

Baseline

Day 1

Day 2

20
10
0
0800

2200

0800
2200
Time of Day

0800

2200

Figure 1. Biomathematical model predictions of fatigue
over 62 hours of sleep deprivation (McCauley et al., 2009).

data from a 62-hour total sleep deprivation experiment
described by Van Dongen et al. (2013) as the basis for
model comparison.

Integrated Models
ACT-R
ACT-R is an integrated cognitive architecture that contains
specialized information processing modules (Anderson,
2007). Buffers connect these modules with a central
procedural module. Procedural knowledge is represented in
the form of production rules. Each rule has conditions that
must be met for it to be selected, and a set of actions that
modify the external state of the world and the internal state
of the architecture when it is performed. The temporal
dynamics of cognition unfold across a sequence of
production cycles. During each cycle, conditions for
different productions are compared against the contents of
the buffers, a production is selected, and the production
fires. The resulting state of the world and architecture serve
as the starting point for the next production cycle.
Task Model Gunzelmann et al. (2009b) built an ACT-R
model of the PVT that contained three core productions:
wait for the stimulus to appear, attend to the stimulus, and
respond. Different conditions favored different production:
wait fired when the screen was blank, attend fired when the
stimulus was present but had not yet been attended to, and
respond fired after the stimulus had been attended to. A
fourth production, respond randomly, could fire at any time.
This production, though rarely chosen because of its low
utility, produced false starts.
Subsequent to that model, ACT-R underwent several
major changes, including the addition of production partial
matching. With production partial matching, productions
whose conditions are not perfectly met remain eligible for
selection, but their utility values are penalized,

Ui! = Ui − MMPi + εi

(1)

Ui is the stored utility for production i, MMPi is the
mismatch penalty, and εi is logistically distributed noise.
The production with highest utility is enacted if its utility
exceeds the threshold,

Production = max (Ui!) if max (Ui!) > threshold

(2)

If no production’s utility exceeds the threshold, a microlapse
occurs; the model becomes inactive for the duration of a
production cycle (cycle time) before initiating a new cycle.
Because of production partial matching, respond can be
selected at any time. This obviates the need for the respond
randomly production: when respond is selected before the
stimulus appears, a false start occurs. But because respond
is subject to the mismatch penalty when its conditions are
not perfectly met, this happens infrequently.
Integration Fatigue affects three components of the ACT-R

1743

model. First, fatigue reduces productions’ utility values,

U ! = FP ⋅ (Ui − MMPi ) + εi

(3)

This differs from Gunzelmann et al. (2009b) because the
function that defines Ui in ACT-R has changed. The FP
parameter is derived from a biomathematical model of
fatigue (McCauley et al., 2013; Fig. 1) by the equation, FP
= 1+FPslope·Fatigue. When FPslope is negative, as we found
by fitting the model, production utilities decrease with
fatigue. Consequently, selections are increasingly driven by
noise. Also, productions’ utilities increasingly fall below the
utility threshold, causing more microlapses.
Second, fatigue lowers the utility threshold,

Production = max (Ui!) if max (Ui!) > FT ⋅ Threshold

(4)

The FT parameter is derived from a biomathematical model
of fatigue (McCauley et al., 2013) by the equation, FT =
1+FTslope·Fatigue. When FTslope is negative, as we found
upon fitting the model, the utility threshold decreases with
fatigue. This partially offsets the effect of fatigue on utility
values, reflecting compensation. But this also offsets the
effect of the mismatch penalty on the respond production,
allowing more false starts.
Third, when no production has sufficiently high utility to
enact, a microlapse occurs. Concurrent with the microlapse,
FP decreases by a small amount (0 < FPdec < 1),

FP ← FP ⋅ FPdec

(5)

The small drop in FP increases the likelihood of a
microlapse in the subsequent cycle. Across such a series of
cycles, the probability of responding decreases
progressively, producing behavioral lapses.

Diffusion Model
The diffusion model belongs to a class of sequential
sampling models for simple reaction time tasks (Ratcliff &
McKoon, 2008). In these models, information is
accumulated sequentially over time, and a response occurs
when accumulated information reaches a criterion.
Response time is the sum of decision time (i.e., the duration
of the diffusion process) and non-decision time (i.e., the
duration of perceptual and motor processes).
Task Model Ratcliff and Van Dongen (2011) built a
diffusion model of the PVT. Because the PVT is a onechoice reaction time task, their model included a single
decision criterion, A. Evidence accumulated from zero to the
criterion. Drift rate varied across trials according to a
normal distribution with mean V and standard deviation η.
Non-decision time was uniformly distributed with mean TND
and range SD. Ratcliff and Van Dongen (2011) found that as
fatigue increased, drift rate (V) decreased, and the standard
deviation of drift rate (η) increased. These dynamics were
captured by decreasing the ratio V/η.

pertains to processing after the stimulus appears, and
therefore makes no predictions about false starts. To
produce false starts, we implemented a diffusion process
that began during the pre-stimulus interval and persisted
beyond stimulus presentation. Conceptually, the rate of
information accumulation should increase once the stimulus
appears. Thus, we set drift rate to zero during the prestimulus interval, and allowed drift rate to become positive
after stimulus presentation.
Neurobiological models of simple decisions further
informed our implementation. Passive decay is an intrinsic
property of neural activity. Excitatory feedback connections
offset decay. When excitatory feedback dominates, the
neural circuit moves away from baseline and is said to be
unstable. When decay dominates, the circuit returns to
baseline and is said to be stable. One function of decay is to
dampen noise from excitatory feedback connections. This
ensures that representations remain near baseline in the
absence of input signals. Usher and McClelland (2001)
incorporated decay into a sequential sampling model of
perceptual choice. Likewise, we incorporated decay into the
PVT model, which reduces the likelihood of responding
during the pre-stimulus interval. Preliminary simulations
showed that the diffusion model with decay committed false
starts about as frequently as participants did.
Integration Ratcliff and Van Dongen (2011) found that the
ratio V/η, as estimated repeatedly over a period of extended
wakefulness, was correlated with the output of a
biomathematical model of fatigue (McCauley et al., 2013).
In our simulations, we allowed η to take one value across all
sessions, and V to take different values for each session (cf.
supplemental material in Ratcliff & Van Dongen, 2011).
Drift rate was set to zero during the pre-stimulus interval.
As such, changes in drift rate with time awake affect poststimulus processing but not the frequency of false starts.
Two other model parameters could affect false starts,
however. First, if decay decreased with time awake, reduced
drag on evidence accumulation would allow more decision
processes to reach the criterion during the pre-stimulus
interval. Second, if the decision criterion decreased with
time awake, more decision processes would terminate
during the pre-stimulus interval. Because Ratcliff and Van
Dongen (2011) reported that the decision criterion did not
vary with time awake, we allowed decay, but not the
decision criterion, to take different values for each session.
We implemented the model as a random walk
approximation of a diffusion process. At each time step, a
displacement of Δ (toward the decision criterion) occurs
with probability p, and a displacement of –Δ (away from the
decision criterion) occurs with probability 1-p. The size of
the displacement depends on the granularity of the time step
(τ = .005 sec) and the within-trial stochastic component of
the accumulation process (s = 0.1; Tuerlinckx et al., 2001),

Δ=s τ

Extension Ratcliff and Van Dongen’s model (2011)

1744

(6)

The probability of positive displacement depends on these
factors and drift rate,

" V τ
p = 0.5⋅ $$1+
s
#

%
''
&

of responses in 10 ms bins from 150 to 500 ms (i.e., the
distribution of alert responses), as well as the proportion of
trials with false starts and lapses.

Results

(7)

To implement decay, we modified the displacement term,

Δ = s τ − λ ⋅ Evidence

(8)

Evidence is the accumulated information to that point in the
trial, and λ is the decay term. Decay acts in the opposite
direction of accumulated information because of the
negative sign, and the strength of decay scales with the
amount of accumulated information.
The V parameter is derived from the biomathematical
model of fatigue (McCauley et al., 2013; Fig 1) by the
equation, V = Vintercept+Vslope·Fatigue. When Vslope is
negative, as we found by fitting the model, drift rate
decreases with fatigue. Consequently, information
accumulation occurs more gradually. The λ parameter is
also derived from the biomathematical model by the
equation, λ = λintercept+λslope·Fatigue. When λslope is negative,
as we found upon fitting the model, decay decreases with
fatigue. This partially offsets the effect of fatigue on drift
rate. But this also offsets the stabilizing effect of decay
during the pre-stimulus interval, allowing more false starts.

ACT-R The ACT-R model closely matched the observed
PDFs (Fig. 2.). MSE for each participant ranged from
.08·10-3 to .16·10-3 with a mean of .11·10-3. Correlation for
each participant ranged from .89 to .96 with a mean of .93.
The ACT-R model captures the three previously
described effects of fatigue on PVT performance: (1)
slowing of alert responses, (2) more lapses, and (3) more
false starts. In the ACT-R model, the first and second effects
occur because of the greater frequency of microlapses with
time awake. FPslope is more negative then FTslope, t(12) =
12.2, p < .001 (Table 1). Consequently, production utilities
drop below the utility threshold after extended wakefulness,
resulting in more microlapses. Microlapses slow alert
responses, and sometimes delay responses beyond 500 ms.
This is accentuated by the fact that with each microlapse,
the probability of another microlapse occurring increases
(FPdec, Eq. 5). The third effect occurs because of the
negative value of FTslope, t(12) = 6.7, p < .001. Lowering the
utility threshold partially offsets the effect of fatigue on
production utilities. But lowering the threshold also reduces
the inhibitory influence of the mismatch penalty on the
respond production, leading to more false starts.

Statistical Methods
Van Dongen et al. (2013) administered PVT sessions to
participants approximately once every 2 hours over 62
hours. Each session contained relatively few observations.
Therefore, we collapsed data over the circadian cycle, that
is, across sessions that occurred in the same day of the
experiment for each participant (Baseline: 0 to 14 hours
awake; Day 1: 14 to 38 hours; Day 2: 38 to 62 hours).
Responses in the PVT occur before (false starts) or after
(alert responses and lapses) the stimulus appears. We fit the
models to the complete reaction time distributions. To do
so, we binned reaction times corresponding to the 5%
quantiles of responses from 150 ms to 500 ms after stimulus
presentation for each participant and on each day of the
experiment. We created cumulative distribution functions
(CDFs) for each participant by calculating the proportion of
trials with responses before 150 ms (i.e., false starts), and
the proportions of trials with responses by each of the 20
quantiles of reaction times. We used a simplex search
algorithm to find parameter values that minimized mean
squared error (MSE) between the predicted and observed
CDFs. Thus, for each participant, we estimated one set of
parameter values across all days of the experiment, and
parameters that changed across sessions did so according to
the biomathematical model. Simulations leveraged largescale computational resources (Harris, 2008).
For ease of interpretation, we display group-level data,
but reported fits are at the level of individuals. We present
probability density functions (PDFs) showing the proportion

Table 1: Mean and Standard Deviation over Subjects of
Parameters for the ACT-R and Diffusion Models
ACT-R Model
Parameter
Value

Diffusion Model
Parameter
Value

Ui
FPslope
Threshold
FTslope
FPdec
Cycle time

TND
SD
A
Vslope
Vintercept
λslope
λintercept
η

4.96 ± .50
-.01 ± .01
4.35 ± .46
-.005 ± .01
.98 ± .01
.04 ± .01

.12 ± .03
.09 ± .03
.10 ± .01
-.02 ± .01
1.30 ± .11
-3·10-4 ± 2·10-4
.04 ± .01
.16 ± .07

Diffusion Model The diffusion model also closely matched
the observed PDFs (Fig. 2). MSE for each participant
ranged from .07·10-3 to .12·10-3 with a mean value of
.10·10-3. Correlation for each participant ranged from .91 to
.96 with a mean value of .94.
Like the ACT-R model, the diffusion model captures the
three previously described effects of fatigue on PVT
performance. The first and second effects occur because of
the more gradual accumulation of information with time
awake. Vslope is negative, t(12) = 9.0, p < .001 (Table 1), so
that although drift rate is initially high, it decreases with
time awake. Consequently, the reaction time distribution
becomes more skewed to the right. The third effect,
increased false starts, occurs because of the negative value
of λslope, t(12) = 3.7, p < .01 (Table 1). Reducing decay
partially offsets the effect of fatigue on drift rate, but this

1745

also creates greater instability. Noise thus begins to drive
the diffusion process beyond the decision criterion during
the pre-stimulus interval, leading to more false starts.
Comparison Better than the fits of the models to the data
were their fits to each other. MSE between the models’
PDFs (.05·10-3) was lower than MSE between either model
and the data. Likewise, the correlation between the models’
PDFs (.97) exceeded the correlation between either model
and the data. Moreover, the models’ residual errors were
highly correlated, r = 0.85. Thus, there was substantial
overlap between the models in terms of what they succeeded
and failed to account for in the data (Fig. 2).

Discussion
In this paper, we compared two computational models of the
effects of fatigue from sleep loss on psychomotor vigilance
performance. The first uses ACT-R; the second uses a
diffusion process. In both accounts, a biomathematical
model controls dynamic parameters affected by sleep loss.
On the surface, the accounts appear dissimilar. They
differ in whether they treat the decision to respond as a
repeated or unitary event. In ACT-R, a production only has
effect when its value exceeds the utility threshold. Slow
responses occur because the productions attend and
respond, though repeatedly selected, have insufficient utility
to enact. The diffusion model represents decision time as the
duration of a single diffusion process. Slow responses occur
because the diffusion process moves inconsistently toward
the decision boundary when drift rate is low.
The accounts also differ in whether they treat evidence
accumulation as discrete or continuous. In ACT-R, the
respond production fires once its value exceeds all other
productions and the utility threshold. This depends largely
on moment-by-moment fluctuations in noise (Eq. 1). The
diffusion model initiates a response when accumulated
information exceeds the decision criterion. Accumulation
occurs gradually in the moments leading up to the response.

Notwithstanding these differences, the accounts capture
the negative effects of fatigue through the same basic
underlying mechanisms. First, fatigue increases the relative
contribution of noise to the decision process. In ACT-R, this
is achieved by decreasing production utilities. In the
diffusion model, this is achieved by decreasing drift rate.
Second, fatigue reduces neural inhibition. In ACT-R, this is
accomplished by reducing the utility threshold. In the
diffusion model as implemented here, this is accomplished
by reducing decay. The unexpected convergence present
across modeling formalisms supports a more general
account of how fatigue from sleep loss impairs psychomotor
vigilance performance.

Connection with Local Sleep Theory
According to a recent theoretical proposal, cognitive deficits
from fatigue due to sleep loss are caused, at least in part, by
use-dependent, local sleep interfering with cognitive
processing (Van Dongen, Belenky, & Krueger, 2011). Sleep
occurs locally at the level of cortical columns in response to
neuronal use, while overall the brain maintains wakefulness.
This degrades the processing capacity of neuronal circuits
that subserve the cognitive processes associated with the
performance task at hand (Chee & Asplund, 2013). The
ACT-R and diffusion modeling accounts described in this
paper are both consistent with this theory.
The local sleep theory also posits that use-dependent local
sleep underlies the time-on-task effect (i.e., the increase of
performance impairment and instability across task
duration) and its interaction with sleep deprivation, as has
been documented for the PVT (Van Dongen, Belenky, &
Krueger, 2011). The time-on-task effect was not adequately
explained by earlier theories of the effects of fatigue on
cognition, and is also not accounted for in the ACT-R and
diffusion models described here because neither embodies
use-dependence. However, it should be straightforward to
incorporate use-dependence in future versions of these
models. Indeed, a proposal already exists for capturing time-

Figure 2. PVT response time distributions across 62 hours of total sleep deprivation (±1 STD), averaged over each day of
the experiment. The first bin shows the proportion of false starts (FS), and the final bin show the proportion of lapses (LA).
The middle bins show the proportion of responses occurring in 10 ms intervals from 150 to 500 ms.

1746

on-task effects on psychomotor vigilance in ACT-R using
the mechanisms described here (Gunzelmann et al., 2010).

Future Research
The present research is based on a single data set that was
used to fit parameters of the integrated computational model
accounts. Work currently in progress will employ
independent data sets for validation. In this further research
we will also pursue a formal mathematical comparison of
the reaction time distributions generated by the ACT-R and
diffusion model approaches.
Both the ACT-R model and the diffusion model described
here are based on putative principles of cognitive
functioning and would be expected to generalize to tasks
other than the PVT (Gunzelmann et al., 2011; Ratcliff &
Van Dongen, 2011). Although encompassing different
levels of abstraction, the two models both describe how the
temporal dynamics of fatigue from sleep loss affect
components of cognition. These components are evoked in
the PVT, and they are evoked in various other tasks. As
such, these computational modeling approaches have
considerable predictive potential – because the same
components of cognition are used in different tasks and
contexts, theories of how fatigue affects those components
can be leveraged to predict performance in novel
circumstances. This potential has already been demonstrated
for the ACT-R model (Gunzelmann et al., 2009a;
Gunzelmann et al., 2011). Even so, the extent of
generalizability of the two distinct accounts discussed here
needs to be documented, and we may find that this
ultimately differentiates them.

Acknowledgments
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors
and do not reflect the official policy or position of the
Department of Defense or the U.S. Government. This
research was supported by the AFRL’s Warfighter
Readiness Research Division and by NIH grant
R01HL105768, and in part by AFOSR grant FA9550-09-10136 and ONR grant N00014-13-1-0302. Matthew Walsh
held a National Research Council Research Associateship
Award with the AFRL while conducting this research.

References
Anderson, J. R. (2007). How can the human mind occur in
the physical universe. New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
Borbély, A. A., & Achermann, P. (1999). Sleep homeostasis
and models of sleep regulation. Journal of Biological
Rhythms, 6, 559-570.
Chee, M. W. L., & Asplund, C. L. (2013). Neuroimaging of
attention and alteration of processing capacity in sleepdeprived persons. In E. Nofzinger, P. Maquet, & M. J.
Thorpy (Eds.), Neuroimaging of sleep and sleep disorders
(pp. 137-144). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dinges, D. F., (1995). An overview of sleepiness and
accidents. Journal of Sleep Research, 4, 4-14.

Gunzelmann, G., Byrne, M.D., Gluck, K.A., & Moore, L.R.
(2009a). Using computational cognitive modeling to
predict dual-task performance with sleep deprivation.
Human Factors, 51, 251-260.
Gunzelmann, G., Gross, J. B., Gluck, K. A., & Dinges, D. F.
(2009b). Sleep deprivation and sustained attention
performance. Integrating mathematical and cognitive
modeling. Cognitive Science, 33, 880-910.
Gunzelmann, G., Moore, L.R., Gluck, K.A., Van Dongen,
H.P.A., & Dinges, D.F. (2010). Fatigue in sustained
attention: Generalizing mechanisms for time awake to
time on task. In P. L. Ackerman (Ed.), Cognitive fatigue:
Multidisciplinary perspectives on current research and
future applications (pp. 83-96). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Gunzelmann, G., Moore, L. R., Salvucci, D. D., & Gluck,
K. A. (2011). Sleep loss and driver performance:
Quantitative predictions with zero free parameters.
Cognitive Systems Research, 12, 154-163.
Harris, J. (2008). MindModeling@Home: a large-scale
computational cognitive modeling infrastructure. In
Proceedings of the 6th annual conference on systems
engineering research.
Hublin, C., Kaprio, J., Partinen, M., & Koskenvuo, M.
(2001). Insufficient sleep: a population-based study in
adults. Sleep, 24, 392-400.
Jackson, M. L., Gunzelmann, G., Whitney, P., Hinson, J.
M., Belenky, G., Rabat, A., & Van Dongen, H. P. A.
(2013). Deconstructing and reconstructing cognitive
performance in sleep deprivation. Sleep Medicine
Reviews, 17, 215-225.
Lim, J., & Dinges, D. F. (2008). Sleep deprivation and
vigilant attention. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 1129, 305-322.
McCauley, P., Kalachev, L. V., Mollicone, D. J., Banks, S.,
Dinges, D. F., & Van Dongen, H. P. A. (2013). Dynamic
circadian modulation in a biomathematical model for the
effects of sleep and sleep loss on waking neurobehavioral
performance. Sleep, 36, 1987-1997.
Ratcliff, R., & McKoon, G. (2008). The diffusion decision
model: Theory and data for two-choice decision tasks.
Neural Computation, 20, 873-922.
Ratcliff, R., & Van Dongen, H. P. A. (2011). Diffusion
model for one-choice reaction-time tasks and the
cognitive effects of sleep deprivation. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 108, 11285-11290.
Tuerlinckx, F., Maris, E., Ratcliff, R., & De Boeck, P.
(2001). A comparison of four methods for simulating the
diffusion process. Behavioral Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 33, 443-456.
Usher, M., & McClelland, J. L. (2001). The time course of
perceptual choice: The leaky, competing accumulator
model. Psychological Review, 108, 550-592.
Van Dongen, H. P. A., Belenky, G., & Krueger, J. M.
(2011), A local, bottom-up perspective on sleep
deprivation and neurobehavioral performance. Current
Topics in Medicinal Chemistry, 11, 2414-2422.

1747

