UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Computational Evidence that Self-regulation of Creativity is Good for Society

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/72k7d135

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Gabora, Liane
Tseng, Simon

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Computational Evidence that Self-regulation of Creativity is Good for Society
Liane Gabora (liane.gabora@ubc.ca)
University of British Columbia
Department of Psychology, Okanagan campus, Arts Building, 3333 University Way
Kelowna BC, V1V 1V7, CANADA

Simon Tseng (s.tseng@alumni.ubc.ca)
University of British Columbia
Department of Engineering, 5000-2332 Main Mall
Vancouver BC,V6T 1Z4, CANADA
Abstract
Excess individual creativity can be detrimental to society
because creators invest in unproven ideas at the expense
of propagating proven ones. Moreover, a proportion of
individuals can benefit from creativity without being creative
themselves by copying creators.
We hypothesized that
(1) societies increase their rate of cultural evolution by
tempering the novelty-generating effects of creativity with
the novelty-preserving effects of imitation, and (2) this is
carried out by selectively rewarding and punishing creativity
according to the value of the individuals’ creative outputs. We
tested this using an agent-based model of cultural evolution
in which each agent self-regulated its invention-to-imitation
ratio as a function of the fitness of its cultural outputs. In
self-regulating societies, agents segregated into creators and
imitators. The mean fitness of cultural outputs was higher
than in non-self-regulating societies, and changes in diversity
were rapider and more pronounced. We discuss limitations
and possible social implications of our findings.
Keywords: Agent-based model; creativity; imitation; individual differences; self regulation; cultural evolution EVOC.

Introduction
It is commonly assumed that creativity is desirable, and
the more creative one is, the better. Our capacity for selfexpression, problem solving, and making aesthetically pleasing artifacts, all stem from our creative abilities. However,
individuals often claim that their creativity is stifled by social
norms, policies, and institutions. Moreover, our educational
systems do not appear to prioritize the cultivation of creativity, and in some ways discourage it.
Perhaps there is an adaptive value to these seemingly
mixed messages that society sends about the social desirability of creativity. Perhaps what is best for society is that individuals vary widely with respect to how creative they are, so
as to ensure that the society as a whole both generates novel
variants, and preserves the best of them. This paper provides
a computational test of the hypothesis that society as a whole
benefits when individuals can vary how creative they are in
response to the perceived effectiveness of their ideas.

Definition and Key Features of Creativity
There are a plethora of definitions of creativity in the literature; nevertheless, it is commonly accepted that a core characteristic of creativity is the production of an idea or product
that meets two criteria: originality or novelty, and appropriateness, adaptiveness, or usefulness, i.e., relevance to the task

at hand (Guilford, 1950; Moran, 2011). Not only are humans
individually creative, but we build on each other’s ideas such
that over centuries, art, science, and technology, as well as
customs and folk knowledge, can be said to evolve. This
cumulative building of new innovations on existing products is sometimes referred to as the ratchet effect (Tomasello,
Kruger, & Ratner, 1993). Creativity has long been associated
with personal fulfillment (May, 1975; Rogers, 1959), selfactualization (Maslow, 1959), and maintaining a competitive
edge in the marketplace. Thus it is often assumed that more
creativity is necessarily better.
However, there are significant drawbacks to creativity
(Cropley, Cropley, Kaufman, & Runco, 2010; Ludwig, 1995).
Generating creative ideas is difficult and time consuming, and
a creative solution to one problem often generates other problems, or has unexpected negative side effects that may only
become apparent after much effort has been invested. Creativity is correlated with rule bending, law breaking, and social unrest (Sternberg & Lubart, 1995; Sulloway, 1996), aggression (Tacher & Readdick, 2006), group conflict (Troyer
& Youngreen, 2009), and dishonesty (Gino & Ariely, 2012).
Creative individuals are more likely to be viewed as aloof,
arrogant, competitive, hostile, independent, introverted, lacking in warmth, nonconformist, norm doubting, unconscientious, unfriendly (Batey & Furnham, 2006; Qian, Plucker, &
Shen, 2010; Treffinger, Young, Selby, & Shepardson, 2002).
They tend to be more emotionally unstable, and more prone
to affective disorders such as depression and bipolar disorder,
and have a higher incidence of schizophrenic tendencies, than
other segments of the population (Andreason, 1987; Eysenck,
1993; Flaherty, 2005). They are also more prone to drug and
alcohol abuse, as well as suicide (Jamison, 1993; Goodwin,
1998; Rothenberg, 1990; Kaufman, 2003). This suggests that
there is a cost to creativity, both to the individual and to society.

Balancing Novelty with Continuity
Given the correlation between creativity and personality traits
that are potentially socially disruptive, it is perhaps fortunate
that in a group of interacting individuals, not all of them need
be particularly creative for the benefits of creativity to be felt
throughout the group. The rest can reap the rewards of the
creator’s ideas by copying them, buying from them, or sim-

2240

ply admiring them. Few of us know how to build a computer,
or write a symphony, but they are nonetheless ours to use and
enjoy. Of course, if everyone relied on the strategy of imitating others rather than coming up with their own ideas, the
generation of cultural novelty would grind to a halt. On the
other hand, if everyone were as creative as the most creative
amongst us, the frequency of the above-mentioned antisocial
tendencies of creative people might be sufficiently high to interfere with cultural stability; i.e., the perpetuation of cultural
continuity. It is well known in theoretical biology that both
novelty and continuity are essential for evolution, that is, for
cumulative, open-ended, adaptive change over time.
This need for both novelty and continuity was demonstrated in an agent-based model of cultural evolution (Gabora,
1995). Novelty was injected into the artificial society through
the invention of new actions, and continuity was preserved
through the imitation of existing actions. When agents never
invented, there was nothing to imitate, and there was no cultural evolution at all. If the ratio of invention to imitation
was even marginally greater than 0, not only was cumulative cultural evolution possible, but eventually all agents converged on optimal cultural outputs. When all agents always
invented and never imitated, the mean fitness of cultural outputs was also sub-optimal because fit ideas were not dispersing through society. The society as a whole performed optimally when the ratio of creating to imitating was approximately 2:1. Although results obtained with a simple computer model may have little bearing on complex human societies, the finding that extremely high levels of creativity can
be detrimental to the society suggests that there may be an
adaptive value to society’s ambivalent attitude toward creativity.
This suggested that society as a whole might benefit from
a distinction between the conventional workforce and what
has been called a “creative class” (Florida, 2002) This was
investigated in the model by introducing two types of agents:
imitators, that only obtained new actions by imitating neighbors, and creators, that obtained new actions either by inventing or imitating (Gabora & Firouzi, 2012). It was possible to vary the probability that creators create versus imitate; thus, whereas a given agent was either a creator or an
imitator throughout the entire run, the proportion of creators
innovating or imitating in a given iteration fluctuated stochastically. The mean fitness of ideas across the artificial society
was highest when not all agents were creators. Specifically,
there was a tradeoff between C, the proportion of creators
to imitators in the society, and p, how creative the creators
were). This provided further support for the hypothesis that
society as a whole functions optimally when creativity is tempered with continuity.
We then hypothesized that society as a whole might perform even better if individuals are able to adjust how creative they are over time in accordance with their perceived
creative success. This could occur through mechanisms such
as selective ostracization of deviant behaviour unless accom-

panied by the generation of valuable cultural novelty, and encouraging of successful creators. In this way society might
self-organize into a balanced mix of novelty generating creators and continuity perpetuating imitators, both of which are
necessary for cumulative cultural evolution. A first step in
investigating this hypothesis was to determine whether it is
algorithmically possible to increase the mean fitness of ideas
in a society by enabling them to self-regulate how creative
they are.

The Computational Model
We investigated this using an agent-based model of cultural
evolution referred to as “EVOlution of Culture”, abbreviated
EVOC. It uses neural network based agents that (1) invent
new ideas, (2) imitate actions implemented by neighbors, (3)
evaluate ideas, and (4) implement successful ideas as actions.
EVOC is an elaboration of Meme and Variations, or MAV
(Gabora, 1995), the earliest computer program to model culture as an evolutionary process in its own right, as opposed to
modeling the interplay of cultural and biological evolution1 .
The goal behind MAV, and also behind EVOC, was to distil
the underlying logic of not biological evolution but cultural
evolution, i.e., the process by which ideas adapt and build on
one another in the minds of interacting individuals. Agents
do not evolve in a biological sense, for they neither die nor
have offspring, but do in a cultural sense, by generating and
sharing ideas for actions. In cultural evolution, the generation
of novelty takes place through invention , and the differential
replication of novelty takes place through imitation . EVOC
was originally developed to investigate the similarities and
differences between biological and cultural evolution, and it
has been used to address such questions as how does the presence of leaders or barriers to the diffusion of ideas affect cultural evolution.
We now summarize briefly the architecture of EVOC in
sufficient detail to explain our results; for further details we
refer the reader to previous publications (Gabora, 1995; Gabora, Chia, & Firouzi, 2013; Gabora & Firouzi, 2012).

Agents
Agents consist of (1) a neural network, which encodes ideas
for actions and detects trends in what constitutes a fit action, (2) a ‘perceptual system’, which observes and evaluates neighbours’ actions, and (3) a body, consisting of six
body parts which implement actions. The neural network
is composed of six input nodes and six corresponding output nodes that represent concepts of body parts (LEFT ARM,
RIGHT ARM, LEFT LEG, RIGHT LEG, HEAD, and HIPS),
and seven hidden nodes that represent more abstract concepts
(LEFT, RIGHT, ARM, LEG, SYMMETRY, OPPOSITE, and
MOVEMENT). Input nodes and output nodes are connected
to hidden nodes of which they are instances (e.g., RIGHT
1 The

approach can thus be contrasted with computer models of
how individual learning affects biological evolution (Best, 1999;
Higgs, 1992; Hinton & Nowlan, 1992; Hutchins & Hazelhurst,
1991).

2241

mh = 1 if head is stationary; 0 otherwise

ARM is connected to RIGHT.) Each body part can occupy
one of three possible positions: a neutral or default position,
and two other positions, which are referred to as active positions. Activation of any input node activates the MOVEMENT hidden node. Same-direction activation of symmetrical input nodes (e.g., positive activation – which represents
upward motion – of both arms) activates the SYMMETRY
node.

Note that there are multiple optima. (For example an action
can be optimal if either both arms move up or if both arms
move down.) The fitness Fc of a multi-step action with n
chained single-step actions (each with fitness Fn ) is calculated
by Eq. 2.
n

Fc =

Invention

Fn

∑ 1.2n−1

(2)

k=1

An idea for a new action is a pattern consisting of six elements
that dictate the placement of the six body parts. Agents generate new actions by modifying their initial action or an action
that has been invented previously or acquired through imitation. During invention, the pattern of activation on the output
nodes is fed back to the input nodes, and invention is biased
according to the activations of the SYMMETRY and MOVEMENT hidden nodes. (Were this not the case there would
be no benefit to using a neural network.) To invent a new
idea, for each node of the idea currently represented on the
input layer of the neural network, the agent makes a probabilistic decision as to whether the position of that body part
will change, and if it does, the direction of change is stochastically biased according to the learning rate. If the new idea
has a higher fitness than the currently implemented idea, the
agent learns and implements the action specified by that idea.
When “chaining” is turned on, an agent can keep adding new
sub-actions and thereby execute a multi-step action, so long
as the most recently-added sub-action is both an optimal subaction and different from the previous sub-action of that action (Gabora et al., 2013).

Learning
Invention makes use of the ability to detect, learn, and respond adaptively to trends. Since no action acquired through
imitation or invention is implemented unless it is fitter than
the current action, new actions provide valuable information
about what constitutes an effective idea. Knowledge acquired
through the evaluation of actions is translated into educated
guesses about what constitutes a successful action by updating the learning rate. For example, an agent may learn that
more overall movement tends to be either beneficial (as with
the fitness function used here) or detrimental, or that symmetrical movement tends to be either beneficial (as with the
fitness function used here) or detrimental, and bias the generation of new actions accordingly.

The Artificial World
These experiments used a default artificial world: a toroidal
lattice with 1024 cells each occupied by a single, stationary
agent, and a von Neumann neighborhood structure. Creators
and imitators were randomly dispersed.

Imitation

A Typical Run

The process of finding a neighbour to imitate works through
a form of lazy (non-greedy) search. The imitating agent randomly scans its neighbours, and adopts the first action that is
fitter than the action it is currently implementing. If it does
not find a neighbour that is executing a fitter action than its
own current action, it continues to execute the current action.

Fitness and diversity of actions are initially low because all
agents are initially immobile, implementing the same action,
with all body parts in the neutral position. Soon some agent
invents an action that has a higher fitness than immobility,
and this action gets imitated, so fitness increases. Fitness increases further as other ideas get invented, assessed, implemented as actions, and spread through imitation. The diversity of actions increases as agents explore the space of possible actions, and then decreases as agents hone in on the fittest
actions. Thus, over successive rounds of invention and imitation, the agents’ actions improve. EVOC thereby models
how “descent with modification” occurs in a purely cultural
context.

Evaluation: The Fitness Function
Following Holland (1975), we refer to the success of an action in the artificial world as its fitness, with the caveat that
unlike its usage in biology, here the term is unrelated to number of offspring (or ideas derived from a given idea). The fitness function used in these experiments rewards activity of all
body parts except for the head, and symmetrical limb movement. Fitness of a single-step action Fn is determined as per
Eq. 1. Total body movement, m, is calculated by adding the
number of active body parts, i.e., body parts not in the neutral
position.
Fn = m + 1.5(sa + st ) + 2(1 − mh )
sa = 1 if arms move symmetrically; 0 otherwise
st = 1 if legs move symmetrically; 0 otherwise

(1)

Method
To test the hypothesis that the mean fitness of cultural outputs
across society increases faster with social regulation (SR)
than without it, we increased the relative frequency of invention for agents that generated superior ideas, and decreased
it for agents that generated inferior ideas. To implement this
the computer code was modified as follows. Each iteration,
for each agent, the fitness of its current action relative to the
mean fitness of actions for all agents at the previous iteration

2242

was assessed. Thus we obtained the relative fitness (RF) of its
cultural output. An agent’s personal probability of creating,
p(C), was a function of RF, determined as follows:
p(C)n = p(C)n−1 × RFn−1

mented actions changes continuously as they find new, fitter
actions.

(3)

The probability of imitating, p(I), was 1 - p(C). Thus
when SR was on, if relative fitness was high the agent invented more, and if it was low the agent imitated more. p(C)
was initialized at 0.5 for both SR and non-SR societies. We
compared runs with SR to runs without it.

Results
All data are averages across 250 runs. The mean fitness of
the cultural outputs of societies with SR (the ability to selfregulate inventiveness as a function of inventive success) was
higher than that of societies without SR, as shown in Figure
1. The fact that ideas got increasingly fitter over the course
of a run was due to the fact that chaining was turned on; a
fit action could always be made fitter by adding another subaction. When chaining was turned off, societies with SR also
outperformed those without it, except that in both SR an nonSR societies the mean fitness plateaued when all agents converged on optimally fit ideas (not shown).

Figure 2: This graph plots the diversity, or total number of
different actions, across all agents over the duration of the
run with and without social regulation.
Societies with SR ended up separating into two distinct
groups: one that primarily invented, and one that primarily
imitated, as illustrated in Figure 3. Thus the observed increase in fitness can indeed be attributed to increasingly pronounced individual differences in their degree of creative expression over the course of a run. Agents that generated superior cultural outputs had more opportunity to do so, while
agents that generated inferior cultural outputs became more
likely to propagate proven effective ideas rather than reinvent
the wheel.

Discussion

Figure 1: This graph plots the mean fitness of implemented
actions across all agents over the duration of the run with
and without social regulation.
The typical pattern was observed with respect to the diversity, or number of different ideas: an increase as the space
of possibilities is explored followed by a decrease as agents
converge on fit actions. However, this pattern occurred earlier, and was more pronounced, in societies with SR than in
societies without it, as shown in Figure 2. Inferior inventors tended to come up with the same ideas and thus discouraging them did not lower diversity, while the ideas of superior inventors tended to go off in different directions, thereby
increasing diversity. Note that, with chaining turned on, although the number of different actions decreases, the agents
do not converge on a static set of actions; the set of imple-

Should society encourage creativity whenever possible, or
with respect to creativity, can there be too much of a good
thing? Are the needs of the individual for creative expression at odds with society’s need to reinforce conventions and
established protocols? EVOC agents are too rudimentary to
suffer the affective penalties of creativity but the model incorporates another drawback to creativity: time spent inventing
is time not spent imitating. Creative agents, whose efforts go
into reprocessing their own ideas rather than copying others,
effectively rupture the fabric of the artificial society; they act
as insulators that impede the diffusion of proven solutions.
Imitators, in contrast, serve as a “cultural memory” that ensures the preservation of successful ideas. When effective
inventors created more and poor inventors created less, the
society as a whole could capitalize on the creative abilities of
the best inventors and capitalize on efforts of the rest to disseminate fit cultural outputs. The results suggest that it can be
beneficial for a social group if individuals are allowed to follow different developmental trajectories in accordance with
their demonstrated successes.
These results do not prove that in real societies successful
creators invent more and unsuccessful creators invent less;

2243

they merely show this kind of self-regulation is a feasible
means of increasing the mean fitness of creative outputs.
However, the fact that strong individual differences in creativity exist (Kaufman, 2003; Wolfradt & Pretz, 2001) suggests
that this occurs in real societies. Whether prompted by individuals themselves or mediated by way of social cues, families, organizations, or societies may evolve faster by spontaneously self-organizing to achieve a balance between creative processes that generate innovations and the imitative
processes that disseminate these innovations. They thereby
temper novelty with continuity. A more complex version of
this scheme is that individuals find a task at which they excel,
such that for each task domain there exists some individual
in the social group who comes to be best equipped to explore
that space of possibilities.
The social practice of discouraging creativity until the individual has proven him- or herself may serve as a form of
social self-regulation ensuring that creative efforts are not
squandered. Individuals who are tuned to social norms and
expectations may over time become increasingly concerned
with imitating and cooperating with others in a manner that
promotes cultural continuity. Their thoughts travel more
well-worn routes, and they are increasingly less likely to innovate. Others might be tuned to the demands of creative
tasks, and less tethered to social norms and expectations, and
thereby more likely to see things from unconventional perspectives. Thus they are more likely to come up with solutions to problems or unexpected challenges, find new avenues
for self-expression, and contribute to the generation of cultural novelty. In other words, what Cropley et al. (2010) refer
to as the “dark side of creativity” may reflect that the creative
individual is tuned to task needs at expense of human needs.
Although in the long run this benefits the group as a whole
because it results in creative outputs, in the short run the creative individual may be less likely to obey social norms and
live up to social expectations, and to experience stigmatization or discrimination as a result, particularly in his/her early
years (Craft, 2005; Scott, 1999; Torrance, 1963). Once the
merits of such individuals’ creative efforts become known,
they may be supported or even idolized.

Figure 3: At the beginning of the run (top) all agents created
and imitated with equal probability. Midway through the run
their p(C) values were distributed along the range of values
from 0 to 1. By the end of the run (bottom) they had
segregated into imitators (with p(C) from 0 to 0.1) and
creators (with p(C) from 0.9 to 1).

The goal here was to investigate a hypothesis concerning
the relationship between creativity and society rather than to
come up with the most realistic model of creativity possible.
However, a limitation of this work is that currently EVOC
does not allow an agent to imitate some features of an idea
and not others. This would be useful because cultural outputs
both in EVOC and the real world exhibit a version of what
in biology is referred to as epistasis, wherein what is optimal
with respect to one component depends on what is going on
with respect to another. Once both components have been optimized in a mutually beneficial way (in EVOC, for example,
symmetrical arm movement), excess creativity risks breaking up co-adapted partial solutions. In future studies we will
investigate the effects of enabling partial imitation. Another
limitation is that the fitness function was static throughout a

2244

run, and agents had only one action to optimize. In real life,
there are many tasks, and a division of labor such that each
agent specializes in a few tasks, and imitates other agents to
carry out other tasks. It may be that no one individual is
an across-the-board “creator” or “imitator” but that different
individuals find different niches for domain-specific creative
outputs.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from the Natural Sciences
and Engineering Research Council of Canada and the Flemish Fund for Scientific Research, Belgium.

References
Andreason, N. (1987). Creativity and mental illness. prevalence rates in writers and their first degree relatives. American Journal of Psychiatry, 144, 1288–1292.
Batey, M., & Furnham, A. (2006). Creativity, intelligence,
and personality: A critical review of the scattered literature.
Genetic and Social General Psychology Monographs, 7,
355–429.
Best, M. (1999). How culture can guide evolution: An inquiry into gene/meme enhancement and opposition. Adaptive Behavior, 132, 289–293.
Craft, A. (2005). Creativity in schools: Tensions and dilemmas. London: Routledge.
Cropley, D., Cropley, A., Kaufman, J., & Runco, M. (2010).
The dark side of creativity. Cambridge UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Eysenck, H. (1993). Creativity and personality: Suggestions
for a theory. Psychological Inquiry, 4, 147–178.
Flaherty, A. (2005). Frontotemporal and dopaminergic control of idea generation and creative drive. Journal of Computational Neurology, 493, 147–153.
Florida, R. (2002). The rise of the creative class. London:
Basic Books.
Gabora, L. (1995). Meme and variations: A computational
model of cultural evolution. In L. Nadel & D. Stein (Eds.),
1993 lectures in complex systems. Reading MA: AddisonWesley.
Gabora, L., Chia, W., & Firouzi, H. (2013). A computational
model of two cognitive transitions underlying cultural evolution. In Proceedings of the 35th annual meeting of the
cognitive science society (pp. 2344–2349). Houston TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Gabora, L., & Firouzi, H. (2012). Society functions best with
an intermediate level of creativity. In Proceedings of the
34th annual meeting of the cognitive science society (pp.
1578–1583). Houston TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Gino, F., & Ariely, D. (2012). The dark side of creativity:
Original thinkers can be more dishonest. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, 445–459.
Goodwin, D. (1998). Alcohol and the writer. New York:
Penguin.
Guilford, J. (1950). Creativity. American Psychologisty, 5,
444–454.

Higgs, P. (1992). The mimetic transition: a simulation study
of the evolution of learning by imitation. Proceedings of the
Royal Society B - Biological Sciences, 267, 1355–1361.
Hinton, G., & Nowlan, S. (1992). How learning can guide
evolution. Complex Systems, 267, 495–502.
Holland, J. (1975). Adaptation in natural and artificial systems. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Hutchins, E., & Hazelhurst, B. (1991). Learning in the cultural process. In C. Langton, J. Taylor, D. Farmer, & S. Rasmussen (Eds.), Artificial life ii. Redwood City: AddisonWesley.
Jamison, K. (1993). Touched by fire: Manic-depressive illness and the artistic temperament. New York: Free Press.
Kaufman, J. (2003). The cost of the muse: Poets die young.
Death Studies, 27, 813–822.
Ludwig, A. (1995). The price of greatness. New York: Guilford Press.
Maslow, A. (1959). Creativity in self-actualizing people.
In Harper & Brothers (Eds.), Creativity and its cultivation.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
May, R. (1975). The courage to create. New York: Bantam.
Moran, S. (2011). The roles of creativity in society. In
J. Kaufman & R. Sternberg (Eds.), Cambridge handbook
of creativity. Cambridge UK: Cambridge University Press.
Qian, M., Plucker, J., & Shen, J. (2010). A model of chinese adolescents creative personality. Creativity Research
Journal, 22, 62–67.
Rogers, C. (1959). Toward a theory of creativity. In H. Anderson (Ed.), Creativity and its cultivation. New York: Harper
& Row.
Rothenberg, A. (1990). Creativity, mental health, and alcoholism. Creativity Research Journal, 3, 179–201.
Scott, C. (1999). Teachers biases toward creative children.
Creativity Research Journal, 12, 321–337.
Sternberg, R., & Lubart, T. (1995). Defying the crowd: Cultivating creativity in a culture of conformity. New York:
Free Press.
Sulloway, F. (1996). Born to rebel. New York: Pantheon.
Tacher, E., & Readdick, C. (2006). The relation between
aggression and creativity among second graders. Creativity
Research Journal, 18, 261267.
Tomasello, M., Kruger, A., & Ratner, H. (1993). Cultural
learning. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16, 495–552.
Torrance, E. (1963). Guiding creative talent. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Treffinger, D., Young, G., Selby, E., & Shepardson, C.
(2002). Assessing creativity: A guide for educators
(rm02170). Storrs CT: University of Connecticut Press and
The National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented.
Troyer, L., & Youngreen, R. (2009). Conflict and creativity
in groups. Journal of Social Issues, 65, 409–413.
Wolfradt, U., & Pretz, J. (2001). Individual differences in creativity: Personality, story writing, and hobbies. European
Journal of Personality, 15, 297–310.

2245

