UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Complement Coercion as the Processing of Aspectual Verbs: Evidence from Self-Paced
Reading and fMRI

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/15x0779z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Lai, Yao-Ying
Lacadie, Cheryl
Constable, Todd
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Complement Coercion as the Processing of Aspectual Verbs:
Evidence from Self-Paced Reading and fMRI
Yao-Ying Lai (yao-ying.lai@yale.edu)
Department of Linguistics, Yale University,
370 Temple Street, New Haven, CT 06520 USA

Cheryl Lacadie (cheryl.lacadie@yale.edu)
Yale Magnetic Resonance Research Center
300 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520 USA

Todd Constable (todd.constable@yale.edu)
Yale Magnetic Resonance Research Center
300 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520 USA

Ashwini Deo (ashwini.deo@yale.edu)
Department of Linguistics, Yale University,
370 Temple Street, New Haven, CT 06520 USA

Maria Mercedes Piñango (maria.pinango@yale.edu)
Department of Linguistics, Yale University,
370 Temple Street, New Haven, CT 06520 USA
Abstract

eventive interpretation is obtained. That is, a sentence like
(1) can only be interpreted as making reference to some
event involving a book with John as its agent.

Verbs like begin and enjoy have been assumed to select
for events and would coerce an entity-denoting
complement to an event in semantic representation; such
type-shifting operation engenders additional processing
cost. However, recent studies show that this effect is
observable only for aspectual verbs (e.g. begin), but not
psychological verbs (e.g. enjoy), suggesting the set of
“coercion verbs” is heterogeneous. We hypothesize that
aspectual verbs select for structured individuals instead of
events. They lexically encode a set of functions, each
applying on a dimension (e.g. eventive, informational,
spatial) denoted by the complement. The parser must
determine the verb’s specific function and the dimension
from the complement. The processing cost results from (1)
exhaustive activation of the verb’s lexical functions and (2)
resolution of ambiguity created by dimension extraction
from the complement. We show that processing aspectual
verbs was more costly than psychological verbs and that it
recruited Wernicke’s area for cost 1 and LIFG for cost 2.

(1) John began enjoyed the book.
(2) John began/enjoyed reading/writing the book.
The contrast in (1) and (2) has been interpreted as an
instance of the broader phenomenon of type coercion.
The hypothesis is that complements denoting ordinary
individuals cannot directly compose with a class of verbs
(including aspectual, psychological, and some others),
leading to a mismatch in the semantic representation. This
mismatch is resolved by a semantic operation, typeshifting (Partee, 1983; Partee & Rooth, 1983), that
coerces the semantic type of the entity-denoting
complement into the appropriate event-denoting type.
Experimental investigation of this phenomenon has
revealed behavioral and neurological patterns that are
taken to support this linguistic analysis. Psycholinguistic
studies, using a variety of experimental paradigms, report
that combining an entity-denoting complement with a
coercion verb (John began the book) engenders more
processing cost than combining it with a non-coercion
verb (John read the book) during real-time
comprehension (Frisson & McElree, 2008; Katsika et al.,
2012; McElree et al., 2001; McElree et al., 2006;
Pickering, McElree, & Traxler, 2005; Pickering et al.,
2006; Traxler, Pickering, McElree, 2002; Traxler et al.,
2005). On the neurolinguistic side, it has been found that

Keywords: complement coercion; aspectual verbs;
semantic composition; semantic-syntax mismatch; typeshifting; ambiguity resolution.

Introduction
The Complement Coercion Phenomenon
It has been proposed that verbs like begin and enjoy
carry a selectional restriction and must combine with an
event-denoting
complement
(Pustejovsky
1995,
Jackendoff 1997). Supporting evidence comes from the
observation that even in sentences where the complement
denotes an individual of the ordinary sort, only an

1

2525

the complement coercion effect recruits three distinct
cortical regions: Wernicke’s area (Piñango & Zurif,
2001), ventro-medial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC)
(Pylkkanen & McElree, 2007), and BA45 (Husband,
Kelly, & Zhu, 2011). The additional cost has been
interpreted as manifesting type-shifting operation or the
mechanism of building an eventive representation from an
entity-denoting expression, and the observed patterns in
particular brain areas have been interpreted as evidence
that these areas implement type-shifting and coercion.

complement (the Appalachian Trial) is conceptualized as
a spatially structured individual extending upon a spatial
axis that consists of ordered subparts. Sentence (4) is true
iff the spatial extent of this famous perch is the initial
subpart of the spatial extent of the Appalachian Trial.
More generally, sentences containing aspectual verbs
are understood to make reference to parthood relations
between objects along a range of dimensions, such as the
spatial, the temporal, the eventive, and the informational
dimension, exemplified by (4), (5), (6), (7) respectively.

Challenges to the Type-shifting Hypothesis

(5) A thunderstorm began the morning.
(6) A prayer started the banquet.
(7) The next lemma finishes the proof.

The type-shifting hypothesis faces challenges in two
respects. The first challenge comes from the distribution
of the linguistic data. At least a subset of coercion verbs
does not necessarily require an event-denoting
complement, as in (3 & 4), casting doubt on the empirical
generalization underlying the type-shifting analysis.

These dimension-specific functions are taken to be
lexically associated with the lexical entries of aspectual
verbs. Because there are several such functions, the
interpretation of aspectual verbs is underdetermined and
depends on which dimension is relevant for the
interpretation in a given context of utterance.
This indeterminacy also obtains in the case of the socalled “coercion” uses of aspectual verbs. A sentence like
John began the book is in fact ambiguous between two
possible interpretations. The salient one is an
interpretation along the eventive dimension (John began
reading/writing/etc. the book), where the individuals John,
the book get mapped to the event that they participate in.
However, the sentence has another, constitutive
interpretation where the individuals John, the book get
mapped to an informational structure, such that some
piece of information corresponding to John is an initial
subpart of the information corresponding to the book (e.g.
a story about John is the first story of the book). The
context determines the intended interpretation, although
one interpretation might be more salient than the other.
This analysis, that we label the Dimension Ambiguity
analysis, makes no assumptions about selectional
restrictions and type-shifting operations to resolve
mismatches. Aspectual verbs combine with their
complements and subjects just like regular verbs but their
full interpretation requires the contextual resolution of an
ambiguity—the specific dimension along which the
complement can be construed as a structured individual.
The observed psycho- and neuro-linguistic reflexes of
complement coercion are taken to reflect ambiguity
resolution and not type-shifting operations. This allows us
to not only maintain a uniform semantics for aspectual
verbs across its uses, but also captures the observation
from Katsika et al. (2012) that aspectual verbs, but not
psychological verbs, engender additional cost.
This is how the processing of aspectual verbs is
hypothesized to be implemented in real time:
(A) When a reader encounters an aspectual verb, they
retrieve the verb together with a number of

(3) The editor’s comments finish the magazine.
(4) This famous perch begins the Appalachian Trail.
The second challenge comes from real-time
implementation. It turns out that only a subset of coercion
verbs engender additional processing cost. Katsika et al.
(2012) and Utt et al. (2013) show that the coercion effect
is observable only with the aspectual verbs (e.g. begin,
finish, start), which modify temporal reference, but not
with psychological verbs (e.g. enjoy, prefer, endure),
which denote mental states. Studies on complement
coercion have conflated the two classes and included
additional unclassified verbs such as try and master. The
set of “coercion verbs” investigated in the prior literature
is thus semantically heterogeneous, and subclasses within
this set do not in fact show an identical processing profile.
These observations suggest that the type-shifting
hypothesis is problematic both in terms of its empirical
coverage and experimental implementation. In what
follows, we present an alternative hypothesis focusing on
aspectual verbs, which do clearly exhibit processing cost.

The Dimension Ambiguity (DA) Hypothesis
Piñango & Deo (2012) propose that aspectual verbs
lexically select for structured entities, which can be
conceptualized as having a totally ordered structure along
some dimension (e.g. temporal, spatial, eventive, etc.).
They do not exclusively require an event but specify a
relation between a structured individual and a subpart
thereof relative to an axis over which the individual
extends (Piñango & Deo, 2012). Specifically, the lexical
semantics of aspectual verbs involves a function f that
applies to a subject denotation x and a object denotation y
such that f(x) is a minimal subpart of f(y).
In (4), the aspectual verb (begin) introduces a function
that maps individuals to their spatial extent, and the

2

2526

dimensional functions that are encoded in the verb’s
lexical entry. These functions each correspond to a
specific dimension (e.g., temporal, spatial,
eventive…). We call this process the exhaustive
activation of lexical functions. For any argument to
the verb, it is possible that there is more than one
dimension relative to which it can be interpreted as
being a structured individual.
(B) To get an interpretation for the composition of the
aspectual verb and the complement, readers must
determine the dimension along which the
complement denotation is construed as a structured
individual. That is, they must choose a particular
function among those encoded in the verb to
determine the interpretation. This is a case of
ambiguity resolution. Once the function is chosen,
the complement can be construed as a structured
individual along the dimension given by that function.
Thus, the processing cost associated with aspectual verbs
results from (A) exhaustive activation of the verb’s lexical
functions (Shapiro, Zurif, & Grimshaw, 1989), and (B)
resolution of ambiguity created by immediate
composition demands (i.e. dimension extraction from the
complement) (Frazier & Rayner, 1990). We suggest that
the cost observed within aspectual verbs in previous
psycholinguistic studies is associated with (B), ambiguity
resolution. In addition, the neurological findings are
consistent with both step (A) and step (B). That is,
activating the lexical functions of aspectual verbs might
recruit a localizable brain region without engendering
observable cost in psychological measurement. On the
other hand, ambiguity resolution may induce observable
cost during real-time comprehension while recruiting a
specific brain region.

psychological verbs in the self-paced reading because the
former involve resolution of an ambiguity. With respect
to neural correlates, we expect aspectual verbs to recruit
additional cortical areas at two positions corresponding to
the two processes mentioned above: (a) when an animate
subject combines with an aspectual verb, where the parser
exhausts the verb’s lexical functions, and (b) when the
aspectual verb combines with the complement, where the
parser mines the complement denotation to determine a
dimension (e.g. spatial, temporal, eventive, informational).

Pretest: Norming questionnaire
To ensure the equal acceptability of the manipulated
conditions, we employed a rating questionnaire.

Method
Forty native speakers of American English took the
questionnaire, all between the ages of 18-30 and without
reading disabilities. The data of three participants were
discarded because their responses were either
undifferentiated or inconsistent. We created 50 triplets;
each contained the three conditions as shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Conditions and sample sentences
Condition
AspectualV
EnjoyingV
LovingV

Example sentences
Lady Gaga
started
preferred
loved
this CD of American pop hits.

With 150 filler sentences introduced, the whole set of the
stimuli amounted to 300 sentences. These stimuli were
divided into two scripts, each randomly assigned to 20
participants. The participants were asked to rate the
sensibility of each sentence from a 1-5 scale
(1=nonsensical; 5=sensical) and answer a multiple-choice,
multiple-answer question probing possible interpretations.

This Study
Our study aims to examine the psychological viability
of the Dimension Ambiguity analysis and to explore its
psychological implementation. We attempt to pin down
the processing cost associated with aspectual verbs and to
investigate its neural correlates. We have dissociated
aspectual verbs from psychological verbs, since only the
former involves the retrieval of multiple functions and the
resolution of dimension ambiguity.
We present a self-paced reading experiment and an
fMRI experiment, along with a pretest questionnaire.
Three verb types are considered: aspectual verbs
(AspectualV), psychological verbs of the enjoy-type
(EnjoyingV), which are categorized as coercion verbs in
the type-shifting account, and psychological verbs of the
love-type (LovingV), which involve no coercion and
thereby serve as controls. All sentences contain an
animate subject and an entity-denoting complement.
Based on the DA hypothesis, we predict that aspectual
verbs will induce longer reading times than either type of

Results
The repeated measures Analysis of Variance (ANOVA)
showed that the three conditions were within the
acceptable range, shown in Table 2.
Table 2: Results of the sensicality rating (N=37)
Condition
AspectualV
EnjoyingV
LovingV

Mean
4.13
4.31
4.80

Standard deviation
0.75
0.52
0.22

Planned pairwise comparisons indicated a significant
difference between AspectualV and LovingV (p< .001) as
3

2527

well as between LovingV and EnjoyingV (p< .001).
Crucially, no difference was found between AspectualV
and EnjoingV (p< .082). The reliability test showed that
the items used in each condition were highly reliable
(Cronbach’s alpha: AspectualV=0.92; EnjoyingV=0.85;
LovingV=0.72).

Experiment 1: Self-paced Reading
We conducted a self-paced reading experiment with a
moving window paradigm to investigate the time-course
of the cost underlying the processing of aspectual verbs
and the enjoy-type of psychological verbs; the two are
collapsed as “coercion verbs” under the type-shifting
account. The love-type of verbs served as the control.

Figure 1: Results of reading times (ms)
At NP+1 position, there was a significant effect of
condition (F1(2,54)=3.67, p< .032; F2(2,98)=6.84, p<
.002). The pairwise comparisons indicate that AspectualV
engendered significantly longer reading times (RTs) than
EnjoyingV (F1(1, 27)=5.45, p< .027; F2(1, 49)=6.10, p<
.017) and LovingV (F1(1, 27)=5.33, p< .029; F2(1,
49)=10.13, p< .003) respectively. The NP+2 position
revealed the same pattern. A significant effect of
condition was found (F1(2,54)=4.16, P< .021;
F2(2,98)=7.03, p< .001). The pairwise comparisons
suggest that AspectualV engendered longer RTs than both
EnjoyingV (F1(1, 27)=7.17, p< .012; F2(1, 49)=9.20, p<
.004) and LovingV (F1(1, 27)=4.64, p< .040; F2(1,
49)=9.68, p< .003).
Overall, the results indicate that aspectual verbs
induced longer RTs than both the enjoy-type and the lovetype of psychological verbs at the two windows following
the complement, while the two types of psychological
verbs did not differ. We suggest that this is because
aspectual verbs, but not psychological verbs, involve
ambiguity resolution: readers have to determine one
dimension along which the sentence is interpreted among
multiple ones (e.g. eventive and informational).

Method
Twenty-eight native speakers of American English
were recruited, all between the ages of 18-30 and without
history of reading disabilities.
The materials were adapted from the pretest
questionnaire. Each sentence was segmented into several
windows as shown below. Our windows of interest were
the verb, complement NP, NP+1, and NP+2 regions.
[Lady Gaga]1 [started(AspectualV) / preferred(EnjoyingV) /
loved(LovingV)]2 [this CD]3 [of]4 [American]5 [pop hits.]6
The participants read the sentences segment by segment
at their own pace, which allowed them to fully understand
the sentences’ meanings. At the end of the sentence, they
were asked a question probing either sensicality or the
content of the sentence just read to ensure comprehension.

Results
The accuracy of the comprehension task was 95.03%.
Results of the reading task are reported in Table 3 and
Figure 1. No significant effect of condition was found at
the verb (F1(2,54)=2.45, p< .096; F1(2,98)=2.20, p<
.117) or at the complement NP (F1(2,54)=1.13, p< .331;
F2(2,98)=0.69, p< .502). Significant differences appeared
at NP+1 and NP+2.

Experiment 2: fMRI

Table 3: Results of reading times in millisecond (standard
errors in parenthesis)

AspectualV
EnjoyingV
LovingV

Verb
553.45
(7.30)
556.42
(7.26)
537.93
(6.58)

ComplementNP
608.01
(8.70)
611.64
(9.61)
598.98
(9.34)

NP+1
502.08
(7.13)
483.78
(5.55)
474.50
(5.28)

NP+2
538.99
(9.07)
511.82
(7.38)
511.49
(7.59)

Previous neurological studies of the complement
coercion effect report activities in three distinct brain
regions: Wernicke’s area in Piñango & Zurif’s (2001)
lesion study, ventral medial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) in
Pylkkänen & McElree’s (2007) MEG study, and BA45 in
Husband, Kelly, & Zhu’s (2011) fMRI experiment.
Despite the discrepant results, all these studies attribute
the effect to type-shifting the complement to obtain an
event interpretation. Notice that these experiments are
subject to the heterogeneous stimuli problem, mixing
aspectual verbs, psychological verbs, and control verbs
(e.g. master, try). Yet as mentioned, recent studies
(Katsika et al., 2012; Utt et al., 2013) indicate that only
aspectual verbs engender additional costs. On the other
hand, the DA hypothesis accounts for the complement
coercion effect as the processing of aspectual verbs. In
our fMRI experiment, we aim to investigate its neural
4

2528

basis, expecting to find brain activities corresponding to
the two hypothesized processes associated with it.

The Dimension Ambiguity hypothesis captures these
patterns as follows: At Event 1, the BA40 activation
(green) reflects the exhaustive activation of the aspectual
verb’s dimension functions. Importantly, BA7 (pink),
which is reported to support spatio-temporal tasks, was
preferentially recruited for AspectualV; the activation is
likely to reflect the conceptualization of the structured
individual. Because the DA hypothesis holds that
aspectual verbs select for structured individuals along
some dimension axis, we take it as evidence favoring the
DA hypothesis over the type-shifting hypothesis. At
Event 2, the LIFG and insula activations may reflect the
process of determining the dimension along which the
complement axis is structured. While our results are
connectable with Piñango & Zurif’s (2001) and Husband
et al.’s (2011) studies, we further clarify the problem of
heterogeneous stimuli present in previous works and
account for the effect as the processing of aspectual verbs.

Method
Sixteen native speakers of American English
participated this study, all between the ages of 18-30,
right-handed, without reading disabilities or history of
neurological disorders. The data from one participant was
excluded from the analysis due to severe head movement.
The stimuli were the same as Exp. 2, with a different set
of fillers. We adopted an event-related paradigm. The
visual stimuli were presented segment-by-segment as in
Exp. 2, each lasting for 500 ms.. For 75% of the
sentences, the participants were queried with yes/no
comprehension questions, each lasting for 4000 ms.
Each sentence was divided into two events that
correspond to the two hypothesized processes induced by
aspectual verbs under the DA account, shown in Table 4.
Event 1 included the subject and the verb; Event 2
included the complement until the sentence-final word.
We hypothesize that the exhaustive activation of an
aspectual verb’s functions occurs at Event 1 when readers
encounter the verb (Shapiro, Zurif, & Grimshaw, 1989),
and that readers attempt to determine a dimension denoted
by the complement at Event 2 while facing the semantic
ambiguity in aspectual verbs (Frazier & Rayner, 1990).
Table 4: Event segmentation in the fMRI experiment
Event 1
Event2
[Subj+V]
[Complement ~]
AspectualV
Lady Gaga started
this CD of ……
EnjoyingV
preferred
LovingV
loved

Figure 2: AspectualV – EnjoyingV at Event 1 (Subj+V)

Results
The overall accuracy of the comprehension task was
88.6%. The response times for the questions are shown in
Table 5. Results of repeated measures ANOVA revealed
no significant effect of conditions in the response times.
Table 5: Subjects’ mean response time by condition
Condition
AspectualV

Mean
1684.18

Standard Error (se)
25.06

LovingV
EnjoyingV

1651.49
1722.11

24.09
25.08

The imaging results showed that, at Event 1 (Subject +
Verb), AspectualV recruited Wernicke’s area (BA40) and
bilateral BA7, 6, 24 over EnjoyingV (Figure 2). At Event
2 (complement~), AspectualV preferentially recruited the
left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG), including BA44, 44, 47,
and left insula over the control LovingV (Figure 3).

Figure 3: AspectualV–LovingV at Event2 (Complement ~)

Discussion & Conclusion
Our self-paced reading experiment showed that
aspectual verbs engendered longer RTs than
psychological verbs during real-time comprehension but
only after the complement had been encountered. The
5

2529

fMRI experiment revealed that aspectual verbs induced
preferential recruitment of the left posterior superior
temporo-parietal cortex (i.e., Wernicke’s area) when
readers encountered the verb and the left inferior frontal
cortex (i.e., Broca’s area) when readers encountered the
complement, over each of the psychological conditions
(enjoy-type and love-type respectively).
Our results are therefore consistent with the Dimension
Ambiguity analysis, which suggests that aspectual verbs,
but not psychological verbs, involve the resolution of
dimension ambiguity arising from multiple lexical
functions, therefore engendering additional cost.
Obtaining the interpretation for a sentence containing an
aspectual verb involves (a) exhaustively activating a set of
functions encoded by the aspectual verb, and (b)
determining the dimension of the complement denotation
along which the structure or axis is construed. Our fMRI
results suggest that the former process recruits
Wernicke’s area (BA40), which supports the activation of
lexico-semantic representation, and the latter process
recruits the LIFG, which supports ambiguity resolution.
Finally, the DA analysis captures a distinction between
aspectual and psychological verbs in a linguistically
principled manner. It also distinguishes between lexical
and compositional semantic processes in brain
architectures. Our study represents an implementation of
the analysis, working out its psychological viability. We
suggest that the complement coercion effect is better
understood as involving the composition and processing
of aspectual verbs rather than special semantic operations
such as type-shifting.

distinguishing between type-shifting and pragmatic
inferencing. The Mental Lexicon, 7.1, 58-76.
McElree, B., Pylkkänen, L., Pickering, M.J., & Traxler,
M. (2006). The time course of enriched composition.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 13, 53-59
McElree, B., Traxler, M. J., Pickering, M. J., Seely, R. E.,
& Jackendoff, R. (2001). Reading time evidence for
enriched composition. Cognition, 78, B17-B25
Partee, B. (1987). Noun phrase interpretation and typeshifting principles. In J. Groenendijk, D. de Jongh, &
M. Stokhof (Eds.), Studies in discourse representation
theory and the theory of generalized quantifiers.
Dordrecht: Foris.
Partee, Barbara, and Mats Rooth, (1983). Generalized
conjunction and type ambiguity. In R. Bäuerle, C.
Schwarze and A. von Stechow, Meaning, use and
interpretation of language. Berlin, Germany:De
Gruyter.
Pickering, M. J., McElree, B., Frisson, S., Chen, L., &
Traxler, M. J. (2006). Aspectual coercion and
underspecification. Discourse Processes, 42, 131-155.
Pickering, M. J., McElree, B., & Traxler, M. J. (2005).
The difficulty of coercion: A response to de Almeida.
Brain & Language, 93, 1–9.
Piñango, M. M., & Ashwini Deo (2012). Aspectual verbs
and the “coercion” effect. Paper presented at SALT 22,
May 18–20, Chicago, IL.
Piñango, M. M., & Zurif, E. B. (2001). Semantic
operations in aphasic comprehension: Implications for
the cortical organization of language. Brain and
Language, 79(2), 297–308
Pustejovsky, J. (1991). The generative lexicon.
Computational Linguistics, 17.
Pustejosvky, J. (1995). The generative lexicon. The MIT
press.
Pylkkänen, L., Llinas, R., & McElree, B. (2007) An MEG
study of silent meaning. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience.
Shapiro, L. P., Zurif, E., & Grimshaw, J. (1989). Verb
processing during sentence comprehension: Contextual
impenetrability. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research,
18, 223- 243.
Traxler, M., McElree, B.,Williams, R.S. & Pickering,
M.J. (2005). Context effects in coercion: Evidence from
eye-movements. Journal of Memory and Language, 53,
1-25.
Traxler, M. J., Pickering, M. J., & McElree, B. (2002).
Coercion in sentence processing: Evidence from eyemovements and self-paced reading. Journal of Memory
and Language, 47, 530–547.
Utt., J., Lenci, A., Pado, S., & Zarcone, A. (2013) The
curious case of metonymic verbs: A distributional
characterization. Towards a Formal Distributional
Semantics-IWCS 2013 Workshop.

Acknowledgement
Research was funded by NSF-BCS grant BCS-0643266 to
Maria M.Pinango, and NSF-INSPIRE Grant CCF1248100 to Maria M. Pinango, Ashwini Deo and Todd
Constable.

References
Frazier, L. & Rayner, K. (1990) Taking on semantic
commitments: Processing multiple meanings vs.
multiple senses. Journal of Memory and Language
29,181–200
Frisson, S. & McElree, B. (2008). Complement coercion
Is not modulated by competition: Evidence from eye
movements. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 34(1), 1-11.
Husband, E.M., Kelly, L,. & Zhu, D. (2011) Using
complement coercion to understand the neural basis of
semantic composition: Evidence from an fMRI study.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 23 (11), 3254-3266.
Jackendoff, Ray. (1997). The architecture of the language
faculty. The MIT press.
Katsika, A., Braze, D., Deo, A. and Piñango, M.M.
(2012). Mechanisms in complement coercion:

6

2530

