UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Comprehending action in depicted paths: Evidence from the cognition of motion lines in
visual narratives

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0x3866fj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Cohn, Neil
Maher, Stephen

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Comprehending action in depicted paths: Evidence from the cognition of motion
lines in visual narratives
Neil Cohn (neilcohn@visuallanguagelab.com)
Center for Research in Language, University of California,
9500 Gilman Dr. Dept. 0526, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0526

Stephen Maher (smaher@mclean.harvard.edu)
Mclean Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Belmont, MA 02478
Abstract

1990). Second, people of cultures unfamiliar with this style
of drawing have trouble understanding that these lines
depict motion, though they do understand accompanying
iconic representations (Kennedy & Ross, 1975; Winter,
1963). Third, interpretation of motion lines appears to
change as people age (Carello, Rosenblum, & Grosofsky,
1986; Friedman & Stevenson, 1975; Gross et al., 1991).
Younger children interpret motion lines as invisible yet
iconic physical forces, such as wind, but recognize them as
symbolic conventions as they grow older (Gross et al.,
1991). Fourth, the representations of motion lines vary
cross-culturally in comics and other drawing systems (Cohn,
2013; McCloud, 1993). Fifth, motion lines appearing in
comics use a wide range of shapes, not only trailing laterally
moving objects, including bouncing or spinning (Cohn,
2013; McCloud, 1993). Altogether, these findings suggest
that motion lines do not originate in vision, but rather come
from being a conventionalized graphic representation.
Nevertheless, research has mostly explored how motion
lines graphically depict events and motion. In general,
images with motion lines are thought to depict more motion
than those with only postural cues (Brooks, 1977; Friedman
& Stevenson, 1975; Gross et al., 1991; Ito, Seno, &
Yamanaka, 2010; Kawabe & Miura, 2006). Also, more lines
and longer lines lead to participants interpreting faster
movement (Hayashi, Matsuda, Tamamiya, & Hiraki, 2012).
Furthermore, motion lines that trail an object have been
rated as more effective at depicting motion than a lack of
lines, background lines, or lines moving in the wrong
direction (Ito et al., 2010). One reason that motion lines
facilitate comprehension and memory of depicted events
more than when those same images lack motion lines is
because they help clarify the interaction between entities
that otherwise may remain underspecified (Brooks, 1977).
Despite the wealth of research investigating motion lines,
especially with seriousness for their supposed implications
on motion understanding, most of these studies remain
limited. Even though motion lines appear ubiquitously in
comics—and most studies emphasize this fact—few studies
make use of this context and therefore do not reflect the full
range of complexity and richness that goes into their
comprehension. For example, stimuli typically use abstract
circles or squares with a trailing motion line, focus
specifically on the action of running, and/or only use
straight lateral motions. However, in comics, motion lines

Motion lines depict the path of a moving object, most
popularly in comics. Some have argued that motion lines
depict the “streaks” in the visual system when a viewer tracks
an object (Burr, 2000). However, previous research has not
used motion lines’ natural context of comics, has only
depicted a limited number of actions (usually just running),
and used only offline measurements like recall or ratings.
Here, we compared panels in comic strips with normal motion
lines and those depicting either no lines or reversed,
anomalous lines. In Experiment 1, images with normal lines
were faster than no lines, which were viewed faster than
anomalous lines. In Experiment 2, ERPs showed that the
absence of normal lines elicited a posterior positivity distinct
from the frontal positivity evoked by the presence of
anomalous lines. These results suggest that motion lines aid in
the comprehension of depicted events as conventionalized
visual signs.
Keywords: Motion lines; comics; visual language; events;
motion; event-related potential; P600; P300.

Introduction
The depiction of motion poses a challenge for static images.
Motion lines (also called action or speed lines) offer a
solution to this issue by depicting the path of an action by
attaching a line or series of lines to a moving object. These
representations are especially pervasive in the visual
vocabulary used in comics across the world (Cohn, 2013;
McCloud, 1993).
Despite their origins in comics and drawings, researchers
have claimed that the comprehension of motion lines
originates in the biological foundations of vision. Since
moving objects leave behind “streaks” in the visual system
when a viewer tracks an object (Geisler, 1999), similar to a
slow shutter speed of a camera, they argue that this residual
could form the basis of our understanding about motion
lines (Burr, 2000). Subsequent research has stressed that
participants better understand or remember the direction of
moving objects when they have motion lines than when they
do not (Kawabe & Miura, 2006; Kim & Francis, 1998).
Thus, under this interpretation, motion lines are a depiction
of a basic aspect of human perception rooted directly in the
visual system.
Nevertheless, this view has several limitations. First,
motion lines are understood by blind people comparably to
sighted people when presented using pictures with raisedlines similar to braille (Kennedy, Gabias, & Piertantoni,

349

accompany nearly any type of depicted actions, not just a
prototypical lateral running figure. Also, contrary to studies
using only straight lines for lateral motions, motion lines in
comics may be curved, may spiral around in a circle, or may
depict points along a path. No previous studies have actually
looked at the understanding of motion lines within the
naturalistic context of a visual narrative sequence as
opposed to an individual image.
Previous studies have also been limited in their
experimental measurements and methodologies. Most
studies of motion lines have focused on recall tasks and/or
subjective ratings. Thus, despite the claims that motion lines
may connect to basic perceptual processes (e.g., Burr, 2000;
Kim & Francis, 1998), no studies have yet examined the
online comprehension of motion lines. In order to overcome
these limitations, we carried out two experiments that
analyzed participants’ comprehension of motion lines
embedded in the naturalistic context of comic strips.

Figure 1. Critical panels from within a multi-image
sequence with manipulation of motion lines to show either
normal lines, no lines, or anomalous lines.

Experiment 1: Self-paced viewing
Experiment 1 used a “self-paced viewing” paradigm
where participants progressed through a sequence frame-byframe at their own pace. If motion lines facilitate event
comprehension, panels with anomalous lines or no lines
would be viewed more slowly than those with normal lines,
consistent with previous offline measurements (e.g., Brooks,
1977; Ito et al., 2010). Specifically, slower viewing times
for panels with no lines than normal lines would support
that motion lines aid the comprehension of depicted events
beyond postural cues.

Participants Sixty-two experienced comic readers (35
male, 27 female, mean age: 24.03) from the Tufts
University
student
population
and
surrounding
neighborhoods were paid for their participation. All
participants gave informed written consent according to
Tufts University’s Human Subjects Review Board
guidelines. Comic reading fluency was assessed using a
pretest questionnaire that asked participants to rate their
habits for reading and drawing various types of visual
narratives (for details, see Cohn, Paczynski, Jackendoff,
Holcomb, & Kuperberg, 2012). Data from two participants
were excluded from analysis because they had difficulty
understanding the task.

Methods
Stimuli We created 90 6-panel long comic strips depicting
explicit motion lines using panels from The Complete
Peanuts volumes 1 through 6 (1950-1962) by Charles
Schulz. Critical panels depicted several different events
including running, jumping, throwing or kicking various
objects (sports balls, sticks, paper, etc.), hitting balls (golf
balls, croquet balls, baseballs), falling off of objects, moving
down a slide, punching or running into objects, among
several others actions. The actual depiction of motion lines
varied based their natural original context, ranging from just
one or two lines to many lines. They also varied in shape:
straight and lateral, angled, vertical, curved, circular, etc.
Such variety was chosen to cover motion lines’ wide range
of naturalistic contexts.
We created three types of critical panels (see Figure 1).
Panels with “normal lines” used the original motion lines.
Panels with “no lines” omitted the motion lines from the
object. These lines were broken up and distributed to other
parts of a frame to retain the same visual complexity as the
original panel. Finally, “anomalous lines” reversed the lines
from their original position to make the object appear to
move in an incongruous motion to the action. Sequence
types were counterbalanced into three lists with no repeating
sequences, and also included 120 fillers.

Procedure Comic strips were presented frame-by-frame on
a desktop computer screen. Participants controlled the pace
of reading with a button press at each panel, and we
measured how long each frame stayed on the screen. Trials
began with a screen reading READY, followed by a
fixation-cross (+). Then, each panel appeared on the screen
one at a time until the end of the sequence. Here, a question
mark appeared where they rated how easy the strip was to
understand on a 1 to 5 scale (1=hard, 5=easy), at which
point the next trial appeared. Prior to the experimental
session, participants completed a practice list of five strips
to orient them to the procedure.

Results
Our three-way ANOVA showed that viewing times
differed significantly between critical panels of all motion
line types in both the subjects analysis, F1(2,118)=11.30,
p<.001, and items analysis, F2(2,178)=5.63, p<.005. As
depicted in Figure 2, critical panels with Normal lines were
viewed significantly faster than those with No lines, which

350

in turn were faster than those with Anomalous lines (all ts <
-2.4, all ps < .05).

running. In contrast, the viewing times measured here
clearly demonstrate the expected contrast between no lines
and anomalous lines using more naturalistic stimuli
depicting a variety of actions.
Overall, these results suggest that motion lines aid in the
comprehension of events. However, do the longer viewing
times shown to no lines compared to normal lines show that
the presence of motion lines are facilitating processing or
that the absence of motion lines inhibit comprehension?
Also, can we attribute the longer viewing times to
anomalous lines and no lines to the same underlying
cognitive processes or are these qualitatively different
effects?
While viewing times are able to provide a significantly
better measure of comprehension than the subjective ratings
or memory tasks used in previous research, they cannot
provide the sensitivity to answer these outstanding
questions. Thus, in Experiment 2 we measured event-related
potentials (ERPs) to the same set of stimuli in Experiment 1.
ERPs provide excellent functional and temporal resolution
of the electrophysiological activity of the brain, and thus
enable us to better answer these types of questions.

Figure 2. Viewing times to critical panels containing
either 1) normal motion lines, 2) no motion lines, or 3)
anomalous motion lines. Error bars represent standard error.

Discussion
This experiment explored the comprehension of comic
panels containing normal motion lines, no lines, and
reversed, anomalous lines. Slower viewing times were
found to panels with no lines than normal lines, with even
slower times appearing to panels with anomalous lines.
These results suggest that motion lines aid in the
comprehension of events, and that the violation of expected
lines strains comprehension.
The longer viewing times to panels with no lines
compared to normal lines support that readers found images
with motion lines easier to comprehend than images without
motion lines. These results are consistent with previous
research suggesting that motion lines provide added
understanding to motion beyond just postural cues (Brooks,
1977; Friedman & Stevenson, 1975; Gross et al., 1991; Ito
et al., 2010; Kawabe & Miura, 2006). The longer viewing
times to panels with anomalous lines than normal lines
further supports that lines incongruous to their actions are
harder to understand than when they fit the expected
context. This result is consistent with Ito et al.’s (2010)
study showing that no lines or reversed lines are rated as
less effective at conveying motion than normal lines. These
findings support that normal motion lines aid in the
comprehension of events more than images without lines or
incongruous lines.
The slowest viewing times appeared to panels with
anomalous lines, not those with no lines, confirming that
these representations were incongruous. These results differ
from Ito et al. (2010), where no difference appeared in
ratings between images with no lines and with reversed
lines. They attributed their lack of a difference to these lines
being viewed as iconic non-motion related representations,
as based on participants’ self-reported interpretations.
However, such disparities may have arisen because of the
reliance on subjectively determined ratings and stimuli that
only depicted a silhouette engaged in a single action of

Experiment 2: Event-related potentials
Thus far, no studies have examined the comprehension of
motion lines in the brain generally, nor using ERPs
specifically. However, ERPs have been used to study visual
narratives and real-world events, which often evoke the
same effects when manipulated as other domains,
particularly language. For example, though it was first
studied in the contexts of semantic processing in language,
images in visual sequences that violate the expected
meaning of the narrative or events have consistently elicited
N400 effects (Amoruso et al., 2013; Cohn et al., 2012;
Sitnikova, Holcomb, & Kuperberg, 2008).
An additional positive-going ERP response also appears
to manipulations of events, often following an N400 (for
review, see Amoruso et al., 2013). This “P600 effect” was
originally thought to index syntactic processing in language
(Kuperberg, 2007; Osterhout & Holcomb, 1992). However,
studies of event perception have found similar positivities to
the viewing of actions where the events are not carried out
correctly (de Bruijn, Schubotz, & Ullsperger, 2007), or
where objects and/or hand position mismatch their
corresponding events (Sitnikova et al., 2008; van Elk,
Bousardt, Bekkering, & van Schie, 2012). Such results are
important because motion lines bind together the elements
in an action (Brooks, 1977). If P600 effects appear to
incongruous component objects in an action, altering the
binding between those components may elicit a similar
brain response.
The notion that the P600 may index a general type of
neurocognitive processing has been debated for some time,
specifically in connection with the well-studied “P300”
effects associated with unpredictable stimuli across
modalities (e.g. Van Petten & Luka, 2012). Indeed, many of
the action-related positivities discussed above have been

351

interpreted as a late onset P300 (de Bruijn et al., 2007; van
Elk et al., 2012). The P300 is the oldest ERP component
recognized as relevant to cognition (Chapman & Bragdon,
1964), and is commonly divided into two types. The P300a
typically has a more anterior distribution and is thought to
be sensitive to “novelty,” possibly connected to top-down
monitoring of attentional mechanisms or the attentional
demands initiated by aspects of a task (Polich, 2007). The
more posteriorly distributed P300b is thought to be a
response to “oddballs” with low probabilistic likelihood or a
disconfirmation of expectations (Donchin & Coles, 1988),
possibly reflecting attempts to update a mental model in
memory (Polich, 2007).
If panels with no lines elicit a larger neural effect in the
same direction as anomalous lines, it would suggest events
were more difficult to understand. In contrast, if an
attenuated response appeared to panels with normal lines
compared with those with no lines, the presence of lines
might facilitate event understanding. In addition, if panels
with anomalous lines elicit a different pattern of effects than
panels with no lines, this would suggest different brain
responses.

practice sequences acclimated participants to the procedure
and stimuli. During the experiment, five breaks were given
at designated intervals.

Methods

Results

Stimuli The same stimuli were used in Experiment 2 as in
Experiment 1.

Between 200 and 400 ms, a larger leftward posterior
positivity appeared to panels with No Lines than those with
Normal Lines localized to Occipital, Parietal, and Left
Posterior regions (all Fs > 4.36, all ps < .05). An additional
anteriorly distributed positivity was greater to Anomalous
Lines than No Lines in the Prefrontal region, F(1,23)=4.56,
p<.05. No main effects appeared in this epoch between
Normal Lines and Anomalous Lines.
Between 400 and 600 ms, a trending interaction for panels
with Normal and No Lines was found in the midline
regions, but without localization of this effect. In contrast, a
frontal positivity was suggested by main effects at the
Prefrontal and Left and Right Anterior regions, with a
posterior positivity in the Left Posterior region (all Fs > 4.6,
all ps < .05) and trending differences in the Parietal region
F(1,23)=3.07, p=.093. In addition, a frontal positivity
appeared at the Prefrontal and both Left and Right Anterior
regions (all Fs > 4.5, all ps < .05), suggesting that panels
with Anomalous Lines evoked a bilateral, frontally
distributed positivity that was greater than both Normal and
No Lines.
Finally, between 600 and 900 ms, Anomalous Lines
showed a greater positivity than No Lines in Prefrontal,
Central, Left Anterior, and Right Anterior regions (all Fs >
3.8, all ps < .065). No significant differences appeared
between panels with Normal Lines and No Lines or
Anomalous Lines.

ERP Recordings ERPs were measured with 29 tin
electrodes in an elastic cap distributed according to the
International 10-20 system, plus additional left and right
hemisphere sites. Electrodes below the left eye and next to
the right eye recorded blinks and vertical and horizontal eye
movements. Electrode sites were placed along the five
midline sites (FPz, Fz, Cz, Pz, Oz), three pairs of medial
sites (FC1/FC2, C3/C4, CP1/CP2), four pairs of lateral sites,
(F3/F4, FC5/FC6, CP5/CP6, P3/P4), and five pairs of
peripheral sites (FP1/FP2, F7/F8, T3/T4, T5/T6, O1/O2) on
each hemisphere. These groupings formed the factors of
Region in the statistical analysis. All electrodes were
referenced to an electrode placed on the left mastoid, while
differential activity was monitored in the right mastoid. A
SA Bioamplifier amplified the electroencephalogram (EEG)
using a bandpass of 0.01 to 40 Hz and continuously sampled
at a rate of 200 Hz. Electrode impedances were kept below
10 kΩ for the eyes and below 5 kΩ at all other sites.

Participants Twenty-five comic readers from Tufts
University and the surrounding area (8 male, 17 female,
mean age: 19.9) participated in the study for compensation
after giving their informed written consent. Participants
were pre-screened to be right-handed English speaking
comic readers with normal vision, no history of head
trauma, and taking no neuropsychiatric drugs. Data from
one participant was excluded due to artifact rejection
exceeding 15%.
Procedure Participants sat in a comfortable chair facing a
computer screen in a room separate from the experimenter
and computers. Because a “flashing” effect of the white
panels on the black screen could potentially induce blinks,
we kept the lights on throughout the experiment.
Participants began a trial by viewing the word READY,
where they pressed a button on a keypad. A fixation-cross
then appeared in the center of the screen, after which each
panel of the sequence automatically appeared one at a time
in that location, out of control of the participant. Each panel
was onscreen for 1350ms, and an ISI of 300ms prevented a
“flipbook” effect that made overlapping panels appear
animated. Stimuli durations were based on the average
viewing times in Experiment 1. After the final panel, a
question mark cued participants to rate the sequence for how
easy it was to understand (1=difficult to 5=easy). Ten prior

352

Figure 3. ERPs to critical panels with either normal motion lines, no motion lines, or anomalous motion lines.
All waveforms and scalp maps illustrating these
distributions are illustrated in Figure 3.

and visual events (Kuperberg, 2007; Osterhout & Holcomb,
1992). In this view, the absence of lines makes events
harder to understand because it no longer binds together the
elements involved in the event. Omitting these lines may
impair a viewer’s ability to bind together the component
parts of the event, thus eliciting a P600 effect (Sitnikova et
al., 2008).
Additionally, the presence of anomalous lines, when
compared to both normal and no lines, evoked a frontal
positivity. This effect may be connected to the typically
anterior P300a, which commonly appears as a “novelty”
response to surprising or unexpected stimuli (Polich, 2007).
Anomalous lines should clearly be considered as “novel” or
unexpected given their context.

Discussion
This experiment found two primary patterns of ERP
effects. A posterior positivity between 200-400 ms occured
to the absence of normal lines, while a frontal positivity
peaked between 400-600 ms to the presence of anomalous
lines. Overall, we found no evidence of early ERP
components associated with purely perceptual processing,
as might be expected if motion lines were tied to “streaks”
in the visual system. Rather, the later effects that we found
suggest that comprehenders require additional processing to
images with no lines or with anomalous lines above and
beyond those with normal motion lines.
Our most noteworthy finding was a posterior positivity
arising for panels that had no lines compared to those with
normal motion lines. This positivity appeared to be greater
to panels with no lines, rather than an attenuated negativity
effect to panels with normal lines. These results imply that,
to experienced comic readers, the absence of lines actually
impairs a readers’ comprehension of an event, rather than
the presence of motion lines facilitating event information.
One possibility is that this effect is tied to the posteriorly
distributed “oddball” P300b, which typically arises to low
probability or unexpected stimuli (Donchin & Coles, 1988).
This would suggest that the absence of lines are inconsistent
with comic readers’ expectations. However, this experiment
did not involve a task when viewing these panels, which is
associated with the P300b (Polich, 2007).
An alternative interpretation of this positivity could
connect it with the P600 effect found in studies of language

General Discussion
In this study, we sought to overcome the limitations of
previous research looking at motion lines by examining
within the naturalistic environments of comic strip panels.
We compared the online comprehension of panels that
either had normal motion lines, no lines, or reversed,
anomalous lines by measuring self-paced viewing times and
ERPs. In Experiment 1, panels with normal lines were
viewed faster than those with no lines, which were in turn
faster than those with anomalous lines. In Experiment 2, we
found two distinct patterns of ERP effects: a posterior
positivity peaking between 200-400 ms appeared to panels
with no lines compared to normal lines, and a bilateral
anterior positivity peaking around 500 ms for panels with
anomalous lines compared to those with both normal and no
lines.

353

Together, these results suggest that the presence of
motion lines in comic panels are important the
comprehension of events. Furthermore, both sets of results
indicate that motion lines—used in diverse and varied
contexts—are conventionalized signs understood and
expected by comic readers to appear in the depiction of
motions and events, and not tied to streaks left behind in the
visual system (Burr, 2000). Rather, motion lines are
conventionalized signs understood through experience,
which is sensitive to both cultural (Kennedy & Ross, 1975;
Winter, 1963) and developmental knowledge (Carello et al.,
1986; Friedman & Stevenson, 1975; Gross et al., 1991).
An alternative account for the understanding of motion
lines may instead tie them to the basic conceptual structure
that underlies other expressive systems, such as language.
This interpretation would be consistent with the idea that
drawings are written in a “visual language” similar in
underlying cognitive structure to spoken languages (Cohn,
2013). Just like different languages have words for
expressing certain conceptualized meanings, visual
languages use diverse ways to map graphic representations
onto the same basic conceptualization of paths. Altogether,
this study shows that research of phenomena in visual
narrative can be useful to the study of a broad range of
issues related to visual cognition, language, and the
comprehension of events.

observation of erroneous everyday actions. Cognitive,
Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 7(4), 278-285.
Donchin, E., & Coles, M. G. H. (1988). Is the P300
component a manifestation of context updating?
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 11(03), 357-374.
Friedman, S. L., & Stevenson, M. B. (1975). Developmental
Changes in the Understanding of Implied Motion in Twodimensional Pictures. Child Development, 46, 773-778.
Geisler, W. S. (1999). Motion streaks provide a spatial code
for motion direction. Nature, 400(6739), 65-69.
Gross, D., Soken, N., Rosengren, K. S., Pick, A. D., Pillow,
B. H., & Melendez, P. (1991). Children’s Understanding
of Action Lines and the Static Representation of Speed of
Locomotion. Child Development, 62, 1124-1141.
Hayashi, H., Matsuda, G., Tamamiya, Y., & Hiraki, K.
(2012). Visual cognition of "speed lines" in comics. Poster
preseneted at the 34th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Sapporo, Japan.
Ito, H., Seno, T., & Yamanaka, M. (2010). Motion
impressions enhanced by converging motion lines.
Perception, 39(11), 1555-1561.
Kawabe, T., & Miura, K. (2006). Representation of dynamic
events triggered by motion lines and static human
postures. Experimental Brain Research, 175(2), 372-375.
Kennedy, J. M., Gabias, P., & Piertantoni, R. (1990).
Meaning, presence and absence in pictures. In K.
Landwehr (Ed.), Ecologicalperception research, visual
communication and esthetics (pp. 43-56). New York:
Springer-Verlag.
Kennedy, J. M., & Ross, A. (1975). Outline picture
perception by the Songe of Paua. Perception, 4, 391-406.
Kim, H., & Francis, G. (1998). A computational and
perceptual account of motion lines. Perception, 27(7),
785-797.
Kuperberg, G. R. (2007). Neural mechanisms of language
comprehension. Brain Research, 1146, 23-49.
McCloud, S. (1993). Understanding Comics: The Invisible
Art. New York, NY: Harper Collins.
Osterhout, L., & Holcomb, P. (1992). Event-related
potentials elicited by syntactic anomaly. Journal of
Memory and Language, 31, 758-806.
Polich, J. (2007). Updating P300: An integrative theory of
P3a and P3b. Clinical neurophysiology, 118(10), 21282148.
Sitnikova, T., Holcomb, P. J., & Kuperberg, G. R. (2008).
Two neurocognitive mechanisms of semantic integration
during the comprehension of visual real-world events.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20(11), 1-21.
van Elk, M., Bousardt, R., Bekkering, H., & van Schie, H.
T. (2012). Using Goal- and Grip-Related Information for
Understanding the Correctness of Other's Actions: An
ERP Study. PLoS ONE, 7(5), e36450.
Van Petten, C., & Luka, B. J. (2012). Prediction during
language comprehension: Benefits, costs, and ERP
components. International Journal of Psychophysiology,
83(2), 176-190.

Acknowledgements
Gina Kuperberg is thanked for funding this work through
NIMH (R01 MH071635), NICHD (HD25889) and
NARSAD (with the Sidney Baer Trust).

References
Amoruso, L., Gelormini, C., Aboitiz, F., Alvarez González,
M., Manes, F., Cardona, J., & Ibanez, A. (2013). N400
ERPs for actions: Building meaning in context. Frontiers
in Human Neuroscience, 7.
Brooks, P. H. (1977). The Role of Action Lines in
Children's Memory for Pictures. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 23, 93-107.
Burr, D. C. (2000). Motion vision: Are "speed lines" used in
human visual motion? Current Biology, 10(12), R440R443.
Carello, C., Rosenblum, L. D., & Grosofsky, A. (1986).
Static depiction of movement. Perception, 15(1), 41-58.
Chapman, R. M., & Bragdon, H. R. (1964). Evoked
Responses to Numerical and Non-Numerical Visual
Stimuli while Problem Solving. Nature, 203(4950), 11551157.
Cohn, N. (2013). The visual language of comics:
Introduction to the structure and cognition of sequential
images. London, UK: Bloomsbury.
Cohn, N., Paczynski, M., Jackendoff, R., Holcomb, P. J., &
Kuperberg, G. R. (2012). (Pea)nuts and bolts of visual
narrative. Cognitive Psychology, 65(1), 1-38.
de Bruijn, E. R. A., Schubotz, R. I., & Ullsperger, M.
(2007). An event-related potential study on the

354

