UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Concepts as Representations for Essences: Evidence from Use of Generics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7m5660s3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Oved, Iris
Cheung, Pierina
Barner, David

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Concepts as Representations for Essences:
Evidence from Use of Generics
Iris Oved1
(irisoved@gmail.com)

Pierina Cheung2
(mpcheung@uwaterloo.ca)

1

2

Department of Psychology, University of California,
San Diego 9500 Gilman Drive, San Diego, CA 92093,
USA

Department of Psychology, University of Waterloo
200 University Avenue W., Waterloo, Ontario,
N2L 3G1, Canada

Abstract

experiments on the conditions for use of generic sentences
that support the essentialist approach over the descriptivist
approach.

This paper compares descriptivist approaches for concept
acquisition with essentialist approaches by exploring the
conditions under which people use generic sentences
(sentences such as ‘Apples are round’ which contrast with
sentences about particulars like ‘All/most of the apples are
round’). It fleshes out the essentialist approach in terms of the
Baptism theory of concept acquisition (Oved, 2009; 2014),
which is made precise with an implementation in which
concepts are values of latent variables in a Bayesian network,
posited as explanations for observed patterns in objects’
perceptible properties (Oved & Fasel, 2011). Two
experiments measuring the use of generics are described and
used as support for this essentialist approach over
descriptivist approaches.
Keywords: Concepts; Concept-Acquisition;
Explanation; Bayesian Networks; Generics.

David Barner1
(barner@ucsd.edu)

Baptizing Concepts for Hypothesized Kinds

Essences;

Introduction
When we hear, “these are kiwanos”, while being shown a
set of objects each displaying a novel combination of
yellowness, spikiness, and ovalness, how do these
regularities factor into our hypotheses of what ‘kiwano’
means? One possibility is that we acquire a new concept,
KIWANO, by conjoining the representations YELLOW,
SPIKEY, and OVAL such that the observed regularities are
directly encoded as part of the meaning of the concept.
Perhaps over time, and over multiple learning instances,
criterial information is differentiated from noise, and we
come to represent KIWANO as a set of probability
distributions over the most typical features. Variants of this
descriptivist approach include classical definition theories
(Locke, 1690; Hume, 1748), prototype theories (Rosch,
1978; Barsalou, 1987, 1999; Prinz 2002), and exemplar
theories (Smith & Medin 1981). Another possibility,
however, is that observed regularities are not themselves
constitutive of meanings, but instead serve only as the basis
for positing hidden/latent properties to explain the
regularities. On such essentialist accounts, the learned
concept KIWANO may be simple in representational
structure (Gelman, 2003; Keil, 1989; Carey, 1985).
The present paper articulates a favored version of the
essentialist approach (Oved, 2009; 2014; Oved & Fasel
2011), an account in the spirit of Bayesian cognitive science
(following Griffiths, Kemp, & Tenenbaum, 2008; Xu &
Tenenbaum, 2007; Gopnik & Tenenbaum, 2007; Kemp,
Perfors, & Tenenbaum, 2007). The paper then describes two

Descriptivist accounts of concepts are largely motivated by
the idea that many of our concepts are acquired as the result
of observed associations, and the most straight-forward way
to acquire them is to compose them directly from perceptual
representations. Nativists since Plato have insisted,
however, that many of our concepts cannot be composed
from (even probability distributions over) perceptual
representations (for arguments see Fodor, 1975, 1981, 1998,
2008). The Baptism view of concept acquisition is
motivated by Fodor’s Challenge – the challenge of showing
how a representationally simple concept can be learned
from observed associations, genuinely learned in the sense
of hypothesis formation and testing (Oved, 2009; 2014).
The view is inspired by Kripke's (1972) baptism view on
the analogous question of how proper names in natural
languages come to have their meanings, treating the
concept-acquisition question as the question of how mental
names for properties/kinds come to have their meanings.
Kripke's maneuver for the meanings of proper names was to
use a reference-fixing description that involves deictic
representations, or pointers – e.g., ‘this baby in my arms
now’, to avoid identifying proper names with descriptions.
A similar approach is used in the Baptism account for
concepts, where the reference-fixing description, e.g., for
the concept APPLE, might be, ‘the latent/unobservable
property that these objects have that explains this similarity
(in redness, roundness, sweetness, etc.)’. Notice that the
description appeals to deep/hidden/latent properties, which
is what makes the account a species of psychological
essentialism. As long as this description manages to
uniquely pick out the property of appleness, it can serve as a
step in acquiring a simple mental term for appleness.1
To see that the Baptism process answers Fodor’s
challenge of showing how a representationally simple
1

Note that a different description could have been used, say,
using taste and touch information, perhaps by a blind child, so long
as it too manages to pick out appleness. See (Oved, 2009; 2014)
for details on how to deal with what philosophers have called the
qua-problem (Devitt & Sterelny, 1999). Roughly, different sets of
similarities are explained by appleness than by fruitness,
edibleness, organicness, McIntoshness, etc..

2723

concept can be learned by hypothesis formation and testing,
we must step back to before the concept learner forms the
reference-fixing description. Consider the process in steps.
Step 1: Assume deep structure. As a species of
psychological essentialism, the Baptism theory claims that
humans assume by default that the many similarities and
differences in objects’ observable properties are determined
and explained by a smaller set of latent/unobservable
properties. These latent properties may be understood as
essences, bearing in mind that any given object may have
several latent properties that each explain different sets of
observable properties. One way to implement this
assumption is with a Bayesian network like that depicted in
Figure 1, which was used in a software robot baby that
learned the number of fruit-kinds in its world as well as the
dependencies of the objects’ colors and shapes on their fruit
kinds (Oved & Fasel, 2011). In contrast, a descriptivist
model would only store shallow associations between
observable classes of properties (e.g., between colors and
shapes), leaving out the further class of properties, fruitkinds, represented in this model. Fruit-kinds would instead
be identified with probabilistic associations between
observable properties.
Crucially, assuming that objects have latent classes
properties that determine/explain the objects’ observable
properties is not equivalent to assuming that concepts have
particular values of those latent classes of properties (i.e., it
does not assume Fodor’s radical nativism about simple
concepts). Particular values for the fruit-kinds, such as
appleness, are not represented until experience gives reason
to posit them as explanations for observed regularities.

Figure 1: Bayesian net in which an object’s
fruit-kind, K, determines the object’s color,
C, and shape, S.
Step 2: Observation. In a world that has regularities, like
ours, a concept learner that goes into its environment and
makes sensory observations will find that objects cluster in
their observable properties.

Step 4: Naming. Finally, the agent assigns an arbitrary
simple mental symbol (or name) to the newly hypothesized
properties/kinds that it takes to be part of the best
explanation for its set of observations.
In the following sections, we describe two experiments
that aim to distinguish between the descriptivist and
essentialist accounts of concepts by examining the use of
generic utterances to describe regularities.

Generics, Laws, and Essences
By many accounts, generic statements (e.g., ‘Apples are
round’ in contrast with ‘All/most apples are round’) are a
linguistic tool for expressing essential relationships between
kinds and their properties (see, e.g., Carlson, 1977; Prasada,
2000; Prasada & Dillingham, 2006, 2009; Prasada,
Khemlani, Leslie & Glucksberg, 2013; Gelman, 2003;
Gelman & Bloom, 2007). Prasada and colleagues have
argued for three types of connections that are expressed with
generic statements – principled connections, statistical
connections, and causal connections (Prasada & Dillingham,
2006, 2009; Prasada et al., 2013). Of interest here are
principled connections – properties that members of a kind
have by virtue of being that kind of thing. For example,
being round is a property that apples have by virtue of being
an apple. We exploited this feature of generic statements to
investigate how observable regularities are involved in
concept acquisition. In two experiments, we manipulated
whether a set of regularities was presented as accidental and
measured the proportion of generic utterances used to
describe the regularities.

Experiment 1

Step 3: Abduction. Next, according to the Baptism account,
the concept learner makes an inference from the observed
clusters to the explanation that objects in a cluster share a
latent/unobservable property that determines their observed
properties. This inference to the best explanation can be
implemented with a truncated version of Bayes’ rule.
P(Model|Data) ∝ P(Data|Model) · P(Model)

A given Model here would be a network like that depicted
in Figure 1, but fleshed out with a number n of kinds, K1…n,
and their probabilistic relationships to the various colors, C,
and shapes S. The rule is then read as: the posterior
probability that a given set of observed Data is explained by
a given Model is proportional to the likelihood that the Data
would be observed given that the Model brought it about,
multiplied by the prior probability on the Model. Candidate
Models, each with a different number of kinds and
relationships to colors and shapes, can thus be compared to
find the candidate with the highest probability.

In the first experiment, participants were initially introduced
to three different novel kinds of creatures, each colored
grey. Later they were shown a world in which all members
of each kind were the same color, but each kind had a
distinct color. In one condition (the Default condition), the
world with its regularities were simply shown without a
story about how the regularities came about, allowing
participants to form default interpretations of the
regularities. In another condition (the Random condition),
participants were shown that the regularities happened by
accident. Participants in both conditions were asked to

2724

describe the colors of the novel creatures, and we measured
the proportion of sentences that were generic.
If participants store concepts as shallow associations, as
suggested by descriptivist accounts, then no difference
should exist between these two cases. If, however,
participants by default adopt an explanatory approach to
observable regularities – i.e., they take the regularities as
evidence for a further property that serves as the common
cause/explanation of the observed correlated traits – then a
difference should exist in the proportion of generic
sentences between the two conditions. Specifically,
participants who were simply shown the regularity should
have used relatively more generic sentences to describe the
scene whereas participants who were shown that the
regularity was accidental should have used relatively few
generic sentences.

Figure 3: Final slide with probe shown to
participants in both conditions.
Between the slides shown in Figures 2 and 3, participants
in the Random condition read a story about how the
creatures got to Gelkon. They read that at the beginning of
the universe, all of the creatures were in a jar in the center of
the galaxy. One day, the jar exploded and all the creatures
randomly landed on the planets. Then, a series of six slides
was shown to depict the explosion, with a jar containing
many instances of each type of creature, uniformly
distributed in green, blue, black, and red, exploding such
that the animals randomly landed onto the five planets.
After seeing the explosion participants in the Random
condition were given the probe slide shown in Figure 3. The
participants were given comprehension tests to ensure they
were attending to the story.

Participants
106 participants (mean age 34 years) were recruited via
Amazon Mechanical Turk. All were located in the USA and
were self-reported native English speakers. Participants
were randomly assigned to two conditions: Random
condition (n = 57) and Default condition (n = 49).

Stimuli
We constructed three distinct creatures each with a novel
label (see Figure 3). These creatures were designed to look
like animate objects. We also constructed distinct planets
and labeled them each with a novel noun.

Procedure

Results

At the beginning of the experiment, participants were told to
read the slides of a story and that they would be tested on
their comprehension of the story afterwards. In both the
Random and Default conditions, participants first read about
a distant galaxy called Plentia with planets that have three
different kinds of creatures: toma, pimwit, kirbo. All
creatures were presented in grey, and the names were
provided on the screen.

Figure 2: Initial presentation of three
novel creatures shown in both Accidental
and Default conditions.
In the Default condition, participants then saw the slide
shown in Figure 2, with a picture of planet Gelkon with the
three creatures each having a distinct color (all of the tomas
were black, all of the pimwits were blue, all of the kirbos
were red). Participants were reminded of the names of the
creatures, and were asked to type three sentences describing
the colors of the creatures on Gelkon.

Responses were coded into three sentence types: generic,
particular, and other. A sentence was coded as generic if it
expressed information about the kind (e.g., 'Kirbos are red';
'The kirbo is red'). A sentence was coded as particular if it
referred to the particular instances (e.g., 'All of the kirbos
are red'; 'The kirbos are red'). Everything else that was not
generic or particular was coded as other (e.g., 'red, blue,
black'; 'Gelkon is a populated planet'). The experimenter
who coded the data was blinded to the condition the
participant was in.
We computed the percentage of generic, particular, and
other sentence types for each participant. On average across
both conditions, there were 37.1% of generic sentences,
47.8% particular sentences, and 15.1% coded as other.
Participants were highly consistent with respect to the type
of response they provided: 103/106 participants always
responded with the same type of sentence.
To compare how often participants in the Random and
Default conditions responded with generic sentences, we
conducted a Mann-Whitney U test. We found a significant
difference of condition, p = .009, with 26.3% of generic
responses in the Random condition and 51.0% in the
Default condition (Figure 5). This suggests that participants
in the Default condition were significantly more likely to
describe the color of the creatures with a generic sentence.

2725

Next, we examined whether participants in the Default
condition would be more likely to respond with a generic
statement than with sentences that refer to particular
instances. Although the percentages suggest that
participants were more likely to provide a generic response
(51.0%) than a particular response (38.8%), the difference
was not significant, p =.37 (Figure 4).

if generic sentences truly reflect essentialist beliefs. We
address each of these three concerns in Experiment 2.

Experiment 2
The goal of Experiment 2 was to replicate findings from
Experiment 1 using a modified paradigm. In Experiment 2,
we equated the number of instances of the creatures and also
the number of planets for both the Random and Default
conditions. Specifically, in both conditions, information
about the relationships between properties and the kind was
presented in text, and participants only saw Gelkon.
Moreover, to investigate whether generic sentences reflect
essentialist beliefs, we included an additional condition –
Essential condition – such that the property of interest is
made explicit that it is an essential property for the kind.

Participants
73 participants were recruited via Amazon Mechanical
Turk. All were self-reported native English speakers who
lived in the US. Participants were randomly assigned to one
of three conditions: Essential condition (n = 27), Default
condition (n = 23), and Random condition (n=23).

Figure 4: Percentages of Generic,
Particular, and Other sentences in the two
conditions.

Stimuli

Discussion
This experiment explored the conditions under which
participants would interpret observable regularities as
reflecting deep properties of a kind. Our findings suggest
that, contrary to predictions from descriptivist accounts,
participants were more likely to respond with generic
statements when shown that the regularities were present by
default (Default condition) than when shown that the
regularities were accidental (Random condition). This
finding suggests that participants in the Default condition
were adopting an explanatory approach to observable
regularities, not merely extracting shallow associations. This
outcome supports the essentialist framework, in that it
suggests that (a) humans distinguish between lawlike and
accidental regularities when interpreting their observations
and (b) by default humans infer from an observed regularity
to an explanation in terms of essences.
However, the current experiment leaves open three
alternative interpretations. First, participants in the Random
condition saw instances of the kinds of creatures in different
colors, and thus, they may have learned that color is not a
very useful cue for category membership. Second, planets
other than Gelkon were shown in the Random condition,
whereas Gelkon is the only planet in the Default condition.
Participants in the Random condition could have
represented the creatures on Gelkon as a subset of the
instances (e.g., a sample), and those in the Default condition
could have represented them as the full set (e.g., the
population). This set/subset difference may have led to
different inferences from the observed regularities. Third,
although we found a higher rate of generic responses in the
Default than in the Random condition, it is not entirely clear

We used the same three creatures as Experiment 1, but their
initial presentation was not filled in (see Figure 5).

Procedure
As with Experiment 1, at the beginning of the experiment,
participants were told to read the slides with a story and that
they would be tested on their comprehension of the story
afterwards. In all of the conditions participants were told
about a planet called Gelkon and were introduced to three
different kinds of creatures: toma, pimwit, kirbo. All
creatures were presented without any color, and the names
were provided on the screen.

Figure 5: Initial presentation of three novel creatures
shown in all conditions.
Participants in the Essential and Random conditions read a
story, displayed at the bottom of the slide shown in Figure
5, about how the creatures on Gelkon got their colors.
Participants in the Essential condition received a story
stating that, “On Gelkon, there are different types of blood
that are different colors. They type of blood a creature has
determines the fur-color of the creature. For example, if a
creature has green blood, then the creature will have green
fur. Since a creature’s blood-type stays the same for its

2726

whole life, a creature’s fur-color stays the same for its whole
life.” Participants in the Random condition received a story
stating that the fur colors of the creatures were highly
unstable and accidental. They read that, “On Gelkon, there
are different types of pools that are different colors. The
type of pool a creature bathes in determines the fur-color of
the creature. For example, if a creature bathes in a green
pool, then its fur will become green. Since a creature can
bathe in a different colored pool each day, its fur-color can
be different each day.” Comprehension checks were made to
ensure participants were reading the slides and attending to
the task.
Participants in all three conditions then saw the slide
shown in Figure 6, with a picture of planet Gelkon with the
three creatures each having a distinct color (all of the tomas
were black, all of the pimwits were blue, all of the kirbos
were red). Participants were reminded of the names of the
creatures, and were asked to type three sentences describing
the colors of the creatures on Gelkon.

Figure 7: Percentages of Generic,
Particular, and Other sentences in the
three conditions.

Discussion
In Experiment 2, we found that participants in both the
Essential and Default conditions were more likely to
describe the color of the creatures with a generic sentence
than those in the Random condition. This suggests that our
results from Experiment 1 were not due to idiosyncrasies of
the task. Crucially, participants from all three conditions
saw the same creatures and distribution of properties. The
only difference was in the information about how the
property is related to the kind, which was presented in text.
Participants in the Random condition read that the property
of interest (i.e., color) was accidental, and those in the
Essential condition read that the color was an essential
property of the creatures. Moreover, our findings also
suggest that generic sentences reflect essentialist beliefs.

Figure 6: Final slide with probe shown to
participants in all conditions.

General Discussion and Conclusions

As with Experiment 1, responses were coded into three
sentence types: generic, particular, and other. The coding
was done blindly.
We computed the percentage of generic, particular, and
other sentence types for each participant. On average across
three conditions, there were 60.0% of ‘generic’ sentences,
17.5% ‘particular’ sentences, and 30.5% coded as ‘other’.
To compare how often participants in the three
conditions responded with generic sentences, we conducted
a Kruskal-Wallis test and found a significant effect of
condition (H(2)=19.98, p < .001). Post-hoc comparisons
using Mann-Whitney U revealed a significant difference
between the Random condition and both the Default (U =
175.0, Z = -3.03, p < .001) and Essential conditions (U =
86.5, Z = -4.38, p < .001). There was no significant
difference between the Default and the Essential conditions
(U = 232.5, Z = -1.76, p = .078). Figure 7 displays the
proportion of the sentence types for each of the conditions.
This suggests that participants in both the Essential and
Default conditions were significantly more likely to
describe the color of the creatures with a generic sentence.

This paper articulates an essentialist account of concepts
and reports two experiments on the uses of generic
sentences that supports such essentialist approaches over
descriptivist ones. In Experiment 1, we aimed to investigate
whether people made different inferences about how a
property was related to the kind when observable
regularities were accidental versus when they were lawlike.
Specifically, we showed participants three novel creatures,
and provided them with information about how the creatures
obtained their colors. We measured the type of sentences
they used to describe the colors of the creatures. Drawing on
previous research on generics, we hypothesized that
participants who inferred that the property-kind relation is
lawlike would be more likely to describe the creatures with
generic sentences than those who inferred that the propertykind relation was accidental. Results from Experiment 1
supported our hypothesis, suggesting that participants
interpreted observable regularities as positing deep/hidden
properties. We also found that this assumption about
observable regularities is defeated when the property is
believed to be related to the kind by accident. Nevertheless,
the findings of Experiment 1 may also be attributable to the
fact that participants in the Random condition saw more

Results

2727

planets (or possible worlds) and more instances that had
different colors, and these differences may allow for
different inferences to be made. Experiment 2 addressed
these concerns by presenting information in text. Moreover,
the logic of Experiment 1 rests on the assumption that
generic sentences reflect a lawlike relation between the
property and the kind, which was not explicitly tested. We
addressed this concern in Experiment 2 by adding an
Essential condition in which it was made clear that colors
were an essential property of the creatures. We found that
participants in both the Essential and the Default conditions
were more likely to provide generic responses than those in
the Random conditions.
Given that the distribution of properties was the same
across the three conditions in Experiment 2, the descriptivist
approach to concepts cannot explain why there was a
difference in the usage of generic sentences between the
Random condition and the Default and Essential conditions.
Our result suggests that people interpret observable
regularities as a signal for a lawlike relation between the
property (color) and kinds, and we argue that this provides
strong evidence for the essentialist approach to concepts.
An issue of interest in future work is how hypotheses
about hidden/latent properties are revised in light of new
data. Clusters of perceptually similar objects may split or
merge. In some cases of such merging and splitting, the
original reference-fixing descriptions may have failed either
to pick out a property that exists or failed to pick out a
property that is unique. Difficult puzzles thus arise about
what the original concepts meant in cases of such revisions.
These concerns are discussed in the full proposal of the
Baptism theory of concepts (Oved, 2009, in press) but are in
need of empirical exploration.

References
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual Change in Childhood.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/Bradford Books.
Barsalou, L. (1987) The instability of graded structure:
Implications for the nature of concepts. In U.Neisser
(Ed.), Concepts and Conceptual Development:Ecological
and Intellectual Factors inCategorization. 101-140. New
York:Cambridge University Press.
Barsalou, L. (1999). Perceptual Symbol Systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22: 577-660.
Carlson, G. (1977). Reference to kinds in English.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst.
Devitt, M. & Sterelny, K (1999). Language and Reality: An
Introduction to the Philosophy of Language. Second ed.
MIT Press.
Fodor, J.A. (1975). The Language of Thought. New York:
Thomas Y. Crowell.
Fodor, J.A. (1981) The present status of the innateness
controversy. In Fodor, J. Representations: Philosophical
Essays on the Foundations of Cognitive Science.
Fodor, J.A. (1998). Concepts: Where Cognitive Science
Went Wrong. New York: Oxford University Press.

Fodor, J.A. (2008). LOT2: The Language of Thought
Revisited. Oxford University Press.
Gelman, S. (2003). The essential child: Origins of
essentialism in everyday thought. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Gelman, S. A., & Bloom, P. (2007). Developmental
changes in the understanding of generics. Cognition,
105, 166-183.
Gopnik, A. and Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007).Bayesian
networks, Bayesian learning, and cognitive development.
Developmental Science 10(3), 281-287.
Griffiths, T. L., Kemp, C., and Tenenbaum, J. B. (2008).
Bayesian models of cognition. In Ron Sun (ed.),
Cambridge Handbook of Computational Cognitive
Modeling. Cambridge University Press.
Hume, David. (1748). An Enquiry into Human
Understanding.
Keil, F. C. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and cognitive
development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kemp, C., Perfors, A., and Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007).
Learning overhypotheses with hierarchical Bayesian
models. Developmental Science 10(3), 307-321.
Locke, J. (1690) An Essay Concerning Human
Understanding.
Oved, I. (2009). Baptizing Meanings for Concepts. Doctoral
Dissertation. Department of Philosophy. Rutgers, The
State University of New Jersey. New Brunswick.
Oved, I. (2014) Hypothesis formation and testing in the
acquisition of representationally simple concepts.
Philosophical Studies.
Oved I. & Fasel I. (2011). Philosophically inspired concept
acquisition for artificial general intelligence. Proceedings
of the 4th Conference of Artificial General Intelligence.
Perfors, A, Tenenbaum, J. B., & Regier, T. (in press). The
learnability of abstract syntactic principles. Cognition.
Prasada, S. (2000). Acquiring generic knowledge. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 4, 66-72.
Prasada, S., & Dillingham, E. (2006). Principled and
statistical connections in common sense conception.
Cognition, 99 (1).
Prasada, S., & Dillinghamn, E. (2009). Representation of
principled connections: A window onto the formal aspect
ofcommon sense conception. Cognitive Science, 33.
Prasada, S., Khemlani, s., Leslie, S.J., & Glucksberg, S.
(2013). Conceptual distinctions amongst generics.
Cognition, 126, 405-422.
Prinz, J. (2002). Furnishing the Mind: Concepts and their
Perceptual Basis. MIT Press.
Rosch, E. (1978) Principles of categorization. In: E. Rosch
& B. Lloyd, eds., Cognition and Categorization.
Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum Associates. 27-48.
Smith, E.E. & Medin, D.L. (1981). Categories and
Concepts. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Xu, F. and Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). Sensitivity to sampling
in Bayesian word learning. Developmental Science 10(3),
288-297.

2728

