UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Context effects and risk amplification: Why more is risky

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2234r2q9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Noguchi, Takao
Hills, Thomas

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Context effects and risk amplification: Why more is risky
Takao Noguchi (t.noguchi@warwick.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK

Thomas T. Hills (thomhills@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK
Abstract
Research on risky choice has been dominantly based on studies of choice between two alternatives, with the findings often generalized to environments with more than two alternatives. One prominent claim of this research is that choices
differ with respect to risk when alternatives are described
(the description paradigm) as opposed to experienced (the
experience paradigm): Individuals appear to make decisions
as if they over-weight small probabilities in the description
paradigm, but under-weight the same probabilities in the experience paradigm. Here, we show that the under-weighting in
the experience paradigm is sensitive to the choice set size in
the gain domain. Two experiments show that as set sizes increase, choices systematically favour risky alternatives in the
experience paradigm. Using simulations of three choice models, we further demonstrate that this risk-amplification is independent of choice and search strategies and is predicted by
the statistical structure of pay-offs. The results suggest caution in generalising findings from two-choice environments to
many-choice environments and further indicate a robust and
systematic problem with increasing choice set sizes.
Keywords: context effect; description-experience gap; decision from experience; search-amplified risk; too much choice

Over the past decade, research with two-choice environments has led to the claim that in the experience paradigm,
where decisions are made after experiencing a series of sample pay-offs (e.g., $0, $0, $0, $9, and $0), individuals make a
decision as if they under-weight small probabilities (Hertwig,
Barron, Weber, & Erev, 2004). This under-weighting has
been juxtaposed against over-weighting of small probabilities in the description paradigm (Kahneman & Tversky,
1979; Tversky & Kahneman, 1992), where pay-offs and their
probabilities are described (e.g., $9 with a 10% probability, otherwise nothing). This difference in the weighting of
small probabilities — termed the description-experience gap
(Hertwig & Erev, 2009) — has been rigorously examined
and consistently confirmed in two-choice environments (e.g.,
Ungemach, Chater, & Stewart, 2009; Lajarraga, Hertwig, &
Gonzalez, 2012; Gonzalez & Dutt, 2011; Newell & Rakow,
2007; Erev et al., 2010; Gottlieb, Weiss, & Chapman, 2007;
Abdellaoui, L’Haridon, & Paraschiv, 2011; Hilbig & Gloeckner, 2011).
The under-weighting of small probabilities in the experience paradigm has been used to explain a variety of phenomenon related to decision making outside the laboratory, including those involving perceived terrorist threats
(Yechiam, Barron, & Erev, 2005) and the recent financial
crisis (Hertwig & Erev, 2009). However, because the number of decision alternative is often more than two outside the

laboratory, those generalisations implicitly assume the principle of independence from irrelevant alternatives (IIA; Arrow,
1963): the order of preferences for alternatives should not be
changed by the inclusion of non-preferred alternatives in a
choice set.
Violations of the principle of IIA, however, have been
reported in various areas of decision making (e.g., Huber,
Payne, & Puto, 1982; Simonson, 1989; Tversky, 1972), and
we examined whether the principle of IIA holds in differing
set sizes. If a risky alternative is preferred between one risky
and one safe alternative, the principle of IIA implies that a
risky alternative is still preferred between many risky and safe
alternatives. Here, a risky alternative has a small probability
of a large pay-off, and a safe alternative has a large probability of a small pay-off.
Prior empirical evidence suggests that decisions can
change systematically with set sizes. Ert and Erev (2007), for
instance, report that when individuals can observe foregone
pay-offs from the alternatives they did not choose, a larger
set tends to lead the individuals to choose the alternative that,
most recently, delivered the largest pay-off. Further, Hills,
Noguchi, and Gibbert (2013) found that larger and more diverse choice sets lead individuals to sample more alternatives
but fewer times per alternative and subsequently to choose alternatives which delivered a larger sample pay-off. As large
pay-offs are often associated with risky alternatives in decision research, these studies imply that increasing set sizes facilitates choice for a risky alternative.
Based on the above work, we hypothesized that in the experience paradigm, safe alternatives would be more often chosen when set sizes are small, but risky alternatives would
be more likely to be chosen with large set sizes. In addition to this increase in risky choice violating the principle
of IIA, we further predict that the effect of set size will diminish the description-experience gap. As discussed above,
the description-experience gap is partly explained by underweighting of small probabilities in the experience paradigm,
which predicts that safe alternatives are more frequently chosen than risky alternatives. If risky alternatives become
more frequently chosen as set-sizes grow, the descriptionexperience gap will become smaller and eventually diminish.
In Experiments 1 and 2, we manipulated the set sizes in
both description and experience paradigms, for both gain and
loss domains, and for conditions in which the expected payoff of an alternative was positively or negatively associated

1084

with the probability of pay-off. We then examined the robustness of these results and their potential cause by simulating
decision models for various set sizes and information search
strategies. Our principle goal was to lay a foundation for identifying environments to which findings from two-choice environments may be best generalised.

mals to derive the non-zero pay-off amount that would appear
on the screen.

Procedure

Experiments 1 and 2
We report how we determined the number of participants,
all data exclusions (if any), all manipulations, and all measures in the experiments. Both experiments employed
a 2 (between-participant, set size: small or large) × 2
(between-participant, paradigm: description or experience) ×
2 (within-participant, domain: gain or loss) design. Experiment 1 was conducted online and the pay-off was in American dollars. Experiment 2 was carried out in a laboratory
and the pay-off was in British pounds. The two experiments
differed in the relationship between risk and expected pay-off
to ensure that the results do not depend on particular structure
of pay-offs. Additionally, the experiments differed in how the
participation fee was calculated (explained below).

Participants
In Experiment 1, 131 participants (73 males, 56 females
and 2 unspecified) were recruited through Mechanical Turk
(http://www.mturk.com). Their age ranged from 18 to 69
with a mean of 30.63. In Experiment 2, 101 students (57
males and 44 females) were recruited through the participant
panel at the University of Warwick. Their age ranged from
18 to 52 with a mean of 22.7. We decided in advance of
collecting the data to test exactly 100 participants for both
experiments, but over-recruited due to technical reasons.

Participants were instructed that their payments would depend on their choices during the experiment. The two experiments asked participants to make six choices in total, three
involving gains and three involving losses. The gain and loss
trials were interleaved and presented in a random order. Each
trial displayed 2 alternatives (small set size) or 32 alternatives
(large set size).
At each trial, participants were asked to sample from the
alternatives as many times as they wanted and then to choose
one of the alternatives. Every time an alternative was sampled, information about the alternative was presented for 500
ms. In the description paradigm, the information displayed
the probability and pay-off amount (e.g., 10%, $9.00). In the
experience paradigm, the information presented was a random sample from the pay-off distribution associated with that
alternative. For example, when an alternative with a 10%
chance of $9.00 was sampled in the experience paradigm, 1
in 10 samples displayed $9.00, otherwise $0.00.
Participants did not learn about the pay-offs from their final
choices until the end of the experiment, when the participation fee was calculated. In Experiment 1, the pay-offs from
the six choices were summed and added to the base fee of
$1.00. The fee ranged from $0.00 to $14.57, with a mean of
$1.80. In Experiment 2, the pay-off from one choice was randomly selected and added to the base fee of £4.00. Participant
could receive up to £8.00, and a mean fee was £4.08.

Results and Discussion

Apparatus
The alternatives were independently and randomly generated
for each trial for each participant. Half of the alternatives
within a trial (1 alternative in the small set size, and 16 alternatives in the large set size) were safe alternatives. The
probability of pay-off for each safe alternative was a random
draw from a uniform distribution between 0.8 and 1.0. The
other half of the alternatives were risky, with probability of
pay-off drawn from a uniform distribution between 0.0 and
0.2. Each alternative was presented as a box on a screen, and
a choice set was presented to the participant as an array of
boxes.
For each trial, we draw a random number from a uniform
distribution between 0.50 and 1.00 for the gain domain and
between −0.50 and −1.00 for the loss domain. This number is used as an expected pay-off for the safe alternatives.
Thus within a trial, all the safe alternatives had the same expected pay-off. In Experiment 1 and 2 the expected pay-off
for the safe alternatives was multiplied by 0.9 and 1.1, respectively, to derive the expected pay-off for the risky alternatives.
For each alternative, the expected pay-off was divided by the
probability of pay-off and rounded to the nearest two deci-

Analyses were confined to trials where participants chose an
alternative they had sampled at least once. This represented
703 choices out of 786 (= 131 participants×6 choices) in Experiment 1, and 562 choices out of 606 (= 101 participants ×
6 trials) in Experiment 2.
Increasing the set size eliminates the descriptionexperience gap. Figures 1 and 2 show the results of Experiments 1 and 2, respectively. Both replicate the descriptionexperience gap for the small set size in the gain and loss
domains. In the gain domain, a risky alternative was more
frequently selected in the description paradigm than in the
experience paradigm. Alternatively in the loss domain, a
risky alternative was more frequently chosen in the experience paradigm than in the description paradigm. These results are consistent with the over-weighting of small probabilities in the description paradigm and the under-weighting
of small probabilities in the experience paradigm, results routinely noted in the literature (e.g., Hertwig & Erev, 2009;
Ungemach et al., 2009; Hilbig & Gloeckner, 2011).
Statistical significance was examined with mixed-effect logistic regressions with maximal random effects (Barr, Levy,
Scheepers, & Tily, 2013) to predict the choices of the risky
alternative. Model fits indicate a significant three-way in-

1085

Proportion of Risky Choice

Description
Experience

.8
.6
.4
.2
Small

Large

Small

Set-Size

Large

Set-Size

(a) Gain Domain

(b) Loss Domain

Proportion of Risky Choice

Figure 1: Proportion of risky choice in Experiment 1. Error bars are standard error.

Description
Experience

.8
.6
.4
.2
Small

Large

Small

Set-Size

Large

Set-Size

(a) Gain Domain

(b) Loss Domain

Figure 2: Proportion of risky choice in Experiment 2. Error bars are standard error.
teraction (Experiment 1: χ2 (1) = 7.01, p = .008; Experiment 2: χ2 (1) = 11.83, p < .001). For the gain domain,
the effect of paradigm depends on set sizes (Experiment 1:
χ2 (1) = 13.85, p < .001; Experiment 2: χ2 (1) = 12.58,
p < .001). When the set size is increased, a risky alternative is significantly more frequently chosen in the experience
paradigm (Experiment 1: χ2 (1) = 18.46, p < .001; Experiment 2: χ2 (1) = 20.64, p < .001) but not in the description
paradigm (ps > .344). This amplified risk taking eliminates
the description-experience gap in the large set size.
For the loss domain, the set size did not significantly influence the proportion of risky choice (ps > .060). Here,
the description-experience gap persisted, providing reassuring support for prior generalisations from the two-choice environments in the loss domain (e.g., Yechiam et al., 2005;
Hertwig & Erev, 2009).
Note that because the associations between the pay-offs
and probability of pay-off differ between the two experiments, these results are not due to participants in one

paradigm simply choosing the alternatives with the higher expected pay-off.
Given the sampled pay-offs, a better alternative is systematically chosen in the large set size. To show that the
elimination of the description-experience gap in the gain domain is not due to a greater tendency for random choice in the
large set size, we computed the mean sample pay-offs participants observed for each alternative. Using this mean pay-off,
the sampled alternatives were ranked in a descending order
within each trial. Ranks were then normalised as follows:
rank − 1
relative rank =
n − 1,
where n is the number of unique alternatives sampled. Random choice is indicated by a mean relative rank of the chosen alternative close to .50. The mean relative rank of the
chosen alternative in the experience paradigm for the large
set size was .85 (SE = 0.02) in Experiment 1 and .90 (SE =
0.02) in Experiment 2. These were both significantly higher

1086

than .50 (using a mixed-effect linear regression with maximal
random effects on the logit-transformed ranks, Experiment 1:
t(325) = 10.40, p < .001; Experiment 2: t(260) = 14.79, p <
.001), indicating that participants consistently chose higher
ranked alternatives among those they sampled and thus were
not choosing randomly.

mean model is a special case of the two-stage model, where
α = 1 and γ = 1.
For each of the choice models and for a variety of set sizes
(from 2 to 32) we simulated 104 participant choices with a
fixed number of samples per alternative.

Simulating Decision Models over Increasing Set
Sizes

The simulation results are summarised in Figures 3 and 4 for
the gain and loss domains, respectively. In both domains the
three models make similar predictions over a large area of
the simulation space. The most striking result is that, in the
gain domain, the simulated participants chose a safe alternative only when the set size and the number of samples are
relatively small. When the set size is larger than two, risky
alternatives were chosen almost exclusively. The only exception is when the number of samples is near one per alternative and only when the number of alternatives is equal
to or smaller than 12. When more than 12 alternatives are
available, all three models predict that a risky alternative is
more frequently chosen, even when the number of samples
is as large as 20 samples per alternative. This is a clear and
dramatic reversal of the inference based on two-choice experiments, where the experience paradigm leads individuals to
under-weight small probabilities and to choose a safe alternative (Hertwig et al., 2004; Hertwig & Erev, 2009).
The simulation indicates that the risk-amplification for the
gain domain is independent of the decision and information
search strategies we examined. Further, the simulation also
provides insight into the reason for the risk-amplification.
To illustrate, suppose an individual samples each alternative
once but the set sizes increase from 2 to 20 — with half risky
and half safe. Further assume that a risky alternative pays
$9.00 with probability .10 and a safe alternative pays $0.90
with probability 1. The frequency of pay-off from the risky
alternative is determined by the binomial distribution. With
two alternatives in a choice set, there is a .10 probability that
a sample from the risky alternative is $9.00, leading to the infrequent choice of a risky alternative. With 20 alternatives
in a choice set, however, there is a 1 − (1 − .10)20 = .88
probability that a sample from at least one risky alternative
is $9.00, leading to the more frequent choice of the risky alternative. Similar results follow for larger sample sizes and
varying choice strategies.
For the loss domain, the same statistical structure of payoffs explains the smaller influence of the set size. Again, we
assume that a risky alternative pays −$9.00 with probability
.10 and that a safe alternative pays −$0.90 with probability
1. When an individual samples once per alternative, a risky
alternative delivers $0.00 with probability 1 − .10 = .90 with
two alternatives in a choice set, leading to the frequent choice
of the risky alternative. With 20 alternatives in a choice set,
at least one risky alternative delivers $0.00 with probability
greater than 1 − .1020 ≈ 1, leading to the choice of the risky
alternative.
In both domains, the results follow straightforwardly from
the binomial distribution of pay-offs associated with the risky

Experiments 1 and 2 demonstrated a set size dependent violation of the principle of independence from irrelevant alternatives and suggest that as the set size increases, decisions tend to favour risky alternatives in the gain domain.
This risk-amplification, however, could possibly be alleviated
by employing different decision or information search strategies. Thus to understand whether and how decision and information search strategies impact on the risk-amplification,
we examined the influence of set size using three of the
best performing models for explaining choices in the experience paradigm reported in Hau, Pleskac, Kiefer, and Hertwig
(2008).

Method
We simulated choices in the environments which reflect those
in Experiments 1 and 2, with the following exception: the expected pay-offs for the risky and safe alternatives were made
equal within each trial. This eliminates any confound associated with the relationship between the expected pay-off and
the alternative categories (i.e., risky and safe). Simulated participants followed one of the three models in making a decision: the maximax model, the two-stage model of cumulative
prospect theory (the two-stage model henceforth), or the natural mean model. Participants with the maximax model chose
the alternative with the largest experienced pay-off.
Participants who followed the two-stage model first
weighted the frequency of pay-offs and transformed pay-off
amounts into a subjective value to derive the perceived expectation of utility, E:
E = w(experienced frequency of pay-off)
× v(amount of pay-off),
where
w( f ) =

fγ
( f γ + (1 − f )γ )1/γ

and
v(x) = sign(x) |x|α .
The participants then chose the alternative with the largest
perceived expectation of utility. We used parameter values
reported in Hau et al. (2008): α = 0.94 and γ = 0.99 for the
gain domain; α = 0.86 and γ = 0.93 for the loss domain.
Lastly, participants using the natural mean chose the alternative with the highest mean of sample pay-offs. This natural

Results and Discussion

1087

0.5

10

1
2

10

20

2

Number of Alternatives

10

20

2

10

20

Number of Alternatives

Number of Alternatives

(b) Two-stage Model

(c) Natural Mean

(a) Maximax

0.0

Proportion of Risky Choice

Number of Samples per Alternative

1.0

20

1.0

20

0.5

10

1
2

10

20

2

Number of Alternatives
(a) Maximax

10

20

2

10

20

Number of Alternatives

Number of Alternatives

(b) Two-stage Model

(c) Natural Mean

0.0

Proportion of Risky Choice

Number of Samples per Alternative

Figure 3: Simulation results for the gain domain.

Figure 4: Simulation results for the loss domain.
alternative. In particular, as the number of risky alternatives
increases, so does the probability of encountering risky alternatives that pay off at their extremes.

General Discussion
Psychological experiments often simplify the complexity of
the environments in which we live. This simplification is, of
course, necessary for researchers to isolate and manipulate
variables of interest while holding other variables constant.
However, this simplification could lead to the neglect of the
variables most likely to influence behaviour outside the laboratory. In the present study, we demonstrate that one such
variable — set size — has a substantial and potentially unavoidable impact on decision making.
Specifically, our experimental results show that increasing
the number of risky and safe alternatives amplifies the risks
individuals take in the gain domain. This risk-amplification

eliminates the description-experience gap — a finding replicated multiple times over the last decade using two-choice
environments. Thus, the risk an individual takes crucially depends on the number of alternatives the individual considers.
As an illustration, suppose an individual is assessing how
likely he or she is to benefit from a new diet. One method of
assessment is to recall other individuals who have benefited
from this diet (Tversky & Kahneman, 1973; Galesic, Olsson,
& Rieskamp, 2012). If the benefits of the diet are rare, then
a recall based on a limited set of other individuals may indicate that the diet is a waste of time. However, as the set
size of known individuals who have tried the diet increases,
the probability that someone will have a positive testimonial
increases.
Our simulations demonstrate that risk-amplification is unavoidable despite changes in information search: Even if an
individual dramatically increased their number of samples,

1088

the risk-amplification would persist. These results indicate
the importance of research on the set size in decision making and further indicate that generalizations from two-choice
environments may be at times both quantitatively and qualitatively misleading.

References
Abdellaoui, M., L’Haridon, O., & Paraschiv, C. (2011). Experienced vs. described uncertainty: Do we need two prospect
theory specifications? Management Science, 57, 1879–
1895.
Arrow, K. J. (1963). Social choice and individual values (2nd
ed. ed.). New York: John Wiley & Sons Inc.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013).
Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and Language,
68, 255-278.
Erev, I., Ert, E., Roth, A. E., Haruvy, E., Herzog, S. M., Hau,
R., . . . Lebiere, C. (2010). A choice prediction competition: Choices from experience and from description. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 23, 15–47.
Ert, E., & Erev, I. (2007). Replicated alternatives and the role
of confusion, chasing, and regret in decisions from experience. Journal of Behaviora Decision Making, 20, 305–
322.
Galesic, M., Olsson, H., & Rieskamp, J. (2012). Social sampling explains apparent biases in judgments of social environments. Psychological Science, 23, 1515–1523.
Gonzalez, C., & Dutt, V. (2011). Instance-based learning: Integrating sampling and repeated decisions from experience.
Psychological Review, 118, 523–551.
Gottlieb, D. A., Weiss, T., & Chapman, G. B. (2007). The
format in which uncertainty information is presented affects decision biases. Psychological Science, 18, 240–246.
Hau, R., Pleskac, T. J., Kiefer, J., & Hertwig, R. (2008).
The description-experience gap in risky choice: the role
of sample size and experienced probabilities. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 21, 493–518.
Hertwig, R., Barron, G., Weber, E. U., & Erev, I. (2004).
Decisions from experience and the effect of rare events in
risky choice. Psychological Science, 15, 534–539.
Hertwig, R., & Erev, I. (2009). The description-experience
gap in risky choice. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13, 517–
23.
Hilbig, B. E., & Gloeckner, A. (2011). Yes, they can! Appropriate weighting of small probabilities as a function of information acquisition. Acta Psychologica, 138, 390–396.
Hills, T. T., Noguchi, T., & Gibbert, M. (2013). Information
overload or search-amplified risk? Set size and order effects on decisions from experience. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 1-9.
Huber, J., Payne, J., & Puto, C. (1982). Adding asymmetrically dominated alternatives: Violations of regularity and
the similarity hypothesis. Journal of Consumer Research,
9, 90–98.

Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory —
Analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47, 263–
291.
Lajarraga, Y., Hertwig, R., & Gonzalez, C. (2012). How
choice ecology influences search in decisions from experience. Cognition, 124, 334–342.
Newell, B. R., & Rakow, T. (2007). The role of experience
in decisions from description. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14, 1133–1139.
Simonson, I. (1989). Choice based on reasons: The case of
attraction and compromise effects. Journal of Consumer
Research, 16, 158–174.
Tversky, A. (1972). Elimination by aspects: A theory of
choice. Psychological Review, 79, 281–299.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and probability. Cognitive Psychology, 5, 207–232.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in prospect
theory: Cumulative representation of uncertainty. Journal
of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 297–323.
Ungemach, C., Chater, N., & Stewart, N. (2009). Are probabilities overweighted or underweighted when rare outcomes are experienced (rarely)? Psychological Science,
20, 473–479.
Yechiam, E., Barron, G., & Erev, I. (2005). The role of
personal experience in contributing to different patterns of
response to rare terrorist attacks. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 49, 430–439.

1089

