UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Coping with Bullying: A Computational Emotion-Theoretic Account

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/11w8r47j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Wilson, Nicholas
Sun, Ron

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Coping with Bullying: A Computational Emotion-Theoretic Account
Nicholas R. Wilson (nwilson@dcscorp.com)
DCS Corporation, 6909 Metro Park Drive, Suite 500
Alexandria, VA 22310 USA

Ron Sun (rsun@rpi.edu)
Cognitive Science Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
110 8th Street, Troy, NY 12180 USA
Abstract

The Clarion-E Model

This paper describes a computational emotion-theoretic model (i.e., Clarion-E) used to capture the dynamics of appraisal
and coping by victims of school bullying. It provides an overview of recent research concerning bullying appraisals and
coping strategies by students who reported themselves as being the victims of school bullying. It also demonstrates how
such processes may be expressed computationally.

The Clarion-E model posits three basic principles of emotion: affect, appraisal, and coping (Wilson, 2012). It was
developed within the Clarion Cognitive Architecture. While
many emotion models exist (see Wilson, 2012 for an indepth comparison), Clarion-E represents a novel approach
to modeling emotion for two reasons. First, it makes the
primary assumption that human cognition can best be captured using a dual-representational design (Sun, 2002; 2003;
Sun, Slusarz, & Terry, 2005). Many theorists maintain that
key aspects of emotion may be “unconscious” (e.g., the processes underlying affect as well as certain parts of appraisal;
see Wilson, 2012 for details). The second reason that Clarion is appropriate for capturing the basic principles of emotion is that it contains several well-defined constructs that
can be utilized to collectively express the mechanisms, processes, and integrative components of the emotional experience. In particular, the motivational aspects of emotion can
be expressed using the motivational subsystem (MS), the
evaluative nature of appraisal is similar to the reasoning
mechanisms within the non-action centered subsystem
(NACS), and the dynamics underlying both reactive affective states and coping (as well as the interactions between
affect, appraisal, and coping) can be implemented using the
meta-cognitive subsystem (MCS).
In terms of the model itself, the first principle follows
from a perspective on affect that posits that the process of
deriving an affective state (1) is fast, reactive and subconscious (i.e., implicit) in nature, (2) originates from intrinsic physiological processes, and (3) precedes the more
conscious (i.e., explicit) aspects of appraisal (see Wilson,
2012 for details). To capture this concept, Clarion-E proposes a meta-cognitive mechanism by which positive and
negative affective states can be generated based on the combination of motivational factors (i.e., drive strengths) and a
reactive (i.e., implicit) judgment about the potential to act
(termed “action potential”).
The motivational subsystem (MS) contains drives (on the
bottom level) and goals (on the top level) and collectively
captures the processes by which an agent is compelled (Sun,
2009). The representations and mechanisms underlying this
subsystem are already justified extensively elsewhere (see
Sun, 2003; 2009), and thus is not rehashed here. Suffice it to
say, though, that the MS meets the necessary criterion (i.e.,
sustainability, purposefulness, focus, and adaptivity) for
representing motivational dynamics. Action potential is rep-

Keywords: Clarion-E; Clarion; bullying; emotion; coping

Introduction
Perhaps one of the most important variables for understanding the effects of bullying from the perspective of the
victim is the notion of coping (Hunter & Boyle, 2002;
2004). Several studies have aimed at fleshing-out student
coping strategies surrounding bullying at school; with particular attention given to the transactional coping theory
(Lazarus & Folkman, 1984). Within this psychological
framework, coping strategies are not considered as trait
phenomenon, but are instead the result of situation-specific
appraisals, with such appraisals themselves being influenced
by both situational as well as personal variables (Lazarus &
Launier, 1978; Lazarus & Folkman, 1984).
Furthermore, according to Lazarus and Launier (1978),
appraisals generally fall under two categories—primary and
secondary. Primary appraisal refers to one’s interpretation
of an event (i.e., beliefs about how the event affects the individual), while secondary appraisal concerns the evaluations of available coping options (e.g., when faced with situations where bullying is present). In this vain, studies suggest that coping responses may be influenced by more than
just the characteristics of stressful situations. In particular,
according to Hunter and Boyle (2002; 2004), the means by
which an individual appraises a situation appears to have an
especially significant influence on coping behavior.
The transactional coping theory accords itself well with
computational models of emotion, making it a rich domain
from which to asses the link between evaluative appraisal
processes and coping behaviors. To that end, this paper develops a detailed computational account of the transactional
coping theory that exposes the exact mechanisms by which
coping-related phenomena may arise. In particular, we will
explore Clarion-E (Wilson, 2012) and demonstrate how it
may be utilized for capturing the dynamics of appraisal and
coping by victims of bullying (Hunter & Boyle, 2004).

3119

Figure 1: Process flow diagram for the Clarion-E model.
resented by the activations of the nodes on the output layer
of the various networks in the bottom level of the actioncentered subsystem (ACS). In other words, action potential
represents the likelihood that a set of actions, which can be
performed in the current state, will be successful in attending to the needs of an agent (Wilson, 2012).
The meta-cognitive subsystem (MCS) is in charge of performing various regulatory processes that facilitate the interactions between the other systems in Clarion (Sun, 2003).
Examples of such processes include: goal setting; parameter
changing; reinforcement signaling; input and output filtering; etc. It has been argued elsewhere that generating reactive affective states can be considered as being a regulatory
process (see Wilson, 2012). Furthermore, such states can be
applied (1) to facilitate further meta-cognitive processes or
(2) as input into “conscious” (i.e., explicit) appraisal processes.
The second principle is concerned with the role of appraisal within the emotion process. In particular, it accounts
for the evaluative nature of such processes that (1) combines
fast, reactive and sub-symbolic (i.e., implicit) mechanisms
with slower, more deliberate (i.e., explicit) ones, (2) uses
physiological, situational, and behavioral inputs, and (3)
specifies a series of dimensions by which emotion-related
knowledge can be represented. Such an account can be seen
as providing an integrative approach to appraisal derivation—combining key aspects of several existing theories
(Wilson, 2012).
Capturing appraisal evaluations can be accomplished using the reasoning mechanisms within the non-actioncentered subsystem (NACS). The NACS is used for storing
and retrieving general knowledge in various forms (Sun,
2003). It also contains mechanisms by which knowledge can
be compared, associated, and otherwise reasoned over (Sun,

2003; Helie & Sun, 2010). It provides both the representational as well mechanistic means by which many aspects of
the appraisal process may be actualized. In particular, chunk
representations can be used to express appraisal dimensions
that are activated using top-down and bottom-up activation
as well as similarity-based and rule-based associative processes. By chaining together these reasoning mechanisms,
the NACS can demonstrate the basic processes of appraisal
(as defined by existing appraisal models; see Wilson, 2012
for a detailed comparison).
The third principle defines the concept of coping as being
a method by which a systems orients toward behavioral patterns that (1) are chosen based on state information, appraised feelings (i.e., emotions), and appraised beliefs about
the state, (2) are enacted by the selection of goals, which
themselves can be derived from appraisals about beliefs and
desired end states, and (3) defines a subset of the coping
phenomenon with regard to the regulation of lower-level
processes. To capture coping, the outcomes of appraisal are
applied by the rest of the system to facilitate regulatory and
coping behavior. It has been previously argued that certain
aspects related to affect and coping may be considered as
being related to regulation (see Wilson, 2012). Therefore, it
should seem reasonable to use the MCS to capture these
dynamics. As this relates specifically to coping, modules in
the MCS can be used to filter and direct the conclusions
from the NACS.
Taken collectively, the basic principles represent an integrated approach to the process of emotion. Looking at Figure 1, the process generally moves from left-to-right, with
drives and action potential feeding into the MCS, which
uses this information to derive reactive affective state (as
well as goals). Next, the state (including the goals and affective state) is fed to the NACS, initiating the appraisal pro-

3120

‘don’t know’ whether there are positive outcomes to bullying use the same amount of
Problem Focused coping as those who say it will definitely have positive outcomes.
This suggests that it may not be ambiguity per se which is important here: rather, pupils
who see no possibility of positive outcomes in bullying situations use less Problem
Focused coping than other children. In order to encourage pupils to use Problem
Focused coping strategies to deal with bullying, such as the assertive strategies

cess (in the form of one or more rounds of reasoning). The
results of appraisal (which are generally represented as
knowledge in the form of emotion terms, beliefs and goals)
are then fed back to the MCS and ACS and used to aid in
action decision-making.
Clarion-E outlines a means by which the broadly-defined
category of Belief-Desire-Intention (Bratman, 1987), or
BDI, theories may be computationally expressed in a detailed and psychologically plausible fashion. For instance,
using our model, affect may be seen as a reactive consequence of one’s desires, appraisal as a process by which
beliefs and intentions are evaluated and derived, and coping
as the means by which intentions are actualized in the service of attending to one’s beliefs and desires.
Figure 2: Challenge appraisal and coping strategy use.1
Figure 3. Challenge appraisals and coping strategy use
While the basic mechanisms of the Clarion-E model have
(from Hunter & Boyle, 2004)
been outlined, it should be noted that for the sake of con-Note. Arrows indicate significant differences (p < .05).
Taken in total, the findings indicate a few key things.
ciseness, this description was intentionally provided at a
First, for those coping scales that were reliably confirmed,
rather high level. For more detail, see Wilson (2012). At this
all were significantly impacted by the presence of challenge
point, we will move to exploring how Clarion-E can be apappraisals (see Figure 2). Second, wishful thinking was inplied to a study by Hunter and Boyle (2004).
versely related to control appraisals. Finally, neither avoidance coping nor threat appraisals were significantly related
Hunter and Boyle (2004)
to any of the other factors that were tested.
Hunter and Boyle (2004) examined coping strategy use in
victims of school bullying. In particular, they used the
transactional model of coping (Lazarus & Folkman, 1984)
to examine the relationship between control, threat, and
challenge appraisals and coping strategy use as reported by
the Ways of Coping Checklist (WCCL). The WCCL categorizes coping behaviors into four distinct categories: problem
focused coping; seeks social support; wishful thinking; and
avoidance. This structure was originally proposed by Folkman and Lazarus (1980), Vitaliano et al. (1985), and
Halstead et al. (1993), and has been used in a wide array of
contexts (Folkman & Lazarus, 1980; Lazarus & Folkman,
1984). Of particular interest, was how the adolescent version of the WCCL (Halstead, Johnson, & Cunningham,
1993) could be used to study coping response within child
and adolescent populations, with particular attention paid to
how youths responded to stressful situations at school,
home, and in other social contexts.
The primary findings from the Hunter and Boyle (2004)
study relate to the relationship between the coping strategies
in the WCCL and appraisals. For problem-focused coping
and seeks social support, main effects for challenge appraisal were found. Further analysis also indicated that more of
these types of coping are used when the potential for positive outcomes to bullying situations are clear or ambiguous
versus when there is definitely no potential for such an outcome. Second, with respect to wishful thinking, both control
and challenge appraisals demonstrated significant (inverse)
effects. That is, participants who appraised themselves as
having no control used more wishful thinking than participants who reported having control over the situation. Conversely, with regard to challenge appraisals, participants
who were unsure whether outcomes would be positive or
not used significantly less wishful thinking than those who
were sure about the possibility of a positive outcome.

Accounting for Coping with Bullying
The Hunter and Boyle (2004) paradigm can be broadly
captured in Clarion-E via the following method. First, drive
strengths in the MS and “action potential” in the ACS are
used to generate a reactive affect state in the MCS. This
state is then fed into the NACS to initiate an appraisal. Two
rounds of reasoning take place within the NACS and the
outcomes of this process are fed back to the MCS and the
ACS. Finally, the ACS chooses an action by factoring-in the
outcomes from the NACS.
The MS is set up to express the key factors of personality
that studies suggest most accurately predict a person’s predilection toward becoming the victim of bullying (Karatzias,
Power, & Swanson, 2002). In particular, studies indicate
that victims usually lack self-assertiveness and have low
self-esteem (Olweus, 1991; Smith & Sharp, 1994; Rigby &
Cox, 1996). This is especially the case for so-called “passive
victims” (Smith & Boulton, 1991), who are not typically
disruptive and tend not to start fights with others.
In modeling this victim type, the similance drive (i.e., the
need to identify with other individuals, to imitate them, and
to go along with their actions) would seem to be the most
relevant, as it is somewhat more avoidant in nature than
other related motivations (Sun, 2009; Sun & Wilson, 2011).
In other words, the similance drive is about the need to
avoid situations where one may be singled-out or otherwise
made to feel separated from others. This is similar to the
types of bullying behaviors described by Whitney and Smith
(1993) and Olweus (1989; 1991; 1993).

1

Yes, No, D/K (Don’t Know) indicates self-reports as to
whether a particular coping strategy was used.

3121

Figure 3: The flow of appraisal in the NACS.
The MS is also set up using the affiliation and belongingness drive. This drive is used to address how individual differences in personality lead to different types of appraisal
and coping responses. Affiliation and belongingness is similar in nature to similance, except that it is approach oriented.
In other words, it refers to the desire to seek associations
with others and to be accepted as part of a social group
(Sun, 2003; 2009; Sun & Wilson, 2011), while similance
deals more with the need to avoid being outcast.
Continuing now to the NACS, the general knowledge
store contains chunks relating to: (1) control and challenge
appraisals, and (2) coping strategies. The coping categories
are used as goal chunks and the control and challenge appraisals are set up as belief-like declarative knowledge
chunks. The belief concept is being used somewhat generically in this case. That is, the beliefs themselves are represented simply as appraisals about the situation (e.g., “the
bully will teach me not to bully others”) that were derived
directly from Hunter and Boyle (2004) and linked to “emotion terms” in order facilitate the appraisal process. The justification for the inclusion of these emotion terms are
somewhat outside the scope of the current topic (see Wilson, 2012 for more details). Suffice it to say, however, that
they have been included in order to (1) provide a link between reactive affective states and bullying appraisals based
on a review of the literature (Watson, Clark, & Tellegen,
1988; Karatzias, Power, & Swanson, 2002), and (2) demonstrate a somewhat more complex set up of the appraisal processes within the NACS.
The appraisal process itself begins with the reception of
sensory input and affective state information (sent from the
MCS). The first round of reasoning activates emotion terms
and belief chunks, which subsequently activate goals (in the
second round). This “appraised knowledge” (i.e., the beliefs
and goals) are then sent to the MCS, which filters them before they are sent to the ACS to be stored in working
memory (see Figure 3). The process of goal-setting, using
goal appraisal and setting modules in the MCS, is also impacted by operations that compare aspects of the current

motivational and sensory state with the strength of appraised desires (i.e., goals). Once set, these goals act (in
conjunction with the appraised knowledge stored in the
working memory) to orient decision-making toward appropriate patterns of behavior. In other words, the declarative
knowledge from the NACS is used to orient behavior by
setting goals, which ultimately guides coping-related decision-making.
The actual behaviors that constitute coping response are
represented as the individual items on the WCCL and set up
as actions in the ACS (and chosen using rules on the top
level). Additionally, using the study by Whitney and Smith
(1993) on the nature and extent of school bullying, a series
of “bullying scenarios” can be created, which serve as sensory input to the simulated agents. By doing it this way, the
agents can be said to actually “experience” the bullying
situations. This provides a somewhat more embodied approach to the self-report questionnaires that were used in
the human experiments. To associate our alternative approach to the Likert-type scale from the Halstead et al.’s
(1993) version of the WCCL, the simulation tracks the frequency that coping behaviors are chosen.

Simulating Hunter and Boyle (2004)
Ten simulated participants were set up in each of four
manipulations: high/low similance drive strength (for capturing intrinsic personality differences), and high/low action
potential (for capturing bullying frequency). For the drive
manipulation, the assumption is that individuals with higher
affiliation and belongingness drives (in comparison to their
similance drives) will tend to appraise situations and choose
strategies that are more related to seeking positive outcomes, whereas individuals with higher similance drives
will tend to appraise situations and choose strategies that
relate to avoiding negative ones. The action potential manipulation relates to implicit judgments about the likelihood
that a bullying event will have a positive outcome. In other
words, it impacts whether an agent will appraise a situation
as being controllable or not.
Each agent was exposed to ten randomly generated “bullying scenarios” based on the frequencies (as indicated by
Whitney & Smith, 1993) by which various features of bullying are said to occur. For each scenario, agents both chose a
coping behavior and report on how they appraised the situation. Each scenario was presented ten times and both coping
behaviors and appraisals were recorded based on how they
related to the coping categories of the WCCL (Folkman &
Lazarus, 1980; Halstead, Johnson, & Cunningham, 1993)
and the appraisal types (i.e., control vs. challenge) as defined by Hunter and Boyle (2002; 2004).
The results of the simulation mostly support the human
data. First, as a matter of confirming the application of the
child and adolescent version of the WCCL (Halstead,
Johnson, & Cunningham, 1993) within the bullying context,
the drive strength manipulation had an impact on coping
behavior. In other words, simulated participants’ similance
drive activations seemed to correctly suggest the direction

3122

Challenge Appraisals

Control Appraisals

2.5

0.8
0.7
0.6

1.5

Frequency

Frequency

2

Yes (AP > 50%)

1

No (AP < 50%)

0.5
0.4

Yes (AP > 50%)

0.3

No (AP < 50%)

0.2

0.5

0.1

0

0
PF

SSS

WT

WT

Figure 4: Appraisal x coping strategy use in simulated participants.
of coping behavior that was chosen. To that end, agents set
up with high similance activations tended to choose more
wishful-thinking behavior, whereas agents with low activations tended to choose more problem-focused and seeks
social support behavior. This is significant as it predicts how
victims of bullying will react to bullying scenarios. That is,
the findings confirm that those victims who approach the
situation positively (i.e., rely more on their approachoriented motivations) will tend to use coping strategies that
are generally thought to be more effective at stopping bullying. Conversely, those victims who view the situation negatively (i.e., rely more on the avoidance-oriented motivations) will tend to use less effective strategies (i.e., wishful
thinking).
Continuing to the action potential manipulation, the manipulation was somewhat correlated with appraisal. That is,
agents with higher action potential more often saw the situation as controllable, whereas agents with lower action potential tended to see the situation as somewhat less so. In addition, action potential was negatively associated with problem-focused and seeks social support coping. In other
words, the lower the action potential (i.e., the less positive
the outcome prediction), the lower the frequency problemfocused and seek-social support behaviors were chosen.
This is significant because it (1) predicts the correlation
between wishful thinking and control appraisals, and (2)
provides a useful context for understanding why some victims may choose less effective forms of coping with bullying. In other words, the findings suggest that those victims
who have attempted to use the more effective forms of coping, but have had little success will tend to see bullying situations as being less controllable, causing them to rely on
less effective (but perhaps “easier”) strategies (i.e., coping).
Finally, with regard to the coping × appraisal interaction,
just like in the human findings, simulated participants more
frequently chose coping-related behaviors (as opposed to
other types of behavior) when the situation was appraised as
a challenge. Furthermore, wishful-thinking type behaviors
were more frequently used in those situations where no control was reported. A graphical representation of these find-

ings can be found in Figure 4. At this point, though, it
would appear that Clarion-E mostly captures the findings
from Hunter and Boyle (2002; 2004). Further discussion of
these finding follow below.

Discussion
The model outlined herein provides a computational account for how affect, appraisal, and coping processes interact. Furthermore, the simulation presented provides a clear
demonstration of how this interaction can capture the phenomenon of coping within the bully-victim paradigm. In
other words, the Clarion-E model provides a comprehensive
computational cognitive and emotion-based interpretation
for how self-reported appraisals and coping strategies may
be embodied within the context of coping with bullying. In
this regard, the simulated findings provide some support for
the Ways of Coping Checklist (Folkman & Lazarus, 1980;
Vitaliano, Russo, Carr, Maiuro, & Becker, 1985; Halstead,
Johnson, & Cunningham, 1993). In addition, by corroborating their findings, the simulation also provides some support
for the appraisal reporting methods developed by Hunter
and Boyle (2002; 2004).
As others have suggested (Hunter, Boyle, & Warden,
2002), research on coping with bullying improves antibullying intervention programs and other support systems
because such work provides a clearer picture of both the
how and why of child and adolescent coping strategies. The
research presented herein is intended to extend this notion
by further clarifying the picture mechanistically.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the various funding agencies that have made this research possible. In particular, we
would like to thank the ONR grant N0014-08-1-0068 as
well as the Army Research Laboratory, project number
APX03.0011.00.0001.

3123

References
Bratman, M. E. (1987). Intention, plans, and practical
reason. Stanford, CA: CLSI Publications.
Folkman, S., & Lazarus, R. (1980). An analysis of coping in
a middle-aged community sample. Journal of Health and
Social Behavior , 21 (3), 219-239.
Halstead, M., Johnson, S. B., & Cunningham, W. (1993).
Measuring coping in adolescents: An application of the
ways of coping checklist. Journal of Clinical Child
Psychology , 22 (3), 337-344.
Helie, S., & Sun, R. (2010). Incubation, insight, and creative
problem solving: A unified theory and a connectionist
model. Psychological Review , 117 (3), 994-1024.
Helie, S., & Sun, R. (2008). Knowledge integration in
creative problem solving. Proceedings of the Thirtieth
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, (pp.
1681 -1686). Washington, DC.
Hunter, S. C., & Boyle, J. M. (2004). Appraisal and coping
strategy use in victims of school bullying. British Journal
of Educational Psychology , 74, 83-107.
Hunter, S. C., & Boyle, J. M. (2002). Perceptions of control
in the victims of school bullying: The importance of early
intervention. Educational Research , 44 (3), 323-336.
Hunter, S. C., Boyle, J. M., & Warden, D. (2002). Help
seeking amongst child and adolescent victims of peeraggression and bullying: The influence of school-stage,
gender, victimization, appraisal, and emotion. British
Psychological
Society,
Developmental
Section
Conference. Sussex: University of Sussex.
Karatzias, A., Power, K. G., & Swanson, V. (2002).
Bullying and victimization in scottish secondary schools:
Same or separate entities? Aggressive Behavior , 28, 4561.
Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal, and
coping. New York, NY: Springer.
Lazarus, R. S., & Launier, R. (1978). Stress-related
transactions between person and environment. In L. A.
Pervin, & M. Lewis, Perspectives in Interactional
Psychology (pp. 287-327). London, UK: Plenum Press.
Maslow, A. (1987). Motivation and personality. New York,
NY: Harper and Row.
Olweus, D. (1991). Bully/vitcim problems among school
children: Basic facts and effects of a school based
intervention program. In D. J. Pepler, & K. H. Rubin, The
development and Treatment of Childhood Aggression.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Olweus, D. (1993). Bullying at school: What we know and
what we can do. Oxford, NY: Blackwell Publishers.
Olweus, D. (1989). Student bully/victim Questionnaire.
Unpublished. As cited by Wilton, M.M.; Craig, W.M.; &
Pepler, D.J. (2000) .
Rigby, K., & Cox, I. (1996). The contribution of bullying at
school and low self-esteem to acts of delinquency among
australian teenagers. Personality and Individual
Differences , 21, 609-612.

Salmivalli, C. (1999). Participant role approach to school
bullying: Implications for interventions. Journal of
Adolescence , 22, 453-459.
Smith, P. K., & Boulton, M. J. (1991). Self-esteem,
sociometric status, and peer-perceived behavioral
characteristics in middle school children in the united
kingdom. Eleventh Meeting of ISSBD .
Smith, P. K., & Sharp, S. (1994). School bullying: Insights
and perspectives. London, UK: Routledge.
Sun, R. (2003). A tutorial on CLARION 5.0. Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute, Cognitive Science Department.
Sun, R. (2002). Duality of mind. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Sun, R. (2009). Motivational representations within a
computational
cognitive
architecture.
Cognitive
Computation , 1 (1), 91-103.
Sun, R., & Wilson, N. (2011). Motivational processes
within the perception-action cycle. In V. Cutsuridis, A.
Hussain, & J. G. Taylor, Perception-Action Cycle:
Models, Architectures, and Hardware (pp. 449-472). New
York, NY: Springer.
Sun, R., & Zhang, X. (2004). Accounting for similaritybased reasoning within a cognitive architecture.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society. Chicago.
Sun, R., Slusarz, P., & Terry, C. (2005). The interaction of
the explicit and the implicit in skill learning: A dualprocess approach. Psychological Review , 112 (1), 159192.
Vitaliano, P., Russo, J., Carr, J., Maiuro, R., & Becker, J.
(1985). The ways of coping checklist: Revision and
psychometric properties. Multivariate Behavioral
Research , 20, 3-26.
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988).
Development and validation of brief measures of positive
and negative affect: The PANAS scales. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology , 54, 1063-1079.
Whitney, I., & Smith, P. K. (1993). A survey of the nature
and extent of bullying in junior/middle and secondary
schools. Educational Research , 35 (1), 3-25.
Wilson, N. R. (2012). Towards a psychologically plausible
comprehensive computational theory of emotion. Troy:
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
Wilton, M. M., Craig, W. M., & Pepler, D. J. (2000).
Emotional regulation and display in classroom victims of
bullying: Characteristic expressions of affect, coping
styles and relevant contextual factors. Social Development
, 9 (2), 226-245.
Winkielman, P., Berridge, K., & Wilbarger, J. (2005).
Unconscious affective reactions to masked happy versus
angry faces influence consumption behavior and
judgements of value. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin , 31 (1), 121-135.

3124

