UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cross-linguistic Evidence for Cognitive Foundations of Polysemy

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/12c346ct

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Zhu, Huichun
Malt, Barbara C.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cross-linguistic Evidence for Cognitive Foundations of Polysemy
Huichun Zhu (huichun.zhu@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, 17 Memorial Drive East
Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA 18015, USA

Barbara C. Malt (barbara.malt@lehigh.edu)
Department of Psychology, 17 Memorial Drive East
Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA 18015, USA
The possibility of complete unpredictability is defeated by
the observation that some relationships between central
sense and extended senses of words tend to recur. For
instance, at least within English, the same word can be used
to refer to both the object and the substance (e.g., chicken;
fish); both the text and the object (e.g., newspaper; book);
both the act and the instrument (e.g., drill; brush); and both
the actor and the act (e.g., cook; scout) (e.g., Blank, 1999;
Norrick, 1981; Nunberg, 1979). More broadly, metaphor
and metonymy frequently characterize the relations between
the most literal sense of a word and its extended senses
(Stern, 1931; Ullmann, 1962; Blank, 1999). For instance,
the foot of a mountain may be metaphorically similar to a
human foot, and the tongue spoken by a linguistic
community is the language that emerges by means
(partially) of the tongue in their mouth.
Still, such observations are largely descriptive and posthoc. They do not indicate, for any given word, what senses
are likely to arise, and they provide no explanation of why
those senses may come about. At a broad level, they do
suggest that language users engage in metaphorical and
metonymic thinking and also that they are sensitive to more
specific relations such as that of an object to its substance.
But that does not reveal what particular senses are likely to
be created or why. Indeed, Lakoff (1987) and Langacker
(1988) have suggested that although the array of senses
conventionally associated with a word is not arbitrary,
neither is it readily predictable.
These analyses of recurring relations have generally been
carried out without closer consideration of the cognitive
processes that might be involved. We suggest that further
consideration of the cognitive processes contributing to
generation of extended senses can help provide predictive
power. In particular, we propose that salient characteristics
of the default referents of the core senses (the most central,
literal senses) provide the basis for sense extensions.
Consider the word head. Suppose that the core sense of the
word refers to a certain body part of animals. Speakers of a
language know many things about typical referents of this
sense of the word. But those things they know are not all
equally salient or important. Although people know that
heads are made of substances such as flesh, bones, blood,
and so on, these features are not likely to be the ones they
bring to mind when thinking about heads. Instead,
properties such as located at top of body and organ of
decision making are more uniquely and saliently associated
with heads. In turn, these salient features will be more

Abstract
Existing discussions of polysemy describe the relations that
extended senses may have to the most central sense of a word,
but they do not explain in more detail how particular senses are
generated for a given word. We propose that extended senses
are initially built on the salient features of referents of core
senses (and further senses may be generated from those). We
provide evidence for the role of salient features of core senses in
generating extended senses through three studies. These studies
use speakers of English and Chinese, historically unrelated
languages.
Keywords: polysemy; word meaning; word senses; crosslinguistic comparison

Introduction
Polysemous words are those that have multiple different but
related meanings (e.g., foot as in “my left foot”, “the foot of
the chair,” “at the foot of the mountain”). Polysemy is the
rule more than the exception for words of moderate to high
frequency (e.g., Berlich, Todd, Herman & Clarke, 2003).
This one-to-many mapping of form to meaning has raised
questions about the representation and processing of
polysemous words (e.g., Bohrn, Altmann & Jacobs, 2012;
Caramazza & Grober, 1976; Klein & Murphy, 2001;
Simpson, 1994). But studies addressing such questions
leave unanswered a logically prior question: How do
polysemous senses of words arise?
At one extreme, it could be that the generation of new
senses from an initial word meaning is entirely
unpredictable. The first extended senses that arise for any
individual word might be highly influenced by the particular
lexical gaps that exist and other characteristics of the
language involved (such as where it falls on the syntheticto-isolating continuum, which affects how morphology can
be used to help build sets of related senses). They may also
be influenced by the cultural conditions present (e.g.,
introduction of new products or practices) that drive
innovation for the linguistic community. The result of these
influences could be that the senses tend to be idiosyncratic
to that word and that language. Furthermore, because
extended senses may build on one another to create chains
moving farther from the original (Lakoff, 1987), once the
first extended sense emerges for a word, the additional
senses it spawns may set the chain for that word off in
directions not followed by other languages for their most
closely related word.

934

uniquely and saliently associated with the core sense of the
word head. These salient characteristics of the word head
are the ones that will be most available to build upon in
creating extended senses, as exemplified in expressions such
as “head of the table” and “head of the department”. On the
other hand, for other body parts, there may be different
salient properties. For noses, for instance, the location with
respect to the rest of the body may be less important but the
role in olfaction may be critical, making smell-related
extended senses of the word nose more likely to emerge.
Much of the past analysis of polysemy has been based on
English and, to a lesser extent, on other Indo-European
languages. The generalizability of the analyses to other
languages is not well-established. Even if sense relations
such as object-substance, text-object, and act-instrument do
appear across languages, the particular words of a language
for which specific polysemous senses arise may vary
unpredictably due to the sorts of influences mentioned
earlier: The earliest extended senses generated for any
particular word might be strongly influenced by elements of
the linguistic and cultural context of the original sense, and
the diverse senses generated in turn may send languages off
in different directions as sense chains develop for a word.
In contrast, our proposal argues for the likelihood of
shared senses across languages. Although some aspects of
what is salient about an entity are bound to be culturespecific, many features of the world will be salient across
cultures due to shared sensory, perceptual, attentional, and
other cognitive processes and shared human needs and
goals. This assertion is supported by data from similaritysorting on diverse sets of real-world entities including both
objects and actions. Speakers of different languages
produce convergent similarity judgments despite the featural
richness of the stimuli, which would have allowed different
sorting patterns to emerge (e.g., Malt et al., 1999; Malt,
Ameel, Imai, Gennari, Saji, & Majid, in press). Given
shared appreciation of some feature of entities, then where
two languages have words with similar core senses, our
proposal suggests that the specific senses they will spawn
will tend to overlap, even for historically independent
languages. This should be most true for extended senses
closest to the core, since they will be generated most
directly from those salient features.
In three studies, we tested the proposal that salient
features associated with core senses of words provide the
foundation upon which extended senses are built. Evidence
is provided for this proposed language-independent
mechanism using data from speakers of English and
Chinese, two historically unrelated languages. Pre-tests first
established core senses and salient features for a set of
words. The studies then asked (1) to what extent extended
senses are shared between English and Chinese; (2) whether
the shared ones tend to be closer to the core sense than nonshared ones; (3a) whether the salient features are more
applicable to shared than non-shared senses; and (3b)
whether the degree of applicability of salient features
predicts distance of senses from the core.

Participants and Materials
Participants for all studies were English and (Mandarin)
Chinese native speakers. None of the English participants
knew any Chinese. All the Chinese participants knew some
English but identified Chinese as their dominant language.
The English-speaking participants were undergraduates at
Lehigh University in the U.S. The Chinese-speaking
participants for the two pre-tests and for Study 1 were
recruited from the Chinese community at Lehigh. The
Chinese participants for Study 2 and 3 were recruited from
universities in Kaifeng and Chengdu, China. Participants
did only one task and only in their native language.
We selected 36 pairs of Chinese and English words for
which the members of each pair were considered likely to
share the same core sense (verified in Pre-test 1, below).
Because higher frequency words tend to have more senses
than lower frequency ones (Zipf, 1949), words were
selected such that the two members of each pair fell into the
same frequency rank. Frequencies were determined using
Subtlex-US for English (Brysbaert & New, 2009) and
Subtlex-CH for Chinese (Cai & Brysbaert, 2010). Twelve
nouns, 12 verbs, and 12 adjectives were included, as
follows. Nouns: head /头,world/世界, hand/手, doctor/医生,
foot/ 脚 , tree/ 树 , face/ 脸 , door/ 门 , heart/ 心 , flower/ 花 ,
mouth/嘴, table/桌.Verbs: push/推, follow/跟, run/跑, win/
赢, touch/触, hang/挂, listen/听, leave/离开, smell/闻, lead/
领, eat/吃, die/死.Adjectives: sweet/甜, safe/安全, short/短,
rich/ 热 , high/ 高 , true/ 真 , hot/ 热 , broken/ 破 , tight/ 紧 ,
empty/空, heavy/重,simple/简单.

Pre-test 1: Verifying Core Senses
Pre-test 1 examined whether the words of each chosen pair
share a core sense. For each word in a language, 30
sentences were selected to represent its varied senses.
English sentences were chosen from The Corpus of
Contemporary American English (COCA, Davies, 2011).
Due to lack of a parallel corpus for Chinese, Chinese
sentences were chosen from www.baidu.com, the most
powerful search engine for modern Chinese. Sentences were
chosen to represent all distinct senses found for a given
word. The determination of “distinct’ senses was based on
the dictionary numbering of senses for English and on
experimenter intuition for Chinese; verification of
psychologically real distinctions among senses is provided
in Study 1. The 30 sentences were printed on paper slips,
one per slip. Because the number of senses per word varied,
some words had more sentence examples per sense than
others.
For each target word, 10 participants were asked to select
all and only the sentences representing the most
fundamental and basis sense of the word. Sentences selected
by 70% or more of participants were considered to represent
the core sense. Each word had at least 3 sentences that met
this criterion, confirming that native speakers agree on the
core sense for words.

935

Two Chinese-English bilingual judges who were blind to
the experimental hypotheses then judged the cross-linguistic
agreement of these data independently. Each was given the
sentences representing the core sense (based on the 70%
criterion) and the non-core senses (all remaining sentences)
for each word of a pair. One judge started from English and
the other from Chinese. They were asked to imagine that
they were translating the core sense of the starting language
into the other language. They were to judge whether the
sense represented by the core sense set of sentences would
fall into the core or non-core set of sentences in the other
language. For all 36 word pairs, both judges selected the
core sense sentences of the other language as the set
containing the core sense of the starting language. This
outcome confirms the similarity of core senses between the
languages for these 36 word pairs.

specific forces make minimal contributions to the sense
generation process and the process is instead heavily
dominated by shared perception of salient features of
entities along with shared processes of generating senses
(including tendencies toward metaphorical and metonymic
thinking, as well as appreciation of specific relations such as
object-substance and act-instrument). Given the likelihood
of some contribution of language- and culture-specific
forces, our perspective does not predict exactly what percent
of senses might be shared between Chinese and English. It
does predict that it should not be close to the lower extreme.
Because the senses used in Pre-test 1 to establish core
meanings were obtained from a dictionary and the internet,
not directly from language users, we first sought evidence of
the psychologically distinct senses for each word. Twentyeight English and 20 Chinese speakers participated in a
sorting task. Participants sorted the 30 sentences for each
word of their native language (as described above) into
piles. They were asked to put all sentences that represented
the same sense in a single pile, and to put sentences
representing different senses into other piles.
A 30 x 30 matrix of the similarity values for each possible
pair of sentences was then created from the sort. The
number of participants who sorted a pair into the same pile
was taken as the similarity value for that pair (e.g., Kruskal
& Wish, 1978). To create a visual representation of the
perceived similarities among the senses represented by the
sentences, multi-dimensional scaling (MDS) (IBM SPSS,
2010) was then carried out on the similarity matrix for each
word. The dimensionality of the solution that was retained
for further use for each word was determined by looking for
the lowest dimensionality with acceptable fit (following the
rule-of-thumb for acceptable Young’s Stress of <.2 and that
for R2 of >.9), along with applying the “elbow” rule
(looking for where a further increase in dimensionality
results in declining additional benefit to fit).
To further help identify discrete senses, hierarchical
clustering (IBM SPSS, 2010) was then applied to the
coordinates of the chosen MDS solution for each word.
Selection of the optimal or most meaningful clustering
solution for each word (that is, the number of different
clusters to allow) was made based on two considerations.
First, we again applied the elbow rule, which limited
candidate solutions to the region of 5-15 clusters. Second,
we sought a solution for each word that provided a level of
granularity showing agreement with the results of Pre-test
1’s core sense task. We looked for the solution in which the
sentences deemed to represent the word’s core sense in Pretest 1 were maximally present within one cluster and
minimally present within any others. The outcome of these
steps was a clustering solution for each word of each
language, where we take each cluster to represent a
psychologically distinct sense.
To evaluate to what extent senses were shared between
the two languages, two new Chinese-English bilingual
judges who were blind to the experimental hypotheses
judged agreement of the obtained senses independently. For

Pre-test 2: Establishing Salient Features
The second pre-test established the salient features of the
core sense of each word and determined whether the same
features emerged for paired words of the two languages.
Twenty participants per language were given 75 seconds to
list all the features that came to mind after reading a given
word (Rosch & Mervis, 1975). This procedure was repeated
for each of the 36 words. They were given an example for
dog of properties such as has fur, four legs, barks, etc.
Properties listed by at least 1/3 of participants per word
were retained for further consideration. For both languages,
about 6 features per word met this criterion (for English, =
6.12, s.d. = 2.14; for Chinese, = 5.89, s.d. = 2.3).
The features of the two languages that met the criterion
were then compared for each word pair by a ChineseEnglish bilingual judge who was blind to the experimental
hypotheses. The judge determined, for each word of a
language, whether she considered a feature listed in one
language to have an appropriate translation among those
listed for its paired word in the other language. A mean of
4.47 (s.d. = 1.89) per word were judged to be shared across
the languages. Thus, most features having consensus within
a language were also agreed on across languages.
This result provides a set of features to use in further
tests. Furthermore, it provides supporting evidence that
speakers from two distinct cultures, speaking historically
independent languages, perceive many of the same features
of a diverse set of entities to be salient.

Study 1: Do Senses Correspond between
English and Chinese?
The first study asked to what extent the extended senses of
our 36 word pairs correspond across the two languages. At
one extreme, it could be that few or no senses of the words
correspond beyond the core sense. This outcome would
suggest that the linguistic and cultural forces idiosyncratic
to individual languages at particular moments in time
dominate the outcomes of the sense generation process. At
the other extreme, the languages could correspond largely or
fully. This would come about if language- and culture-

936

each word pair, each judge began with the senses within one
language (as represented by the sets of sentences
constituting the clusters just determined) and looked for a
match among the sentence clusters of the other language.
Two senses were considered a match between the languages
if and only if both judges proposed the same clusters as
matching. Based on their judgments, the average number of
shared senses across word pairs of the two languages was
56%. (Because the English and Chinese paired words
sometimes differed in the number of sense clusters obtained,
in principle, calculating the percent of English senses shared
with Chinese and the percent of Chinese senses shared with
English could produce somewhat different values. In
practice, however, both values were within rounding range
of 56%.) There was no effect of word type in either
language; outcomes were similar for nouns, verbs, and
adjectives.
In short, slightly over half of all senses identified in
English and in Chinese were shared between the two
languages. This value indicates that generation of extended
senses from core senses of words is influenced to some
extent by language- and culture-specific factors. At the same
time, though, it shows a level of agreement that is
impressive given the historical independence of the English
and Chinese languages, as well as the markedly different
cultural histories. This level of agreement argues for a
substantial influence of shared cognitive representations and
processes on the generation of extended senses.

Mean judgments for each extended sense were calculated.
Collapsing across the two languages, shared senses were
rated as closer to the core senses (M = 3.91, SD = .71) than
non-shared senses (M = 4.30, SD = .57). The main effect of
sharing status was significant, F(1, 39) = 40.78, p < .001, ηp2
= .51.
We further analyzed the two languages separately. For
each language separately, shared senses were rated as closer
to core senses than non-shared senses. The main effect of
sharing status was significant for both languages. For
English, the mean for shared senses was 3.73 (SD = .67),
and for Non-Shared senses, 4.20 (SD = .59), F(1, 20) =
38.50, p < .001, ηp2 = .66. For Chinese, the mean for shared
senses was 4.12 (SD = .69), and for non-shared senses, 4.42
(SD = .52), F(1, 19) = 9.97, p = .005, ηp2 = .34.
This outcome supports the proposal that salient features
of core senses provide the foundation for extended senses by
showing that the specific senses appearing in two unrelated
languages are those closest to parallel core senses of the
languages. In doing so, it also provides evidence that similar
cognitive processes drive sense generation for English and
Chinese.

Study 3, Part A: Are Salient Features More
Applicable to Shared Senses than Non-shared
Ones?
To further evaluate whether salient features associated with
core senses provide the foundation on which extended
senses are built, we asked directly whether, within each
language, salient characteristics of core senses are more
applicable to shared senses than to non-shared ones.
Nineteen English and 20 Chinese participants
participated. The 30 sentences were again presented
presorted into clusters representing the word’s
psychologically distinct senses as determined in Study 1. In
addition, the features that passed the 1/3 criterion in Pre-test
2 were presented. The participants judged, for each sense,
whether each of the features for that word was applicable to
that sense. Judgments were made using a 0-7 scale, where 0
was labeled “completely inapplicable”, 4 was “moderately
applicable”, and 7 was “perfectly applicable”.
Mean ratings for the feature set for each sense were
calculated. The feature sets of the core senses were judged
as more applicable to shared senses than to non-shared
senses in both languages. For English, the mean feature
rating for shared senses was 2.42 (SD = .53); the mean
rating for non-shared senses was 1.85 (SD = .48), p < .001
(planned comparisons LSD). For Chinese, the mean rating
for shared senses was 2.06 (SD = .65); the mean rating for
non-shared senses was 1.71 (SD = .70), p < .001 (planned
comparisons LSD).
This result provides evidence that features saliently
associated with the core senses of words for speakers of
both languages are projected into extended senses. It also
confirms that senses shared between the two languages are
more closely tied to the features jointly perceived as salient
than are non-shared senses.

Study 2: Are Shared Extended Senses Closer to
the Core than Non-shared Ones?
The results of Study 1 are compatible with the proposal that
salient features associated with core senses of words provide
the foundation upon which extended senses are built.
However, it does not provide a direct test of this notion. As
the next step in evaluating our proposal, we examined
whether extended senses that are shared between the two
languages are closer to the core senses of the words than
those that are not shared. If senses are generated from cores
by building on salient features of the cores (and further
senses may be generating by building upon those in ways
that create chains of senses increasingly distant from the
core; Lakoff, 1987), then those closest to the core should
also be the most likely to be shared. More distant senses are
more likely to be influenced by language- and culturespecific factors and therefore to be more idiosyncratic.
Twenty-one English and 20 Chinese participants
participated in a task to judge the distance of extended
senses from core senses. For each target word of their
language, they were given the 30 sentences presorted into
clusters representing the word’s psychologically distinct
senses as determined in Study 1. The cluster representing
the core sense was marked for participants. Participants
judged the distance between each extended sense and the
core using a 1-7 scale, where 1 was labeled “very close”, 4
was “neither far nor close”, and 7 was “very far”.

937

such as Turkish, for instance, can form many new words by
piling additional morphemes onto root words. This feature
opens possibilities for the creation of word senses that
would typically be captured in multi-word phrases in many
other languages. (It also complicates determination of what
should count as the senses of a single root word.) For
Chinese, a related issue arises. Chinese often creates
compound words by combining two characters, which serve
as conventional (not created-on-the-fly) units of meaning.
Generating new compounds and generating new senses of a
single character are two different ways for sense extensions
to come about in Chinese, while English (among other
languages) has only something similar to the latter. Further
issues arise with other languages. In languages with
grammatical gender, the gender marker can suggest
different senses of the same word. In French, le pendule is
equivalent to English pendulum while la pendule is
equivalent to English clock, and in German, der See means
lake while die See means sea (Ullman, 1962). In light of
these considerations, it is particularly impressive that
English and Chinese do, in fact, share a sizeable set of
extended senses that can be predicted on purely
psychological grounds, apart from linguistic considerations.
The more languages that can be studied, and the more
different samples of words that are used, the clearer it will
be what portion of variance the psychological processes
account for. Ultimately, however, a full account will need to
be able to understand the language-specific factors as well.
The second additional consideration is about the role of
bottom-up forces. Our focus has been more on the top-down
than the bottom-up. That is, the current discussion has been
about how cognitive processes drive new senses, without
addressing how external stimuli help inspire them. However,
more often than not, new senses are not created just because
they can be. Rather, novel usages of existing words arise
when there is a need. For example, think about a computer
mouse. When this device was newly invented, a name for it
was needed. Its body and tail shape presumably activated
mental representations of the mouse mammal, and so mouse
became a possible name for it. A full account of how
extended senses arise will need to incorporate such bottomup influences. In doing so, it will help articulate how
cultural needs of the moment and lexical gaps with respect
to those needs play into the extension of senses. Note,
however, that this bottom-up triggering of mouse as a
possibility does not operate in isolation from the top-down.
If the body shape and tail were not salient features of the
mouse mammal and salient associates of the pre-existing
sense of the word mouse, then mouse as the name for the
computer gadget would be unmotivated and puzzling to
users. Both directions of influence must be considered.

Study 3, Part B: Does the Applicability of
Salient Features Predict the Perceived Distance
of Senses from the Core?
As a final step in testing our proposal, we asked whether
ratings of feature applicability to senses (as derived from the
data of Study 3, Part A) predict the perceived distance of
senses from the core (as derived from the data of Study 2).
If extended senses are generated from cores via salient
features, then the more applicable the features are to a sense,
the closer the sense should be to the core.
For each language, we calculated the Pearson correlation
between applicability ratings to each given sense of each
word from Study 3 Part A and distance ratings of the same
senses from Study 2. For both languages, the more
applicable the salient features, the less distant the extended
senses to the core senses. The correlations were significant
for both languages: for English, r = -.613, p < .001; for
Chinese, r = -.647, p < .001. These data provide evidence
for the proposed mechanism of polysemy. Salient features
of core senses provide the foundation for generating initial
extended senses (and additional senses may then build upon
those).

Discussion
The current findings indicate that despite language-and
culture-specific influences, psychological forces common to
speakers of different languages play a prominent role in
polysemy generation. English and Chinese speakers can and
do agree on what features associated with paired words are
salient. Furthermore, this agreement is reflected in a shared
set of extended senses of those words. This provides
evidence that there exists a common psychological
mechanism driving generation of polysemy in different
languages. By combining a cross-linguistic perspective with
a cognitive one, this project disentangles psychological
forces from non-psychological ones.
Although there have been past proposals about the
existence of general principles of polysemy (e.g.,
Langacker, 1988; Nunberg, 1979; Norrick, 1981), none of
them has been detailed and concrete enough to provide
predictive power about what senses might be generated for
specific words or what senses might be shared across
languages. The current data demonstrate that a more
predictive account is possible by giving closer consideration
to the psychological processes involved. Our proposal is
consistent with past ideas about the importance of
metaphorical and metonymic thinking. However, it builds
on them to help create a more complete account of how
specific senses of words come about.
There are at least two major directions to consider in
further developing accounts of when and where polysemous
senses of words will arise. One is to better understand how
language characteristics do influence generation of senses in
individual languages. We alluded earlier to the possibility
that language morphology (the synthetic-to-isolating
continuum) may matter. A heavily agglutinating language

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a grant from the National
Science Foundation (#BCS-1057855) to Barbara Malt and
Ping Li. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the

938

author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Science Foundation. We thank Kathleen Costello,
Yishuang Li, Shenchi Tian, Andrew DeLena, Nikolas
Rivera, Lauren O’Brien, Xinyue Geng, Yihan Lin, Nikolas
Rivera, and Aislinn Rowan for assistance with data
collection and analysis, and Padraig O’Seaghdha, Amanda
Brandone, Mark Bickhard, and Kiri Lee for helpful
discussion.

Constraints on moving and meaning. Journal of Memory
and Language.
Malt, B., Sloman, S.A., Gennari, S., Shi, M., & Wang, Y.
(1999). Knowing versus naming: Similarity and the
linguistic categorization of artifacts. Journal of Memory
and Language, 40, 230-262.
Norrick, N. (1981). Semiotic Principles in Semantic Theory.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Nunberg, G. (1979). The non-uniqueness of semantic
solutions: Polysemy. Linguistics and Philosophy, 3 (1),
143-184.
Rosch, E. & Mervis, C. (1975). Family resemblances:
Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 7(4), 573-605.
Simpson, G. B. (1994). Context and the processing of
ambiguous words. In M. A. Gernsbacher (Ed.), Handbook
of psycholinguistics (pp. 359-374). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Stern, G. (1931). Meaning and change of meaning with
special reference to the English language. Göteborg:
Elander.
Ullmann, S. (1962). Semantics: An Introduction to the
Science of Meaning. Oxford: Blankwell.
Zipf, G. (1949). Human Behavior and the Principle of Least
Effort. Addison-Wesley Press, Inc.

References
Nerlich, B., Todd, Z., Herman, V. & Clarke, D. (2003).
Polysemy: Flexible Patterns of Meaning in Mind and
Language. Berlin/New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Blank, A. (1999). Why do new meanings occur? A
cognitive typology of the motivations for lexical semantic
change. In A. Blank & P. Koch (Eds.), Historical
Semantics and Cognition (pp. 61–90). Berlin/New York:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Bohrn, I. C., Altmann, U., & Jacobs, A. M. (2012). Looking
at the brains behind figurative language — A quantitative
meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies on metaphor,
idiom, and irony processing. Neuropsychologia, 50(11),
2669-2683.
Brysbaert, M. & New, B. (2009). Moving beyond Kučera
and Francis: A critical evaluation of current word
frequency norms and the introduction of a new and
improved word frequency measure for American English.
Behavior Research Methods, 2009, 41 (4), 977-990.
Cai, Q. & Brysbaert, M. (2010). SUBTLEX-CH: Chinese
word and character frequencies based on film subtitles.
Plos ONE, 5(6), e10729.
Caramazza, A., & Grober, E. (1976). Polysemy and the
structure of the subjective lexicon. In C. Rameh (Ed.),
Georgetown University roundtable on languages and
linguistics. Semantics: Theory and application (pp. 181206). Washington, DC: Georgetown Univ. Press.
Davies, M. (2011). The corpus of contemporary American
English as the first reliable monitor corpus of English.
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 25, 447-465.
IBM Corp. Released 2010. IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows,
Version 19.0. Armonk, NY: IBM Corp.
Klein, D. & Murphy, G.L. (2001). The representation of
polysemous words. Journal of Memory and Language,
45, 259-282.
Kruskal, J. & Wish, M. (1978), Multidimensional scaling.
Sage University Paper series on Quantitative Application
in the Social Sciences (pp.7-11). Beverly Hills and
London: Sage Publications.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire, and dangerous things:
What categories reveal about the mind. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Langacker, R. (1988). Review of George Lakoff: Women,
fire and dangerous things. Language, 64(2), 384-395.
Malt, B. C., Ameel, E., Imai, M., Gennari, S., Saji, N., &
Majid, A. (in press). Human locomotion in languages:

939

