UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Differences between Observation and Intervention in Causal Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/599364f6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Saito, Motoyuki
Shimazaki, Tsuneo

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Differences between Observation and Intervention in Causal Learning
Motoyuki Saito (m-saito@kwansei.ac.jp)
Department of Psychological Science, Kwansei Gakuin University
Hyogo 662-8501, JAPAN

Tsuneo Shimazaki (shimazaki@kwansei.ac.jp)
Department of Psychological Science, Kwansei Gakuin University
Hyogo 662-8501, JAPAN

Abstract
Previous studies have suggested that learning is improved
when people actively intervene rather than when they
passively observe in causal structure learning tasks. Two
experiments were conducted to investigate whether a
facilitative effect will occur in the judgment of causal strength.
In Experiment 1, participants were asked to learn causal
strength in a situation where the target cause and context
independently produced the effect. The intervention group
could manipulate the state of the cause, which was later
presented to the observation group (i.e., yoked-control
procedure). The results demonstrated that participants made
similar evaluations for the target cause, but not for the context.
Experiment 2 was designed to examine whether different
estimations were because of facilitation or bias in which
participants undervalue other causes. The results provide
support for a facilitative effect, but suggest that the
improvement with intervention may be limited to the
estimation of weak causal strength.
Keywords: causal reasoning; causal inference; intervention;
causal power; yoked control procedure.

Introduction
The ability to learn causal relations is essential for adapting
to complex environments. Causal knowledge enables people
to explain past events, to control present situations, and to
predict future consequences. When someone catches a cold,
for example, this might be attributed to viruses and lack of
sleep. The person might take medicine to control this
condition, with the expectation of getting better. It has been
recognized that both children and adults easily represent
causal relations (Gopnik & Schulz, 2007; Sloman, 2005; see
also Holyoak & Cheng, 2011 for a review).
Information about causal relations can be acquired by
passive observation and active intervention. Whereas
learning by observation includes an observation of a
system’s autonomous behavior, learning by intervention
involves an exogenous manipulation to the causal system
that changes the state of the variable in some way (Pearl,
2000; Steyvers, Tenenbaum, Wagenmakers, & Blum, 2003).
In the above example, observation corresponds to seeing
your friend take medicine, while intervention corresponds to
making your friend take medicine. Both observation and
intervention provide the state (i.e., presence or absence) of
the cause and its effect, but they differ in how this
information is conveyed.

Differences between observation and intervention have
been well documented in structure learning tasks where
participants are required to infer causal directions among
events. Steyvers et al. (2003) investigated people’s ability to
infer causal structure from both observation and
intervention. The results demonstrated that performance
improved when people were allowed to intervene in the
causal system. Similar results were obtained in Lagnado and
Sloman (2004). The benefit of intervention is explained by
the fact that interventions can discriminate Markov
equivalent models which mere observation cannot. For
instance, observations about co-occurrences imply statistical
relations between two events X and Y; however, they
cannot differentiate whether X causes Y or Y causes X. If
event X is manipulated and nothing happens, the possibility
that X causes Y is eliminated. The relation that Y causes X
is confirmed by the fact that a manipulation of Y changes
the state of X. Sobel and Kushnir (2006) revealed that
learners were better at inferring causal structure when they
intervened of their own free will, rather than observing data
from another’s intervention. They discussed that causal
learning is facilitated because learners who intervened freely
were able to receive the data in a desired order, and
concluded that decision making is an important part of
causal learning from intervention.
In contrast to many studies about causal structure learning,
only a few studies have focused on differences between
observation and intervention when people make judgments
of causal strength. Whether intervention facilitates
estimation of causal strength remains unknown. Hattori and
Oaksford (2007) investigated the differences between
observation and intervention when assessing causal strength.
Participants were asked to learn the strength of the causal
relation between using a particular type of fertilizer and
plants blooming, by either observation or intervention. Their
results demonstrated that people tended to ignore the
information that both cause and effect were absent (i.e., cell
d information in a 2 × 2 contingency table) when learning
with observation. However, the study is limited in two ways.
First, they did not make comparisons between the causal
ratings of the observation group and those of the
intervention group, nor between participants’ ratings and
normative values, such as causal power (Cheng, 1997),
because the experiment was conducted to establish the
criteria for meta-analysis. In addition, covariation
information for each group was programmed separately,

2865

resulting in a difference in the presented information
between the observation and intervention groups. Therefore,
the measured difference between observation and
intervention might result from the cause density effect, in
which estimated causal strength becomes higher as the
probability of the cause increases (e.g., Perales & Shanks,
2007), or from the outcome density effect, in which
estimated causal strength becomes higher as the probability
of the outcome increases (e.g., Shanks, 1985). This problem
can be resolved by using a yoked control procedure. In this
procedure, the same sequence of trials generated by a
participant in the intervention group is presented to a yoked
participant in the observation group. No previous research
has provided direct evidence about the role of intervention
in judgments of causal strength with a yoked control
procedure.
Recent studies on causal learning from intervention have
suggested that people can select the more informative
situation to assess causal strength (e.g., Barberia, Baetu,
Sansa, & Baker, 2010; Green & Over, 2009). Barberia et al.
(2010) demonstrated that participants preferred to test
generative causes in the low base rate context where the
alternative causes have little effectiveness. In such contexts,
the effectiveness of the target cause is not confounded by
the effectiveness of the alternative causes. Learning by
intervention includes the opportunity for informative
selection; in contrast, learning by observation does not.
Although the yoked control procedure equalizes the
presented information, receiving information in a desired
order would serve as a facilitator. Therefore, we
hypothesized that intervention leads to more accurate
estimation of causal strength.
The purpose of the present study is to investigate whether
intervention facilitates evaluation of causal strength. In
Experiment 1, participants were asked to learn causal
strength in the situation where the target cause and context
independently produced the effect. In Experiment 2, another
cause was added in order to highlight the difference between
observation and intervention. If intervention improves
judgments of causal strength, ratings of the intervention
group should be closer to the normative values than those of
the observation group.

Experiment 1
In order to investigate the difference between observation
and intervention, we used a common-effect causal structure
in which two causes independently produced the effect. One
cause is the target cause which participants could
manipulate; the other cause is the context which is always
present regardless of the state of the target cause (i.e.,
P(context) = 1). Therefore, when participants observe the
presence of the effect, they cannot be sure whether it
occurred because of the target cause or because of the
context. In the cover story of the experiment, the target
cause and context corresponded to the missiles and
minefield respectively. Participants were asked to assess the
likelihood that the missile caused the tank to blow up. The

common-effect structure provides the state of the target
cause with different informative values. When the target
cause is present, participants receive information about the
joint influence of the cause and context. In contrast, the
absence of the target cause conveys information about the
causal strength of the context. In order to precisely assess
the causal power of the target cause, participants have to
grasp the causal power of the context. The intervention
group could select the information in their desired order.
The causal power of the target cause, q(target cause), is the
likelihood that the cause will generate an effect in a context
with no alternative causes (Cheng, 1997). When the target
cause and context influence the occurrence of the effect
independently, q(target cause) is calculated as follows:

q(target cause)


P(effect | cause, context )  P(effect | cause, context )
1  P(effect | cause, context )

In this equation, P(effect|cause, context) is the probability of
the effect given the presence of the cause and context.
P(effect|¬cause, context) is the probability of the effect
given the absence of the cause and the presence of the
context. The causal power of the context, q(context), is defined
as follows:

q(context)  P(effect | cause, context )
These indices are easily calculated on the basis of the
presented information. Participants were asked to estimate
the causal power of the target cause and context. The
distinctive feature of the present study lies in using a yoked
control procedure and a common-effect causal model. The
hypothesis predicts that people become better at inferring
the causal strength when they are allowed to intervene in the
target cause.

Method
Participants and design Twenty-four undergraduates from
Kwansei Gakuin University received course credit for
taking part in this experiment. They were randomly
assigned to one of two groups resulting from the
manipulation of the type of learning (observation or
intervention).
Instructions Participants received verbal and written
instructions in Japanese, and were asked to confirm that
they understood the instructions. An English translation of
outlines of the instructions was provided below:

2866

Imagine that you are a researcher in military facilities
attempting to determine the effectiveness of new antitank missiles. The term “effectiveness” means how
likely the missile will blow up the tanks.
When a missile hits a tank, it causes the tank to
blow up. However, the tank will not be destroyed if
the missile fails to hit it. In addition, the target tank

runs through a minefield. Thus, when a tank explodes
in the minefield, you cannot be sure whether it
exploded because of the missile or because of a mine.
Of course, if you do not launch a missile at the tank
and it explodes, then you know that it must have
exploded because of a mine. Note that the target tank
always runs in a different area of the minefield and
therefore a single explosion by a mine does not imply
that the tank will never explode because of a mine.
Your task is to observe whether missiles cause the
tank to blow up and to judge how effective the
missiles are. Note that the experimental task does not
require any knowledge of missiles and tanks. (The
remaining instructions describe how to progress
through the learning phase and test phase.)
Learning Phase The learning phase consisted of 40 trials
that presented information about the launch of missiles and
the tank’s explosion. Participants were requested to observe
the states of the missiles and tanks, and to infer causal
relationship between them. They were randomly assigned to
either the intervention or the observation group. Participants
in the intervention group were told to decide whether to
launch a missile. First, a tank was displayed on a screen.
There were also two buttons on the screen: one for
launching the missile, and the other for not launching the
missile. After they made a choice, the state of the missile
was presented. The presence of the missile was indicated by
the picture of the missile. The absence of the missile was
represented by the appearance of the missile labeled with a
cross mark. At the same time, a button labeled “NEXT” was
displayed on the screen. After clicking the button, the
outcome of launching the missile was shown. The
destruction of the tank was indicated by the appearance of
an explosion; in contrast, the tank remained unchanged
when the missile failed to hit. The screen was returned to its
primary state 1.5s after the result was displayed.
The same procedure was used for participants in the
observation group, except that they did not decide whether
to launch the missiles. First, a tank and the state of the
missile (presence or absence) were shown on the screen.
After participants clicked the “NEXT” button, the state of
the tank was provided. For each participant in the
observation group, the states of the missiles and the
subsequent outcomes were yoked to those of a participant in
the intervention group. Thus, the covariation information
between the two groups was identical. Each participant
completed four contingency conditions of 40 trials. The
different conditions were .25-.25, .75-.75, .75-0, and .75-.25
(Table 1). The first term refers to the probability of the tank
blowing-up on a trial with a launched missile (i.e.,
P(effect|target cause, context)) and the second term to the
probability of the tank’s destruction on a trial with no
launched missile (i.e., P(effect|¬target cause, context)). In
the .25-.25 condition, for example, the tank exploded 25%
of the times, regardless of whether the missile was launched.
That is, the missile had no causal power [q(target cause) = 0] and

Table 1: Causal Power of Target Cause and Context
in Each Condition in Experiment 1
Contingency conditions
Causal power
.25-.25 .75-.75
.75-0
.75-.25
q (target cause)
0
0
.75
.67
q (context)
.25
.75
0
.25
Note. The name of conditions represent P(effect|target cause,
context), P(effect|¬target cause, context) in order.
the mine had weak causal power [q(context) = .25]. Similarly,
the causal power of the missile was zero in the .75-.75
condition [q(target cause) = 0]. The outcome density in the .75.75 condition was higher than that in the .25-.25 condition
because of the high causal strength of the mine [q(context)
= .75]. In contrast, the missile had strong causal power and
the mine had no causal power in the .75-0 condition [i.e.,
q(target cause) = .75, q(context) = 0]. In the .75-.25 condition, both
missiles and mines caused the tank to blow up. Whereas the
missile had strong causal power [q(target cause) = .75], the mine
had weak causal power [q(context) = .25]. Thus, the causal
power of the missile and mine differed in each contingency
condition. In addition, the actual contingency varied slightly
from participant to participant because the participants’
actions were out of our control. To reduce the potential
variance of the actual contingency, 90% of the outcome
states were determined in a manner that converged with the
programmed values and the remaining 10% were
determined at random. The order of the contingency
conditions was counterbalanced with the constraint that two
ineffective missile conditions (i.e., .25-.25 condition, .75-.75
condition) did not follow each other.
Test phase After 40 trials had been completed, participants
were asked to estimate the causal strength of the target
cause and context. A rating scale was presented on the
screen together with the question, “To what extent does the
missile cause the tank to blow up?” A rating was made on a
scale from 0 (the missile does not cause the tank to blow up
at all) to 100 (the tank causes the tank to blow up every
time). Subsequently, participants were requested to infer the
causal power of the context in a similar manner. Then, after
a brief delay, participants began the learning and test phases
for the next contingency condition. They were instructed
that their judgments should be made independently of their
answers in prior conditions.

Results and Discussion
Figure 1 shows the mean ratings for target cause and context
in each condition. Separate analyses of variance for target
cause and context with the type of learning (observation,
intervention) as a between-participants factor, and the
contingency condition (.25-.25, .75-.75, .75-0, .75-.25) as a
within-participants factor were conducted. The analysis for
the target cause revealed a significant effect of the
contingency condition, F(3, 66) = 35.21, MSE = 340.01, p
< .001, η G2 = .51, but no effect of the type of learning, F(1,
22) = 0.21, MSE = 567.95, p = .648, η G2 = .003. The

2867

interaction between the type of learning and the contingency
condition was not significant, F(3, 66) = 0.58, MSE =
340.01, p = .631, η G2 = .02. Individual comparisons of the
contingency condition revealed significant differences
among the four conditions (ps < .01), except for the
comparison between the .75-0 and .75-.25 conditions (p
= .31). These results suggest that both the intervention and
observation group roughly differentiated the causal strength
of the target cause in each contingency condition. Although
the target cause had no causal power in the .25-.25 and .75.75 conditions [i.e., q(target cause) = 0], causal ratings in .75-.75
condition were higher than that in .25-.25 condition. This
pattern of results clearly demonstrates the outcome density
bias, which suggests that the probability of the outcome
positively affects judgments of causal strength (e.g., Shanks,
1985).
The parallel analysis for the context yielded significant
main effects of the type of learning, F(1, 22) = 7.11, MSE =
398.98, p = .014, η G2 = .09, and the contingency condition,
F(3, 66) = 59.93, MSE = 282.15, p < .001, η G2 = .65, but no
interaction between the type of learning and the contingency
condition, F(3, 66) = 0.35, MSE = 282.15, p = .790, η G2 = .01.
Individual comparisons revealed significant differences
among all conditions (ps < .001), except for the comparison
between the .25-.25 condition and the .75-.25 condition (p
= .35). As the causal power of the context can be obtained
from the probability of the effect being present given the
absence of the target cause (see Table 1), participants in the
intervention group made more accurate estimations than
those in the observation group.
Although the results of Experiment 1 are consistent with
the hypothesis that intervention leads to more accurate
estimation of causal strength, there is still an alternative
interpretation to consider: the lower estimation of causal
strength of the context might be due to the possibility that
the intervention causes participants to undervalue alternative
causes besides those in which they intervened. Indeed,
Kushnir, Wellman, and Gelman (2009) reported the selfagency bias in which people weigh their own action as more

effective than the action of others. There remains a
possibility that participants in the intervention group
exhibited a self-agency bias and undervalued the causal
power of the context. Experiment 2 was conducted to assess
this possibility.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 demonstrated that participants made similar
evaluations of the target cause regardless of whether they
intervened or observed, but made different estimates of the
causal power of the context. The results were interpreted as
an indication that interventions lead to more accurate
inferences for context. However, there is an alternative
interpretation that intervention results in the decreased
evaluations of the other causes due to a self-agency bias.
Experiment 2 was designed to investigate these two
interpretations. The experimental procedure was similar to
that of Experiment 1, but another cause was introduced in
addition to the target cause and context. Adding another
cause enabled us to differentiate whether interventions
facilitate the estimation of causal strength or decrease
estimations of other causes. If people accurately estimate for
causal strength with interventions, the deviations from
normative values in the intervention group should be
smaller than those in the observation group. If interventions
simply make people undervalue other causes, participants in
the intervention group should make light of the causal
strength of another cause and context.

Method
Participants and design Eighteen undergraduates from
Kwansei Gakuin University participated in the experiment
and received course credit. None of them took part in
Experiment 1. As in Experiment 1, they were randomly
assigned to either the observation or intervention group.
Procedure The procedure corresponded to the one in
Experiment 1, except that another cause was introduced in
addition to the target cause and context. In the instructions,

Target Cause

Context

90

100

Intervention
Observation

Mean judgment of causal strength

Mean judgment of causal strength

100

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

90

Intervention
Observation

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

0

0
.25-.25

.75-.75

.75-.00

.75-.25

.25-.25

Contingency condition

.75-.75

.75-.00

.75-.25

Contingency condition

Figure 1. Mean causal ratings of the intervention and observation group in each contingency condition of Experiment 1, for
target cause (left panel) and context (right panel). The error bars represent standard errors of the mean.

2868

the cover story was explained and participants were told to
infer the influence of the new missile (i.e., target cause) on
the tank’s explosion. Participants were informed that the
tank’s explosion could also be caused by the mine (i.e.,
context) or by another missile also targeted at the tank (i.e.,
another cause).
In the learning phase, participants received information
about the target cause, another cause, and the context on 40
trials. Whereas the context was always present (i.e.,
P(context) = 1), another cause was present in the half of the
trials (i.e, P(another cause) = .5). The probability that the
target cause occurred in the trial depended on the choices of
the intervention group. Participants in the intervention group
could choose the state of the target cause with knowledge of
whether another cause was present or not; in contrast,
participants in the observation group were shown the states
of the target cause and another cause. Each participant
completed four contingency conditions. The different
conditions were .75-.75-.75, .25-.75-.25, .75-.25-.25,
and .75-.75-.25 (Table 2). The first term refers to the
probability of the tank blowing up on a trial with a launched
missile (i.e., P(effect|target cause, ¬another cause, context)),
and the second term to the probability of the tank’s
destruction on a trial with another launched missile (i.e.,
P(effect|¬target cause, another cause, context)), and the
third term to the probability of the tank’s explosion on a
trial with no launched missile (i.e., P(effect|¬target cause,
¬another cause, context)). Thus, each condition differed in
the causal power of the target cause, another cause, and the
context.
In the test phase, participants were told to judge the causal
strength of the target cause, another cause, and the context
in the same way as in Experiment 1. After a brief delay,
participants completed the learning and test phases for the
next contingency condition. The order of the contingency
condition was counterbalanced across participants via a
Graeco-Latin square design.

.75-.75-.75
0
0
.75

70
60
50
40
30
20

90

Figure 2 shows the mean ratings for target cause, another
cause and the context in each condition. Separate analyses
of variance for target cause, another cause, and the context
with the type of learning (observation, intervention) as a
between-participants factor, and the contingency condition
(.75-.75-.75, .25-.75-.25, .75-.25-.25, .75-.75-.25) as a
within-participants factor were conducted. The analysis for
the target cause yielded only a significant main effect of the
contingency condition, F(3, 48) = 13.26, MSE = 344.45, p
2
< .001, η G = .38 (all other Fs < 1). As in Experiment 1, both
the observation and intervention groups demonstrated strong
outcome density bias in the .75-.75-.75 condition where the
target cause had no causal power. Although comparisons
between participants’ judgments and causal powers suggest
that participants in the intervention group made more
accurate estimations than those in the observation group in
the .25-.75-.25 condition, the difference was not statistically
significant.
The parallel analysis for another cause revealed a
significant effect of the contingency condition, F(3, 48) =
25.60, MSE = 240.38, p < .001, η G2 = .51, but no significant
effect of the type of learning, F(1, 16) = 1.17, MSE = 377.59,
p = .296, η G2 = .02. There was no significant interaction, F <
1. If participants exhibited a self-agency bias in the

Context

70
60
50
40
30
20
10

0

0
.25-.75-.25

.75-.25-.25

Contingency condition

.75-.75-.25

100

Intervention
Observation

80

10

.75-.75-.25
.67
.67
.25

Results and Discussion

Mean judgment of causal strength

80

.75-.75-.75

Contingency conditions
.25-.75-.25 .75-.25-.25
0
.67
.67
0
.25
.25

Note. The contingency conditions represent P(effect|target
cause, ¬another cause, context), P(effect|¬target cause,
another cause, context), and P(effect|¬target cause, ¬another
cause, context) in order.

100

Intervention
Observation

Mean judgment of causal strength

Mean judgment of causal strength

Causal power
q (target cause)
q (another cause)
q (context)

Another Cause

Target Cause
100
90

Table 2: Causal Power of Target Cause, Another Cause,
and Context in Each Condition in Experiment 2

90

Intervention
Observation

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

.75-.75-.75

.25-.75-.25

.75-.25-.25

Contingency condition

.75-.75-.25

.75-.75-.75

.25-.75-.25

.75-.25-.25

.75-.75-.25

Contingency condition

Figure 2. Mean ratings of the intervention and observation group in each contingency condition of Experiment 1, for target
cause (left panel), another cause (center panel), and context (right panel). The error bars represent standard errors of the mean.

2869

judgments of another cause, participants in the intervention
group would make lower estimations than the observation
group when the causal power of another cause was high.
However, both groups made similar estimations when
another cause had strong causal strength (i.e., .25-.75-.25
and .75-.75-.25 conditions). Instead, participants in the
intervention group seemed to make better estimates when
another cause had weak causal power (i.e., .75-.25-.25
condition).
The parallel analysis for context revealed a significant
effect of the contingency condition, F(3, 48) = 13.56, MSE
= 315.13, p < .001, η G2 = .34, but no effect of the type of
learning, F(1, 16) = 1.27, MSE = 613.26, p = .276, η G2 = .03.
The interaction between the type of learning and the
contingency condition was not significant, F < 1. These
results suggest that participants could differentiate the
strong context from the weak context.
In order to investigate the difference between learning by
observation and learning by intervention in greater detail,
we calculated the root mean square error (RMSE) of the
causal judgments (mean square deviation between judgment
and causal power). As a result, the RMSEs of the
intervention group (RMSE(target cause) = 33.4, RMSE(another cause)
= 33.3, RMSE(context) = 20.7) were lower than those of the
observation group (RMSE(target cause) = 35.4, RMSE(another cause)
= 36.7, RMSE(context) = 26.4) in all types of the causal
judgments. These results support the hypothesis that
intervention leads to more accurate estimation of causal
strength.

General Discussion
The present study demonstrates that learning by intervention
leads to more accurate judgments of causal strength than
learning by observation. Although these results are
consistent with the previous findings in causal structure
learning tasks, the improvement with intervention is limited
in two ways. First, intervention does not facilitate all
judgments, but improves judgments when causal strength is
weak. In order to accurately assess the weak causal power,
people have to pay attention to information about negative
relationships (i.e., cell b and c information in a 2 × 2
contingency table). Maldonado, Jimenez, Herrera, Perales,
and Catena (2006) reported that people tend to ignore such
information in incidental situations. Since the intervention
group could select the type of information they received,
they might have been more likely to consider negative
evidence into account than the observation group. That is,
the benefit of the intervention might result from increased
attention to information about negative relationships. This
possibility can be assessed by asking participants to estimate
the number of trials of each type that have been presented in
learning phase. Second, participants overestimated the
causal strength even though the target cause was irrelevant
to the occurrence of the effect (i.e., outcome density bias).
Since the effect is often present, there is little chance to
disconfirm the positive relationship between action and
outcome. Future research will reveal how intervention leads

to judgments that are more accurate and distorts judgments
of non-contingent relationships.

References
Barberia, I., Baetu, I., Sansa, J., & Baker, A. G. (2010).
Choosing optimal causal backgrounds for causal
discovery. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
63, 2413–2431.
Cheng, P. W. (1997). From covariation to causation: A
causal power theory. Psychological Review, 104, 367–405.
Gopnik, A., & Schulz, L. E. (2007). Causal learning:
Psychology, philosophy, and computation. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Green, D. W., & Over, D. E. (2009). Valuing intervention
and observation. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 62, 1010–1022.
Hattori, M., & Oaksford, M. (2007). Adaptive noninterventional heuristics for covariation detection in
causal induction: Model comparison and rational analysis.
Cognitive Science, 31, 765–814.
Holyoak, K, J., & Cheng, P, W. (2011). Causal learning and
inference as a rational process: The new synthesis. Annual
Review of Psychology, 62, 135-163.
Kushnir, T., Wellman, H. M., & Gelman, S. A. (2009). A
self-agency bias in preschoolers’ causal inferences.
Developmental Psychology, 45, 597–603.
Lagnado, D. A, & Sloman, S. (2004). The advantage of
timely intervention. Journal of Experimental Psychology.
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30, 856–876.
Maldonado, A., Jiménez, G., Herrera, A., Perales, J. C., &
Catena, A. (2006). Inattentional blindness for negative
relationships in human causal learning. Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 59, 457–470.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality: Models, reasoning and inference.
Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University
Press.
Perales, J. C., & Shanks, D. R. (2007). Models of
covariation-based causal judgment: A review and
synthesis. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14, 577–596.
Shanks, D. R. (1985). Continuous monitoring of human
contingency judgment across trials. Memory & Cognition,
13, 158–167.
Sloman, S. A. (2005). Causal models: How people think
about the world and its alternatives. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Sobel, D. M., & Kushnir, T. (2006). The importance of
decision making in causal learning from interventions.
Memory & Cognition, 34, 411–419.
Steyvers, M., Tenenbaum, J. B., Wagenmakers, E. J., &
Blum, B. (2003). Inferring causal networks from
observations and interventions. Cognitive Science, 27,
453-489.

2870

