UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Disentangling Language and Education Effects on False Belief Understanding: Evidence
From Homesigners, Signers, and Unschooled Spanish Speakers

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6587d470

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Gagne, Deanna
Coppola, Marie

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Disentangling Language and Education Effects on False Belief Understanding:
Evidence From Homesigners, Signers, and Unschooled Spanish Speakers
Deanna L. Gagne (deanna.gagne@uconn.edu)
Department of Psychology, 406 Babbidge Road, Unit 1020
Storrs, CT 06269-1020 USA

Marie Coppola (marie.coppola@uconn.edu)
Departments of Psychology and Linguistics, 406 Babbidge Road, Unit 1020
Storrs, CT 06269-1020 USA

Abstract

Howard et al., 2008; Gola, 2012) and complement
structures (e.g., deVilliers & Pyers, 2002) have been
associated with theory of mind abilities. This is not simply
based on linguistic complexity: Hale & Tager-Flusberg
(2003) found that training on sentential complements, but
not relative clauses, improved children’s ToM performance
relative to pre-training levels. Those advocating languagebased theories argue that some aspect of language is
central to normal ToM development.
We cannot easily disentangle these factors in typically
developing children because language and social abilities
develop simultaneously. By 4-5 years of age, children have
amassed enough social experience and language to
successfully navigate the gold standard task for assessing
ToM: false belief (FB) (e.g., Wimmer & Perner, 1983).
Working with deaf individuals who have not acquired
conventional language, and instead use gestural systems,
called homesign, to communicate (Goldin-Meadow, 2003)
enables us to distinguish these factors in ways that other
groups cannot. Despite their lack of conventional linguistic
input, homesigners who continue to use their gesture
systems as a primary language as adults are not socially
impaired; they enjoy relatively typical social interactions
with their hearing families, friends, and neighbors. While
not full languages, mature homesign systems exhibit a
range of linguistic properties (e.g., the grammatical relation
of subject, Coppola & Newport, 2005).
One of the main advantages of research with recently
emerging languages is the opportunity to measure the
effects of absent or atypical linguistic input, and the
linguistic and cognitive benefits conferred by participating
in a linguistic community. Neither of the two groups of
Deaf participants studied here, Homesigners and Cohort 1
signers of Nicaraguan Sign Language (NSL) (the first
group of signers to begin creating the language in the
l970s), had access to linguistic input transmitted vertically,
that is, from a pre-existing language model. However,
Cohort 1 signers did engage in language genesis with their
peers (horizontal transmission) (Senghas et al., 2005). NSL
signers of all cohorts interact with many other users who
use the system as a primary language, i.e., members of the
Deaf community in Managua. Though homesigners rely on
their gesture systems for their entire lives, the hearing
people around them use it only with the homesigner.

To investigate the contributions of language and education
to Theory of Mind understanding, three Nicaraguan groups
were tested using a minimally verbal protocol in which they
themselves experienced a false belief instead of being told of
one. We also assessed the relationship of executive function
abilities to false belief performance. Homesigners, who have
no linguistic community, did not succeed on either the False
Belief or executive function tasks. Nicaraguan Sign
Language users, who have educational experience and are
part of an emerging linguistic community, performed the
best on executive function, though less well on false belief,
than Spanish speakers who have little to no education. This
study showed that: without a language community,
succeeding on either task is difficult; executive function may
not be as tied to false belief performance as previously
believed; and education may play a greater role in executive
function success than language does.
Keywords: Theory of Mind; Simulation Theory; false
belief; social cognition; executive function; homesign;
Nicaraguan Sign Language; language community; education.

Introduction
Theory of Mind (ToM), the ability to understand that
others have beliefs and desires different from one’s own,
and that those beliefs and desires may influence their
behavior (Wimmer & Perner, 1983, among others), is a
foundational aspect of human social cognition. Whether
this ability is primarily driven by language development,
life experience, or social interactions is actively debated.
Proponents of so-called Simulation Theories argue that
life experience and social interactions are sufficient to
scaffold mature ToM abilities, without the need for
language (e.g., Gordon, 1986; Goldman, 1992). On this
view, one’s own experiences provide the foundation for
ToM by serving as a template for understanding how
others will behave in a given similar situation; these
templates are updated as one gains more life experience.
Language can play a part, because it provides a way to
interact more, and to thus update one’s templates more
efficiently, but it is the reflection on one’s own experiences
that primarily supports the understanding of other minds.
Other researchers argue that language development, and
even specific linguistic structures, are essential to the
child’s development of a mature ToM. Mental verbs (e.g.,

2246

Further, each homesigner’s mother does not share the
system with the homesigner, despite having used it over a
long period of time (Carrigan & Coppola, 2012). By these
criteria, the homesigner, hearing family members and
friends who use homesign, and their patterns of interaction
do not constitute a linguistic community (even a small
one). Empirical and computational evidence suggests that
the rich interconnections among users that characterize
typical sociolinguistic communities are essential for
developing some aspects of linguistic structure, e.g., a
conventionalized lexicon (Richie et al., 2014). Thus, we
compare Homesigners and NSL Cohort 1 signers to see the
effects of having a linguistic community on ToM abilities.
Signers who were exposed to sign language via the Deaf
community before 10 years of age performed better on
ToM tasks than those who entered after age 10 (Morgan &
Kegl, 2006). Cohort 2 signers, who represent a more
developed stage of NSL, outperformed Cohort 1 signers
(who were their linguistic models) on a change-location FB
task (Pyers & Senghas, 2009). Success in both cohorts was
related to the number of mental verbs used to describe
short videos. On a task similar to the current task, Cohort 2
outperformed Cohort 1 overall (Pyers, 2005), with Cohort
1 signers having moderate success on Appearance/ Reality
items. Could this success be due to participation in a
linguistic community, or simply a consequence of
fundamental human abilities to observe and reflect?
Like most deaf children born to hearing parents who do
not know a sign language, all NSL signers in past and
present studies gained access to their linguistic community
via educational settings. Thus, we cannot separate having a
linguistic community from education in either NSL signers
(who have both) or Homesigners, who have neither. We
introduce Unschooled Spanish Speakers, who have full
access to a language community, but have little to no
education, to help us disentangle these factors.

ToM development (FB understanding) and executive
function (inhibitory control). In Study 1 we induced each
participant to unwittingly hold a false belief and then asked
them to predict the behavior of another person who
encountered the very same false belief. We predicted that
Homesigners, who do not participate in a linguistic
community, and thus are unlikely to have developed the
linguistic structures that support FB understanding, would
not succeed. Prior results suggested that some NSL Signers
would succeed. Given that the Spanish speakers are adults
with typical developmental histories, we expected them to
succeed.

Study 1: Theory of Mind
Participants
All participants were Nicaraguan: 4 Homesigners (HS), 6
signers from Cohort 1, representing NSL’s earliest users
(NSL Signers), and 5 Unschooled Spanish Speakers (USS)
who, like homesigners, had little to no education, but who,
like the NSL signers, were part of a linguistic community
(Table 1). Four of the five unschooled hearing participants
were full-time agricultural workers; the fifth worked
making tortillas for a family business. Their lack of
education primarily resulted from economic restrictions
and the distance to the nearest school.

Materials and Procedure
In order to study the effects of language on false belief and
executive function abilities, we sought an alternative to
traditional FB tasks, in which experimenters provide task
instructions, content, and prompts using language, and in
which participants respond verbally. We also avoided tasks
that required experience with activities typical of middleclass home and educational contexts. For example, the
picture-completion task used with NSL signers in Pyers &
Senghas (2009) was not successful with Nicaraguan
homesigners, and may also present issues for unschooled
hearing Nicaraguans, who similarly may not appreciate the
convention of sequentially ordered pictures representing
events in a narrative (as in storybooks). In our design, we
strove to eliminate language from both the task instructions
and task demands, and therefore used an experiential FB
task adapted from Pyers (2005), described below.
We gave each participant firsthand experience with
Appearance-Reality (A/R) and Unexpected Contents (UC)
false belief situations. They then participated in a
prediction game in which they earned money for making
correct predictions. We describe the procedure in great
detail because the incremental, implicit understanding of
the task instructions, and how participants should respond,
are essential to our commitment to a minimally verbal
procedure that fairly assesses the theory of mind abilities
of homesigners in particular. Table 2 summarizes the three
phases and 14 trials that each participant saw, first for the
experience condition, then again during the prediction
condition.

Table 1: Summary of participant group characteristics.
Age
Group
Homesigners

(mean,
range)

Linguistic
community

31.5y

No

(26–35y)

NSL Cohort 1

41y
28.5y
(19-39y)

(mean, range)

Very little
(0.5y, 0-1.5y)

Yes

(35-45y)

Unschooled
Spanish Speakers

Educational
experience

Yes1
(10.5y, 6-13y)

Yes

Very little
(0.7y, 0-3y)

We studied three extremely rare and understudied groups
in Nicaragua to distinguish the contributions of language
(i.e., linguistic community) and educational experience to
1

No secondary school was then available to NSL signers; they
attended elementary school until ~16 years of age (completing 6th
grade), and some then attended vocational school. Furthermore, a
typical school day in Nicaragua tends to be of a ½ day format,
due to a lack of resources in the school system. Thus, the reported
mean is not comparable to completing some high school.

2247

Phase 1: Stickers: The goal of Phase 1 was twofold.
The experience condition familiarized participants with the
process of choosing items from an array, and (nonverbally)
demonstrated that a choice on a particular trial may be
obvious (such as in an array of three originally identical
stickers, one pristine, and the other two crumpled or
ripped), or a choice might be based on preference (e.g., two
different-colored smiley face stickers). In the prediction
condition, the sticker phase provided the understanding
that: 1) sometimes it is easy to predict someone else’s
behavior (obvious choice trials), 2) sometimes it is hard
(individual preference trials), and 3) correct predictions
earn them a small monetary reward (5 Córdobas per
correct prediction (max. 70 Córdobas or US$2.75) across
all trials (a healthy incentive given typical local incomes).

Phase 3: Unexpected Contents: In the UC phase, the
participant was presented with one of two arrays: paper, a
glass, a lock, and a candle or a notebook, a mug, a lockbox
and a box of cigarettes. The participant was then presented
with a series of tools and was asked to indicate which
object in the array each tool is used with. First, the
participant was presented with a pen, and had to match it
with an object (paper or notebook). Upon choosing the
paper, the participant was asked to make a mark on the
paper. The participant was then presented with a pitcher of
water and asked to match it to an object (the glass or mug).
Upon choosing, the participant was asked to pour water
into the vessel. Third, the participant was presented with
the matchbox (containing a key, but no matches), and
again asked to match it to an object (in the False Belief
trial, the participant should choose the candle or cigarettes,
but in the knowledge trial, the participant should know that
the matchbox contains a key and choose the lock or
lockbox). Upon choosing the candle or cigarettes, the
participant was encouraged to light the candle or a
cigarette, and subsequently discovered that the matchbox
contained a key, not matches. The array was then switched
(i.e., paper to notebook, etc.) but the three tools (pen,
pitcher, and matchbox) were left in view of the participant,
so he or she could see that no one, including the
experimenter, touched them. The entirety of Phase 3 was
repeated, matching tools to their objects; the key trial was
the matchbox trial, during which the participant should
demonstrate his or her knowledge that the matchbox
contained a key (instead of matches), and thus should be
matched with the lock/lockbox, not the candle/cigarettes.
In the prediction phase, the first two tools (pen, pitcher of
water) set the participant up for the tool-matching
paradigm, while the third (matchbox containing a key)
presented a false belief, then a test of knowledge.
To reiterate, after experiencing the entire task, and more
importantly, directly experiencing the false beliefs, each
participant participated in all trials again, but this time as a
predictor of another’s choices– a confederate who was a
member of the research team but who had not previously
participated in any aspect of this task. The participant
indicated the item the confederate would choose, before
the confederate actually made a selection, by marking a set
of laminated sheets with images of all the arrays.

Table 2. The phases and individual trials that each
participant saw, once as an experiencer and then once
as a predictor of a confederate’s choices. All relevant
ordering possibilities were counterbalanced.
Phase
Stickers
(familiarization
with procedure)

Trial
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Appearance/
Reality
8
9
10
11
Unexpected
Contents

12
13
14

Description
Stickers – Obvious choice
Stickers – Obvious choice
Stickers – Individual preference
Stickers – Individual preference
Stickers – Obvious choice
Stickers – Individual preference
Cookies – 1, 2, 4 cookies on plates
(Plate with 4 cookies is fake)
(Experience False Belief)
Cookies – 1, 2, 4 cookies on plates
(Plate with 4 cookies is fake)
(Test Knowledge)
Tool matching – Pen with paper
Tool matching – Pitcher with cup
Tool matching – Matchbox
(containing key)
(Experience False Belief)
Tool matching – Pen with notebook
Tool matching – Pitcher with mug
Tool matching – Matchbox
(containing key)
(Test Knowledge)

Phase 2: Appearance/Reality: In the A/R phase, the
participant saw three plates holding 1, 2, and 4 cookies.
Unbeknownst to the participant, the four “cookies” were
very convincing ceramic composite replicas. The
experimenter encouraged each participant to indicate the
“best” plate. For the homesigners, this was done by
pointing at the participant, and then to the three plates of
cookies, followed by a thumbs-up gesture with a
questioning look. All participants chose the plate with four
cookies during their experience phase; when encouraged to
try a cookie, they discovered that the cookies were not real.
The cookies were returned to their original array and the
question or gestures were repeated, this time to test the
participant’s knowledge that the cookies were fake (thus
the plate with 2 cookies should be chosen as the “best”).

Results
A participant had to correctly predict the confederate’s
choices in both the A/R and UC phases to pass the task
overall (see Figure 1, white and black bars, for proportion
of participants passing each subtest). None of the
Homesigners, who lack a linguistic community, passed;
however, immersion in a linguistic community did not
guarantee passing for NSL signers and Unschooled
Spanish Speakers. Nevertheless, the Spearman’s rho
revealed a statistically significant inverse relationship
between the amount of time an individual lacked a
linguistic community and UC score (rs[15] = -.51, p = .05).

2248

However, no significant relationship between linguistic
community and A/R FB was found (rs[15] = -.43, p = .11).
The Spearman’s rho also failed to reveal a statistically
significant relationship between education and either FB
task (UC: rs[15] = .23, p = .42; A/R: (rs[15] = .08, p = .78).

predict the tool match. Moreover, the homesigners never
indicated that they thought they were being fooled. To
ensure this trust, the items for the FB tasks were never
moved from the participant’s sight.

Study 2: Executive Function
Executive function (EF) has been studied extensively (e.g.,
Anderson, 2002), and has been shown to relate to ToM
development (e.g., Carlson et al., 2004). de Villiers & de
Villiers (2012) summarizes the mixed findings regarding
executive function’s role in A/R tasks vs. other FB tasks.
Study 2 explores these relationships in the Nicaraguan
groups, who vary in language and educational background.
To our knowledge this study is the first to investigate EF
abilities in these groups. We tested their Executive
Function abilities using a simple inhibitory control (mixed
congruent/incongruent) task (Shusterman et al., 2012) that
required minimal verbal instruction and required only a
behavioral response (vs. a verbal response). This task was
chosen because it has been used with young deaf
populations in the United States, and because the conflict
of rules parallels a FB trial: one must suppress one rule (or
truth) for another. This EF task also provided a measure of
non-verbal intelligence with minimally verbal instructions
– an important methodological consideration given the lack
of standardized non-verbal IQ tasks that could be used
across the three participant groups in our study.

Figure 1. Proportion of each group that passed each task.
No participant passed the Unexpected Contents phase
without also passing Appearance/ Reality, thus the scores
for UC were the same as passing the task overall.
Executive Function performance did not relate to A/R
performance, but was best among NSL Signers, the only
group with substantial educational experience.

Discussion
In sum, as strength of linguistic community increased (with
Homesigners having the weakest, and hearing Nicaraguans
the strongest), the passing rate for A/R and UC increased.
Notably, hearing Nicaraguans did not universally pass
either task, in conflict with our prediction that membership
in a linguistic community would enable passing. Also, the
passing rates differed for A/R and UC, suggesting that
these subtasks tap different aspects of FB (though typically
developing American five-year olds pass both tasks).
Our confidence that participants, including the
homesigners, understood the FB task derives from its
design and from our years of experience working with
these individuals on a variety of language and cognitive
tasks. Unlike traditional FB tasks, the current task instructs
via experience rather than verbally, and the task phases
gave participants experiences prior to making predictions–
the very experiences that a Simulation Theorist would
expect to scaffold predictions about another’s choices.
The sticker phase provided the experience of making
easy vs. hard (preference) choices, and then participants
experienced earning or not earning incentives for correct
predictions. An additional control is built into the UC
phase: a correct prediction of matchbox could come about
in three ways: the participant actually understood the other
person’s FB; they forgot what was actually in the box, or
they didn’t understand the task, and simply answered on
the basis of the appearance of the box. However, in our
dataset, whenever a participant did not succeed, they had
predicted the lock/lockbox, evidence that they had not
forgotten what was in the box and were actually trying to

Method
Participants
All participants were the same as in Study 1.

Materials and Procedure
The experimenter sat across from the participant, with two
6”-diameter light-buttons on the table between them. In the
instruction portion, the experimenter donned a black or
white glove on her right hand and gesturally or verbally
instructed the participant that when she tapped a button
with that hand, the participant was to tap the same button.
The participant was allowed to practice with feedback. The
experiment had three testing phases: 1) Right hand; 2) Left
hand; 3) Both hands. In the first testing phase, the
experimenter tapped the buttons with her right hand in a
prescribed pattern (3x on the left, 3x on the right, 6 total).
In phase 2, a similar procedure was used with the left
hand, but with the opposite glove color (i.e., if the right
hand had had a black glove in phase 1, then the left had the
white). Laterality of glove color was counterbalanced
across participants. Importantly, the left hand “rule” was
that whichever button was tapped, the participant had to
tap the other button. After a few practice trials with
feedback, the task began with six button taps, as in phase 1.
In the third phase both gloved hands (one black and one
white), tapped the buttons. Both rules from phase 1 and
phase 2 continued to apply: when the right hand tapped a
button, the participant still had to tap the same button;

2249

likewise, when the left hand tapped a button, the
participant had to tap the other button. Note that the glove
color/ hand did not change from the control phases. Phase
3 contained 12 trials, with four possible hand/button
combinations. All participants, including the homesigners,
clearly understood the rules; in fact, homesigners enjoyed
the task so much that they afterward donned the gloves
themselves to play with others as a diversion.

between language and education. However, our design
cannot distinguish between membership in a language
community combined with education and education alone.
A community language (even an emerging one) combined
with moderate 2 levels of education apparently enabled
NSL Signers to pass at a higher rate than the other two
groups. Notably, NSL Signers’ lack of a conventionalized
language and the fact that their primary language was not
even used in their classrooms did not prevent the majority
of them from achieving criterion.

General Discussion
We conducted two studies investigating the effects of
language and education on false belief understanding and
executive function performance in three Nicaraguan
groups: Homesigners, who do not participate in a linguistic
community and have little schooling; Nicaraguan Sign
Language Signers, who were among the initial creators of
this emerging language, and Unschooled Spanish Speakers,
members of a linguistic community, with sparse education.
Our results suggest three conclusions: 1) a linguistic
community is necessary, but not sufficient, to support
success on FB tasks; 2) education, more than language,
relates to executive function; and 3) executive function
ability does not relate to false belief performance.
These results support theories in which language may
play a crucial role in the development of theory of mind.
According to simulation theorists, having an experience of
a false belief shortly before predicting the response of
another individual holding the same false belief in the very
same situation would eliminate the need for language, and
indicate that life experience and introspection supports the
understanding of others’ beliefs and actions. Our results
showed that life experiences, even those experienced
immediately prior to prediction, did not help adults without
a linguistic community. Thus, Simulation (and related)
theories (e.g., Gordon, 1986; Goldman, 1992) cannot explain
the behavior of homesigners, who presumably reflect on
their own experiences, yet remain unable to leverage that
reflection into successful prediction of others’ behavior.
We found the executive function results particularly
striking. NSL Signers outperformed both the Homesigners
and Unschooled Spanish Speakers, both of whom had very
little educational experience. However, these groups
differed greatly in their linguistic profiles: despite having
typical language backgrounds, only one Spanish Speaker
passed executive function. As it turns out, he was the one
participant who had had some schooling. Thus, we suggest
that education, more than language, underpins
congruent/non-congruent EF abilities. Ostrosky-Solís and
colleagues (2004) found no differences between
participants with and without education on a task (the

Figure 2. Individual scores for each participant on phase 3
of the Executive Function task (two rules combined).
Circle color indicates FB performance (see legend).

Results
All participants scored well above chance (50%) on
control phases (right & left hands alone), (MHS=90%,
MNSL=95%, MUSS=86%), showing they understood the
task. The phase of interest is the third phase, which
required the participants to maintain two conflicting
instructions – to either tap the same or the other button,
depending on the hand being used/glove color. Typically
developing hearing children in the US scored 86% on this
task (Mage=57 mo.) (Shusterman, et al., 2012). We thus set
the passing criterion at 80% for the adults; given this, no
homesigner passed, 5 out of 6 NSL Signers passed, and 1
of 5 USSs passed (Figure 1, grey bars).
Figure 2 presents individual EF scores, with FB scores
indicated by marker color (see legend). The Spearman’s
rho revealed a statistically significant relationship between
years of education and EF score (rs[15] = .62, p = .01).
Homesigners and USS scored in the same range on EF,
with the exception of one USS who scored 100% – this
participant is the only Spanish speaker who reported some
education (3 y), whereas all other USSs reported none.

Discussion
The fact that NSL Signers, the only group with significant
educational experiences, tended to score higher than the
other two groups, suggests that education may play a role
in developing EF abilities. Somewhat surprisingly, 4 out of
5 Spanish Speakers did not perform at levels achieved by
typically developing American 5 year-olds, suggesting that
a native language alone does not ensure success on this
task. These results suggest the possibility of an interaction

2

The teachers of Cohort 1 signers used spoken Spanish
and did not sign; thus, the reported education levels are
likely overestimates relative to typical US levels.

2250

“opposites” task) that was similar to our control Phase 2.
We have not located any studies that examine language or
education effects on a Phase 3-type task, which requires
participants to manage both same- and opposite-responses.
The orally-educated deaf children in Shusterman et al.’s
(2012) study showed delays in executive function relative
to their hearing counterparts. We speculate, based on our
results, that later improvements in these deaf children’s EF
would stem from additional educational experience rather
than from further linguistic development.
Contrary to our hypothesis, the participant groups
patterned differently on false belief and executive function,
suggesting that EF ability does not drive FB performance.
We acknowledge some limitations. First, Homesigners,
NSL Signers, and Unschooled Spanish-speaking adults are
extremely rare and difficult to recruit and test, yielding
small sample sizes. Also, we did not administer any
standard IQ tasks. Over many years of interaction with the
research group, the homesigners have not exhibited signs
of congenital cognitive deficits, and their performance on
perceptual matching and mental rotation tasks is in the
same range as that of their hearing family members. Future
work will utilize implicit measures of FB performance,
such as eyegaze or looking time measures.

Carlson, S., Mandell, D., & Williams, L. (2004). Executive
function and theory of mind: stability and prediction
from ages 2-3. Developmental Psychology, 40(6).
Carrigan, E., & Coppola, M. (2012). Mothers do not drive
structure in adult homesign systems: Evidence from
comprehension. Proc. 34th Annual Cog. Sci. Soc. Austin, TX.
Coppola, M., & Newport, E. (2005). Grammatical subjects in
homesign: Abstract linguistic structure in adult primary
gesture systems without linguistic input. PNAS, 102(52).
de Villiers, P., & de Villiers, J. (2012). Deception
dissociates from false belief reasoning in deaf children:
Implications for the implicit versus explicit theory of
mind distinction. British Journal of Dev. Psych., 30(1).
de Villiers, J., & Pyers, J. (2002). Complements to cognition:
A longitudinal study of the relationship between complex
syntax and false-belief understanding. Cog. Dev. 17(1).
Gola, A. (2012). Mental verb input for promoting children's
theory of mind: A training study. Cog. Dev., 27(1), 64-76.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (2003). The resilience of language.
NY, NY: Psychology Press.
Goldman, A. I. (1992). In defense of the simulation theory.
Mind & Language, 7(1­‐2), 104-119.
Gordon, R. M. (1986). Folk psychology as simulation.
Mind & Language, 1(2), 158-171.
Hale, C., & Tager-Flusberg, H. (2003). The influence of
language on theory of mind: A training study.
Developmental Science, 6(3), 346-359.
Howard, A., Mayeux, L., & Naigles, L. (2008). Conversational correlates of children's acquisition of mental
verbs and a theory of mind. First Language, 28(4).
Morgan, G., & Kegl, J. (2006). Nicaraguan Sign Language
and theory of mind: The issue of critical periods and
abilities. J. Child Psych. and Psychiatry, 47(8), 811-19.
Ostrosky­‐Solís, F., Ramírez, M., Lozano, A., Picasso, H.,
& Velez, A. (2004). Culture or education? Neuropsychological test performance of a Maya indigenous
population. International Journal of Psychology, 39(1).
Pyers, J. E. (2005). The relationship between language and
false-belief understanding: Evidence from learners of an
emerging sign language in Nicaragua (PhD diss.).
Pyers, J. E., & Senghas, A. (2009). Language promotes
false-belief understanding: Evidence from learners of a
new sign language. Psychological Sci., 20(7), 805-812.
Richie, R., Yang, C., & Coppola, M. (2014). Modeling the
emergence of lexicons in homesign systems. TopiCS, 6(1).
Senghas, R. J., Senghas, A., & Pyers, J. (2005). The emergence
of NSL: Questions of development, acquisition, and evolution.
Biology and knowledge revisited. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Shusterman, A., T. Berkowitz & R. Lange. (2012). The
acquisition of number concepts in oral-deaf preschoolers. Paper presented at the BUCLD, Boston, MA.
Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs:
Representation and constraining function of wrong
beliefs in young children's understanding of deception.
Cognition, 13(1).

Conclusion
Our results suggest that language primarily contributes to
success on false belief tasks, whereas education is related
to executive function success. The homesigners’ inability
to pass either type of task indicates that life experience
alone isn’t enough to overcome the consequences of lack
of participation in a linguistic community, lending support
to theories that emphasize language in ToM development,
rather than experiences (e.g., Simulation Theories). Some
aspects of language require participation in a linguistic
community to develop. While our results support a critical
role for language, they do not address which aspects of
language structure are essential. Further research is
necessary to assess the specific relationships between
participation in a linguistic community and education on
executive function and theory of mind understandings.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the hearing and deaf participants for
allowing us to learn from them. We thank Dr. Claudia
Molina and Leybi Tinoco for fieldwork support in
Nicaragua, Jennie Pyers for incredibly helpful discussions
regarding the experiential false belief task, Devika Prasad
for coding assistance, and Emily Carrigan and Russell
Richie for comments. Funding provided by NSF IGERT,
Graduate Research fellowship and a UConn Center for
Latin American Studies/El Instituto grant to DG, and NIH
P30 DC010751 to MC and D. Lillo-Martin.
References
Anderson, P. (2002). Assessment and development of executive
function during childhood. Child Neuropsych., 8(2).

2251

