UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Do Social Norms Influence Causal Inferences?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6qc3p3mb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Samland, Jana
Waldmann, Michael R.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Do Social Norms Influence Causal Inferences?
Jana Samland (jana.samland@psych.uni-goettingen.de)
Michael R. Waldmann (michael.waldmann@bio.uni-goettingen.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Göttingen, Gosslerstr. 14, 37073 Göttingen, Germany

Abstract
While it is well known that agents only tend to be held accountable
for events they have caused, recent findings suggest that the
inverse relation between causation and accountability also holds.
According to this view, normative evaluations also affect
responses to causal test questions. A key problem of this research
is that causal queries are typically ambiguous. The question
whether somebody has caused a specific outcome may on the one
hand refer to causal relations, but it may also be understood as a
request to assess the moral accountability of the agent. To test
whether normative evaluations really affect causal inference, it is
necessary to disambiguate the test question. In Experiment 1, we
showed that the assumed influence of social or prescriptive norms
on causality disappears when causal inference is measured using
unambiguous test questions. Furthermore, Experiment 2
demonstrates that no influence of moral values is seen when the
pragmatic context of the task highlights the causal meaning of the
test question. Both findings cast doubt on the claim that normative
evaluations influence causal inference.
Keywords: causal reasoning; moral judgment; causal selection;
conversational pragmatics; norms

Introduction
Most theories of moral judgments assume that
accountability judgments presuppose a causal relation
between the agent and the evaluated outcome (Driver, 2008;
Shaver, 1985; Sloman, Fernbach, & Ewing, 2009; Weiner,
1995). Agents are only held accountable for outcomes if, at
least to some extent, they are a relevant contributing cause.
Consistent with this relation, several studies have shown
that the degree to which an agent is held morally
accountable decreases when a second alternative cause is
introduced that would have generated the outcome anyway
(Gerstenberg & Lagnado, 2010; Moore, Clark, & Kane,
2008; Woolfolk, Doris, & Darley, 2006).
While it is well accepted that judgments about moral
accountability presuppose causal relations, a number of
recent studies have tried to show that the inverse relation
also holds. According to these studies, moral evaluations
also influence causal inferences (Alicke, 1992; Hitchcock &
Knobe, 2009; Knobe & Fraser, 2008; Knobe, 2010). One
popular example of this inverse relation is the pen vignette
used in an experiment by Knobe and Fraser (2008). In this
study, participants were presented with a story about
employees working in a philosophy department. Although
only the administrative assistants are allowed to take pens
from the desk of the receptionist and the faculty members
are not, everyone takes pens regularly. When Professor
Smith and an administrative assistant meet in front of the
desk and take pens one morning, a problem arises: There are
no pens left. When subjects were asked about who has

“caused the problem,” they tended to name Professor Smith
rather than the administrative assistant. As the only relevant
difference between both agents is the wrongness of their
behavior, Knobe and Fraser interpreted the finding as
showing that causal attributions are influenced by moral
evaluations.
More recently it has been called into question whether it
is only moral norms that influence causal judgments (see
Hitchcock & Knobe, 2009). Similar influences as in the pen
vignette have also been demonstrated in scenarios in which
agents follow or disregard other types of social norms,
including legal and conventional norms. Our research will
therefore be generally concerned with the potential
influence of (prescriptive) social norms on causal inference.

The Ambiguity of Causal Queries
A key methodological problem of studies investigating the
influence of norms on causal inferences is the notorious
ambiguity of the term “cause,” especially in the context of
human actions. In physical domains, causal queries are less
ambiguous. The question whether a specific button causes
the light to go on asks for an assessment of a counterfactual
relation between states of the button and the light. The
presence of a causal relation implies that the light tends to
go on when the button is pressed but without pressing the
button the light would not have turned on. By contrast, in
the context of human actions the term “cause” is ambiguous.
It may refer to the presence of a mechanism underlying a
causal counterfactual relation as in the button example, or it
may refer to the question whether the agent can be held
accountable for the outcome. Although accountability
presupposes causation, its assessment also implies social
norms. Sytsma, Livengood, and Rose (2011) point out this
ambiguity when they state that “[c]ausal attributions are
typically used to indicate something more akin to who is
responsible for a given outcome than who caused the
outcome in the descriptive sense of the term used by
philosophers” (p. 815). Being accountable for a negative
event often entails blame and punishment, whereas a
positive outcome may lead to praise and approval.
Regarding responses to causal test questions, the
ambiguity of the term “cause” can pose a problem since one
has to know which of the two meanings a participant had in
mind. This problem is particularly salient in Knobe and
Fraser’s (2008) question about “who caused the problem,”
which clearly has moral connotations. If the test question is
interpreted as a request to assess (moral) accountability, it is
trivial that Professor Smith is selected, who has broken the
rules. But even if the question was interpreted as a request

1359

to make a truly causal judgment, there are several
possibilities of how social norms could influence causal
inference. We will explicate two possibilities of how this
influence could be understood.

Possible Influences of Social Norms on Causal
Inference
Causal Models Causal representations could be influenced
by normative evaluations in two ways. In the causal
literature, a basic distinction has been made between causal
structure and strength (see Lagnado, Waldmann, Hagmayer,
& Sloman, 2007). Whereas causal structure refers to the
presence or absence of a causal arrow between two events,
causal strength quantifies the strength of this relation. Thus,
one possibility is that norms influence the structure of causal
model representation, or that they determine the relative
strength of the different causal links within the model. The
possibility that normative evaluations influence the causal
structure has been raised by Knobe (2010), who writes:
“(…) people’s judgment that the professor is doing
something wrong is somehow affecting their intuitions
about whether or not the professor caused the events that
followed” (p. 319-320). The second possibility is to
acknowledge the existence of multiple causal links, but
assign them different strengths. This possibility is raised by
Liu and Ditto (2013) who say: “[t]he more participants
believed that the action was immoral even if it had
beneficial consequences, the less they believed it would
actually produce those consequences (…)” (p. 318).
In sum, the claim may be that social norms influence
causal inferences via changes in the causal structure of the
assumed causal model or via changes of the size of
parameters (e.g., causal strength).
Causal Selection Another possibility how norms could
influence causality is that normative evaluations influence
causal selection judgments without affecting the structure of
the causal model or causal strength. It is well known that
people distinguish between causes and mere background
conditions although both are equally causal for the target
effect. For example, a fire in a forest may both depend on a
lightning bolt and oxygen, but typically the first factor is
selected as the relevant cause. Hitchcock and Knobe (2009)
accordingly state that “[p]eople seem to rely on extrastructural information to select certain candidate causes over
others (…)” (p. 592).
There are various theories of causal selection. One of the
many discussed selection criteria is abnormality, that is, the
idea that people tend to pick abnormal factors over normal
ones as causes (Hilton & Slugoski, 1986; Hitchcock &
Knobe, 2009). But why should people select abnormal
events as causes? One explanation, offered by Hitchcock
and Knobe (2009), is that abnormal factors are often
suitable as targets of intervention. Normality is broadly
construed in this approach and may include moral,
conventional, or statistical norms (i.e., rarity). For example,
if somebody behaves immorally, we are more likely to think

about interventions that lead to normal behavior than we
think about ways to turn normal into abnormal behavior.
Reasoning about an intervention leads to counterfactual
thinking about what would have happened if the abnormal
factor had been absent, which in turn highlights this factor
as the relevant cause.
Hilton (1990) proposes another explanation for the
selection of abnormal factors that traces the choice to
informativeness. According to this “conversational
pragmatics” view, abnormal factors tend to be selected
because they add relevant new information, whereas normal
factors are viewed as belonging to the tacit knowledge of
discourse participants.
Apart from theories focusing on abnormality, there are
also other theories of causal selection. Cheng and Novick
(1991) for example argue that those factors are selected that
covary with the effect within the focal set reasoners
currently consider. Given the multitude of theories and
experimental findings it seems unlikely that there is one true
account of causal selection; different factors may determine
causal selection in different contexts. Hitchcock and
Knobe’s (2009) position is unique in that it postulates that
prescriptive social norms may influence causal selection.

Testing the Influence of Social Norms on Causal
Inference
Current empirical findings are consistent with all mentioned
accounts: normative evaluations could either influence
causal inferences (via changes in causal representations or
via causal selection) or merely subjects’ interpretation of the
causal test questions as requesting accountability judgments.
Our goal is to distinguish between these accounts by using
unambiguous measures of causal representations that target
uniquely causal features.
Most causal theories focusing on causal structure and
strength belong to the heterogeneous class of dependency
theories (see Waldmann & Hagmayer, 2013, for an
overview). According to dependency theories, a factor C is a
cause of its effect E if E depends upon C. Dependency has
been formalized differently in the various philosophical and
psychological approaches. Probabilistic theories focus on
statistical dependency: Causes raise or lower the probability
of their effects. Interventionist theories emphasize the role
of interventions that bring about effects. Finally,
counterfactual theories describe an event C as a cause of E
when it holds that if C had not occurred, E would not have
occurred. All these approaches share the view that causes
are difference makers and that causal relations express
dependency (see also Mayrhofer & Waldmann, in press).
Thus, dependency theories generally contrast the case in
which both cause and effect are present with the
counterfactual case in which the cause is absent. They differ
in the method of estimation of this contrast and in the
quantification of the size of the contrast. Since in the
literature on social norms, cover stories have been used that
describe causal relations on a qualitative, not a quantitative
level, these differences are irrelevant for the present

1360

purpose. In Experiment 1, we therefore chose to use a
general contrast measure, which is consistent with all
dependency theories. To measure subjects’ intuitions about
causal structure and strength we had them estimate the
probability of the effect in the presence and the
counterfactual absence of the cause. The presence of a
generative causal link is indicated by a positive contrast,
that is, the probability of the effect should be estimated
higher in the presence than in the absence of the cause. The
size of assumed causal strength can be read off the size of
the difference of the ratings. Since the contrast measure is
less ambiguous than the typically used cause question, it
allows for a clearer test of the hypothesis that norms
influence causal representations of structure or strength. If
these representations are affected by normative evaluations,
the differences of the two probability ratings are expected to
be higher for norm-violating factors compared to normconforming ones. Experiment 1 will test whether social
norms influence causal representations comparing the
contrast measure with the standard cause test question.
A lack of an effect on the contrast measure would
demonstrate that normative evaluations do not influence
causal representations, but would still be consistent with the
second possibility that these evaluations affect causal
selection. In Experiment 2 we therefore used Knobe and
Fraser’s (2009) cause question in all conditions, but varied
details of the presentation of the cover story. The goal of
this manipulation was to manipulate the pragmatic context
of the task in a way that the causal meaning of the test
question is highlighted in one condition. This condition is
contrasted with the standard scenario. Given that both
conditions present the same scenario involving the same
norms, a theory that assumes that these norms influence
causal selection via the highlighting of targets of
intervention should predict similar effects in both
conditions. By contrast, if causal test questions are
ambiguous, a difference between the conditions is expected.

Experiment 1
In the literature, several cover stories have been used to
demonstrate the influence of normative evaluations on
causal judgments. In these studies, two agents jointly cause
an outcome. In the instructions, norms are mentioned that
make the action morally permissible for one, but not the
other agent. We test three popular scenarios and compare a
control condition in which the previously used cause
question is used with a condition in which causal
representations are measured by means of a contrast
measure. If norms influence causal representations, they
should affect both measures. If, however, the previously
found effects were due to the ambiguity of the cause
question, an effect should only be seen with this test
question but not with the contrast measure.

Method
Participants 218 participants took part in the three reported
conditions, which were part of a larger study. The

experiment was run online in the U.K. 12 subjects failed a
final attention test, which left 206 subjects for the analyses.
Subjects earned 50 British pence for their participation.
Design The design of the experiment is based on a 3
(scenario: pen vs. computer crash vs. drug) × 2 (test
question: cause vs. contrast) × 2 (normality: normal vs.
abnormal) structure with the last factor being manipulated
within subject. Participants were randomly assigned to one
of six conditions; each subject was presented with one of the
three scenarios and one type of test question.
One of the used scenarios was the pen vignette described
in the introduction (Knobe & Fraser, 2008). In the computer
crash scenario, two agents (Lauren and Jane) simultaneously
log on a computer although only Lauren has the permission
to do so. As a consequence, the computer crashes (Knobe,
2005). The drug scenario describes a pharmacist and an
intern who both sign a request for a drug that a patient
requires. Both sign off although the intern thereby
transgresses the hospital’s policy. Consequently, the patient
gets the drug and recovers (Hitchcock & Knobe, 2009). This
cover story was developed to test a condition in which the
breaking of a norm leads to a good outcome.
After having read their scenario, subjects in the control
condition were presented with the two cause questions that
have been used in previous studies: “How strongly did agent
A/agent B cause X (the outcome)?” Responses were given
on an 11-point Likert scale ranging from “not at all” (0) to
“completely” (100). Subjects in the contrast measure
condition were asked to estimate the probabilities of the
effect in the presence and absence of the cause. In the pen
scenario, for instance, we asked subjects (i) how likely it is
“that the problem occurred in the given situation”, and then
for each agent in randomized order (ii) how likely it is “that
the problem would have occurred” if Professor Smith/the
administrative assistant “hadn’t taken any pen.” To express
their judgments, we gave subjects an 11-point Likert Scale
ranging from “impossible” (0) to “certain” (100). The
contrast measure is based on the difference between the two
estimates for the presence and absence of the cause.
At the end of the experiment, subjects were presented a
simple transitive inference task, which was used to exclude
subjects who did not sufficiently pay attention to the task.

Results and Discussion
The results can be seen in Fig. 1, which, apart from a
difference between scenarios, shows a clear interaction with
the type of test question. Whereas we replicated the typical
finding that abnormal factors yield higher ratings than
normal factors with the cause question, this effect virtually
disappeared with the less ambiguous contrast measure. The
ANOVA confirms these impressions. Apart from main
effects for scenario (F(2, 200) = 5.72, p = .004, ηp² = 0.05),
question type (F(1, 200) = 74.6, p < .001, ηp² = 0.27), and
normality (F(1, 200) = 45.5, p < .001, ηp² = 0.19), the
crucial interaction between normality and question type

1361

turned out to be highly significant, F(1, 200) = 40.9;
p < .001; ηp² = 0.17.
In sum, the results of Experiment 1 clearly confirm the
hypothesis that norms do not affect causal representations:
when participants were confronted with a measure that
specifically targets intuitions about the structure and
parameters of causal models, causal judgments were
unaffected by whether the protagonist violated or conformed
to the norm.
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Computer Crash
Pen
Drug

Causal Judgment

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
normal abnormal
Cause Question

with a new inference condition in which information
relevant for answering the test question had to be inferred
by combining pieces of information from the previous
instruction phase. Thus, the task of the inference condition
was slightly more complicated. We hypothesized that the
additional inference step makes it pragmatically more
appropriate to interpret the test question as a query about
causal relations rather than about accountability. By
contrast, in the standard knowledge condition, the causal
setup is extremely transparent so that it seems more likely
that subjects infer that the experimenter cannot possibly
intend to ask a trivial question about causal relations. Thus,
whereas in the knowledge condition we expected the
typically found influence of norms, we expected no such
effect in the inference condition. Such an interaction would
weaken theories that claim an influence of social norms on
causal selection because the normative status of the agents’
behavior did not change across conditions.

Method
Participants 104 subjects participated in the online
experiment, and were reimbursed with 50 British pence. We
excluded subjects who did not manage to pass the attention
test (5 subjects in this study). Thus, we analyzed the data of
99 participants.

normal abnormal
Contrast Measure

Figure 1: Results of Experiment 1. The judgments for the
cause question can take values between 0 and 100; the
contrast measure, which is based on differences, can take
values between -100 and 100 (although the cover stories
suggest positive values). Error bars represent standard errors
of means (SE).

Experiment 2
The results of Experiment 1 refute the hypothesis that
normative evaluations affect causal representations, but are
still consistent with the possibility that these evaluations
may affect causal selection within otherwise invariant causal
models (Hitchcock & Knobe, 2009). The goal of
Experiment 2 was to test this possibility against the
alternative that social norms simply highlight the
accountability meaning of the cause question.
In the present study we focused on the pen scenario. In
Experiment 1 we compared the ambiguous cause test
question with an unambiguous contrast measure. We
expected that most subjects would interpret the cause test
question as a request to assess accountability. Since in
Experiment 2 we focused on causal selection which is not
measured by the contrast measure, we solely used the cause
question. Our goal was to compare variations of the cover
story that we expected to either highlight the accountability
or the causal meaning of the causal test question.
To manipulate how subjects represented the meaning of
the cause question in this study, we compared a variant of
the pen scenario (knowledge condition) in which all
information is directly described as in the original version

Design The design of the experiment is based on a 2
(instruction condition: knowledge vs. inference) × 2
(normality: normal vs. abnormal) structure with the last
factor being manipulated within subject. Participants were
randomly assigned to one of two conditions, the knowledge
and the inference condition. In both conditions, subjects
were presented with an adapted version of the pen vignette
(Knobe & Fraser, 2008). The instructions in both conditions
stated that in a philosophy department a chute system had
been implemented so that office material can be delivered
automatically into the offices of the employees. In order to
get pens, rubbers or pencil sharpeners, everyone can simply
push one of the buttons, which are located on the writing
desks, and soon receive the requested office material in a
damper. Each button had a different color and was assigned
to a specific product. Subsequently, participants were tested
whether they remembered the association between the color
of the button and the respective product. Next, the normality
assumptions were manipulated. Subjects read that, due to a
shortage of material, only the administrative assistants are
allowed to press the buttons inside their offices. As in the
original pen vignette, subjects were then told that in contrast
to the regulations both administrative assistants and faculty
members order pens and that therefore the receptionist
repeatedly sends notes to remind the employees of the rules.
The key difference between the inference and knowledge
condition was that only in the inference condition an
additional instruction phase followed. In this additional
instruction, two administrative assistants (Mrs. Cooper and
Mr. Wall) were introduced. Mrs. Cooper usually presses the
blue button, as she needs a lot of pens, whereas Mr. Wall

1362

typically presses the yellow one for pencil sharpeners. Next,
two faculty members (Prof. Thompson and Prof. Smith)
working in the department were mentioned. Professor
Thompson usually presses the green button because she
needs plenty of rubbers, and Professor Smith typically
presses the blue button for pens. To ensure that subjects
learned these relations, they were asked to assess the
likelihood that a button press may lead to missing pens for
each employee separately using a 7-point rating scale that
ranged from (1) “impossible” to (7) “inevitable.”
In the last section of the instruction, in both conditions the
standard situation of the pen scenario was presented.
Subjects were told that Professor Smith and the
administrative assistant Mrs. Cooper pressed a button at the
same time. The following instruction was presented in both
conditions with the sole difference that in the knowledge
condition the information in parentheses was given. Thus, in
the inference condition subjects needed to recall the
association between the employee, the colored button, and
the requested item:

importantly also a significant interaction between normality
and instruction condition, F (1, 97) = 14.1, p < .001, ηp² =
0.13.
In sum, the results are consistent with the hypothesis that
in conditions in which the underlying causal structure is
trivial, subjects tend to shift their understanding of the test
question to an accountability meaning. However, when the
task is slightly more complicated, as in the inference
condition, subjects seemed to have found it more plausible
to interpret the test question as a query about causes.
Consequently, in this condition the effect of norms
disappeared.
A reviewer pointed out that an alternative interpretation of
the lack of an effect of norms in the inference condition
might be that in this condition there is more uncertainty
about what the protagonists actually did. We will test this
hypothesis in future experiments.

Causal Judgment

“One Morning, both the administrative assistant Mrs.
Cooper and the faculty member Professor Smith press a
[the blue] button in their offices at the same time
(09:37:58 am) For both, the requested item [pen] is
delivered successfully. A few minutes later (09:41:22
am), the receptionist needs to take an important
message, for which she needs a pen and therefore
presses her blue button … but she has a problem. There
are no pens left in the material stores.”

Finally, subjects in both conditions were requested to
indicate their agreement with the assertion the
administrative assistant Mrs. Walter and Professor Smith
“caused the problem.” A rating scale was used for both
questions that ranged from “not at all” (1) to “completely”
(7). As in the previous study the transitivity question was
given at the end of the experiment.

7

Inference Condition

6

Knowledge Condition

5
4
3
2
1
normal

abnormal

Results

Figure 2: Results of Experiment 2. Error bars indicate
standard errors of means (SE).

The procedure contained various comprehension tests. First,
most subjects were able to recall the assignment of color of
button to the respective product (79 to 87 percent). Second,
Mrs. Cooper (M = 5.07; SD = 1.85) and Prof. Smith (M =
4.87; SD = 2.07), who regularly press the blue button
associated with pens, were rated to be more likely to be
responsible for a shortage of pens than Mr. Wall (M = 2.52;
SD = 1.93) and Prof. Thompson (M = 2.76; SD = 2.09), who
usually press the yellow or the green buttons.
The most crucial result can be seen in Fig. 2. Whereas we
replicated the effect of normality in the standard knowledge
condition in which the causal structure was transparently
conveyed, subjects made no difference between the two
protagonists in the slightly more complicated inference
condition, regardless of whether their behavior conformed
to the norm or violated it. This pattern is statistically
supported by an ANOVA that yielded a main effect for
normality, F (1, 97) = 12.1, p < .001, ηp² = 0.11, but more

The present work revisits recent research suggesting an
influence of prescriptive social norms on causal inference.
According to these studies, people seem to view the
behavior of an agent that violates a norm as more causal
than one that conforms to norms (Alicke, 1992; Knobe &
Fraser, 2008; Knobe & Hitchcock, 2009). Several possible
influences on causal inference are possible. The most
extreme hypothesis is that normative evaluations modify
representations of causal structure or causal strength.
Alternatively, social norms may leave causal representations
unaffected but influence which of several causes is selected
as primary.
In the present work we have tested these hypotheses
against a third possibility. We suspected that the effects that
have been shown in the literature might simply be due to an
ambiguity of the test question. The question whether the

General Discussion

1363

behavior of a specific person causes an outcome may refer
to a causal relation but may also be interpreted as a request
to assess accountability. It is not surprising that social norms
affect answers to the test question if subjects understand the
question as a request to assess accountability.
We have conducted two experiments that clearly support
the ambiguous meaning hypothesis. In Experiment 1, we
compared the standard test question with an unambiguous
measure of causal structure and strength. Norms only
affected responses to the standard test question that had
been used in previous research but did not influence a
contrast measure that specifically targets causal
representations. In Experiment 2, we focused on the cause
question but manipulated whether the context favors the
causal or the accountability meaning. Again, social norms
only influenced the responses in the knowledge condition
that creates a context in which a causal interpretation is
pragmatically implausible.
There are several directions for future research. In our
work we have focused on the standard cover stories that had
been used in the literature to demonstrate the influence of
social norms. It would be interesting to test a larger variety
of different types of norms and to investigate their
similarities and differences.
Another interesting direction would be to tie the studies
better to the literature on causes and conditions which has
typically focused on physical or biological scenarios (e.g.,
Cheng & Novick, 1991). One attractive feature of the theory
of Hitchcock and Knobe (2009) is that their account is not
only applicable to prescriptive but also to descriptive norms
(see also Sytsma et al., 2012; Roxborough & Cumby, 2009).
Therefore, this theory can also motivate predictions for tasks
in which nonsocial scenarios are presented. Although
breadth is certainly a striking feature of this theory, we
suspect that a closer look will reveal that there is no unique
account of causal selection that explains all findings.

References
Alicke, M. D. (1992). Culpable causation. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 368-378.
Cheng, P. W., & Novick, L. R. (1991). Causes versus
enabling conditions. Cognition, 40, 83-120.
Driver, J. (2008). Attribution of causation and moral
responsibility. In W. Sinnott-Armstrong (Ed.), Moral
Psychology (Vol.2): The Cognitive Science of Morality:
Intuition and Diversity (pp. 423-439). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Gerstenberg, T., & Lagnado, D. A. (2010). Spreading the
blame: The allocation of responsibility amongst multiple
agents. Cognition, 115, 166-171.
Hilton, D. J. (1990). Converstational processes and causal
explanation. Psychological Bulletin, 107, 65-81.
Hilton, D. J., & Slugoski, B. R. (1986). Knowledge-based
causal attribution: The abnormal conditions focus model.
Psychological Review, 93, 75-88.
Hitchcock, C., & Knobe, J. (2009). Cause and norm.
Journal of Philosophy, 106, 587-612.

Knobe, J. (2005). Attribution and normativity: A problem in
the philosophy of social psychology. Unpublished
manuscript, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill.
Knobe, J. (2010). Person as scientist, person as moralist.
Behavior and Brain Science, 33, 315-365.
Knobe, J., & Fraser, B. (2008). Causal judgment and moral
judgment: Two experiments. In W. Sinnott-Armstrong
(Ed.), Moral Psychology. The Cognitive Science of
Morality: Intuition and Diversity (pp. 441-447).
Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Lagnado, D. A., Waldmann, M. R., Hagmayer, Y., &
Sloman, S. A. (2007). Beyond covariation: Cues to causal
structure. In A. Gopnik & L. Schultz (Eds.), Causal
learning: Psychology, philosophy, and computation (pp.
154-172). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Liu, B. S., & Ditto, P. H. (2013). What dilemma? Moral
evaluation shapes factual belief. Social Psychological and
Personality Science, 4, 316-323.
Mayrhofer, R., & Waldmann, M. R. (in press). Agents and
causes: Dispositional intuitions as a guide to causal
structure. Cognitive Science.
Moore, A. B., Clark, B. A., & Kane, M. J. (2008). Who
shalt not kill? Individual differences in working memory
capacity, executive control, and moral judgment.
Psychological Science, 19, 549-557.
Roxborough, C., & Cumby, J. (2009). Folk psychological
concepts: Causation. Philosophical Psychology, 22, 205213.
Shaver, K. G. (1985). The attribution of blame: Causality,
responsibility, and blameworthiness. New York:
Springer-Verlag.
Sloman, S. A., Fernbach, P. M., & Ewing, S. (2009). Causal
models: The representational infrastructure for moral
judgment. In D. M. Bartels, C. W. Bauman, L. J. Skitka &
D. L. Medin (Eds.), Moral judgment and decision
making: The psychology of learning and motivation:
Advances in research and theory (pp. 1-26). San Diego,
CA: Elsevier.
Sytsma, J., Livengood, J., & Rose, D. (2012). Two types of
typicality: Rethinking the role of statistical typicality in
ordinary causal attributions. Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and
Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 43,
814-820.
Waldmann, M. R., & Hagmayer, Y. (2013). Causal
reasoning. In D. Reisberg (Ed.), Oxford Handbook of
Cognitive Psychology (pp. 733-752). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Weiner, B. (1995). Judgments of responsibility: A
foundation for a theory of social conduct. New York:
Guilford Press.
Woolfolk, R. L., Doris, J. M., & Darley, J. M. (2006).
Identification, situational constraint, and social cognition:
Studies in the attribution of moral responsibility.
Cognition, 100, 283-301.

1364

