UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Do We Recommend Lower Electricity Consumption after Priming with Pro-social and Intrinsic
Values?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/55z8c2g6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Guath, Mona
Juslin, Peter

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Do We Recommend Lower Electricity Consumption after Priming
with Pro-social and Intrinsic Values?
Mona Guath (mona.guath@psyk.uu.se) & Peter Juslin (peter.juslin@psyk.uu.se)
Department of Psychology, Uppsala University, P. O Box 1225,
Uppsala, 751 42 Sweden
Abstract
The standard approach to changing people’s energy
consumption, which involves information about appropriately structured economic incentives, is becoming increasingly questioned. In an experiment, we investigated if it is possible to affect the electricity consumption recommended for the average American
citizen by priming participants with either pro-social
aspects of the “American stereotype” (intrinsic values) or by superficial and self-enhancing aspects of
the “American stereotype” (extrinsic values). The results showed that the participants that were primed
with extrinsic values recommended significantly
higher electricity consumption for the average American, as compared to both the intrinsic value priming
condition and to a neutral control condition.
Keywords: Intrinsic values, priming, MTurk, sustainable behavior

Introduction
The standard techno-economic model, which has traditionally dominated policy interventions in the energy sector, has become increasingly questioned (Stern,
2011). The effects of information and economic incentives are typically smaller than economic models
would predict. From this, often large so called energy
efficiency gap (Jaffe & Stavins, 1994), it has become
clear that to decrease the gap it is necessary to pay
more attention to the psychological processes. Some
studies have focused on the importance of social
norms for the acceptance of climate change strategies
(Nilsson, von Borgstede, & Biel, 2004), others have
looked closer at the feedback processes in energy use
(Fisher, 2008). Yet others have highlighted the importance of tailored interventions, monitoring the target behavior (Steg & Vlek, 2009). A subcategory of
the latter group has looked more in detail into how
values and identity are related to environmentally
friendly behavior. In two experiments, Bolderdijk et
al. (2012) investigated how an economic vs. biospheric appeal affected the number of people that checked
the air pressure in their tires at a petrol station. A significantly larger number of people checked their tires
with the biospheric appeal. The reason for this, according to the authors, is that when complying with
the biospheric appeal the participants can nurture a

positive self-concept. The economic appeal, on the
other hand, rather makes them feel stingy and greedy.
A slightly different interpretation of the petrol station study is offered by value research. The basic assumption behind the value research is that priming or
activating a set of values increases a certain type of
behavior and decreases the incidence of behaviors
associated with an opposing value. The theory is derived from Schwarz (1992) value model, proposing
that all humans are guided by values, which in turn are
expressed in ten different motivators (e.g. power, hedonism, benevolence and security). The motives can
be modeled in a circle, divided into four superordinate
opposing values: self-transcendence vs. selfenhancement and conservation vs. openness to
change. Values at about 180 degrees and hence motives generate contradictory behavior, and typically
generate null correlations, whereas adjacent values
and motives have strong correlations (Maio et al.,
2009). There is another model, based on goals rather
than values (Grouzet et al., 2005), yielding the same
predictions but with a slightly different terminology.
The model is built on the assumption that there are
two dimensions, one opposing intrinsic and extrinsic
goals and the other contrasting physical and selftranscending goals. The idea is that the goals are in
conflict with each other and, thus, the person has to
negotiate with herself to choose a line of behaviors
that is compatible with the demands (Maio et al.,
2009). In a series of experiments Maio et al. (2009)
investigated how priming certain values affected value
congruent and incongruent behaviors. They concluded
that priming a set of values indeed increases a certain
type of behavior and decreases behavior associated
with an opposing value. Applied to Bolderdijk et al.’s
(2012) study, the biospheric appeal tapped into the
participants’ intrinsic values, whereas the economic
appeal triggered extrinsic values, which were incongruent with environmentally friendly behavior.
Sheldon, Nichols, and Kasser (2012) propose that
intrinsic values are part of the American identity,
and in line with the social identity theory (SIT;
Tajfel, 1981) they suggest that an activation of that
identity will cause the person to act in line with the
values attached to that identity or group norm. Furthermore, when priming people with a certain identity, people are likely to act and hold attitudes in line
with the values attached to that identity. Which val-

2304

ue set associated with a certain social identity that is
activated depends on the social context.
By priming people with a value one can attempt to
control the context, and thus emphasize a set of values or an identity. “Priming” is defined by Tulving
and Schacter (1990) as “a change in the ability to
identify or produce an item as a result of a specific
prior encounter with the item”. There are different
kinds of priming, here we focus on semantic priming, defined as the association strength between two
or more concepts that have a semantic relatedness in
memory (Topolinski & Deutsch, 2013).

The Present Study
In the present study, we wanted to investigate how
priming people with an identity affect their attitudes
to electricity consumption. The design was in many
respects inspired by Sheldon et al.’s (2011) study,
except that the outcome variable in their study was
recommended carbon footprint. The essence of the
design is the assumption that depending on what
aspects of a social identity (in this case the American
identity) that are activated, the participants will act
differently, but always in line with the norms attached to the specific social identity. In other words,
by activating a certain identity, thereby increasing
the access to certain lines of reasoning and certain
arguments, we propose to manipulate the likelihood
that the participants will act in line with the attitudes
and behaviors attached to that role.
The experiment investigated the extent to which
priming affected the amount of electricity participants
recommended that other citizens should consume for
everyday activities. The intrinsic priming was a short
text that reminded the participant of the pro-social
values attached to the stereotypical conception of an
“American” (e.g., generosity and responsibility). The
extrinsic priming condition reminded the participant
of the superficial and selfish values attached to the
stereotypical conception of an “American” (e.g., a
focus on material gains, competitiveness). The control
condition just referred to the participants as Americans, without emphasizing any specific values (the
survey was administered on AMT and directed specifically to an American audience). To assure that the
contents of the priming manipulation were properly
encoded half of the participants in each priming condition were required to engage in an additional elaboration of the content of the texts intended as primes.

that people are more inclined to recommend less usage
of natural or common resources when primed with
pro-social values. We also used two explicit attitude
tests: attitudes to energy conservation and perceived
behavioral control (Abrahamese & Steg, 2009) and
attitudes to reduced electricity consumption (Ek &
Söderholm, 2010). By including both an indirect behavioral measure and an attitudinal measure we hoped
to capture the differences, if any, that were caused by
the priming. Finally, we included a measure of numeracy, BANT (the Berlin Advanced Numeracy Test:
Cokely et al., 2012), in order to investigate if the
quantitative assessments of electricity consumption
were affected by the participant’s numeracy. The experiment was conducted on AMT (Amazon Mechanical Turk) via the crowdsourcing site Crowdflower.

Method
Participants, Stimuli and Design
The experiment included a total of 351 participants,
185 women and 165 with mean age 32.1 years (SD=
12.6). They completed 23 items in one trial and were
paid $ 0.30 to complete the task, which lasted approximately 8 min.
The task was presented to the participants as a survey with the goal to explore factors in human judgment and decision making. Trials were constructed
in Lime Survey, and connected to AMT via Crowdflower. The background color was a default theme in
Lime survey: blue, with white text in Arial 14
points.
The experiment was a 2x3 factorial betweensubjects design with priming condition and elaborating task/no elaboration task as independent variables.
The primary dependent variables were amount of electricity consumption recommended and the points on
the Abrahamese and Steg’s (2009) and Ek and Söderholm’s (2010) energy consumption attitude tests.

Procedure
The priming stimulus was a short text, reminding the
participants of either the extrinsic or the intrinsic
side of the American character (Sheldon et al.,
2011). The intrinsic American prime was phrased as:
‘‘Now we would like to know more about
you as an American. The American people
are known around the world for their generosity, and their willingness to pull together in
times of need. Americans are also known for
their ideal of self-expression and personal
development, and for their strong family values”.

We predicted that an intrinsic priming condition
would recommend significantly lower electricity consumption than an extrinsic priming condition and a
control group. This is in line with previous research
(e.g. Sheldon et al., 2011; Kamenica, 2012) showing

2305

The extrinsic American prime was expressed as:
“Now we would like to know more about you
as an American. The American people are
known around the world for their focus on
wealth, financial success, and material gain.
Americans are also known for their competiveness, and for their movie industry with
its Hollywood ideals of beauty, celebrity, and
fame.’’

posed to the priming texts, participants were also
asked to read a text about the reasons for consuming
less electricity as well as continuing consuming electricity at the current level. The rationale for including a text about electricity was to follow Sheldon et
al.’s (2011) original design, and to secure that all
participants had a basic notion about what electricity
is and how it used to generate energy.
Recommended Electricity Consumption
240

And, finally, the control condition (neutral
American) read:

220

‘‘Now, we would like to know more about
you as an American’’.

Cost ($ per month)

200

After the priming, half of the participants (elaboration condition) were asked to list three needs that all
Americans share in common. After that, all participants were asked to rate their policy preferences
relevant to Americans’ electricity consumption.
Concretely, they were asked to recommend average
consumption of for the following 10 widely used
electricity consuming appliances and activities. The
questions were phrased as follows:

Median
25%-75%
Non-Outlier Range

180
160
140
120
100
80
Control

Extrinsic

Intrinsic

Priming condition

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

7.
8.
9.
10.

How many times per week do you recommend that one uses the dishwasher?
How many minutes per day do you recommend that one uses the oven?
How many hours per day do you recommend that one watches TV?
How many hours per day do you recommend that one uses the computer?
How many degrees Farenheit do you recommend as the average room temperature?
How many times per week do you recommend that one uses the tumble dryer (0 indicates that one lets the laudry air dry)?
How many minutes do you recommend for
an average shower?
How many times a week do you recommend that washing machine be used?
How many minutes per day do you recommend that one uses the micro oven?
How many minutes per day do you recommend that one uses the stove?

Before the priming, participants completed two
surveys: background variables (gender, age and educational background) and BANT (Berlin Advanced
Numeracy Test: Cokely et al., 2012). The previously
mentioned attitude tests were not administered until
after the priming and electricity recommendations,
in order to avoid any confounding effects arising
from filling out the attitudes tests. Before being ex-

Figure 1. The median monthly cost in dollars for the recommended electricity consumption of the average American in each of the three priming conditions of the experiment.

Results
Data from the electricity consumption variables were
not normally distributed due to many outliers and
there was heterogeneity in the variance. For this reason, non-parametric tests were used for all analyses.
The recommended electricity consumption data were
recalculated into price in dollars ($ 0.12/h) by transforming the usage times into kWh according to the
Swedish Energy Agency’s (Energimyndigheten, 2009)
key figures for electricity usage. In that way, the individual relationship between the electricity posts (e.g.,
the temperature and the computer) was intact, while
the different units were transformed to a common
scale. The sum, in dollars per month, of the electricity
consumption was computed for each participant, and a
Kruskal-Wallis test revealed that the recommended
electricity consumption differed significantly between
priming groups (χ2(2, N = 317) = 9.013, p= .011, twotailed) but not between the elaboration/no elaboration
groups (U = 12402, N1 = 156, N2 = 161, p = .849, twotailed). Moreover, visual inspection of the medians in
each cell revealed no signs interaction between the
priming and elaboration conditions. The median recommended monthly electricity in the control condition
and in the intrinsic value priming condition was the

2306

same, $139, while median recommended consumption
in the extrinsic value priming condition was $ 148.
Further analysis of the priming conditions, revealed
that there was a significant difference between American control and extrinsic priming (U = 3951, N1 = 89,
N2 = 114, p = .007, two-tailed), intrinsic and extrinsic
priming (U = 5286, N1 = 114, N2 = 114, p = .015, twotailed) but not between intrinsic and American control
(U = 4938, N1 = 89, N2 = 114, p = .745, two-tailed).
Thus, as illustrated in Figure 1, the median recommended consumption in the extrinsic value priming
was significantly higher than in the other two conditions, but the results were associated with large individual differences.
A Kruskall-Wallis test on the number of points at
the attitude tests for the priming conditions revealed
no significant differences for neither attitudes to energy conservation and perceived behavioral control
(Abrahamese & Steg, 2009), (χ2(2, N = 315) = 4.465,
p= .107), nor for attitudes to reduced electricity consumption (Ek & Söderholm, 2010), (χ2(2, N = 316) =
0.860, p= .650). Nor did the elaboration conditions
generate any significant differences for either of the
attitude tests: attitudes to energy conservation (U =
11956, N1 = 155, N2 = 160, p = .580) nor attitudes to
electricity (U = 11994, N1 = 155, N2 = 161, p = .549).
A visual inspection did not reveal any interaction effects between the two independent variables.
There were two significant, but, weak correlations
between the background variables. There was a significant negative correlation between age and gender (r
=-.146, N = 347, p <.006), males were somewhat
younger, and a positive significant correlation between
age and attitudes to energy conservation and perceived
behavioral control (r =-.134, N = 315, p <.017). The
latter correlation suggests that higher age goes with
more positive attitudes to energy conservation.

Discussion
The results revealed significant differences in the
recommended electricity consumption between the
extrinsic and the intrinsic priming conditions, with a
higher recommended electricity consumption with
extrinsic value priming. There were no significant
effects of whether the participants elaborated or not
on the material. Furthermore, there were no significant effects on the environmental attitude tests.
The difference between extrinsic and intrinsic in
median recommended electricity consumption was
modest in magnitude ($148 vs. $139). Notably, the
results replicate the basic results in Sheldon et al.’s
(2011) study, who presented significant differences
between extrinsic and intrinsic American priming in
recommended size of carbon footprint. However,

there were also some unexpected differences, in that
the American control and extrinsic American prime,
in Sheldon et al. yielded the same carbon footprint
recommendations. On the other hand, in Sheldon et
al. there was another priming condition called Missouri student, which yielded the same recommendations as the intrinsic American priming group. It
seems as if identity primes which are designed as
neutral, are connected to the contextually available
values. A tentative interpretation of the results is that
participants look for cues how to act, when they are
not present. The text about electricity and/or the very
task to recommend electricity consumption for an
average American citizen may have provided a cue
for the control group to act environmentally friendly.
In other words, the “default-prime” for this content
may fall closer to the intrinsic value prime, considering the current debate on environmental issues.
The most interesting result, though, is that it
seems to be possible to affect how much electricity
people recommend by simply reminding them about
either pro-social (intrinsic) or egocentric (extrinsic)
values. Notably, the effect was not achieved by an
implicit or subliminal priming procedure, but by
letting the participants read a text about values of the
American spirit. This is what Schwartz’s (1992) and
Grouzet et al.’s (2005) models predict, namely that
the values expressed in the intrinsic American text
will promote an environmentally friendly behavior,
and the opposite for extrinsic values.
The interpretation of the results would have been
unambiguous had it not been for the lack of association between value prime (intrinsic/extrinsic) and the
attitude measures. One possibility is that the attitudes tests measure more permanent attitudes to
electricity and energy consumption, which are not so
easily affected by value priming. Other possible explanations are that the priming effect may not have
lasted long enough to be visible when participants
came to the attitude questions (the very last questions in the experiment) or that the attitude instruments themselves suffer from limited reliability.
Previous research has showed that the lag of semantic priming effects can be long lasting, provided
that the participant engages in same level of processing for both the prime as the target. Another
criterion, for longer (semantic) priming effects, is
the degree of overlap of semantic features between
the prime and target (Becker et al., 1997). In a more
recent study, de Lange et al. (2011) show that the
weight of evidence in decision making is dependent
on the level of processing: participants showed a
strategic bias for stimuli processed on a higher level.

2307

Applied to the present data, a possible interpretation of the absence of priming effect on the attitude
tests, could be that there is little overlap between the
prime (intrinsic and extrinsic values) and attitudes to
electricity and energy consumption. More importantly, the text that constitutes the prime, in both conditions, does not require much processing of the participant, possibly, resulting in a short priming effect.
In the light of this, future experiments would focus
on the processing aspect of the prime. First, in order
to establish whether the same priming effect can be
achieved for attitude tests, second, to possibly enhance the priming effects on the electricity consumption. This is important, since priming is an inherently volatile phenomenon, and if the procedure
is to be applied in wider context they must be more
reliable than at present.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Swedish strategic
research- program StandUp for Energy (see
http://www.standupforenergy.se).

References
Abrahamese, W., & Steg, L. (2009). How do sociodemographic and psychological factors relate to
households’ direct and indirect energy use and
savings? Journal of Economic Psychology, 30,
711–720.
Becker, S., Moscovitch, M., Behrmann, M., & Joordens, S. Long-Term Semantic Priming: A Computational Account and Empirical Evidence. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 23, 1059-1082.
Bolderdijk, J.W., Steg, L., Geller, E.S., Lehman, P.
K., & Postmes, T. (2012). Comparing the effectiveness of monetary versus moral motives in environmental campaigning. Nature Climate
Change, 3, 410-413.
Cokely, E.T., Galesic, M., Schulz, E., Ghazal, S.,
Garcia-Retamero, R. (2012). Measuring Risk Literacy: The Berlin Numeracy Test. Judgment and
Decision Making, 7, 25–47.
de Lange, F.P., van Gaal, S., Lamme, V.A.F., &
Dehaene, S. (2011). How Awareness Changes the
Relative Weights of Evidence During Human Decision-Making. PLoS Biology, 9, 1-10.
Ek, K., & Söderholm, P. (2010). The devil is in the
details: Household electricity saving behavior and
the role of information. Energy Policy, 38, 1578–
1587.
Energimyndigheten (2009). Spara energi – och
dryga ut hushållskassan. Retrieved from:
http://www.energimyndigheten.se

Fischer, C. (2008). Feedback on household electricity consumption: A tool for saving energy? Energy
Efficiency, 1, 79–104.
Grouzet, F. M. E., Kasser, T., Ahuvia, A., Dols, J.
M. F., Kim, Y., Lau, S., et al. (2005). The structure of goal contents across 15 cultures. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 800–816.
Jaffe, A. B., & Stavins, R. N. (1994). The energyefficiency gap: What does it mean? Energy Policy,
22, 804 – 810.
Kamenica, E. (2012). Behavioral Economics and
Psychology of Incentives. Annual Review of Economics, 13, 1-26.
Maio, G. R., Pakizeh, A., Cheung, W.-Y., & Rees,
K. J. (2009). Changing, priming, and acting on
values: Effects via motivational relations in a circular model. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 97, 699–715.
Nilsson, A., Von Borgstede, C., & Biel A. (2004).
Willingness to accept climate change policy
measures: The effect of values and norms. Journal
of Environmental Psychology, 24, 267- 277.
Schwartz, S. H. (1992). Universals in the content
and structure of values: Theoretical advances and
empirical tests in 20 countries. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 25, 1–65.
Sheldon, K.M., Nichols, C.P., & Kasser, T. (2011).
Americans Recommend Smaller Ecological Footprints When Reminded of Intrinsic American Values of Self-Expression, Family, and Generosity.
Ecopsychology, 2, 97-104.
Stern, P.C. (2011). Contributions of Psychology to
Limiting Climate Change. American Psychologist,
6, 303-314.
Tajfel, H. (1981). Human groups and social categories: Studies in social psychology. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Topolinski, S., & Deutsch, R. (2013). Phasic Affective Modulation of Semantic Priming. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 39, 414–436
Tulving, E., & Schacter, D.L. (1990). Priming and
Human Memory Systems, Science, 247, 302-306.

2308

