UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does Language Shape the Production and Perception of Gestures?A Study on late
Chinese-English Bilinguals’ Conceptions about Time

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0dn9m9m9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Gu, Yan
Mol, Lisette
Hoetjes, Marieke
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Does Language Shape the Production and Perception of Gestures?
A Study on late Chinese-English Bilinguals’ Conceptions about Time
Yan Gu (yan.gu@tilburguniversity.edu)
Lisette Mol (l.mol@tilburguniversity.edu)
Marieke Hoetjes (m.w.hoetjes@tilburguniversity.edu)
Marc Swerts (m.g.j.swerts@tilburguniversity.edu)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Tilburg University, the Netherlands

Abstract
Does language influence the production and perception of
gestures? The metaphorical use of language in representing
time is deeply interlinked with actions in space, such as
gestures. In Chinese, speakers can talk and gesture about
time as if it were horizontal, sagittal, or vertical. In English,
speakers rarely employ the vertical plane. Two experiments
showed that the verbal use of vertical spatial metaphors had
an online influence on the production and perception of
gestures by late Chinese-English bilinguals. Participants
produced more vertical gestures when talking about time
references by use of vertical spatial metaphors, e.g. ‘shàngzhōu’ (literally: ‘above week’, meaning ‘last week’), and
they preferred vertical gestures to horizontal gestures when
perceiving time references with vertical spatial metaphors.
Gestures are not only shaped by the language specific
conceptualisation, but are also sensitive to the changes in
linguistic choices, both in production and perception.
Keywords: gesture; space; time; metaphor; Chinese

Introduction
When representing abstract conceptions, people often
recruit metaphors from more concrete domains, for
instance, ‘time is space’ (Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2008).
In all cultures people use space to represent time
(Boroditsky, 2000). For example, English speakers can
use spatial metaphors to talk about time such as ‘The
future lies not too far ahead’, and ‘The day has been long’.
In English, as well as in many other languages, speakers
often conceptualise the past at the back (or leftwards),
and the future at the front (or rightwards) (Calbris, 2008;
Clark, 1973). However, this is not the case for all
languages: for example, speakers of Aymara have the
concept that ‘The future is behind’ (Núñez & Sweetser,
2006). The spatiotemporal thought can also be expressed
in speakers’ co-speech metaphoric gestures. Typically,
English speakers produce horizontal and sagittal gestures
to indicate timelines (Casasanto & Jasmin, 2012).
Interestingly, Chinese speakers can additionally talk
about time vertically by employing vertical spatial
metaphors of ‘上’ (shàng: above) and ‘下’ (xià: below) to
indicate the time conceptions of early and late. For
example, ‘上周’ (shàng zhōu) can literally be translated as
‘above week’, which means ‘last week’, while ‘下下周’
(xià xià zhōu) as ‘below below week’, referring to ‘the
week after next week’. Due to the differences in use of
spatial metaphors in time conceptions, Boroditsky (2001)
argues that Chinese speakers may have a different
conceptualisation of time than English speakers. Her
argument is based on Slobin’s (1987) ‘thinking-forspeaking’ hypothesis, which proposes that speakers’

habitual thinking in a language will influence their
cognitive attention and speech production - that is, the
choices of what to focus on and how to say it. Specifically
in Chinese, Boroditsky (2001) believes that the use of
vertical spatial metaphors to talk about time shapes
Chinese speakers’ language-specific conceptual schema.
Interestingly, Chinese speakers can also gesture about
time vertically. For instance, they can point upward to
indicate the concept of an earlier time such as ‘last week’
or point downward to indicate that of a later time such as
‘next week’ (Chui, 2011; Gu, Mol, Hoetjes, & Swerts,
2013). One possible explanation to account for such a
phenomenon could be embodiment, which proposes that
conceptual representations are largely grounded in a
sensorimotor medium motor, and representations are
activated and often instantiated in the forms of gestures.
However, given the language speakers are Chinese, one
cannot preclude that Chinese lexical representations are
activated which in turn influence the gestural patterns.
Then the question arises whether the vertical gesturing
about time results from Chinese speakers having different
time conceptualisations in general (Boroditsky, 2001), or
whether there is an additional online effect of how time is
linguistically encoded in Chinese. In other words, the
vertical gesturing about time conceptions can be due to (a)
Chinese speakers’ vertical thinking of time (a languagespecific conceptual schema); (b) the linguistic choices of
the vertical words which drive the gestures; or (c) both the
conceptual schema and the current linguistic choices. If
the first explanation holds, then Chinese speakers will
also gesture vertically when speaking English. That means
their vertical gesturing will be unaffected by the language
itself. However, if the vertical gesturing is not merely
caused by the general conceptualisation of time, then it is
likely to be immediately affected by the language.
According to Kita & Özyürek’s (2003) Interface
Hypothesis, gestures not only reflect imagistic (spatiomotoric) representations of events, but also aid thinkingfor-speaking. In their production model, the generation of
a gesture is modulated by two forces: the spatio-motoric
thinking from the Working Memory, and the linguistic
encoding possibilities from the Message Generator, both
of which interact with each other. The ultimate content of
a gesture is determined by the Action Generator, which
takes into account the two forms of thinking, such that
gestures are adjusted to fit the verbalisation.
For instance, Kita & Özyürek (2003) found that a scene
of a ‘Rolling Event’ can be expressed as ‘rolling down’ in
English, with manner and path conflated into a single
clause. Therefore, this information tends to be conflated in

547

gesture too, with one gesture expressing both manner and
path. However, in Turkish and Japanese, the manner and
path have to be expressed separately in two clauses (i.e.,
‘move down, in a rolling fashion’), and consequently tend
to be accompanied by two separate gestures. This
suggests that gestures are coordinated to speech online,
and the linguistic encoding possibilities influence gesture
production during formulation (see hypothesis b above).
This cross-linguistic difference in the description of
events also influences one’s perception. For instance, as
revealed by an eye-tracking study, when participants were
instructed to watch a motion event in the intent of later
description, native speakers of Greek (a verb-framed
language similar to Turkish) were significantly more
likely to focus on path over manner than native speakers
of English. However, there were no such differences when
they were simply told to watch the clip. The results
showed that the verbal task has an effect on the gazing of
motion and path, and language can guide event perception
(Papafragou, Hulbert, & Trueswell, 2008).
So far, evidence supporting the Interface Hypothesis
predominantly has come from studies of motion event
descriptions and from monolingual speakers (e.g., Kita,
Özyürek, Allen, Brown, Furman, & Ishizuka, 2007;
Özyürek, Kita, Allen, Furman, & Brown, 2005). It is
found that languages are co-activated in a bilingual
speaker (Wu & Thierry, 2010). In order to find out what
shapes Chinese speakers’ vertical gesturing about time,
and also to test the model further, we study the abstract
concept of time in a bilingual context. Firstly, as time in
Chinese can be expressed by use of vertical spatial
metaphors or no spatial metaphor, and secondly time
conceptions with Chinese vertical spatial metaphors are
encoded linguistically differently in English, the Interface
Hypothesis will predict that: (1) the gesture production
during the verbal use of Chinese vertical spatial
metaphors will be different from that during the verbal use
of neutral words; (2) the production of gestures in Chinese
will be different from that of the paraphrased translation
in English. However, if Chinese-English bilinguals apply
the same time conceptualisations in L1 and L2, these
differences are not predicted.
Moreover, an increasing number of studies show that
the production and the perception of speech and gesture
are interconnected. For instance, perceiving gestures
automatically activates the brain areas involved in
producing these corresponding actions (cf. Mashal,
Andric, & Small, 2012; Hostetter & Alibali, 2008).
Additionally, studies have shown that there is an on-line
integration of semantic information from speech and
gesture (e.g., Özyürek, Willems, Kita, & Hagoort, 2007).
Therefore, it is legitimate to test whether the perception of
vertical gestures about time by the Chinese-English
bilinguals is also influenced by the linguistic encoding
possibilities besides the influence from the pre-determined
conceptual schema.
In the current study we aim to explore whether the
verbal expression of time conceptions with spatial
metaphors affects Chinese-English bilinguals’ production
and perception of gestures. In two studies on bilinguals’
vertical conceptualisation of time, we demonstrate that
language influences both production and perception.

Production Experiment
In the production experiment, we address two questions:
(1) In Chinese, will verbally producing time conceptions
with vertical spatial metaphors (‘above week’, ‘below
month’, etc.) lead to more vertical gestures than in the
case of verbally producing time conceptions without a
spatial metaphor (e.g., Neither in Chinese nor in English
‘yesterday’, and ‘tomorrow’ are spatial expressions
with reference to time)? (2) Given the fact that English
and Chinese speakers may think of time differently
(Boroditsky, 2001), will late Chinese-English bilinguals
produce more vertical gestures in Chinese than in English?
(Bilinguals are defined as sequential bilinguals, who first
acquired Chinese as the L1 and then English as the L2.)

Method
Participants
46 late Chinese-English bilinguals (L1 = Chinese; 35 F
and 11 M; mean age = 24 yrs) were paid for participation.
They were students from Tilburg University (Netherlands),
who originally came from China. Their English
proficiency was between intermediate and advanced.
Stimuli
Eleven Chinese wordlists were constructed for a word
definition task, four of which were relevant to the current
study. They consisted of words that conveyed time
conceptions (see Table 1). Time references (1) and (2)
contained words with vertical spatial metaphors
(‘上’/shàng, above, and ‘下’/xià, below) to indicate the
time conceptions of ‘early’ and ‘late’. By contrast, words
in (3) and (4) did not contain explicit lexical references to
vertical (‘shàng’ or ‘xià’), or sagittal (‘前’/qián, front or
‘ 后 ’/hòu, back) space dimensions. The English version
was a translation of Chinese. Note that wordlists (1) and
(2) were translated into English to express the same
concepts but with neutral words. The reason for this is
twofold: first, English has few comparable vertical spatial
metaphors for time conceptions; secondly, we can
examine whether there is a trace of the L1 vertical
thinking of time in the L2.
Table 1: Wordlists of targeted time referents.
Chinese
(1)

上周, 下周

English
last week, next week

shàng zhōu, xià zhōu
(2)

上辈子, 下辈子

shàng bèi zi, xià bèi zi
(3)

昨天,今天, 明天

zuó tiān, jīn tiān, míng tiān
(4)

早晨, 晌午, 傍晚, 深夜

zǎo chén, shǎng wǔ, bàng
wǎn, shēn yè

previous life, next
life
yesterday, today ,
tomorrow
morning,
noon,
evening, late at night

Procedure
Each participant was paired with an addressee and tested
individually. The experiment was ostensibly set up as a
language and memory experiment, in which the speaker’s
short-term memory and the addressee’s long-term

548

memory would be tested. They sat face-to-face in a quiet
room, where a monitor was placed in front of the speaker.
There were wordlists in the centre of the monitor that
were only seen by the speaker. The speaker was informed
that he/she would have to remember the wordlists shortly
after having seen them twice, find the relationship
between the words within a list and explain the definitions
of the words in the list to the addressee as logically as
possible. The addressee was told to remember the
speaker’s descriptions as much as possible for the
memory test afterwards, and s/he was allowed to ask the
speaker clarification questions. After the task, the
addressee was taken to another room for the memory test,
which s/he did not actually need to complete.
All participants took part twice in the experiment, once
in Chinese and once in English. The testing order of the
languages was counterbalanced and the interval between
the two tests was approximately ten days. The addressees
were native speakers of Chinese for the Chinese task, and
English-Dutch bilinguals for the English task. The entire
experiment was videotaped with participants’ consent.
Participants were not instructed to perform gestures in the
task. A post-experiment questionnaire showed that
participants were not aware that the purpose of the study
was to investigate speakers’ gestures.
Coding and Measurements
The temporal gestures (gestures performed to represent
time conceptions) accompanying the speech that
described the target wordlists were annotated in ELAN.
The planes of gestures were categorised as vertical,
horizontal, or sagittal, and the directionality of each plane
was also indicated. A participant could explain a wordlist
by using temporal gestures from several planes, which
were coded in each plane accordingly. When a participant
produced repetitive temporal gestures within a plane for a
specific word or words in the wordlist, this gesturing was
only counted once. For each participant, the number of
vertical gestures produced for each of the four wordlists
was counted. Thus the wordlist-type (vertical and neutral)
and the language factors (Chinese and English) were
independent variables, and the number of vertical gestures
was the dependent variable.
Four participants did not produce any gesture in
Chinese or in English for the four target wordlists and one
participant did not finish the experiment. Data from these
five people were excluded from the analysis.

Results and Discussion
Participants produced a total of 328 (41×4×2) target
wordlists for both languages, 269 (82.0%) of which were
accompanied by temporal gestures (128 (78.0%) for
Chinese and 140 (85.4%) for English) (see Figure 1).
Among the four wordlists for each participant, the
average number of temporal gestures in English (M = 3.51,
SD = .71) was significantly higher than that in Chinese (M
= 3.14, SD = 1.06), t (40) = 1.95, p = .058, two tailed, r
= .30. This is to be expected, because late bilingual
speakers usually gesture more often in their second
language than in their first language (Gullberg, 1998).
A 2×2 repeated measures ANOVA with wordlist-type
(vertical and neutral) and language (Chinese and English)

as within subject variables showed that there was a main
effect of wordlist-type on the number of vertical gestures,
F (1, 40) = 14.30, p < .001, ηp2 = .26, but no main effect of
language, F (1, 40) = 1.34, p = .18, ηp2 = .03. There was a
significant interaction between language and wordlist-type
(vertical and neutral), F (1, 40) = 10.94, p = .002, ηp2 = .22.
no gesture
nonvertical temporal gestures
vertical gestures at least once
80
60
40
20
0
Chinese
vertical

Chinese English English
neutral translation neutral
of vertical

Figure 1: The number of wordlists that were accompanied
by gestures for the four types of time references (82 for
each type). The non-vertical temporal gestures included
gestures in both horizontal and sagittal planes.
0,8

Vertical/translation
Neutral

0,6
0,4
0,2
0
Chinese

English

Figure 2: The number of vertical gestures for vertical and
neutral wordlists. Note in English vertical wordlists were
a translation of Chinese time concepts in neutral words.
Follow-up post hoc analyses (with Bonferroni α level
corrected to 0.025) revealed that the Chinese wordlists
with vertical spatial metaphors (M = .56, SD = .71) were
accompanied by a significantly higher number of vertical
gestures than the neutral Chinese words (M = .24, SD
= .43), t (40) = 2.81, p = .008, two tailed, r = .41, 95% CI
= (.09, .55) (see Figure 2). This indicated that speaking
time references with vertical spatial metaphors has an
online effect on the production of vertical gestures. By
contrast, the difference between the two types of wordlists
was not statistically significant in English, t (40) = 1.64, p
= .11, two tailed, r = .06, 95% CI = (-.03, .32). This
suggests that the production of vertical temporal gestures
is sensitive to the linguistic choices.
As for the comparisons between languages, firstly, the
number of vertical gestures for wordlists with vertical
spatial metaphors was significantly higher in Chinese (M
= .56, SD = .71) than in the English translation (M = .05,
SD = .31), t (40) = 4.40, p < .001, r = .57, 95% CI =
(.28, .75). Figure 3 shows a participant producing vertical
gestures in Chinese and horizontal ones in English.
One may explain this as the result of simply having two
different language specific conceptualisations of time,

549

which are pre-determined by Chinese and English. If this
is true, we should expect the same pattern in the case of
wordlists with neutral words. However, for the neutral
wordlists, there was no significant difference in the
number of accompanying vertical gestures between the
two languages (Chinese: M = .24, SD = .43; English M
= .20, SD = .46), t (40) = .57, p = .57, two tailed, r = .09,
95% CI = (-.12, .22).
Why did the temporal gestures of the two types of time
references (vertical and neutral) display such differences
across languages? It is likely that apart from the thinking
from spatio-motoric cognition, there is another force – the
force from the linguistic encoding possibilities, resulting
in the increase of producing vertical gestures for the time
references with vertical spatial metaphors in Chinese.

Participants
109 late Chinese-English bilinguals (L1 = Chinese; 52 F
and 57 M; mean age = 18 yrs) from Nanjing University,
China participated in the first part of the experiment and
90 participants came back for the second part. They were
paid for their participation.
Stimuli
Thirty items were constructed, consisting of eight target
items of time references and twenty-two fillers. Each item
consisted of a sentence which was followed by a silent
video clip of a seated person (visible from shoulders to
upper legs) who made specific gestures. For instance, a
sentence was shown as ‘The person is asked to perform
body languages that indicate the time directions of last
week and next week symbolically’. The clip underneath
the sentence would show an actor who first pointed to his
left side and then right side (horizontal gesture plane) or,
in a counterbalanced version, who pointed upward and
downward (vertical gesture plane) to indicate the time
conceptions of ‘last week’ and ‘next week’.
Table 2: Time references with vertical spatial metaphors
and time references with neutral words.

Chinese: last week

Chinese: next week
Chinese
(1)

上周, 下周

English
last week, next week

shàng zhōu, xià zhōu
(2)

上午, 下午

a.m., p.m.

shàng wǔ, xià wǔ
(3)

上月, 下月

last month, next month

shàng yuè, xià yuè
English: last week

English: next week

Figure 3: Gestures of last week and next week
by a participant in Chinese and in English.

Perception Experiment
In the perception experiment, we address two questions (1)
In Chinese, will observers prefer vertical gestures for
phrases with explicit vertical spatial metaphors (e.g.,
‘above week’) over vertical gestures for words which do
not have such an explicit spatial indicator? (2) Will there
be perceptual differences in languages in that respect
between Chinese and English? If one’s perception of
gesture is also sensitive to linguistic choices, then firstly
Chinese-English bilinguals are likely to prefer vertical
gestures to horizontal ones for Chinese time references
with vertical spatial metaphors. Also, Chinese speakers
are likely to prefer vertical gestures more for time
references with vertical spatial metaphors compared to
neutral words. Moreover, we expect there to be less of a
preference for a vertical gesture plane in English than in
Chinese, especially for time references with vertical
spatial metaphors (since in English vertical wordlists were
translated into neutral words). To test these hypotheses,
Chinese-English bilinguals were asked to do a rating task.

Method

(4)

上学期, 下学期

shàng xué qī, xià xué qī
(5)

昨天, 明天

last semester/term next
semester /term
yesterday, tomorrow

zuó tiān, míng tiān
(6)

早晨, 傍晚

morning, evening

zǎo chén, bàng wǎn
(7)

去年, 明年

last year, next year

qù nián, míng nián
(8)

早春, 晚春

early spring, late spring

zǎo chūn, wǎn chūn
Among the eight items in Table 2, time references (1),
(2), (3) and (4) contained vertical spatial metaphors and
time references (5), (6), (7) and (8) were literally neutral
(no spatial metaphors) in Chinese. Half of the time
references [(1) & (2); (5) & (6)] were performed in the
vertical gesture plane and the other half [(3) & (4); (7) &
(8)] were performed in the horizontal plane. These
references were counterbalanced in gesture planes by
creating a second version, in which, items [(1) & (2); (5)
& (6)] were performed in the horizontal plane whereas the
other four were performed in the vertical plane.
Additionally, half of the fillers (unrelated to time
conceptions) had incongruent gestures (of varying degree),
with the sentence instructions and the other half were
congruent. The text was created in Chinese and the
English text was a translation of the Chinese one in
neutral words. All tests were conducted via Qualtrics.

550

(.52, .86), but they did not rate significantly different in
horizontal gestures for the two type of wordlists, t (78) =
1.25, p = .21, r = .14, 95% CI = (-.07, .31) (see Figure 4).
Assuming that the neutral and metaphoric time references
share the same conceptualisation of time within a
language, the major differences between the two are the
differences in linguistic choices. This indicated that the
vertical spatial metaphor of time referents had an
influence on perceiving the vertical temporal gestures.
With respect to English, the pattern of results was quite
similar to that in Chinese. For the English translation of
Chinese vertical spatial metaphors (English vertical
translation), participants also preferred vertical gestures
(M = 2.99, SD = 1.32) to horizontal gestures (M = 2.66,
Results and Discussion
SD = 1.13), t (78) = 2.90, p = .005, r = .31, 95% CI =
(.10, .56), but they did not have such preference for
First, there was no significant difference between the two
wordlists without spatial metaphors (English neutral),
versions, F (1, 77) = .031, p = .86, ηp2 = .00, so data from
either. Besides, vertical gestures for ‘English vertical
the two versions were merged. A 2×2×2 repeated
translation’ (M = 3.40, SD = 1.38) was rated by a
measures ANOVA with wordlist-type (vertical and
significantly higher score than vertical gestures for the
neutral) × gesture plane (horizontal and vertical) ×
‘English neutral’ wordlists (M = 2.70, SD = 1.17), t (78) =
language (Chinese and English) as within subject factors,
8.20, p < .001, r = .68, 95% CI = (.16, .53) (see the right
and rating scores as dependent variable revealed that there
half of Figure 4). The similar pattern of results from the
were main effects of word-type, F (1, 78) = 37.11, p
2
L1 and L2 suggests that Chinese speakers still thought in
< .001, ηp = .32 and gesture plane, F (1, 78) = 23.65, p
their first language when perceiving the English words,
< .001, ηp2 = .22, but there was no main effect of language,
and the language in which they perceived appeared to
F (1, 78) = 1.83, p = .18, ηp2 = .02. Furthermore, there was
have little influence on the perception of the gestures.
a significant interaction between wordlist-type and gesture
2
This also supports Wu and Thierry (2010)’s proposal that
plane, F (1, 78) = 17.08, p < .001, ηp = .18, a significant
languages are co-activated in a bilingual speaker.
interaction between wordlist-type and language, F (1, 78)
2
However, further comparisons between Chinese and
= 4.26, p = .042, ηp = .052, and a marginally significant
English
revealed that participants rated vertical gestures
interaction between word-type × gesture plane × language,
2
with
a
higher
score when perceiving Chinese wordlists
F (1, 78) = 3.39, p = .07, ηp = .04 (see Figure 4).
containing vertical spatial metaphors (M = 3.40, SD =
1.38) than that when perceiving the English translation of
4
vertical
the wordlists (M = 2.99, SD = 1.32), t (78) = 2.05, p
3
gesture
= .044, two tailed, r = .23, 95% CI = (.11, .81), but this
2
horizontal
bias towards vertical gestures in Chinese no longer existed
1
gesture
when it came to wordlists with neutral words, t (78) = .43,
0
p = .67, r = .05, 95% CI = (-.21, .35) (black bars in Figure
Chinese
Chinese
English
English
4). As for the rating score for the horizontal gestures, the
vertical
neutral
vertical
neutral
difference across the two languages was not significant
translation
for either type of wordlist (white bars). In short, only for
wordlists with vertical spatial metaphors were more
Figure 4: The mean rating scores of the two types of time
preferred in Chinese as opposed to English. The results
references (words with vertical spatial metaphors and with
indicated that the English translation of Chinese vertical
neutral words) in Chinese and in English.
spatial metaphors weakened the linguistic influence on
gesture perception. This raises an interesting question as
In order to understand these interactions, follow-up post
to what extent these cross-linguistic differences in mental
hoc analyses (with Bonferroni α level corrected to 0.025)
lexicons will cause the differences in conceptualisation.
were conducted. Firstly, for Chinese wordlists containing
Future work should study the correlation between gesture
vertical spatial metaphors (Chinese vertical), participants
production, length of stay, and level of L2 proficiency.
preferred vertical gestures (M = 3.40, SD = 1.38) to
To sum up, the results showed that firstly, in Chinese,
horizontal gestures (M = 2.80, SD = 1.27), t (78) = 5.53, p
the
bilingual speakers preferred the vertical gestures more
< .001, r = .53, 95% CI = (.37, .79). One may immediate
for
time references with vertical spatial words than for
interpret this as Chinese speakers’ general preference of
neutral
words. Secondly, when perceiving time references
vertical gestures over horizontal ones. However, there
with
vertical
spatial metaphors, they preferred vertical
were no such preferences in time references with neutral
gestures
to
horizontal
gestures. Additionally, participants
words (Chinese neutral), t (78) = .13, p = .90, r = .01, 95%
preferred
vertical
gestures
for time references containing
CI = (-.18, .20). Also participants rated vertical gestures
vertical
spatial
metaphor
over
vertical gestures for the
for ‘Chinese vertical’ wordlists (M = 3.40, SD = 1.38)
English
translation.
higher than that for ‘Chinese neutral’ wordlists (M = 2.70,
Interestingly, the results of the perception experiment
SD = 1.17), t (78) = 8.20, p < .001, r = .68, 95% CI =
displayed a similar pattern to that of the production,
Procedure
Participants took part twice in the experiment, once in
Chinese and once in English, with an interval of one week.
In the first test, they were randomly assigned to one of the
two versions to fill out a 1-7-scale rating task in a large
computer classroom. They were shown the sentence
instructions and the silent video clips. Participants were
asked to judge the extent to which the gestures in the clip
expressed the instruction correctly, with 1 meaning ‘very
poor’ and 7 meaning ‘excellent’. The sequence of the
languages tested was counterbalanced. Data from 30
participants were excluded because they either did the two
tests in the same language or did not finish the task.

551

especially in the L1 Chinese. The parallel between
production and perception data suggests that the linguistic
encoding possibilities of time conceptions also have an
influence on the perception of temporal gestures.
Superficially, when having the linguistic input, one’s
ideas or concepts of a certain entity are activated and the
corresponding mental stimulations are created, including
possible co-thought gestures based on the action schemata.
These gestures are likely to be influenced by the linguistic
choices, and adjusted to aid for the understanding of the
gesture input. Finally, there is an integration of the
semantic information from both inputs.

General Discussion and Conclusion
This study investigated late Chinese-English bilingual
speakers’ production and perception of temporal gestures
for time conceptions. In the production experiment, first
of all, participants’ performances of vertical gestures for
time references in both Chinese and English indicated that
they can employ a vertical conceptualisation of time. The
results from the comparisons of the two types of time
references within and between languages showed that the
extent to which vertical gestures were produced was also
dependent on the linguistic choices. Therefore, gestures
are shaped by the online interface between spatio-motoric
thinking and speaking, in which spatial imagery is
adjusted to fit the verbalisation, rather than by the predetermined language-specific conceptual schemas
(vertical conceptualisations of time) only (Boroditsky,
2001). The study provides unique new evidence for the
Interface Hypothesis (Kita & Özyürek, 2003) and
suggests that gesture production is dynamic and sensitive
to linguistic encoding possibilities.
Additionally, linguistic choices seem to also influence
the perception of gestures. For example, in comparison to
the horizontal gesture plane, the vertical gesture plane was
more preferred for time references with vertical spatial
metaphors. Thus the perception of temporal gestures is
affected by the vertical spatial metaphors, similarly as
what we have found for production. This similar patterns
exhibited in both studies not only provide insight into the
immediate and chronic influence of a language on the
production and perception of gestures, but also suggest
that there is an interconnection between perception and
production. Future work can research how the production
mechanisms are used to predict perception of gestures.

Acknowledgements
The first author received financial support from NWO
Promoties in de geesteswetenschappen (322-89-007),
which is greatly acknowledged. We thank the reviewers’
for their useful comments. We are grateful to all the
participants and colleagues for their participation in the
experiments. We thank Hua CHEN for her help with the
perception experiments in Nanjing University, China.

References
Boroditsky, L. (2000). Metaphoric
Understanding time through spatial
Cognition, 75(1), 1-28.

structuring:
metaphors.

Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought?:
Mandarin and English speakers’ conceptions of time.
Cognitive Psychology, 43(1), 1-22.
Calbris, C. (2008). From left to right: Coverbal gestures
and their symbolic use of space. In A. Cienki & C.
Müller (Eds.), Metaphor and Gesture (pp.27-53).
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Casasanto, D. & Boroditsky, L. (2008). Time in the mind:
Using space to think about time. Cognition, 106(2),
579-593.
Casasanto, D. & Jasmin, K. (2012). The hands of time:
Temporal gestures in English speakers. Cognitive
Linguistics, 23(4), 643-674.
Chui, K. (2011). Conceptual metaphors in gestures.
Cognitive Linguistics, 22(3), 437-458.
Clark, H. (1973). Space, time semantics, and the child. In
T. E. Moore (Ed.), Cognitive Development and the
Acquisition of Language (pp. 27-63). New York:
Academic Press.
Gu, Y., Mol, L., Hoetjes, M.W., & Swerts, M. (2013).
What can Chinese speakers' temporal gestures reveal
about their conception of time? Proceedings of TiGeR
2013 conference. Tilburg, Netherlands.
Gullberg, M. (1998). Gesture as a Communication
Strategy in Second Language Discourse: A Study of
Learners of French and Swedish. Travaux de l'institut
de linguistique de Lund, 35. Linguistics and Phonetics.
Hostetter, A. B. & Alibali, M. W. (2008). Visible
embodiment:
Gestures
as
simulated
action.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 15(3), 495-514.
Kita, S., & Özyürek, A. (2003). What does crosslinguistic variation in semantic coordination of speech
and gesture reveal?: Evidence for an interface
representation of spatial thinking and speaking. Journal
of Memory and Language, 48(1), 16-32.
Kita, S., Özyürek, A., Allen, S., Brown, A., Furman, R.,
& Ishizuka, T. (2007). Relations between syntactic
encoding and co-speech gestures: Implications for a
model of speech and gesture production. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 22(8), 1212-1236.
Mashal, N., Andric, M., & Small, S.L. (2012). Motor and
non-motor language representations in the brain. In:
Faust, M. (Ed.), The Handbook of the Neuropsychology
of Language (pp. 276-293). Oxford, England: WileyBlackwell.
Núñez, R., & Sweetser, E. (2006). With the future behind
them: Convergent evidence from Aymara language and
gesture in the cross-linguistic comparison of spatial
construals of time. Cognitive Science, 30(3), 401-450.
Özyürek, A., Kita, S., Allen, S., Furman, R., & Brown, A.
(2005). How does linguistic framing of events influence
co-speech gestures? Insights from cross-linguistic
variations and similarities. Gesture, 5(1/2), 219-240.
Papafragou, A., Hulbert, J., & Trueswell, J. (2008). Does
language guide event perception? Evidence from eye
movements. Cognition, 108(1), 155-184.
Slobin, D. (1987). Thinking for speaking. Proceedings of
the Berkeley Linguistic Society, 13, 435-445.
Wu, Y.J. & Thierry, G. (2010). Chinese-English
bilinguals reading English hear Chinese. Journal of
Neuroscience, 30 (22), 7646-7651.

552

