UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does incidental training increase the prevalence of overall similarity classification? A reexamination of kemler Nelson (1984)

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1x21n8xn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Inkster, Angus
Milton, Fraser
Wills, Andy

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Does incidental training increase the prevalence of overall similarity classification?
A re-examination of Kemler Nelson (1984).
Angus B. Inkster (angus.inkster@students.plymouth.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Plymouth University, Drake Circus
Plymouth, PL4 8AA

Fraser N. Milton (f.n.milton@exeter.ac.uk)
Washington Singer Laboratories, Psychology, College of Life and Environmental Sciences,
University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QG

Andy J. Wills (andy.wills@plymouth.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Plymouth University, Drake Circus
Plymouth, PL4 8AA
Abstract

reducing time for categorization increased overall similarity
classifications and decreased dimensionally based classifications. This result was replicated in Smith and Kemler Nelson (1984) who further demonstrated that concurrent load,
and instructions that encourage impressionistic responding,
increased overall similarity responses. A classic study by
Kemler Nelson (1984) used incidental training, where although category membership information is presented on all
trials, participants were not directed to attend to it, and compared it to intentional training, where a participant is directed
to attend to relevant category membership information to enable correct classification. She found that those who learned
the category structure incidentally made more overall similarity classifications than those who learned the category structure intentionally. Smith and Shapiro (1989) followed a similar procedure to Kemler Nelson (1984), but manipulated concurrent load. They found that concurrent load increased overall similarity classifications.

Kemler Nelson (1984) reported that incidental training, relative to intentional training, increased the prevalence of overall
similarity classification, supporting a non-deliberative account
of overall similarity sorting. However, the analysis conducted
by Kemler Nelson (1984) does not adequately distinguish between usage of an overall similarity classification strategy and
single-attribute strategies. The current study replicates Kemler
Nelson’s (1984) experiment, seeking to test the original conclusions using a more rigorous analysis. The current study approximates the original experimental procedure, using almost
identical stimuli and a longer, modified test phase. Results
replicate those found by Kemler Nelson (1984) when the original analysis is applied; however the model-based analysis suggest an overall similarity classification strategy is used rarely
and that incidental training increases the prevalence of suboptimal single-attribute strategies. These results imply that
overall similarity classification may be more deliberative than
previously thought.
Keywords: incidental training, overall similarity classification, single-attribute classification, model-based analysis.

In a seminal study, Brooks (1978) described two processes
of categorization. In analytic categorization, the participant
separates aspects of the stimulus and evaluates their ability
to predict category membership. Brooks assumed analytic
categorization would lead to a subset of the stimulus dimensions controlling responding. In non-analytic categorization,
the participant predicts category membership on the basis of
overall similarity of all stimulus dimensions to known examples. Brooks suggested that non-analytic categorization
would be prevalent when a person’s cognitive resources were
limited. Another way of phrasing this hypothesis is to say
that overall similarity classification is considered to be less
deliberative than, for example, single-dimension classification. For brevity, we will describe this as the less-is-more
hypothesis; e.g. less time spent categorizing objects results
in more information from those objects having control over
responding. We will contrast this with the more-is-more hypothesis; e.g. more time spent categorizing objects results
in more information from those objects having control over
responding.
Following the publication of Brooks (1978), experimental evidence seeming to support a less-is-more hypothesis of
categorization accumulated. Ward (1983) used a triad procedure, where stimulus triplets are presented, to show that

However, not all experimental evidence supported the lessis-more hypothesis. Ward and Scott (1987) found that classifying by overall similarity took longer than by a singleattribute-plus-exception strategy. Several studies found no
significant effect of time pressure on overall similarity classifications (Smith & Kemler Nelson, 1984, Experiment 4;
Smith & Shapiro, 1989, Experiments 2-3). Nevertheless, the
less-is-more hypothesis became widely accepted by the end
of the 1990’s. Goldstone and Barsalou (1998) stated that,
“evidence suggests that in many situations, it is easier for people to base similarity and categorization judgments on more,
rather than fewer, properties (p.239-240).
More recent research seemingly provides further support
for the less-is-more hypothesis. Waldron and Ashby (2001)
demonstrated that concurrent load retarded the acquisition
of a single-dimension category structure more than it retarded the acquisition of a multidimensional category structure. Zeithamova and Maddox (2006) used a different stimulus set to Waldron and Ashby (2001), and found a similar
effect.
Of course, as with earlier research, not all evidence supported the less-is-more hypothesis. Milton, Longmore, and
Wills (2008) reported multiple experiments where increased

649

time pressure resulted in a reduction of overall similarity classifications in a spontaneous classification task, although one
result consistent with a less-is-more strategy was reported.
Wills et al. (2009) compared pigeons, squirrels and adult humans under closely matched conditions, but failed to find any
species difference in the relative prevalence of overall similarity versus single-dimension classification. Wills, Milton,
Longmore, Hester, and Robinson (2013) provide support for a
more-is-more hypothesis, reporting three experiments where
manipulation of concurrent load reduces overall similarity
classification. A further two experiments suggest that those
using an overall similarity classification strategy had larger
working memory capacities, and that instructions to respond
meticulously increase the frequency of overall similarity classifications.
Wills et al. (2013) also provide a critique of the methodologies of the supporting research, in particular the criterial attribute procedure used in Kemler Nelson (1984) and the triad
procedure used in Ward (1983). They suggest that none of
the methodologies used previously adequately distinguish between less-is-more and more-is-more hypotheses (see Wills et
al. (2013) for a more detailed review of these points). The current study focuses upon further investigation of the methodology employed in Kemler Nelson (1984). Kemler Nelson
(1984) is widely regarded as a seminal study in the investigation of the less-is-more hypothesis. We refer to their procedure here as the criterial attribute procedure, the abstract
structure of which can be seen in Figure 1. There are two
methods of attaining 100% accuracy during the procedure’s
training phase, responding based on the criterial attribute(the
dimension of a stimulus that perfectly predicts category membership, D1 in Figure 1), and responding based on information from at least three of the dimensions of a stimulus (e.g.
D2,D3 and D4 in Figure 1). The first method is referred to
as the Criterial Attribute strategy (a single-attribute strategy),
whilst the second method is referred to as the Family Resemblance strategy (an overall similarity strategy).

training, followed by a test phase. Participants trained incidentally completed an old/new recognition task, with category membership information about each stimulus incidentally presented, whilst those trained intentionally received a
feedback driven categorization task. The critical test stimuli, seen in Figure 1, are used to distinguish between the two
strategies, family resemblance and criterial attribute. A person using the criterial attribute strategy would put the first
critical test stimulus in Category A and the second in Category B, given that in Figure 1 classifying on the basis of the
criterial attribute D1 suggests Category A membership for the
first critical test stimulus, and Category B membership for the
second critical test stimulus. A person using the family resemblance strategy would respond in the opposite way, as the
majority of dimensions for the first critical stimulus suggest
Category B membership, and the majority of dimensions for
the second critical stimulus suggest Category A membership.

Kemler Nelson (1984) found that adults trained incidentally are more likely to employ a family resemblance strategy than those trained intentionally. Kemler Nelson (1984)
is commonly used as evidence in support of the less-is-more
hypothesis, but the critical test stimuli used to assess categorization strategy pose a potential problem. Another possible
strategy in addition to the family resemblance and criterial
attribute strategies is a non-criterial attribute strategy. A noncriterial attribute strategy is another single-attribute strategy,
where a participant responds on the basis on a single attribute
that does not perfectly predict category membership, e.g. D2
in Figure 1. Use of a non-criterial attribute strategy would
result in 75% accuracy during the training phase, enough to
pass the learning criterion. The problem arises from the fact
that responses that indicate a family resemblance strategy are
identical to those indicative of a non-criterial attribute strategy. It is possible that the apparent prevalence of the family resemblance strategy in the incidental condition is partly
due to participants using the non-criterial attribute strategy
instead. Although Kemler Nelson (1984) does discuss this
issue and prevents some fairly informal analyses, we felt the
issue merited further, more rigorous, examination.

Training stimuli

D1
0
0
0
0

Category A
D2 D3 D4
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0

D1
1
1
1
1

Category B
D2 D3 D4
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
1

The present study attempts to determine the strategy used
by each participant by looking at responses to all the stimuli
presented, as opposed to just the critical test stimuli. The use
of a model-based analysis could reveal one of two things, that
the family resemblance strategy is indeed prevalent in participants trained incidentally, or that the prevalence of family resemblance strategy found in Kemler Nelson (1984) was due
to participants using a non-criterial attribute strategy. With
this in mind, the present study aims to replicate Kemler Nelson (1984), using the same procedure but with an extended
test phase to facilitate effective usage of the model-based
analysis.

Critical Test Stimuli
D1 D2 D3 D4
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
Figure 1: Training stimuli and critical test stimuli
Participants underwent either incidental or intentional

650

Method

The uniforms both had a height of 4.5 cm; the doctor’s had a
width of 5 cm and the policeman’s had a width of 9 cm. After
1000ms, the face stimulus appeared in the center of the top of
the screen above the uniforms. After a further 2000 ms, “C
- Policeman” and “M - Doctor” appeared indicating the response keys to be used. The side of the screen on which each
uniform appeared was counterbalanced between participants.
Once the participant had responded, feedback was presented
for 1500ms. Feedback took the form of the face transposing onto the correct uniform and either the word “correct” or
“incorrect” appearing at the top of the screen. After 24 such
training trials, participants were moved on to the test phase.
Participants in the incidental condition were told that their
task was to decide whether or not they had previously seen a
face, before rating their confidence in each decision. No feedback was given on their responses. The faces were presented
above the uniform of the group they belonged to; no mention was made of the significance of this. Each trial started
with the presentation of the two uniforms, to the bottom left
and bottom right of the screen respectively. The side of the
screen on which each uniform appeared was counterbalanced
between participants. After 1000ms, the face stimulus appeared combined with the correct uniform. After a further
2000 ms the question “Seen before?” and the response keys
“Y/N” appeared in the center of the bottom of the screen. After a response was made, the question “Confidence?” and the
response keys “1 - 2 - 3” (1 being the least confident, 3 being
the most confident) appeared at the center of the bottom of the
screen. It is noted that an optimally responding participant in
the incidental condition would respond consistently with “N”
for each trial after the first block. Whilst this is a somewhat
strange task, it does follow the incidental task of the original
study. After 24 trials, participants were moved on to the test
phase.
Test phase. Participants in the intentional condition were
informed that they would be performing the same task, but
without feedback. Participants in the incidental condition
were told that they should have noticed that in the training
phase some of the faces belonged to doctors and some to policemen. They were told that they would see the same faces
as in the training phase and that they should aim to categorise
them as either doctors or policemen. No feedback was given.
The structure of the test trials was identical to the training
phase of the intentional condition, without the feedback at
the end of each trial.

Participants and Apparatus
106 undergraduate psychology students at the University of
Plymouth participated for course credit. The experiment was
conducted on standard PCs, connected to 19 inch flat-screen
monitors. Responses were collected using standard PC keyboards. Participants sat roughly 30 cm from the screen. The
experiment was run using E-Prime version 2.0.

Stimuli
The stimuli were caricatured line drawings of faces, closely
based on those in Experiment 1 of Kemler Nelson (1984),
but using ear size as a dimension instead of eye color. Example stimuli are shown in Figure 2. The stimuli varied on
four dimensions; hair (straight or curly), ears (large or small),
nose (large or small) and moustache(large or small), with the
levels of each dimension counterbalanced between participants. One dimension perfectly predicted category membership, with the specific dimension counterbalanced between
participants. Each face stimulus was approximately 6cm high
and 8cm wide. The 8 stimuli used in training are shown in
Figure 1, the test stimuli were all 16 stimuli possible in this
four dimensional binary set.

Figure 2: Example stimuli

Procedure
Participants were assigned to one of two conditions, the intentional condition and the incidental condition. The experiment
consisted of two sections, a training phase and a test phase.
The training phase comprised three blocks of the eight training stimuli seen in Figure 1, with order of presentation randomised within each block. The test phase comprised eight
blocks of the sixteen possible stimuli, with order of presentation randomised within each block. In contrast to the original
study, all stimuli were presented equally often, whereas in
Kemler Nelson (1984) the critical test stimuli were presented
more frequently than other stimuli in the test phase. Block
breaks in both phases were not signalled to participants.
Training phase. Participants in the intentional condition
were told that their task was to identify whether each face was
that of a doctor or a policeman. Participants were told that
they should try to figure out the rule for identifying whether
a face was a policeman or a doctor. Feedback was given for
each response, either correcting or confirming their response.
Each trial started with the presentation of the two uniforms,
to the bottom left and bottom right of the screen respectively.

Results
In Kemler Nelson (1984), participants who failed to reach
a criterion of two thirds correct on the training stimuli presented in the test phase were excluded from further analysis.
Our test phase was much longer to enable use of the modelbased analysis, so the criterion used in the present study was
two thirds correct on the training stimuli in the first three
blocks of the test phase. This is the closest match to the original criterion that could be used. Applying this criterion left

651

Table 1: Average number of classification strategy judgements made on critical test stimuli between conditions
Condition
Intentional
Incidental

Criterial Attribute
10.9
7.6

Table 2: The number of participants best fitting each strategy
Condition
Intentional
Incidental

Family Resemblance
5.1
8.4

FR
2
1

CA
19
13

NCA
7
16

family resemblance, criterial attribute and non-criterial attribute strategies are reported in Table 2. One person in the
intentional condition was excluded from analysis as response
key preference was the best fitting strategy of learning. Inspection of the table reveals two points of interest. First, the
family resemblance strategy was rarely used in either condition. Second, incidental training, relative to intentional
training, seems to increase the prevalence of non-criterial attribute classification - a sub-optimal single-attribute strategy,
χ2 (1, N = 55) = 4.5, p = 0.034.
The average consistency score across the participants in
the intentional condition was 116(91%), and in the incidental
condition was 103.9(81%), both of which are above chance.
The average consistency score for the intentional condition
was significantly higher than the average consistency score
for the incidental condition, t(53) = 3.1, p = 0.0031.

29 participants in the intentional conditions and 30 in the incidental condition. In order to achieve these approximately
equal group sizes, more participants had to be run in the incidental condition than the intentional condition (35 intentional, 71 incidental). In Kemler Nelson (1984) a similar pattern was noted (17 intentional, 23 incidental, to produce 16
participants in each condition), although the difference was
not as extreme as in the present study.
Original study analyses. The first result of interest is the
number of criterial attribute judgements and family resemblance judgements made on the critical test stimuli in each
condition, which are reported in Table 1. The test stimuli
appeared a total of sixteen times in each condition. There
were significantly more criterial attribute judgements made
on the critical test stimuli in the intentional condition than
the incidental condition, t(55) = 2.14, p = 0.037. Of mathematical necessity, there are also significantly more family
resemblance judgements made on the critical test stimuli in
the incidental condition than the intentional condition.
It is also worth noting that participants in the intentional condition made significantly more criterial attribute
judgements than family resemblance judgements, t(28) =
2.48, p = 0.02. However, participants in the incidental condition did not make significantly more of one type of judgement
than the other, t(29) = 0.37, p = 0.71.
Model-Based Analysis A model-based analysis was also
conducted on the results of the experiment. The analysis
consisted of assigning each stimulus the predicted responses
of each categorization strategy that we examined (family resemblance, criterial attribute, non-criterial attribute and a response key preference strategy). For each response made in
line with the predicted response of a particular categorization
strategy, that specific strategy scored a point. This was repeated for each stimulus presented during the 128 trials of
the test phase for each individual participant. At the end the
scores for each strategy were totalled, and the strategy with
the highest consistency score was deemed to be the best fitting strategy for that participant, and the most likely strategy
they were employing, a similar method to that employed by
Thompson (1994) in the context of a different paradigm. The
consistency score represents the number of responses made
in line with the predicted responses of a particular categorization strategy. For six of the sixteen different test phase
stimuli, the overall similarity strategy can make no prediction
(e.g. 1010). For these stimuli the family resemblance strategy
scored half a point regardless of the participant’s response.
Further Analyses. The number of participants using the

Discussion
The present study found the same effect reported in
Kemler Nelson (1984) when applying their analysis, but
when the more rigorous model-based analysis was applied
found instead that the family resemblance strategy was used
rarely and that incidental training, relative to intentional training, increases the prevalence of sub-optimal single-attribute
strategies. This does not support the findings of the original
study and instead seems to support a more-is-more hypothesis
of categorization.
These results seem to contradict those found by
Kemler Nelson (1984). A possible explanation lies in the differences between the training received by participants. Intentional training focuses participants on the fact that there is a
problem to be solved, and that the trial-by-trial feedback on
category membership will help them do this. Under such conditions, many participants presumably work out that one attribute perfectly predicts category membership, and they continue to use this discovery in the test phase.
It is less clear how participants approach the incidental
condition. One possibility is that participants, at the beginning of the test phase, select one attribute and respond on
that basis (e.g. “policemen have large ears”). The fact that
the criterial attribute is selected more often, relative to the
non-criterial attributes, than would be expected by chance
suggests this selection is not entirely random, but it is presumably harder to identify the criterial attribute from memory than from the online hypothesis-testing permitted by the
intentional condition procedure.
One limitation of the current study is that six of the sixteen test stimuli cannot be consistently classified by an overall

652

similarity strategy (e.g. 1010). This might have lead to participants abandoning the family resemblance strategy upon
realising it could not categorize all the stimuli in the test
phase, and instead adopting a single-attribute strategy. Despite slightly increasing the number of participants best fit by
a family resemblance strategy, the conclusions of the current
study are unaffected if those six stimuli are excluded from
the analysis, although removing such stimuli from the experiment entirely would be a stronger test of this hypothesis. This
work is currently underway in our lab.
The participants in the current study seemed to have
a higher failure rate in the incidental condition than in
Kemler Nelson (1984). One possible reason for this could be
the implementation of the procedure electronically, as completing the procedure 1-on-1 with the experimenter (as was
the case in the original study) could have increased participant motivation. Given the large sample sizes required for
model-based analyses, individual testing of participants is not
a particularly efficient approach. One alternative - currently
under investigation in our lab - is to extend the length of training.
One way in which the present study could be further investigated is through the application of formal models such as the
widely accepted Generalized Context Model. A recent study
by Nosofsky, Denton, Zaki, Murphy-Knudsen, and Unverzagt
(2012) investigated incidental prototype-extraction task performance in cognitively impaired patients, applying a modified Elimination By Aspects model to their data to give an
explanation of their results. Applying a formal processing
model to the present study’s data is a work currently being
conducted in our lab; we hope to be able to present this at the
conference.
Of course, Kemler Nelson (1984) is not the only study to
support a less-is-more hypothesis from a criterial attribute
procedure. In particular, Smith and Shapiro (1989) is a likely
candidate for replication and application of the model-based
analysis, given the similarities between the procedures used,
and we are currently collecting data for such a replication.
Further avenues for possible research include other methodologies for investigating the less-is-more hypothesis, such as
the triad procedure employed by Ward (1983) and Smith and
Kemler Nelson (1984).

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 34, 676-692.
Nosofsky, R. M., Denton, S. E., Zaki, S. R., MurphyKnudsen, A. F., & Unverzagt, F. W. (2012). Studies of
implicit prototype extraction in patients with mild cognitive impairment and early alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 38, 860-880.
Smith, J. D., & Kemler Nelson, D. G. (1984). Overall similarity in adults’ classification: The child in all of us. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 113, 137159.
Smith, J. D., & Shapiro, J. H. (1989). The occurrence of
holistic categorization. Journal of Memory and Language, 28, 386-399.
Thompson, L. A. (1994). Dimensional strategies dominate perceptual classification. Child Development, 65,
1627-1645.
Waldron, E. M., & Ashby, F. G. (2001). he effects of concurrent task interference on category learning: evidence
for multiple category learning systems. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 8, 168-176.
Ward, T. B. (1983). Response tempo and separable-integral
responding: Evidence for an integral-to-separable processing sequence in visual perception. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 9, 103-112.
Ward, T. B., & Scott, J. (1987). Analytic and holistic modes
of learning family- resemblance concepts. Memory and
Cognition, 15, 42-54.
Wills, A., Lea, S. E. G., Leaver, L. A., Osthaus, B., Ryan,
C. M. E., & Suret, M. B. e. a. (2009). A comparative analysis of the categorization of multidimensional
stimuli: I. unidimensional classification does not necessarily imply analytic processing; evidence from pigeons (columba livia), squirrels (scurius carolinensis),
and humans (homo sapiens). Journal of Comparative
Psychology, 123, 391-405.
Wills, A., Milton, F., Longmore, C., Hester, S., & Robinson,
J. (2013). Is overall similarity classification less effortful than single-dimension classification? Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 66, 299-318.
Zeithamova, D., & Maddox, W. T. (2006). Dual-task interference in perceptual category learning. Memory and
Cognition, 34, 387-398.

References
Brooks, L. (1978). Nonanalytic concept formation and memory for instances. In E. Rosch & B. B. Lloyd (Eds.),
Cognition and categorization (p. 169-211). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum..
Goldstone, R. L., & Barsalou, L. W. (1998). Reuniting perception and conception. Cognition, 65, 231-262.
Kemler Nelson, D. G. (1984). The effect of intention on what
concepts are acquired. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 23(6), 734-759.
Milton, F. N., Longmore, C. A., & Wills, A. J. (2008). Processes of overall similarity sorting in free classification.

653

