UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does spatiotemporal integration occur with single empty time intervals instead of two
neighboring intervals in the visual modality?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3705r7j0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Kuroda, Tsuyoshi
Grondin, Simon
Tobimatsu, Shozo

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Does spatiotemporal integration occur with single empty time intervals
instead of two neighboring intervals in the visual modality?
Tsuyoshi Kuroda (tkuroda@neurophy.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp)
Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Neurological Institute, Graduate School of Medical Sciences
Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, 812-8582 Japan

Simon Grondin (Simon.Grondin@psy.ulaval.ca)
École de psychologie, Université Laval, 2325 rue des Bibliothèques
Québec, G1V 0A6 Canada

Shozo Tobimatsu (tobi@neurophy.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp)
Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Neurological Institute, Graduate School of Medical Sciences
Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, 812-8582 Japan

Abstract
The kappa effect is an illusion involving spatiotemporal
integration in the cognitive process and is demonstrated with
three successive signals delimiting two neighboring empty
time intervals. The present experiment was conducted with
single time intervals delimited by two signals, instead of three,
to examine whether perceived duration would be modulated
by space. Each of the two flashes was delivered from the left
or right side in one session (horizontal direction), while each
was delivered from the upper or bottom side in the other
session (vertical direction). Empty time intervals were
perceived as longer when two flashes were delivered from
different locations than when delivered from an identical
location, but only when the flashes were presented in the
horizontal direction. Given that the kappa effect can occur
when three signals are presented vertically, spatiotemporal
integration seemed difficult to occur with single time intervals
compared to two neighboring intervals.
Keywords: kappa effect; temporal discrimination; peripheral
vision; imputed velocity

Introduction
Space and time are integrated in the cognitive process in
order to perceive the motion of external objects.
Spatiotemporal integration has been investigated since the
early 20th century in the field of psychophysics (Abe 1935;
Helson 1930), while this issue has recently attracted
attention from neuroscience researchers (e.g., Bonato, Zorzi,
& Umiltà, 2012; Vallesi, McIntosh, & Stuss, 2011).
The kappa effect is one of the famous illusions involving
spatiotemporal integration in perception (Cohen, Hansel, &
Sylvester, 1953; Jones & Huang, 1982). This effect takes
place, for example, with three flashes, A, B and C, which
are presented successively at equal temporal intervals. Two
neighboring time intervals, A-B and B-C, are perceived as
equal to each other if these flashes are aligned at equal
spatial intervals. However, A-B duration is perceived as
shorter than B-C duration, despite the physical equality of
these durations, if B is spatially closer to A than to C; as
well, A-B duration is perceived as longer than B-C duration
if B is spatially closer to C than to A. The effect is thus

interpreted as indicating a perceptual tendency to
overestimate duration when spatial distance is increased.
The kappa effect is explained by the imputed-velocity
model, positing the constancy of motional speed or velocity
(Alards-Tomalin, Leboe-McGowan, & Mondor, 2013;
Henry & McAuley, 2009; Jones, & Huang, 1982; ten
Hoopen, Miyauchi, & Nakajima, 2008). According to this
model, the kappa-effect (three-stimuli) pattern is perceived
as consisting of a single object appearing three times,
instead of three discrete objects appearing successively.
This single object is perceived as passing through space
with constant speed. Speed constancy is physically kept
when three stimuli are presented at equal temporal intervals
and at equal spatial distances, but not kept if the middle
stimulus is made close to the initial or to the last one in
space, when time intervals are kept equal. This speed
inconstancy, however, is re-adjusted by the perceptual
system. The first duration is perceived as shorter than the
second one when the middle stimulus is spatially close to
the initial one, while the first duration is perceived as longer
than the second one when the middle stimulus is close to the
last one, so that the single object is perceived as moving
between three spatial locations with constant speed.
The imputed-velocity model does not help to predict any
spatial effects on the perception of single time intervals
delimited by two signals. Indeed, the presentation of only
two signals does not imply whether speed is constant or not.
Several studies nevertheless have demonstrated phenomena
that seemed to be variations of the kappa effect with single
intervals. Price-Williams (1954) conducted an experiment
where participants adjusted a single time interval between
two flashes and made it equivalent to another interval (the
adjustment method), and indicated that intervals are
perceived as longer when they are delimited by two flashes
located further away from each other. Grondin (1998)
conducted an experiment where participants categorized
single time intervals delimited by two flashes as short or
long (the single-stimulus method), and found (in
Experiment 2) that participants tended to respond “long”
when the first and second flashes were located on the left

2519

and right side, or the right and left side, respectively,
compared to when both stimuli were delivered from an
identical location on the left or the right side.
However, Guay and Grondin (2001) indicated that longer
spatial distance resulted in shorter perceived duration,
instead of longer, with single intervals. In their experiment,
each of the two flashes was delivered from one of the three
locations aligned on a vertical axis; the above (A), the
middle (M), and the below (B). Participants tended to judge
empty time intervals delimited by A and B as “short”
compared to intervals delimited by A and M or by M and B.
Since, in Grondin (1998), perceived duration increased
when two stimuli were delivered from different locations
aligned on a horizontal axis, the vertical and the horizontal
presentations of two flashes might have different effects on
perceived duration. However, in Guay and Grondin’s study,
M was located on the central visual field (fixation point)
while A and B were located on the peripheral field. This
visual-field difference might have affected the results.
Indeed, Aedo-Jury and Pins (2010) reported that empty time
intervals were perceived as shorter when two stimuli were
delivered from a location further away from fovea.
Given the small number of relevant studies with single
intervals, it would make sense to re-examine whether
spatiotemporal integration would occur with single intervals
delimited by two successive flashes. In the present
experiment, two flashes were located on identical or
different locations but both in the peripheral field. These
flashes were aligned on a horizontal or a vertical axis. The
method was almost compatible with that adopted by
Grondin (1998).

Figure 1: Experimental settings.

Method
Participants
Seventeen participants, including an author T.K., were
recruited. They were students or employees at Kyushu
University, 6 males and 11 females, aged 19-32 years. They
self-reported having normal non-corrected or corrected
visual acuity.

Apparatus and stimuli
In order to guarantee the good timing accuracy of
presentation of two flashes, we made equipment consisting
of two light emitting diodes (LEDs) as used in Arao,
Suetomi and Nakajima (2000). The timing accuracy of the
equipment was indeed checked by conducting physical
measurements with a photo diode. Two 5-mm round red
LEDs (OptoSupply OSR6LU5B64A-5V) were lit or unlit by
electric currents that were outputted from a 2-channel audio
amplifier (audio-technica AT-HA20) connected to a
computer (Epson AT990E). The electric signals of two
successive flashes were digitally generated and saved in a
stereo WAV file that was sampled at 44100 Hz and
quantized to 16 bits. Two channels of the WAV file
corresponded to the two LEDs. Signals for lighting the
LEDs were 3000-Hz 20-ms sinusoidal waveforms; these
sinusoids resulted in alternating currents but the LEDs could
rectify the currents. Amplitude rose and decayed during 5
ms with raised-cosine ramps at the beginning and the end of
each sinusoidal signal, these ramps being included in the
signal length. Thus, empty time intervals were delimited by
two 20-ms flashes (including 5-ms rise and decay times).
Microsoft Visual Basic 2012 was used to generate
waveforms and to make a computer program conducting the
experiment.
Empty time intervals were manipulated in terms of
duration from the termination of the preceding flash to the
onset of the following flash (i.e., they were inter-stimulus
intervals). They lasted either 220 or 280 ms.
The two LEDs were attached near the edges of a square
white board, which was located in front of a computer
display (Figure 1). The board had a hall at its center, and a
part of the computer display could be seen through this hall.
A red cross of around 5 mm that participants fixated was
presented on the center of the display. This cross and the
LEDs were aligned on a horizontal or a vertical axis. The
direction of the LEDs (horizontal or vertical) was changed
by rotating the white board. The LEDs were located on the
left side (L) and the right side (R) to the fixation point when
they were aligned horizontally, while they were on the
upper side (U) and the bottom side (B) when aligned
vertically. Two flashes were emitted from identical or
different LEDs, resulting in four conditions for each
direction: LL, LR, RL and RR for the horizontal direction;
UU, UB, BU and BB for the vertical direction. Each LED
was 18° apart from the fixation point in visual angle.
Participants were seated about 1 m in front of the board.

2520

In order to avoid adaptation and afterimage effects on
retina, flashes were presented in a normally illuminated
room as in Arao et al. (2000) and Price-Williams (1954),
instead of a darkroom. The luminance of the white board
was between 16 and 30 cd/m2. The luminance of the flashes
was above 250 cd/m2 when measured 1 m in front of the
board. However, due to the very small size of the LEDs, it
was technically difficult to specify precise luminance values
of the flashes. In order to cancel out potential luminance
difference between the two LEDs, the location of the LEDs
was interchanged between nine participants and eight
participants.

Design and procedure
The present experiment was based on a 2 (directions) × 4
(locations) × 2 (durations) design. The two direction
conditions were presented in separate sessions whose order
was counterbalanced and the statistical analysis was
conducted separately on these conditions. Each of the two
sessions was divided into two sub-sessions, each one
consisting of five blocks. In each block, the eight patterns (4
locations × 2 durations) were presented four times each in a
random order.
The categorization method (or the signal-detection-theory
approach) as used in Grondin (1998) was adopted.
Participants were instructed to respond “short” when an
inter-stimulus interval delimited by two flashes was briefer
than 250 ms (i.e., 220 ms) and to respond “long” when the
interval was longer than 250 ms (280 ms). After the
response, a feedback message indicating whether the
response was correct or incorrect was presented at the center
of the display during 1.2 s. The next trial started 1 s after the
termination of the feedback.
Participants responded by pressing a button of a computer
mouse. In one sub-session, participants pressed the left and
the right buttons for responding “short” and “long,”
respectively. In the other sub-session, they pressed on the
right and the left buttons for responding “short” and “long,”
respectively. The order of these sub-sessions was
counterbalanced.
Participants were instructed to respond as correctly as
possible, but for the first few trials of the first block, they
were allowed to choose “short” or “long” randomly because
they did not know how long the around-250-ms interval
would be perceived as. Thus, the first block of each subsession was regarded as training and removed from the data
analysis. Participants were instructed not to adjust their
perceived duration according to spatial distance between
presented stimuli. They were also instructed not to count the
cadence or make sounds synchronized with flashes (e.g.,
hand tapping and internal voicing) for discrimination. Hand
tapping and internal voicing might reduce the spatial effects
because sounds were made at a constant location.
A break of a few seconds was taken between the blocks.
Each session took about 30 min and both sessions were
conducted in one day.

Dependent variables
As mentioned earlier, the first block of each sub-session was
regarded as training and removed from the data analysis.
The two sub-sessions were collapsed, resulting in 32
responses for each session, for each duration and for each
location condition (2 sub-sessions × 4 blocks × 4 responses).
Two signal-detection-theory measures, d’ and β, were
estimated from participants’ responses as in Grondin (1998).
d’ indicates how well participants discriminate between the
220-ms and the 280-ms intervals; a higher value indicates
better discrimination. β indicates how likely participants
were to perceive intervals as “long” instead of “short”; a
lower value indicates that participants were likely to
respond “long.” Note that β is usually used in the literature
to express the tendency for participants to prefer responding
one of the two alternatives in detection tasks, while in the
present study this measure is interpreted as a sign of
perceived duration (see also Kuroda & Grondin, 2013); if
intervals are perceived as longer, participants should more
frequently respond “long” instead of “short.”

2521

Figure 2: Mean log10β of each location condition for the
horizontal (upper panel) and for the vertical condition
(lower panel). Bars are standard error of mean between
participants.

ANOVA was based on a two-way (2 × 2) factorial design
with repeated measures and based on linear mixed
algorithms where compound symmetry was adopted as the
covariance matrix structure. The first factor and the second
factor were the preceding flash’s location and the following
flash’s location, respectively (left vs. right for the horizontal
session; upper vs. bottom for the vertical session). Main
effects could reveal whether the location of each flash, per
se, changed results, whereas the interaction was of interest
for the current discussion. The interaction will be significant
if perceived duration change when the preceding and the
following flashes were delivered from different locations
compared to an identical location.

Results

Figure 3: Mean d’ of each location condition for the
horizontal (upper panel) and for the vertical condition
(lower panel). Bars are standard error of mean between
participants.
d’ was given by Zfalse minus Zhit (Macmillan, & Creelman,
2005). Zhit is a z score of one minus the hit probability and
Zfalse is a z score of one minus the false-alarm probability.
The hit probability here means how frequently participants
correctly responded “long” when the interval was actually
long (i.e., 280 ms). The false-alarm probability means how
frequently participants wrongly responded “long” when the
interval was actually short (i.e., 220-ms). d’ was more than
0 except in 3 cases out of 136 (17 participants × 4 locations
× 2 directions).
β was given by dividing Yhit by Yfalse, which were the yaxis values of standard normal distribution corresponding to
Zhit and Zfalse, respectively (Macmillan, & Creelman, 2005).
However, we indeed used log10β instead of β for keeping the
linearity of scale and using zero as equal responses of
“short” and “long.”

Statistical analysis
Statistical comparison was conducted separately on the two
direction (horizontal and vertical) sessions with an analysis
of variance (ANOVA; with SPSS PASW 18.00). This

The mean log10β of each experimental condition is shown in
Figure 2. For the horizontal session, the results of the linear
mixed ANOVA indicated that LR and RL conditions led to
lower log10β (longer perceived duration) than LL and RR
conditions. Indeed, neither the preceding-location effect,
F(1, 48) = 0.122, p = .729, nor the following-location effect
was significant, F(1, 48) = 0.011, p = .916, while the
interaction was significant, F(1, 48) = 7.100, p = .010. Note
that in this model the degree of freedom for denominators
was given by (2 preceding × 2 following locations – 1) ×
(17 participants – 1). For the vertical session, whereas BU
and BB seemed to result in lower log10β than UU and UB,
the preceding-location effect was only marginally
significant, F(1, 48) = 3.469, p = .069, and the followinglocation effect was not significant, F(1, 48) < 0.001, p
= .995. The interaction was not significant, F(1, 48) < 0.001,
p = .987.
The mean d’ of each experimental condition is shown in
Figure 3. For the horizontal session, the significant
interaction, F(1, 48) = 8.918, p = .004, indicated that
delivering two flashes from an identical location (LL and
RR) resulted in higher d’ than delivering them from
different locations (LR and RL). The preceding-location
effect was not significant, F(1, 48) = 0.481, p = .491, while
the following-location effect was significant, F(1, 48) =
4.124, p = .048. For the vertical session, the precedinglocation effect was significant, F(1, 48) = 5.931, p = .019,
indicating that d’ was higher when the preceding flash was
delivered from the upper side than when delivered from the
bottom side. Neither the following-location effect, F(1, 48)
= 0.030, p = .862, nor the interaction, F(1, 48) = 1.461, p
= .233, was significant.

Discussion
Empty time intervals were perceived as longer when these
intervals were marked by two successive flashes delivered
from different locations than from an identical location, but
only when the flashes were presented in the horizontal
direction. Indeed, participants more frequently responded
“long” (lower log10β) in the LR and RL sequences than in
the LL and RR sequences, thus replicating the results of
Grondin (1998). However, this identical- vs. different-

2522

locations difference was not observed when two flashes
were presented in the vertical direction. Guay and Grondin
(2001) also reported, as mentioned in the Introduction, that
empty time intervals were not perceived as longer but rather
were perceived as shorter when they were marked by two
flashes further away from each other in the vertical direction.
However, Cohen, Hansel and Sylvester (1955) demonstrated
the occurrence of the kappa effect when three flashes
(instead of two) were presented in the vertical direction
(although there were some differences between downward
and upward presentations). Given this, the presentation of
two successive signals seemed to have little effect on
inducing spatiotemporal integration, compared to that of
three signals resulting in the kappa effect, when these
signals were presented vertically. The future researches
should use three successive flashes with the same
experimental settings as in the present experiment.
It seemed disputable to posit that a common mechanism
underlies the spatial effects observed in the horizontal
condition of the present experiment and the kappa effect that
occurs with three signals. As mentioned in the Introduction,
the kappa effect is attributed to the perceptual tendency to
keep the constancy of motion speed, but the presentation of
only two signals in the present experiment does not imply
whether speed is constant or not. Instead, the results of the
horizontal condition might be attributed to the fact that two
flashes stimulated different cortical hemispheres or an
identical hemisphere. In the LR and RL sequences, two
flashes were delivered from different visual fields, resulting
in the stimulation of different cortical hemispheres. In the
LL and RR sequences, both flashes were delivered from
either the left or the right field, resulting in the stimulation
of one hemisphere. The processing of empty time intervals
across different hemispheres might have resulted in longer
perceived duration than the processing of intervals within an
identical hemisphere. This argument becomes plausible
when one considers what is indicated by Grondin, Kuroda
and Mitsudo (2011) and by Kuroda and Grondin (2013).
Both studies used empty time intervals of around 500 ms
delimited by two electro-tactile signals. Grondin et al.
reported that empty time intervals were perceived as longer
when two signals were presented to different (left and right)
hands than when presented to the same hand. Kuroda and
Grondin, however, reported that there were some individual
differences regarding whether intervals were perceived as
shorter or longer when two signals were delivered to
different (middle and little) fingers of the same hand,
compared with when delivered to an identical finger. In
Grondin et al., two signals stimulated different or identical
hemispheres, but in Kuroda and Grondin, two signals
stimulated different or identical cortical regions of the same
hemisphere. Moreover, Grondin et al. reported that
discrimination was impaired (the Weber fraction was
increased) when two signals stimulated different
hemispheres (hand) compared with when stimulating the
same hemisphere. This was consistent with the results of the
present experiment where discrimination was impaired (d’

was decreased) when two signals were delivered from
different (left and right) visual fields than when delivered
from the same field. Note that any identical- vs. differentlocations differences were not observed in the vertical
condition where each flash stimulated both hemispheres
regardless of whether these flashes were delivered from
identical or different locations. Given this, duration
processing of single empty time intervals might be
modulated by whether two signals stimulate identical or
different cortical hemispheres, instead of how long these
flashes are apart in the external space.
Finally, it is interesting that discrimination was improved
when the first flash was delivered from the upper side than
when delivered from the bottom side. This result did not
seem consistent with the idea that the resolution of spatial
attention is more precise for lower visual fields (see He,
Cavanagh, & Intriligator, 1997). If discrimination had
gained benefits from spatial attention paid to the first flash,
it should have been improved when the first flash was
delivered from the bottom instead of the upper side.
Alternatively, the result might be compatible with that
reported by Previc and Naegele (2001) where participants
faster detected targets delivered from upper fields. Duration
processing might be facilitated when its beginning is
marked by a signal that can be easily detected.

Acknowledgments
The first author is the Research Fellow of Japan Society for
the Promotion of Science. This work was made possible by
research grants awarded to TK by JSPS KAKENHI Grant
Number 25-3275 and to SG by the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Council of Canada. We would like to express
our gratitude to Yoshitaka Nakajima for useful comments to
prepare equipment.

References
Abe, S. (1935). Experimental study on the co-relation
between time and space. Tohoku Psychol Folia, 3, 53-68
Aedo-Jury, F., & Pins, D. (2010). Time compression
increases with eccentricity: A magnocellular property.
NeuroReport, 21, 84-89.
Alards-Tomalin, D., Leboe-McGowan, L. C., Mondor, T. A.
(2013). Examining auditory kappa effects through
manipulating intensity differences between sequential
tones. Psychological Research, 77, 480-491.
Arao, H., Suetomi, D., & Nakajima, Y. (2000). Does timeshrinking take place in visual temporal patterns?
Perception, 29, 819-830.
Bonato, M., Zorzi, M., & Umiltà, C. (2012). When time is
space: Evidence for a mental time line. Neuroscience and
Biobehavioral Reviews, 36, 2257–2273.
Cohen, J., Hansel, C. E. M., & Sylvester, J. D. (1953). A
new phenomenon in time judgment. Nature, 172, 901.
Cohen, J., Hansel, C. E. M., & Sylvester, J. D. (1955).
Interdependence in judgments of space, time and
movement. Acta Psychologica, 11, 360-372.

2523

Grondin, S. (1998). Judgments of the duration of visually
marked empty time intervals: Linking perceived duration
and sensitivity. Perception & Psychophysics, 60, 319-330.
Grondin, S., Kuroda, T., & Mitsudo, T. (2011). Spatial
effects on tactile duration categorization. Canadian
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 65, 163-167.
Guay, I., & Grondin, S. (2001). Influence on time interval
categorization of distance between markers located on a
vertical plane. In E. Sommerfeld, R. Kompass, T.
Lachman (Eds.), Proceedings of the 17th Annual Meeting
of the International Society for Psychophysics (pp. 391396). Berlin, Germany: Pabst Science Publishers.
He, S., Cavanagh, P., & Intriligator, J. (1997). Attentional
resolution. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 1, 115-121.
Helson, H. (1930). The tau effect: an example of
psychological relativity. Science, 71, 536-537.
Henry, M. J. & McAuley, J. D. (2009). Evaluation of an
imputed pitch velocity model of the auditory kappa effect.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 35, 551-564.
Jones, B., & Huang, Y. L. (1982). Space-time dependencies
in psychophysical judgment of extent and duration:
Algebraic models of the tau and kappa effect.
Psychological Bulletin, 91, 128-142.
Kuroda, T., & Grondin, S. (2013). Discrimination is not
impaired when more cortical space between two electrotactile
markers
increases
perceived
duration.
Experimental Brain Research, 224, 303-312.
Macmillan, N. A., & Creelman, C. D. (2005). Detection
Theory: A User’s Guide (2nd Ed.), New York, USA:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Previc, F. H., & Naegele, P. D. (2001). Target-tilt and
vertical-hemifield asymmetries in free-scan search for 3D targets. Perception & Psychophysics, 63, 445-457.
Price-Williams, D. R. (1954). The kappa effect. Nature, 173,
363-364.
ten Hoopen, G. Miyauchi, R. & Nakajima, Y. (2008). Timebased illusions in the auditory mode. In S. Grondin (Ed.).
Psychology of time (pp. 139-187). Bingley, UK: Emerald
Group Publishing.
Vallesi, A., McIntosh, A. R., & Stuss, D. T. (2011). How
time modulates spatial responses. Cortex, 47, 148-156.

2524

