UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Moral Concerns on Negotiations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/13h967h3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Kim, Eunkyung
Dehghani, Morteza
Kim, Yoo Kyoung
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Moral Concerns on Negotiations
Eunkyung Kim (eunkyung@usc.edu)1, Morteza Dehghani (mdehghan@usc.edu)1,
Yoo Kyoung Kim (yookyouk@usc.edu)2, Peter J. Carnevale (peter.carnevale@marshall.usc.edu)2,
Jonathan Gratch (gratch@ict.usc.edu)3
1

Brain Creativity Institute, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089 USA
2
Marshall School of Business, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089
3
Institute for Creative Technologies, University of Southern California, Playa Vista, CA 90094
Abstract
There is now considerable evidence that emotion plays an
important role in negotiation. Emotions, such as anger and
happiness, affect concession-making, not only in human vs.
human negotiations but also in human vs. agent negotiations.
Recent research has demonstrated the impact of emotional
expressions in morally-charged negotiations. Thus, taking
people’s moral concerns into account is crucial for building
agents that operate in morally sensitive domains. This paper
explores the interplay between people’s moral concerns,
emotional expressions and concession-making during a
morally charged negotiation. Our results demonstrate that
participants who had stronger concerns for the Individualizing
foundations (Harm and Fairness) make greater concessions
for sacred negotiation items when faced with a sad opponent
than an angry opponent. Also, we find that participants who
had high Binding foundations (In-group, Authority and
Purity) are more sensitive to social status, and make greater
concessions in scenarios that involve agents in a higher social
status.
Keywords: Emotion; Moral Foundations Theory; Sacred
values; Negotiation; Agent Modeling.

Introduction
With the growing interest in understanding the role of
emotional expressions in negotiation (e.g., Barry, Fulmer &
Goates, 2006; Van Kleef et al., 2010), many studies have
investigated how emotional expression affects negotiation
processes and outcomes (Ames & Johar, 2009; Choi et al.,
2012; de Melo et al., 2014). For instance, negotiators
concede more when their opponent expresses anger instead
of happiness (Van Kleef, De Dreu & Manstead, 2004a,
2004b). Sinaceur & Tiedens (2006) further reveal that the
effect of anger on concession works only when anger
recipients have poor alternatives. The past works on
emotional expression suggest that emotion plays an
important role as a signal (e.g., anger indicates a
negotiator’s dissatisfaction with his opponent’s offer).
Furthermore, negotiators respond to emotional expressions
depending on their own conditions (e.g., alternatives). Thus,
it is important to understand what moderates a negotiator’s
reaction to emotional expression.
Past studies have shown that positive moods in
negotiation foster concession-making (e.g., Carnevale &
Isen, 1986). Mood effects may be mediated by expression of
positive emotion, for example, a positive-mood induction
procedure may lead negotiators to smile more and this
smiling may have an impact on perceptions and concession-

making. Regardless, the possible interaction of emotion and
other variables, for example, cognition as in decision frame
(Carnevale, 2008), or motivation as in moral concerns, is a
domain highly worthy of inquiry.
Although some studies have tried to understand how
people’s innate personality interacts with their emotion
during negotiation games (Bolton, Katok, & Zwick, 1998;
Batson & Moran, 1999), little research has paid attention to
how moral concerns impact reactions to emotional
expressions and affect concession-making. Our recent
research demonstrates that emotional expressions can
potentially shift moral concerns during a negotiation, such
that displays of anger would backfire if the negotiator
associates moral significance to the objects of the
negotiation, whereas displays of sadness promote higher
concession-making (Dehghani, Gratch and Carnevale,
2012). Because morality significantly influences decisionmaking (e.g., Sjöberg & Winroth, 1986; Gintis et al., 2003),
the present research aims to examine the role of people’s
moral concerns on how they react to emotional expressions
and make concessions.
Adapting the Moral Foundations Theory (Haidt &
Graham, 2007; Haidt & Joseph, 2007; Graham, 2013), we
examine effects of two different types of foundations (i.e.,
Individualizing foundations and Binding foundations) on
concession-making. We predict that people who have
stronger Individualizing foundations would react more to
emotional expressions because the Individualizing
foundations indicate the tendency to care about other
people’s emotions (whether others are emotionally or
physically suffering, or being treated fairly) and therefore,
that would effect their concession-making. On the other
hand, we predict that people with stronger Binding
foundations be more sensitive to their negotiation partner’s
social status because Binding foundations indicate concern
about other people’s roles in the group (whether negotiation
partner is their boss or co-worker).
Understanding the interaction between moral concerns
and emotion are crucial in designing autonomous decisionmaking agents that operate in morally sensitive domains.
Progress in agent research has enabled us to work closely
with software agents in morally sensitive situations where
agents’ actions may lead to significant results, such as loss
of life (Tambe, 2011; Dehghani et al., 2013). Therefore, it is
important to better understand the interactions between
people’s moral concerns, emotion and agent decisionmaking strategies. Our results suggest that incorporating

2495

Sacred-Objects Negotiation Task

understanding of people’s moral concerns and their
reactions to emotional expressions are crucial in designing
such agents.
The paper is structured as follows: First, we discuss the
Moral Foundations Theory. Next, we introduce the
framework we used in our experiment. Then, we describe
our experimental design and hypotheses. Finally, we explain
our results and future work.

Moral Foundations Theory
In Moral Foundations Theory (Haidt & Graham, 2007;
Haidt & Joseph, 2007; Graham, 2013), Graham, Haidt and
Nosek (2009) introduce two different types of foundations:
Individualizing foundations and Binding foundations. They
refer to the Harm/Care and Fairness/Reciprocity foundations
as ‘‘Individualizing” foundations because of the focus on
individual rights, and they refer to the In-group/Loyalty,
Authority/Subversion, and Purity/Sanctity foundations as
‘‘Binding” foundations because of the focus on binding
individuals within groups through duties and loyalty. Five
moral sensitivities in both types of foundations are:

Dehghani, Gratch and Carnevale (2012) introduced the
Sacred-Objects Negotiation Task, a web-based multi-round
negotiation task where a participant and a computer-agent
can make a proposal in turn to negotiate items (Figure 1).
Four different items are placed on a trading board
initially, and participants can move items on the board into
own possession or into opponent’s possession by dragging
and dropping the items. After each round, the player who
received the proposal can choose either to accept the
proposal or make a new proposal. Both the agent and the
participant can express their emotional reaction using facial
display during the game.
There are six rounds of negotiation during which each
player makes six proposals in total.

• Harm/Care: A concern for caring for and protecting
individuals from harm.
• Fairness/Reciprocity: A concern for justice, rights and
autonomy.
• In-group/Loyalty: A concern with issues of loyalty and
self-sacrifice for ones in-group.
• Authority/Subversion: A concern with issues associated
with showing respect and obedience to authority.
• Purity/Sanctity: A concern for purity and sanctity.
The Moral Foundations Theory argues that each of these
five foundations serve distinct but related social functions
and the degree of emphasis on these foundations varies
across cultures. This theory has been used to investigate
political cultures (e.g., liberals and conservatives) and
judgments about cultural issues (e.g., abortion, immigration,
and same-sex marriage) (Koleva et al., 2012). Specifically,
Graham, Haidt and Nosek (2009) demonstrate that liberals
place more significance on the Harm/Care and
Fairness/Reciprocity foundations relative to the other three
foundations, whereas conservatives place a relatively
equally focus on all five foundations.
We hypothesize that Individual foundations would
interact with the agent’s expressed emotion and Binding
foundations would interact with the social status of the
opponent. This is because we expect Individualizing
foundations are closely related to an individual’s emotional
status, whereas Binding principles are more related to
people’s roles in the group. To measure the degree to which
people value each of five foundations, we used the 32-item
Moral Foundations Questionnaire (MFQ) (Graham et al.,
2011).

Figure 1: Sacred-Objects Negotiation Task Interface.

Agent Expressions
Agents follow one of two possible facial display policies
depending on the condition: anger or sadness. Regardless of
a participant’s offer, the angry agent always displays anger
on rounds 1, 3, and 5, and returning to a neutral face after
five seconds. The sad agent acts in the same way but
displays sadness instead of anger. In all other rounds, both
agents display a neutral face (Figure 2).

2496

Figure 2: Facial displays used in the experiment
(Anger, Neutrality and Sadness)

Agent Offers

Design

All agents in this study follow one of the following two
strategies. In the first strategy, the agent starts with making
no concessions at all (non-conceder agent) and concedes
little through the negotiation. In the second strategy, the
agent starts with some concession (conceder) and gradually
increases its concession. Both strategies involve more and
more concession over time.
There are four different groups of items in the
negotiations ([medicine packages, water bottles, food cans,
hand sanitizers]), with five items per group. The negotiation
strategy of the non-conceder agent is as follows: Round 1:
[0, 0, 0, 0]; Round 2: [0, 1, 2, 2]; Round 3: [1, 0, 1, 2];
Round 4: [1, 1, 3, 2]; Round 5: [1, 2, 4, 4]; Round 6: [2, 1,
2, 2], where the numbers in the brackets represent how
many times in each group the agent chooses to give to the
participant. The negotiation strategy of the conceder agent is
as follows: Round 1: [2, 1, 1, 1]; Round 2: [2, 1, 2, 2];
Round 3: [2, 2, 2, 3]; Round 4: [3, 1, 1, 1]; Round 5: [3, 2,
1, 2]; Round 6: [3, 3, 2, 2].
To decide whether to accept or reject a participant’s
offer, the agent uses hidden payoff values for each group of
items; the value of medicine package, a water bottle, a food
can, and a hand sanitizer are estimated as 50, 10, 5, and 1
respectively. The agent accepts the offer only when the
received offer has greater or equal values to the one the
agent is about to make. Otherwise, it rejects the offer and
proposes a new offer.

The experiment follows a 2 X 2 X 2 between-subject
factorial design with the following independent variables:
Agent’s expressed emotion (anger vs. sadness),
Experimental scenario (boss vs. co-worker), and Moral
concern cluster (high Individualizing foundations vs. low
Individualizing foundations). The main dependent variable
in our experiment is demand difference of medicine, which
is calculated by subtracting demand of medicine in round
one from demand of medicine in the last round of
negotiation. Higher demand difference of medicine indicates
higher concession on medicine in the last round of
negotiation compared to the first round. The maximum
demand difference is five, and the minimum demand
difference is zero in our setting.

Experiment
In the following experiment, we investigate the interplay of
moral concerns and the interpersonal effects of emotion in
the Sacred-Objects Negotiation Task described above.
As discussed previously, our first hypothesis is that strong
preference on Individual foundations (Harm and Fairness)
would yield larger concessions to sad compared to angry
agent on items that are of moral importance to participants.
Secondly, we hypothesize Binding foundations (In-group,
Authority and Purity) interacts with opponent’s social status
(boss vs. co-worker). We suggest that people with high
Binding foundations concede more to their boss than their
co-worker, while people with low Binding foundations
behave reversely.

Participants
153 American Amazon-Turk workers (age: 35.1, gender:
54.4% female) were paid $1 each to participate in our study.
We set the following qualification requirement in the
Amazon-Turk; to avoid novice Amazon-Turk workers, we
limited participants to ones having greater than or equal to
100 approved HIT. To avoid excessively professional
survey-takers, we also limited participants to ones having
less than 10,000 HIT. On average it took each participant 15
minutes and 21 seconds to complete our task.

2497

There has been an earthquake in the town you live in
and many have been injured. All roads to your town
have been blocked and as a result aid is coming in
very slowly. Because of this every family has to split
packages of aid sent using helicopters with your [A:
boss] [B: co-worker]'s family.
You and the family that have to split the aids with
each other, both have babies who have been injured
and have developed infections. The only way to
control the spread of infection, which if not stopped
will become lethal, is to use penicillin. You are also
running low on food, but have enough clean water that
would last you for several days. You have enough
soaps, so you might not need any hand sanitizers.
Given the circumstances, you know that no other aid
package will be received for another week.
In the task, to review, you will negotiate with the
other family over the aid packages that include
1. Medicine (penicillin)
2. Water bottles
3. Canned food
4. Hand sanitizer
You have to negotiate how these items have to be
split between your family and your [A: boss] [B: coworker]'s family. You do not know how much food
and water the other family has.
The negotiation is done in a sequence of alternating
offers. You will make the first offer. The other
negotiator may or may not accept your offer. If it does
not accept it, that is, if it rejects your offer, it will send
you a new offer. You can either accept or reject its
offer. If you accept it, you will get to keep the items
that you did not give them. If you reject their offer,
you can make another offer and submit it to them.
Both families will have a chance to make 6 offers in
this negotiation.
Figure 3: Participants were presented either
scenario A (boss) or scenario B (co-worker)

Procedure
After agreeing on the consent form, each participant was
first given the 32-item MFQ. In the MFQ, we inserted two
questions with clear correct answer to ensure that the
participants were filling out the questionnaire in good faith.
Participants who missed the filter question were not allowed
to participate in the experiment. Participants then received
one of the two scenarios described in Figure 3. We
differentiate the hierarchy of the opponent in two levels,
boss and co-worker.
After reading one of the scenarios, participants were
asked to take a quiz, which was designed to check their
understanding of the experimental scenario. There were five
questions (e.g., Which item in your possession is running
low?; What is the only way to control the spread of
infection in your baby?). If they missed any of the
questions, they were asked to read the scenario again until
they gave correct answers to all five questions in the quiz.
This was to ensure that all participants completely
understood the experimental scenario and would provide
reliable data.
We then assessed participants’ values regarding the
medicine package using Baron and Spranca’s (1997)
measure of sacred value. In line with this measure, we asked
participants “How do you feel about giving up the medicine
package?” and they received the following four choices:
a.
b.
c.
d.

I think this definitely needs to happen.
I do not object to this.
This is acceptable only if the benefits of trading the
medicine are great enough.
This should not be done no matter how great the
benefits.

We categorized participants who selected “d” as having a
sacred value for the medicine package. Participants then
played the Sacred-Objects Negotiation Task with one of the
agents described above (conceder vs. non-conceder, sad vs.
angry). Participants were not told they would play with
artificial agents. To simulate that the participants were
playing other humans, we added randomized delays in
response time (3~8 sec). During the game-play, participants

could review the scenario anytime by pressing the “review
scenario” button on the top of the interface.
After completing the Sacred-Objects Negotiation Task,
we asked participants to fill out a short demographic
questionnaire.

Results and Analysis
Participants who dropped out of the negotiation before
Round 3 were excluded from the analysis (N = 20) because
they made only one or two offers and were exposed to the
emotional displays of the agent only once. There was no
effect of strategy, so we collapsed across agent strategy
conditions. Among a total of 133 participants, 96
participants (72.2%) regarded the medicine package as a
sacred item, hence we compared participants who perceived
medicine as sacred items compared to those who did not.
Extending the previous research, we hypothesized that an
agent’s anger and sadness expression would interact with a
negotiator’s moral concerns. We clustered participants
based on their concerns on Individualizing (Harm and
Fairness) and Binding (In-group, Authority and Purity)
foundations (measured using the MFQ).

Individualizing Foundations
Individualizing foundations (Harm and Fairness)
concentrate on the individual as the locus of moral value
(Haidt & Graham, 2007). We hypothesized there would be
behavioral differences in how participants with high or low
Individualizing foundations negotiate in a moral domain.
We added participants’ scores on the Individualizing
foundations, and performed a median split on our data using
these scores. We named the people who had high Harm and
Fairness values as highHF and low Harm and Fairness value
as lowHF.
The data was analyzed using a two way ANOVA with
three between-subject factors, the agent’s expressed emotion
(anger vs. sadness), participants’ perception to the medicine
package (sacred value vs. no sacred value) and moral
foundation cluster (high HF vs. low HF). There was a
significant interaction between agent emotion and sacred
value (F(1,83) = 4.248, p = 0.04). This is a replication of

Figure 4: Demand difference for medicine in highHF cluster (left), in total population (center), in lowHF cluster (right)

2498

Dehghani, Gratch and Carnevale (2012) where they
demonstrate that people conceded more to a sad agent than
an angry agent when they perceived a negotiation item as
sacred, but act in an opposite way when perceiving an item
as non-sacred one (Figure 4, center). There was also a
marginal three-way interaction between agent emotion,
sacred values and HF cluster (F(1,83) = 3.189, p = 0.07). To
further investigate this three-way interaction, we analyzed
the data separately for the two HF clusters (highHF vs.
lowHF). In the highHF cluster, ANOVA results indicate a
significant interaction between emotion and sacred values
(F(1,39) = 6.545, p = 0.01). Following up, T-tests show that
highHF participants conceded more on morally significant
items to sad agents compared to angry agents (t(26) = 2.598,
p = 0.01). However, the interaction between emotion and
sacred values is insignificant in lowHF cluster (F(1,44) =
0.077, p = 0.78).
We also analyzed participants’ frequency of expressed
emotions. Our results show that participants who have
higher Individualizing concerns expressed emotions more
frequently than those who have low Individualizing
concerns (t(131) = 2.003, p = 0.04).

Binding Foundations
Binding foundations (In-group, Authority and Purity)
concentrate on the group as the locus of moral value (Haidt
& Graham, 2007). We did the same clustering for Binding
foundations. We added participants’ In-group, Authority
and Purity values and divided all the participants in two
groups using the median. We referred to participants who
had high Binding foundation values as highIAP and low
Binding foundations as lowIAP.

Figure 5: Demand difference for medicine when
perceived as sacred item in high/low IAP cluster
As our two scenarios included two different levels of
hierarchy of the opponent (boss vs. co-worker), we expected
that participant’s level of Binding concerns would affect
their concession rate. We performed a 2 X 2 ANOVA,
where the first factor was the scenario (boss vs. co-worker)
and the second factor was IAP cluster. As expected, there
was a significant interaction between the scenario and the
IAP cluster for demand difference of medicine (F(1,67) =
5.162, p = 0.02) (Figure 5).

Discussion
In this experiment, we demonstrated that emotions in
morally charged negotiations interact with moral concerns.
Specifically, the moral concerns a person considers most
important are directly correlated with their behavior in
negotiations. The main findings include that Individualizing
foundations (Harm and Fairness) interact with reactions to
emotions, while Binding foundations (In-group, Authority
and Purity) interact with opponent’s social status rather than
reactions to emotions.
People with high Individualizing foundations show
greater concessions to sad compared to angry agents on
items that they associate a moral significance to, while they
show greater concessions to angry compared to sad agents
on items which they do not consider as morally significant.
In other words, for people who value Harm and Fairness
strongly, when sacred value items are at stake in a
negotiation, anger produces a counterproductive effect; that
is, concessions on morally significant items become larger
in the case of seeing the other player’s sad face and feeling
that the other player is weak. The nature of Individualizing
foundations can explain this interplay of emotions and
morality: this is due to valuing fairness and well-being of
individuals over other factors. The assumption made is that
the sad player has suffered some sort of injustice, or that the
sad player needs to be taken care of. Thus, people with high
Individualizing foundations make more concession on
morally significant items to sad agents in negotiations.
Another finding of this paper is that high Binding
foundations are correlated with the opponent’s social status
rather than opponent’s emotional expressions. People with
higher Binding foundations concede more to an opponent
with high social status than one with low social status. This
is because people with high Binding concerns tend to care
more about people’s roles in the group, rather than an
individual’s emotional status. Thus, a player with high
group standing will be more respected, feared, or admired
and a person with high Bindings concerns will concede
more to that player. This tendency is reversed in people with
lower Binding foundations, who care less about the
authority of the other side. They rather feel empathy for
their co-workers, so they make more concessions to their
co-workers.
These findings are important to understand what affects a
negotiator’s reaction to emotional expression, hence they
should be considered while designing autonomous agents
that are to operate in morally sensitive negotiations.
Considering that decision-making in morally sensitive
missions (e.g., military operations) often results in life or
death outcomes for humans (Dehghani et al., 2013),
accurate prediction of people’s concession-making would be
an important factor. For example, if a robot is trying to save
people from a disaster, based on that culture’s moral
concerns, it might be more effective for it to express sadness
to persuade them to leave their morally significant
possessions and escape from the dangerous area. Even
though not all moral concerns might apply in practice as we

2499

used a hypothetical scenario in our experiment, these
findings certainly suggest future direction of building agents
that operate in morally sensitive domains.
As a future work, we plan to conduct the same experiment
in an East Asian country to see if there are greater effects of
social status in a relatively hierarchical culture. Brett &
Okumura (1998) show the social status difference interacts
with power in hierarchical societies (e.g., Japan) relative to
egalitarian ones (e.g., the U.S.). In hierarchical societies, we
expect to replicate our results from this experiment. People
with high Binding foundations would concede morally
significant items more to an opponent with a high social
status than an opponent with a low social status, while
people with low Binding foundations would show the
reverse tendency. However, we expect that the overall
concession would be greater to the high social status
opponents in hierarchical societies compared to egalitarian
ones.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by AFOSR YIP
(FA9550-12-1-0361) to Morteza Dehghani, and in part by
NSF (IIS-1211064, SES-0836004).

References
Ames, D. R., & Johar, G. V. (2009). I'll Know What You're
Like When I See How You Feel How and When
Affective
Displays
Influence
Behavior-Based
Impressions. Psychological Science, 20(5), 586-593.
Baron, J., & Spranca, M. (1997). Protected values.
Organizational behavior and human decision processes,
70, 1-16.
Barry, B., Fulmer, I. S., & Goates, N. (2006). Bargaining
with feeling: Emotionality in and around negotiation.
Negotiation theory and research, 99-127.
Batson, C. D., & Moran, T. (1999). Empathy-induced
altruism in a prisoner’s dilemma. European Journal of
Social Psychology, 29(7), 909-924.
Bolton, G. E., Katok, E., & Zwick, R. (1998). Dictator game
giving: Rules of fairness versus acts of kindness.
International Journal of Game Theory, 27(2), 269-299.
Brett, J. M., & Okumura, T. (1998). Inter-and intracultural
negotiation: US and Japanese negotiators. Academy of
Management Journal, 41(5), 495-510.
Carnevale, P. J., & Isen, A. M. (1986). The influence of
positive affect and visual access on the discovery of
integrative
solutions
in
bilateral
negotiation.
Organizational behavior and human decision Processes,
37, 1-13.
Carnevale, P. J. (2008). Positive affect and decision frame in
negotiation. Group Decision and Negotiation, 17, 51-63.
Choi, A., Melo, C. D., Woo, W., & Gratch, J. (2012).
Affective engagement to emotional facial expressions of
embodied social agents in a decision-­‐making game.
Computer Animation and Virtual Worlds, 23, 331-342.
Dehghani, M., Gratch, J., & Carnevale P. (2012).
Interpersonal Effects of Emotions in Morally-charged

Negotiations. In the Proceedings of the 34th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (CogSci).
Dehghani, M., Immordino-Yang, M. H., Graham, J.,
Marsella, S., Forbus, K., Ginges J., Tambe, M. &
Maheswaran, R. (2013). Computational Models of Moral
Perception, Conflict & Elevation. In Proceedings of the
International Association for Computing and Philosophy
(IACAP) 2013, College Park, MD.
de Melo, C. M., Carnevale, P. J., Read, S. J., & Gratch, J.
(2014). Reading people’s minds from emotion
expressions in interdependent decision making. Journal of
personality and social psychology, 106(1), 73.
Gintis, H., Bowles, S., Boyd, R., & Fehr, E. (2003).
Explaining altruistic behavior in humans. Evolution and
Human Behavior, 24(3), 153-172.
Graham, J. (2013). Mapping the Moral Maps: From
Alternate Taxonomies to Competing Predictions.
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 17, 237-241.
Graham, J., Nosek, B., Haidt, J., Iyer, R., Koleva, S., &
Ditto, P. (2011). Mapping the moral domain. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 101, 366-385.
Haidt, J., & Graham, J. (2007). When morality opposes
justice: Conservatives have moral intuitions that liberals
may not recognize. Social Justice Research, 20, 98-116.
Haidt, J., & Joseph, C. (2007). The moral mind: How five
sets of innate intuitions guide the development of many
culture-specific virtues, and perhaps even modules. The
innate mind, 3, 367-392.
Koleva, S. P., Graham, J., Iyer, R., Ditto, P. H., & Haidt, J.
(2012). Tracing the threads: How five moral concerns
(especially Purity) help explain culture war attitudes.
Journal of Research in Personality, 46(2), 184-194.
Sinaceur, M., & Tiedens, L. Z. (2006). Get mad and get
more than even: When and why anger expression is
effective in negotiations. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 42(3), 314-322.c
Sjöberg, L., & Winroth, E. (1986). Risk, moral value of
actions, and mood. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology,
27(1), 191-208.
Tambe, M. (2011). Security and Game Theory: Algorithms,
Deployed Systems, Lessons Learned. Cambridge
University Press.
Van Kleef, G. A., De Dreu, C. K., & Manstead, A. S.
(2004a). The interpersonal effects of anger and happiness
in negotiations. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 86(1), 57.
Van Kleef, G. A., De Dreu, C. K., & Manstead, A. S.
(2004b). The interpersonal effects of emotions in
negotiations: A motivated information processing
approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
87, 510-528.
Van Kleef, G. A., De Dreu, C. K., & Manstead, A. S.
(2010). An interpersonal approach to emotion in social
decision making: The emotions as social information
model. Advances in experimental social psychology, 42,
45-96.

2500

