UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Text Exposure on Spoken Sentence Production

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0fj9s4h3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Montag, Jessica
MacDonald, Maryellen

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Text Exposure on Spoken Sentence Production
Jessica L. Montag (JLMONTAG@Indiana.Edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Maryellen C. MacDonald (MCMACDONALD@Wisc.Edu)
Department of Psychology, 1202 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA
Abstract
Adults are sophisticated language users, and there is much
debate as to the maturational and experiential changes that
occur throughout childhood to bring about these abilities. We
propose that the onset of literacy may be an important event
in the course of language development, as it marks a
qualitative shift in the linguistic patterns to which an
individual is exposed. In Experiment 1, we investigate the
frequencies of two complex sentence types in child-directed
speech and literature. In Experiment 2, these sentence types
are elicited from eight and twelve year old children and adults
in a picture-description production task. Differences between
written and spoken language predict both group differences
and individual differences in text exposure on the production
task. Linguistic experience gained from reading may affect
spoken production choices, and the onset of literacy may be
an important predictor for what in the laboratory is deemed
adult-like language use.
Keywords: Sentence production; relative clauses; corpus
analysis; literacy.

Introduction
By adulthood, language users can rapidly access their
knowledge of different patterns, at different grain sizes,
when producing and comprehending language.
This
sophisticated language ability takes time to develop, and
there is much debate as to the sorts of changes that occur
across the developmental trajectory that eventually yield
these language abilities. This is especially true of complex
sentences, particularly those containing relative clauses, as
these sentence types tend to have longer developmental
trajectories and even in adults are thought to tax working
memory or other language abilities (Gibson, 1998; Just &
Carpenter, 1992; Miller & Chomsky, 1963). Indeed, many
theories of language development suggest that children
struggle with complex sentences because they tax working
memory capacity (deVilliers et al., 1979) or reflect
children’s limited syntactic competence (Goodluck &
Tavakolian, 1982)
More recent theories suggest that children’s limited
linguistic experience may contribute to their difficulty with
these complex sentences. Children’s use of relative clauses
(Diessel & Tomasello, 2005) and other language
constructions tend to track their linguistic input (Bates &
MacWhinney, 1987; Cameron-Faulkner, Lieven &
Tomasello, 2003; Huttenlocher et al., 2002; Naigles & HoffGinsberg, 1998). Quantifying the types of experience that a

child may have with a particular sentence type may be
crucial for understanding children’s comprehension and
production behavior.
In order to quantify a child’s experience with a particular
sentence type, it is important to consider experience from
both the spoken, and when a child learns how to read, the
written domain. This is particularly true of sentences
containing object relative (1) and passive relative clauses
(2a,b), which are known to have different distributions in
written and spoken language in adult-directed sources (Reali
& Christiansen, 2007; Roland, Dick & Elman, 2007). These
systematically different linguistic patterns in written and
spoken language suggests that learning to read might mark
an important period of change in language development, in
which there is a qualitative shift in the pattern of language
statistics and individual encounters. The goal of the present
study is to determine whether these sentence types also
occur with different patterns in child-directed written and
spoken language, and use differences in the patterns
between these domains to make predictions about eight and
twelve-year old children and adults’ production patterns in a
picture-description production task.
1) Object Relative: The ball that the man is throwing
2a) Be-Passive Relative: The ball that is being thrown by
the man
2b) Get-Passive Relative: The ball that is getting thrown
by the man
These sentence types are a particularly interesting arena
to investigate effects of reading because previous research
suggests that in adult-directed sources, object relative
clauses (1) tend to be more frequent in spoken language
while passive relatives (2a,b) tend to be more frequent in
written language (Roland et al., 2007). If these patterns
appear in child-directed sources as well, we would predict
that older children, or children who are better readers, might
produce more passive relatives than younger children or
poorer readers. Previous work also suggests that in main
clause utterances, get-passives (2b) are more frequent in
spoken language than be-passives (2a), while opposite is
true of written language (Biber et al., 1999; Collins, 1996).
Again, we would predict that older children or better readers
should produce more be-passives, consistent with their
higher rates of exposure to patterns of written language.
Experiment 1 consists of corpus analyses of child-directed
speech (CHILDES; MacWhinney, 2000) and children’s

1030

literature (COCA; Davies, 2008-). The goal is to determine
the frequencies of object and passive relative clauses in
child-directed written and spoken language, in order to
gauge children’s experience with these constructions, and
use the these environmental patterns to make predictions
about production patterns. Experiment 2 is a production
study that elicits object and passive relative clauses from
eight and twelve year old children and adults. We used a
task that has previously been used to elicit object and
passive relative clauses in adults (Gennari, Mirkovic &
MacDonald, 2012; Montag & MacDonald, 2014).
Previous work suggests that language experience via
reading has a significant effect on language comprehension
abilities, but an effect of text exposure on production
choices would be a novel finding. This is important not
only to better understand the motivations behind production
choices, but would also provide strong support for an
experience-based theory of language development. Further,
if differences in the production patterns of children and
adults or between individuals with more or less text
exposure vary along the dimensions that distinguish written
and spoken language, we would implicate reading as an
important source of language statistics for an individual’s
attainment of what in the lab is deemed adult-like language
behavior.

Experiment 1: Corpus Analyses
Two corpus analyses aim to quantify the patterns of object
and passive relative clause use in child-directed written and
spoken language.

Written Corpus
The written corpus used was the juvenile literature1
contained in the COCA (Corpus of Contemporary American
English) corpus (Davies, 2008-). This corpus consists of
2.40 million words of literature intended for children aged
3-16 years. It consists of fiction and non-fiction magazine
articles and excerpts from fiction novels from 97 different
sources (magazine and book titles). Part of speech tags
were used to extract possible relative clauses. We then
eliminated irrelevant sentences by hand.

Spoken Corpus
The spoken corpus used was a 1.12 million word2 subset of
the parsed CHILDES (MacWhinney, 2000) corpus of adults
speaking to children between the ages of six months and
five years. The CLAN program was used to extract all
complement modifications, which contains all relative
clauses. All sentences containing object and passive relative
caluses were then extracted from these sentences by hand.
1
In the version of COCA used in these analyses (updated June
6, 2012) about a quarter of the documents categorized as juvenile
literature were not juvenile literature. All reported data removes
these irrelevant documents.
2
The CHILDES corpora used were Bates, Bernstein, Bliss,
Bloom (1970), Bloom (1973), Bohannon, Brent and Brown.

Corpus Coding
All relative clauses were coded not only for whether they
were an object relative or be/get passive relative, but for a
number of additional factors shown to affect production
patterns and/or comprehension difficulty: Animacy of the
head noun (e.g. the book/teacher that the student saw),
whether or not the relative clause was preceded by a relative
pronoun (e.g. The book that I read vs. The book I read).
Object relatives were further coded for the animacy of the
embedded noun and type of embedded noun (pronoun or
full noun phrase, e.g. (The book the teacher read vs. The
book she read). Passive relatives were coded for whether an
agent was specified (e.g. The book that was read vs. The
book that was read by the teacher). This coding allowed us
to make predictions about the production choices that
speakers might make in Experiment 2 if they were affected
by patterns of spoken and written language. If production
choices are affected by both sets of patterns, then older
individuals and individuals with more text exposure should
make choices more similar to the patterns in written
language, reflecting their greater amount of experience.

Results
As shown in Tables 1, 2, and 3, there are substantial
differences between the patterns of object and passive
relative clause use in the written and spoken corpora. There
is no table for passive relatives found in the spoken corpus
because only 3 passive relative utterances were found. Most
relevant for the predictions of Experiment 2, the overall
rates of object and passive relative use varied between the
two corpora. Per million noun phrases, we found 8,925
object and 3,359 passive relatives in the written corpus and
1,879 object and 15 passive relatives per million noun
phrases in the spoken corpus (raw counts: Written: 3,300
object and 1,242 passive relative; Spoken: 383 object and 3
passive relative). All passive relative tokens were bepassive, because get-passives tend to be a feature of spoken
language and are uncommon in written language, and
passives were overall extremely rare in the spoken corpus.
The first important finding is that there are overall more
relative clauses, of either type, in the written corpus. The
second important finding is that the ratios of object to
passive relatives vary between the two corpora. In the
written corpus, there are 2.7 object relatives for each passive
relative while in the spoken corpus, there are 125 object
relatives for each passive relative. These frequencies are
consistent with the results of previous corpus analyses of
object and passive relative clause distributions (Roland, et
al., 2007). Even in child-directed written and spoken
corpora, text not only provides more complex utterances of
any type, but disproportionately more experience with
passive relative clauses.
This is the first corpus analysis specifically investigating
relative clause use in child-directed speech and literature,
and it will be an important tool for predicting relative clause
production and comprehension patterns in this, and future
work with children.

1031

Experiment 2: Sentence Production

Grand Total

Total
Grand
Total

Inanimate
Head Noun

Animate
Inanimate

Animate
Head Noun

Animate
Inanimate
Embedded
Pronoun

Inanimate
Head Noun

Embedded
Full NP

Animate
Head Noun

Total

Table 1: Summary of object relative clauses in COCA
juvenile literature per million NPs.
With
Relative
No Relative
Pronoun
Pronoun

11

203

214

35

417

452

665

11
0

162
41

173
41

30
5

354
62

384
68

557
108

92

847

938 1209

6112 7321 8260

87 841 928 1204
5
5
11
5
103 1049 1152 1244

6050 7254 8181
62
68
78
6529 7773 8925

Inanimate
Head Noun

Animate
Head Noun

Inanimate
Head Noun

Animate
Head Noun

Total

Total
Grand
Total

Table 2: Summary of passive relative clauses in COCA
juvenile literature per million NPs.
With
Relative
No Relative
Pronoun
Pronoun

Agent
No Agent

8
89

38 46
257 346

46
435

400 446 492
2085 2521 2867

Grand Total

97

295 392

481

2486 2967 3359

Total

Grand
Total

Inanimate
Head Noun

Animate
Head Noun

Inanimate
Head Noun

0

15

15

0

29

29

44

0
0

10
5

10
5

0
0

20
10

20
10

29
15

Total

Animate
Head Noun

Table 3: Summary of object relative clauses in CHILDES
child-directed speech per million NPs.
With
Relative
No Relative
Pronoun
Pronoun

Embedded
Full NP
Animate
Inanimate
Embedded
Pronoun

15

358 373

103

1359 1462 1835

Animate
Inanimate

15
0

353 368
5
5

103
0

1349 1452 1820
10
10
15

Grand Total

15

373 388

103

1389 1492 1879

This production study elicits object and passive relative
clauses in children and adults with a production task similar
to that of Gennari, et al. (2012) and Montag and MacDonald
(2014). Participants also completed measures of text
exposure. Given the large differences in relative clause
usage found in the corpus analyses of Experiment 1,
individuals with more text exposure (older children and
those who spend more time reading) should produce more
passive relative clauses than those with less text exposure.

Method
Participants Thirty undergraduates at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison participated in exchange for course
credit in an introductory psychology course. All were
native speakers of American English. Thirty eight-year old
children (15 female; mean age 8,3; SD 7.4 months; range
6,11-9,1) and 30 twelve year old children (9 female; mean
age 12,2; SD 4.8 months; range 11;3-12;11) in the Madison,
Wisconsin area also participated in exchange for a $10 gift
card. All were native speakers of American English.
Materials Eighteen verbs that can each take both an
animate or inanimate grammatical object were selected, and
color illustrations were created that depicted two instances
of that verb, once with a human agent acting on an animate
entity and once acting on an inanimate entity. For example,
the picture for the verb ‘throw’ (Figure 1) incorporated both
a man being thrown and a ball being thrown. This animacy
manipulation was an independent variable of the study.
Additional materials were used to estimate text exposure
in children and adults. For adults we used the author
recognition task and reading habits questionnaire used by
Acheson, Wells and MacDonald (2008). For children, we
created a title recognition task appropriate for eight and
twelve year old children. This task was a modified and
updated version of the children’s title recognition task of
Cunningham and Stanovich (1990).

Figure 1: Test picture for verb “throw.”
Procedure Written instructions appeared on a computer
monitor and participants were instructed to read the
instructions to themselves. All participants were presented
with the same instructions, but the experimenter read the
instructions aloud to the 8-year olds while the text was on
the monitor. This was the only difference in experimental

1032

procedure across age groups. These instructions described a
cover task, in which participants were told that this task was
about describing pictures, and another group of participants
may try to guess which pictures they are describing. They
were told that because various aspects of the pictures may
be changed, describing the actions in which the people and
objects were taking part would be the best strategy to
employ in order to complete the task. Participants were
never given sample object or passive relative clauses in the
instructions or at any other point during the task.
In each trial, a color picture appeared on the screen and
after three seconds, participants heard a question asking
about the target person or object in the picture (for example,
Who is wearing orange? or What is red? referring to the
man or the ball in Figure 1) and answered the question by
speaking into a microphone. Each participant saw nine
animate and nine inanimate trials, and items were
counterbalanced so that each participant saw each picture
only once. Test and filler trials were pseudo-randomized
such that there was always at least one filler trial between
test trials. After the production task, participants performed
either the author (adults) or title recognition task (children).

Results

Proportion of Utternaces

Responses tended to contain object and passive relative
clauses. Sentences 1, 2a and 2b list sample responses for
the inanimate target “ball.” Responses that did not contain a
relative clause with a verb were excluded. Exclusion rates
were low, at only 29.4% for eight year olds, 15.4% for
twelve year olds and 15.6% for adults. The remaining
responses were coded as containing either an object, bepassive or get-passive relative clause. Response data are
shown in Figure 2.

Get-Passive

Be-Passive

Object

1	  
0.8	  
0.6	  
0.4	  
0.2	  
0	  

8 year 12 year Adult
old
old

8 year 12 year Adult
old
old

Animate
Inanimate
Figure 2: Proportion of object, be-passive and get-passive
productions by age and animacy.
When target entities were animate, adults produced 8.0%
(SD=14.1) object relative responses, 79.3% (SD = 25.7) bepassive and 12.7% (SD = 21.2) get-passive responses;
twelve year olds produced 5.9% (SD = 13.7) object relative
responses, 51.7% (SD = 39.5) be-passive and 41.5% (SD =
37.8) get-passive responses and eight year-olds produced
16.5% (SD = 24.6) object relative responses, 18.1% (SD =
31.9) be-passive and 64.6% (SD = 36.6) get-passive

utterances. Three passive utterances (twelve year-olds: two;
eight year-olds; one) contained neither get nor be (e.g. the
ball thrown by the man), accounted for less than 1% of total
utterances. When target entities were inanimate, adults
produced 54.0% (SD = 35.4) object relative responses,
45.4% (SD = 35.7) be-passive and 0.7% (SD = 3.7) getpassive responses; twelve year olds produced 77.3% (SD =
28.6) object relative responses, 18.3% (SD = 26.4) bepassive and 3.6% (SD = 9.5) get-passive responses and
eight year-olds produced 76.5% (SD = 29.7) object relative
responses, 5.5% (SD = 18.5) be-passive and 18.0% (SD =
25.4) get-passive utterances. In addition, twelve year olds
produced two passive utterances with neither get nor be,
accounting for less than 1% of total responses.
Production choices significantly varied by animacy and
age. Using mixed-effects logistic regression (glmer) in the
lme4 package in R (Bates et al., 2013), when comparing the
use of an object relative to any passive form, all age groups
showed an effect of animacy (z = 7.03, p < 0.001) such that
speakers produced more passive utterances when describing
animate entities. Further, there was a linear trend, such that
older speakers produced more passive utterances than
younger speakers (z = 4.40, p < 0.001). Within passive
utterances the rate of be-passive use also increased with age
(z = 7.55, p < 0.001). These age-related results are
consistent with the corpus analyses of Experiment 1. Older
children and adults, who presumably have more text
exposure, tend to produce more utterance forms
characteristic of written language, yielding more passive
relative utterances and more be-passive utterances with age.
Though group differences show a greater rate of passive
relative use with age and text exposure, the overall rate of
passive use, especially with animate targets is quite high,
even for the youngest participants. This result reflects finergrained patterns in speakers’ experience with language:
object relative clauses with full noun embedded noun
phrases are rare, especially when modifying animate
entities. In the corpus analysis of Experiment 1, there were
no examples of object relatives with an animate head noun
and a full embedded NP in the spoken corpus (e.g., The man
that the woman saw) and only 41 per million NPs in the
written corpus (Table 1, full: 11 + reduced: 30 = 41).
However, there were (from Table 2) 579 per million NPs
animate-headed passive relatives in the written corpus. The
Experiment 2 task did not promote the use of pronouns (e.g.
the ball he threw), and so the high rate of passives in the
animate condition reflects children’s and adults’ sensitivity
to the statistics of English passive relative use in this
environment. Thus, the overall high rate of passive
responses, given the demands of the task, is completely
predicted by the corpus analysis. Further, the observed
animacy effect is also predicted, as in the corpus, object
relative clauses are much more common with inanimate
head nouns as opposed to animate head nouns (per million
NPs, Animate head noun: 579/41 or 14 times more passive
than object relatives; Inanimate head noun 2780/617 or 4.5
times more passive than object relatives in the written

1033

corpora, and 15/29 or .5 passives for each object relative in
the spoken corpus.)
Thus, the corpus analysis of
Experiment 1 made correct predictions for the production
choices in Experiment 2. The corpus analysis predicted a
higher rate of passive productions for animate targets than
inanimate targets (effect of animacy) and a higher rate of
passive responses for older participants or participants with
greater text exposure. These predictions were indeed
observed in the pattern of production responses.

Individual Differences
Group differences are consistent with an effect of text
exposure on production choices, but an additional test of the
hypothesis would be to find individual differences in text
exposure within groups contributing to production choices.
The title and author recognition tasks administered to
participants allowed us to investigate the effect of individual
differences in text exposure on production choices.
In adults, we found an effect of text exposure on utterance
form. In a logistic mixed effects regression model (full
model) predicting choice of object or passive relative
utterance with both animacy and author recognition score,
we find (obviously) and effect of animacy (z = -4.46, p <
0.001), and also an effect of text exposure (z = -2.39, p <
0.05). Individuals with higher scores on the author
recognition task tended to produce more passive responses,
consistent with the higher proportion of passive relatives in
written language. Within passive utterances, there was no
effect of text exposure on get versus be-passive use, which
is not surprising given the overall low rate of get-passive
use among adults.
When investigating the effect of text exposure on
production choices in children, we wanted to observe an
effect of text exposure beyond the effect of age. However,
because age and text exposure are highly correlated (r =
0.73), we first created a model using age to predict
production choices (logistic mixed-effects regression, full
model), then used animacy and text exposure to predict the
residuals of that model. These models employed linear
mixed-effects regression with random slopes for animacy by
participant and item. When predicting the choice of object
or passive relative, we found an interaction between
animacy and text exposure, such that individuals with more
text exposure produced more passives, but only for animate
targets (t = -2.63, change in model fit: p < 0.05). Within
passives, text exposure predicted the choice of get or bepassive (t = 3.07, p < 0.01) such that children with more text
exposure produced more be-passives. These results are
consistent with the higher rate of passives, especially bepassives in written language.
Individual differences within both adults and children are
consistent with the hypothesis that text exposure affects
spoken language production. Differences between groups
and individuals were predicted by the corpus analyses of
Experiment 1, such that older individuals and individuals
with more text exposure made structure choices more
consistent with the distributions of written language.

Discussion
Both the group differences and individual differences are
consistent with an effect of text exposure on production
choices. Group differences show that passive relative use
increases with age, and within passives, be-passive use
increases with age. Both of these findings show that older
speakers tend to more often produce the forms more
characteristic of spoken language. Individual differences
show that both adults and children with greater degrees of
text exposure tend to produce more passive utterances.
Again, text exposure is associated with a greater proportion
of utterances representative of written language.
These findings shed some light on the types of changes
occurring during childhood, and the types of experience that
may contribute to language development. These findings is
consistent with an experience-based explanation of language
development and suggests that language experience through
reading may be an important precursor for what is defined
as adult-like language behavior in the laboratory.

General Discussion
This study investigated the relationship between
children’s and adults’ linguistic experiences and their
implicit language production choices. Experiment 1 showed
that there are substantial differences in the distribution of
relative clause types in child directed speech and child
directed text. The existence of these differences suggest the
potential for individual differences in people’s language
production, as production is known to reflect the linguistic
environment.
Specifically, we predicted that older
individuals or individuals with more text exposure should
produce more passive relative clauses, as these tend to be
much more frequent in written language. Previous work
also predicted a higher rate of be-passives in older or more
literate participants, as get-passives tend to be a feature of
spoken language. Our results supported these predictions.
Group differences show an increase in overall passive use
and be-passive use with age. Further, individual differences
show an increase in passive use with text exposure (and an
increase in be-passive use with age).
These results are an important first step in investigating
the extent to which becoming a reader shifts people’s
exposure to language statistics. Subsequent work should
seek to clarify these results and investigate alternative
explanations. For example, individuals with more text
exposure likely differ on a number of dimensions. Children
who read more often may also have parents who read more
often, so experiential differences may come from qualitative
differences in parental speech, or a greater amount of
parental speech not text exposure itself. Likewise, adults
with greater text exposure may come from, or self-select
themselves into contexts in which when they speak with
other highly literate individuals so again, so the cause of the
differences in production choices cannot be determined.
That said, the consistency between the group and individual
differences and the predictions derived from the corpus
analysis of Experiment 1 certainly suggests that tend

1034

exposure could be the causal variable, which has
implications for the study of language development, and the
role of literacy in language use.
An effect of written language experience on spoken
language production is important for a number of reasons.
First, it shows that the domains of spoken and written
language may not be independent systems and experience in
both domains contributes to linguistic behavior. This work
highlights the differences between the statistics of written
and spoken language, and suggests that learning theories of
language must take into account the fact that literate
individual encounter two qualitatively different sets of
language statistics, and this diversity of experience likely
contributes to patterns of language use in and out of the lab.
Second, this work suggests a significant amount of
knowledge transfer between the written and spoken
language domains. The present study suggests that language
behavior can be closely predicted though the experience an
individual has likely encountered, and considering the dual
contributions of written and spoken language experience
improves those predictions. This approach blurs the line
between the typically distinct notions of language
acquisition, adult language use and literacy. This
perspective is consistent with training studies of adults
(Wells, Christiansen, Race, Acheson & MacDonald, 2009)
that suggest that language behavior changes with
experience, well into adulthood. The onset of literacy in
childhood, not any particular domain-general cognitive
development, may be an important predictor of what might
have otherwise been considered language development, as
children are exposed to a new set of linguistic patterns with
the onset of literacy. Further, text exposure, through
reading, across the lifetime continues to provide linguistic
experience, qualitatively different from that of spoken
language, that continues to account for individual
differences into adulthood.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the NIH [Grants T32
HD049899 and R01 HD047425]; the NSF [Grant number
1123788]; and the Wisconsin Alumni Research Fund.

References
Acheson, D. J., Wells, J. B., & MacDonald, M. C. (2008).
New and updated tests of print exposure and reading
abilities in college students. Behavior Research
Methods, 40, 278-289.
Bates, E., & MacWhinney, B. (1987). Competition,
variation, and language learning. In B. MacWhinney
(Ed.), Mechanisms of language acquisition. Hillsdale,
New Jersey: Erlbaum.
Bates, D. M., Maechler, M., Bolker, B. & Walker, S.
(2013). lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using Eigen
and S4. R package version 1.0-4. http://CRAN.Rproject.org/package=lme4
Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S., & Finegan,
E. (1999). Longman Grammar of Spoken and Written

English. London: Longman.
Cameron-Faulkner, T., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M. (2003).
A construction based analysis of child directed speech.
Cognitive Science, 27, 843-873.
Collins, P. C. (1996). Get-­‐passives in English. World
Englishes, 15, 43-56.
Cunningham, A. E., & Stanovich, K. E. (1991). Tracking
the unique effects of print exposure in children:
Associations with vocabulary, general knowledge, and
spelling. Journal of Educational Psychology, 83, 264.
Davies, M. (2008-) The Corpus of Contemporary American
English: 450 million words, 1990-present. Available
online at http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/.
de Villiers, J., Tager-Flusberg, H. B., Hakuta, K. & Cohen,
M. (1979). Children's comprehension of relative clauses.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 8, 499-518.
Diessel, H., & Tomasello, M. (2005). A new look at the
acquisition of relative clauses. Language, 81, 882–906.
Gennari, S.P., Mirković, J., & MacDonald, M.C. (2012).
Animacy and competition in relative clause production: a
cross-linguistic investigation. Cognitive Psychology, 65,
141-176.
Gibson, E. (1998). Linguistic complexity: Locality of
syntactic dependencies. Cognition, 68(1), 1-76.
Goodluck, H., & Tavakolian, S. (1982). Competence and
processing in children's grammar of relative clauses.
Cognition 11, 1-27.
Huttenlocher, J., Vasilyeva, M., Cymerman, E., & Levine,
S. (2002). Language input and child syntax. Cognitive
Psychology, 45, 337-374.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES Project: Tools for
analyzing talk. Third Edition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1992). A capacity theory of
comprehension: Individual differences in working
memory. Psychological review, 99, 122-149.
Chomsky, N., & Miller, G. A. (1963). Introduction to the
formal analysis of natural languages. In R. D. Luce, R. R.
Bush, & E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of Mathematical
Psychology, vol. 2 (pp. 269-321). New York: Wiley.
Montag, J. L. & MacDonald, M. C. (in press). Visual
salience modulates sentence choice in relative clause
production. Language and Speech.
Naigles, L. R., & Hoff-Ginsberg, E. (1998). Why are some
verbs learned before other verbs? Effects of input
frequency and structure on children's early verb use.
Journal of Child Language, 25, 95-120.
Reali, F. & Christiansen, M. H. (2007). Processing of
relative clauses is made easier by frequency of
occurrence, Journal of Memory and Language, 57, 1-23.
Roland, D., Dick, F. & Elman, J. L. (2007). Frequency of
basic English grammatical structures: A corpus analysis.
Journal of Memory and Language, 57, 348-379.
Wells, J. B., Christiansen, M. H., Race, D. S., Acheson, D.
J., & MacDonald, M. C. (2009). Experience and sentence
comprehension: Statistical learning and relative clause
comprehension. Cognitive Psychology, 58, 250-271.

1035

