UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Eye Gaze Direction on Vocal Imitation in Individuals with Autism Spectrum
Disorder: Does Joint Attention Matter?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0p60h8ft

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Postma-Nilsenova, Marie
Van Kastel, Mariska
Balsters, Martijn

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Eye Gaze Direction on Vocal Imitation in Individuals with Autism
Spectrum Disorder: Does Joint Attention Matter?
Marie Postma-Nilsenová (M.Nilsenova@tilburguniversity.edu)
Mariska van Kastel (mvkastel7@gmail.com)
Martijn Balsters (M.J.H.Balsters@tilburguniversity.edu)

Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Tilburg University, The Netherlands
Abstract
Several recent studies showed the effect of eye gaze direction
on both instructed and spontaneous imitative behavior, as
well as the acquisition of action-effect binding. In particular,
direct eye gaze of a model gesturer/talker, compared to
averted eye gaze, gives rise to faster gesture imitation and
better vocal imitation, and reinforces intersubjective
stimulus-effect learning. In an experiment with Autism
Spectrum Disorder participants and a control group (N = 32),
we explored vocal imitation in conditions with engaged eye
gaze, averted gaze and gaze establishing joint attention. We
found that speakers from both groups were least likely to
mimic the vocal patterns of the model talker in a condition
with joint attention. The finding suggests that establishing
joint attention by gaze directing negatively affects vocal
imitative behavior.
Keywords: Eye gaze; Vocal Imitation; Mimicry; Joint
Attention; Autism.

Introduction
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder, characterized by impairments in social
and communicative behavior, and accompanying restricted range of interests and behaviors, that affects
approximately 1% of the population (Tesink, 2013).
Despite the great varieties in symptom severity and
levels of intelligence, delayed information processing
and difficulties regarding social interactions appear to
be common in all individuals diagnosed with the disorder. With regard to interaction with other people, ASD
individuals are known to have trouble with engaging in
social interactions, responding to external emotional
cues and making eye contact with others (Werner et al.,
2000).
Arguably, one of the most important skills regarding
social interaction and communication of affect concerns processing of nonverbal cues and their imitation.
At a very early stage of life, social behaviors such as
engaging in eye contact, joint attention and facial as
well as vocal expression recognition are present in
normally developing young infants. Nonverbal cues
provide infants with important information, helping
them with communication resulting in increased and
better survival. Infants are exposed to intonation pat-

terns even before they are born and display facial
recognition and a visual preference for faces already
during the first six months of life (Dawson et al.,
2005). During their first year, they become capable of
interpreting features such as gaze direction, facial
movements and vocal expressions of emotion. Given
the fact that the aforementioned behaviors have been
claimed to be impaired in people with autism, these
deficiencies might play an important diagnostic role in
terms of early indication of brain functioning typical
for autism and in possible communication training.
Interestingly, several studies have shown that, compared to normal individuals, autistic individuals use
different strategies to process faces (Dawson et al.,
2005; Langdell, 1978). Whereas normally developed
individuals use a more holistic approach in terms of
facial expression recognition, autistic individuals seem
to rely on a more feature-based piecemeal information
processing. For instance, when performing facial identification tasks, autistic children have shown a preference for mouths (lower facial parts) rather than the
eyes (higher facial parts) compared to typically developed individuals (Langdell, 1978).
Next to that, ASD individuals perform worse at brief
stimulus presentations, suggesting a slower processing
of gaze direction compared to non-autistic individuals
(Wallace et al., 2006). Past eye-tracking studies also
showed that autistic individuals fixate less frequently
and for a shorter time on others’ eyes than non-ASD
individuals (Senju, 2013; Speer et al., 2007). In several
experiments, autistic individuals failed to show the
‘eye contact effect’; a phenomenon in which perceived
gaze is immediately followed by the processing of
social information (Senju, Hasegawa, & Tojo, 2005;
Senju, & Johnsson, 2009).
Nevertheless, although atypical gaze behavior is one
diagnostic features of ASD, previous experiments
suggest that autistic individuals do not suffer from a
general impairment in gaze processing; for instance,
they can tell direct from averted gaze and are able to
discriminate subtle differences in gaze direction
(Leekam et al., 1997; Senju, 2013; Baron-Cohen et al.,
1995). In addition, ASD individuals also demonstrate

2693

the so-called gaze cueing effect, the phenomenon in
which the observer shifts his attention to the direction
of the perceived gaze (Frischen, Bayliss, & Tipper,
2007; Senju et al., 2004). Other investigations showed
that ASD individuals are equally fast at detecting faces
and at gender recognition, regardless of gaze direction
(von Grünau, & Anston, 1995; Pellicano, & Macrae,
2009). In addition, physiological studies demonstrated
enhanced responses in autistic individuals to direct
perceived gaze. Strikingly, children with ASD showed
a stronger skin conductance response for straight gaze
compared to averted gaze, whereas typically developed
children showed no differences in both conditions
(Kylliäinen, & Hietanen, 2006) which would suggest
that they are more sensitive to eye contact.
The studies summarized above suggest that although
gaze processing is not fundamentally impaired in ASD
and perceived direct gaze can evoke physiological
reactions in autistic individuals, it does not spontaneously facilitate cognitive or behavioral processing
(Senju, 2013). In line with this generalization, ASD
individuals are also known to perform worse with respect to imitative behavior, compared to non-ASD
individuals. As indicated by experimental results obtained in different domains and with varying methods,
there appears to be a strong relation between eye gaze
and imitation. Wang, Newport, and Hamilton (2011)
found that reaction times for displaying gestures congruent with those shown on a video were faster if the
person in the video engaged the participant with her
gaze compared to videos where she was looking away
(replication of the result reported in Wang, Ramsey, &
Hamilton, 2011). Faster reaction times were also reported by Sato and Itakura (2013) for intersubjective
action-effect binding acquired in a condition with target’s direct gaze, compared to averted gaze or closed
eyes. A study conducted by Postma-Nilsenová, Brunninkhuis, and Postma (2013), combining both eye
contact and vocal mimicry in typically functioning
participants, revealed a sensitivity to the eye gaze direction of an embodied interaction agent (EIA); participants adjusted their pitch slope more to the EIA in
case of direct eye gaze than with averted gaze.
Imitation (also sometimes referred to as adaptive behavior, or accommodation, though not to be confused
with mimicry, see Gonzalez-Liencres, Shamay-Tsoory,
& Brüne, 2013) stands for the unconscious tendency to
observe other one's behavior and copy it while being
aware of the difference between self and other (Blakemore & Frith, 2005; Chartrand & Van Baaren, 2009;
Gonzalez-Liencres et al., 2013; Van Holland, 2007).
According to previous research, imitation of the interlocutor is one of the most important aspects in social
communication (Ingersoll, 2008; Toth, Munson, Meltzoff & Dawson, 2006). It serves several general functions, such as providing a sense of mutual connectedness, shared social experiences and a means of communication between social partners (Meltzoff, 2005;
Toth et al., 2006). Additionally, an interlocutor is eval-

uated more positively in a conversation when he or she
imitates the interaction partner (Chartrand & Barg,
1999). In short, imitation is a powerful mechanism that
both tests and strengthens social relationships; besides,
it is closely related to cooperative behavior and is often
seen as a form of empathy (Bensing, 1991).
In typically developing children, the ability to imitate
is present early on in life. It is a learning strategy that
children use to acquire and control new behavior and
whereby the goal of the behavior of the interaction
partner is understood (Van Holland, 2007). Children
with a form of autism, however, have difficulty with
understanding the goal of their interaction partners.
Although they may mimic the same behavior as typically developing children in an interaction, they do not
understand the underlying social meaning of that particular behavior (Van Holland, 2007; Williams et al.,
2006). Also as adults, autistic individuals perform
worse than typically functioning individuals with respect to some types of imitative behavior (Hadjikhani,
2007; Rogers, Hepburn, Stackhouse & Wehner, 2003).
The complex empirical results regarding imitative
behavior displayed by autistic individuals can be linked
to different theoretical notions: 'functional adaptation'
and '(automatic) imitation'. Functional adaptation
serves to support audience design and common ground
during a conversation and it is usually employed consciously. Automatic imitation, on the other hand, is
mostly an unconscious process. The communication
deficits described for people with autism commonly
concern functional adaptation, to be precise audience
design accommodation (Slocombe et al., 2012). This is
in contrast to automatic imitation; while autistic individuals have difficulty with understanding the interaction partner's behavior goal, they can and do imitate
that behavior (Van Holland, 2007; Williams et al.,
2006), e.g., facial expressions (Press, Richardson &
Bird, 2010). A.o., Slocombe et al. (2012) investigated
in their study the linguistic imitation in adults with and
without Asperger's syndrome. Their results revealed
that adults with Asperger's syndrome demonstrated
linguistic imitation in terms of lexical choice, spatial
frame of reference and syntactic structure. In addition,
it appeared that there was no difference between adults
with and without Asperger's syndrome.
Despite the vast literature on autism and joint attention
on the one hand, and autism and imitation on the other
hand, to our knowledge, no studies have been conducted so far in which effects of eye gaze on vocal imitation were investigated among individuals with ASD. In
the present study, we explored imitative vocal behavior
in three conditions, with the target displaying a direct
(engaging) eye gaze, with the target averting her eyes
without establishing eye contact, and, finally, with her
initiating the participant’s gaze following by first establishing eye contact and then directing her gaze towards a relevant object in the environment. In view of
earlier findings, we examined if (1) adult ASD partici-

2694

pants would imitate the prosody of the target’s voice to
a lesser degree than typically functioning participants,
and (2) if the degree of imitation will be affected by the
target’s gaze behavior, particularly in a comparison
between the typically functioning group and the ASD
group.

subsequently repeated the digit. In the beginning of the
session, the participant's vocal baseline was recorded;
the input for the baseline was presented visually on the
screen.

Experiment
(a)

The goal of the experiment was to investigate if the
direction of model talker's eye gaze affects vocal pitch
imitation in speakers with ASD.

Method
Participants Thirty-two participants (28 male, 4
female, divided equally per group), half of them
diagnosed with autism and the other half representing a
control group, were recruited for the study. The control
group matched the ASD group on age, education and
gender (for ASD: Mean Age = 37.9, SD = 13.4, age
range 21-67; for Control: Mean Age = 36.6, SD = 15.4,
age range 18-69).1 The uneven number of male and
female participants is due to the fact that autism is
more common in males than in females (Tesink, 2013).
The ASD participants were highly functioning
individuals who were previously diagnosed by a
medical specialist and were clients of two different
institutions in the Netherlands; they all scored above
average on the Autism Spectrum Quotient form
(Baron-Cohen, 2012), as reported by the institutions
through which the participants were recruited (scores
were not made available to us). This study received
ethical approval from the Department of Psychology,
University Ethical Review Board.
Design The experiment had a 2 x 3 within-between
participant design, with ASD and typically functioning
participants and with the variable Eye Gaze consisting
of three experimental conditions: Direct Gaze, Joint
Attention (initial direct gaze directed towards an object
in the left or right visual field) and Averted Gaze (gaze
averted left or right without any additional object
without an initial direct gaze), see Figure 1. The object
in the Joint Attention condition was the digit
pronounced by the model talker. The dependent
variable was the degree of pitch imitation, measured
for Pitch Slope as well as imitation with respect to the
duration of voiced frames, a measure of Speech Rate.
Material The experimental session consisted of 60
randomized trials. The participant first observed an
audiovisual clip in which the model talker pronounced
a monosyllabic digit (ten different digits in total) and
1

In total, data were collected from 24 ASD participants; only
the results of the participants for which a matched control
participant was available are reported here. A splitfile
repeated measures analysis of variance with the ASD group
revealed exactly the same patterns for the two dependant
variables as those reported in the results section, with a
comparable level of significance.

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Experimental stimuli with (a) direct gaze
(Direct Gaze condition), (b) averted gaze to the right
(Averted Gaze condition) and (c) gaze directed
towards an object (Joint Attention condition).

The audiovisual clips showed a female model talker
filmed against a neutral background. The vocal stimuli
were recorded with five different intonation patterns:
rise, late rise, fall, low and high (see Figure 2). All
clips had the duration of 10 seconds, including a 0.5
sec fade-from-black and fade-to-black to smooth the
transition between consecutive movies, to mark the
beginning and end of each stimulus and to avoid and
unnatural gaze duration. The voicing lasted
approximately 400 ms followed by a response window
during which the participants were instructed to repeat
the digit uttered by the model talker. In the Joint
Attention condition, the digit appeared on the screen
after initial eye contact, followed by a head turn of the
model talker and by her uttering the digit. Prior to the
experiment, the recordings were tested for being
emotionally neutral; recordings that were seen as
emotionally expressive (1 visual and 3 audio) were
removed from the stimulus set and re-recorded. In the
Joint Attention condition, the digits appeared in the left
or right visual field after three seconds and before the
model talker pronounced the digit.
Procedure The experiment was conducted with the
help of the E-prime environment (Psychological
Software Tools Inc., Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA)
on a Dell E173pc computer with no Internet connection
and virus detection to prevent automatic pop-ups and
updates and with a PC 320 G4ME headset. At the start
of the experiment, the participants received a

2695

distracting memory task (remembering a sequence of
numbers until the end of the session).

Figure 2: Different contours employed by the model
talker.

Each trial was introduced by a 500 ms fixation
cross. The 60 trials were divided into two blocks
with a two-minute break in between. The
recordings of the participant's vocal output were
stored in separate uncompressed wav-files. They
were analyzed with the help of the Praat speech
analysis software (Boersma & Weenink, 2014)
using Praat scripts with standardized pitch tracking
setting for male (60-300 Hz) and female (80-500
Hz) speakers. To detect if participants changed their
vocal parameters differently in the three
experimental conditions, we calculated for each
digit the absolute difference between the
measurement in the baseline condition and the
measurement in the condition with Joint Attention,
Direct Gaze and Averted Gaze, using the vocal
parameters Pitch Slope (measuring local contour
changes) and Speech Rate (measured by counting
voiced frames in the recording based on the
detectable pitch).2 In order to calculate the degree
of imitation, each measurement was compared to
the model talker's parameters, in the following way:
First, we calculated the absolute difference between
the model talker’s Pitch Slope/Speech Rate and the
participant’s baseline, i.e., the Slope/Rate of the
participant before being exposed to the model
talker. Second, the absolute difference between the
model talker’s Slope/Rate and the participant’s
Slope/Rate while repeating after the model talker
was calculated. Finally, by subtracting the values of
the baseline difference and the repetition difference,
we obtained a measure of vocal imitation. For each
participant, we calculated the mean degree of
imitation in the three experimental conditions.
2

In principle, other types of measures of vocal imitation are
possible, such as mean pitch, (log) pitch range, or local
minima and maxima. These values, however, are perceptually
elusive and their role in vocal imitation is thus dubious;
moreover, local minima and maxima are highly sensitive to
the pitch tracker settings and thus not suitable for semiautomatic analysis.

Results
Two mixed analyses of variance (ANOVAs) were used
to compare the vocal parameters of ASD and typically
functioning participants collected in the three
experimental conditions. There was no main effect of
experimental group (ASD, Control) on Pitch Slope
Imitation, F (1,30) = 0.01, p = .945 and no interaction
effect between experimental group and Gaze Direction
(Direct Gaze, Averted Gaze, Joint Attention), F (2,60)
= 0.05, p = .948. There was a significant main effect of
Gaze Direction, F (2,60) = 3.23, p = .047, partial eta
squared = .10. Participants imitated the most in the
condition with Direct Gaze and the least in the
condition with Joined Attention. Pairwise comparisons
with Bonferroni correction revealed a marginal
difference between imitation in the condition with
Direct Gaze and with Joint Attention, t(37) = 1.97, p =
.056; there was no difference between Direct and
Averted Gaze, t(37) = 0.28, p = .783, and between
Averted Gaze and Joint Attention, t(37) = 1.78, p =
.083. For descriptives, see Table 1.
Table 1: Descriptive values for Pitch Slope Imitation
(measured in Hz) in the three experimental conditions
(positive value indicates convergence to target’s values,
negative value shows divergence).
Group
ASD

Control

EMM

S.E.

Direct Gaze

22.5

27.2

Averted Gaze

10.1

26.7

Joint Attention

-29.3

29.1

Direct Gaze

21.3

27.2

Averted Gaze

0.9

26.8

Joint Attention

-25.6

29.1

With respect to imitation of Speech Rate, there was no
main effect of experimental group (ASD, Control) on
Speech Rate, F(1,30) = 0.05, p = .826 and no
interaction effect between experimental group and
Gaze Direction (Direct Gaze, Averted Gaze, Joint
Attention), F(2,60) = 0.46, p = .636. There was a
significant main effect of Gaze Direction, F (2,60) =
3.35, p = .042, partial eta squared = .10. Participants
imitated the most in the condition with Averted Gaze
and the least in the condition with Joined Attention.
Pairwise comparisons with Bonferroni correction
revealed a significant difference between imitation in
the condition with Averted Gaze and with Joint
Attention, t(39) = 2.48, p = .017; there was no
difference between Joint Attention and Direct Gaze,
t(39) = 1.51, p = .139, and between Averted Gaze and
Direct Gaze, t(39) = 1.72, p = .094. For descriptives,
see Table 2.

2696

Table 2: Descriptive values for Speech Rate Imitation
(Hz) in the three experimental conditions (positive
value indicates convergence to target’s values, negative
value shows divergence).
Group
ASD

Control

EMM

S.E.

Direct Gaze

-1.03

1.94

Averted Gaze

1.30

1.10

Joint Attention

-2.37

1.52

Direct Gaze

-0.98

1.94

Averted Gaze

-0.26

1.10

Joint Attention

-2.07

1.52

Discussion and Conclusions
In this study, we explored vocal imitation of two
prosodically independent features, pitch slope and
speech rate, in relation to eye gaze direction of the
model talker. Eye gaze direction and vocal mimicry are
powerful nonverbal social signals (Postma-Nilsenová,
Brunninkhuis, & Postma, 2013). Both pitch and speech
rate provide important information regarding emotions,
and attitudes of the speaker and their imitation convergence and facilitates feelings of empathy and affiliation. Results of several recent experimental studies
indicated that imitation decreases in situations where
gaze engagement is lacking (Wang, Newport, & Hamilton, 2011; Wang, Ramsey, & Hamilton, 2011; Postma
-Nilsenová, Brunninkhuis, & Postma, 2013). This effect has, however, not been explored in contexts where
the speaker initiates gaze following by first establishing eye contact and then directing her gaze towards a
relevant object in the environment. Given that joint
attention is an undeniable part of language learning
with vocal imitation as its vehicle, it could be argued
that despite the absence of direct gaze speakers in such
contexts would be likely to mimic each other’s vocal
patterns. The outcomes of our study, however, show
that this is not the case and provide partial backing for
the view that absence of direct gaze slows down and,
possibly, disrupts the imitation process (Wang, Ramsey, & Hamilton, 2011). The process of establishing
joint attention, as well as the capability to imitate nonverbal cues, are both considered to be problematic for
individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorders (Vanvuchelen, Roeyers, & De Weerdt, 2011). In our experiment, we compared the performance of autistic speakers to a matched control group of typically functioning
adults. We found no difference in the degree of vocal
imitation between these groups, disregarding the gaze
direction of the model talker. This finding is in accordance with other recent studies of imitation in adult
autism (Slocombe et al., 2012) and can be interpreted
in line with approaches that view imitation as an automatic process that is not necessarily absent in autism.

According to these views, it is not imitation as such
that lies at the core of empathy and perspective taking
(Theory of Mind), but rather its inhibition (Santiesteban et al., 2012). Future research should further
explore the effect of gaze on imitation in contexts
where gaze following is not initiated by the model
talker but by the imitator who directs her attention. In
particular, it is conceivable that imitation increases in
contexts where the model talker “follows into” the
focus of the speaker, in line with results previously
reported for gestural and linguistic development. A
setting in which the follow-into joint attention could be
established would likely be more interactive; it remains
to be seen if spontaneous imitation would result in the
same patterns as those found in the current experiment.
Another alternative experimental setup would be one
where the object to which joint attention is directed is
not additionally introduced into the visual scene (as in
our experiment) but remains present in all conditions,
thus not introducing a distraction that possibly disrupts
the imitation process. Finally, it is possible that making
use of emotionally charged stimuli (rather than emotionally neutral, as in our experiment) would increase
the difference in prosodic imitation between ASD and
typically functioning speakers.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the anonymous CogSci
2014 reviewers for their comments, to Susan Vermeer
for her help with collecting experimental data, to
Caroliene van Lier-Appels and Lilian van Ensel for
facilitating the research, to Eric Postma and Paul Vogt
for helpful suggestions, and to the participants in the
experiment for their time.

References
Baron-Cohen, S., Campbell, R., Karmiloff-Smith, A.,
Grant, J., and Walker, J. (1995). Are children with
autism blind to the mentalistic significance of the
eyes? Brit J of Dev Psychology, 13, 379-398.
Bensing, J.M. (1991). Doctor-Patient Communication
and the Quality of Care. Soc. Sci. Med., 32(11),
1301-1310. NIVEL: Utrecht.
Blakemore, S., & Frith, U. (2005). The learning brain:
lessons for education. Oxford: Blackwell.
Boersma, Paul & Weenink, David (2014). Praat: doing
phonetics by computer [Computer program]. Version
5.3.63, http://www.praat.org/
Chartrand, T., & Barg, J. (1999). The chameleon effect:
The perception-behavior link and social interaction.
J of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 893-910.
Chartrand, T.L., & Van Baaren, R. (2009). Human
mimicry. Adv Exp Soc Psychol, 41, 219-274.
Dawson, G., Webb, S. J., and McPartland, J. (2005).
Understanding the Nature of Face Processing
Impairment in Autism: Insights From Behavioral and
Electrophysiological Studies. Developmental
Neuropsychology, 27, 403-424.
Frischen, A., Bayliss, A. P., and Tipper, S. P. (2007).
Gaze cueing of attention: visual attention, social

2697

cognition, and individual differences. Psychological
Bulletin, 133, 694.
Gonzalez-Liencres, C., Shamay-Tsoory, S.G., and
Brüne, M. (2013). Towards a neuroscience of
empathy: Ontogeny, phylogeny, brain mechanisms,
context and psychopathology. Neuroscience &
Biobehavioral Reviews, 37, 1237-1548.
Hadjikhani, N. (2007). Mirror neuron system and
Autism. Progress in Autism Research, Nova Science
Publishing Inc, pp. 151-166.
Ingersoll, B. (2008). The social role of imitation in
autism: Implications for the treatment of imitation
deficits. Infants & Young Children, 21, 107-119.
Kylliäinen, A., and Hietanen, J. K. (2006). Skin
conductance responses to another person’s gaze in
children with autism. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 36, 517-525.
Langdell, T. (1978). Recognition of Faces: An
Approach to the Study of Autism. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 19, 255-268.
Leekam, S., Baron-Cohen, S., Perrett, D., Milders, M.,
and Brown, S. (1997). Eye-direction detection: a
dissociation between geometric and joint attention
skills in autism. British Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 15, 77-95.
Meltzoff, A. N. (2005). Imitation and other minds: The
‘‘Like Me’’ hypothesis. In Hurley, S., & Chater, N.
(Eds.), Perspectives on imitation: From cognitive
neuroscience to social science (pp. 55–77). Cam
bridge: MIT Press.
Pellicano, E., and Macrae, C. N. (2009). Mutual eye
gaze facilitates person categorization for typically
developing children, but not for children with autism.
Psychonomic bulletin & review, 16, 1094-1099.
Postma-Nilsenová, M., Brunninkhuis, N., & Postma, E.
(2013). Eye Gaze Affects Vocal Intonation Mimicry.
In M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, & I. Wachsmuth
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference of
The Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1139-1144).
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Press, C., Richardson, D., & Bird, G. (2010). Intact
imitation of emotional facial actions in autism
spectrum conditions. Neuropsychologia, 48, 32913297.
Rogers, S. J., Hepburn, S. L., Stackhouse, T., &
Wehner, E. (2003). Imitation performance in toddlers
with autism and those with other developmental dis
orders. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 44, 763–781.
Santiesteban, I., White, S., Cook, J., Gilbert, S. J.,
Heyes, C., & Bird., G. (2012). Training social
cognition: From imitation to Theory of Mind.
Cognition, 122, 228-235.
Sato, A., & Itakura, S. (2013). Intersubjective actioneffect binding: Eye contact modulates acquisition of
bidirectional association between our and others’
actions. Cognition, 127, 383-390.
Senju, A. (2013). Atypical development of spontaneous
social cognition in autism spectrum disorders. Brain
& Development, 35, 96-101.
Senju, A., Tojo, Y., Dairoku, H., and Hasegawa, T.

(2004). Reflexive orienting in response to eye gaze
and an arrow in children with and without autism.
J of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 45, 445-458.
Senju, A., Hasegawa, T., and Tojo, Y. (2005). Does
perceived direct gaze boost detection in adults and
children with and without autism? The stare-in-thecrowd effect revisited. Visual Cognition, 12, 14741496.
Senju, A., and Johnsson, M. H. (2009). Atypical eye
contact in autism: Models, mechanisms and
development. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral
Reviews, 33, 1204-1214.
Slocombe, K. E., Alvarez, I., Branigan, H. P., Jellema,
T., Burnett, H. G., Fischer, A., Li, Y. H., Garrod, S.,
and Levita, L. (2012). Linguistic Alignment in Adults
with and Without Asperger’s Syndrome. Journal of
Autism and Developmental Disorders, 1-14.
Speer, L. L., Cook, A. E., McMahon, W. M., and Clark,
E. (2007). Face processing in children with autism
Effects of stimulus contents and type. Autism, 11,
265-277.
Tesink, C. (2013). Neurobiological insights into lan
guage comprehension in autism: Context matters.
The Netherlands: Donders series.
Toth, K., Munson, J., Meltzoff, A. N., & Dawson, G.
(2006). Early predictors of communication develop
ment in young children with autism spectrum disor
der: Joint attention, imitation, and toy play. J of Au
tism and Developmental Disorders, 36, 993–1005.
Van Holland, S. (2007). Waarom hebben kinderen met
een autistische stoornis moeite met imiteren? (Essay
Opvoeding en Ontwikkeling, Utrecht University,
Utrecht). Retrieved from http://www.
freewebs.com/sanne_van_holland/PaperAutisme.pdf
Vanvuchelen, M., Roeyers, H., & De Weerdt, W.
(2011). Do imitation problems reflect a core
characteristic in autism? Evidence from a literature
review. Res in Autism Spectrum Disorders, 5, 89-95.
von Grünau, M., and Anston, C. (1995). The detection
of gaze direction: A stare-in-the-crowd effect.
Perception, 24, 1297-1313.
Wallace, S., Coleman, M., Pascalis, O., and Bailey, A.
(2006). A study of impaired judgment of eye-gaze
direction and related face-processing deficits in
autism spectrum disorders. Perception, 35, 1651.
Wang, Y., Newport, R., & Hamilton, A. (2011). Eye
contact enhances mimicry of intransitive hand move
ments. Biology Letters, 7, 7–10.
Wang, Y., Ramsey, R., & Hamilton, A. F. de C.
(2011). The control of mimicry by eye contact is
mediated by medial prefrontal cortex. Journal of
Neuroscience, 31, 12001-12010.
Werner, E., Dawson, G., Osterling, J., and Dinno, N.
(2000). Brief Report: Recognition of Autism
Spectrum Disorder Before One Year of Age.
J of Autism and Dev Disorders, 30, 157-162.
Williams, J. H. G., Waiter, G. D., Gilchrist, A., Perrett,
D. I., Murray, A. D., and Whiten, A. (2006). Neural
mechanisms of imitation and mirror neuron
functioning in autistic spectrum disorder.
Neuropsychologia, 44, 610-621.

2698

