UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Endogenously- but not Exogenously-driven Selective Sustained Attention is Related to
Learning in a Classroom-like Setting in Kindergarten Children

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7d57g5h9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Erickson, Lucy
Thiessen, Erik
Godwin, Karrie
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Endogenously- but not Exogenously-driven Selective Sustained Attention is Related
to Learning in a Classroom-like Setting in Kindergarten Children
Lucy C. Erickson (lerickso@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh PA 15213 USA

Erik D. Thiessen (thiessen@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh PA 15213 USA

Karrie E. Godwin (kegodwin@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh PA 15213 USA

John P. Dickerson (dickerson@cs.cmu.edu)
Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Anna V. Fisher (fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh PA 15213 USA

(e.g., Wei, Wang, & Klausner, 2012). Despite agreement on
the importance of SSA for human learning and performance,
several key theoretical questions about the development of
attention, and the relation between attentional processes and
learning outcomes, remain unresolved.
One of the challenges in addressing questions about the
relation between attention and learning is the paucity of
appropriate experimental paradigms, particularly for
preschool-age children. With regards to assessment of SSA,
preschoolers are in a measurement gap: they are too old for
the assessment tools used with infants and toddlers, but
often too young to generate usable data on adult tasks
adapted for use with children (e.g., Continuous Performance
Task; for review see Fisher & Kloos, in press). Additionally,
any paradigm assessing young children’s SSA needs to be
similarly motivating across a range of ages, such that agerelated changes in young children’s performance can be
attributed to changes in psychological processes rather than
to age-related differences in the level of motivation and
engagement in the task. In order to address this
measurement gap we developed a novel paradigm to study
SSA in preschool-age children, the Track-It task (Fisher &
Kloos, in press; Fisher, Thiessen, Godwin, Kloos, &
Dickerson, 2013). In the Track-It task participants visually
track a target moving along a random trajectory on a grid.
The target can be accompanied by several distractors, also
moving along random trajectories. The participants’ task is
to report the last grid location visited by the target before it
disappears.
Prior research with the Track-It task has primarily focused
on disentangling the endogenous and exogenous factors that
support SSA. Exogenous factors relate to the characteristics

Abstract
Selective sustained attention (SSA) is vital for higher order
cognition. Although endogenous and exogenous factors
influence SSA, assessment of the degree to which these
factors influence performance and learning is often
challenging. We report findings from the Track-It task, a
paradigm that aims to assess the contribution of endogenous
and exogenous factors to SSA within the same task.
Behavioral accuracy and eye-tracking data on the Track-It
task were correlated with performance on a learning task.
Behavioral accuracy and fixations to distractors did not
predict learning when exogenous factors supported SSA. In
contrast, fixations to distractors were negatively correlated
with learning when endogenous factors supported SSA.
Similarly, higher behavioral accuracy was correlated with
greater learning when endogenous factors supported SSA.
These findings suggest that although children showed
equivalent levels of distractibility when exogenous and
endogenous factors supported SSA, different conditions of the
Track-It task likely engaged different attentional control
mechanisms.
Keywords: selective attention; sustained attention; attention
and learning; measurement; exogenous and endogenous
factors

Introduction
Selective sustained attention (SSA) is the ability to process
some parts of the environment at the exclusion of others
over a period of time, an ability that has been argued to be
fundamental to learning. In particular, selective sustained
attention has been implicated in contexts ranging from
infants learning their first words (e.g., Yu & Smith, 2012) to
college students learning in formal educational settings

1
457

of the stimuli (e.g., contrast, brightness, motion, etc.); they
are often described in terms of the degree to which a
stimulus is “salient.” In newborns and very young infants,
selection is typically described as stimulus-driven or
automatic such that the locus of attention is determined
largely by the physical properties of a stimulus (for reviews
see Bornstein, 1990; Ruff & Rothbart, 2001). Over the
course of development, endogenous factors come to play a
larger role in SSA (Diamond, 2006; Colombo & Cheatham,
2006; Oakes, Kannass, & Shaddy, 2002; Ruff & Rothbart,
2001). Endogenous factors are cognitive processes, such as
working memory which is necessary for goal representation,
that allow the organism to voluntarily control the locus of its
attention (Colombo & Cheatham, 2006; Kane & Engle,
2002).
In the Track-It task, the contributions of exogenous and
endogenous factors are assessed through distractor
manipulations. Specifically, in the Homogeneous distractors
condition the distractors are identical to each other (e.g., red
triangles) and different from the target (e.g., a blue square);
in the Heterogeneous distractors condition the distractors are
unique from each other (e.g., a red triangle and a green
diamond) and from the target (e.g., a blue square). Tracking
accuracy in the Heterogeneous distractors condition is
hypothesized to reflect the contribution of predominantly
endogenous factors: the task provides no contextual support
to benefit performance (e.g., each object in the set is equally
distinct and therefore targets are no more salient than
distractors) and children have to exert effortful control to
remain on-task. In contrast, in the Homogeneous distractors
condition the target object is distinct and therefore more
salient than the distractors. Thus, performance in the
Homogeneous distractors condition is hypothesized to
reflect the contributions of both endogenous factors (e.g.,
effortful control) and exogenous factors (e.g., higher
saliency of target objects compared to distractors).
If different conditions of the Track-It task tap into
separate and differentiable factors supporting attention,
these conditions should be more or less predictive of
learning outcomes as a function of how closely the learning
task relates to (or depends upon) exogenous or endogenous
processes. This prediction has not been thoroughly assessed
in the developmental literature. Most claims about the
relation between attention and learning outcomes have
simply established that some form of attention is necessary
for learning.
For example, prior experiments have
demonstrated that infants and young children learn better
when they attend to the input, and that attention to particular
aspects of the input facilitates learning of those aspects (e.g.,
Baker, Olson, & Behrmann, 2004; Toro, Sinnett, & SotoFaraco, 2005). However, these prior experiments have not
distinguished between exogenous and endogenous factors
promoting attention, nor how these different factors might
be differentially involved in different tasks.
We suggest that endogenous attention will be useful
primarily in tasks that involve explicit learning, in settings
where the child has some discretion over which aspect of

the input to which he or she attends. By contrast,
exogenous attention should be more useful in settings where
learning is driven by the characteristics of the stimuli, such
as implicit or statistical learning tasks. In this experiment,
we test the first of these predictions. We placed children in
a simulated classroom setting, presented them with a series
of lessons on age-appropriate introductory science content,
and subsequently tested children’s learning of this material.
In separate sessions, we assessed children’s performance in
the Homogeneous and Heterogeneous Distractor conditions
of the Track-It task. We predict that children’s performance
in the Heterogeneous (but not Homogeneous) distractor
condition will be correlated with their learning scores in the
classroom-like setting. This is because the Heterogeneous
Distractor condition taps into the kinds of endogenous
factors (such as working memory and inhibition) that may
be critical for success in formal education settings. By
contrast, the abilities measured in the Homogeneous
Distractor condition are predicted to be less relevant for
success in the classroom.

Method
Participants
Participants were 24 typically developing kindergarten
students (Mage = 5.37 years; 12 females, 12 males). None of
the children who participated in the present study had been
diagnosed with a learning disability. All participants were
recruited from a laboratory school at a private university in
Pittsburgh, PA.

Design, Stimuli, and Procedure
Children completed the Track-It task in the eye tracker. The
Track-It task was administered twice during the 2012-2013
school year. Children also completed a classroom learning
task which consisted of three lessons which occurred over a
two-week period in the winter of 2012. Additional details
regarding the administration of each task are provided
below
Track-It Task. The Track-It task was presented on the
Tobii T60 tracker. Fixations and behavioral accuracy data
were collected. In the task (freely available for download at
http://www.psy.cmu.edu/~trackit/), participants viewed a 3
x 3 grid and were asked to track a single target object
moving around the screen among six distractors. After a
variable length trial (M = 12.60 s, SD = 1.91 s), all of the
objects disappeared from the screen and the participants
were asked to select the grid location the target last visited
prior to disappearing. Both targets and distractors were
randomly selected from a pool of 72 unique objects (e.g.,
green diamond, orange triangle). Each grid location was
marked in a pastel color to assist children in reporting the
last location visited by the target.
In the Homogeneous Distractors Condition, all of the
distractors were identical in shape and color. Consequently,
the target was visually distinct from all distractors, and thus
exogenous factors, in addition to endogenous factors,
supported SSA. In the Heterogeneous Distractors Condition,

2
458

each object was unique in shape and color. The saliency of
the target and the distractors was equivalent, and thus only
endogenous factors supported SSA. Objects subtended
approximately 2.8° of the visual angle at a viewing distance
of 50 cm. The speed of motion for objects was set to 500
pixels per frame at 30 frames per second, using a 17”
monitor of 1024x768 resolution.
At the beginning of a trial, participants viewed a static
image of the objects in a randomized starting position, with
a red circle clearly marking the target. The experimenter
waited until the participant was ready and initiated the trial,
at which point the red circle disappeared and the objects
began moving. The motion path of the distractors was not
restricted, but the path of the target was restricted such that
the trial would not end until the target had visited all nine
possible locations. In order to minimize possible confusion
when reporting the location last visited by the target object,
the target would only disappear in the middle of the grid
cell. The trial length was a minimum of 10s; however, the
actual trial length varied slightly in order to adhere to the
motion restrictions. A schematic depiction of the Track-It
task is presented in Figure 1.

experimental conditions were administered in two separate
testing sessions. The condition order was counterbalanced
across participants. The average delay between testing
sessions was 5.02 weeks (SD = 2.99 weeks). Each session
consisted of six test trials. The trials were broken into two
sets, with each set containing three trials. This procedure
allowed the experimenter to recalibrate the eye tracker in
between sets.
Classroom Learning Task To prevent over-crowding in
the laboratory classroom, the children were divided into two
groups using stratified random assignment in order to equate
groups on age and gender (Group 1: N = 12, Mage = 5.37
years, 6 females, 6 males; Group 2: N = 12, Mage = 5.39
years, 6 females, 6 males). However, one child was absent
on all occasions when the classroom learning task was
administered, and therefore provided no data on this task.
As a result, the final sample used for subsequent analyses
consisted of 23 children.
The classroom learning task took place in a research
laboratory that was modified to look like a classroom.
Instruction consisted of a short read-aloud, which is a
common instructional activity in kindergarten classrooms.
During the lessons, children sat on colorful carpet squares in
a semi-circle facing the teacher. The seating arrangement
was randomly assigned at the beginning of the study and
remained constant for all of the testing sessions (akin to the
stable seating arrangement participants experience in their
own classroom). All lessons were conducted by a
hypothesis-blind research assistant who had prior early
childhood education experience.
Children participated in three lessons over a 2-week
period. Lessons consisted of 5- to 7-minute read-alouds.
Lesson topics included: Plate Tectonics, Volcanoes, and
Bugs. The children had not received formal instruction on
any of the lesson topics during the current academic year
Assessment workbooks were created to measure the
children’s learning outcomes. The assessments were
administered at the end of each lesson. Each assessment
included six questions in which children were asked to
select the correct answer from four pictorial response
options (one correct answer and three lures). All of the
response options were novel (i.e., four pictures children did
not see during the read-aloud) to ensure the children were
not merely selecting an answer based on familiarity.
Example lesson content and an assessment item are
presented in Figure 2. Additionally, prior to the beginning
of the study the children were pre-tested on their knowledge
of the instructional content in order to ensure the lesson
content was novel to the children. The format of the pre-test
assessments was identical to the assessments described
above
A delayed post-test was administered 13.63 weeks after
the classroom learning task in order to assess retention of
the lesson content. The delayed post-test was administered
in a single testing session. The children were assessed
individually in a quiet room adjacent to their classroom.

Figure 1. Schematic depiction of the Track-It task in the
Heterogeneous Distractors condition (Panel A) and the
Homogenous Distractors condition (Panel B).
After selecting the grid location in which the target
disappeared, participants were given a memory check.
Children were presented with a 2 x 2 grid of objects they
had seen during the trial and asked to select the target
object. The memory check served to differentiate between
possible reasons why a participant might fail to select the
appropriate target location. Specifically, if a participant
failed to select the appropriate target location, and also
failed to identify the target during the memory check, this
might indicate that encoding of the target was insufficiently
robust to last for the entire trial, rather than a failure of SSA.
In contrast, if participants failed to select the appropriate
target location, yet succeeded on the memory check, this
would indicate that the failure was one of SSA rather than
memory.
The experimental condition of the Track-It task
(Homogeneous Distractors or Heterogeneous Distractors)
was manipulated as a within-subjects variable. The

3
459

The Earth is made up of 3
different layers, and the layers of
the Earth have special names. The
first layer is called the crust. The
crust is made of mostly rock. The
thickness of the Earth’s crust varies
from 3 miles to 34 miles.

3

7

1

10

Analysis of the eye-tracking data revealed that children
were not more likely to fixate on distractors in the
Heterogeneous Distractors Condition (M = 0.32, SD = 0.19)
than in the Homogeneous Distractors Condition (M = 0.36,
SD = 0.14) paired-samples t (21) = 1.025, ns. However, the
correlation between proportion of fixations in the
Heterogeneous and Homogeneous Distractors Conditions
was not significant, (r = 0.35, p = 0.11), which may suggest
that the two conditions of the Track-It task differed in the
degree to which they relied on endogenous processes. For
example, it is possible that re-fixating to the target object
after getting distracted in the Homogenous distractors
condition was aided by the target’s saliency and required
fewer endogenous resources than re-fixating to the target in
the Heterogeneous Distractors condition. In contrast, in the
Heterogeneous Distractors condition performance was only
supported by endogenous factors as the saliency of the
target and distractors was equivalent,

Q) How many layers
does the Earth have?
A) 3

Figure 2. Sample content from the Volcano lesson (Panel A)
and a sample assessment question from the Volcano lesson
(Panel B). All text was presented verbally.

Performance on the Classroom Learning Task
Children’s pre-test accuracy was not different from chance
(25%), suggesting that the lesson content was in fact novel
to the children; MPre-test = 0.23 (0.09) t(22) = 1.26, p = 0.22.
Children’s
accuracy
immediately
following
the
administration of the lessons was significantly above
chance, (M = .54, SD = .21), one-sample t(22) = 6.83, p <
.0001. Furthermore, the results suggest that the children
successfully learned from the instruction as evidenced by
their higher accuracy on the post-test compared to their
performance on the pre-test, paired-samples t(22) = 7.42, p
< 0.0001.
Children’s accuracy on the delayed post-test (M = .34, SD
= .21) was considerably lower than on the immediate posttest, paired-sample t(22) = 6.15, p < .0001. Nonetheless,
children’s accuracy on the delayed post-test was marginally
above chance, one-sample t(22) = 2.02, p = .056, suggesting
some degree of retention of the learned material even after a
significant delay (13.63 weeks).

Coding and Analyses of the Eye Tracking Data
Eye-tracking data were collected on a Tobii T60 Eye
Tracker. The proportion of fixations to distractors, an index
of children’s distractibility, was defined as the number of
fixations that were near a distractor but not near a target,
divided by the total number of fixations. A fixation was
defined as a look that fell within a certain radius of an object
(70 pixels of any part of the 120 pixel-wide object), but did
not enter the radius of an object from the opposing category
during the duration of the look (e.g., a fixation to a
distractor that never entered the radius of the target).
Fixation data were not available for one child in both
conditions because Tobii did not register any fixations.
Fixation data could not be computed for one child in one
condition due to experimenter error. As a result, statistical
analyses utilizing fixation data were obtained from 23 of the
24 children in the homogeneous condition and 22 of the 24
children in the heterogeneous condition.

The Relationship between Endogenously- and
Exogenously-driven SSA and Learning
To explore the hypothesis that learning in formal settings
requires endogenously-driven SSA to a greater extent than
exogenously-driven SSA, we examined the pattern of
correlations among children’s learning scores on the
classroom task, Track-It response accuracy, and fixations to
distractors in the Track-It task.
We consistently observed a pattern of correlations that
supported the hypothesis stated above: children’s classroom
learning scores were significantly correlated with their
performance in the Heterogeneous Distractors condition but
not in the Homogenous Distractors condition of the Track-It
task. It is notable that this pattern of correlations was
observed for both immediate and delayed post-test scores
with both response accuracy and eye tracking data on the
Track-It task (see Table 1 and Figure 3).

Results
Performance on the Track-It Task
Paired t tests were used to determine whether memory and
tracking response accuracy differed as a function of
experimental condition. Memory accuracy approached
ceiling, and did not significantly differ between the
Homogeneous Distractors and Heterogeneous Distractors
Conditions (M = 97.92, SD = 7.47 and M = 95.83, SD =
7.37, respectively), t(23) = 1.14, ns. Tracking accuracy was
also high, and did not differ significantly between the
Homogeneous Distractors and Heterogeneous Distractors
Conditions (M = 79.17, SD = 26.58 and M = 85.42, SD =
15.78, respectively), t(23) = 1.23, ns.

4
460

Specifically, the proportion of fixations to distractors in
the Heterogeneous Distractors Condition was negatively
correlated with children’s learning scores on the immediate
post-test (r = -0.43, p = .05) and with their delayed post-test
learning scores (r = - .663, p < .005; see Figure 3). In other
words, greater proportion of fixations to distractors in this
condition corresponded to lowers scores in the classroom
learning task. In contrast, the proportion of fixations to
distractors in the Homogeneous Distractors Condition was
not significantly related to the immediate post-test learning
scores (r = -0.18, p = 0.42) or the delayed post-test scores (r
= - .328, p= .136).
Table 1: The pattern of correlations in the present study.

** p ≤ .01 (2-tailed); * p ≤ .05 (2-tailed); ~ p ≤ .06 (2-tailed)

A similar pattern emerged when we analyzed tracking
response accuracy on the Track-It task: the more accurate
children were in identifying the last location visited by the
target in the Heterogeneous Distractors Condition, the
higher their immediate post-test learning scores were (r =
0.574, p = .01). The correlation between Track-It response
accuracy and delayed post-test scores was marginally
significant (r = .412, p = .051). These findings are presented
in Figure 3. At the same time, there was no significant
association between Track-It response accuracy in the
Homogeneous Distractors Condition and immediate posttest learning scores (r = 0.350, p = 0.101) or delayed posttest learning scores (r = .284, p > .18).

Figure 3. Scatterplots depicting significant correlations
between both behavioral accuracy and the proportion of
fixations to distractors and learning on the immediate and
delayed post-tests.

5
461

A.V.F. (R305A110444); by the Department of Education
through a Graduate Training Grant awarded to Carnegie
Mellon University (R305B090023); by the National Science
Foundation through a grant awarded to L.C.E. (0946825);
and by the Department of Defense through a National
Defense Science & Engineering Graduate Fellowship
awarded to J.P.D.

Discussion
Kindergarten children were equally good at both tracking
and encoding targets on the Track-It task regardless of
whether the distractors were homogeneous (in which both
endogenous and exogenous factors support SSA) or
heterogeneous (only endogenous factors support SSA).
Although previous findings indicate that children are
superior at tracking targets among homogeneous distractors,
these differences are more pronounced in 3- and 4-yearolds, with older children showing comparable performance
when endogenous and exogenous factors support SSA
(Fisher et al., 2013).
Although children showed equivalent accuracy and
proportion of fixations to distractors in both conditions,
performance in the two conditions may not have recruited
the same attentional control mechanisms. Specifically, we
hypothesize that the Homogeneous and Heterogeneous
distractors conditions recruit exogenous and endogenous
attentional control mechanisms respectively. This possibility
is supported by (1) the patterns of correlations between
performance in the two conditions and (2) the pattern of
correlations between performance on the Track-It task and
the immediate as well as the delayed post-test of the
classroom learning task. Specifically, both behavioral
tracking accuracy and fixations to the distractors in the
Heterogeneous Distractors Condition were related to
children’s performance in the classroom learning task:
children who were more accurate in identifying the last
location visited by the target and whose attention was less
easily captured by distractors tended to show superior
learning scores. In contrast, in the Homogeneous Distractors
Condition, accuracy and fixations to distractors were not
significantly related to children’s learning scores.
One likely possibility is that targets are more attention
grabbing when the distractors are homogeneous than when
they are heterogeneous. As a result, children who fixate on
distractors during the task may have more difficulty reorienting to the target when the distractors are
heterogeneous than when they are homogeneous. Future
research will be necessary to test this possibility.
The present findings dovetail with recent work suggesting
that the Track-It task allows for the separation of
endogenous and exogenous factors supporting SSA within a
single task (Fisher et al., 2013). In addition, these results
replicate the finding that distractibility as measured by
accuracy on the Track-It task predicts learning in an
ecologically valid task of classroom learning.

References
Baker, C. I., Olson, C. R., & Behrmann, M. (2004). Role of
attention and perceptual grouping in visual statistical
learning. Psychological Science, 15(7), 460–466.
Bornstein, M. H. (1990). Attention in infancy and the
prediction of cognitive capacities in childhood. In J. Enns
(Ed.), Development of attention: Research and theory (pp.
3–19). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Colombo, J., & Cheatham, C. L. (2006). The emergence and
basis of endogenous attention in infancy and early
childhood. In R. Kail (Ed.). Advances in child
development and behavior (Vol. 34, pp. 283–310).
Oxford, UK: Academic Press.
Diamond, A. (2006). The early development of executive
functions. In E. Bialystok & F. Craik (Eds.), Lifespan
cognition: Mechanisms of change (pp. 7–95). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Fisher, A., & Kloos, H. (in press). Development of Selective
Sustained Attention: The Role of Executive Functions. To
be published by APA edited volume on Executive
Functions.
Fisher, A., Thiessen, E., Godwin, K., Kloos, H., &
Dickerson, J. (2013). Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology. Journal
of
Experimental
Child
Psychology,114, 275–294.
Kane, M. J., & Engle, R. W. (2002). The role of prefrontal
cortex in working–memory capacity, executive attention,
and general fluid intelligence: An individual–differences
perspective. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(4), 637–
671.
Oakes, L., Kannass, K. N., & Shaddy, D. J. (2002).
Developmental changes in endogenous control of
attention: The role of target familiarity on infants’
distraction latency. Child Development, 73, 1644–1655.
Ruff, H., & Rothbart, M. K. (2001). Attention in early
development. New York: Oxford University Press.
Toro, J. M., Sinnett, S., & Soto–Faraco, S. (2005). Speech
segmentation by statistical learning depends on
attention. Cognition, 97(2), B25–B34.
Wei, F. Y. F., Wang, Y. K., & Klausner, M. (2012).
Rethinking college students' self–regulation and sustained
attention: Does text messaging during class influence
cognitive learning?. Communication Education, 61(3),
185–204.
Yu, C., & Smith, L.B. (2012). Embodied attention and word
learning by toddlers. Cognition, 244–262.

Acknowledgements
We thank Megan Petroccia, Amy Barrett, and Ashley
Episcopo for their help collecting the data. We also thank
the children, parents, and teachers who made this project
possible. The work reported here was supported by the
National Science Foundation, through a grant awarded to
E.D.T. (BCS0642415); by the Institute of Education
Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, through a grant to

6
462

