UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Exploring the Unconscious Nature of Insight Using Continuous Flash Suppression and a Dual
Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0r08b91x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Suzuki, Hiroaki
Fukuda, Haruaki
Miyata, Hiromitsu
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Exploring the Unconscious Nature of Insight
Using Continuous Flash Suppression and a Dual Task
Hiroaki Suzuki (susan@ri.aoyama.ac.jp)
College of Education, Psychology and Human Studies, Aoyama Gakuin University
4-4-25 Shibuya, Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 150-8366, Japan

Haruaki Fukuda (haruaki@idea.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The University of Tokyo
3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan

Hiromitsu Miyata (miyata@hirc.aoyama.ac.jp)
Human Innovation Research Center, Aoyama Gakuin University
4-4-25 Shibuya, Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 150-8366, Japan

Keishi Tsuchiya (stk16.instagram@gmail.com)
College of Education, Psychology and Human Studies, Aoyama Gakuin University
4-4-25 Shibuya, Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 150-8366, Japan

Abstract

Dynamic Constraint Relaxation Theory of Insight

A growing body of evidence suggests that implicit
information processing has considerable effects on the higherorder cognitive processes such as insight problem solving. Is
such implicit information stored within the working memory
system, or is it processed in a storage system other than
working memory? To differentiate these two possibilities, the
present study examined solution of the T-puzzle, an insight
problem, after participants were or were not subliminally
presented with the hint images by using the continuous flash
suppression (CFS). A spatial tapping task, which is deemed to
interfere with spatial working memory, was introduced during
CFS. The two hypotheses each predicted deteriorated and
maintained performance on the T-puzzle after the tapping task.
Contrary to these hypotheses, participants tended to exhibit
better solution performance and relaxation of constraints after
having the tapping task, either with or without subliminal
presentation of the hints. Mechanisms by which the secondary
task may facilitate insight problem solving are discussed.
Keywords: insight problem solving; working memory;
implicit processing; T-puzzle; continuous flash suppression.

Introduction
Whereas explicit information processing is generally
assumed to govern human higher thoughts, studies on
implicit learning and memory have suggested that implicit
information has considerable influence on our thoughts and
behavior (Eagleman, 2011). For example, researchers have
long assumed that conscious information processing
including goal setting, planning, monitoring of actions, etc.
plays a dominant role in human problem solving. However,
a number of recent reports suggest that subliminally
presented hint stimuli significantly facilitate subsequent
performance on insight problems (Hattori et al., 2013;
Suzuki & Fukuda, 2013). That is, information that is
processed at the subconscious level may considerably
influence higher-order cognitive processes such as insight.

Insight problem solving has several unique characteristics.
First, whereas problems typically used in psychological
experiments are simple, it is quite difficult for solvers to
attain solutions by themselves (Ohlsson, 1992). Second,
solvers stick to the incorrect approaches and make the same
errors repeatedly (Kaplan & Simon, 1990). During these
impasses, they frequently ignore useful information that was
accidentally found or generated (Suzuki et al., 2000).
Finally, insight seems to come to the mind suddenly.
A number of theories have proposed different
mechanisms by which problem solving by insight is attained.
We here adopt the ideas of the dynamic constraint relaxation
theory (Suzuki, 2009), which has been developed under the
strong influence of the notion of constraint (Knoblich et al.,
1999) and Q-learning with softmax algorithm (Bridle, 1990).
The theory assumes three kinds of constraints and a
relaxation mechanism. The term “constraint” here refers to
humans’ natural tendencies to select appropriate options and
exclude inappropriate ones out of the huge amount of
information. The object-level constraint reflects people’s
natural preferences of how given objects are encoded. The
relational constraint refers to solvers’ natural preferences of
how given multiple objects are related to each other. The
goal constraint evaluates a match between the current and
the desired states, and gives feedback to the constraints
responsible for generating the current states. At the initial
stages of problem solving, the object-level and relational
constraints jointly operate to lead solvers to an impasse.
However, as solvers repeat manipulations, feedback
provided by the goal constraint dynamically alters the
strength values of the object-level and relational constraints.
This increases the probabilities of constraint violation. At a
certain stage of problem solving, solvers accidentally violate
each constraint to attain correct solution. This theory

2955

effectively explains sudden nature of insight, effects of hints,
individual differences, etc., and can apply to various insight
problems (Suzuki, 2009; Suzuki et al., 2000).
The T-puzzle is a task that consists of four polygonal
shapes that have to be put together to form a capital T
(Figure 1). Despite the apparent simplicity of the task, it is
actually a quite difficult problem, with less than 10% of
naïve solvers attaining correct solution within 15 minutes
(Suzuki et al, 2000). The T-puzzle has a number of
characteristics unique to insight problems. First, most
participants persist in placing the pentagon in a position
either horizontal or vertical to the reference line. They also
incorrectly try to fill the concave corner of the pentagon
with the other pieces of shapes. Second, discontinuity of
behavior is observed. That is, when insight occurs, the
aforementioned incorrect manipulations are taken over by
tilting the pentagon without filling its concave corner. Third,
there are cases in which useful strategies that are generated
are abandoned during impasses (Suzuki et al., 2000).

Figure 1: The T-puzzle: The four pieces and the solution.
From the perspective of the dynamic constraint relaxation
theory, the object-level constraint in the T-puzzle relates to
how each piece of shape is placed. Whereas there exist
countless ways of putting each shape, people are strongly
inclined to place it in a stable position, that is, either
horizontally or vertically to the reference line such as the
sides of the table. This makes it difficult for solvers to place
the pentagon in a diagonal orientation. The relational
constraint is considered to be how more than one piece of
shape is connected to each other. People naturally tend to
make a good-looking shape having fewer convex corners,
which explains why solvers frequently fill the concave
corner of the pentagon with the other pieces.

Working Memory System and Insight
Traditional models of working memory involving
phonological loop, visuo-spatial sketchpad, and central
executive have assumed that the working memory system
stores information to which the agent is intentionally paying
attention with conscious awareness (Baddeley, 1986). In
contrast with these views, Hassin et al. (2009) proposed that
working memory can operate unintentionally and without
conscious awareness, and that the models of working
memory should be expanded to implicit working memory.
In these research contexts, Suzuki and Fukuda (2013)
used the T-puzzle to examine whether and how hint stimuli
that are subliminally presented may influence subsequent
insight problem solving. They used continuous flash

suppression (CFS), a technique that is frequently used to
control conscious awareness of visual stimuli (Tsuchiya &
Koch, 2005). In CFS, one eye is presented with a series of
rapidly changing stimuli while the other eye is presented
with a static visual stimulus. The static stimulus then
becomes consciously repressed by the changing stimuli.
Unlike the previous studies that put the hint stimuli in
between the continuously presented frames of the moving
images (Hattori et al., 2013), the CFS is advantageous in
that it allows for subliminal presentation of the stimuli for
several seconds or even longer. Suzuki and Fukuda (2013)
found that participants who had been subliminally presented
with the solution of the puzzle solved the problem in 55.7
seconds on average, significantly shorter than those who
had had no prior presentation of the solution (311 seconds
on average). Participants presented with subliminal hints
also tended to show greater relaxation of constraints as they
made more manipulations during problem solving. These
data clearly suggest the influence of unconsciously
processed information on the solution of an insight problem.
These results provide us with a new possibility
concerning the nature of working memory. Since
information used in the problem solving is assumed to be
located in working memory, subliminally presented hint
information should be stored in working memory, and exert
control over the problem solving process. However,
traditional models of working memory may not accept this
interpretation because they assume that information in this
storage is consciously accessible.
There are two plausible hypotheses to resolve the conflict
between the experimental findings and the working memory
theory. The first is the possibility that the there exists a
place within the working memory system that the conscious
processes fail to access. According to this view, subliminal
hints of an insight problem would have been stored in this
place to facilitate problem solving at the expsense of its
capacity. The second hypothesis assumes that outside the
working memory system there exists another storage, i.e.,
implicit working memory that is inaccessible by conscious
process. In this view, subliminal information stored in this
working memory would have enhanced subsequent problem
solving without any load on the traditional working
memory .

Purpose of the Study
Accordingly, the present study was designed to differentiate
the two hypotheses described above. Working memory is
considered to have limited capacity (Baddeley, 1986). That
is, it is difficult to store and process too much information at
a time. It would thus be possible to differentiate the
aforementioned two hypotheses by introducing a secondary
task that places loads on working memory during subliminal
presentation of the hints. If the influence of subliminal hints
on problem solving decreases by introducing the secondary
task, that would support the first hypothesis that there is a
place within working memory that refuses access by
conscious processes. By contrast, if the secondary task has

2956

no effects on the influence of subliminal hints, the second
hypothesis would be supported that the subliminal
information exists in the implicit working memory system.
Even if neither of these hypothesis are supported, it could
still be possible that the secondary task has positive/negative
effects on the solution of the puzzle. In these cases,
relationships between working memory and insight would
be suggested. We subliminally presented the solution of the
T-puzzle by using CFS before participants were actually
confronted with the problem. We also introduced the spatial
tapping task during CFS, which is considered to interfere
with spatial working memory (Suto, 2005).

Method
Participants
Fifty-nine Japanese university students (28 females; mean
age = 20.9 years) having normal or corrected-to-normal
vision participated. Participants were assigned to the
following four groups: hint-tapping, hint-no-tapping, nohint-tapping, and no-hint-no-tapping, according to whether
they were exposed to the subliminal hint and the tapping
task during CFS. Thirteen were excluded because they
reported experience with the T-puzzle prior to the study.
Number of participants included in the analysis for each
group was 14, 15, 9, and 8, respectively. The Ethics
Committee of Aoyama Gakuin University approved the
study. All participants provided written informed consent
upon agreement to cooperate.

Settings and Stimuli
During subliminal presentation of the hint, a personal
computer (iMac A1207, Apple, CA; CPU: Core2Duo 2.33
GHz) with a 20-inches LCD monitor was located on a table
in front of the participant, who sat on a chair. A stereoscope
for creating binocular rivalry (TKK 129, Takei Scientific
Instruments, Niigata, Japan) was located adjacent to the
participant’s eyes. The stereoscope had a square-shaped
opening window and two mirrors on each eye’s side, so that
different images could be presented to each eye at a time.
The participant could look into the windows by putting
his/her chin on the chin support. The rapid changing stimuli
and a static image could appear simultaneously on each half
of the display (right or left).

On the side of the dominant eye, multiple geometrical
figures with high contrast appeared at randomized locations
(30 flips per second). Whereas images presented to the nondominant eye (hereinafter referred to as “target stimuli”)
were sufficiently visible with one eye, these images were
suppressed from visual awareness by the flash images.
Three types of target stimuli were used for each stage of the
experiment: an instruction stimulus, test stimuli, and hint
stimuli (Figure 2). The instruction stimulus was an
illustration of the face of Anpanman, a character of a
popular Japanese anime, which was used to explain CFS to
the participants. The test stimuli had three variations each
consisting of multiple geometrical figures. These stimuli
were used to confirm that participants did not consciously
perceive the target stimuli during CFS. The hint stimuli
were the correct solutions of the T-puzzle. There were two
variations according to whether the concave corner of the
pentagon was on the right or left side of the T-shape. Each
of these variations was used randomly and equally often.
The size of these target stimuli were between 5 and 7
degrees in visual angle. Brightness of these target stimuli
was sufficiently decreased so that they would be invisible
during CFS.
During subsequent solution of the T-puzzle, four pieces of
wood that were components of the puzzle were placed on a
table other than that during CFS. A sheet of paper provided
a lattice of 4 x 3 squares (about 16 x 12 cm), which served
as the outer frame when putting the wood pieces to form a
T-shape. A digital camcorder (HDR-XR520V, SONY,
Tokyo, Japan) was placed on a tripod behind the participant
and the chair, in order to record manipulation of the wood
pieces during solution of the puzzle.

Procedure
Dominant Eye Assessment The study took place in a quiet
room arranged for psychological experiments. The
experimenter (KT) first told the participant that the study
consisted of two independent experiments each concerning
visual perception and problem solving. The dominant eye of
the participant was then assessed. The participant extended
both arms, brought both hands together to create a triangular
opening, then with both eyes open looked at a distant objet
(a magnet) through the opening. The participant then
alternated closing eyes to determine which eye is viewing
the object (i.e., the dominant eye).
Presentation of Subliminal Hints The participant was next
instructed to sit on the chair to look at the visual stimuli
using CFS. The experiment room was made dim during
presentation of stimuli by turning off the light. A small red
fixation cross was then presented to each eye. If necessary,
the participant adjusted the angles of the mirrors equipped
in the stereoscope and the heights of the chair and the chin
support, until the two crosses appeared to be in the same
spatial location at the center of the window.

Figure 2: The hint (above) and test (below) stimuli.

2957

Then the experimenter explained CFS to the participant.
The instruction stimulus was presented to the non-dominant
eye. After confirming that the participant failed to perceive
the instruction stimulus, the experimenter told the
participant to close the dominant eye so that s/he would see
the instruction stimulus. The participant was then told that
the instruction stimulus presented to the non-dominant eye
was suppressed by the flash images presented to the
dominant eye. The participant was also told that this
experiment on visual perception aims to change the
brightness of the stimulus presented to the non-dominant
eye in order to determine the extent to which that stimulus is
perceived. The flash and the instruction stimuli lasted for 10
seconds for this and the subsequent test stages.
For the two conditions that involved the spatial tapping
task (i.e., hint-tapping, and no-hint-tapping), a white square
appeared at one of the three locations, i.e., right, center, or
left, within the flash images presented to the dominant eye.
Following practice, the participant was told to press the
corresponding key on the keyboard according to the location
of the white square during CFS. The square successively
appeared at random locations during the period, to which
the participant had to respond as quickly and accurately as
possible. The tapping task was absent in the other two
conditions (i.e., hint-no-tapping, and no-hint-no-tapping).
Next, one of the randomly selected test stimuli was
presented to the non-dominant eye. The participant was
required to verbally report if s/he perceived any visual
stimuli other than the flash images. The actual purpose of
this test stage was to confirm that the participant did not
perceive the stimulus presented to the non-dominant eye.
This confirmation was made twice, and participants who
reported that s/he perceived the test stimuli were assigned to
the conditions with no subliminal hint presentation (i.e., nohint-tapping or no-hint-no-tapping). Then, for conditions
with subliminal hint (i.e., hint-tapping and hint-no-tapping),
one of the hint stimuli were presented to the non-dominant
eye. This hint presentation was conducted using instructions
and procedure identical to those during test stimuli, so that
the experimenter could confirm that the participant did not
perceive the hint. For conditions with no subliminal hint
(i.e., no-hint-tapping and no-hint-no-tapping), one of the test
stimuli was presented in the same way as in the previous
stage. The participant was then told that the first experiment
had finished.

the participant failed to solve the puzzle three minutes after
this advice (18 minutes in total), the solution phase was
terminated and the correct solution was shown. Throughout
the solution period, the digital camcorder recorded the
manipulation of the wood pieces, though not the face of the
participant. Posture of the participant was corrected if
his/her own body parts obstructed the recording. All
participants were debriefed after completing the study.

Results
Accuracy and Solution Time
Table 1 shows proportions of participants who successfully
solved the puzzle－for those without advice (solution within
15 minutes) and for those either with or without advice
(solution within 18 minutes). Participants reporting prior
experience with successful solution of the puzzle are not
included. Even though proportions of correct solution were
generally lower than those in Suzuki and Fukuda (2013),
more than 33 % of participants in the hint-tapping and the
no-hint-tapping conditions successfully solved the puzzle
without advice, in contrast to those in the remaining two
conditions (20 % or less). Compared with the control (nohint-no-tapping) condition, frequency of participants for the
other three conditions with successful solution failed to
differ significantly, either when solvers without advice
(Fisher’s exact test; all ps > 0.254) are considered or when
those with advice are included (all ps > 0.329). However,
whereas successful solvers without advice were
significantly less frequent than non-successful ones for the
hint-no-tapping (1/2 binomial test; p = 0.018) and the nohint-no-tapping (p = 0.035) conditions, these were not the
cases for the hint-tapping (p = 0.212) or no-hint-tapping (p
= 0.254) conditions. These data show trends that
participants who had been exposed to the tapping task
during CFS were better at solving the subsequent insight
problem than those who had not.

Solution of the T-puzzle The participant was then
instructed to sit on another chair in the same experiment
room for the second experiment on problem solving. The
task here was to actually solve the T-puzzle. The participant
was told to put together the four pieces of wood place on the
table to form a T-shape. The participant solved the task on
the sheet of paper having the lattice as the outer frame,
which was expected to moderately facilitate insight. When
correct solution was not attained within 15 minutes, the
participant was verbally advised that s/he should not fill the
concave corner of the pentagon with the other pieces. When

2958

Table 1: Proportions of solvers for each condition.
Condition
Hint-tapping
Hint-no-tapping
No-hint-tapping
No-hint-no-tapping

N
total
14
15
9
8

% solvers
(no advice)
35.7
20.0
33.3
12.5

% solvers
(advice)
57.1
46.7
33.3
37.5

Table 2: Mean (SD) solution time in seconds.
Condition
Hint-tapping
Hint-no-tapping
No-hint-tapping
No-hint-no-tapping

Solution time
(no advice)
347.7 (164.3)
518.1 (290.4)
468.4 (189.1)
581.1 (0.0)

Solution time
(advice)
608.8 (361.4)
777.6 (295.3)
468.4 (189.1)
809.7 (161.9)

Table 2 shows mean solution time for the successful
solvers. Participants who failed to solve the puzzle were not
included in this analysis. Without advice, only one
participant solved the puzzle for the control (no-hint-notapping) condition. Nevertheless, solution time tended to be
shorter in the conditions with tapping than in those without
tapping, parallel to the trends observed for the frequency of
participants. When directly compared with the solution time
for the successful solver in the control condition (581.1
seconds), mean solution time for the hint-tapping condition
was significantly shorter (one-sample t-test: t[4] = -2.842, p
= 0.047), although those for the hint-no-tapping (t[2] = 0.307, p = 0.788) or no-hint-tapping conditions (t[2] = 0.843, p = 0.488) were not. The trend was consistent when
the successful solvers after taking advice were included.

for the relational constraint. Main effect of tapping (F[1, 38]
= 3.489, p = 0.070) and main effect of success (F[1, 38] =
3.755, p = 0.060) approached statistical significance, and
main effect of quarter (F[3, 114] = 20.545, p < 0.001) was
statistically significant. Multiple comparisons with
Bonferroni correction revealed significant differences
between Q4 and Q1 (p < 0.001), Q4 and Q2 (p < 0.001), Q4
and Q3 (p = 0.001), and between Q3 and Q1 (p = 0.015).
Other than these outcomes, there were no statistically
significant main effects or interactions for these constraints.

Relaxation of Constraints
A further analysis was conducted in association with the
dynamic constraint relaxation theory. As mentioned above,
solving the T-puzzle requires violation of both the objectlevel and the relational constraints (Suzuki, 2009).
Videotaped data were used to count the numbers of
segments in which violation of these constraints occurred. A
“segment” in this context was deemed to start when one
piece of the puzzle was connected to another piece and to
end when these pieces were separated. Violation of the
object-level constraint refers to the cases in which a piece is
placed in a diagonal orientation, and violation of the
relational constraint refers to the cases in which the
pentagon is connected to another piece with its concave
corner left unfilled. Both successful and non-successful
solvers were included in this analysis. To elucidate the
temporal course of the violation of constraints, the total
number of segments for each constraint and condition was
divided into quarters. Figure 2 depicts mean proportions of
violation for each condition and quarter of segments (Q1 to
Q4). A four-way repeated-measures analysis of variance
(ANOVA) with hint/no-hint (2), tapping/no-tapping (2), and
success/non-success (with no advice) (2) as between-subject
factors and quarter of segments (4) as a within-subject factor
was conducted for each constraint. The proportions were
arcsine transformed in order to make distributions more
normal for parametric statistics.
For the object-level constraint, main effect of tapping
(F[1, 38] = 5.000, p = 0.031), main effect of success (F[1,
38] = 4.433, p = 0.042), main effect of quarter (F[3, 114] =
15.842, p < 0.001), and interaction between success and
quarter (F[3, 114] = 7.114, p < 0.001) were statistically
significant. Multiple comparisons with Bonferroni
correction showed that violations were more frequent in Q4
than in Q1, Q2, and Q3 (all ps < 0.001). In these data,
participants who were exposed to the tapping task showed
more frequent violation of the constraint than those who
were not. In addition, successful solvers exhibit more
frequent violations than non-successful ones, with these
violations becoming more frequent towards the later stages
of problem solving. These trends were generally consistent

Figure 3: Temporal course of constraint relaxation

Discussion
Our initial hypotheses predicted enhanced performance on
the T-puzzle with the subliminal hint presentation. They
also predicted either deteriorated or maintained performance
on the puzzle with the introduction of the spatial tapping
task during CFS. The results supported neither of these
possibilities. Instead, participants who had been exposed to
the tapping task tended to show more frequent and quicker
solution of the problem. These trends were consistent when
manipulations of the pieces were analyzed from the
perspective of the dynamic constraint relaxation theory.
Participants having the tapping task tended to exhibit greater
relaxation of the constraints than those having no secondary

2959

task. Thus, contrary to our expectations, engaging in a
secondary task during CFS, rather than the hint itself, seems
to have facilitated insight. Additional findings were that
successful solvers tended to show more frequent violation of
constraints, and that proportions of violations were higher
toward later stages of solution.
Nevertheless, the present results should provide us with
another view regarding relationships between insight and
working memory system. One possible scenario may be that
engaging in a task that loads one subsystem of working
memory (i.e., visuo-spatial sketchpad) activates general
executive mechanisms involved in working memory, and
that activation later facilitated violation of constraints when
solving a spatial insight problem. This may suggest that
working memory system and insight are positively
associated with each other, at least when these mechanisms
are successively activated in this order. These
interpretations appear consistent with DeCaro et al. (2008)
showing that people having lower working memory
capacity learned a procedural/unconscious task faster than
those having higher working memory capacity. These data
suggested that explicit testing of the hypothesis without
working memory load may inhibit implicit learning, which
seems consistent with the idea that working memory load
can relax constraints. Even though DeCaro et al. used a
category learning task instead of an insight problem, it may
be plausible that similar processes were involved in the
present study as well.
These interpretations would still require cautious
considerations. First, rather than the secondary tapping task,
the primary visual task used during CFS may have
significantly interfered with the storage of the hint
information (e.g., Miyake & Shah, 1990). The detailed
nature of the geometrical stimuli used to create CFS may
also explain why the positive effect of the hint found in the
previous study (Suzuki & Fukuda, 2013) was not replicated
in the present experiment. These need to be explored by
varying the nature of the visual stimuli. Second, it may be
plausible that the tapping have presented a dual-task
challenge to the participants, thereby encouraging them to
try harder to perform better during the solution period. It
seems desirable to control such motivational factors by
introducing different types of secondary tasks. In addition,
because participants in the present study who perceived the
test stimuli were systematically assigned to the conditions
with no hint, it should be required to address the potential
relations between how the solver perceives the implicit
stimulus and how strongly the hint facilitates the solution.
These further modifications should help to elucidate the
mechanisms by which implicit processing and working
memory may influence insight problem solving.

Acknowledgments

References
Baddeley, A. D. (1986). Working memory. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Bridle, J. S. (1990). Probabilistic interpretation of
feedforward classification network outputs with
relationships to statistical pattern recognition. In F.
Fogelman-Soulie & J. Herault (Eds.) Neurocomputing:
Algorithms, Architectures, and Applications (pp. 227 236). Berlin: Springer-Verlag
DeCaro, M. S., Thomas, R. D., & Beilock, S. L. (2008).
Individual differences in category learning: Sometimes
less working memory capacity is better than one.
Cognition, 107, 284-294.
Eagleman, D. (2011). Incognito: The secret lives of the
brain. New York: Pantheon Books.
Hassin, R. R., Bargh, J. A., Engell, A. D., & McCulloch, K.
C. (2009). Implicit working memory. Consciousness and
Cognition, 18, 665-678.
Hattori, M., Sloman, S. A., & Orita, R. (2013). Effects of
subliminal hints on insight problem solving. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 20, 790-797.
Kaplan, C. A. & Simon, H. A. (1990). In search for insight.
Cognitive Psychology, 22, 374-419.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S, Haider, H. & Rhenius, D. (1999).
Constraint relaxation and chunk decomposition in insight
problem-solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25, 1534-1555.
Miyake, A., & Shah, P. (Eds). Models of working memory:
Mechanisms of active maintenance and executive control.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ohlsson, S. (1992). Information processing explanations of
insight and related phenomena. In M. T. Keane and K. J.
Gilhooly (Eds.) Advances in the Psychology of Thinking,
vol. 1. Hertfordshire, UK: Harvester, 1-44.
Suto, S. (2005). An examination of visuo-spatial rehearsal
in working memory. The Japanese Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 2, 1-8 (in Japanese).
Suzuki, H. (2009). Dynamics of insight problem-solving:
Its generative, redundant, and interactive Nature. In S.
Watanabe, A. P. Blaisdell, L. Huber, and A. Young (Eds.)
“Rational animals, irrational humans (pp. 253-268).
Tokyo: Keio University Press
Suzuki, H., Abe, K., Hiraki, K. and Miyazaki, M. (2000).
Cue-readiness in insight problem-solving. Proceedings of
the Twenty-Third Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, 1012-1017.
Suzuki, H., & Fukuda, H. (2013). Unconscious nature of
insight problem solving: An analysis using subliminal
priming by continuous flash suppression. Cognitive
Studies, 20, 353-367 (in Japanese).
Tsuchiya, N., & Koch, C. (2005). Continuous flash
suppression reduces negative afterimages. Nature
Neuroscience, 8, 1096-1101.

This study was supported by the Grants-in-Aid for Scientific
Research No. 50192620 from the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science (JSPS) to Hiroaki Suzuki.

2960

