UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Eye can't ignore what you're saying: Varying the reliability of gaze and language

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/326668xp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
MacDonald, Ross
Tatler, Benjamin

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Eye can’t ignore what you’re saying: Varying the reliability of gaze and language
Ross G. Macdonald (rgmacdonald@dundee.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Dundee, Nethergate,
Dundee, DD1 4HN, UK

Benjamin W. Tatler (b.w.tatler@activevisionlab.org)
School of Psychology, University of Dundee, Nethergate,
Dundee, DD1 4HN, UK

detect, localise and identify the target when the cue was
directed to the invalid location. A later study (Ricciardelli,
Bricolo, Aglioti, & Chelazzi, 2002) found that these invalid
gaze cues also lead to eye movements in the incorrect
direction. The above experiments provide strong evidence
for a reflexive shift in attention caused by gaze cues.
The automatic capture of attention, however, cannot fully
account for the way we respond to gaze cue stimuli, as these
responses have been shown to vary with perceived cuereliability. When gaze cue validity is reduced to 20%, the
reflexive effect is still present, but only at short SOAs
(~100ms) (Kuhn & Kingstone, 2009). Hill et al. (2005)
directly compared responses to different gaze cue
reliabilities. Half of their participants took part in a version
of the gaze cueing paradigm in which all gaze cues were
either valid or invalid. The remaining participants took part
in a task in which 50% of gaze cues were valid and the rest
invalid. The invalid trials had a detrimental effect on
response time for participants in the former task at SOAs up
to 150ms only, however in the latter paradigm the
detrimental effect was apparent up to 750ms. The authors
argue that this is evidence for two streams of attentional
control when viewing a gaze cue. Initially there is an
automatic orienting effect (present in both tasks) and then a
slower, top-down, selective effect (present when cues were
100% invalid). Whether both, one or neither of these
attentional effects is unique to social cues is unclear (for
discussion see Birmingham & Kingstone, 2009), however it
is clear that the perceived reliability of a gaze cue modulates
our response.
Language has also been shown to modulate the utilisation
of gaze cues. Linguistic research using the visual-world
paradigm has shown an intimate link between the words
people hear and where they look; people will not only look
to areas referenced in language, but also make anticipatory
looks to items relating to sentences they are hearing
(Altmann & Kamide, 1999). Research looking specifically
at the use of gaze cues in a real-world interaction (Hanna &
Brennan, 2007) found that gaze cues facilitate
communication; listeners in a target selection task used gaze
cues to identify targets before linguistic disambiguation. In
a more controlled experiment, Staudte and Crocker (2011)
showed participants videos of a robot providing gaze cues to
visible items while they heard incorrect sentences about
these items. The sentences could always be corrected in two
different and equally plausible ways. Participants mostly
corrected the sentences in the way that made the gazed-at
item the object of the sentence. These studies clearly show

Abstract
Gaze cues quickly orient attention, but language can affect
the extent to which we follow these cues (Macdonald &
Tatler, 2013). We investigated how reliability of language
and gaze cues affect attention. Participants, provided with
gaze and verbal cues, selected one of two potential targets and
received immediate feedback. Different combinations of gaze
and language reliabilities (50%, 80%, 100%) were used
across nine sessions. The most reliable cue available informed
participants’ decisions. Language was favoured when
reliability was equal and cues incongruent. When language
cues were 100% reliable, incongruent gaze cues had a larger
detrimental effect on performance when they were 80%
reliable compared to 50%. When gaze cues were 100%
reliable, there was an overall detrimental effect of unreliable
language, with performance slower when language was 50%
reliable compared to 80%. We conclude that language cues
are favoured and cause disruption when unreliable, even
when superfluous to the task.
Keywords: social attention; eye movements; joint attention;
language; gaze cueing.

Introduction
During an everyday social interaction, we provide verbal
and non-verbal cues to express our intentions, thoughts and
emotions. In the research areas of social cognition and
attention, cues provided by the gaze of another have been
the focus of much empirical research. Gaze cues have been
shown to orient attention and viewer gaze automatically,
leading some to conclude that humans have evolved to
reflexively orient attention in the direction of a gaze cue
(Emery, 2000). However, there is evidence that the effects
of gaze cues on attention and eye movements can be
modulated by the perceived reliability of the cue (Hill et al.,
2005). Furthermore, the verbal cues that often accompany
gaze cues in the real world have been shown to affect the
extent to which people seek and follow the gaze of another
(Macdonald & Tatler, 2013). The present study aims to
bring together these two factors to investigate how varying
the reliability of both gaze cues and language cues interact
to affect attention and behaviour.
Friesen and Kingstone (1998) developed a Posner-type
(1980) gaze-cueing paradigm to investigate the effect of
distracting gaze cues on attention. The paradigm involved
detecting, localising and identifying a target (a letter – “F”
or “T”) on the left or right of a display screen. In the centre
of the screen there was a simple drawing of a face looking
left, right or centrally, which participants were informed did
not predict target location. Participants were slower to

910

Methods

that gaze cues can influence the understanding of
ambiguous language.
As well as gaze cues influencing language, the type of
language used can influence the utilisation of gaze cues.
Knoeferle and Kreysa (2012) found that when unambiguous
sentences were harder to process (sentences with an
uncommon, but grammatically legal structure), participants
were less likely to use helpful gaze cues. Knoeferle and
Kreysa argue that the extra cognitive resources required for
sentence comprehension leave fewer resources free to utilise
non-verbal cues, suggesting a hierarchical use of language
and gaze, in which linguistic processing takes precedent
over gaze following.
In a previous study, we investigated the interaction
between gaze cues and language in a controlled real-world
paradigm (Macdonald & Tatler, 2013). Participants
followed instructions provided by an experimenter in order
to build abstract structures out of building blocks. The
experimenter varied the language used (unambiguous or
ambiguous) and the presence of gaze cues (present or
absent) between participants. Participants were found to
only seek and follow gaze cues when language was
ambiguous, which was the only condition in which gaze
cues were required for the task. We argue that this is strong
evidence for selective utilisation of gaze cues, dependent on
the informativeness of language.
The above studies show that language has a clear
influence on gaze following as does the perceived reliability
of a gaze cue. In the present study, we investigate the
relationship between gaze and language reliabilities.
Participants each carried out 4,320 trials (over nine sessions)
of a simple target selection task. We varied the reliabilities
of the gaze and language cues and analysed how these cues
influenced eye movements and performance.
Given the well-established gaze cueing effects using
similar paradigms (Friesen & Kingstone, 1998; Ricciardelli
et al, 2002), we hypothesised that gaze cues would influence
eye movements even when less reliable than language.
However we also hypothesised that this effect would be
modulated by gaze cue reliability, as top-down socialattentional processes will inhibit gaze following at low
reliabilities (Hill et al, 2005). Previous evidence suggests
that gaze cues are ignored in favour of language when gaze
provides no additional information (Macdonald & Tatler,
2013) or when available cognitive resources are focussed on
language processing (Knoeferle & Kreysa, 2012).
Therefore, language cues were predicted to be favoured over
gaze cues and lead to task disruption when incongruent.

Participants
Five students from the University of Dundee took part in
nine one-hour sessions over a two-week period. They each
received £20 for their participation.

Materials and eye movement recording
Gaze cue stimuli were composed of eight four-second
videos. The videos began with a face staring forward, then
after two seconds the face turned to look left or right. Each
of these clips was mirrored to provide 16 unique clips (eight
cueing to the left and eight to the right). Language cues
were made up of 30 descriptor audio clips (“select the
[object name]”), two spatial-determiner audio clips (“on the
[left or right]”) and twelve featural-determiner audio clips
(“that’s [colour]”). On either side of the head stimuli there
was a target picture. These pictures were 200x200 pixels in
size and featured objects that differed only in colour. There
were 30 pairs of pictures, each of which was used once in
each 30-trial block. Stimuli were presented on a 19-inch
computer monitor (with a resolution of 1024 x 768),
approximately 64 cm away from the participant. At this
distance the screen was 31.8° x 23.8°of visual angle. A
control pad with a left and a right trigger was used for
participant responses. This experiment was carried out using
an SR Research EyeLink 1000 desk-mounted eye-tracker
and the SR Research Experiment Builder software. This
system uses corneal reflection and pupil position to
calculate where a participant is fixating. Calibration
involved the participant fixating on nine markers on the
screen. Once calibrated, a verification procedure took place.
Verification (and if necessary, re-calibration) was carried
out after every block of 30 trials. The mean calibration error
was .369° (SD = .260°) of visual angle. Before each trial,
participants fixated a marker in the middle of the screen.
The lead experimenter could see the estimated fixation point
on their display and was required to accept this fixation in
order for the trial to begin. The average error for the
experiment was .502° (SD = .260°) of visual angle

Design
The present experiment used a within-subjects design.
Between sessions there were two independent variables: The
probability that the gaze cue was correct (50%, 80%, 100%)
and the probability that the language cue was correct (50%,
80%, 100%). Each of the nine sessions used a unique
combination of these probabilities. Within each session,
there were 16 blocks of trials and in each of these the
proportion of correct cues matched the proportion for the
whole session. Within each block we varied whether each
cue was correct (except when the cue was 100%).

911

Figure 1: Stills from an example trial. After the central fixation point was fixated, a video began showing a face looking at the
participant, with pictures on either side that differed in colour. While this video played the first part of the sentence was heard.
After two seconds the head began to turn towards one of the targets while the second part of the sentence was heard. After
making a decision the participant received immediate feedback

Procedure

Analysis

Each participant was initially informed that they would be
required to take part in nine sessions over a two-week
period. The lead experimenter explained to the participant
that in each session they would have to do the same thing;
complete 480 trials of a simple decision task. Participants
were informed that in each trial they would be shown
pictures of two objects on a screen, one on the left and one
on the right, and that they would have to choose between
these by looking at their chosen target and then pressing the
left or right trigger on the control pad. They were told that
there would be verbal and non-verbal cues to help guide
them, but that these might not always be reliable.
Participants were then informed that they would receive
immediate visual feedback after each response and that they
should try their best to get as many correct as possible. The
eye-tracker was then set-up, calibration carried out, and then
the first trial began. The trial started with one of the 16 foursecond videos playing in the centre of the screen.
Throughout the trial the target items were displayed at either
side of the video. Alongside the video, one of the twosecond descriptor audio clips played. When the audio clip
finished (simultaneously with the onset of the gaze cue), the
audio determiner clip began playing (Figure 1). After this
point, participants were able to select a target, after which
they were informed (on screen) whether they were
“correct” (in green) or “wrong” (in red). Participants were
free to take breaks at any time. The session was complete
after 480 trials. Participants returned on eight more
occasions to repeat this procedure. Across the sessions
language cue reliability (50%, 80%, 100%) and gaze cue
reliability (50%, 80%, 100%) varied in all possible
combinations. Participants were not told the reliabilities of
the gaze and language cues.

We used three dependent variables in our analysis: two
performance measures (accuracy and response time) and
one eye movement measure (time to first fixate the target).
Our initial analysis focused on how these variables were
affected by the overall reliability of both language and gaze
cues. To analyse this we performed 3 (gaze reliability) X 3
(language reliability) ANOVAs for each of our dependent
variables.
We also investigated the interaction between cue
congruity and reliability. To do this we analysed the session
with 80% reliable gaze and language cues. We used this
session because it was the only session with incongruent
trials in which both cues were a) more informative than
chance and b) equally reliable. Secondly, we analysed
sessions in which one cue was 100% reliable and the other
cue less reliable to see if there was a detrimental effect of
incongruent gaze and language cues and to investigate
whether this was mediated by cue reliability. For many of
these analyses we compared uneven sample sizes, so we
avoided using traditional ANOVA models. Instead, we used
the lme4 package in the R statistical programming
environment to run linear mixed effects (LME) models,
using subject and item as random factors. We carried out
model comparisons to calculate p-values for main effects
and interactions. Post-hoc comparisons were carried out by
Tukey tests using the glht() function in the multcomp
library.

Results
Effect of changing cue reliability
Each of the nine sessions used a different combination of
language and gaze cue reliabilities. Figure 2 shows the
results for our three dependent variables for each session. A
clear interaction can be seen between language and gaze cue
reliability for accuracy (Figure 2a). A 3x3 ANOVA
confirmed main effects of language reliability, F(2,36) =

912

a)

b

c)

)

Figure 2: The mean values for a) Accuracy, b) Time to first fixate the target (FT) and c) Response time (RT)
across gaze and language reliabilities. Error bars show standard error of means.
115.32, p < 0.001, and gaze reliability, F(2,36) = 112.76, p
< 0.001, as well as a significant interaction, F(4,36) = 38.00,
p < 0.001. Accuracy approached ceiling whenever at least
one cue was 100%, approached .8 when the most reliable
cue was 80% accurate and approached .5 when both cues
were 50% accurate. One participant who behaved atypically
can account for the large error bar in the 80% gaze cue/ 50%
language cue reliabilities condition.
The time to first fixate the target (FT) (Figure 2b)
increased as gaze reliability decreased, F(2,36) = 17.28, p <
0.001. In Figure 2b, FT appears quickest for low reliability
language conditions, except when gaze was 100% accurate.
However, neither a significant interaction, F(4,36) = 1.83, p
= 0.145, nor any main effect of language reliability was
found, F(2,36) = 2.13, p = 0.134.
Response time similarly increased as gaze reliability
decreased, F(2,36) = 7.01, p = 0.003 (Figure 2c). There was
no main effect of language reliability, F(2,36) = 0.03, p =
0.965, nor any interaction, F(4,36) = 0.61, p = 0.661.

Effects of equally reliable incongruent cues We analysed
the session with 80% gaze and language reliability. In this
condition, it was equally advantageous to follow gaze or
language cues when there was an incongruity. This analysis
allowed us to identify any biases for either cue. One
participant was removed from this analysis as they exhibited
very different behaviour to the other participants. Figure 3
shows the proportion of trials in which each type of cue was
followed for incongruent trials only. Language cues were
followed in significantly more incongruent trials, t(6) =
8.627, p < 0.001. This indicates that when cues were
incongruent, participants were more likely to follow the
language cue.
Effects of the less reliable cue The next stage of our
congruity analysis focused on the four sessions in which one
cue was 100% accurate and the other cue less accurate. We
were specifically interested in whether the reliability of the
latter cue affected our measures, even though the former cue
was completely reliable. In these four sessions, there were
2-levels of congruity: 1) cues congruent with each other and
correct and 2) cues incongruent with each other, with the
less reliable cue incorrect.
Figures 4a and 4b show the time to first fixate the target
(FT) for congruent and incongruent trials in the four
sessions. An LME model of FT (using congruity and gaze
reliability as fixed factors) for trials where language
reliability was 100% (Figure 4a) showed congruent trials to
have significantly quicker FT scores, β = -277.36, SE =
39.22, t = -7.071, p < 001, as well as an approaching
significant interaction between congruity and gaze
reliability, β = 234.29, SE = 112.74, t = -2.078, p = .056,
although there was no overall effect of gaze reliability, β =
83.52, SE = 68.18, t = -1.225, p = .207. Post-hoc Tukey tests
showed significant differences in FT between the gaze cue
reliability conditions for both congruent and incongruent
cues. However, FT was shorter in the 80% reliable
condition, relative to the 50% reliable condition, for
congruent cues, p < .001, but longer for incongruent cues, p
< .001.
An LME model of FT for trials in which gaze reliability
was 100% (Figure 4b) showed no overall difference

Effects of cue congruity

Figure 3: The proportion of cues that were followed
in 80% gaze and language cue reliability condition
when cues were incongruent. Standard error across
trials is shown.

913

a)

b)

a)

b)

Figure 5: The mean response time (ms) for participants
in congruent and incongruent cue trials for a) sessions with
100% language reliability and 50% and 80% gaze
reliabilities and b) sessions with 100% gaze reliability and
50% and 80% language reliabilities. Standard error across
trials is shown for each mean.

Figure 4: The mean time to fixate target (ms) for
participants in congruent and incongruent cue trials for
a) sessions with 100% language reliability and 50% and
80% gaze reliabilities and b) sessions with 100% gaze
reliability and 50% and 80% language reliabilities.
Standard error across trials is shown for each mean.
between FT in congruent and incongruent trials, β = 4.870,
SE = 6.038, t = .807, p = .424. However, FT was
significantly quicker when language reliability was 80%
compared to 50%, β = -123.323, SE = 55.317, t = -2.229, p
= .045. There was no interaction between these two factors,
β = .866, SE = 12.232, t = .071, p = .947.
Finally, we ran LME models of response time (RT). For
trials in which language cues were 100% reliable (Figure
5a). Congruent trials were found to have significantly
quicker RT scores, β = 115.670, SE = 21.120, t = -5.478, p <
.001, and an approaching significant interaction was found
between congruity and gaze reliability, β = -100.410, SE =
48.480, t = -2.071, p = .055. There was no overall effect of
gaze reliability, β = -10.840, SE = 39.680, t = -.273, p =
.761. Post-hoc Tukey tests showed that that incongruent
trials had a significantly higher RT when gaze cue reliability
was 80% compared to 50%, p < 0.001, and that congruent
trials had a significantly higher RT when gaze cue reliability
was 50% compared to 80% p <0.001.
When gaze reliability was 100% (Figure 5b) there was no
difference between RT in congruent and incongruent trials,
β = -13.445, SE = 8.307, t = -1.619, p = .113. RT was
quicker when language reliability was 80% compared to
50%, but this difference was not significant, β = -166.698,
SE = 101.074, t = -1.649, p = .108. There was no interaction
between these two factors, β = -6.470, SE = 13.599, t = .476, p = .627.

reliability had an effect on the time to first fixate the target
(FT) and response time (RT), showing that these cues speed
up performance when useful. Gaze and language cues had
rather different effects on attention and performance when
they were the less reliable cue. Language was most
disruptive when least reliable, suggesting that it was the
favoured cue (Knoeferle & Kreysa, 2012). Gaze cues had a
smaller effect when least reliable, supporting the findings of
Macdonald and Tatler (2013).
Our analysis of the effects of cue reliability on accuracy
shows a clear interaction between the language and gaze
cues. Participants strategically followed the instructions of
the most reliable cue at their disposal. Neither FT nor RT
was significantly influenced by language reliability, but they
were affected by gaze reliability, showing that helpful gaze
cues benefited performance.
The analysis of congruity effects allowed us to investigate
what happens when gaze and language cue different targets,
and how this is affected by reliability. When cues were
equally, but not entirely reliable (80%), participants
followed the language cue more often when the cues were
incongruent, suggesting that language is the dominant cue.
This finding supports our hypothesis, as well as the results
of earlier studies. Macdonald and Tatler (2013) showed that
when language and gaze cues were both informative
participants used language and ignored gaze, while
Knoeferle and Kreysa (2012) found that when processing
difficult sentences, participants ignored supportive gaze
cues. Both studies suggest a preference for language cues
over gaze cues, however it is arguable that in both
paradigms the cues are not given equal prominence; in
Macdonald and Tatler (2013) gaze cues had to be actively
sought out, while verbal instructions were directed toward
the participant and in Knoeferle and Kreysa (2012) language
comprehension was central to the task and gaze cues were
only supportive. In the present study, however, our
paradigm gave equal prominence to language and gaze cues,
both explicitly (by telling participants that verbal and nonverbal cues were there to help them) and implicitly (by
making the reliability of both cues 80%). We have therefore

Discussion
The aim of this study was to investigate how varying the
reliability of language cues and gaze cues affects attention
and performance in a simple task. We used a target selection
task in which the accuracy of both gaze and language cues
varied across sessions. In order to gather reliable data each
session comprised 480 trials, allowing participants to learn
cue reliabilities. Additionally we required that sessions be
conducted on different days, to reduce the chance of
strategies learned in one session affecting another.
Participants generally learned quickly and used the most
informative cue provided to inform their response. Gaze

914

shown that language cues are preferred over gaze cues when
both cues provide the same quality of information.
When the language cues were 100% reliable, gaze stimuli
had a larger facilitative effect (when congruent) and
detrimental effect (when incongruent) on FT and RT when
they were 80% reliable compared to 50% reliable. This
suggests that 1) gaze cues are not completely ignored, even
when language is 100% accurate and 2) the extent to which
they are ignored is inversely related to their perceived
reliability. This shows that the gaze cues had more influence
when they were more reliable; reliable cues slowed down
performance when incongruent with language and sped up
performance when congruent.
Overall, the distracting gaze cue results are in line with
our hypothesis. When language was 100% accurate, gaze
need not (and should not) have been used, however the gaze
cues still slowed down performance. These results are
typical of a gaze cueing paradigm study (Friesen &
Kingstone, 1998). We also found that gaze cues have less
influence when they are less reliable, supporting previous
findings that the attentional effects of gaze cues are affected
by reliability (Hill et al, 2005). Using a real world
interaction we have previously found evidence that gaze
cues are not sought nor followed when language provides all
of the necessary information to complete a task (Macdonald
& Tatler, 2013). However, in the present study we have seen
that when gaze cues were centrally presented on a screen
(i.e. gaze seeking is out of the participant’s control), gaze
following was not inhibited completely by more informative
language, but instead gaze following was modulated by the
reliability of the cues.
The same effects were not found when language
reliability varied alongside 100% reliable gaze cues. FT was
significantly slower when language reliability was 50%
compared to 80%. We suggest this finding is due to the high
rate of incorrect language cues interfering with participants’
performance in the task. This effect does not occur with
gaze cues because of the relative importance of language
compared to gaze in communication; gaze cues are easier to
ignore than language. These findings, combined with the
preference shown for language cues when presented
alongside equally reliable gaze cues, supports our
hypothesis that language is the dominant cue.
There was no overall effect of language congruity in these
results, suggesting that participants followed the more
reliable gaze cues and were uninfluenced by instances of
incongruent language. It is surprising to find that the
congruity effects of a less reliable gaze cue effect
performance, but that the same effects are not found with
language cues, particularly given that we have shown
evidence that language is the preferred cue. To speculate, it
may be because gaze cues were processed faster than
language cues and so when the former were entirely
reliable, the latter had less time to disrupt processing (RTs
were faster for 100% gaze reliability conditions than 100%
language reliability conditions).

This experiment investigated the effect of varying gaze
and language cue reliability on attention. Participants
strategically made use of the most reliable cue to complete
the task and favoured language when reliabilities were
equal. Our results show that changing the reliability of
language affects attention differently than changing the
reliability of gaze. Language is the favoured cue and causes
overall disruption when unreliable, regardless of congruity,
whereas gaze is disruptive when incongruent to more
informative language, but only when gaze is more reliable
than chance.

Acknowledgments
This paper was supported by an EPSRC Studentship
awarded to Ross Macdonald

References
Altmann, G. T. M., & Kamide, Y. (1999). Incremental
interpretation at verbs: Restricting the domain of
subsequent reference. Cognition, 73, 247–264.
Birmingham, E. & Kingstone, A. (2009). Human social
attention: A new look at past, present and future
investigations. The Year in Cognitive Neuroscience:
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 2009, 118140.
Friesen, C.K., & Kingstone, A. (1998). The eyes have it!
Reflexive orienting is triggered by nonpredictive gaze.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 5, 490-495.
Hanna, J. E., & Brennan, S. E. (2007). Speakers’ eye gaze
disambiguates referring expressions early during face-toface conversation. Journal of Memory and Language, 57,
596–615.
Knoeferle, P., & Kreysa, H. (2012). Can speaker gaze
modulate syntactic structuring and thematic role
assignment during spoken sentence comprehension?
Frontiers in Psychology, 3, 538.
Kuhn, G., & Kingstone, A. (2009). Look away! Eyes and
arrows engage oculomotor responses automatically.
Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 71 (2), 314-327.
Macdonald, R.G., & Tatler, B.W. (2013). Do as eye say:
Gaze-cueing and language in a real-world social
interaction. Journal of Vision, 13(4):6, 1-12.
Posner, M.I. (1980). Orienting of attention. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 32, 3-25.
Ricciardelli, P., Bricolo, E., Aglioti, S. M., & Chelazzi, L.
(2002). My eyes want to look where your eyes are
looking: Exploring the tendency to imitate another
individual’s gaze. Neuroreport, 13 (17), 2259-2264.
Staudte, M., & Crocker, M. W. (2011). Investigating joint
attention mechanisms through spoken human-robot
interaction, Cognition, 120, 268-291.

915

