UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Gesture and Speech Input are Interlocking Pieces: The Development of Children’s Jigsaw
Puzzle Assembly Ability

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3h2198h1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Young, Christopher
Cartmill, Erica
Levine, Susan
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Gesture and Speech Input are Interlocking Pieces:
The Development of Children’s Jigsaw Puzzle Assembly Ability
Christopher J. Young (youngcj@uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology, 5848 S. University Ave
Chicago, IL 60637 USA
Erica A. Cartmill (cartmill@anthro.ucla.edu)
UCLA Department of Anthropology, 341 Haines Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA
Susan C. Levine (s-levine@uchicago.edu)
Susan Goldin-Meadow (sgm@uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology, 5848 S. University Ave
Chicago, IL 60637 USA
Abstract
Spatial reasoning ability is enhanced by spatial activities and
spatial language. Spatial games (e.g., block building,
assembling jigsaw puzzles) are often accompanied by spatial
language, which, in turn, is often accompanied by co-speech
gesture. Here we investigate the effects of spatial language
and gesture in the context of puzzle play in improving
preschool children’s puzzle assembly ability. We do this by
conducting a training study in which we independently
manipulate the presence of spatial language and the presence
of gesture in the context of four jigsaw puzzle training
sessions. Our findings show that providing co-speech gesture
along with spatial language is particularly effective in
improving children’s ability to put together puzzles on their
own.
Keywords: spatial cognition; gesture; puzzle play; preschool
children; spatial language; STEM

Introduction
A growing body of research supports a positive
relationship between spatial skills and success in the STEM
(science, technology, engineering, and mathematics)
disciplines. This relationship holds across a wide range of
ages, from preschoolers to older children and adults (e.g.
Gunderson, Ramirez, Levine, and Beilock, 2012; Verdine,
Golinkoff, Hirsch-Pasek, Newcombe, Filipowicz, and
Change, 2013; Mix & Cheng, 2014; Benbow, Lubinski,
Shea, and Eftekhari-Sanjani, 2000; Shea, Lubinski &
Benbow, 2001; Wai, Lubinski, & Benbow, 2009). Further,
spatial skills mediate the frequently reported relationship
between gender and mathematics performance (Casey,
Nuttall, & Pezaris, 1997; Casey, Nuttall, Pezaris, and
Benbow, 1995). These findings illustrate the role of spatial
skills in core academic subjects and highlight the
importance of improving those spatial skills beginning early
in life. In the current study, we experimentally manipulate
the availability of two sources of input – spatial language
and co-speech gesture – that are correlated with spatial
thinking, (e.g., Levine, Ratliff, Huttenlocher and Cannon,
2012; Pruden, Levine & Huttenlocher, 2011).

Sex differences in spatial tasks, such as mental rotation,
may, at least partly, reflect differences in how frequently
boys and girls are exposed to spatial activities at young ages
(Baenninger and Newcombe, 1995). Experience with play
activities that rely on spatial skills predicts performance on
academic achievement measures, whether the activity is
playing with LEGOs, wooden blocks, or jigsaw puzzles
(respectively, Wolfgang, Stannard, and Jones, 2003; Casey,
Andrews, Schindler, Kersh, Samper, and Copley, 2008;
Levine et al. 2012). However few studies have
experimentally manipulated the specific types of input
provided to children in play in order to evaluate whether
they have a causal effect on improving spatial abilities. In
this study, we manipulated whether spatial information was
provided in both speech and gesture in order to test whether
the spatial language and gesture that occur naturally during
puzzle play actually lead to, as opposed to merely being
correlated with, improvements in children’s spatial thinking
and spatial skills.
Spatial Language and Gesture
Spatial language input predicts performance on spatial
activities (Casasola, 2005; Lowenstein & Gentner, 2005;
Pruden & Hirsh-Pasek, 2006). Children who do not acquire
spatial language lack words for spatial relationships, and
this deficiency is correlated with poor performance even on
non-verbal spatial tasks (as in deaf Turkish children who
could not learn spoken language, had no access to sign
language, and had not invented gestures for spatial relations;
Gentner, Özyürek, Gürcanli, and Goldin-Meadow, 2013).
The effect of knowing relevant spatial terms on performing
a spatial task has also been tested experimentally. Children
who produce an appropriate term for a spatial concept like
“left” or “above” perform better in search and navigation
tasks than children who do not produce these terms
(Gentner, 2003; Shusterman, Lee, and Spelke, 2011;
Hermer-Vazquez, Moffet, and Munkholm, 2001).
The acquisition of spatial terms is influenced by
environmental input at home and at school. A longitudinal
study of children’s language development shows that parent

1820

spatial language use predicts children’s use of spatial
language, which in turn predicts their performance on nonverbal spatial tasks, including a spatial transformation task
and a spatial analogies test (Pruden et al., 2011). Moreover,
parent spatial language accompanied by gesture predicts
children’s spatial language better than parent spatial
language that is not unaccompanied by gesture (Cartmill,
Pruden, Levine and Goldin-Meadow, 2010). Previous
experimental work has shown that when children are given
instruction in both gesture and speech, children integrate the
information provided in the two modalities and gain a
deeper understanding of the concept (e.g., Piagetian
conservation; Church, Ayman-Nolley, and Mahootian,
2004; Ping and Goldin-Meadow, 2008). Gesture has the
potential to play a central role in learning spatial tasks
because it is itself spatial and thus can transparently
illustrate spatial concepts. Indeed, gesture may provide a
bridge from spatial language to the world by linking spatial
words to the features of the spatial world they represent
(e.g., tracing a straight edge when explaining “this part is
straight”).
In the context of spatial activities, spatial input from
adults may have a particularly strong impact on learning.
The amount of spatial language parents used during puzzle
play with their children predicted children’s later mental
transformation skills, but the effect was only found for girls
(Levine et al. 2012). The lack of a relationship in boys may
be attributable to the fact that parents used more spatial
language overall with boys during puzzle play (i.e., perhaps
all boys were getting “enough” spatial language). Gesture
input may be particularly important in physical spatial tasks
like puzzle play, but the respective contributions of gesture
and spatial language input during spatial play have not been
studied systematically.

The Present Study
We gave children training modeled after the naturalistic
puzzle play children engage in with caregivers (Levine et al.
2012). We scripted the kinds of speech and gesture that
naturalistically occurs when parents instruct their children in
puzzle play in order to test whether these aspects of input
improve children’s subsequent spatial skill.
Our study explored (1) whether jigsaw puzzle ability
could be improved through training, and (2) whether spatial
language and gesture input work together during puzzle play
to improve children’s spatial skills (as measured by the
ability to assemble a jigsaw puzzle). We were also
interested in whether puzzle training provides children with
an opportunity to develop their spatial abilities more
generally, particularly those involved in performing mental
transformations and understanding spatial relations. We
hypothesized that spatial language and the gestures that
accompany this language both provide important spatial
information and that, when used together, the two would
have a greater effect on the development of children’s
spatial skills than either modality on its own.

Study Overview
The study tested preschool children in a pretest-trainingposttest design in which children were randomly assigned to
one of four training conditions (described below). The study
involved a total of 7 days of testing spread over a two- to
three-school-week period. It involved 2 pre-test days, 3
training days that involved teaching with 4 different puzzles,
and 2 post-test days. All tasks were videotaped to
corroborate their results and were later coded. Missing data
was excluded, and not imputed.

Participants
Seventy-five preschool-aged children (40 boys) participated
in the study. The mean age of participating children was 57
months (SD=5.1 months, range 48-68 months). Thirty-five
additional children began the study but were excluded
during testing because they missed days of school during
the training or testing period or expressed a desire to quit.
The children attended one of 5 preschools (four public
schools and one private school) in the Chicago Public
School system. The schools varied in the average
socioeconomic status of their students. The average
percentage of students who were on free or reduced lunch
programs across schools was 83.9%. The population was
diverse in terms of race and ethnicity; according to
demographics questionnaires returned by parents of students
who chose to take part in the study, 48% of students
identified themselves as Caucasian, 33% identified as
African American, 14% identified as Asian, 2% identified
as American Indian, and 4% identified as other.
Additionally 25% of subjected reported they were of
Hispanic ethnicity.

Design
Pre-test/Post-test The pre/post-test was administered
during two 30-minute sessions given on two days and
assessed a variety of spatial skills. All children received the
same 5 tasks; a puzzle assembly task, the Children’s Mental
Transformation Test (CMTT; Levine, Huttenlocher, Taylor,
and Langenrock, 1999), a spatial analogies test adapted
from the Primary Test of Cognitive Skills (Huttenlocher &
Levine, 1990), the Test of Relational Concepts (TRC;
Edmontson and Thane, 1992), and a spatial language
production task. The assessment of puzzle assembly skill
served as the near transfer from the training task since it was
a similar but unrelated puzzle, and tests of mental
transformation, spatial analogy and spatial relational
language served as far transfer tasks.
Pretest On Day 1 children completed the TRC and CMTT.
On Day 2, children completed the spatial analogy task, the
puzzle assembly task (in which children were given 5
minutes to assemble a 24-piece jigsaw puzzle), and a spatial
language production task (in which children were asked to
tell an experimenter how to assemble a 12-piece puzzle,

1821

Posttest On Days 6-7, children repeated the pre-test. No
items changed between the pre- and post-test except for the
12-piece puzzle used in the spatial language production task.
Children who were absent from school during the testing
period resumed testing where they left off when they
returned, but training never preceded Posttest by more than
7 calendar days.
Puzzle Assessment The near transfer task was a puzzle
assessment in which children were given 5 minutes to
assemble as much of a 24-piece jigsaw puzzle as they were
able to complete on their own. This puzzle was identical in
the pre-test and post-test. The puzzle was contained within a
wooden frame, with 24 wooden pieces depicting animals
and a landscape. The experimenter was present during
assembly, but offered no help other than generic
encouragement and prompting if the child began to lose
interest. At the end of 5 minutes, children were offered help
in finishing the puzzle if they had not completed it.
Children were given a puzzle piece location score and a
puzzle piece connection score (both ranging between 0 and
24). Puzzle piece location score was determined by counting
the number of pieces that were within a one-puzzle-piece
radius of their correct position in a properly completed
puzzle. The puzzle piece connection score was determined
by tallying the number of puzzle-pieces on the board that
were interconnected (making a score of 1 impossible).
Scoring was completed using a screen shot of each child’s
performance 5 minutes following the beginning of the task.
Transfer tasks Children were given three additional spatial
tasks designed to test their spatial language and reasoning
ability. The spatial language tasks we provided were a
modified version of the Test of Relational Concepts (TRC;
Edmontson and Thane, 1992). The TRC tested children’s
comprehension vocabulary of spatial words by asking them
to identify a picture that illustrates a spatial word. The
spatial reasoning tasks consisted of a test of mental
transformation and a test of spatial analogy. In the
Children’s Mental Transformation Task (Levine,
Huttenlocher, Taylor, and Langenrock, 1999), children were
shown images depicting two target pieces (symmetrical
halves of a dark shape) that they were asked to mentally
assemble, in order to identify the correct whole among an
array of four shapes. The spatial analogy task was adapted
from the Primary Test of Cognitive Skills (Huttenlocher &
Levine, 1990). The task tested children’s ability to
generalize spatial relationships between objects in sets of
pictures

SPATIAL	  	  	  LANGUAGE	  
(SL+)
GESTURE	  (G+)

Training On Day 3 children received training on two 24piece puzzles. On days 4-5 children received training with
two 48-piece puzzles, one on each day.

Training The study used a training paradigm in which each
child assembled puzzles with an experimenter; the
experimenter provided different input depending on the
training condition to which the child was randomly
assigned. All children received the same amount of
experience with the puzzles but varied along two
dimensions: (1) language, containing eitherspatial or nonspatial descriptors of the puzzles and (2) co-speech gesture,
indicating spatial aspects of the puzzle or entirely absent.
Figure 1 presents an example of the language and gesture
provided in each of the four experimental conditions.
During training, the experimenter and child took turns
placing pieces in the puzzle. The order in which each piece
was placed in the puzzle was predetermined and the
experimenter handed pieces to the child so there was no
search element involved in selecting a piece. The language
and gesture that the experimenters used was scripted to
tightly control the spatial and non-spatial language and cospeech gesture the children received within each condition.
The experimenter typically described the features of their
pieces before they put them in and then remarked on the
pictures or features of the puzzle that became visible after
inserting a piece. A few times during each puzzle the
experimenter attempted to put a piece in the incorrect
location or with the incorrect orientation and then narrated
the corrections (e.g., “I have to turn it right-side up before it
will fit”). The experimenter also commented on some of the
children’s pieces once they had been correctly placed. If
children had difficulty placing a piece, experimenters
prompted the child up to three times using generic prompts
(e.g., “try it another way/place”) before finally pointing to
the correct location.

NO	  GESTURE	  
(G-­‐)

which was designed to elicit spatial language from the child;
due to the high rate of non-compliance on this task, the
results are not discussed here).

NO	  SPATIAL	  
LANGUAGE	  (SL-­‐)

This	  piece	  has	  two	  
straight	  sides	  [trace	  
corner	  on	  piece]	  so	  it	  
will	  fit	  in	  one	  of	  the	  
corners	  [trace	  top	  
corners	  in	  frame].

This	  piece	  has	  
some	  light	  blue	  
colors	  [trace	  corner	  
on	  piece]	  so	  it	  will	  go	  
in	  the	  sky	  [trace	  top	  
corners	  in	  frame].

This	  piece	  has	  two	  
straight	  sides,	  so	  it	  
will	  fit	  in	  one	  of	  the	  
corners.

This	  piece	  has	  
some	  light	  blue	  
colors,	  so	  it	  will	  go	  in	  
the	  sky.

Figure 1: Sample experimenter language and gesture used to
describe a puzzle piece in the four experimental conditions.

1822

Gesture Gesture information was provided either by
directly illustrating spatial concepts (e.g. holding the
forefinger and thumb in an “L” shape to represent a corner
piece), or by tracing spatial features on the puzzle pieces or
frame (e.g., tracing a straight edge of the frame). The
gestures used were the same in the two gesture conditions
and accompanied by a phrase containing either terms
referring to spatial or non-spatial properties of pieces. For
example, a gesture in which the experimenter dragged her
finger down a completed side of a jungle puzzle was
accompanied by “Good job! You finished the left side of the
puzzle” in the spatial language condition, and “Good job!
Now we can see three different kinds of plants” in the nonspatial condition.

Table 1. Relations Among Puzzle Assembly Ability and
Spatial Skills

Pretest to Posttest Changes Transfer tasks and the puzzle
assembly measure were analyzed using a 2 (–gesture/
+gesture) X 2 (–spatial language/+spatial language)
repeated measures ANCOVA, controlling for child age.
Puzzle Assembly We investigated how gesture and spatial
language interacted in children’s improvement in puzzle
assembly. We observed an interaction between spatial
language and gesture on children’s improvement in puzzle
skill, F(1,70)=4.1), p<.05, ηp2=.06 (Figure 2). Bonferronicorrected post-hoc analyses showed a significant difference
between experimental conditions F(3,70)=2.98, p<.05. The
interaction was driven by a difference between children in
the two spatial language conditions; children who received
co-speech gesture with spatial language had significantly
higher scores than those who received spatial language
without gesture.

Puzzle Assembly Score
(Pieces Correctly Placed and Connected)

Spatial Language In the two conditions that included
spatial language, experimenters used spatial words to refer
to (1) dimensions, features, and shapes (e.g., small, curvy,
straight, corner, border, square, circle), (2) orientations and
transformations (e.g., upside-down, turn, flip), (3) locations
and directions (e.g., behind, next to, left), or (4) physical
connections (e.g., fits, connects, lines up with). In the nonspatial language conditions, the experimenter referred to
properties of the images on the pieces using (1) colors and
textures (e.g., red, yellow, sandy, wooden), (2) actions or
emotions (e.g., playing, splashing, happy, excited), (3)
landmark features of the natural world (e.g., sky, ground,
trees), or (4) pattern and outline matching (e.g.,
goes/doesn’t go, matches). Deictic language (e.g., “I think it
goes here/there”) was minimized in all conditions, so that
children who received gesture input would not have access
to unique information (i.e., by seeing points during deictic
language).

Results
Relations among tasks
We examined the relationship between sex, age, and
pretest measures of puzzle assembly and spatial ability. We
found no significant relationship between sex and any of our
spatial measures. Age was significantly related to puzzle
assembly, in both location (r=.25) and connection (r=.26,
ps<.05). Age was also significantly related to performance
on the TRC (r=.44, p<.01), but not to the other spatial
measures. Within the puzzle assembly measures, location
and connection scores were very highly correlated (r=.96),
p<.01). We therefore summed these scores to create a
composite measure of puzzle assembly skill (used for the
remainder of our analyses). Within the measures of spatial
skill, the TRC was significantly related to the spatial
analogies test (r=.39) and CMTT (r=.48), and the spatial
analogies test and CMTT were also significantly related
(r=.50, ps<.01). The puzzle assembly measure was
significantly related to all other spatial measures, as shown
in Table 1. In sum, the correlations show that puzzle
assembly skill and other spatial assessment measures that
are widely used in the field are related.

*
10

5

0
+SL, +G +SL, -G

-SL, +G

-SL, -G

Figure 2: Pretest-Posttest change in Puzzle Assembly Score

Transfer Tasks We examined the effect of spatial language
and gesture during training on gain scores on the CMTT,
Spatial Analogies Test, and TRC, controlling for age. We
did not find any improvement across any of the tasks.

1823

General Discussion
In this paper we examined the effectiveness of various
puzzle play interventions in promoting children’s spatial
skill. We also evaluated how various commonly used
measures of spatial ability relate to puzzle play proficiency
in young children. With respect to our first question, we
found that preschool children’s performance on multiple
verbal and non-verbal spatial tasks were modestly correlated
and related to puzzle assembly skill. We did not find any
differences associated with sex on spatial ability at this
young age range.
With respect to the role that spatial language and gesture
play in the development of spatial skill, our findings
demonstrate the facilitative effect that gesture has on spatial
language during children’s puzzle assembly. Our results
do not support a simple “more is better” theory regarding
spatial language input; children in our study did not benefit
from simply hearing spatial language. Rather, the quality of
the input mattered, and the presence of co-speech gesture
conveying relevant spatial information was an important
indicator of quality of input.
Spatial gestures may
disambiguate potentially unclear spatial language, and may
thus be critical to understanding the typical directions
parents provide in a spatial task. These gestures may also
contribute to children’s spatial skill by providing enriching
information in the form of concrete and dynamic analogue
information about particularly relevant pieces of spatial
information (Krauss, Chen, and Gottesman, 2000).
Our findings also bear on basic questions about how
information contained in speech and gesture interact (Alibali
and Goldin-Meadow, 1993; Dick, Goldin-Meadow,
Solodkin and Small, 2012; Kelly, Creigh, and Bartolotti,
2010). Gesture may provide children with an immediate,
concrete exemplar of the spatial terms they hear. Gestures
are frequently used when defining spatial terms (Krauss,
1998), and providing gesture and speech together promotes
learning new concepts (Church, Ayman-Nolley, and
Mahootian, 2004). Observing gestures may also signal to
children that they should prepare to make (or simulate)
manipulations to objects. It is also possible that gesture
renders accompanying speech more engaging and accessible
to children, rather than adding spatial information of its
own. Further research is needed to understand the various
ways in which the co-speech gestures that commonly
accompany spatial language contribute to the child’s
learning. The current study, however, provides evidence
that gestural input does contribute to learning in the spatial
domain.
Learning to put the pieces of a puzzle together is based
both on one’s visuospatial abilities and on learning
appropriate strategies (Dykens, 2002; Verdine, Troseth,
Hodapp and Dykens, 2008). Children’s spatial abilities and
strategies are likely influenced by the input they receive
from caregivers; children’s performance on spatial measures
is strongly related to both parent speech and gesture
(Pruden, et al. 2011; Ehrlich, Levine, and Goldin-Meadow,
2006). The interplay of these factors in the home is difficult

to disentangle, but our results support the previous finding
that parent gesture explains unique variance in children’s
spatial language (Cartmill et al. 2010), and also suggests
that gesture accompanying spatial language contributes to
the development of children’s spatial thinking. Although we
provided only a brief intervention (experience with 4
puzzles over 3 days), the effect of combining spatial
language and gesture over time might contribute to the
development of strong spatial thinking, not only on near
transfer tasks but perhaps more broadly.
Beyond showing the significant benefit to be garnered
with even a short training regimen in a spatial task when
providing gestural cues, these results bear on larger
questions of how to support the development of young
children’s spatial skills. Our findings suggest that spatial
language with co-speech gesture might provide a learning
tool that, over time, could benefit skill development in this
important domain.

References
Alibali, M. W., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (1993). Gesturespeech mismatch and mechanisms of learning: What the
hands reveal about a child's state of mind. Cognitive
psychology, 25, 468-468.
Baenninger, M., & Newcombe, N. (1995). Environmental
input to the development of sex-related differences in
spatial and mathematical ability.Learning and Individual
Differences, 7(4), 363-379.
Benbow, C. P., Lubinski, D., Shea, D. L., & EftekhariSanjani, H. (2000). Sex differences in mathematical
reasoning ability at age 13: Their status 20 years
later. Psychological Science, 11(6), 474-480.
Cartmill, E., Pruden, S. M., Levine, S. C., Goldin-Meadow,
S., & Center, S. I. L. (2010). The role of parent gesture in
children’s spatial language development. In Proceedings
of the 34th Annual Boston University Conference on
Language Development (pp. 70-77).
Casasola, M. (2005). When less is more: How infants learn
to form an abstract categorical representation of
support. Child development, 76(1), 279-290.
Casey, B. M., Andrews, N., Schindler, H., Kersh, J. E.,
Samper, A., & Copley, J. (2008). The development of
spatial skills through interventions involving block
building activities. Cognition and Instruction, 26(3), 269309.
Casey, M. B., Nuttall, R. L., & Pezaris, E. (1997).
Mediators of gender differences in mathematics college
entrance test scores: a comparison of spatial skills with
internalized beliefs and anxieties. Developmental
Psychology,33(4), 669.
Casey, M. B., Nuttall, R., Pezaris, E., & Benbow, C. P.
(1995). The influence of spatial ability on gender
differences in mathematics college entrance test scores
across diverse samples. Developmental
Psychology, 31(4), 697.
Church, R. B., Ayman-Nolley, S., & Mahootian, S. (2004).
The role of gesture in bilingual education: Does gesture

1824

enhance learning?. International Journal of Bilingual
Education and Bilingualism, 7(4), 303-319.
Dick, A. S., Goldin-Meadow, S., Solodkin, A., & Small, S.
L. (2012). Gesture in the developing
brain. Developmental science, 15(2), 165-180.
Dykens, E. M. (2002). Are jigsaw puzzle skills ‘spared’ in
persons with Prader-Willi syn- drome? Journal of Child
Psychology & Psychiatry, 43, 343–352.
Edmonston, N. K., & Thane, N. L. (1992). Children's use of
comprehension strategies in response to relational words:
implications for assessment. American Journal of SpeechLanguage Pathology, 1(2), 30.
Ehrlich, S. B., Levine, S. C., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2006).
The importance of gesture in children's spatial
reasoning. Developmental psychology, 42(6), 1259.
Gentner, D. (2003). Why we’re so smart. Language in
mind: Advances in the study of language and thought,
195-235.
Gentner, D., Özyürek, A., Gürcanli, Ö., & Goldin-Meadow,
S. (2013). Spatial language facilitates spatial cognition:
Evidence from children who lack language
input. Cognition, 127(3), 318-330.
Gunderson, E. A., Ramirez, G., Levine, S. C., & Beilock, S.
L. (2012). The role of parents and teachers in the
development of gender-related math attitudes.Sex
Roles, 66(3-4), 153-166.
Hermer-Vazquez, L., Moffet, A., & Munkholm, P. (2001).
Language, space, and the development of cognitive
flexibility in humans: The case of two spatial memory
tasks. Cognition, 79(3), 263-299.
Hirsh-Pasek, K., & Golinkoff, R. M. (Eds.). (2006). Action
meets word: How children learn verbs. New York, NY::
Oxford University Press.
Huttenlocher, J., & Levine, S.C. (1990). Primary Test of
Cognitive Skills. Monterey, CA: CTB ⁄ McGraw-Hill.
Kelly, S. D., Creigh, P., & Bartolotti, J. (2010). Integrating
speech and iconic gestures in a stroop-like task: Evidence
for automatic processing. Journal of cognitive
neuroscience, 22(4), 683-694.
Krauss, R. M. (1998). Why do we gesture when we
speak?. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 7(2), 54-60.
Krauss, R. M., Chen, Y., & Gotfexnum, R. F. (2000). 13
Lexical gestures and lexical access: a process
model. Language and gesture, 2, 261.
Levine, S. C., Huttenlocher, J., Taylor, A., & Langrock, A.
(1999). Early sex differences in spatial
skill. Developmental psychology, 35(4), 940.
Levine, S. C., Ratliff, K. R., Huttenlocher, J., & Cannon, J.
(2012). Early puzzle play: A predictor of preschoolers'
spatial transformation skill. Developmental
psychology, 48(2), 530.
Loewenstein, J., & Gentner, D. (2005). Relational language
and the development of relational mapping. Cognitive
Psychology, 50(4), 315-353.
Mix, K. S., & Cheng, Y. L. (2012). The relation between
space and math: developmental and educational

implications. Advances in child development and
behavior, 42, 197.
Ping, R. M., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2008). Hands in the air:
using ungrounded iconic gestures to teach children
conservation of quantity. Developmental
psychology, 44(5), 1277.
Pruden, S. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R. M., &
Hennon, E. A. (2006). The Birth of Words: Ten-MonthOlds Learn Words Through Perceptual Salience.Child
development, 77(2), 266-280.
Pruden, S. M., Levine, S. C., & Huttenlocher, J. (2011).
Children’s spatial thinking: does talk about the spatial
world matter?. Developmental Science,14(6), 1417-1430.
Shea, D. L., Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. P. (2001).
Importance of assessing spatial ability in intellectually
talented young adolescents: A 20-year longitudinal
study. Journal of Educational Psychology, 93(3), 604.
Shusterman, A., Ah Lee, S., & Spelke, E. S. (2011).
Cognitive effects of language on human
navigation. Cognition, 120(2), 186-201.
Verdine, B. N., Golinkoff, R. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K.,
Newcombe, N. S., Filipowicz, A. T., & Chang, A. (2013).
Deconstructing Building Blocks: Preschoolers' Spatial
Assembly Performance Relates to Early Mathematical
Skills. Child development.
Verdine, B. N., Troseth, G. L., Hodapp, R. M., & Dykens,
E. M. (2008). Strategies and correlates of jigsaw puzzle
and visuospatial performance by persons with PraderWilli syndrome. Journal Information, 113(5).
Wai, J., Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. P. (2009). Spatial
ability for STEM domains: Aligning over 50 years of
cumulative psychological knowledge solidifies its
importance. Journal of Educational Psychology, 101(4),
817.
Wolfgang, C., Stannard, L., & Jones, I. (2003). Advanced
constructional play with LEGOs among preschoolers as a
predictor of later school achievement in
mathematics. Early Child Development and Care, 173(5),
467-475.

1825

