UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
God Can Hear But Does He Have Ears? Dissociations Between Psychological and
Physiological Dimensions of Anthropomorphism

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/74q4v7ff

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Shtulman, Andrew
Lindeman, Marjaana

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

God Can Hear But Does He Have Ears? Dissociations Between Psychological and
Physiological Dimensions of Anthropomorphism
Andrew Shtulman (shtulman@oxy.edu)
Department of Psychology, Occidental College
1600 Campus Road, Los Angeles, CA 90041

Marjaana Lindeman (marjaana.lindeman@helsinki.fi)
Department of Psychology, University of Helsinki
P.O. Box 9, 00014 Helsinki, Finland

Abstract
Anthropomorphism is a default strategy for making the
unfamiliar familiar, but is it a uniform strategy? Do all
dimensions of anthropomorphism “hang together”? We
explored this question by involving adults (n = 99) in a
speeded property-attribution task in which they decided, as
quickly as possible, whether properties of two types—
psychological and physiological—could be attributed to God.
Participants not only attributed more psychological properties
to God than physiological properties, but they were also
faster, more consistent, and more confident in making those
attributions. Participants showed the reverse pattern when
denying properties to God. That is, they were slower, less
consistent, and less confident in denying psychological
properties to God than in denying physiological ones. These
findings suggest that God is conceptualized, by default, as
having a mind but not a body—a distinction that has
important implications for the nature and origin of God
concepts in particular and supernatural concepts in general.
Keywords: religious cognition, God concepts, folk theories

Introduction
The Greek philosopher Xenophanes of Colophon once
noted, “If cattle or horses or lions had hands and could
draw, and could sculpt like men, then the horses would draw
their gods like horses, and cattle like cattle; and each they
would shape bodies of gods in the likeness, each kind, of
their own” (Lesher, 1992). This intuition—that God
concepts are essentially a projection of human properties
onto a nonhuman entity—has remained popular for
centuries. Many scholars have appealed to anthropomorphism as a way of explaining religion in general
(Guthrie, 1993; Hume, 1757; Tylor, 1871) or God concepts
in particular (Boyer, 2001; Barrett & Keil, 1996; Kelemen,
2004). Guthrie (1993), for instance, has argued that belief in
supernatural beings, like God, arises from an evolutionarily
endowed propensity to interpret changes in the physical
environment as products of intentional agency. Similarly,
Boyer (2001) has argued that God concepts are highly
memorable, and thus highly “contagious,” because they are
built from one of our most inferentially rich and early
developing ontologies: the “PERSON” ontology.
This appeal to anthropomorphism, though initially a
matter of speculation, has been validated by research
demonstrating the ubiquity of anthropomorphic thought in
everyday life. Psychological studies have shown that people

regularly attribute human properties to nonhuman entities,
including animated shapes (Heider & Simmel, 1944),
computers (Nass & Moon, 2000), robots (Haslam, et al.,
2008), pets (Epley, Waytz, & Cacioppo, 2007), nature
(White, 1992), and groups of moving objects (Bloom &
Veres, 1999). While there are a number of factors that
influence the strength and consistency of such attributions—
e.g., salience and accessability of intentional explanations,
need to understand and predict the physical environment,
degree of social connectedness (Epley et al., 2007)—the
basic tendency to attribute human properties to nonhuman
entities appears to be automatic, widespread, and early
developing. Even infants appear to adopt an ”intentional
stance” in the presence of self-moving objects, expecting
such objects to move in a goal-directed manner (Gergely,
Nadasdy, Csibra, & Biro, 1995), exert stable preferences for
some objects over others (Woodward, 1998), and interact
contingently with other agents in the environment (Johnson,
Slaughter, & Carey, 1998).
One important caveat when applying these findings to
theories of religious cognition is that the kind of
anthropomorphism readily displayed from infancy to
adulthood is not the attribution of all human properties to
nonhuman entities but the attribution of basic psychological
properties—i.e., beliefs, desires, emotions, perceptions—to
these entities. This distinction is important for two reasons.
First, Boyer (2001) has explicitly argued that God concepts
are really just “PERSON” concepts on to which God’s
extraordinary properties (e.g., omnipotence, omnipresence,
immortality) have been grafted. This stipulation is vital to
Boyer’s larger claim that religious concepts derive their
memorability from inconsistencies between the entailments
of the concept’s base ontology and the entailments of its
unique, non-natural properties. In the case of God,
inconsistencies between beliefs like (a) people die and (b)
God does not die or (c) people are in one place at one time
and (d) God is in all places at all times are what presumably
makes God concepts highly memorable and thus highly
transmittable. While it is possible that most people do, in
fact, assign God the physiological attributes that would lead
to such contradictions, this assumption does not
automatically follow from the psychological literature on
anthropomorphism, which documents a predisposition to
treat nonhuman entities as agents but does not document a
predisposition to treat those same entities as people.

2931

Second, it is commonly assumed that people have two
distinct God concepts, a concrete anthropomorphic concept,
held implicitly, and an abstract theological concept, held
explicitly. The two God concepts are thought to be
inconsistent with one another and to be used in different
contexts (Pyysiainen, 2004; Slone, 2004). These
conclusions are based on a study by Barrett and Keil (1996),
in which they assessed God concepts both directly, with
specific questions about God’s extraordinary properties, and
indirectly, with a story processing task. The authors argued
that if participants were asked directly what they believed
about God, they would hesitate to articulate an anthropomorphic concept, for fear it might sound juvenile, but would
not hesitate to articulate such a concept in a story recall task,
where the object of investigation was presumably memory,
not belief. The results showed that while participants
explicitly endorsed abstract, theological statements like
“God knows everything” and “God can do multiple mental
activities simultaneously,” they nevertheless imposed
human limitations on God’s mental activities when recalling
stories about God. This inconsistency has been taken to
indicate that abstract God concepts, of the form prescribed
by theological doctrines, coexist with more concrete,
anthropomorphic God concepts. Yet, without additional
investigations of the kinds of human properties attributed to
God and under what conditions, it remains unclear whether
Barrett and Keil’s (1996) findings are best interpreted as
evidence of two globally distinct concepts or as evidence of
a single concept plagued by local inconsistencies.
Given that many theoretical claims rests on the
assumption that God is conceptualized as a person and not
just an agent, we sought to extend the literature on God
concepts by explicitly comparing property-attribution
judgments for two types of properties: (1) psychological
properties, like beliefs, desires, intentions, emotions, and
perceptions, which are predicated on possessing a mind, and
(2) physiological properties, like engaging in biological
processes, possessing biological organs, and taking a
physical form, which are predicated on possessing a body.
Our hypothesis was not only that participants would be
more inclined to attribute psychological properties to God
than physiological properties but also that the attribution of
psychological properties would be cognitively easier than
the attribution of physiological properties. We thus
measured not just the frequency of psychological and
physiological attributions but also (a) their speed, (b) their
consistency across two sets of judgment, and (c) the
confidence with which those judgments were made. Our
prediction was that, if psychological properties are
cognitively easier to attribute to God than are physiological
properties, then participants should attribute them faster,
more consistently, and more confidently. On the other hand,
participants should exhibit the opposite pattern of results
when denying properties to God. That is, participants should
be faster, more consistent, and more confident when
denying physiological properties to God than when denying
psychological properties to God. It was also predicted that

participants would provide different types of justifications
for their psychological and physiological judgments, given
that the former may be based on earlier developing, and thus
more automatic, modes of construal.

Method
Participants
Ninety-nine undergraduates at Occidental College were
recruited from psychology courses and compensated with
course credit. The majority (70%) were female, and 26%
self-identified as Protestant, 15% as Catholic, 13% as
Jewish, and 7% as something else (e.g., Buddhist, Quaker).
The remaining 39% reported no current religious affiliation.
While the proportion of participants without a religious
affiliation was higher than desirable, participants’ degree of
religiosity did not interact with any of the findings noted
below (see the “Correlations with Religiosity” section).

Procedure
Participants completed three tasks in a fixed order. The
tasks were administered using MediaLab v2012 software.
The first task was a speeded property-attribution task in
which participants were shown one of 47 properties and
asked to determine, as quickly as possible, whether that
property was true of God. Participants registered their
response by pressing 1 for “true” and 2 for “false,” and their
response times were recorded in milliseconds.
The properties were selected to cover a wide range of
functions within each domain. The psychological properties
were: knows things, knows what’s what, is aware of things,
can aim at something, can want, can strive for something,
can desire something, can commit a planned action, can be
goal oriented, can make plans, can be satisfied, can be
happy, can be worried, can be sad, can hear, can see, can
sense warmth, can smell, can sense coldness, can sense pain,
and can taste. The physiological properties were: lives, can
recover from an illness, can breathe, can eat food, can drink,
can reproduce, can transmit a disease, can die, can grow old,
can become ill, can become tired, has a heart, has a brain,
has hands and feet, has eyes, has ears, has lungs, has bones,
has a digestive system, has a vascular system, exerts force,
has a stable existence, has an independent existence, can
make an object move, has a measurable weight, has a
measurable height. The ordering of the properties was
randomized across participants.
Following each judgment, participants were asked to rate
their confidence in that judgment on a scale from 1 to 5,
with 1 labeled as “not confident” and 5 labeled as “100%
confident.” Participants were informed that, while their
judgments were being timed, their confidence ratings were
not, thus affording a brief respite between judgments.
The second task was similar to the first in that participants
were shown the same 47 properties (in a randomized order)
and asked to make property-attributions judgments once
again. Doing so allowed us to assess the consistency of

2932

Figure 1: Response times (in seconds) by property type and
judgment type.

Figure 2: Confidence ratings (out of 5) by property type and
judgment type.

participants’ judgments across two separate measurement
periods. Participants were informed that their judgments in
the second part of the survey were not being timed and were
thus urged to take as much time as needed. Participants
were also urged to provide a justification for each judgment.
The coding of those justifications is described below.
The third task measured participants’ religiosity using 16
items from the Fetzer Brief Multidimensional Measure of
Religiousness/Spirituality (taken from Neff, 2006). The
original scale includes 20 five-point items assessing daily
spirituality, positive religious coping, private and public
religiosity, and self-rated religiosity. Example items are “I
believe in a God who watches over me” and “I find strength
and comfort in religion.” Four items were excluded because
they were not specific to religious belief or belief in God
(e.g., “I have forgiven those who hurt me”). Participants
rated their endorsement of each item on a scale from 1
(“strongly disagree”) to 5 (“strongly agree”). They also
entered demographic information during this final part of
the survey, namely, age, gender, and religious affiliation.

intentional agents than properties characteristic of living
things or physical objects.

Results
Property Attributions
On average, participants were twice as likely to attribute a
psychological property to God than to attribute a
physiological property to God. The mean proportion of
psychological properties attributed to God was 0.72 (SD =
0.27), whereas the mean proportion of physiological
properties attributed to God was 0.35 (SD = 0.24). A pairedsamples t test confirmed that this difference was highly
significant (t(98) = 17.24, p < .001). Thus, consistent with
previous research (Shtulman, 2008, 2010), participants were
more likely to attribute to God properties characteristic of

Response Times
Response times for the psychological properties (M = 2.59
seconds, SD = 0.78) were, on the whole, highly similar to
those for the physiological properties (M = 2.65 seconds, SD
= 0.73). Nevertheless, response times varied by judgment
type across the two domains, as shown in Figure 1. When
participants attributed a property to God, they were faster to
do so for psychological properties than for physiological
properties, yet when they denied a property to God, they
were faster to do so for physiological properties than for
psychological properties.
These effects were confirmed using a repeated-measures
analysis of variance (ANOVA) in which property type was
treated as a within-participants variable (psychological vs.
physiological) and judgment type (attributed vs. denied) was
treated as a between-participants variable. No main effects
of property type (F(1,98) = 1.24, ns) or judgment type
(F(1,98) < 1) were observed, but there was a significant
interaction between them (F(1,98) = 20.57, p < .001, partial
eta2 = .17). These results suggest that participants’ default
stance toward the psychological properties was to attribute
those properties but their default stance toward the
physiological properties was to deny those properties;
making the opposite judgment thus required some additional
degree of thought or effort.

Confidence Ratings
Participants’ confidence ratings patterned similarly to their
response times, as shown in Figure 2. A repeated-measures
ANOVA of the same type used to analyze response times
was used to analyze confidence ratings. This analysis

2933

Figure 3: Proportion of consistent responses across trials by
property type and judgment type.

Figure 4: Justification type (comparisons to humans vs.
inferences from God’s actions) by domain.

revealed no main effect of property type (F(1,98) < 1) but a
significant main effect of judgment type (F(1,98) = 3.99, p
< .05, partial eta2 = .04), as participants were slightly more
confident attributing properties to God (M = 3.9, SD = 0.7)
than denying properties to God (M = 3.8, SD = 0.8). This
analysis also revealed a significant interaction between
property type and response type (F(1,98) = 53.16, p < .001,
partial eta2 = .35) such that confidence was highest for
psychological properties when those properties were
attributed to God but was highest for physiological
properties when those properties were denied to God.

Response Consistency
Participants completed the property-attribution task twice,
once under the prompt to respond as quickly as possible and
once under the prompt to take as much time as needed. The
proportion of properties for which participants provided the
same judgment across trials is displayed in Figure 3 as a
function of property type and judgment type. A repeatedmeasures ANOVA revealed similar findings to those
revealed above: response consistency did not vary either by
property type (F(1,98) < 1) or by judgment type (F(1,98) <
1) but did vary by the interaction between them (F(1,98) =
53.46, p < .001, partial eta2 = .35). For psychological
properties, participants were more likely to change their
minds about denying those properties to God than about
attributing them to God; for physiological properties,
however, the reverse was true. We should note that the
overall proportion of properties attributed to God in the
second block of judgments was similar to that in the first
block. Under speeded conditions, participants attributed, on
average, 72% of the psychological properties and 35% of
the physiological properties. Under non-speeded conditions,
those percentages were 71% and 32%, respectively.

Justifications
In the second (unspeeded) block of property-attribution
judgments, participants provided justifications for those
judgments. Justifications were sorted into one of three
categories: comparisons to humans, appeals to God’s
properties, or inferences from God’s actions. Comparisons
to humans emphasized similarities between God and
humans in the case of properties attributed to God (e.g.,
“God has human senses”) or differences between God and
humans in the case of properties denied to God (e.g., “God
doesn’t experience the world like humans do”). Appeals to
God’s properties highlighted some aspect of God’s unique,
theologically specified ontology that was either consistent
with the property at hand (e.g., “God can influence the
world by any means”) or inconsistent with that property
(e.g., “God doesn’t live because God doesn’t die; God
simply exists”). Inferences from God’s actions specified
how the property at hand was either presupposed by
something God is purported to do (e.g., “If God can listen to
our prayers then I would assume that he can hear them”) or
precluded by something God is purported to do (e.g., “God
cannot transmit a disease because he never harms others”).
The reliability of this coding scheme was assessed by
comparing the codes of two independent coders for a quarter
of the 4653 justifications provided. Agreement was high
(86%, Cohen’s kappa = .79).
Overall, 44% of justifications were coded as comparisons
to humans, 27% as appeals to God’s properties, and 24% as
inferences from God’s actions. The remaining 5% did not
contain any codable information. Domain differences were
observed for two of the three types of justifications:
comparisons to humans and inferences from God’s actions.
These differences are displayed in Figure 4. When justifying
judgments for psychological properties, participants tended

2934

to cite inferences from God’s actions, but when justifying
judgments for physiological properties, participants tended
to cite comparisons to humans. Participants were equally
likely to appeal to God’s unique properties when justifying
psychological judgments (M = 0.26, SD = 0.17) and
physiological ones (M = 0.28, SD = 0.16; t(98) = 1.35, ns).
The justification data were analyzed using a repeatedmeasures ANOVA in which property type (psychological
vs. physiological) was treated as a within-participants
variable and justification type (comparison vs. inference)
was treated as a between-participants variable. No main
effect of property type was observed (F(1,98) < 1) but a
significant main effect justification type was (F(1,98) =
23.80, p < .001, partial eta2 = .20), consistent with the
overall distribution of justification noted above. More
importantly, the interaction between property type and
justification type was also significant (F(1,98) = 139.72, p <
.001, partial eta2 = .59), indicating that participants found
different kinds of considerations salient when reflecting on
different kinds of properties. God’s similarity to humans
was most salient when reflecting on God’s physiological
properties, but God’s role in worldly affairs was most
salient when reflecting on God’s psychological properties.

Correlations with Religiosity
Correlations between participants’ scores on the Fetzer Brief
Multidimensional Measure of Religiousness/Spirituality
(Neff, 2006) and their property attributions, response times,
confidence ratings, response consistency, and justification
patterns are displayed in Table 1. The higher participants’
scores, the more properties they attributed to God—both
psychological and physiological—and the more confident
they were in their judgments. Higher scores were also
associated with different justification patterns, namely, more
inferences from God’s actions and fewer comparisons to
humans. In short, the more religious participants were, the
more they treated God like a human in their property
attributions but the less they explicitly compared God to a
human in their justifications. Importantly, these effects did
not differ by domain, which indicates that religiosity may
influence overall levels of anthropomorphism but not the
dissociation between psychological and physiological
dimensions of anthropomorphism documented above.
Table 1: Correlations between Fetzer religiosity scores and
responses to the psychological (psych) and physiological
(phys) items. *p < .05, **p < .01
Measure
Property attributions
Response times
Confidence ratings
Response consistency
Justifications:
(a) Comparisons to humans
(b) Inferences from God’s actions
(c) Appeals to God’s properties

Psych
.38**
.02
.24*
.05

Phys
.29**
.03
.20*
.03

-.27**
.25*
.18

-.27**
.38**
.14

Discussion
Belief in God is central to the lives of many Western
adults, but much remains unknown about the conceptual
foundations of this foundational belief. Previous research on
the nature of God concepts has assumed that such concepts
are rooted in a widespread and early developing tendency to
anthropomorphize the natural world (e.g., Guthrie, 1993),
and the present study investigated this assumption by
clarifying (a) the dimensions along which God is, and is not,
typically anthropomorphized and (b) the speed, consistency,
and confidence with which those dimensions are deployed.
It was found that participants not only attributed more
psychological properties to God than physiological
properties, but they were also faster, more consistent, and
more confident in making those attributions. Moreover,
participants showed the reverse pattern when denying
properties to God, being slower, less consistent, and less
confident when denying psychological properties to God
than when denying physiological properties to God.
These findings complement Bering’s (2002) finding that
adults make a clear distinction between psychological
properties (e.g., thinking, feeling) and biological properties
(e.g., eating, drinking) when reasoning about the continuity
of life after death, with most attributing psychological
properties to the dead but few attributing biological or even
psychobiological properties (e.g., hunger, thirst). These
findings also complement Astuti and Harris’s (2008) finding
that, in cultures where it is commonly believe that the dead
continue to exist as ancestral spirits, most people believe
that psychological properties survive the transition from
person to spirit but biological properties do not.
On the other hand, these findings are not particularly
consistent with Boyer’s (2001) claim that God, among other
supernatural beings, is conceptualized as a person with
counterintuitive properties. Rather, most adults appear to
conceptualize God in a more limited manner—i.e., as an
agent, in possession of mind-dependent properties like
seeing, knowing, and feeling, but not body-dependent
properties like eating, breathing, and growing. These
findings are also inconsistent with Barrett and Keil’s (1996)
claim that we hold two distinct God concepts: an implicit
anthropomorphic concept and an explicit theological
concept. Putting individuals under time pressure is a wellestablished method for eliciting implicit concepts (Goldberg
& Thompson-Schill, 2009; Shtulman & Valcarcel, 2012),
yet, in the present study, attributions of human properties to
God did not differ between speeded and unspeeded
conditions. Moreover, those attributions should have
decreased with religiosity if religious individuals are more
familiar with, and more accepting of, theological concepts
than are non-religious individuals. But, in actuality, the
opposite was found: participants’ attributions increased with
religiosity, both in the psychological domain and in the
physiological domain.
In sum, the findings of the present study suggest that
anthropomorphism (gr. anthropo = human) may not be the
best way to characterize people’s God concepts. Instead,

2935

these concepts may be better characterized as agentive or
even animistic (lat. anima = soul, spirit, breath). Analyzed
in this way, participants’ attribution patterns appear to be
symptomatic of what Lindeman and Aarnio (2007) have
termed “core knowledge confusions,” or instances in which
the properties of one foundational domain are applied
(inappropriately) to the entities within another. Examples
include misapplying psychological properties to nonpsychological entities (e.g., attributing memory to
furniture), misapplying biological properties to nonbiological entities (e.g., attributing healing powers to water),
and misapplying physical properties to non-physical entities
(e.g., attributing contact causality to thought).
Lindeman and colleagues have found that susceptibility to
core knowledge confusions is correlated with multiple
dimensions of paranormal belief (Lindeman & Aarnio,
2007) and with interpreting random events as having a
purpose (Svedholm, Lindeman, & Lipsanen, 2010). The
present work extends this analysis into the domain of
religious belief, as participants’ God concepts could easily
be characterized as core knowledge confusions between
physical, biological, and psychological phenomena—i.e., as
the misapplication of a handful of biological properties, like
“can live,” and a handful of physical properties, like “has an
independent existence,” to the human mind. Whether or not
this analysis is correct, we maintain that God concepts are
best studied within a broader developmental perspective and
that future research should focus not just on the conceptualization of God’s extraordinary properties but also on the
conceptualization of God’s “ordinary” properties, like
seeing, hearing, wanting, and knowing. It is these properties,
after all, that has inspired anthropomorphic explanations of
religion from Xenophanes’ time to the present.

References
Astuti, R., & Harris, P. L. (2008). Understanding mortality
and the life of the ancestors in rural Madagascar.
Cognitive Science, 32, 713-740.
Barrett, J. L., & Keil, F. C. (1996). Conceptualizing a
nonnatural entity: Anthropomorphism in God concepts.
Cognitive Psychology, 31, 219-247.
Bering, J. M. (2002). Intuitive conceptions of dead agents’
minds: The natural foundations of afterlife beliefs as
phenomenological boundary. Journal of Cognition and
Culture, 2, 263-308.
Bloom, P., & Veres, C. (1999). The perceived intentionality
of groups. Cognition, 71, B1-B9.
Boyer, P. (2001). Religion explained: The evolutionary
origins of religious thought. New York: Basic Books.
Epley, N., Waytz, A., & Cacioppo, J.T. (2007). On seeing
human: A three-factor theory of anthropomorphism.
Psychological Review, 114, 864–886.
Gergely, G., Nadasdy, Z., Csibra, G., & Biro, S. (1995).
Taking the intentional stance at 12 months of age.
Cognition, 56, 165–193.

Goldberg, R. F., & Thompson-Schill, S. L. (2009).
Developmental “roots” in mature biological knowledge.
Psychological Science, 20, 480-487.
Guthrie, S. (1993). Faces in the cloud. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Haslam, N., Kashima, Y., Loughnan, S., Shi, J., & Suitner,
C. (2008). Subhuman, inhuman, and superhuman:
Contrasting humans with nonhumans in three cultures.
Social Cognition, 26, 248-258.
Heider, F. & Simmel, M. (1944). An experimental study of
apparent behavior. American Journal of Psychology, 57,
243–259.
Hume, D. (1757/2009). The natural history of religion.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Johnson, S. C., Slaughter, V., & Carey, S. (1998). Whose
gaze will infants follow? Features that elicit gazefollowing in 12-month-olds. Developmental Science, 1,
233-238.
Kelemen, D. (2004). Are children “Intuitive theists”?
Psychological Science, 15, 295-301.
Lindeman, M., & Aarnio, K. (2007). Superstitious, magical,
and paranormal beliefs: An integrative model. Journal of
Research in Personality, 41, 731-744.
Nass, C., & Moon, Y. (2000). Machines and mindlessness:
Social responses to computers. Journal of Social Issues,
56, 81-103.
Neff, J. A. (2006). Exploring the dimensionality of
“religiosity” and “spirituality” in the Fetzer multidimensional measure. Journal for the Scientific Study of
Religion, 45, 449-459.
Pyysiäinen, I. (2004). Intuitive and explicit in religious
thought. Journal of Cognition and Culture, 4, 123-150.
Shtulman, A. (2008). Variation in the anthropomorphization
of supernatural beings and its implications for cognitive
theories of religion. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 34, 1123-1138.
Shtulman, A. (2010). Theories of God: Explanatory
coherence in a non-scientific domain. Proceedings of the
32nd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society,
1295-1300.
Shtulman, A., & Valcarcel, J. (2012). Scientific knowledge
suppresses
but
does
not
supplant
earlier
intuitions. Cognition, 124, 209-215.
Slone, J. D. (2004). Theological incorrectness: Why
religious people believe what they shouldn’t. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Svedholm, A. M., Lindeman, M., & Lipsanen, J. (2010).
Believing in the purpose of events: Why does it occur,
and is it supernatural? Applied Cognitive Psychology, 24,
252-265.
Tylor, E. B. (1871/1974). Primitive culture. New York:
Gordon Press.
White, P. A. (1992). The anthropomorphic machine: Causal
order in nature and the world view of common sense.
British Journal of Psychology, 83, 61-96.
Woodward, A. (1998). Infants selectively encode the goal
object of an actor’s reach. Cognition, 69, 1-34.

2936

