UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Gradual Acquisition of Mental State Meaning: A Computational Investigation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7d18c1f7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Barak, Libby
Fazly, Afsaneh
Stevenson, Suzanne

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Gradual Acquisition of Mental State Meaning: A Computational Investigation
Libby Barak, Afsaneh Fazly, and Suzanne Stevenson
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
{libbyb,afsaneh,suzanne}@cs.toronto.edu
Abstract
The acquisition of Mental State Verbs (MSVs) has been extensively studied in respect to their common occurrence with sentential complement syntax. However, MSVs also occur in a variety of other syntactic structures. Moreover, other verb classes
frequently occur with sentential complements, e.g., Communication and Perception verbs. The similarity in distribution of
the various verb classes over syntactic patterns may affect the
acquisition of the meaning of MSVs by association. In this
study we present a novel computational model to learn verb
classes, which allows us to analyze the association of mental verbs to their meaning over a variety of syntactic patterns.
Our results point to an important role of the full syntactic preferences of MSVs on top of their occurrences with sentential
complements.

Introduction
Mental State Verbs (MSVs), such as think and want, are initially produced by children much later than verbs from other
semantic classes, such as Action (e.g., throw), Perception
(e.g., see), and Communication (e.g., say) (Shatz et al., 1983).
Even within the class of MSVs different verbs are acquired at
different stages. For example, children produce Desire verbs,
such as want and wish, earlier than Belief verbs, such as think
and know (Shatz et al., 1983; Bartsch and Wellman, 1995;
Asplin, 2002; de Villiers, 2005; Papafragou et al., 2007).
One group of psycholinguistic studies attributes the observed delay in the acquisition of MSVs in general, and the
developmental lag of Belief verbs in particular, to the syntactic requirements of these verbs (de Villiers and Pyers, 2002;
de Villiers, 2005; Papafragou et al., 2007). These studies
provide evidence from the tendency of MSVs to appear with
the Sentential Complement (SC) construction, and argue that
since these complex patterns are difficult for children to master (because of the embedded clause), they cause a delay in
the acquisition of MSVs. In addition, the later production
of Belief verbs compared to Desire verbs is suggested to be
due to their association with two different kinds of SC syntax: Desire verbs occur mostly with an infinitival SC (as in I
want (her) to leave), while Belief verbs occur mostly with a
finite SC (a full tensed embedded clause, as in I think (that)
she left). Notably, infinitivals appear earlier than finite SCs in
the speech of young children (Bloom et al., 1984, 1989), and
hence are assumed to be easier to acquire.
In contrast, another group of studies argues that the complex syntax of SCs cannot be the sole explanatory factor for
the observed delays in the acquisition of MSVs. These studies provide evidence for their argument from several observations: First, children use finite SCs with verbs of Communication (e.g., say) and Perception (e.g., see) long before they use

them with Belief verbs (Bartsch and Wellman, 1995). The relatively high frequency of these non-MSVs with the SC syntax may thus be a factor that affects the acquisition of MSVs.
For instance, de Villiers and Pyers (2002) and Israel (2008)
suggest that children first learn to use the complex SC syntax with conceptually simpler verbs that share aspects of the
MSV semantics, e.g., Communication and Perception verbs.
This stage can be used to break into the full mental meaning
of MSVs using the acquired shared meaning with Communication and Perception verbs. Secondly, there is evidence that
except for very high-frequency MSVs (such as think) many of
these verbs frequently appear in constructions other than the
SC (Diessel and Tomasello, 2001; Klainerman, 2010). Thus,
the non-SC usages of MSVs might also play a special role in
their pattern of acquisition.
Together, the above studies suggest that, in order to capture the full developmental trajectory of MSVs, we need to
look at the interaction of the following factors: (i) The overall syntactic behaviour of MSVs, including their appearance
with the SC and non-SC syntactic patterns; (ii) The syntactic
behaviour of other non-MSV verbs, especially Communication and Perception verbs that have a high-frequency of occurrence with the SC syntax; and (iii) The shared semantic
properties of MSVs with other semantic classes of verbs.
We examine the interaction of these factors by using a computational model that simultaneously learns argument structure constructions, as well as semantic verb classes (Barak
et al., 2014). Specifically, we develop a novel incremental
model that forms verb classes by drawing on the similarity of
their distribution across these learned constructions. We learn
these constructions using the model of Barak et al. (2013) to
group usages of verbs into clusters based on the similarity
of their linguistic properties. Each learned construction represents an abstraction over similar verb usages, while each
verb class captures a higher-level of syntactic and semantic
similarity among verb types. The verb classes enable us to
expand the analysis in (Barak et al., 2013) that focused on the
role of SC syntax in the acquisition of MSVs from the learned
constructions. These incrementally-learned verb classes thus
allow us to examine the developing interaction of the above
three factors, as well as their role in the acquisition of MSVs
in their full mental meaning.
Our results suggest how the properties of child-directed
speech (CDS) may be guiding the acquisition process of
MSVs in the interaction over a variety of verb classes. Moreover, our results point to the role of non-SC syntax in replicating the gradual association of MSVs to SC syntax and mental
meaning.

1886

Figure 1: A visual representation of the two layers in the model.
The sample constructions present a small subset of the features
and semantic properties used in our model. A full frame includes
the predicate syntactic features (syntactic pattern, argument count,
preposition, and complementizer) and semantic features (event primitives and event participants).

The Computational Model
The model we develop here is a significant extension to an
existing incremental Bayesian model of verb argument structure acquisition (Alishahi and Stevenson, 2008; Barak et al.,
2012). Specifically, our model learns clusters of similar verb
usages (constructions), as in the model of Barak et al. However, our model adds another layer of abstraction that learns
groupings of verbs that exhibit similar distributional patterns
of occurrence across the learned constructions. To distinguish
between the clusters of the two layers of our new model, we
refer to the clusters of verb usages in the first layer as constructions, and to the groupings of verbs in the second layer
as verb classes (see Figure 1).

Overview of the Model
The model learns from a sequence of frames, where each
frame is a collection of syntactic and semantic features representing what the learner might extract from a learning situation. The model incrementally clusters the input frames
into constructions that reflect probabilistic associations of the
syntactic and semantic features across similar verb usages.
Each learned cluster is a probabilistic (and possibly noisy)
representation of an argument structure construction: e.g., a
cluster containing frames corresponding to usages such as I
eat apples, She took the ball, and He got a book, etc., represents a Transitive Action construction.1 Such grouping of
similar verb usages allows for some degree of generalization over the observed input, e.g., when encountering a novel
verb in a transitive utterance, the model predicts that this verb
shares semantic properties with other Action verbs appearing in a similar pattern. Nonetheless, such groupings do not
capture the full range of syntactic and semantic behaviour
of MSVs and other verbs, which can provide insights into
what might be responsible for the observed developmental
patterns of MSVs. To capture this, our model learns groupings of verbs that have similar distributions across its learned
constructions, forming semantic verb classes that provide a

higher-level of abstraction over the input.
Figure 1 presents a visualization of the layers of the model.
In this example, usages of think might be clustered into one
construction with see, but into another construction with say.
While each construction represents a different association of
semantic and syntactic properties given the usages, the verb
classes group all think, see, and say together given their cooccurrence over several constructions. The grouping of these
verbs into one verb class associates their occurrence with various finite-SC patterns, i.e., w/o that, which is not captured
in the constructions. Importantly, the model incrementally
and simultaneously learns both of these types of knowledge,
allowing us to examine the developmental trajectory of the
acquisition of MSVs. In the rest of this section, we first explain how our model learns constructions of verb usages, and
then describe how it forms its knowledge of verb classes by
drawing on its own learned knowledge of constructions.
The model also includes a component that simulates the
difficulty of children in attending to the mental content, e.g.,
“believing”, in a scene that also includes an easier-to-observe
physical action, e.g., “walking” (Papafragou et al., 2007).
The model simulates this developing attention to mental content as an increasing ability to correctly interpret a scene
paired with an SC utterance as having mental semantic properties. At the same time, we assume the child records the
observed syntactic properties but erroneously coupling them
to the mis-interpreted physical semantic content. For instance, young children may focus on the “making” action in
He thinks Mom made pancakes, rather than on the “thinking”,
but record the use of Sentential Complement (SC) pattern (see
(Barak et al., 2012) for more details).

Learning Constructions of Verb Usages
The model processes input frames one at a time in a sequence
and groups them into clusters on the basis of the overall similarity in the values of their features. Importantly, the model
learns these clusters incrementally, and the number and type
of clusters is not predetermined. The model considers the
creation of a new cluster for a given frame if the frame is not
sufficiently similar to any of the existing clusters. Formally,
the model finds the best cluster for a given frame F as in:
BestCluster(F) = argmax P(k|F)

(1)

k∈Clusters

where k ranges over all existing clusters and a new one. Using
Bayes rule:
P(k|F) =

P(k)P(F|k)
∝ P(k)P(F|k)
P(F)

(2)

The prior probability of a cluster P(k) is estimated as the
proportion of frames that are in k out of all observed input
frames, thus assigning a higher prior to larger clusters representing more frequent constructions. The likelihood P(F|k)
is estimated based on the match of feature values in F and in
the frames of k (assuming independence of the features):

1 Note that, because the associations are probabilistic, a linguistic
construction may be represented by more than one cluster.

P(F|k) =

∏

i∈Features

1887

Pi ( j|k)

(3)

where i refers to the ith feature of F and j refers to its value,
and Pi ( j|k) is calculated using a smoothed version of:
Pi ( j|k) =

counti ( j, k)
nk

(4)

where counti ( j, k) is the number of times feature i has the
value j in cluster k, and nk is the number of frames in k.

Learning Verb Classes
In addition to grouping verb usages into constructions, our
new model groups verbs into classes on the basis of their distribution across these learned constructions. The algorithm
for learning the verb classes is similar to that for learning the
constructions, with the exception that the only feature used
here is the distribution of the target verb (to be classified)
across the learned constructions. Similarly to learning the
constructions, the model learns the verb classes incrementally
and the number and type of classes is not predetermined. The
model considers the creation of a new class for a given verb
distribution if the distribution is not sufficiently similar to any
of those represented by the existing verb classes.
Formally, after each clustering decision to a construction,
the model extracts the current distribution dv of a verb v over
the learned constructions as a smoothed version of the verb’s
probability of occurrence in each of these clusters:
dv : P(k|v) =

count(v, k)
nv

(5)

Experimental Setup
Generation of the Input Corpora
We follow the input generation methodology of Alishahi and
Stevenson (2008) and Barak et al. (2013) to create naturalistic input that is based on the distributional properties of verbs
across a range of syntactic constructions, as observed in CDS.
For this, we use an input-generation lexicon that contains information about the distributional properties of 71 verbs, covering verbs from different semantic classes and different frequency ranges. Each lexical entry includes the overall frequency of each verb, and its relative frequency with each of
a number of observed syntactic constructions. The frequencies are extracted from a manual annotation of a sample of
100 child-directed utterances per verb (or all utterances if less
than 100) from a collection of eight corpora from CHILDES
(MacWhinney, 2000).2
A single input corpus is generated by iteratively selecting
a random verb and a one of its argument constructions based
on their frequencies according to the lexicon. Since the generation of the input is probabilistic, we conduct 100 simulations for our experiments (each simulation using a different
input corpus) to avoid any dependency on specific idiosyncratic properties of a single generated corpus. Importantly,
each of the input corpora has the distributional properties observed in CDS, but at the same time the order of presentation
of verb usages may vary across the corpora.

Set-up of Simulations

where c ranges over all existing classes as well as a new class
that is represented as a uniform distribution over the existing
constructions. Jensen–Shannon divergence, DJS , is a popular
method for measuring the distance between two distributions:
It is based on the Kullback–Leibler divergence, but it is symmetric and has a finite value between 0 and 1:

Our goal here is to evaluate how our model interprets a typical usage of an MSV, resembling the verb identification task
used in many psycholinguistic studies of MSV acquisition
(e.g., Asplin, 2002; Papafragou et al., 2007). In this task,
participants are asked to predict the meaning of a novel verb
(e.g., gorp) in a given utterance (e.g., “she gorps that daddy
is sleeping”) paired with an image/video depicting a mental
event. We simulate this task to examine the developmental
trajectory of MSV acquisition in our model.
Specifically, we train our model on a randomly generated
input corpus of 10, 000 input frames, performing periodic
tests: At each test point, we present the model with a test
frame that represents the psycholinguistic settings of the verb
identification task.We then use the model to estimate the likelihood of the event type corresponding to the 5 semantic verb
classes of Belief, Desire, Perception, Communication, and
Action. These likelihoods represent our model’s interpretation of a test scenario: E.g., the likelihood of the event type
Perception given a Belief-fin test frame reflects how likely it
is that our model interprets the novel verb in the frame as having a Perception semantics; see the following section for how
we estimate the event type likelihoods. We use two kinds of
test frames to represent typical usages of MSVs: (i) Desire-inf
containing a novel verb, the infinitival-SC syntactic properties, and the semantic properties of a randomly-chosen De-

1
1
1
1
DJS (pkq) = DKL (pk (p + q)) + DKL (qk (p + q)) (8)
2
2
2
2

2 Brown (1973); Suppes (1974); Kuczaj (1977); Bloom et al.
(1974); Sachs (1983); Lieven et al. (2009).

where count(v, k) is the number of times the verb v appears in
construction k, and nv is the number of times v has occurred
in the input thus far. Each verb class c is represented by a
distribution dc that is a weighted average of the distributions
of its members:
dc =

1
∑ count(v, c) × dv
|c| v∈c

(6)

where |c| is the size of class c, count(v, c) is the number of
occurrences of v that have been assigned to c, and dv is the
distribution of the verb v (for the instances assigned to the
class c).
The model finds the best class for a given verb distribution
dv based on its similarity to the distributions of all existing
classes and a new one, as in:
BestClass(dv ) = argmax (1 − DJS (dc kdv ))

(7)

c∈Classes

1888

sire verb from our lexicon; and (ii) Belief-fin containing a
novel verb, the finite-SC syntactic properties, and the semantic properties of a randomly-chosen Belief verb from our lexicon.

Estimating Event Type Likelihoods
Recall that each verb entry in our lexicon is represented as a
collection of features, including a set of event primitives —
e.g., the set associated with the Belief verb think is {state,
cogitate, belief, communicate}. We estimate each event type
likelihood (e.g., Belief likelihood) by averaging over the likelihoods of all event primitive sets corresponding to verbs of
that class (e.g., all Belief verbs) according to our lexicon.
Formally, we calculate the likelihood of each event primitive set S given a test frame Ftest , as in:
P(S |Ftest ) =

∑

Pevent primitives (S |k)P(k|Ftest ) (9)

k∈Clusters

where P(S |k) is the probability of the primitive set S given
construction k, calculated as in Eqn. (4); and P(k|Ftest ) is the
probability of assigning the test frame Ftest to construction
k. Note that only the constructions encode the individual semantic and syntactic features (including the event primitives).
Hence we need to rely on the model’s learned constructions to
estimate P(S |k). However, we can use two ways of estimating
P(k|Ftest ): (i) by drawing on the model’s learned knowledge
as reflected in the constructions; and (ii) by drawing on the
model’s learned knowledge of verb classes. This would help
us understand the role of the model’s learned verb classes in
the acquisition of MSVs.
For the constructions, we simply calculate PL1 (k|Ftest ) as
in Eqn. (2). For the classes, we calculate PL2 (k|Ftest ) as in:
PL2 (k|Ftest ) ≈

∑

P(k|c)P(c|Ftest )

(10)

c∈Classes

where P(k|c) is the probability of construction k given the
distribution dc of class c over the learned constructions (see
Eqn. 6 for how dc is calculated). To estimate P(c|Ftest ), we
compare dc with PL1 (k|Ftest ) where the latter reflects the probability distribution of Ftest across the constructions. We use
Jensen–Shannon divergence (as in Eqn. (8)) to measure the
similarity between the two distributions.

Experimental Results
Psycholinguistic studies have observed that children produce
Desire verbs before Belief verbs (Shatz et al., 1983; Bartsch
and Wellman, 1995). However, even for Desire verbs, there
is still an initial stage when they are produced mostly in nonmental meaning (Bartsch and Wellman, 1995). Most psycholinguistic studies on MSVs, however, have focused on
their occurrences with the complex sentential complement
(SC) syntax. However, it has been noted that many usages
of these verbs are with non-SC patterns, signifying the importance of looking at their full range of syntactic behaviour

Figure 2: The distribution of our 5 verb classes over the 4 most frequent syntactic constructions for the MSVs. Note that the frequency
of Action verbs with the transitive construction is higher than its appearance from the chart. The total frequency of each class, shown on
the chart, includes the occurrences of the class with all the syntactic
construction in the data.

(Diessel and Tomasello, 2001; Klainerman, 2010). The interaction of Desire and Belief verbs with other (conceptuallysimpler) verbs over their shared syntactic and semantic properties might play a role in the acquisition of MSVs (de Villiers and Pyers, 2002; Israel, 2008). We use our model to shed
light on the factors that might be responsible for the observed
developmental patterns of Desire and Belief verbs.
We test our model’s knowledge of MSVs (Belief and Desire verbs) by examining the event type likelihoods (that we
estimate as explained above). We say that the model has acquired a solid knowledge of Belief (Desire) verbs if it assigns
the highest likelihood to the Belief (Desire) event type when
presented with a Belief-fin (Desire-inf) test frame. We also
examine the event type likelihoods that our model assigns to
the other non-MSV classes (i.e., Perception, Communication,
and Action), given each of our two types of test frames. This
will help us understand the role of non-MSV verb classes in
the acquisition of MSVs. In addition, recall that we include
both semantic and syntactic properties in our test frames. Following the settings of the psycholinguistic task that we simulate here, we include the typical syntactic pattern used with
MSVs (i.e., the SC syntax) to make the model rely on constructions associated with this pattern to predict the event type
of the novel verb. Note that because we include the semantic properties of Belief or Desire in the test frames, it also
has the effect of looking into constructions that reflect mental
semantics even when associated with non-SC syntactic patterns. This way, we can study the role of both the SC and the
non-SC syntax in the acquisition of MSVs.
To evaluate the role of verb classes in the acquisition of
MSVs, we compare the developmental patterns in our model
arising from each of the two layers. In one case, we estimate
event likelihoods given only the knowledge of constructions;
in the other, we estimate these likelihoods by using the knowledge of verb classes.

Analysis based on the Learned Constructions
Figure 3(a) presents the likelihood of each event type given
the Desire-inf test frame, while Figure 3(b) presents the likelihoods given the Belief-fin test frame. As can be seen, our

1889

(a) Model’s likelihoods Desire-inf given test frame

(a) Model’s likelihoods given Desire-inf test frame

(b) Model’s likelihoods given Belief-fin test frame

(b) Model’s likelihoods given Belief-fin test frame

Figure 3: The likelihoods of each event type given the learned con-

Figure 4: The likelihoods of each event type given the learned verb

structions.

classes.

model acquires Desire verbs almost instantly (from very early
stages of training), but exhibits a delay in its acquisition of
Belief verbs. This pattern is similar to what has been observed in children in that Desires are acquired earlier than
Belief verbs; however, it is lacking the observed initial stage
of not producing Desire verbs in their mental meanings. Interestingly, the earlier acquisition of Desire verbs can be attributed to its higher frequency (compared to Belief verbs) of
appearing with non-SC syntax, e.g., I want a cookie, I like
apples. The different syntactic distributions of Desire and
Belief verbs can be seen in Figure 2. Recall that our model
incorporates an attentional mechanism whereby when it encounters an SC utterance during the initial stages, it has some
difficulty in encoding the mental event due to a competition
arising from the action within the SC. Since Belief verbs more
frequently appear with the SC syntax, they are more likely to
be mis-interpreted at early stages, giving rise to a delay in
their acquisition. In contrast, the non-SC usages of Desire
verbs are correctly recorded even at the early learning stages.
These results point to the importance of looking at both SC
and non-SC usages of MSVs.
Looking more closely at Figure 3(b), we can see that early
on our model interprets a Belief test frame mostly as having
a Perception meaning, and only sometimes as having a Communication meaning. Interpretation of Beliefs as Perception
or Communication initially is consistent with the hypotheses
of de Villiers and Pyers (2002) and Israel (2008). However,
if we look at the distributions of these three verb classes (Belief, Perception, and Communication) in our data (Figure 2),
we cannot explain why a Perception interpretation is more

likely than Communication: Compared to Perception verbs,
Communication verbs seem to have a distribution closer to
that of Belief verbs. Clearly, the constructions do not fully
capture the interaction among the different verb classes. In
addition, we saw that our model did not show a similar behaviour to children in that it learned Desire verbs too quickly.
We attribute this limitation to the fact that the constructions
do not capture the interaction between Desire verbs and the
other semantic classes (e.g., Action) that could only be captured through generalizations over the full range of syntactic
behaviour of all verbs. We now turn into the same analysis
using the model’s learned verb classes.

Analysis based on the Learned Verb Classes
Figure 4(a) presents the event type likelihoods given the
Desire-inf test frame, according to the verb classes.3 Unlike
given the constructions, here we observe a delay in the association of Desire verbs to their mental meaning, as observed in
children (Bartsch and Wellman, 1995). The replication of this
trend is enabled by capturing the association of Desire verbs
to Communication and Action verbs over the use of transitive
constructions as well as infinitival-SC: The similarity of the
overall syntactic distribution of Desire verbs to Communication and Action verbs can be seen in Figure 2.
Figure 4(b) presents the event type likelihoods for the
Belief-fin test frame, which show a delayed acquisition com3 Note that the class-based likelihoods are shown on a different
scale than those of based on the constructions. We have fewer verb
class clusters, and thus we cannot directly compare the likelihood
values. Instead we focus on the trends in the relative likelihoods
across the 5 event types.

1890

pared to Desire verbs (cf. Figure 4(a)). We replicate this trend
when using verb classes, because our incrementally-learned
verb classes actually capture the higher similarity of the distribution of Belief verbs across the syntactic patterns to other
verb classes, compared with the relatively distinctive distribution of Desire verbs (as can be seen in Figure 2). Moreover,
in contrast to the pattern presented from the constructions,
initially the model interprets the Belief-fin test frame as either Perception or Communication (with similar likelihoods),
which is more in line with what has been suggested in the
psycholinguistic literature (de Villiers and Pyers, 2002). Our
model’s verb classes capture the similar distribution over syntactic properties of Belief and Communication verbs, unlike
the results presented for the constructions.

Discussion
We use a computational model of learning verb classes to
show the role of a variety of syntactic constructions in learning the meaning of MSVs. While Barak et al. (2013) focused
on the role of one syntactic construction, i.e., SCs, our results
here point to the importance of looking at the distribution of
MSVs over the full range of syntactic constructions. Our results present an initial high likelihood of interpreting usages
of MSVs as having non-mental meaning based on the interaction of MSVs with other verb classes based on their syntactic
distribution. This can serve as an additional research direction
while psycholinguistic studies mostly focused on the cognitive and pragmatic properties of MSVs as a possible cause for
the initial production of MSVs in non-mental meaning.
The focus of this work is on the role of the distribution
of MSVs over SC and non-SC patterns in their acquisition.
We hope to expand this analysis to additional languages that
differ in their distributional properties over the syntactic patterns in the future. Moreover, in a preliminary analysis of
the formed constructions and verb classes we note that the
similarity in semantic properties across verb classes should
also play a role in the learning process of MSVs. Notably,
we would like to address the possible use of MSVs in nonmental meaning in CDS (Bartsch and Wellman, 1995; Diessel and Tomasello, 2001). We hope to evaluate the role of
semantic properties of MSV usages in future work, while
carefully assessing the semantic properties of such usages in
CDS over time, including possible parental usages of MSVs
in non-mental usages in the input children observe.

References
Afra Alishahi and Suzanne Stevenson. 2008. A computational model of early argument structure acquisition. Cognitive Science, 32(5):789–834.
Kristen N. Asplin. 2002. Can complement frames help children learn the meaning of abstract verbs? Ph.D. thesis,
UMass Amherst.
Libby Barak, Afsaneh Fazly, and Suzanne Stevenson. 2012.
Modeling the acquisition of mental state verbs.

Libby Barak, Afsaneh Fazly, and Suzanne Stevenson. 2013.
Acquisition of desires before beliefs: A computational investigation. CoNLL-2013, page 231.
Libby Barak, Afsaneh Fazly, and Suzanne Stevenson. 2014.
Learning verb classes in an incremental model.
Karen Bartsch and Henry M. Wellman. 1995. Children talk
about the mind. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Lois Bloom, Lois Hood, and Patsy Lightbown. 1974. Imitation in language development: If, when, and why. Cognitive Psychology, 6(3):380–420.
Lois Bloom, Matthew Rispoli, Barbara Gartner, and Jeremie
Hafitz. 1989. Acquisition of complementation. Journal of
Child Language, 16(01):101–120.
Lois Bloom, Jo Tackeff, and Margaret Lahey. 1984. Learning to in complement constructions. Journal of Child Language, 11(02):391–406.
Roger Brown. 1973. A first language: The early stages. Harvard Univ. Press.
Jill G. de Villiers. 2005. Can language acquisition give children a point of view. In Why Language Matters for Theory
of Mind, pages 199–232. Oxford Univ. Press.
Jill G de Villiers and Jennie E Pyers. 2002. Complements to
cognition: A longitudinal study of the relationship between
complex syntax and false-belief-understanding. Cognitive
Development, 17(1):1037–1060.
Holger Diessel and Michael Tomasello. 2001. The acquisition of finite complement clauses in english: A corpusbased analysis. Cognitive Linguistics, 12(2):97–142.
Michael Israel. 2008. Mental spaces and mental verbs in early
child English. Language in the Context of Use: Discourse
and Cognitive Approaches to Language, 37:199.
Lara D Klainerman. 2010. Syntactic collocations patterns and
mental state verb acquisition.
A. Kuczaj, Stan. 1977. The acquisition of regular and irregular past tense forms. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 16(5):589–600.
Elena Lieven, Dorothé Salomo, and Michael Tomasello.
2009. Two-year-old children’s production of multiword utterances: A usage-based analysis. Cognitive Linguistics,
20(3):481–507.
B. MacWhinney. 2000. The CHILDES project: Tools for analyzing talk, volume 2. Psychology Press.
Anna Papafragou, Kimberly Cassidy, and Lila Gleitman.
2007. When we think about thinking: The acquisition of
belief verbs. Cognition, 105(1):125–165.
Jacqueline Sachs. 1983. Talking about the There and Then:
The emergence of displaced reference in parent–child discourse. Children’s language, 4.
Marilyn Shatz, Henry M. Wellman, and Sharon Silber. 1983.
The acquisition of mental verbs: A systematic investigation of the first reference to mental state. Cognition,
14(3):301–321.
Patrick Suppes. 1974. The semantics of children’s language.
American psychologist, 29(2):103.

1891

