UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Grammatical Change Begins within the Word: Causal Modeling of the Co-evolution of
Icelandic Morphology and Syntax

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/66x226jt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Author
Moscoso del Prado, Fermin

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Grammatical Change Begins within the Word:
Causal Modeling of the Co-evolution of Icelandic Morphology and Syntax
Fermín Moscoso del Prado Martín (fmoscoso@linguistics.ucsb.edu)
Department of Linguistics, UC – Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA
Abstract
I introduce a combination of information-theoretical and
causal modeling to study the cascading of changes between
the morphology and the syntax of a language on a diachronic
scale. Through the analysis of a historical treebank of
Icelandic language ranging from the XII to the XXI century, I
show that it is changes in the inflectional morphology of the
language that triggered changes in its syntax. This offers a
novel and powerful approach to draw conclusions in historical
linguistics from a macroscopic perspective. In addition, these
findings have implications for the dynamical properties of the
linguistic system.
Keywords: Granger-causality; Historical Linguistics;
Icelandic; Information Theory; Morphological paradigms;
Syntactic complexity.

Introduction
A common observation in the field of Historical Linguistics
is that grammatical changes in language tend to be cascaded
(e.g., Biberauer & Roberts, 2008; Lightfoot, 2002). Changes
at a given level of language (e.g., phonology, morphology,
syntax, …) disturb the unstable equilibrium at which human
languages reside, triggering a cascade of further linguistic
changes as a result. These cascaded changes continue until
the system reaches a new meta-stable state (e.g, Croft, 1995;
Smith, 1996). For instance, it is widely documented that the
loss of the grammatical case markers (morphology) in Late
Middle English led to a more rigid word order (syntax) in
Early Modern English (cf., Fisiak, 1984).
Traditionally, historical linguists have tracked these
cascaded changes by looking for the earliest document at
which a particular grammatical innovation can be found or –
conversely– at the latest time in which a later extinct
construction was documented. Historical linguistics often
relies on hard dichotomies on the presence or absence of
individual words, affixes, or constructions. This approach is
clearly useful for documenting the approximate time at
which particular constructions appeared or disappeared. The
approach is however limited in its power to detect more
subtle forms of grammatical change. For instance, as I will
argue in this study, Icelandic morphological paradigms are
remarkably resilient, having survived with little change for a
such a long period, that most of its current system can be
directly traced –virtually unchanged– all the way up to the
Old West Norse of the XII century. However, despite the
striking conservativeness of the Icelandic paradigms, their
patterns of usage have changed along this period.

One can obtain a higher degree of sensitivity by studying
the frequencies (and implicitly the probabilities) of usage of
different constructions in diachronic scale. These often
reveal gradual changes in the grammar of a language. For
instance, Ellegård (1953) documented how the usage of the
English periphrastic do construction (e.g., I do not speak vs.
I speak not, or Do you speak? vs. Speak you?) arose
gradually –rather than abruptly– during a period of two
hundred years, from the late XV century to early XVIII
century. With the wide availability of diachronic corpora in
electronic form, these frequency-based methods have gained
much prominence in recent years (see Hilpert & Gries, in
press, for a recent survey of quantitative methods in
historical linguistics). Admittedly, frequency methods offer
an improved sensitivity to the gradualness of grammatical
changes along time. Most often, these methods are applied
to relate the evolution of the usage of a particular
construction in different contexts. The natural tools to
achieve this type of inferences are different types of
regression analysis. These analyses study the correlations
between different factors that might affect the emergence or
demise of a construction. For instance, Hilpert (2013) uses
such tools to analyze the evolution of (among many others)
the patterns of usage of the English future constructions will
vs. be going to. Using a logistic regression analysis, he
identifies several factors that significantly co-occur with the
uses of either construction.
One must –however– keep in mind the old adagio:
“correlation does not imply causation”. Even in the cases
when one finds significant correlation between the
frequencies of use and co-occurrence of different linguistic
patterns and constructions, it still remains problematic to
argue that one pattern causes another. Back to example
above, the causal connection between the loss of
grammatical case and the fixation of word order is in fact
not so trivial on the basis of the historical data alone.
Evidently, I cannot infer that I have just had dinner because
it stopped raining, even if I observed both events in a
sequence. To make such arguments, I would require some
form of statistical evidence on how reliably do I start eating
whenever it stops raining. Similarly, just the temporal
sequentiality between the loss of case marking and the
emergence of rigid word order does not –by itself alone–
necessarily warrant causality. For instance, Kiparsky (1996)
discusses how fixed word order arose also in Icelandic while
the case markers were preserved.

2657

Fortunately, the inherent temporality of diachronic data
lends itself naturally to the use of more explicitly causal
methods. In the presence of temporal sequences, one can use
Granger-causality (Granger, 1969) analyses to assess
whether one time series is significantly affecting the
evolution of another. Importantly, in contrast with plain
correlations, Granger-causality is asymmetrical, and takes
time as a crucial factor in its computation. This reflects the
old philosophical constraint that causes must always
temporally precede their effects.

Co-evolution of complexities
In the discussion above I have assumed that the object of
study should be individual constructions, as has been so
productively exploited in the philological tradition.
However, a parallel and also important line of investigation
concerns not so much the individual constructions
themselves, but the more general macroscopic balance in the
system. This approach, although more detached from
descriptive linguistics, is of great importance for drawing
inferences on the types of constraints and mental processes
that drive the very nature of human languages. As important
as is the study of the individual constructions, it is to be able
to generalize between those specific instances. Jointly
considering strict causality measures with a detached
macroscopic look at the morphological and syntactic
systems, is the main objective of this study. With this goal, I
advance an hypothesis of how language change would be
reflected in measures of language complexity.
Consider that we have two coupled measures, one
measuring the overall complexity of a language's
inflectional morphology system, and another measure of the
syntactic complexity of the language (i.e., irrespective of

Figure 1. Expected pattern of a causal relation in language
change. Change on the hypothetical grammatical component
plotted by the black line triggers change in the component
plotted by the gray line.

individual constructions). As is illustrated by Fig. 1, plotting
the joint temporal evolution of these two measures along the
language's history would reveal the periods in time at which
change is occurring in the language. Notice that
grammatical change implies that, during the temporal
interval at which change is taking place, the old
grammatical forms on their way out of the language, would
co-exists with the newer forms. Therefore, these critical
periods of change would be revealed by peaks on the
complexity measures, whereas the meta-stable periods in
which language is not changing so much would be
represented by flat valleys in the complexity curves.
When one simultaneously considers two (or more) of
these curves, there are multiple patterns that could become
apparent:
1. Change could be happening at just one of the
curves. This would be indicative of change at one
level of the grammar which is not cascaded into
other levels.
2. Change happens simultaneously in both curves, as
would be indicated by roughly overlapping peaks.
This would signal co-temporal change at both
levels in the language. In turn this could be due to
both of the changes being driven by some other
event. Whether this event would be endogenous
(e.g., changes in the phonology of the language) or
exogenous (e.g., increased language contact during
this period due to geo-political events) is beyond
the scope of this study. Another possibility in this
case could be that of two perfectly coupled
systems, in which changes propagate across levels
almost instantly.
3. Changes at one level are temporally followed by
changes at the other, which is the pattern illustrated
in Fig. 1. In this case it would be possible to talk
about cascading of the changes across the levels.
However, prior to making such argument one
would need explicit statistical evidence that the
second level is indeed “following” the first one.
Granger-causality is very well suited to test such an
hypothesis.
In this study, I investigate the presence of such patterns
between the morphology and the syntax of Icelandic. In
what follows, I begin by introducing the measures of
diversity used to compute the curves. I then compute the
curves for a large diachronic corpus of Icelandic with full
morphosyntactic annotation (the IcePaHC corpus;
Wallenberg, Ingason, Sigurðsson & Rögnvaldsson, 2011),
and finally I assess whether or not a causal relation can be
statistically argued on the basis of the curves.

Grammatical Diversities
With the goal studying the co-evolution of the richness of
the inflectional paradigms (inflectional diversity), and the
diversity of the syntactic structures (syntactic diversity) in a

2658

language, I introduce here suitable macroscopic measures of
these two diversities. Importantly, both of these measures
are also of demonstrated psychological relevance for
language processing, a factor that will become important in
the discussion.

which measures the richness of the inflectional paradigms in
the language.

Syntactic Diversity

Inflectional Diversity
In recent years, it has become evident that the richness of a
base word's morphological paradigms (i.e., the set of forms
that can be created from it using consistent inflectional
process, such as prefixing and suffixing) is an important
factor in the mental representation of the word. Moscoso del
Prado, Kostić, and Baayen (2004) showed that this richness
was best demonstrated by the entropy (Shannon, 1948) of an
inflectional paradigm. If
denote the probabilities of
occurrence of the of the inflected forms of a word w having
n distinct inflectional variants, they defined the inflectional
entropy as,

This measure has been demonstrated to be an major codeterminer of human lexical recognition latencies,
resiliency and regularity of inflectional processes (Baayen &
Moscoso del Prado, 2005), and crucially, predicts the
relative ease with which the paradigms are acquired (Stoll et
al., 2012).
Inflectional entropy is therefore a good measure of the
diversity of inflected forms in which a word can appear.
Therefore, the average of the inflectional entropy across all
the words in a language will provide an accurate measure of
the richness of its inflectional paradigms. This average
entropy is in fact just the conditional entropy of the inflected
forms given the lemmas. If
denotes a lemma in a
language, and w denotes an inflected form, we can define
the entropy of the lemmas as

I refer to syntactic diversity as the diversity of the syntactic
structures that can be used in the language. According to
some theories of grammar, this diversity is potentially
infinite for human languages. For instance, if the grammar is
defined by a simple recursive phrase-structure grammar,
there is an unbounded number of possible grammatical
structures that could be generated by the grammar. This
however is not the case when one considers that the
grammars themselves must be probabilistic. Even if –
formally speaking– all structures generated a probabilistic
grammar with infinite generative capacity are possible,
reality dictates that many such structures will be abysmally
improbable, and can for all practical reasons can be
overlooked.
If we describe the grammar of a language at a particular
point in time using a probabilistic context-free grammar
(PCFG; Booth & Thompson, 1973; Charniak, 1997), it is
also possible to compute the entropy of the parse trees
generated by this grammar, which I will denote by H(G).
Notice here that, as discussed above, the number of
syntactic trees that could potentially be generated by a
PCFG is possibly infinite. However, the number of trees that
will be generated with a non-negligible (cf., Shannon, 1948)
probability is actually finite, and given by the exponent of
the entropy. Making use of a theorem by Grenander (1976),
Chi (1999) showed that the entropy of a PCFG can be
computed exactly from its rules and the associated
probabilities. Chi further demonstrated that this entropy is
finite for any PCFG that can be inferred by maximumlikelihood from a corpus.
Similar to what was found for inflectional entropies, Hale
(2006) showed that the syntactic entropy H(G) is a predictor
of the relative ease or difficulty with which a sentence is
understood by people.

Corpus Analysis

where
denotes the probability of encountering the
lemma . Further, we can define the joint entropy between
the lemmas and the word forms

Materials & methods

where
denotes the probability with which the
inflected word form w belonging to lemma is found in the
language. On the basis of these two measures, the average
inflectional entropy is exactly given by the conditional
entropy

Materials. I obtained the Icelandic Parsed Historical Corpus
(IcePaHC v0.9; Wallenberg et al., 2011). This corpus
contains morpho-syntactically annotated (i.e., parsed and
lemmatized) samples of Icelandic language ranging from
AD 1,150 to AD 2,008. This period covers basically the
whole history of the Icelandic language, from its origins as
an Old West Norse dialect, to the current official language
of Iceland. The corpus contains roughly 1,000,000 word
tokens of parsed Icelandic, divided into 61 files of similar
sizes (around 18,000 words per file). Each of the files
correspond to documents from one particular year. The

2659

Figure 2. Diachronic co-evolution of morphological and syntactic diversity in Icelandic, according to the IcePaHC corpus.
The solid blue line plots the evolution of the richness of the inflectional paradigms. The dashed red line plots the evolution
of syntactic diversity in the same period. The central segment plots the average width of the time interval over which the
temporal smoothing was performed. Notice that the vertical scales are different for inflectional diversity (left vertical axis),
and syntactic diversity (right vertical axis).
documents were chosen to cover the period in an
approximately uniform manner, sampling from different
genres at each period (inasmuch as possible).
Preprocessing. In order to increase the available sample
size for each particular year, and also to account for the
gradual nature of language change (e.g., Ellegård, 1953), I
constructed new samples based on a sliding window
technique. Taking the files in chronological order, I slid a
window of seven files across the list, at each step
constructing a sub-corpus with all the documents in each file
in the window. In this way, I obtained 55 sub-corpora, each
containing an average of 101,123 ± 1,974 word tokens.
Notice that, in this way, each sub-corpus overlaps strongly
with the previous one. Using a window of seven files
amounts to considering samples spanning an average of 84
± 4 years, which is indicated by the width of the green
segment on Fig. 2.
Computation of the diversities. For each of the files, I
estimated the inflectional diversity (H(W|L)) and syntactic
diversity (H(G)) measures described above.
In order to estimate H(W|L), one must consider that the
probability values obtained from the corpus are maximumlikelihood estimators, and are therefore certain to result in
substantial underestimations on the entropy. For this reason,
I made use of the Coverage-Adjusted Entropy Estimator of
Chao and Shen (2003). This techniques relies on classical

Good-Turing frequency smoothing (Good, 1953) of the
word frequencies combined with an additional correction of
the entropy equations to account for unseen terms.
Similarly, estimation of H(G) required first performing a
simple maximum-likelihood grammar induction on each of
the 55 treebanks (i.e, by simply counting the number of
instances of each grammatical rule, discounting the lexical
productions). The entropy was then estimated using the
technique of Chi (1999). In addition, to also account for
possibly unobserved context-free rules, the Chao-Shen
technique was also applied to the rule probabilities.

Results and Discussion
Fig. 2 plots the chronological evolution of the estimated
inflectional (blue solid line, solid dots) and syntactic (red
dashed lines, open dots) diversities for the 55 sub-corpora.
The year for each of the sub-corpora was computed as the
average of the years included in the seven sampled files.
Notice the different scales of the diversities, plotted on the
left and right vertical axes.
The pattern is remarkably reminiscent of what was
predicted in Fig. 1. The inflectional diversity begins a rapid
increase in the mid XIV century, reaching a peak in the late
XVI century, from which it follows a downwards stabilizing
pattern down to contemporary Icelandic. This indicates that
a change in the usage of the paradigms was occurring during
this period. We will return later to what these changes might
be reflecting, here I will just remark that the peak of the

2660

change coincides with the historical point on which the
Icelandic bible was printed, a major milestone in the
standardization of modern Icelandic.
The syntactic diversity measure on the other hand,
follows a pattern very similar to that observed for the
inflectional diversity, only apparently lagged by some 20-30
years. If this lagging was found to be reliable, it would mean
that the changes in Icelandic syntax were indeed a
consequence of the changes in its morphology, with a lag of
approximately one generation between the start of the
change in the inflectional morphology, and the beginning of
the syntactic change.

Causality analyses
In order to assess whether there was indeed a causal relation
between the inflectional and syntactic entropy time series, I
turn now to a Granger-causality analysis.
Granger-causality. If x and y are stationary time series, in
order to test whether x Granger-causes y, one starts by
fitting autoregressive models that predict the values of y
from its own m values lagged into the past,
y[t]=a0 + a1y[t-1] + a2y[t-2] + ... +amy[t-m] + ε[t].
One then augments the autoregression by including v lagged
values of x:
y[t]=a0 + a1y[t-1] + a2y[t-2] + ... +amy[t-m] +
+ b1x[t-1] + b2x[t-2] + ... +bvx[t-v] + ε[t],
where the ε[t] terms denote uncorrelated (white) gaussian
noises. If the second regression is a significant improvement
over the first, then it can be said that x Granger-causes y,
indicating that past values of x significantly predict future
values of y over and above any predictive power of y's own
past values. This is tested using an F-test, with the null
hypothesis being that the second model does not improve on
the first one.
Analysis. Despite the Chao-Shen corrections, both entropy
measures retained significant correlations with the size of
the sub-corpora and with the richness of its vocabulary.
Furthermore, the width of the chronological interval covered
by each particular sub-corpus was also linearly related to the
entropy measures. In order to avoid these factors acting as
confounds linking the two entropy measures, I residualized
them away by performing linear regressions with each of the
entropies as the dependent variable, and the variables
mentioned above as co-predictors. I retained for the
causality analyses the residuals from these regressions.
Also, in order to improve the comparability of the results,
and for better fitting the autoregressive models, both
residual time series (which were roughly normally

distributed) were standardized to zero mean and unit
variance.
As can be appreciated in Fig. 2, the peaking trend present
in both time series makes them non-stationary, a fact that
was confirmed by a Kwiatkowski-Phillips-Schmidt-Shin
test for trend stationarity (Inflectional Entropy: KPSS Level
= 0.55, p=.03; Syntactic Entropy: KPSS Level = .40,
p=.08). As the Granger-test requires that both series are
stationary, I differentiated the sequences (i.e., took the
differences
between
consecutive
values).
These
differentiated sequences were not significantly deviating
from stationarity. A further level of differentiation
eliminated the unit roots, while retaining the stationarity
(Inflectional entropy: KPSS level=.27, p=.1; Syntactic
entropy: KPSS level=.14, p=.1). These doubly
differentiated sequences were deemed suitable for Grangercausality analyses.
I selected the optimal autoregressive orders (values m and
v) in the autoregression equations by fitting autoregressive
models with different number of lags, and choosing the
model with the lowest AIC value (in fact all other model
selection criteria coincided in this choice). This indicated
that the optimal models were those with a single lagged
value in time. In order to be safe, I included two terms
(m=2, v=2) in both autoregressions (the results did not
change when these lags were anywhere between 1 and 6).
I fitted four autoregressive models (i.e, two models to test
whether inflectional entropy Granger-causes syntactic
entropy, and two models to test the reverse hypothesis,
whether syntactic entropy predicts inflectional entropy).
Model comparisons revealed that inflectional entropy
significantly
Granger-causes
syntactic
entropy
(F(2,94)=4.59, p=.01), whereas –crucially– syntactic
entropy does not Granger-cause inflectional entropy (F<1).
These results confirm the intuition from observing Fig. 2,
the changes in the syntax are the consequence of the
changes in the inflectional morphology.

Conclusion
I have shown that there is substantial statistical evidence to
assert that the changes in Icelandic grammar were triggered
by changes in its inflectional morphology. This confirms
previous intuitions that grammatical change spreads
outwards from the words into the rest of the grammar (e.g.,
Lightfoot, 2002). In doing so, I have introduced I new
method for studying grammatical change from a
macroscopic perspective.
The periods where change is more marked coincide with
major changes in the history of Icelandic. The most
dramatic changes correspond to the end of the Middle
Icelandic period (AD 1350 – AD 1550), reflecting the
formation of modern Icelandic (AD 1550 onwards).
Interestingly, it would superficially seem as if the
morphology of Icelandic had changed very little. Even
today, Icelandic inflection is, except for very slight details,

2661

virtually identical to the inflection of Old West Norse. The
change in the complexity of the inflectional paradigms must
have taken place within the relative frequencies of use of
each of the forms (e.g., nominal cases, verbal forms). This is
indicative of those inflectional markers changing their
functions, which is known to affect the mental
representation of words (Kostić, Marković & Baucal, 2003).
Another possibility is that, either both the inflectional, or
both the inflectional and the syntactic changes were
themselves triggered by changes in the phonology of
Icelandic. Indeed, phonology is the component of Icelandic
grammar that has undergone the strongest change in
historical times. Therefore it is very likely that phonology
also played an important role in triggering these changes.
Importantly, changes in the entropy of an inflectional
paradigm are known to have important consequences for the
cost of processing (Moscoso del Prado et al., 2004) and
acquiring words (Stoll et al., 2012). This would be in line
with theories positing that problems and changes in
language acquisition are crucial drivers of grammatical
change (e.g., Lightfoot, 2002). A problem in the acquisition
of morphological paradigms could in turn trigger problems
in the acquisition of syntax. This is reinforced by the lag of
approximately one generation between the onset of
inflectional and grammatical change, which as be seen in
Fig. 2. One can therefore speculate that it is the changes in
the frequencies of the paradigm members in the parent
generation leading to more inconsistent evidence for the
children. This would in turn trigger syntactic changes in this
generations, causing a sort of chain reaction that results in
syntactic changes (word order, etc.) across the grammar.
In sum, I have shown how information theory and causal
modelling are useful for the study of grammatical change at
a macroscopic scale.

References
Baayen, R. H. and Moscoso del Prado Martín, F. (2005)
Semantic density and past-tense formation in three
Germanic languages. Language, 81, 666-698
Biberauer, T., & Roberts, I. (2008). Cascading parameter
changes: internally driven change in Middle and Early
Modern English. In Th. Eythórsson (Ed.) Grammatical
Change and Linguistic Theory: The Rosendal Papers (pp.
79-114). Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Booth, T. L. & Thompson, R. A. (1973). Applying
probability measures to abstract languages. IEEE
Transactions on Computers, C-22, 442–450.
Chao, A., & Shen, T.-J. (2003). Nonparametric estimation of
Shannon's index of diversity when there are unseen
species in the sample. Environmental and Ecological
Statistics,10, 429-443.
Chi, Z. (1999) Statistical properties of probabilistic contextfree grammars. Computational Linguistics, 25, 131–160
Charniak, E. (1997). Statistical parsing with a context-free
grammar and word statistics. In Proceedings of the

Fourteenth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
Menlo Park, CA: AAAI Press/MIT Press
Ellegård, A. (1953). The Auxiliary Do: The Establishment
and Regulation of its Use in English. Stockholm:
Almqvist & Wiksell.
Fisiak, A. (Ed.) (1984) Historical Syntax. Berlin: de
Gruyter.
Good, I. J. (1953). The population frequencies of species
and the estimation of population parameters. Biometrika,
40, 237–264.
Granger, C. W. J. (1969). Investigating Causal Relations by
Econometric Models and Cross-spectral Methods.
Econometrica 37, 424–438.
Grenander, U. (1976) Lectures in Pattern Theory, Volume
1, Pattern Synthesis. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag.
Hale, J. T. (2006). Uncertainty about the rest of the
sentence. Cognitive Science, 30 , 643–672.
Hilpert, M. (2013). Constructional change in English.
Developments in Allomorphy, Word Formation, and
Syntax. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Hilpert, M. & Gries, S. Th. (in press). Quantitative
approaches to diachronic corpus linguistics. In M. Kytö &
P. Pahta (Eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of English
Historical Linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Kiparsky, P. (1996). The shift to head-initial VP in
Germanic. In S. Epstein H., Thrainsson, & S. Peters
(Eds.), Studies in Comparative Germanic Syntax, 2,
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Kostić, A., Marković, T., & Baucal, A. (2003) Inflectional
morphology and word meaning: Orthogonal or coimplicative cognitive domains? In R. H. Baayen & R.
Schreuder (Eds.) Morphological Structure in Language
Processing. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Lightfoot, D. (Ed.) (2002).
Syntactic Effects of
Morphological Change. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
Moscoso del Prado Martín, F., Kostić, A., & Baayen, R. H.
(2004). Putting the bits together: an information
theoretical perspective on morphological processing.
Cognition, 94, 1–18.
Shannon, C. E. (1948). A Mathematical Theory of
Communication. Bell System Technical Journal, 27, 379–
423
Smith, J. (1996). A Historical Study of English. New York,
NY: Routledge.
Stoll, S., Bickel, B., Lieven, E., Paudyal, N. P., Banjade, G.,
Bhatta, T. N., Gaenszle, M., Pettigrew, J., Rai, I. P., Rai,
M. and Rai, N. K. (2012). Nouns and verbs in Chintang:
Children’s usage and surrounding adult speech. Journal
of Child Language, 39, 284–321.
Wallenberg, J. C., Ingason, A. K., Sigurðsson, E. F., &
Rögnvaldsson, E. (2011). Icelandic Parsed Historical
Corpus (IcePaHC). Version 0.9. Available from

2662

http://www.linguist.is/icelandic_treebank

