UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Head gestures as congruent or incongruent signs of children’s attitudes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5gb5n083

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Swerts, Marc
Boerrigter, Tarissa
Gurova, Yan

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Head gestures as congruent or incongruent signs of children’s attitudes
Marc Swerts (m.g.j.swerts@tilburguniversity.edu)
Tarissa Boerrigter (tarissaboerrigter@gmail.com)
Yan Gu (yan.gu@tilburguniversity.edu)
Tilburg Center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), School of Humanities, Tilburg University
PO Box 90153, 5000 LE, Tilburg, The Netherlands

Abstract
This study looks into children’s use of head gestures to
express their appreciation for objects, comparing cases in
which the gestures match or do not match their true attitude.
Children of about 5, 6 and 7 years old were asked to tell an
experimenter whether or not they would like to have shown
objects as presents for their birthday. In a first round,
children were not given any additional instructions, so that
their feedback matched their genuine attitude towards the
objects. In a second round, they were asked to give feedback
in a way that was the opposite of what they felt. Analyses of
their verbal reactions and response delays suggest that the
youngest children found it harder to produce incongruent
feedback. While the relative use of head gestures decreases
with age, all children produce more head gestures in the
congruent condition, and produce more shaking gestures.
Keywords: head
development

gestures,

signs

of

attitude,

child

Introduction
Children, as part of their communicative development,
not only acquire the phonology, words and syntax of a
language, but also learn how to interact via nonverbal
features. One particular case at hand is the use of head
movements: speakers exploit such gestures to support their
spoken interactions, while their addressees derive
meaningful information from them (e.g. Maynard 1987;
McClave 2000). Darwin already remarked in the 19th
century that many cultures use head gestures as cues to
confirm or disconfirm information, and the most commonly
found pattern is one where people make a succession of
vertical movements (nodding) as an affirmative feedback
signal to their conversation partners, whereas a series of
horizontal movements (shaking) is used to deny
information. This association of vertical movements with
positive and horizontal movements with negative feedback
has been argued by Darwin to have a natural origin: he
hypothesized that this specific use of gestures and their
interpretation stem from early childhood, where nodding is
produced by babies when they search for milk, whereas a
head shake comes from refusing the milk (Darwin 1872). At
later stages in people’s lifes, the gestures get a more
generic, or more symbolic, function of acceptance or
refusal, and become used in a wider variety of contexts, not
necessarily related to food.

Interestingly, it turns out that some cultures display a
pattern which is the reverse of the more general trend, such
as in Bulgaria where horizontal movements are being
interpreted as “yes” and vertical movements as “no”
(Andonova & Taylor 2012). The fact that the conventions
about head movements may vary between communities and
that their associated meanings can be opaque to members of
a different culture suggests that their symbolic function
needs to be acquired by children. That is, they cannot (or no
longer) simply be derived from some intrinsic and natural
form-function correspondence between a bodily movement
and what this movement is supposed to depict, like is the
case with a throwing gesture that people use to illustrate that
specific act. One relevant question therefore is when and
how children learn to use and interpret such emblematic
gestures. In addition, analogous to what we know about
other forms of linguistic or cognitive development, it is also
interesting to explore how such gestures develop in
growing children, i.e., whether people –with age- change in
how they use emblems, just as they evolve regarding their
lexical vocabulary and their use of syntactic structures.
Guidetti (2005) investigated French children at age 1;4,
2;0 and 3;0 while they were spontaneously interacting with
their mothers, and specifically looked into refusal and
acceptance messages which could be gestural, verbal or
combinations of gestural and verbal. The study revealed that
children in all age groups used nodding and shaking, often
in combination with verbal messages, but the proportion of
gesture-only messages turned out to be higher for younger
children. Also, the study showed that assertions were more
frequently expressed than refusals. Similarly, Fusaro, Harris
and Pan (2012) studied child-mother dyads and observed
children at 14, 20 and 32 months. They found that the
frequency of these gestures increases with age, and that
there is especially a rapid increase in nodding between 20
and 32 months, however mostly combined with speech.
Additionally, children as they grow older more frequently
begin to use such gestures in combination with speech,
though isolated head nods continue to be used
predominantly at 32 months. So both studies by Guidetti
(2005) and Fusaro, Harris and Pan (2012) suggest that the
absolute frequency of head gesture increases with age, but
that the gestures becomes relatively less important, since
proportionally speaking older children signal similar kinds
of feedback more often with verbal messages.

2961

In sum: developmental studies have brought to light that
children fairly early in their life learn the “meaning” of
nods and shakes, and also use them accordingly. However,
the experimental studies by Guidetti (2005) and by Fusaro,
Harris and Pan (2012) concentrated on fairly young
children, so that it remains to be seen how a child’s gestural
behavior further develops at somewhat older ages. Also, to
the best of our knowledge, child-directed research in this
area has exclusively looked at contexts in which the child
reactions in interactions with others are truthful, so that the
horizontal and vertical head gestures are congruent with
positive or negative messages that children intend to
convey. To gain insight into the degree of automaticity with
which such gestures are produced, the current study
compares children’s gestural behavior in truthful situations
with situations where children are asked to express an
attitude which is opposite to what they truly feel. We deal
with Dutch children between the age of 5 and 7. Also, note
that Dutch follows the general trend displayed in most
cultures where nodding and shaking serve as positive or
negative feedback signals, respectively.

Current study
Our current study has a number of goals. First, from the
discussion of previous work it has become clear that
typically-developing children fairly early during their life
learn to associate head movements with symbolic meanings,
and use them accordingly. So far, most child-directed
studies of head gestures have focused on relatively young
children and report that, with age, these children become
more experienced users of such gestures. Not much is
known, though, about developmental patterns in children
who are somewhat older. From the literature, it is hard to
predict what to expect regarding the development of head
gestures in somewhat older children. On the one hand, one
could argue that this relative use of head gestures will
probably continue to increase, because the developing child
becomes a more advanced user of these gestures, and
becomes more knowledgeable about how to produce the
gestures in a wider variety of situations as a function of a
more developed socialization process. On the other hand, it
has been shown that children between age 7 and 12, as they
grow older, also become less expressive in terms of their
nonverbal behavior (Shahid, Krahmer & Swerts 2008), even
when this has mostly been shown for expressions of
emotions. That is, older children tend to internalize their
emotions more, and are better in controlling them and
adapting them to specific social contexts. Based on this, and
given that older children also have better developed verbal
skills which could serve similar purposes as the nonverbal
messages, it could be that children with age use head
gestures less frequently.
Second, results from earlier work suggest that children
exploit such head gestures almost automatically and
spontaneously when they want to convey affirmative or
negative feedback, especially given that earlier work

focused on signals that are in line with the children’s
positive or negative attitudes. So when children are allowed
to express their “true” internal state, this is very naturally
and relatively frequently reflected in their head movements.
That naturally begs the question as to whether such head
gestures would still occur in cognitively more demanding
contexts, such as when they would have to be deceptive
about their attitude. Previous work has shown that lieing is a
more mentally challenging task for people than simply
telling the truth (Vrij, Fisher, Mann & Leal 2006; Gombos
2006). This has, for instance, been shown by experimental
work in which adult participants were invited to give
answers to a series of questions in either a truthful or
deceptive manner, and then appeared to be faster in the
former task (Seymour, Seifert, Shafto & Mosmann 2000;
Walczyk, Mahoney, Doverspike & Griffith-Ross 2009).
Because of the additional mental processing tasks, children
may typically behave in a less instinctive manner when they
have to express attitudes which are in conflict with what
they “really” feel (Swerts, van Doorenmalen &Verhoofstad
2013). In a deceptive context, where there is a mismatch
between the true attitude and what the head gesture displays,
one could expect that the automaticity of gestures may get
lost.
And third, developmental patterns in head gestures in
growing children may be different for affirmative and
negative head gestures. As we saw above, previous work on
younger children has shown that, for them, acceptance and
refusal gestures are quite distinct, in the sense that these
children feel more inclined to signal affirmative than
negative feedback (Guidetti 2005; Fusaro, Harris & Pan
2012). This may suggest that the latter type of gestures
represent more marked behavior, even though it remains to
be seen whether this also holds for older children. In
addition, there is also a related, but more general finding
that denying information is a cognitively more demanding
activity than accepting information. From the point of view
of comprehension, it has already been shown a few decades
ago (Clark & Chase 1972; Wason 1959), as well as in many
follow-up studies, that comprehenders find it harder to
process sentences in which information is negated than
sentences that contain affirmative information.
For
instance, if people are asked to verify whether the content of
a sentence matches what is shown in a picture, then people
are faster to respond to this task when the sentence is
phrased in a positive (X is above Y) than in a negative
manner (X is not below Y) (Clark & Chase 1972). While
not going into the details of the proposed cognitive models
that explain such results, this difference in verification
latency has been interpreted as evidence that positive
sentences represent a “simpler” code. So, even though
previous studies were mostly perceptual/comprehensive in
nature, and were not concerned with head gestures at all,
they do suggest that affirmative and negative actions are
mentally quite distinct, which may have repercussions on
how participants display different kinds of feedback in a
production experiment.

2962

Method
Participants
44 children (20 girls) from the same school participated in
the experiment. These children were distributed in groups 2,
3 and 4 of their primary school in the following way: 10 (7
girls) in group 2, 20 (8 girls) in group 3 and 14 (5 girls) in
group 4, with average ages of 5 years and 2 months, 6 years
and 3 months, and 7 years and 2 months, respectively.
Children were allowed to participate only if the
experimenters had received an informed consent from their
parents and school. All children were given a small gift as a
token of appreciation. Data from one child from the
youngest group were not further analysed because that child
did not manage to do the “reverse world” condition (see
next session).

Procedure
Children were asked to inform an experimenter (the
second author of this article) as to whether they liked or
disliked objects that were presented to them as a series of
pictures on a computer screen of a laptop positioned in front
of them. While the experimenter was physically present in
the same room, the children could not see her. In particular,
they were instructed to signal whether they would love a
specific object (like a swimming pool) as a birthday present
or not. In order to make sure that this set-up would lead to
both affirmative and negative reactions from children, we
selected objects which presumably would be liked by quite a
number of children, and presents (e.g. an onion) that would
probably lead to opposite reactions. The selection of the
objects was based on some pretesting, and we tried to design
the list in such a way that we would likely get about an
equal number of positive and negative responses from
children. Also, we designed two lists that varied a bit,
depending on whether the pictures would be shown to boys
or girls, such that we, for instance, used a doll in the list for
the girls, and a football for the boys. In this way, twenty
objects in total were randomly presented to participating
children in 2 conditions (see below). It is important to note
that children were only instructed to inform the
experimenter about their appreciation of the objects, and
were not explicitly asked to use head gestures.
The procedure was such that we first elicited responses
from children (in an individually performed experiment) in
a truthful manner (congruent condition), whereby we did not
present children with any specific instructions to them other
than that they had to indicate whether or not they would
appreciate a specific object as a present or not. After they
had done this test, they were again presented with the same
list of objects, but this time they were asked to do the task
under a “reverse world” condition, which was explained to
them as a condition in which they had to express the
opposite of what they thought (incongruent condition). Both
conditions were preceded by a short practice session, in
which the children together with the experimenter would
give a reaction to some trial objects that were not used in the

actual experiment later on. After this practice session, the
experimenter would disappear out of sight (to avoid that
children would search for eye contact or would get
influenced by the experimenter’s behavior) but stayed in the
same room, and the children would then do the actual
experiment. The experimenter would remain silent during
the actual experiment, though she could see and hear the
participating children. It turned out that both tasks could
easily be understood by the children, who also informed the
experimenter afterwards that they thought it was a fun
experiment. The whole procedure, including the practice
sessions, took about 6 minutes on average per child.
The objects were presented as pictures to the children in a
powerpoint presentation, the speed of which was paced by
the experimenter via a remote control. She always showed a
new slide immediately after a child had responded to a
preceding slide. To facilitate the measurements of reaction
times afterwards, a new picture was always presented
simultaneously with a specific nonverbal computer sound.
The presentation was shown on an Apple Macbook Pro
versie 10.7.4. During the experiment, the participating
children were video-recorded with a built-in FaceTime HD
camera that had a 1280 by 720 resolution, so that children’s
responses and head gestures could be analysed at a later
stage. Video recordings were saved as iMovie clips, and the
audio streams were extracted from these recordings to
enable the measurement of response delays in Praat.

Results
In this section, we present the results of a number of
analyses. Before we give details on the distribution of
different types of head gestures, we provide some statistics
on other features of the children’s responses, in particular on
how adequately they could do the task to confirm or
disconfirm information in a truthful or deceptive manner
(subsection response types), and how quickly they were able
to respond under various settings (subsection on reaction
times).
Table 1: Relative frequency (absolute number and percentages) for
affirmative and negative responses as a function of age group and
experimental condition.

Group
2
3
4

Condition
Congruent
Incongruent
Congruent
Incongruent
Congruent
Incongruent

Response
Affirmative
Negative
94 (47%)
106 (53%)
98 (49%)
102 (51%)
156 (39%)
244 (61%)
209 (52%)
191 (48%)
105 (38%)
175 (63%)
158 (56%)
122 (44%)

Overall distribution of responses
Overall, it turns out that children –as intended- produced
about an equal amount of affirmative and negative feedback
cues, with a slightly higher proportion of negative ones
(negative: 941 (53.4%); positive: 820 (46.6%)). Table 1
tabulates the numbers and percentages of these two types of

2963

feedback cues as a function of age and experimental
condition (so whether children were being truthful or
deceptive). This table also shows that the distributions are
somewhat different for the different age groups. In the
“ideal” case where children would always manage to be
deceptive about their true attitude, the distribution of
affirmative and negative reactions in the incongruent
condition should present a mirror image of the distribution
of these reactions in the congruent condition, given that the
former condition should literally reveal the opposite pattern
of the latter one. As can be seen, this only appears to be true
for the distributions of the two older age groups, while the
distributions for the two conditions appear to be more
similar for the youngest group. These distributional
differences already suggest that the younger children found
it more difficult to be deceptive about their appreciation.
This is also reflected in table 2 which tabulates the
percentages of “errors” regarding affirmative and negative
responses for the different age groups in the incongruent
condition only. Errors were operationalized as those cases in
which a response to an object in the incongruent condition
turned out not to be the exact opposite of what the child had
responded in the congruent condition. For instance, if a
child in the congruent condition would state that it did not
like a potato as a birthday present, we would classify an
identical reaction in the incongruent condition as an error.
As can be seen, there is an overall decline in these errors as
a function of the age group. Moreover, there is a difference
in distributional patterns between the different age groups:
while the youngest children make about an equal amount of
errors for both the affirmative and negative actions, the
errors appear to be relatively more frequent for negative
responses in the two older groups.
Table 2: Percentage of errors in the incongruent condition for
affirmative and negative responses as a function of age group.

Group
2
3
4

Response
Affirmative
Negative
24.7%
24.1%
7.1%
26.9%
10.5%
24.8%

Total
24.4%
16.6%
13.2%

Reaction times
Given the earlier findings by Walczyk and colleagues
(Walczyk, Mahoney, Doverspike & Griffith-Ross 2009) that
reponse time is a good indicator of whether people are being
truthful or deceptive, we measured how long children took
to produce an utterance after the picture had been shown
(using the computer sound presented in the powerpoint as a
reference). We only did these analyses for responses that
contained speech. The large majority of the participants’
responses were produced with speech, except for 4 children
from the youngest group who regularly or always responded
with a nonverbal head gesture only, so these “silent”
responses were not taken into account in the current
measurement. The analysis revealed main effects of
condition (F(1,36)=24.046, p < .001) and age

(F(2,36)=3.290, p < .05), while the effect of valence
(affirmative vs negative), and none of the higher-level
interactions turned out to be significant. Closer inspection of
the averages revealed that incongruent feedback is produced
after a significantly longer delay than congruent. Posthoc
analyses using the Bonferroni method reveal that the
younger age group is significantly slower than the middle
one, while none of the other contrasts turned out to be
significantly different.
Table 3: Reaction times in seconds (means and standard error) for
affirmative and negative responses as a function of age group and
experimental condition

Group
2
3
4

Condition
Congruent
Incongruent
Congruent
Incongruent
Congruent
Incongruent

Response
Affirmative
Negative
1.73 (.20)
1.65 (.14)
1.95 (.21)
2.21 (.23)
1.12 (.12)
1.31 (.09)
1.77 (.13)
1.48 (.14)
1.43 (.14)
1.40 (.10)
1.61 (.15)
1.56 (.16)

Gestures
Given the previous findings, we now present data on the
frequency and type of head gestures as a function of the
various experimental factors. To this end, the second author
of this article annotated all the responses of the children in
terms of presence or absence of a gesture, and in case of
presence, determined whether a gesture was of a vertical
(nodding) or horizontal (shaking) type.
Table 4 presents the distribution of noddings, shakes and
other behaviours (those cases that did not contain a nod or a
shake) as a function of the age group, whether a feedback
was affirmative or negative, and whether this was done in a
congruent or incongruent manner. The table reveals a
number of interesting patterns related to these various
factors. First, it can be seen that the number of head gestures
decreases as a function of age. Overall, the younger children
of group 2 produce more instances of nods and shakes, and
that number becomes lower for children in groups 3 and 4.
Second, it can be seen that, for all age groups, negative
reactions lead to more head gestures than affirmative ones.
And third, there appears to be pattern, true for all age groups
and for both confirmative and negative types of feedback,
that the congruent condition leads to more gestures than the
incongruent one. These observations are confirmed
statistically by means of a 3X2X2 repeated measures anova
with age group (3 levels: group 2, group 3, group 4) as
between-subject factor, with valence (2 levels: affirmative,
negative) and condition (2 levels: congruent, incongruent)
as within-subject factor, and with the percentage of
matching gestures for each child as dependent variable. A
matching gesture was defined as a head movement that
corresponded with the affirmative or negative status of the
feedback (affirmative: nodding; negative: shaking). The
analysis revealed main effects of valence (F(1,41)=14.819, p
< .001) (negative responses lead to more gestures than

2964

affirmative; negative: 25%; positive: 18%), and condition
(F(1,41)=4.840, p < .05) (congruent condition leads to more
gestures than incongruent; congruent: 26%; incongruent:
16%), and of age (F(2,41)=6.736, p < .01). Posthoc analyses
using the Bonferroni method reveal that the younger age
groups differs from the other, while the two older do not
differ from each other, with a decreasing number of gestures
as a function of increasing age (group 2: 41%; group 3: 6%;
group 4: 17%). None of the interactions between the various
factors turned out to be significant.
Table 4: Percentages of nodding, shaking and other responses as a
function of age group, type of response and experimental
condition. Numbers in bold face represent percentages for
matching gestures (further explanation in the text).
Group
2

Action
Affirm.
Negat.

3

Affirm.
Negat.

4

Affir.
Negat.

Condition
Congr.
Incongr.
Congr.
Incongr.
Congr.
Incongr.
Congr.
Incongr.
Congr.
Incongr.
Congr.
Incongr.

Nod
34.0
29.6
0
2.0
10.3
6.2
0.4
0
9.5
2.5
0
0

Shake
0
2.0
55.7
45.1
0
0.5
18.0
9.9
0
0.6
26.3
3.3

Other
66.0
68.4
44.3
52.9
89.7
93.3
81.6
90.1
90.5
96.8
73.7
96.7

General discussion and conclusion
The present study has presented an analysis of nods and
shakes produced by children in different age groups, when
they were asked to indicate their appreciation for various
objects that were shown to them as a series of pictures.
There were two experimental conditions: a congruent one in
which children could express their true attitude, and an
incongruent one, in which children were asked to signal the
opposite of what they really felt. Overall, we found that the
latter condition appeared to be the more “demanding”
condition, and that the experienced difficulty of the task
decreased as a function of age. Overall, younger children
made more errors than older ones when they had to give
their appreciative feedback in the incongruent condition. In
addition, while the proportion of errors was about the same
for affirmative and negative responses in the youngest
group, the older groups made relatively more errors for the
negative feedback cases. Also, in line with earlier work, it
turned out that children overall took significantly longer to
respond to a shown picture in the incongruent than in the
congruent condition.
When we look at their actual gestural behavior, it was
found that the relative use of gestures depends on whether
they are used in a congruent or incongruent manner. More
specifically, we found that gestures are more frequently
used in the congruent condition, which appears to be true for
all age groups, albeit that the overall number of gestures
decreases as a function of age as well (see below). Possibly,

this result is related to the fact that the incongruent
condition is cognitively demanding, as also became clear
from the results of the response latencies above. In general,
it has been found that people find it more difficult to express
nonverbal expressions when these are not consistent with
the internal states of a speaker. In a study on the expression
of emotions, for instance, Wilting, Krahmer and Swerts
(2006) found that spontaneous expressions of negative or
positive feelings appear more natural and less marked,
compared to acted versions of these emotions that are not
“felt” as such by the speakers. Along the same lines, it may
have been harder for the children to produce head gestures
when these are not in line with their true attitude towards an
object. Other studies on deception also revealed that
producing a lie may have consequences for a person’s
nonverbal behavior, even when studies vary regarding the
extent to which alleged nonverbal correlates of deception
are consistent and reliable (DePaulo, Lindsay, Malone,
Muhlenbruck, Charlton & Cooper 2003; Swerts, van
Doorenmalen & Verhoofstad 2013).
These results about differences between congruent and
incongruent settings on head gestures are also in line with
earlier findings on cognitive, “natural” associations between
overt head gestures and negative or positive connotations.
Overt head gestures are not only relevant for an interlocutor
who observes these gestures from his/her conversation
partner as feedback cues about the ongoing interaction, but,
in addition, such gestures may also positively or negatively
affect the attitude of the person who is producing them.
Experimental studies in which participants were invited to
either nod (affirmative) or shake (negative) their heads
while doing specific tasks showed that the former type of
movements led these participants to become more positive
about a product or an idea, while the reverse appeared to be
true with the latter type of gestures (Wells & Petty 1980;
Briñol & Petty 2003). These results are consistent with a
self-validating hypothesis which predicts that gestures have
a biasing effect that can enhance or inhibit specific attitudes
of people. The current study analyses participants’ behavior
when this natural link is being disrupted, i.e., when people
are asked to express their appreciation for objects in a
deceptive manner, so signaling the opposite of what their
real attitude is, this less likely leads to using head gestures.
Next, it appears that there is an overall decrease in the
use of gestures as a function of age. This is reminiscent of
earlier work on children, though those studies focused on
younger children than the ones investigated in the current
study (e.g. Guidetti 2005). It is also in line with earlier work
that showed that children display fewer nonverbal correlates
of their emotions as they grow older (e.g. Shahid, Krahmer
& Swerts 2008). The difference in the relative frequency of
head gestures between younger and older kids could be
related to the fact that the verbal skills of children develop
with age. Young children learn fairly early what the
symbolic, emblematic meaning is of head gestures,
especially as these have been argued to have a natural origin
(Darwin 1872). While younger kids may over-use nonverbal

2965

gestures to communicate particular things, the older children
gradually rely more on verbal language for their messages,
and exploit head gestures in a more controlled manner so
that they suit specific social contexts.
And finally, if we compare the nodding and shaking
gestures, it appears that shaking gestures are more
frequently used than nodding gestures, and this appears to
be true for every age group that we analysed in this study.
At first sight, this seems to be in conflict with earlier studies
(Guidetti 2005; Fusaro, Harris & Pan 2012) with their
reported findings that nodding occurs more frequently than
shaking. However, this appears to be true only when we
consider absolute frequencies, where it was indeed found
that children more often signal acceptance than refusal.
Looking more closely at the data by Guidetti (2005),
however, reveals that the proportion of those acts that
contain a gesture (either nodding or shaking) is actually
higher for the refusals, which finding is in line with what we
have found. In other words, while it may be true that
positive feedback signals predominate in natural interactions
of young children, the relative usage of head gestures to
support such acts is higher for refusals. One possible
explanation for this is that children feel a higher need to
signal denials by means of (additional) gestures, because
these kinds of feedback cues represent more marked cases.
In that sense, the results are in line with earlier work on
positive vs negative feedback cues that showed that the
latter type tend to be produced with more prominent
prosodic features (e.g. higher pitch, slower tempo, longer
delay), as it is often more crucial for communication
partners to detect negative feedback than positive feedback
because they signal a (potential) problem in the ongoing
interaction (Shimojima, Katagiri, Koiso & Swerts 2002).

Acknowledgments:
We thank the children and their parents, as well as the
teachers and director of the Trinoom elementary school in
Eindhoven (The Netherlands) for their willingness to
participate in the experiment reported upon in this article.

References
Andonova, Elena & Taylor, Holly.A. (2012). Nodding in
dis/agreement: a tale of two cultures. Cognitive
Processing 13, 79-82.
Briñol, Pablo & Petty, Richard E. (2003). Overt head
movements and persuasion: a self-validation analysis.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 84 (6),
1123-1139.
Clark, Herbert H. & Chase, William G. (1972). On the
process of comparing sentences against pictures Cognitive
Psychology 3, 472-517.
Darwin, Charles (1872) The expression of the emotions in
man and animals (3rd edition). Oxford University Press
[1998].
DePaulo, Bella M. (1988). Nonverbal aspects of deception.
Journal of Nonverbal Behavior 12, 153–161.

DePaulo, Bella M., Lindsay, James J., Malone, Brian E.,
Muhlenbruck, Laura, Charlton, Kelly, & Cooper, Harris
(2003). Cues to deception. Psychological Bulletin 129,
74–118.
Fusaro, Maria, Harris, Paul L. & Pan, Barbara A. (2012).
Head nodding and head shaking gestures in children’s
early communication. First Language 32 (4), 439-458.
Gombos, Victor A. (2009). The Cognition of Deception:
The Role of Executive Processes in Producing Lies.
Genetic, Social, and General Psychology Monographs
132 (3), 197-214.
Guidetti, Michèle (2005). Yes or no? How young French
children combine gestures and speech to agree and refuse.
Journal of Child Language 32, 911-924.
Matsumoto, David & Hwang, Hyi Sung (2013). Cultural
similarities and differences in emblematic gestures.
Journal of Nonverbal Behavior 37, 1-27.
Maynard, Senko K. (1987). Interactional functions of a
nonverbal sign: Head movement in Japanese dyadic
casual conversation. Journal of Pragmatics, 11, 589–606.
McClave, Evelyn Z. (2000). Linguistic functions of head
movements in the context of speech. Journal of
Pragmatics, 32, 855–878.
Seymour, Travis L., Seifert, Colleen M., Shafto, Michael G.
& Mosmann, Andrea L. (2000). Using response time
measures to access “Guilty Knowledge”. Journal of
Applied Psychology 85 (1), 30-37.
Shahid, Suleman, Krahmer, Emiel J., & Swerts, Marc
(2008). Alone or together: Exploring the effect of
physical co-presence on the emotional expressions of
game playing children across cultures. In P. Markopoulus
(Ed.), Fun and Games (pp. 94-105). Berlin/Heidelberg:
Springer.
Shimojima, Atsushi, Katagiri, Yasuhiro, Koiso, Hanai &
Swerts, Marc (2002). Informational and DialogueCoordinating Functions of Prosodic Features of Japanese
Echoic Responses. Speech Communication 36, 113-132.
Swerts, Marc, van Doorenmalen, Anniek & Verhoofstad,
Lynn (2013) Detecting cues to deception from children's
facial expressions: On the effectiveness of two visual
manipulation techniques. Journal of Phonetics 41, 359368.
Walczyk, J.J., Mahoney, KT., Doverspike, D. & GriffithRoss, D.A. (2009). Cognitive lie detection: Response
time and consistency of answers as cues to deception.
Journal of Business and Psychology 24 (1), 33-49.
Wason, Peter C. (1959). The processing of positive and
negative information. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology 11 (2), 92-107.
Wells, Gary L., & Petty, Richard E. (1980). The effects of
overt head movements on persuasion: Compatibility and
incompatibility of responses. Basic and Applied Social
Psychology 1, 219–230.
Wilting, Janneke, Krahmer, Emiel & Swerts, Marc (2006)
Real vs. acted emotional speech. Proceedings Interspeech
2006, (pp. 805-808), September 2006, Pittsburgh, Pa,
USA.

2966

