UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Awareness and Valuation of the Future Jointly Shape Intertemporal Financial Decisions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3vh194w9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Bartels, Daniel
Urminksy, Oleg
Frederick, Shane

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How Awareness and Valuation of the Future Jointly Shape Intertemporal Financial
Decisions
Daniel M. Bartels (bartels@uchicago.edu)
University of Chicago, 5807 S. Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637 USA

Oleg Urminsky (oleg.urminsky@chicagobooth.edu)
University of Chicago, 5807 S. Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637 USA

Shane Frederick (shane.frederick@yale.edu)
Yale University, 52 Hillhouse Ave. Room 116
New Haven, CT 06511 USA
missing how these considerations interact to shape intertemporal choices and therefore failing to predict when people
exercise restraint in spending. We find that these factors are
mutually reinforcing. Our three studies find that valuing future outcomes reduces spending primarily when opportunity
costs are considered. These results help account for the dearth
of evidence showing a relation between time preference (as
measured by elicited discount factors) and saving or restraint
in spending.

Abstract
We examine people’s preferences about whether to engage in
discretionary spending vs. save their money and find that reduced spending in the present requires the combination of both
being motivated to provide for one’s future self (valuing the future) and actively considering long-term implications of one’s
choices (awareness of the future). Feeling more connected to
the future self—thinking that the important psychological properties that define your current self are preserved in the person
you will be in the future—provides the motivation for people to
make far-sighted choices by changing the valuation of future
outcomes. However, this change only reduces spending when
opportunity costs are highlighted.
Keywords: Judgment; Decision Making;
Choice; Personal Identity; Consumer Behavior.

Valuing future outcomes
Time preferences (i.e., the strength of people’s preference to
receive outcomes sooner and thereby forego larger outcomes
that occur later) have been interpreted as the degree to which
the future is valued, and therefore have long been viewed as
one of the primary determinants of savings and spending decisions (Frederick, Loewenstein, & O’Donoghue, 2002).
While the degree of discounting, the functional form of discount rates, and correlates of discounting have been widely
studied, less work has been done on the motivational reasons
why people discount the value of future outcomes so steeply,
and why some people are less patient than others. Prior work
has instead primarily focused on either economic considerations (e.g, liquidity constraints; Meyer, 1976) or perceptual
accounts (e.g, subjective time, Zauberman et al., 2009).
One starting point for understanding the underlying motivation is the idea that a person can be construed as a temporal
sequence of overlapping, but partly distinct selves (Parfit,
1984), rather than a single identical entity over time. The motivation to sacrifice consumption on behalf of future selves
could then depend on how “connected” the current self feels
toward those future selves— how much overlap the person
perceives with respect to beliefs, values, goals, and other defining features of personal identity. The more one anticipates
change in these aspects, the less motivated the person may be
to save for the future self who will benefit. Recent work implicates psychological connectedness as a determinant of intertemporal choices. High felt connectedness has been related
to impatience in intertemporal choice tasks (Bartels, Kvaran,
& Nichols, 2013; Bartels & Rips, 2010; Ersner-Hershfield,
Wimmer, & Knutson, 2009).

Intertemporal

Introduction
“If you're wasting $5 a day on little things like a latte at Starbucks or a muffin, you can become very rich if you can cut
back on that, and actually took that money and put it in a
savings account at work, like a 401(k) plan or an IRA account… [I]n your 20s, you can actually be a multimillionaire
by the time you reach retirement by simply finding your latte
factor and paying yourself back.” (Bach, 2002)
The advice above—offered by financial self-help guru David Bach—describes a savings strategy that is not easily followed. Continuous restraint is difficult to achieve: one must
take into account the future opportunities that current indulgences displace and must value those future outcomes, even
though the benefits enjoyed by future selves come at the cost
of current forbearance. Individual differences in these two
dispositions (considering and valuing future outcomes) may
help explain why people in similar economic circumstances
sometimes save at very different rates.
In the current studies, we study how both factors jointly
shape spending decisions. We investigate people’s awareness
of the future consequences of their choices via the degree to
which they consider the opportunity costs of their choices. We
investigate the valuation of future outcomes via connectedness to the future self, which has been shown to impact time
discounting (Bartels & Urminsky, 2011). We think that studying either factor in isolation yields an incomplete account,

140

However, those studies—like most laboratory-based research on time discounting — measured intertemporal preferences using tradeoffs between explicitly specified smaller
rewards available sooner and larger rewards available later
(e.g., would you rather have $500 in a week or $1000 in a
year?). Spending decisions, by contrast, are rarely explicitly
framed as an intertemporal tradeoff. For example, a person
might spend $4 on a latte at Starbucks without thinking about
opportunity costs at all (Frederick et al., 2009), and people
may make such decisions without considering the future opportunity costs of the expenditure. This observation may help
explain why attempts to use estimates of discounting derived
from laboratory tasks to predict “far-sighted” decision making
in the field have yielded mixed results (see Urminsky & Zauberman, 2013 for a review).

In this paper, we investigate the unaddressed question of
whether and how these two factors interact in shaping people’
spending decisions. The current studies offer insights into
why financial outcomes have not been consistently predicted
by measures of discounting in the prior literature by finding
evidence that awareness of and valuation of the future interact
to predict people’s choices.

Study 1
Study1 examines how the recognition of tradeoffs inherent in
choices and how valuation of the future (which increases with
greater connectedness to the future self) jointly determine
financial decisions. Any single contemplated expenditure, by
itself, rarely jeopardizes any other specific spending or savings goals and, thus, may often be made without considering
opportunity costs. However, the notion of opportunity cost
can be readily cued, and we predict that recognizing the
tradeoffs inherent in choice will potentiate the relation between connectedness and thrift.

Awareness of future outcomes
A growing body of literature has shown that increasing the
salience of opportunity costs or tradeoffs (we will use the two
terms interchangeably) restrains spending. In particular, Frederick et al. (2009) show that merely reminding people that
unspent money could be used for other purposes reduced intended spending. While some of the opportunity costs considered may be in the present (e.g., other items in the same
store), the opportunity cost of a current purchase could often
also be construed as reduced consumption in the future. Furthermore, manipulations that explicitly direct attention to
future consequences have been shown to increase preferences
for delayed rewards (Hershfield et al., 2011). Likewise, a
greater focus on long-term consequences predicts higher (reported) intent to save more money for retirement (Nenkov,
Inman, & Hulland, 2008) and higher (reported) incidence of
healthy behaviors (Strathman et al., 1994). Individual differences in the propensity for financial planning (e.g., explicit
consideration of future spending) predict accumulated wealth,
coupon use, and credit score (Lynch et al., 2010).
To date, there has been minimal overlap between research
investigating the consideration of future outcomes and research investigating the valuation of future outcomes. Neither
the distinction, nor possible interactions are typically discussed. Accounts of decision-making based on this discounting literature then often assume that people vary in their patience, without distinguishing between consideration and valuation of future consequences as determinants of patience.
In contrast, we argue that the consideration of future outcomes and the valuation of those outcomes are not only conceptually distinct, but the nature of the interaction between
the two is important for understanding how people make everyday intertemporal choices. To illustrate the distinction, consider two people, Jan and Fran, who both spend all their discretionary income every month on current consumption instead of saving for the future, but for different reasons. Jan
spends all her money because she fails to consider her future
financial needs. In contrast, Fran spends all her money because, despite being aware of the consequences, she doesn’t
care about what happens to her when she’s old.

Method
We collected 137 complete surveys from adult online participants who were considering buying an iPad. We crossed an
opportunity cost manipulation used by Frederick et al. (2009)
with a psychological connectedness manipulation used by
Bartels and Urminsky (2011), which induces the belief that
one’s identity will (or will not) substantially change. Specifically, participants in the high connectedness condition (N =
69) began by reading a short description of recent research
suggesting that adulthood is characterized by stability in identity (e.g., “the important characteristics that make you the
person you are right now... are established early in life and
fixed by the end of adolescence”). Participants in the lowconnectedness condition (N = 68) read about instability (e.g.,
“the important characteristics that make you the person you
are right now... are likely to change radically, even over the
course of a few months....”). Participants then rated their felt
connectedness to the future self—the degree to which they
felt that the important psychological properties that define
their current selves would be preserved in their future
selves—on a 100 point scale, and on a corresponding visual
analog scale utilizing Euler circles with varying degrees of
overlap. These two measures were substantially correlated (r
= 0.73), and we used the average as our measure of connectedness. The manipulation influenced rated connectedness as
intended (M = 77.1, SD = 16.3 in the high condition vs. M =
62.8, SD = 19.5 in the low condition; t(135) = 4.68, p < .01).
Participants were then presented with the choice below.
The $100 price difference between the two products was left
implicit in the control condition (N = 67), but stated explicitly
for participants in the “salient opportunity cost” condition (N
= 70):
Imagine that you have been saving some extra money on
the side to make some purchases, and that you are faced
with the following choice. Select the option you would prefer.

141

(A) Buy a 64 Gigabyte Apple iPad for $735
(B) Buy a 32 Gigabyte Apple iPad for $635 [leaving you
$100 for other purposes]
(C) Not buy either iPad

visit to the video store, you come across a special sale on a
new DVD. This DVD is one with your favorite actor or actress, and your favorite type of movie (e.g., comedy, drama,
thriller, etc.). This particular DVD that you are considering
is one that you have been thinking about buying for a long
time. It is available at a special sale price of $14.99.
What would you do in this situation?
(A) Buy this entertaining DVD
(B) Not buy this entertaining DVD [keeping the $14.99 for
other purposes]
Participants also rated their felt connectedness to the future
self as in Study 1 and then completed the “Consideration of
Future Consequences” scale (Strathman et al. 1994) and the
“Propensity to Plan for Money” scale (Lynch et al. 2010)
adapted to a one-year time frame.

Results and Discussion
In the high connectedness condition, adding the opportunity
cost reminder decreased the choice share of the premium
iPad, from 35% to 6% (χ2 = 9.3, p <.05) but had no such
effect in the low connectedness condition (27% vs. 23%,
n.s.). The difference in connectedness only reduced choices of
the premium product when opportunity costs were cued (23%
vs. 6%, χ2 = 4.2, p <.05), but not when the cue was absent
(27% vs. 35%, n.s.).
We also coded the spending level of the chosen option ($0,
$635, or $735) and regressed this measure on connectedness,
opportunity cost cue, and their interaction. Here, we find the
predicted interaction (β = -59.97, t = -2.10, p < .05) and no
main effects (βs = -12.10 and -22.32, ts <1 for Connectedness
and Opportunity Cost Cue; See Figure 1), suggesting that
exercising financial restraint requires both high degrees of
connectedness to one’s future self and a reminder to consider
opportunity costs of current expenditures.

Results and Discussion
The opportunity cost manipulation reduced intended purchase
rates from 63% to 49% (χ2 = 4.1; p < .05). A spotlight analysis based on a fitted logistic regression model showed that the
opportunity cost cue was especially effective for people with
connectedness scores one-standard deviation above the mean
(for whom the opportunity cost reminder decreased purchase
rates from 58% to 28%). Conversely, among those whose
connectedness scores were one standard deviation below the
mean, the manipulation had no effect (68% vs. 72%).
We also analyzed two measures of spontaneous consideration of opportunity costs. The consideration of future consequences scale and the propensity to plan scale correlated
strongly with each other (r = .53). Both measures also correlated significantly—though not especially strongly—with
connectedness to the future self (rs = .18 and .22, ps < .01).
Overall, purchase intent was negatively correlated with
connectedness, propensity to plan, and consideration of future
consequences (biserial correlations: rs ≤ .19, ps < .05). However, higher connectedness related to lower purchase intent
when opportunity costs were highlighted (r(97) = -.42, p <
.01), but not in the control condition (r(102) = -.09, p > .10).
The difference between correlations is significant (z = -2.48, p
< .01).
Not surprisingly, when opportunity costs were experimentally highlighted, the spontaneous propensity to plan became
a directionally weaker predictor of purchase intent (r = -.31
vs. -.09, p = .10), as did consideration of future consequences
(r = -.24 vs. -.12, n.s.). In short, psychological connectedness
to the future self has a greater effect on purchase decisions
when tradeoffs are highlighted, and highlighting tradeoffs
reduces the significance of individual differences in the spontaneous tendency to do so.
To model the combined effects of these factors, we jointly
regressed respondents’ purchase decision on opportunity cost
cue, connectedness, propensity to plan and the interactions
between these variables. All of the predictor variables except
for connectedness and all pairwise interactions were significant. More importantly, the three-way interaction was significant (all ps < .01), indicating that measured propensity to plan
moderated the interaction of connectedness and opportunity

Figure 1: Amount spent by whether or not opportunity
costs were cued and by low/high connectedness condition

Study 2
In Study 1, we manipulated the salience of opportunity costs,
but some people may not require such prompts. Spiller (2011)
found that people with greater propensity to plan for the future (a scale introduced by Lynch et al., 2010) are more likely
to spontaneously recognize opportunity costs. We predict that
connectedness to the future self should be a stronger predictor
of discretionary purchasing among those with greater propensity to plan, much as we predict it to be when opportunity
costs are experimentally cued.

Method
One hundred ninety-nine adults completed an online survey
where respondents chose whether to spend $14.99 on a hypothetical DVD, and we manipulated the salience of the expenditure’s opportunity cost by including or excluding the
reminder in brackets below:
Imagine that you have been saving some extra money on
the side to make some purchases, and on your most recent

142

cue reminder. The full details of the logistic regression are
given in the table below. (We find similar results when we
replace propensity to plan with consideration of future consequences but omit this analysis due to space constraints.)
Source
Constant
Connectedness
Opportunity Cost Cue
Propensity to Plan (PTP)
Cue x Connectedness
Cue x PTP
Cue x Connectedness x PTP


.633
-.232
-.673
-.741
-.795
.750
.917

SE
.203
.226
.203
.242
.248
.242
.248

Wald
9.70
1.05
10.99
9.41
10.27
9.64
13.67

would anticipate difficulty generating the reasons, and would
therefore interpret this experience as evidence of lower connectedness to their future selves.
In the final two stages, participants completed two tasks: (i)
ranking the desirability of six product categories (pocket video cameras, blenders, bed sheets, pocket watches, laser printers, and nonstick frying pans) from 1 = “Most desirable; the
kind of product I want the most” to 6 = “Least desirable; the
kind of product I want the least”, and (ii) choosing between a
more and less expensive product from each of those categories.
In the high tradeoff salience condition, the ranking task
preceded the decision of which product to purchase. The
ranking task was intended to make tradeoffs between different
priorities more salient, encouraging recognition that satisfying
one purchase goal subordinates others. At a minimum, the
task makes participants contemplate at least five other uses of
their money before their first decision of whether to splurge
or save. In the low tradeoff salience condition, the same ranking task was completed after making the choices.
We expected the connectedness manipulation to have the
strongest effect when tradeoffs were highlighted by the ranking task. Our analyses focused on how often, and under which
conditions, participants "splurged" by buying the more expensive product in each of the six categories. This design also
allows us to examine how closely that choice relates to the
ranked desirability of the product category, testing whether
the combination of high connectedness and high tradeoff salience motivate thrift across the board, or whether knowing and
caring about future outcomes causes people to reduce spending for less-valued categories.

p
.002
.305
.001
.002
.001
.002
.000

These findings have implications for understanding the efficacy of behavioral interventions that remind people of the
future consequences of their actions (e.g., that buying a latte
means spending down one’s retirement account). Such interventions are likely to be less effective for those who don't
identify strongly with their future selves (and may therefore
steeply discount the value of future outcomes) and are likely
to be redundant for people who already spontaneously construe choices in terms of opportunity costs.

Study 3
So far, our results suggest that people who think of choices as
affecting future selves they care for will make more farsighted choices—foregoing the impulse to purchase goods
they covet but can sensibly forego. One interpretation of these
findings is that the combination of connectedness to the future
self and opportunity cost salience merely makes people less
willing to spend in the present and therefore more likely to
reject any purchase.
Alternatively, those more connected people who are aware
of opportunity costs may be more likely to trade off the consumption value of the product on offer against the long-term
utility of not spending (e.g., the value of money in the bank),
resulting in spending that is more focused on what the person
values most highly. If this is the case, a greater reduction in
spending will be concentrated among products that provide
low value to the person. To test this, in the following study we
examine which purchases are most affected by our connectedness and opportunity cost manipulations. We also extend
our results by using a common task (considering the relative
desirability of multiple product categories before shopping) to
manipulate the salience of tradeoffs.

Results and Discussion
Number of expensive purchases. As predicted, people
forced to consider tradeoffs (by initially ranking the categories) chose fewer premium products when made to feel more
connected (1.45 vs. 2.36, t = 3.08, p < .01), but connectedness
had no effect when the ranking task came second (2.19 vs.
2.03, n.s.). A linear regression confirmed that the predicted
interaction was significant (β = -.27, t = -2.38, p < .05), but
found no effect of tradeoff salience and a marginal main effect of connectedness. Analyzing the amount spent yields a
similar result: when tradeoffs are cued, higher connectedness
yields lower spending ($489 vs. $503, t = 2.99, p < .01) but
otherwise has no effect ($500 vs. $498). A linear regression
predicting total intended spend confirms the significant interaction (β = -3.78, t = -2.16, p < .05) and finds a marginal main
effect of connectedness and no effect of opportunity cost.

Method
We collected 130 complete surveys from online participants.
We crossed a connectedness manipulation with a tradeoff
salience manipulation. The procedure consisted of three stages: First, we manipulated connectedness by randomly assigning respondents to estimate the difficulty of generating 10 [2]
reasons why their own identity would remain very stable over
the next year, after reading that most participants in a previous study could do so (see Bartels & Urminsky, 2011). We
expected that participants considering two reasons would find
the task easy, and therefore have no reason to doubt the stability of their identity. In contrast, those considering ten reasons

Price Sensitivity. Participants ranked the six categories, from
most to least preferred. For each participant, we computed the
correlation between the rank assigned to that category of
product (1 through 6) and their decision to purchase the more
expensive item within the category. Across all conditions, the
average within-subjects correlation was significantly less than
zero (average r = -.12, t = -3.64, p < .001)—respondents were
less likely to splurge for categories they cared less about. Fur-

143

ther probing reveals that higher (vs. lower) connectedness
yields fewer choices of the premium option in the less preferred categories (average r = -.25 vs. .06, t(64) = 3.40, p =
.001) when tradeoffs are highlighted, but not when they are
not highlighted (average r = -.15 vs. .09, n.s.).

ing them together yields insights that are not apparent when
either is studied alone.
We find that the awareness of opportunity costs is insufficient to motivate fiscal restraint among people low in connectedness, who place lower value on future outcomes, and
therefore may be least prone to save. We also find that the
motivation to provide for future selves is insufficient to motivate thrift when opportunity costs are not highlighted.
The efficacy of making tradeoffs salient for promoting
thrift could depend on the specific opportunity costs highlighted. We would expect connectedness (via its influence on
temporal discounting) to matter more if the opportunity costs
were characterized as future consumption. Since our opportunity cost reminders were generic and not specifically about
future opportunities displaced by current indulgences, our
studies may be a conservative test of the interaction we posit.

Figure 2: Probability of buying more expensive item in pair
by (i) whether or not opportunity costs were cued, (ii)
low/high connectedness condition, and (iii) whether the items
were ranked as relatively more/less desirable by participants

Implications for interventions in financial decision
making
The large literature on financial decision making has explored
various interventions aimed at promoting far-sighted behavior. Many interventions target people’s presumed lack of information to optimize such decisions. For example, credit
card companies are required to disclose the monthly payment
needed to pay off one’s accumulated debt in three years, cigarette packaging requirements mandate explicit warnings of
the long-term health consequences of smoking, and New
York requires chain restaurants to post calorie information.
Related interventions assume that people may fail to fully
process information or fail to summon it at the right time. For
example, studies have found increased savings or reduced
debt from interventions like reminding people of the consequences of failing to save (e.g., Koehler et al., 2011). Presumably this affects behavior by bolstering the accessibility of
intertemporal tradeoffs in the face of competing cognitive
demands. Other interventions, such as surveys about banking
and savings (Dholakia & Morwitz, 2002), or collecting deposits in person (Ashraf, Karlan, & Yin, 2006) may provide
inadvertent reminders, with similar effects.
However, informational interventions have not always been
found to be effective. The current studies suggest that these
kinds of interventions can fail to have an impact either because such tradeoffs are spontaneously taken into account (a
person may have a high propensity to plan) or because people
have low connectedness with the future selves their current
forbearance would benefit. Thus, efficacy of interventions
will vary markedly across people, for reasons unrelated to the
intervention's potential benefit. Our analysis suggests that
connectedness-increasing interventions may therefore increase the efficacy of informational manipulations. However,
not all informational interventions will necessarily have such
positive synergies: for example, an ad which emphasizes the
costliness of medicating our frail older selves could well undermine the feelings of connectedness that provides our motivation to save for those older selves in the first place.
If intertemporal preferences are stable, our results are consistent with the characterization of informational interventions

These results suggest that among participants who were
made to feel more connected to the future self, the tendency
to splurge was not only reduced, but spending was more concentrated in the most personally important product categories,
which was especially pronounced in the high tradeoff salience
conditions (i.e. when people ranked categories before choosing). To illustrate, Figure 2 presents the fraction of times respondents chose to splurge in the higher ranked (top 3) vs.
lower ranked (bottom 3) product categories. As predicted,
only those in the high connectedness- high tradeoff salience
condition had fewer choices of the premium product for the
lower-ranked (vs. higher ranked) categories (M = .14, SD =
.21 vs. M = .34, SD = .29, t(37) = 3.73, p < .001). No such
difference was observed in the other conditions (all ps > .10).
Thus, it is specifically when opportunity cost is highlighted
and connectedness is heightened, that people reduce spending, specifically on less desirable products (relative to all other conditions).
This study generalizes our findings to a more typical purchase situation. A task that people often do before shopping—
prioritizing categories of spending—can highlight tradeoffs,
and this facilitates the effect of connectedness on fiscal restraint. Furthermore, the restrained spending occurs for purchases of product categories that are less personally desirable.
As a result, higher-connectedness respondents’ tastes for
spending are both reduced and more focused after completing
the ranking task.

General Discussion
The general framework of decision making advanced in this
paper recognizes two factors that jointly determine choices:
(i) valuation of one’s future interests (which is partially determined by connectedness) and (ii) awareness of the intertemporal tradeoffs entailed by current choices. These key
factors have been studied before, but in isolation, and examin-

144

as “nudges”, which affect the choices of those who want to
make far-sighted choices but not those of people who have a
preference for current consumption. However, recent research
on connectedness suggests that intertemporal choices may not
represent stable preferences, and therefore bolstering people’s
sense of connectedness with their future self could also be
seen as an alternative type of intervention (Bartels & Urminsky, 2011) that acts on underlying preferences. Interventions
that involve imagining one’s future self (e.g. “motivational
interviewing” used in smoking and alcohol reduction: Colby
et al., 2005), or more literally, viewing one’s aged self (Hershfield et al. 2011) may be operating through a similar mechanism. However, these types of interventions, as well as attempts to directly impact time preference (e.g., Urminsky &
Kivetz, 2011), will primarily affect decisions for which the
tradeoffs are explicit or spontaneously considered. When a
non-planner passes by Starbucks, merely shifting her relative
valuation of present versus future consumption is unlikely to
impact her coffee purchasing, unless she happens to view that
purchase in terms of a tradeoff—unless she finds her “latte
factor,” as David Bach describes it.
The current studies suggest that greater attention should be
placed on the interaction between the factors underlying intertemporal cognition and behavior. Interventions which succeed
in both facilitating the recognition of tradeoffs and fostering
feelings of connectedness will best promote the interests of
people’ future selves. Prudence may require the convergence
of specific thoughts and specific feelings at the moment of
decision: an explicit consideration of the costs of an indulgence, and empathy for those future selves who bear those
costs. Once we recognize and identify with the future beneficiaries of our sacrifices, fiscal restraint may feel more like
buying ourselves a future gift and less like self-deprivation.

Colby, S.M., Monti, P.M., O'Leary Tevyaw, T., Barnett, N.P.,
Spirito, A., Rohsenow, D.J., Riggs, S., & Lewander, W.
(2005). Brief motivational intervention for adolescent
smokers in medical settings. Addictive Behaviors, 30, 865–
874
Dholakia, U.M. & Morwitz, V.G. (2002). “The scope and
persistence of mere-measurement effects: Evidence from a
field study of customer satisfaction measurement. Journal
of Consumer Research, 29, 159-167.
Ersner-Hershfield, H., Wimmer, G.E., & Knutson, B. (2009).
Saving for the future self: Neural measures of future selfcontinuity predict temporal discounting. Social Cognitive
and Affective Neuroscience, 4, 85-92.
Frederick, S, Loewenstein, G., & O’Donoghue, T. (2002).
Time discounting and time preference: A critical review.
Journal of Economic Literature, 40, 351-401
Frederick, S., Novemsky, N., Wang, J., Dhar, R., & Nowlis. S.
(2009). Opportunity cost neglect. Journal of Consumer Research, 36, 553-561.
Hershfield, H.E., Goldstein, D.G., Sharpe, W.F., Fox, J., Yeykelis, L., Carstensen, L.L., & Bailenson, J.N. (2011). Increasing saving behavior through age-progressed renderings of the future self. Journal of Marketing Research, 48,
S23-S37.
Koehler, D., White, R., & John, L. (2011). The price of good
intentions. Social Psychological and Personality Science,
2, 90-96.
Lynch, J.G., Netemeyer, R.G., Spiller, S.A., & Zammit, A.
(2010). A generalizable scale of propensity to plan: The
long and the short of planning for time and for money.
Journal of Consumer Research, 37, 108-128.
Meyer, R.F. (1976). Preferences over time. In R. Keeney &
H. Raiffa (Eds.) Decisions with Multiple Objectives, pp.
473-89. New York: Wiley.
Nenkov, G.Y., Inman, J., & Hulland, J. (2008). Considering
the future: The conceptualization and measurement of
elaboration on potential outcomes. Journal of Consumer
Research, 35, 126.
Parfit, D. (1984). Reasons and Persons. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Spiller, S.A. (2011). Opportunity cost consideration. Journal
of Consumer Research, 38, 595-610.
Strathman, A., Gleicher, F., Boninger, D.S., & Edwards, C.S.
(1994). The consideration of future consequences: Weighing immediate and distant outcomes of behavior. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 66,742-752
Urminsky, O. & Kivetz, R. (2011). Scope insensitivity and the
“mere token” effect. Journal of Marketing Research,
48,282–295.
Urminsky, O. & Zauberman, G. (2013). The psychology of
intertemporal preferences. Working paper.
Zauberman, G., Kim, B.K., Malkoc, S., & Bettman, J.R.
(2009). Discounting time and time discounting: Subjective
time perception and intertemporal preferences. Journal of
Marketing Research, 46, 543–56.

Acknowledgments
We thank Eugene Caruso, Pete McGraw, Stephen Spiller, and
Rob St. Louis for helpful comments, the 2013 Chicago
Blackhawks for winning the Stanley Cup, and Jarrett Fowler
for superogatory research assistance.

References
Ashraf, N., Karlan, D., Yin, W. (2006). Tying Odysseus to the
mast: Evidence from a commitment savings product in the
Philippines. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, 635-72.
Bach, D. (2002). Interview with Fredericka Whitfield, Anchor
of CNN Sunday Morning, CNN, Aired December 29, 2002
- 11:23 A.M. EST.
Bartels, D.M., & Rips, L.J. (2010). Psychological connectedness and intertemporal choice. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 139, 49-69.
Bartels, D.M. & Urminsky, O. (2011). On intertemporal selfishness: The perceived instability of identity underlies impatient consumption. Journal of Consumer Research, 38,
182-198.
Bartels, D.M., Kvaran, T, & Nichols, S. (2013). Selfless giving. Cognition, 129, 392-403.

145

