UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Should Examples be Learned in a Production Task? An Experimental Investigation in
Mathematical Problem Posing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2rx3792x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Kojima, Kazuaki
Miwa, Kazuhisa
Matsui, Tatsunori

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How Should Examples be Learned in a Production Task? An Experimental
Investigation in Mathematical Problem Posing
Kazuaki Kojima (kojima@lt-lab.teikyo-u.ac.jp)
Learning Technology Laboratory, Teikyo University, 1-1 Toyosatodai, Utsunomiya, Japan

Kazuhisa Miwa (miwa@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Information Science, Nagoya University, Furocho, Chikusaku, Nagoya, Japan

Tatsunori Matsui (matsui-t@waseda.jp)
Faculty of Human Sciences, Waseda University, 2-579-15 Mikajima, Tokorozawa, Japan
Abstract
When using mathematics in problem solving in everyday life,
problem solvers must recognize and formulate problems by
themselves because structured problems are not provided.
Therefore, it is an important task in general education to
foster learner problem posing. Although learning by solving
examples is adopted in general education, it may not be
sufficiently effective in fostering learner problem posing
because cognitive skills differ between problem solving and
problem posing. This study experimentally investigated the
effects of three learning activities in problem posing: learning
by solving an example, learning by reproducing an example,
and learning by evaluating an example. In our experiment,
undergraduates were asked to pose their own new and unique
problems from a base problem initially given after learning an
example by solving, reproducing, or evaluating it. The results
indicated that learning by reproducing the example was the
most effective in fostering the composition of new problems.
Keywords: Production task; problem posing; learning from
examples; mathematical learning.

Introduction
In addition to solving problems given by a teacher or
textbook, problem posing, by which learners create
problems, has also been identified as an important activity
in mathematics education. In fact, some mathematicians and
mathematics educators have pointed out that problem posing
lies at the heart of mathematical activity (Polya, 1945;
Silver, 1994). Problem posing is a necessary skill for
problem solving in everyday life. Because structured
problems are not provided when using mathematics in
everyday life, problem solvers must recognize and
formulate problems by themselves (Ishida & Inoue, 1983;
Singer & Voica, 2013). Therefore, it is an important task in
general education to foster learner problem posing. Several
studies have addressed this issue in terms of a learning
activity to improve problem solving, despite insufficiently
addressing the skill of learner problem posing itself.
In the research of problem posing, it was empirically
confirmed that novice learners succeeded in posing new
problems based on mathematical relationships given in
formulae or equations (we refer to these as solutions),
whereas they had difficulty in posing problems by
composing novel solutions on their own (Christou et al.,
2005; Kojima, Miwa, & Matsui, 2010). Because problem

posing in everyday life is performed under various
constraints by using different materials, it is desirable to
foster skill to pose diverse problems appropriately. Thus, a
learning method to improve the composition of solutions by
novice learners is required.
To support learning by novice learners, it is efficient and
effective to use examples. Examples are indispensable in
learning in any domain, including mathematics. In general
mathematics education, procedures to reach answers in
solving problems are initially instructed with examples.
However, the general method of learning from examples in
problem solving may not be sufficiently effective in
problem posing because cognitive skills in problem solving
and problem posing are different. We refer to the former
task as a comprehension task, and the latter as a production
task. In fact, it is reported that learning different tasks such
as comprehension and production has no influence on the
other (Singley & Anderson, 1989). In comprehension tasks,
transfer of a solution learned in an example to problem
solving has been argued (e.g., Gick & Holyoak, 1983;
Novick & Holyoak, 1991) and adaptive scaffolding that
enhances learning from examples has been discussed (e.g.,
Conati & VanLehn, 2000; Schwonke, Renkl, Krieg,
Wittwer, Aleven, & Salden, 2009; McLaren & Isotani,
2011). However, the central issue is basically limited to
problem solving and does not include problem posing.
This study experimentally investigated the effects of
activities for learning from an example in problem posing.
In our experiment, undergraduates were asked to pose their
own new and unique problems from a base problem initially
given after they had learned an example. We compared
three activities for learning from an example: learning by
solving an example used in general education, learning by
reproducing an example and learning by evaluating an
example. The third activity of evaluation is adopted in some
studies (Hirai, Hazeyama & Inoue, 2009; Takagi &
Teshigawara, 2006; Yu, Liu & Chan, 2005), in which a
learner evaluates problems posed by other learners.
However, the focus of these studies was mainly on
improving comprehension of declarative knowledge through
the evaluation of problems, not on the production of
problems itself. The second activity of reproduction was
proposed in our previous study (Kojima, Miwa & Matsui,
2013), in which a learner understands an example from the

2501

viewpoint of the poser by reproducing the same problem as
the example.

Solution.
Let x denote the number of boxes.
110x + 50 = 120x − 20
According to the above equation, x = 7.

Methods
Procedures and Materials
Undergraduates
participated
in
the
experimental
investigation conducted in three classes of a cognitive
science lecture from 2010 to 2012. They were engaged in
two tasks, each requiring the posing of new problems from a
one initially given as a base.
The undergraduates were first given a learning task in the
domain of word problems solved with simultaneous
equations. They were told that the purpose of the learning
task was to instruct them how to pose a novel problem from
a base. The base in the learning task was the following
problem A1.
A1: I bought some 60-yen oranges and 120-yen apples for
1020 yen. The total number of oranges and apples was 12.
How many oranges and apples did I buy?
Solution:
Let x denote the number of oranges and y denote the
number of apples.
x + y = 12
60x + 120y = 1020
According to the equations above, x = 7 and y = 5.
The undergraduates learned the following problem A2 as an
example of output in the domain of A1.
A2: Last year, I bought some 40-yen pencils and 110-yen
pens. The total number was 13. This year, I bought 2
times as many pencils as last year, as many pens as last
year, and a 300-yen pen case for 1430 yen. How many
pencils and pens did I buy last year?
Solution.
Let x denote the number of pencils and y denote the
number of pens.
x + y = 13
40 × 2x + 110y = 1430 − 300
According to the equations above, x = 10 and y = 3.

Prior to the start of the problem posing task, the
undergraduates were instructed to pose as many, diverse and
unique problems as possible in 20 minutes.

Condition Groups
In the 2010 class, undergraduates were provided sheets of
paper on which the text and solution of A1 and the text of A2
were printed in the learning task. They were asked to solve
A2 and write the answer in the sheet. Thus, we refer to the
undergraduates as a solving group.
In 2011, undergraduates were first presented A1 and A2 on
a screen in front of the classroom. They were then provided
sheets on which A1 and information indicating how to
compose A2 from A1 were printed after A2 had been
removed from the screen. They were asked to reproduce the
same problem as A2 according to the information. They
were also told that texts of their problems did not need to be
identical to the example as long as it could be solved by the
solution identical to the example. The purpose of using such
information, not the example itself, is to prevent mere
duplication of the characters and symbols composing the
example. (For details on reproducing information of the
composition of an example, see Kojima et al., 2013.) We
refer to the undergraduates as a reproduction group.
Appendix A shows the information presented to this group.
In 2012, undergraduates were provided sheets on which
A1 and A2 were printed. They were asked to evaluate A2
from the viewpoints of the originality and feasibility as a
mathematical problem by using 5 point scales and describe
the reasons of the evaluations. These viewpoints are
generally used in the research of creative thinking. We refer
to these undergraduates as an evaluation group.

Analysis

The solution of A2 was composed by an alteration that
added two parameters and operations to A1. Thus, it can be a
hint for composing novel solutions in problem posing by the
undergraduates.
The learning task was followed by a problem posing task,
in which the undergraduates were asked to pose their own
problems in the domain of word problems solved with
unitary equations. The base in the problem posing task was
the following problem B.

Problems posed by the undergraduates in the problem
posing task were analyzed in terms of the variety, strategies
to alter solutions, and the complexities of solutions. The
variety of each problem was evaluated based on the four
categories shown in Figure 1, which indicate similarities in
situations and solutions between the problem and base.
Situations of problems denote contextual settings expressed
in texts such as purchase of goods or transfer by vehicles.
Category I/I indicates problems that are almost the same as
the base; D/I indicates problems generated by altering the
situations of the base; I/D indicates problems generated by
altering the solutions; and D/D indicates problems generated
by combining alterations in both situations and solutions.
The example A2 is a problem in Category I/D.

B: I want to buy some boxes of cookies. If I buy 110-yen
boxes of cookies, then I have 50 yen left. If I buy 120-yen
boxes of chocolate cookies, then I need 20 yen more.
How many boxes do I want?

2502

each year varied. In the control group, 76 undergraduates
participated.

Solutions
Identical Different
Base

Results

Identical

I/I

I/D

Different

D/I

D/D

Situations

Figure 1: Categories of problems for evaluating varieties.
Strategies to alter solutions of problems posed by the
undergraduates were evaluated by comparing the solution
structure of each problem with that of the base. The
undergraduates’ problems were classified into not altered,
partially altered (adding/removing operations to/from the
solution of the base) or overall altered (composing a
solution entirely different from the base). A2 was posed with
partially altered.
The complexities of the undergraduates’ problems were
estimated by comparing the number of operations required
to reach the answers in each problem with that of base. The
number of operations in the base is three. Only the
complexities of I/D and D/D problems were analyzed
because the structure of solutions in I/I and D/I problems are
always equal to the base. These classifications of the
undergraduates’ problems were conducted by the first
author according to features of the problem texts and formal
structures of solutions.
We had acquired problems posed by undergraduates in
the same problem posing task without learning of any
example in the previous study (Kojima et al., 2010). Results
indicated that the undergraduates successfully posed many
I/I and D/I problems but posed few I/D problems, and their
I/D and D/D problems mostly had simple and inappropriate
solutions. The effects of learning the example were verified
through comparison of the solving, reproduction, and
evaluation groups in this experiment (experimental groups)
with the previous study as a control group.
In the reproduction group, some undergraduates did not
reproduce A2 but posed problems different from A2 in some
ways (e.g., changing parameters or operations in A2), and
some did not complete reproduction in the learning task.
Such undergraduates were excluded from the analysis.
Some of others in the reproduction group failed in
reproducing A2. Although they wrote the same solution to
A2, their problem texts were contradictory to the solution.
Therefore, data of those who failed in the learning task
(reproduction-f group) were separately described from the
others who succeeded (reproduction-s group).
In the solving group, 62 undergraduates participated; in
the reproduction group, 132; and in the evaluation group, 25.
In the reproduction group, 44 did not reproduce A2, and 8
did not complete reproduction. In the others, 52 were in the
reproduction-s group, and 28 were in the reproduction-f
group. The numbers of participants in each group differed
because the numbers of undergraduates in the lecture classes

Undergraduates
in
the
solving,
reproduction-s,
reproduction-f and evaluation groups posed 372 problems in
the problem posing task. Sixty eight of the posed problems
were excluded because they were in domains other than the
base (e.g., solved with inequalities) or unsolvable due to
insufficient or contradictory constraints. Appendix B shows
some examples of problems posed in the experimental
groups. In the same way, the control group posed 146
problems and 29 of them were excluded.

The varieties
Figure 2 indicates the proportions of posed problems in
each category. As mentioned above, the control group posed
few I/D problems. The experimental groups posed more I/D
problems than the control group. We compared the control
group with the solving group using the chi-square test; the
result indicated a significant difference between the solving
and control groups (χ2(3) = 11.51, p < .01). Furthermore, the
results of residual analysis indicated that the number of D/I
problems in the control group was significantly high but
significantly low in the solving group. The number of I/D
problems in the solving group was significantly high but
significantly low in the control group. Similarly, a
significant difference existed between the reproduction-s
and control groups (χ2(3) = 15.26, p < .01). The number of
I/I problems in the control group was significantly high but
significantly low in the reproduction-s group. The number
of I/D problems in the reproduction-s group was
significantly high but significantly low in the control group.
There was also a significant difference between the
evaluation and control groups (χ2(3) = 14.48, p < .01). The
number of D/I problems in the control group was
significantly high but significantly low in the evaluation
group was, whereas the number of I/D problems in the
evaluation group was significantly high but significantly
low in the control group. There was no difference between
the reproduction-f and control groups (χ2(3) = 4.64, n.s.).

2503

Figure 2: Proportions of posed problems in each category.

Solution-altering strategies
Figure 3 indicates the proportions of posed problems
composed with each solution-altering strategy in each group.
The chi-square test indicated a significant difference
between the solving and control groups (χ2(2) = 7.98, p
< .05). Furthermore, the results of residual analysis
indicated that the number of not altered in the control group
was significantly high but significantly low in the solving
group, whereas the number of fully altered in the solving
group was significantly high but significantly low in the
control group. Similarly, there was a significant difference
between the reproduction-s and control groups (χ2(2) =
13.20, p < .01). The results of residual analysis indicated
that the number of not altered in the control group was
significantly high but significantly low in the reproduction-s
group. The number of partially altered in the reproduction-s
group was significantly high but significantly low in the
control group. There was also a significant difference
between the evaluation and control groups (χ2(2) = 8.20, p
< .05). The results of residual analysis indicated that the
number of not altered in the control group was significantly
high but significantly low in the evaluation group, whereas
the number of partially altered in the evaluation group was
significantly high but significantly low in the control group.
There was a moderate but significant difference between the
reproduction-f and control groups (χ2(2) = 5.61, p < .10).
The results of residual analysis indicated that the number of
partially altered in the reproduction-f group was
significantly high but significantly low in the control group.

Figure 3: Proportions of posed problems with each solutionaltering strategy

The complexities
Figure 4 indicates the proportions of I/D and D/D
problems whose number of operations increased or
decreased from the base. In half of the I/D and D/D
problems posed by the control group, the number of
operations decreased from the base. This means that half of
the I/D and D/D problems were simpler than the base. The
number of such simple problems was smaller only in the
reproduction-s group. We compared the control group with
the solving, reproduction-s, reproduction-f, or evaluation
groups using the chi-square test; the results indicated a

significant difference between the reproduction-s and
control groups (χ2(2) = 11.36, p < .01). Furthermore, the
results of residual analysis indicated that the number of
decreased in the control group was significantly high but
significantly low in the reproduction-s group. The number
of increased in the reproduction-s group was significantly
high but significantly low in the control group. There was
no difference between the solving and control groups (χ2(2)
= 2.58, n.s.), the reproduction-f and control groups (χ2(2) =
1.06, n.s.), or the evaluation and control groups (χ2(2) = 0.06,
n.s.).

Figure 4: Proportions of altered problems whose operations
increased or decreased

Discussion
The results presented above indicate that the experimental
groups posed more I/D problems than the control group.
The experimental groups learned the example of an I/D
problem. Thus, the example facilitated posing problems in
the same category of the example regardless of the learning
activities.
On the other hand, there was a difference among the
experimental groups in the solution-altering strategies.
Problems posed with overall altered increased in the solving
group, whereas problems posed with partially altered
increased in the production-s, production-f, and evaluation
groups. The latter three groups adapted ideas used in the
example because it was composed with partially altered.
The solving group learned the example through a
comprehension task, while the reproduction-s and
reproduction-f groups did so through a production task. It
has been documented that the reproduction of an example
can facilitate creative performance because such activity
prompts a conceptual background in creation of the example
(Ishibashi & Okada, 2006). Similar to reproduction,
evaluation is regarded as a production task and related to
creative thinking. In fact, the influence of evaluating
examples on creative performance has been demonstrated
(e.g., Lonergan, Scott & Mumford, 2004). Similarly, this
study demonstrated that learning the example through a
production task facilitated adaptation of the example to
problem posing by the undergraduates.

2504

The results shown in Figures 2 and 3 confirm that
learning the example increased problems whose solutions
were different from the base. As described in the
introduction, it is difficult for novices to compose novel
solutions in problem posing. The experimental groups posed
problems with novel solutions in some senses, even though
only the reproduction-s group posed many problems more
complex than the base. The undergraduates could learn how
to formulate more complex solutions by adding operations.
However, such problem posing was performed only by
those who had succeeded in reproducing the example.
These facts prove that learning by reproducing an
example is effective in terms of a learning activity in a
production task. However, this activity also involves
difficulty. The reproduction-f group failed in the learning
task. The example must be quite easy for undergraduates to
solve. In fact, no one in the solving group failed in the
learning task. Although learning by reproduction is effective,
it imposes a significant challenge to learners. Therefore,
further supportive intervention must be introduced in
learning from an example through a production task.
The reproduction-s and the evaluation groups both
adapted the example to the problem posing task. The
evaluation group posed many I/D problems as well as
partially altered problems. However, like the control group,
the evaluation group posed many I/D and D/D problems that
were simpler than the base. Although this group assessed
the example from the viewpoints of its originality and
feasibility, alternative viewpoints might be needed in
evaluation to improve the effects of an example.
Furthermore, to enhance the effects of evaluation, one
alternative is to present a nasty problem as an example. A
learner may devise a good idea through evaluating such an
example and find how to improve it. Further study is needed
to thoroughly examine this point.

Acknowledgments
This study was partially supported by the Grant-in-Aid for
Young Scientists (B) 23700990 and 25870820 of the
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and
Technology, Japan.

References
Christou, C., Mousoulides, N., Pittalis, M., Pitta-Pantazi, D.,
& Sriraman, B. (2005). An Empirical Taxonomy of
Problem Posing Processes. International Review on
Mathematical Education, 37, 149-158.
Conati, C., & VanLehn, K. (2000). Toward ComputerBased Support of Meta-Cognitive Skills: A
Computational Framework to Coach Self-Explanation.
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in
Education, 11, 398-415.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema Induction
and Analogical Transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Hirai, Y., Hazeyama, A., & Inoue, T. (2009). Assessment of
Learning in Concerto III: A Collaborative Learning
Support System Based on Question-posing. Proceedings

of Computers and Advanced Technology in Education
2009 (pp. 36-43). Calgary, Canada: ACTA Press.
Ishida, K., & Inoue, Y. (1983). How to Teach Pupils to
Write Mathematics Problems. Journal of Japan Society of
Mathematical Education, 65, 109-112.
Ishibashi, K., & Okada, T. (2006). Exploring the Effect of
Copying Incomprehensible Exemplars on Creative
Drawings. Proceedings of the 28th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1545-1550). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Novick, L. R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1991). Mathematical
Problem Solving by Analogy. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17, 398415.
Kojima, K., Miwa, K., & Matsui, T. (2010). An
Experimental Study on Support for Leaning of Problem
Posing as a Production Task. Transactions of Japanese
Society for Information and Systems in Education, 27,
302-315.
Kojima, K., Miwa, K., & Matsui, T. (2013). Supporting
Mathematical Problem Posing with a System for Learning
Generation Processes through Examples. International
Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 22, 161190.
Lonergan, D. C., Scott, G. M., & Mumford, M. D. (2004).
Evaluative Aspects of Creative Thought: Effects of
Appraisal and Revision Standards. Creativity Research
Journal, 16, 231-246.
McLaren, B. M. & Isotani, S. (2011). When Is It Best to
Learn with All Worked Examples? Proceedings of 15th
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in
Education (pp. 222-229). Berlin, Germany: SpringerVerlag.
Polya, G. (1945). How to Solve it. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Schwonke, R., Renkl, A., Krieg, C., Wittwer, J. Aleven, V.
& Salden, R. (2009). The Worked-Example Effect: Not
an Artefact of Lousy Control Conditions. Computers in
Human Behavior, 25, 258-266.
Silver, E. A. (1994). On Mathematical Problem Posing. For
the Learning of Mathematics, 14, 19-28.
Singer, F. M., & Voica, C. (2013) A Problem-Solving
Conceptual Framework and its Implications in Designing
Problem-Posing Tasks. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 83(1), 9-26.
Singley, M. K., & Anderson, J. R. (1989). The Transfer of
Cognitive Skill. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Takagi, M., & Teshigawara, Y. (2006). A WBT System
Enabling to Create New or Similar Quizzes
Collaboratively by Students. Proceedings of the 3rd
International Conference on Educational Technology (pp.
263-268). Calgary, Canada: ACTA Press.
Yu, F., Liu, Y., & Chan. T. (2005). A Web-based Learning
System for Question-Posing and Peer Assessment.
Innovations in Education and Teaching International, 42,
337-348.

2505

family of 3 persons bought 6 bags and each person ate the
same number of cookies. Another family of 6 persons
bought 10 bags and 10 single cookies and each person ate
the same number of cookies. The numbers of cookies for
one person were the same in the both families. How many
cookies does the bag contain?
Solution.
Let x denote the number of cookies in a bag.
6x / 3 = (10x + 10) / 6
x = 5.
(posed with overall altered)

Appendix A: Information indicating how to
compose A2 from A1
The example was composed by altering the base in the ways
described below. According to these, make a problem
identical to the example. It is unnecessary to exactly
reproduce the text of the example as long as your problem is
solved with the same solution.
x&y
objects are altered to “pencils” and “pens”
x: pencils
y: pens
answers: x = 10, y = 3 (how many)
Numeric parameters in text
2 parameters are added
parameters: (total)13, pen 110 yen, pencil 40 yen,
pencil 2 times, (total) 1430 yen, pen case 300 yen
Third object (pen case and 300 yen) is added

D/D problems posed in the evaluation group
I drove from Tokyo to Nagoya. My car was driven at the
speed of 100 km per hour on a highway and the journey
took 4 hours. Find the distance I drove.
Let x denote the distance I drove.
100 × 4 = x
x = 400.
(posed with overall altered)

Solution
Altered from the base
[x pencils] + [y pens] = [total 13]
[*1] × [x pencils] + [110 yen pen] × [y pens] = [*2]
*1
Operation [40 yen pencil] × [2 times pencils] is
added
*2
Operation [total 1430 yen] − [pen case 300 yen] is
added
Problem text
Keywords: last year, pencils, pens, total, buy, this year,
the number, pen case

Appendix B: Example of posed problems
D/I problem posed in the solving group
A teacher planned to divide students into groups of equal
numbers of students. If 5 students were assigned to each
group, then 2 students were left. If 6 students were
assigned to each group, then 4 additional students were
needed. How many groups did the teacher want to make?
Solution.
Let x denote the number of groups.
5x + 2 = 6x − 4
x = 6.
I/D problems posed in the production-s group
To buy 8 loaves of breads, I need 100 yen more. If 30
percent is discounted from the price of a loaf, 284 yen is
left after buying 8 loaves. Find the price of a loaf.
Solution.
8x − 100 = 8x × (10 − 3) / 10 + 284
x = 160.
(posed with partially altered)
A store sells a “tasty cookie.” A customer can buy a
single cookie, and a bag containing some cookies. A

2506

