UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How robust is the recent event preference?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6653g50x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Abashidze, Dato
Carminati, Maria Nella
Knoeferle, Pia

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How robust is the recent event preference?
Dato Abashidze (dabashidze@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de)
Pia Knoeferle (knoeferl@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de)
Maria Nella Carminati (mcarmina@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de)
Cognitive Interaction Technology Excellence Cluster, Department of Linguistics
Bielefeld University, Germany
Abstract

while they heard a sentence involving the objects in the
scene. In this and many other visual world studies, it has
generally been observed that looks to objects are rapidly
guided by the object name (e.g., apple narrows the domain
of reference to apples) or by the linguistic input more
generally (e.g., eat can restrict the range of possible direct
objects to edible ones, see Altmann & Kamide, 1999).
In theory, though, such tight synchronization may not
always obtain; for example, one might expect the use of
linguistic information to lag behind that of visual
information with visual cues being prioritized, and vice
versa (Knoeferle & Crocker, 2006; 2007; see also
Hartsuiker, Huettig & Olivers 2011). The challenge for
researchers is then to investigate the factors (e.g., the type of
visual context or the frequency of visual and linguistic cues
among others) that modulate the timing and priorities in the
interaction between linguistic and nonlinguistic information.
One phenomenon in this interaction is the recent event
preference, a tendency for people to preferentially direct
their attention to the target of a recently depicted event
relative to the target of a possible future event, while they
hear a sentence with a future tense meaning describing the
future event (Knoeferle & Crocker, 2007).
Following up from the initial study by Knoeferle and
Crocker (2007, Experiment 3), which used static clip-art
stimuli, the recent event preference has also been
investigated using dynamic real-world stimuli. In Knoeferle
et al., (2011, Experiment 1), the experimenter was sitting at
a table on which two objects were located (e.g. pancakes
and strawberries, both of which could be sugared). The
experimenter performed an event (i.e., sugaring
strawberries) and subsequently participants listened to a
past-tense sentence (Der Versuchsleiter zuckerte kürzlich
die Erdbeeren ‘The experimenter recently sugared the
strawberries’) or to a present tense sentence with a future
meaning (Der Versuchsleiter zuckert demnächst die
Pfannkuchen ‘The experimenter will soon sugar the
pancakes’). As in the clip-art study, for a given trial, the
experimenter performed only the recent event (i.e., sugaring
the strawberries). The results replicated the findings from
the clipart experiment: In the future tense condition,
participants preferred to look at the recently-acted upon
object during most of the sentence, and a clear preference to
look at the future object surfaced only during the last word
(NP2, when the future target was actually named). This

Previous eye tracking findings show that people
preferentially direct their attention to the target of a
recently depicted event compared with the target of a
possible future event during the comprehension of a
spoken sentence relating to the recent or future event
(e.g., Abashidze, Knoeferle, Carminati, & Essig, 2011;
Knoeferle & Crocker, 2007). This gaze pattern emerged
even when the frequency of occurrence of future and
recent events did not differ within the experiment,
Knoeferle, Carminati, Abashidze, & Essig, 2011,
Experiment 2). To further test the robustness of the
recent event preference, the current studies introduced a
frequency bias in favor of the future over the recent
event (Experiment 1: 88% future vs. 12% past events in
combination with future and past sentences;
Experiment 2: 75% future vs. 25% past event). We
found that increasing the frequency of the future event
did result in earlier fixations to the target of the future
event than previously observed (in Experiment 2 of
Knoeferle, Carminati, Abashidze, & Essig, 2011).
However, in the current studies we essentially
replicated the same overall preference to look at the
target of the recent event throughout sentence
presentation. A memory test supported these results.
Thus, within-experiment frequency appears to modulate
the recent event preference to some extent, but cannot
override it. We propose that an epistemic bias of the
human mind favors assertions about past events over
future ones.
Keywords: Visual context effects, Sentence
comprehension, Frequency manipulation, Eye tracking

Introduction
Our everyday environment is full of visual objects and
events and observers arguably focus their attention on the
events that are relevant for a given situation, ignoring
others. Indeed, many previous findings have shown that
participants are sensitive to the visual context and that they
use it for language comprehension. When participants listen
to an utterance about information in a visual scene, they
inspect the object in that scene in close temporal
coordination to their mention (Cooper, 1974; Tanenhaus,
Spivey-Knowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995) and they can
even anticipate an object before its mention based on verb
meaning. For example, in Tanenhaus’ et al. (1995) visual
world study, people moved their eyes on a depicted scene

92

pattern was confirmed by the statistical results, which
revealed a significant tense effect in the NP2 region, but not
in the verb and adverb regions. Furthermore and
importantly, in all sentence regions, including the NP2
region, an overall preference to look at the recent object
emerged, which was independent of sentence tense.

(Kaschak, Loney, & Borreggine, 2006. Haskell; Thornton &
MacDonald, 2010; see also Britt, Mirman, Kornilov, &
Magnuson 2014) and sentence reading (Wells, Christiansen,
Race, Acheson & MacDonald, 2009).
To the extent that the importance of statistical regularities
extends to perceptual experience of events, the frequency
with which events are shown and then mentioned (“recent
events”) versus the frequency with which events are
performed after they were announced (“future events”)
could plausibly affect how rapidly comprehenders access
those events, and which ones they prefer to visually attend
to during comprehension.
In sum, the goal of these two studies was to see whether
seeing more future events and hearing more future tense
sentences could make the future tense and event more
accessible. Increasing the frequency of future events against
that of past events might produce stronger and earlier effects
in the future tense condition than in the previous studies.
One change that we might see is that the recent-event
preference
decreases
or
disappears
completely.
Alternatively, it could be that events that we have seen and
then heard mentioned are more prominent in working
memory than future actions even when the latter are much
more frequent. It is possible that these working memory
representation increase visual attention to the target of the
recent event, which might lead humans to inspect a recent
action target earlier and more often than the target of an
equally plausible future action. In the current experiments
we also gave participants a post-experiment memory test. If
recent (vs. future) events are anchored more firmly first in
working and then in short-term memory, participants should
be better at recalling the targets of recent (vs. future) events.

Frequency of linguistic and visual cues as a
modulating factor
One important concern regarding Knoeferle and Crocker
(2007, Experiment 3) and Knoeferle et al. (2011,
Experiment 1) is that the recent event preference may have
arisen because participants in those two experiments only
ever saw the past event performed. Because the future event
was never shown in those studies, the procedure may have
created a within-experiment frequency bias towards relying
more on recently depicted than on equally plausible future
events. This frequency imbalance was addressed in the next
study (Knoeferle et al. 2011, Experiment 2) in which
participants were also shown future events. In this
experiment the experimenter post-sentence performed the
action referring to the (previously heard) future tense
sentence. Thus, during the experiment participants were
shown recent and future events equally often (50:50
frequency). If the frequency with which people experience
recent and future events modulates the recent event
preference, we expect an earlier effect of tense (i.e., looks to
the recent and future object should start to diverge earlier as
a function of tense). Indeed in this experiment, the tense
effect achieved significance in the adverb region (compared
to the NP2 region in Knoeferle et al. 2011, Experiment 1).
However, we still replicated the significant overall
preference to look at the recent object independent of tense
up to the last region. Thus, although the 50:50 frequency
manipulations produced an earlier effect of tense, it does not
appear to be strong enough to eliminate the recent event
preference.
The two current experiments were designed to test the
resilience of the recent event preference by introducing
frequency manipulations that create a very strong bias
towards the future relative to the recent event. In other
words during the experiments, participants saw future
events performed more often than recent ones (of which
more later). The rationale of these manipulations was based
on findings that within- experiment frequency biases and
short-term experience could modulate sentence processing.
In fact, in recent years it has become increasingly clear that
language comprehension and also other cognitive and motor
processes are sensitive to statistical regularities. For
example, in action execution, the recent trial-to-trial
visuomotor experience can affect upcoming movement
decisions (e.g., which one of two potential targets to reach
for, Chapman, Gallivan, Wood, Milne, Culham & Goodale
2010). In language, statistical regularities can be exploited
by children as young as 8 months for segmenting words in
fluent speech (Saffran, Aslin & Newport, 1996). Short-term
language experience also modulates language production

Participants
Thirty-two German native speakers (aged 19 to 32)
participated in each experiment. Participants (all students of
Bielefeld University, Germany) were each paid 6 Euros for
their participation. All had normal or corrected-to-normal
vision, were unaware of the purpose of the experiment, and
gave informed consent.

Materials and design
Twenty-four experimental items were used in each of the
two experiments. Half of these items (12) were the same as
those used in Knoeferle et al., 2011, Experiment 2, and an
additional 12 were constructed using similar criteria. Each
item consisted of two everyday objects (e.g., cucumbers and
tomatoes, see Figure 1) and four sentences (see Table 1). All
critical sentences had the structure NP-V-ADV-NP and a
male native German speaker recorded them. The sentences
were always about two objects and presented in two tense
conditions. In one condition, the verb was in the present
tense with a time adverb (demnächst, ‘soon’) indicating the
future (Table 1, 1a-a’). In the other condition, the verb was
in the simple past, and the following time adverb (kürzlich,
‘recently’) also indicated the past (Table 1, 1b-b’). Only
German regular verbs were used in the critical sentences. As

93

can be seen from Table 1, there were two sentences for each
tense condition; this counterbalancing ensured that each
object was once the target of both a past and future action.
In turn, this ensured that visual characteristics of any given
post-verbal target object contributed equally to each critical
condition. Importantly, the two objects mentioned in an item
could be equally plausible targets of the action expressed by
the verb (e.g. both cucumbers and tomatoes can be
flavored). The words in a sentence were matched for spoken
syllables and lemma frequency within an item (Baayen et
al., 1995).
For every item we recorded two videos, each lasting in
average of 5015 ms. The scene for both videos always
showed a person sitting at a table, and two objects on the
table (e.g. cucumbers and tomatoes), one on the left and one
on the right, at about equal distance from the person. The
first video showed the person performing an action on one
object (e.g., flavoring cucumbers, Fig. 1, a; Fig. 1 shows the
order in which the videos were presented in a typical critical
item trial) and the second showed the person performing the
same action on the other object (e.g., flavoring tomatoes,
Fig 1, c). The position of the target objects (right vs. left)
was counterbalanced across items. For every item we also
created a snapshot (i.e., a static photo, see Fig. 1, b) showing
the person in a static position performing no action and
looking at the camera. Examples of the videos and the
snapshot associated with the experimental sentences in
Table 1 are shown in Figure 1 (a-c). The same 24
experimental sentences/videos were used in Experiment 1
and 2.
Additionally, we created a number of filler items. The
frequency bias manipulation was achieved by having most
filler items associated with future tense sentences (e.g., Der
Versuchleiter zeichnet in der nächsten Zukunft ein Haus auf
dem Notizblock, literally: ‘The experimenter will draw in the
near future a house on the notebook’). This manipulation is
explained in detail below (see “Frequency bias
manipulation”).
An important difference between Experiments 1 and 2 was
that in the filler trials of Experiment 1 the first video was
not shown and therefore the trial started with a static image
and the future sentence (see e.g. Fig. 1, b) and ended with
the video of the ‘future’ action. In this respect, filler trials
differed from the experimental trials of Experiment 1, in
which participants saw two videos. In Experiment 2 the
filler trials were exactly as the experimental trials, i.e., with
two videos being shown, one before and one after the
sentence.
The experimental and filler items were combined to form
4 lists using a Latin square. Each list contained every critical
item in only one condition and all fillers. Before the
experiment, lists were pseudo-randomized and each
participant saw an individually randomized version of one
of the four experimental lists.

Table 1. Example experimental sentences and conditions
Condition
&
counterbalancing
1a FUTURE TENSE

1a’ FUTURE TENSE

1b PAST TENSE

1b’ PAST TENSE

Sentences
Der Versuchsleiter würzt
demnächst die Tomaten
‘The experimenter will soon
flavor the tomatoes.’
Der Versuchsleiter würzt
demnächst die Gurken
‘The experimenter will soon
flavor the cucumbers.’
Der Versuchsleiter würzte
kürzlich die Gurken
‘The experimenter recently
flavored the cucumbers.’
Der Versuchsleiter würzte
kürzlich die Tomaten
‘The experimenter recently
flavored the tomatoes.’

Frequency bias manipulation
As mentioned, there were 24 experimental items in each
experiment. The number of filler items was 72 and 40 for
Experiment 1 and 2 respectively. Thus in Experiment 1
people saw a total of 96 items (24 critical +72 fillers) and in
Experiment 2 a total of 64 items (24 critical + 40 fillers).
Half of experimental trials (12) showed the recent action
and the other half (12) the past action. All the filler trials of
Experiment 1 only showed the future action, so the number
of future and recent actions seen by participants in this
experiment was 84 and 12 respectively (approx 88% vs.
12% past events and sentences). In Experiment 2, 36 filler
trials showed the future and recent actions and only played a
future tense sentence, and the remaining 4 showed the
recent and future actions and only played a past tense
sentence, making a total of 48 future vs. 16 recent actions
being seen over the experiment (75% vs. 25%). Thus, in
both Experiment 1 and 2 there was an overwhelming bias
towards future events.

Materials for the memory test

Figure 1: Sequence of events of a typical experimental trial

For the memory test we created two snapshots of the first
and second video of each experimental item, i.e., showing

94

Analyses and results (Experiments 1 and 2)

the experimenter performing one of the two actions (see Fig
2). The two snapshots associated with each item were
combined into one display. Two versions were created in
which the respective location of the two pictures was
counterbalanced.

Eye tracking
For the coding of participants’ eye gaze during the
experimental trials, a period of interest was defined, starting
from the onset of the verb until the offset of the post-verbal
NP (NP2), i.e. the end of the sentence. The measure of
interest for the purpose of our study is fixations to the recent
and future target objects as the sentence unfolds. We first
computed gaze probabilities to the two target objects in each
successive 20 ms time slots, starting from the onset of the
verb until the end of the sentence. Because looks to these
two entities are not linearly independent (more looks to one
object imply fewer looks to the other, and vice-versa), we
next computed mean log gaze probability ratios for the
recent relative to the future target (ln (P (recent target)/P
(future target))). In this measure, a score of zero indicates
that both targets are fixated equally frequently; a positive
score reflects a preference for looking at the recent target
over the future target, and a negative ratio indicates the
opposite. We used this measure to plot the time course
graphs from verb onset, which are shown in Fig. 3 (a-b). In
Fig.3 the dotted lines indicate the recent condition (sentence
in the past tense) and the solid lines indicate the future
condition (sentence in the future tense).
As can be seen (Fig. 3a-b), in both experiments looks to
the future and recent object as a function of tense start to
diverge towards the end of the verb region. Mixed effects
ANOVAs (by participants and items) on the mean log ratios
for each region (Verb, Adverb, NP2) showed a significant
effect of tense (all p’s < .05) in the Adverb and NP2 regions
in Experiment 1. In Experiment 2, tense was significant
(only marginally by participants) also in the Verb region.
Thus, the frequency manipulation in favor of the recent
event did produce an earlier effect of tense in both
experiments. However and importantly, as can be seen from
Fig. 3a-b, in both experiments the log ratio in both tense
conditions remained above zero until the late Adverb region
(specifically until 2100 ms after verb onset in Experiment 1
see Fig 3, a, and 1900 ms after verb onset in Experiment 2,
see Fig 3, b), indicating that, until then, the recent target
received more looks than the future target even in the future
tense condition. In the future tense condition, the log ratio
eventually turns negative in both experiments (see Fig 3 ab), indicating a preference for the future over the recent
target.

Figure 2. An example of a display for the memory test

Procedure
Procedure for eye tracking study
Participants were informed that the experiment consisted of
an eye-tracking experiment followed by a short memory
test. During the eye-tracking experiment, participants were
instructed to look at the computer display and listen
carefully to the sentence. They were not given any details of
what the memory test would be about. After successful
calibration of the eye tracker, the experiment started. In a
given experimental trial, the timing of the trial sequence is
illustrated in Fig 1. Participants saw a video of a person
performing one action before the sentence (e.g., flavoring
the cucumbers, see Fig. 1, a) and then the static picture
appeared. After 700 ms, the sentence was played out. The
static picture remained on the screen until 700 ms after the
end of the sentence (see Fig. 1, b). The sentence presented
(see, Table 1, 1b or 1a) was either Der Versuchsleiter
würzte kürzlich die Gurke ‘The experimenter recently
flavored the cucumbers’ or Der Versuchsleiter würzt
demnächst die Tomate ‘The experimenter will soon flavor
the tomatoes’. After the static picture had disappeared,
participants were shown a second video of the person
performing the second action (e.g., flavoring the tomatoes,
see Fig. 1, c). In the middle of the experiment participants
had a short break.

Procedure for memory test
Participants did the memory test after the eye tracking
session. They were assigned randomly to four
counterbalancing lists and each saw a randomized order of
the list. They were shown pictures such as those in Fig. 2,
one for each experimental item. Above the picture, a
question appeared, which could be in one of two versions:
(a) Welche Aktion wurde VOR dem Satz durchgeführt?,
‘Which action was performed before the sentence?’
(b) Welche Aktion wurde NACH dem Satz durchgeführt?,
‘Which action was performed after the sentence?’.
Participants were to give their response with a button press.
After the memory tested ended, participants were debriefed.
The experiment lasted approximately 45-50 minutes.

Figure 3 Mean log gaze probability ratios (ln (P(recent
target/P(future target))) as a function of condition from
Verb onset for Experiment 1 and 2
a)

95

2 there were neither main effects nor interactions of target
and tense in the LME analyses.
Figure 4. Percentage of correct answers as a function of
object and tense, Experiment 1 and 2
a
b

b)

Discussion
In the current studies we tested the robustness of the recent
event preference by introducing a within-experiment
frequency manipulation, which was overwhelmingly in
favor of future over recent events. In Experiment 1 the
future events seen by participants constituted 88% of the
total number of trials in the experiment (vs. 12% for recent
events). In Experiment 2 future events made up 75% (vs.
25%) of the trials. In addition, the two experiments differed
in the presentation of the filler trials. In a previous study
where past and future events were seen by participants
equally often in the experiment (Knoeferle et al., 2011)
tense effects achieved significance from the Adverb region.
Furthermore, an overall preference emerged of looks to the
recent object throughout the sentence, irrespective of tense.
The frequency manipulation of the current experiments was
motivated by findings showing that within-experiment
frequency biases and short-term experience can modulate
language processing. As such, we expected that our strong
frequency bias might substantially mitigate, eliminate, or
even reverse the recent event preference.
This was not the case. Although we did observe a
significant tense effect earlier e.g. in the verb region in
Experiment 2 than in the experiment with the 50:50
frequency manipulation, we replicated the overall
preference for the recent object (up until sentence end)
observed in previous experiments. The results of the
memory test (in the previous studies memory tests were not
administered) also suggest that recent events are
remembered better than future ones.
Which cognitive mechanisms underlie the recent event
preference? Before attempting to answer this question, two
clarifications are in order regarding the surprising and
unexpected weak effect of our strong frequency
manipulation on the recent event preference. First, the
learning of statistical regularities in language has been
found to increase in strength over time (e.g., Kaschak &
Glenberg, 2004), so it is possible that the frequency
manipulation in our study did not have an immediate effect
but ‘built up’ over time in the course of the experiment. To
assess whether that was the case, we performed post-hoc
analyses on our eye tracking data with experimental block
as a factor (i.e. first vs. second half of experiment). If

Furthermore, the grand mean (i.e., the mean of the two
conditions) was positive in all sentence regions in both
experiments, showing an overall preference for the recent
target irrespective of tense. This overall preference for the
recent target throughout the sentence was confirmed by a
significant intercept in all the ANOVAs by region for both
experiments (significant intercept=grand mean significantly
different from zero). Thus, despite the strong frequency bias
towards future events, the current experiments replicated the
significant overall preference to look at the recent object
independent of tense up to the very last sentential region.

Memory test
The purpose of the memory test was to assess participants’
memory of the events/actions they had seen in the
experimental video sequences during the eye tracking
session. In particular, we wanted to see whether actions that
had been presented before the sentence (i.e. the recent
actions) were remembered better than actions inspected after
the sentence had been heard (i.e. the future actions).
We calculated the percentage of correct answers by
condition for participants and items separately. The average
percentages (by participant) are illustrated in Figure 4a and
4b. In both tests, participants correctly answered, 80% of the
questions in Experiment 1 (Fig. 4, a) and 83% of the
questions in Experiment 2 (Fig. 4, b). As we can see from
the graphs, participants were more accurate in recognizing
the recent event targets than the future event target objects
in Exp 1 (83% vs. 77%) and in Exp 2 (86 % vs. 80%).
In logistic linear mixed effect (LME) analyses for
Experiment 1 we found marginal effects of target object (p
=0.06) and tense (p=0.09), but no interaction. In Experiment

96

learning of statistical regularities (the frequency of
occurrence of a recent vs. future event, in association with a
past vs. future tense sentence) takes place, and becomes
stronger over time, we should find stronger tense effects in
the second half than in the first half of the experiment.
However, our analyses showed that the effects were as
strong in the first as in the second half.
Second, it is generally assumed that not only short term
but also long-term linguistic experience of statistical
regularities can modulate language processing (e.g., Gries &
Divjak, 2012). Thus, the recent event preference could stem
from the fact that in everyday language past tense sentences
(in combination with a past tense adverb) are more frequent
than present tense sentences in combination with a future
adverb. In this respect, Knoeferle et al., (2011) presented
evidence from corpus studies showing that this is not the
case. Thus, the recent event preference unlikely stems from
the representation of long-term linguistic regularities.
We propose that the recent event preference reflects an
epistemic bias of the human mind: Assertions about a past
event command more attention than assertions about a
future event because they are based on stronger evidence
about event truth. In fact, while a past event can generally
be verified, a future one cannot, at least not until it has
actually happened, and until then it remains uncertain if it
will happen (McFarlane, 2003; Staub & Clifton, 2011). An
alternative explanation is that the recent event preference
does not reflect an epistemic bias, but is the result of a verbnoun association that participants might have formed after
seeing the first video clip (of the recent event). This would
arguably be the most active association at sentence start, so
it drives eye movements (this would imply that participants
silently named the recent action, and the object acted upon,
while they saw it performed). This explanation may contain
some truth, but does not account for why participants, when
encountering a future tense verb and adverb referring
unambiguously to a future event, ‘unnecessarily’ linger on
the recent object, and why overall they still prefer to look at
the recent object until late in the sentence, even in the
presence of strong frequency biases such as ours.

Baayen, R. H., Pipenbrock, R., & Gulikers, L. (1995). The
Celex Lexical Database (CD-ROM). Philadelphia, PA:
Linguistic Data Consortium.
Britt, A. E., Mirman, D. Kornilov, S. A., & Magnuson, J. S.
(2014). Effect of repetition proportion on language-driven
anticipatory eye movements. Acta Psychologica, 145,
128–138.
Chapman, C. S., Gallivan, J. P., Wood, D. K., & Milne, J. L.
(2010). Reaching for the unknown: Multiple target
encoding and real-time decision- making in a rapid reach
task. Cognition 116, 168–176.
Cooper, R. M. (1974). Control of eye fixation by meaning
of spoken language: New methodology for real-time
investigation of speech perception, memory, and language
processing. Cognitive Psychology, 6, 84−107.
Gries, S. Th. & Divjak, D. (2012). Frequency Effects in
Language Learning and Processing. Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Hartsuiker, R. J., Huettig, F., & Olivers, C. N. (2011).
Visual search and visual world: Interactions among visual
attention, language, and working memory (introduction to
the special issue). Acta Psychologica, 137(2), 135-137.
Haskell T. R., Thornton R., & MacDonald M. C. (2010).
Experience and grammatical agreement: Statistical
learning shapes number agreement production. Cognition
114, 151–164.
Kaschak, M. P., Loney, R. A., & Borreggine, K. L. (2006).
Recent experience affects the strength of structural
priming. Cognition, 99, B73–B82.
Knoeferle, P., & Crocker, M. W. (2006). The Coordinated
Interplay of Scene, Utterance, and World Knowledge.
Cognitive Science, 30, 481-529.
Knoeferle P., & Crocker M. W. (2007). The influence of
recent scene events on spoken comprehension. JML, 75,
519–543.10.1016/j.jml.2007.01.003
Knoeferle, P., Carminati, M., Abashidze, D., & Essig, K.
(2011). Preferential inspection of recent real-world events
over future events. Front. Cognition 2:376.
McFarlane, J (2003). Future contingents and relative truth.
Philosophical Quarterly, 53, 322–36.
Saffran J., Aslin R. N., & Newport E. (1996). Statistical
learning by 8-month old infants. Science 274, 1926–1928.
Staub, A., & Clifton, C., Jr. (2011). Processing effects of an
indeterminate future. In: Jesse A. Harris and Margaret
Grant (Eds.), University of Massachusetts Occasional
Papers in Linguistics, Vol. 38: Processing Linguistic
Structure (pp. 131-140). GLSA Publishing.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., Eberhard, K., &
Sedivy, J. C. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic
information in spoken language comprehension. Science,
268, 632–634.
Wells J. B., Christiansen M. H., Race D. S., Acheson D. C.,
& MacDonald M. C. (2009). Experience and sentence
processing: statistical learning and relative clause
comprehension. Cognition 58, 250–271.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the Cognitive Interaction
Technology Excellence Center (German Research
Foundation, DFG) and by the SFB 673 “Alignment in
Communication” (DFG).

References
Abashidze, D., Knoeferle, P., Carminati, M.N., & Essig, K.
(2011). The role of recent real-world versus future events
in the comprehension of referentially ambiguous
sentences. In: B. Kokinov, A. Karmiloff-Smith, & N.
Nersessian (Eds), EUROCOGSCI. New Bulgarian
University.
Altmann, G. T. M., & Kamide, Y. (1999). Incremental
interpretation at verbs: restricting the domain of
subsequent reference. Cognition, 73, 247–264.

97

