UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Improving Programming Instruction with Subgoal Labeled Instructional Text

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1d80v8hm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Margulieux, Lauren
Catrambone, Richard

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Improving Programming Instruction with Subgoal Labeled Instructional Text
Lauren Margulieux (l.marg@gatech.edu)
Georgia Institute of Technology, School of Psychology
Atlanta, GA 30332-0170 USA

Richard Catrambone (rc7@prism.gatech.edu)
Georgia Institute of Technology, School of Psychology
Atlanta, GA 30332-0170 USA
Abstract

(LeFevre & Dixon, 1986) because they take less effort to
understand than instructional text (Eiriksdottir &
Catrambone, 2011). Using worked examples in this way,
however, can inhibit transfer to novel problems because
they are specific to a particular context, and learners are
commonly not able to glean abstract information from these
concrete examples. To improve this type of transfer,
examples that emphasize subgoals have been used (e.g.,
Catrambone, 1998; see Figure 1).

In science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) education, problem solving tends to be highly
procedural, and these procedures are typically taught with
general instructional text and specific worked examples.
Subgoal labels have been used in worked examples to help
learners understand the procedure being demonstrated and
improve problem solving performance. The effect of subgoal
labels in instructional text, however, has not been explored.
The present study examined the efficacy of subgoal labeled
instructional text and worked examples for programming
education. The results show that learners who received
subgoal labels in both the text and example are able to solve
novel problems better than those who do not. Subgoal labels
in the text appear to have a different effect, rather than an
additive effect, on learners than subgoal labels in the
example. Specifically, subgoal labels in text appear to help
the learner articulate the procedure, and subgoal labels in the
example appear to help the learner apply the procedure.
Furthermore, having subgoal labels in both types of
instruction might help learners integrate the information from
those sources better.

Subgoal Labeled Worked Example
Create Component
1. From the basic palette drag out a label.
2. Place the label underneath the image.
Set Properties
3. Set the text to Click button to see your fortune.
4. Rename it to fortuneLabel.
Unlabeled Worked Example
1. From the basic palette drag out a label.
2. Place the label underneath the image.
3. Set the text to Click button to see your fortune.
4. Rename it to fortuneLabel.

Keywords: STEM education; subgoal learning; worked
examples; procedural text.

Introduction

Figure 1: Worked examples with and without subgoal
labels.

Knowledge of computing is increasingly necessary in our
society. As computing advances, individuals need to
understand more about it to understand technical
information and make well-informed decisions. Moreover,
individuals with advanced computing knowledge are needed
to fill increasingly technical jobs and promote innovation.
To reflect these societal goals, a major learning goal for
computing is that students understand core concepts and
principles with the underlying expectation that they can
transfer their knowledge to solve problems or critically
evaluate information.
In computing like in other STEM subjects, both
instructional text and worked examples are used to provide
instruction that is abstract enough to apply to novel
problems and concrete enough to grasp (Trafton & Reiser,
1993). Instructional text describes a procedure abstractly
(LeFevre & Dixon, 1986) and provides information about
reasoning within a domain (Reder & Anderson, 1980);
worked examples demonstrate how to apply procedures to
specific problems. Worked examples are typically used by
students as the primary method to learn procedures

To understand what a subgoal is, consider a complex
problem solution. Achieving the solution would be the
overall goal, and the problem solver takes many individual
steps towards that goal. Subgoals are in-between; they are
functional pieces of the solution achieved by completing
one or more individual steps. The same subgoals tend to
appear across problems within a topic area; therefore,
teaching learners to identify and achieve subgoals increases
their success at solving novel problems (Catrambone &
Holyoak, 1990).
Research on subgoal labeled worked examples suggests
that improved outcomes caused by subgoal labels stems
from three sources: highlighting the structure of the worked
example for the learner (Atkinson & Derry, 2000;
Catrambone, 1995a), helping the learner mentally organize
information (Catrambone, 1995b), and inducing the learner
to self-explain the examples (Catrambone, 1998; Renkl &
Atkinson, 2002). Though subgoal labels improve learning
from worked examples, the effect of subgoal labels in
instructional text has not been explored.

952

Subgoal labels in instructional text (see Figure 2) might
provide extra guidance that would help learners use and
understand the information in the text better. Subgoal labels
in both types of instructional material also might help text
and examples complement each other better by connecting
related information with the same subgoal labels. This type
of presentation might help learners integrate information
presented in each type of instruction.

a video demonstration and textual step-by-step guide
detailing how to create a Fortune Teller app (i.e., worked
example; excerpt in Figure 1). A video demonstration (of an
expert making the app and explaining the procedure) was
used because videos can quickly and naturally show learners
to use direct-manipulation interfaces (Palmiter, Elkerton, &
Baggett, 1991) like App Inventor. Participants were also
asked to make the app themselves using the step-by-step
guide because studying an example and applying the
procedure can lead to better learning than studying alone
(Trafton & Reiser, 1993).

Subgoal Labeled Instructional Text
Create Component
Components are the pieces that provide your app functionality,
such as a button that users can press or a label to display…
Set Properties
You’ll be able to change the properties of each component in the
App Inventor Designer as well. For example, you can change…

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 explores the efficacy of subgoal labels in
instructional text. The assessment tasks in this experiment
were designed to measure participants’ skill in problem
solving and mental representations of information learned.

Unlabeled Instructional Text
Components are the pieces that provide your app functionality,
such as a button that users can press or a label to display…
You’ll be able to change the properties of each component in the
App Inventor Designer as well. For example, you can change…

Method
Participants Participants were 120 students from a midsized university who received class credit for participation.
Participants must not have had experience with App
Inventor or taken more than one course in computer science
or programming. These restrictions were necessary because
instructions were designed for novices.
Procedure Sessions were between 70 and 90 minutes
depending on how quickly participants completed the
protocol. During the sessions, experimenters provided
technical support and answered questions about the study
(e.g., “Can I watch the video again?”) but did not answer
questions about the instructions or App Inventor (e.g., “How
do I make a button?”). First, participants filled out a
demographic questionnaire to provide information about
possible predictors of programming performance (Rountree,
Rountree, Robins, & Hannah, 2004; i.e., age, gender, field
of study, SAT scores, high school and college GPA, year in
school, number of completed credits, primary language,
computer science experience, comfort with computers, and
expected difficulty of learning App Inventor).
Next was the instructional period. During this time,
participants received the instructional materials. Examples
of subgoal labeled and unlabeled materials are in Figures 1
and 2. For participants who received subgoal labeled
worked examples, the video presented subgoal labels in
pop-up text boxes that did not cover the part of the interface
that was being used. Participants had up to 30 minutes to
create the app using the instructions and the App Inventor
website. Next was the assessment period. During the
assessments, participants could not access the instructional
materials, but they could access the App Inventor website
and the app that they had created (to serve as a memory cue
to aid problem solving).
The assessment tasks included 1) a problem solving task,
2) an explanation task, and 3) a generalization task. The

Figure 2: Instructional text with and without subgoal
labels.
In summary, subgoal labels in the instructional text and
worked examples are expected to
 help learners understand problem solving procedures in a
way that enables transfer to novel contexts,
 guide learners’ mental organization of knowledge,
 help learners integrate information from various sources,
 and help learners understand information by encouraging
learning strategies like self-explanation.

Overview of Experiments
The present study explored the effectiveness of subgoal
labeled instructional materials compared to unlabeled
instructional materials to teach computer programming.
Participants learned to create applications (apps) for
Android devices using Android App Inventor. This
computer programming language was chosen because it is a
drag-and-drop language. Drag-and-drop programming
languages are effective for teaching novices because,
instead of writing code to create programs, users drag
components from a menu and place them together like
puzzle pieces. This type of code creation is more easily
understood by novices (Hundhausen, Farley, & Brown,
2009). Instructions from the ICE Distance Education Portal
(Ericson, 2012) were used to develop instructional
materials. Materials in all conditions were identical except
for the subgoal labels. Subgoals were determined using the
Task Analysis by Problem Solving (TAPS; Catrambone,
2012) technique with subject-matter experts.
For instruction, participants received text detailing how to
create apps (i.e., instructional text; excerpt in Figure 2) and

953

problem solving task asked participants to list the steps that
they would take to make parts of an app (e.g., “Write the
steps you would take to italicize the fortune presented,” or
“Write the steps you would take to create a list of colors and
make the ball change to a random color whenever it collided
with something”). This assessment was meant to measure
how well participants could solve novel problems. In the
explanation task, participants were given an expert’s
solutions for the previous problem solving tasks and asked
to group steps of the solutions however they thought apt.
Then, participants described what each group achieved. This
assessment was meant to measure how well participants
could explain solutions. The generalization assessment
asked participants to describe the general procedure that
they would take to create an app with given specifications.
This assessment was meant to measure how well
participants could abstractly describe the problem solving
procedure that they learned in the session.

This pattern suggests that the interaction caused a main
effect of text, but closer evaluation showed that there was no
simple main effect of text design (see Table 1). This
interaction between text type and example type might have
occurred because learners in procedural domains typically
rely on worked examples to demonstrate how to apply
domain knowledge to problem solving (LeFevre & Dixon,
1986). Therefore, in order for subgoal labeled text to aid
problem solving performance, it might need to be
accompanied by subgoal labeled examples to guide
application.
Table 1: Post-hoc analyses of problem solving task. Note:
SL = subgoal labeled, UL = unlabeled, and ex. = example.

Design The experiment was a two-by-two, betweensubjects, factorial design: the format of instructional text
(subgoal labeled or unlabeled) crossed with the format of
the worked example (subgoal labeled or unlabeled). The
dependent variables were performance on tasks.

Results and Discussion
Of the demographic information collected as possible
predictors, none correlated with performance on the tasks
and will not be discussed further.

Condition

n

M

SD

SL text,
SL ex.

30

16.4

4.3

UL text,
SL ex.

30

SL text,
UL ex.

30

UL text,
UL ex.

30

9.8
5.6
5.5

Std.
error

p

5.08

1.30

<.01

3.18

1.36

<.01

.106

1.33

.92

5.6
4.8
4.9

Attempted Problem Solutions To better understand
participants’ performance, the problem solving tasks were
also scored for how much of the solution participants
attempted. This score is meant to measure how many
functional components of the solutions the participants
attempted, regardless of whether their answers were correct.
A high score would suggest that a participant recognized the
components needed in the solution, even if they could not
correctly achieve each component.
To calculate this score, the correct solutions for the
problem solving tasks were deconstructed into the subgoals,
or functional components, that were necessary to complete
the solution. Participants earned a point for each subgoal
that was attempted. Attempting a subgoal was operationally
defined as listing at least one step required to achieve the
subgoal, listing a step that would achieve a similar function
(e.g., listing a step to change a property regardless of
whether it was the correct property), or describing the
subgoal. The maximum score that participants could earn
was 10. ICC(A) for this assessment was .95.
There was a main effect of example design. Participants
who received the subgoal labeled example (M = 6.9, SD =
2.7) attempted more subgoals than those who did not (M =
4.1, SD = 2.8), F (1, 116) = 30.43, MSE = 7.73, p < .001,
est. ω2 = .20, f = .50. No other statistically significant
differences were observed (see Table 2). These results, in
conjunction with problem solving performance, suggest that
the subgoal labeled text did not prompt participants to

Problem Solving Performance For this task, participants
earned one point for each correct step they took towards the
correct problem solution. This scoring scheme afforded
more sensitivity than judging an entire solution as correct or
incorrect. The maximum score that participants could earn
was 22. Participant responses were scored by two raters, and
interrater reliability was measured with intraclass
correlation coefficient of absolute agreement (ICC(A)).
ICC(A) for this assessment was .94.
There was a main effect of example design consistent
with previous literature (e.g., Margulieux, Guzdial, &
Catrambone, 2012). Participants who received subgoal
labels in the example (M = 13.1, SD = 6.0) performed better
than those who did not (M = 5.5, SD = 4.8), F (1, 116) =
70.19, MSE = 24.47, p < .001, est. ω2 = .32, f = .76. A main
effect of text design was also found. Participants who
received subgoal labels in the text (M = 11.0, SD = 7.1)
performed better than those who did not (M = 7.6, SD =
5.7), F (1, 116) = 13.90, MSE = 24.47, p < .001, est. ω2 =
.06, f = .34. In addition, there was an ordinal interaction
between text design and example design, F (1, 116) = 12.82,
MSE = 24.47, p = .001, est. ω2 = .05, f = .57. This
interaction shows that participants who received subgoal
labels in the text performed better than those who did not
only when they also received subgoal labels in the example.

954

attempt more components but, when paired with the subgoal
labeled example, helped them correctly achieve more of
their attempted components.
It is possible that receiving more instantiations of each
subgoal label, whether in text or in additional subgoal
labeled examples, would allow learners to compare more
instances, refine their procedural rules, and solve problems
better. Though this possibility is not directly explored in the
present study, the results from other tasks suggest that
subgoal labels have a different effect on learners when
presented in instructional text than when presented in
worked examples.

There was no meaningful difference for example design.
Both subgoal labeled and unlabeled example groups
produced 30% functional descriptions. Incorrect responses
included superficial information such as how the blocks
were put together or where in the interface the steps were
completed. These results suggest that subgoal labeled text
helped learners to better articulate the purpose of steps.
Table 3. Post-hoc analyses of grouping task. Note: SL =
subgoal labeled, UL = unlabeled, and ex. = example.

Table 2: Post-hoc analyses of attempted problem
solutions. Note: SL = subgoal labeled, UL = unlabeled, and
ex. = example.
Condition
SL text,
SL ex.

n
30

M
7.0

SD

UL text,
SL ex.

30

SL text,
UL ex.

30

UL text,
UL ex.

30

6.7
4.2
3.9

n

M

SD

SL text,
SL ex.

30

4.8

2.5

UL text,
SL ex.

Std.
error

p

.70

.60

SL text,
UL ex.

2.6
.53

Condition

UL text,
UL ex.

2.8
3.42

.71

<.01

.50

.74

.62

2.8

30

30

30

3.3

3.3

3.2

Std.
error

p

2.51

.57

.02

.06

.55

.95

.12

.55

.90

1.9

2.3

1.9

Generalization Task The generalization task was meant to
measure how well participants could create a high level
description of the procedure. To score this task, participants
received a point for each structural feature that they
described. Participants did not receive points for specific
descriptions (e.g., information about how to achieve a step
using the interface) or unnecessary features. The maximum
score on this assessment was six. The ICC(A) was .89.
There was a main effect of text design: people who
received subgoal labeled text (M = 4.4, SD = 1.1) performed
better than those who did not (M = 3.5, SD = 1.3), F (1, 116)
= 15.11, MSE = 1.49, p < .001, est. ω2 = .10, f = .35. There
was no main effect of example design, F (1, 116) = 2.70, p
= .10, and there was no interaction, F (1, 116) = .20, p = .66.
These results are consistent with the explanation task in that
subgoal labels in text aided articulation.
Experiment 1 explored the efficacy of subgoal labeled
instructional text to teach a programming task. The results
suggest that subgoal labeled text helps learners to explain a
procedure and to solve novel tasks when paired with
subgoal labeled worked examples. Experiment 2 continues
this exploration in a different learning scenario.

3.0

Explanation Task The participants completed an
explanation assessment to measure how well they could
explain problem solutions. Participants received two scores
for this assessment: a grouping score for how well they
organized steps and a description score for how well they
explained groups. To score the grouping portion of this task,
participants received one point for each group that contained
only structurally similar steps. They could earn up to nine
points. ICC(A) for this assessment was .97.
Participants who received subgoal labels in both the text
and example made more correct groups than all others, and
there were no other statistically significant differences (see
Table 3). To perform well on this task, participants needed
to integrate procedural knowledge (to identify structural
groups) and application knowledge (to apply the groups to
specific problems), and subgoal labels in both types of
instructional material might have aided this integration.
To score the description portion of this task, the
descriptions that participants gave for the groups were
analyzed qualitatively to determine if participants correctly
identified their functions. Over 50% of the responses given
by participants who received subgoal labeled text correctly
described the function of a group of steps. In contrast, less
than 10% of the responses given by participants who
received unlabeled text correctly described the function.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 attempted to replicate performance results
from Experiment 1 in a more ecologically valid learning
scenario. In Experiment 1, participants were not allowed to
use instructional materials when solving novel problems,
which is not typical in most learning environments.
Experiment 2 allowed participants to use instructions during
problem solving.

955

Method

allowed to use the instructional materials during problem
solving and the instructions were the same except for
subgoal labels. All participants were equally likely to
overlook components of the procedure. In conjunction with
problem solving performance, these results suggest that
receiving subgoal labels in both the text and example helped
participants understand and/or reference the instructions
better to solve novel problems.
Subgoal labels in instructional text, in addition to
previously discussed benefits, could help learners find
information in the text to help them resolve specific problem
solving impasses. VanLehn, Jones, and Chi (1992) found
that when participants had trouble with a problem, many
participants spent a long time searching the text, but only a
small proportion found relevant information. Subgoal labels
in text might help students who are struggling with a
problem to find relevant information more quickly.

The method for Experiment 2 was the same as for
Experiment 1 (i.e., in sample size, selection of participants,
procedure, and design). The only differences were that
participants could use instructional materials during
problem solving and the assessment period included only
the problem solving task. The other tasks used in
Experiment 1 were meant to measure mental organization of
information; therefore, they were not relevant for this
experiment.

Results and Discussion
Of the demographic information collected as possible
predictors, two were correlated with performance. High
school GPA correlated positively, r = .30, p < .01, and
number of college credits completed correlated positively, r
= .25, p = .01, with score on the problem solving task. These
predictors were not expected to confound the analyses of the
performance metrics because the variance was evenly
distributed among groups, and, therefore, no group had an
advantage.

Conclusion
The present research advances knowledge about strategies
for improving novice problem solving in a STEM domain.
The findings provide three important pieces of information
about subgoal labeled instructional materials:

Problem Solving Performance This task and scoring was
the same as in Experiment 1. The maximum score was 22.
ICC(A) for this assessment was .94.
There was an ordinal interaction between text design and
example design, F (1, 116) = 5.87, MSE = 24.26, p = .017,
est. ω2 = .07, f = .22. This interaction demonstrated that
participants who received subgoal labels in the text and
example outperformed all other groups. There were no
other significant differences (see Table 4).

 Subgoal labeled text might improve performance only
when paired with subgoal labeled examples.
 Subgoal labeled text seems to help learners explain
procedures while subgoal labeled examples seem to
help learners apply procedures.
 Subgoal labels can lead to better problem solving when
the labels appear in both examples and text than when
subgoal labels appear in examples alone.

Table 4: Post-hoc analyses of problem solving task in
Experiment 2. Note: SL = subgoal labeled, UL = unlabeled,
and ex. = example.
Condition

n

M

SD

SL text,
SL ex.

30

10.5

6.0

UL text,
UL ex.

30

SL text,
UL ex.

30

UL text,
UL ex.

30

7.2
6.7
6.3

Std.
error

p

2.20

1.51

.03

.37

1.28

.71

.30

1.16

.77

Participants who received subgoal labels in both the text
and example outperformed those in other conditions. This
effect might have occurred for at least two reasons. First,
when learners receive multiple representations of content
(e.g., text and example), features that help them translate
between those representations leads to better integration and
understanding of the information (Ainsworth, 2006).
Subgoal labels might have helped learners translate between
the two types of instructional materials. Second, receiving
the subgoal labeled text, similar to receiving principles in
text (Eiriksdottir & Catrambone, 2011), might have helped
participants organize information from the general
procedure better. Better organization of the general
procedure could have led to more effective processing of an
example that used the same labels.
The results from the explanation and generalization tasks
in Experiment 1 also suggest that subgoal labels in the text
led to different benefits than subgoal labels in the example.
If learners reviewed enough subgoal labeled examples, they
might gather the same type of information offered by
subgoal labeled text. This method of learning, however,
would likely be less efficient, especially in a domain such as
programming that contains complex tasks.

5.0
4.3
4.1

Attempted Problem Solutions This score was calculated
using the same method as in Experiment 1. The maximum
score was 10. ICC(A) for this assessment was .95.
There was no main effect of example design, F (1, 116) =
2.70, p = .10, no main effect of text design, F (1, 116) =
2.21, p = .14, and no interaction, F (1, 116) = 1.40, p = .24.
These findings were expected because participants were

956

This subgoal intervention manipulates the instructional
materials that students receive; therefore, distributing the
intervention would be relatively easy. Furthermore, these
interventions are not reliant on instructors; therefore, they
can be used in a range of learning environments, such as
online learning. This study did not explore the efficacy of
this manipulation in a learning environment with an
instructor, but it could still improve learning. Instructors, as
experts, sometimes do not realize how to help learners form
useful knowledge representations, partly because much of
their procedural knowledge has become automated. Using
subgoal labeled materials would ensure that students
received the fundamental knowledge that they needed to
understand procedures.
Subgoal labeled worked examples have already been
shown to significantly increase learners’ problem solving
performance (Catrambone, 1998). The present study
demonstrated that subgoal labeled instructional text can
increase this effect and improve other types of performance.
This study suggests that subgoal labels should be used in
both instructional text and worked examples designed to
teach problem solving procedures.

Catrambone, R. (2012). Task Analysis by Problem Solving
(TAPS): Uncovering expert knowledge to develop highquality instructional materials and training.
http://cunningham.columbusstate.edu/technology
symposium/docs/Catrambone%20white%20paper.pdf
Catrambone, R., & Holyoak, K. (1990). Learning subgoals
and methods for solving probability problems. Memory &
Cognition, 18(6), 593-603.
Eiriksdottir, E., & Catrambone, R. (2011). Procedural
instructions, principles, and examples: How to structure
instructions for procedural tasks to enhance performance,
learning, and transfer. Human Factors, 53(6), 749-770.
Ericson, B. (2012, February 12). ICE Distance Education
Portal. Retrieved from http://ice.cc.gatech.edu/dl/?q
=node/641
Gecer, A. (2013). Lecturer-student communication in
blended learning environments. Educational Sciences:
Theory and Practice, 13(1), 362-367.
Hundhausen, C. D., Farley, S. F., & Brown, J. L. (2009).
Can direct manipulation lower the barriers to computer
programming and promote transfer of training?: An
experimental study. ACM Transactions in CHI, 16(3).
LeFevre, J., & Dixon, P. (1986). Do written instructions
need examples? Cognition and Instruction, 3, l-30.
Margulieux, L. E., Guzdial, M., & Catrambone, R. (2012).
Subgoal-labeled instructional material improves
performance and transfer in learning to develop mobile
applications. Proceedings of the Ninth Annual
International Conference on International Computing
Education Research (pp. 71-78). New York, NY:
Association for Computing Machinery.
Palmiter, S., Elkerton, J., & Baggett, P. (1991). Animated
demonstrations versus written instructions for learning
procedural tasks: A preliminary investigation.
International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 34, 687701.
Reder, L. M., & Anderson, J. R. (1980). A comparison of
texts and their summaries: Memorial consequences.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 19, 121134.
Renkl, A., & Atkinson, R. K. (2002). Learning from
examples: Fostering self-explanations in computer-based
learning environments. Interactive Learning
Environments, 10(2), 105-199.
Rountree, N., Rountree, J., Robins, A., & Hannah, R.
(2004). Interacting factors that predict success and failure
in a CSI course. SIGCSE Bulletin, 33(4), pp. 101-104.
Trafton, J. G., & Reiser, B. J. (1993). The contributions of
studying examples and solving problems to skill
acquisition. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 10171022). Boulder, CO.
VanLehn, K., Jones, R., & Chi, M. T. H. (1992). A model of
the self-explanation effect. The Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 2, 1-59.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by an APA 2012
APF/COGDOP Graduate Research Scholarship. We thank
Frank Durso and Mark Guzdial for their feedback. We also
thank Gerin Williams for her help collecting and scoring
data.

References
Ainsworth, S. (2006). DeFT: A conceptual framework for
considering learning with multiple representations.
Learning and Instruction, 16, 183-198. doi:
10.1016/j.learninstruc.2006.03.001
Atkinson, R. K., & Derry, S. (2000). Computer-based
examples designed to encourage optimal example
processing: A study examining the impact of sequentially
presented, subgoal-oriented worked examples.
Proceedings of 2000 International Conference of the
Learning Sciences, 132-133.
Catrambone, R. (1994). Improving examples to improve
transfer to novel problems. Memory and Cognition, 22,
605‐615.
Catrambone, R. (1995a). Following instructions: Effects of
principles and examples. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 1(3), 227-244.
Catrambone, R. (1995b). Aiding subgoal learning: Effects
on transfer. Journal of Educational Psychology, 87(1), 517.
Catrambone, R. (1998). The subgoal learning model:
Creating better examples so that students can solve novel
problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
127, 355-376.

957

