UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Individuation vs. Aggregation Strategies for Processing Number Sets

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1j6800jz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Cravalho, Patrick
Morris, Bradley
Was, Christopher
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Individuation vs. Aggregation Strategies for Processing Number Sets
Patrick F. Cravalho (pcravalh@kent.edu), Bradley J. Morris (bmorri20@kent.edu),
Christopher A. Was (cwas@kent.edu)
Department of Educational Psychology, 405 White Hall
Kent, OH 44242 USA

Amy M. Masnick (Amy.M.Masnick@hofstra.edu)
Department of Psychology, Hauser Hall
Hempstead, NY 11549 USA
Abstract

number sets and then compared summary values that
included approximate means and variance (Masnick &
Morris, 2008; Morris & Masnick, in press). Because
participants were asked to compare sets, aggregation is
consistent with the goal of the task itself. One open question
is if the selection of aggregation or individuation strategies
is related to the task goal. Cravalho, Morris, Was, and
Masnick (2013) examined memory for individual numbers
when processing number sets and found evidence that
participants were likely to recognize individual values, even
for sets of eight, at levels greater than chance. However,
these experiments limited the amount of study time before
recognition, displayed only two recognition options, and did
not record objective data from which to identify processing
strategies.

How do people remember individual values from a set of
numbers? Previous research has demonstrated seemingly
conflicting findings. In some tasks, participants implicitly
aggregate number sets (Morris & Masnick, in press), but in
other tasks, participants recognized individual values, even
for sets of eight, at levels greater than chance (Cravalho,
Morris, Was, & Masnick, 2013). In the current paper, we
investigated the possibility that these differences are driven
by the strategies participants use to achieve different
processing goals. The current paper describes three
experiments in which participants were given the goal of
correctly recognizing individual numbers presented in number
sets of varying sizes (four, six, and eight). The results suggest
that participants used individuation strategies in which they
attended to diagnostic information while encoding numbers
(e.g., the ones column in a set of numbers) and that we can
explicitly individuate sets larger than four with the use of
effective strategies.

Aims and Predictions
We investigated the types of strategies participants would
use when given the goal of correctly recognizing individual
numbers presented in number sets of varying sizes. If the
subject focused on the global properties of sets, they would
aggregate the number set; conversely, if the subject used
individuation strategies, they would process information
about individual values that would allow them to be
recognized correctly.
The independent variable was number set size (four, six,
and eight). Dependent variables were number recognition,
reaction time, confidence judgments, self-reports of strategy
use (Exp. 1 and Exp. 2), and eye fixations (Exp. 3). We
predicted that number recognition accuracy would be related
to the properties of the set and strategy selection. More
specifically, we predicted that smaller set size would be
associated with individuation strategy use and larger sets
would be associated with aggregation strategies. Further, we
predicted that the use of a more diagnostic strategy (i.e., a
strategy that focused attention onto critical information to
achieve the processing goal) would lead to better number
recognition performance than less diagnostic strategies (e.g.
focusing on whole numbers). We expected different
strategies to emerge as set size increases. For instance,
encoding individual numbers (e.g., memorizing numbers) is
expected to be associated with sets of four, while encoding
set aggregates (e.g., scanning the numbers) is expected to be

Keywords: Numerical Processing; Strategies; Eye Tracking.

Introduction
How do people remember individual numbers when they are
presented a set of numbers? Non-symbolic number
representation, or “number sense”, occurs in an approximate
number system (ANS) that underlies arithmetic operations
such as estimation (Lemer, Dehaene, Spelke, & Cohen,
2003; Dehaene, Spelke, Pinel, Stanescu, & Tsivkin, 1999).
The ANS may incorporate two systems, a parallel
individuation system and an aggregation system (Hyde,
2011). Evidence for these points comes from two wellreplicated findings. First, people individuate items, i.e.,
represent individual values within a set, for sets smaller than
four (Scholl, 2001) and second, given sets larger than four,
people aggregate items, i.e., average over sets retaining
information about set features (Masnick & Morris, 2008;
Scholl, 2001).
The difference between the two systems may be based on
strategies (Hyde, 2011) and how we focus our attention
(Chong & Treisman, 2005). For example, focusing on a
scene would promote aggregation of information, while
focusing on an object would promote individuation.
Previous research has suggested that when adults and
children compare number sets, participants aggregated

373

associated with sets larger than four. Finally, we predicted
that confidence judgments would decrease as set size
increased.

trials, participants were shown the set mean. For the
remaining half, participants were shown the set median;
although for sets of 4 the mean and median were identical.
The three blocks of experimental trials were presented
sequentially, randomized within-participants. The presented
location of the actual value and mean value was also
randomized so that the actual value and mean value were
presented on the left or right side of the screen in 50% of
trials. After completing all number set trials, participants
were surveyed about their strategy use during the task.
Participants were presented nine strategy descriptions (see
Table 1) and were asked to estimate how often they used
each strategy during the experiment using the following
scale: 1) never, 2) some trials, 3) most trials, or 4) always.
The response options and prompt remained on the screen
until the participant chose an answer. The strategy
descriptions were derived from the authors’ previous work
on number set processing (Masnick & Morris, 2008;
Cravalho, Morris, Was, & Masnick, 2013).

Experiment 1
Method
Participants. Participants (N = 21) were undergraduate
students at a Midwestern state university. The average age
was 20.43 (SD = 1.91), 76% of the participants were female.
Procedure. The number set task consisted of 126 trials
presented using E-Prime® software. Each trial had four
parts, described here in order of presentation (see Figure 1).

+

276
265
329
318

Table 1: Strategy Descriptions and Examples.

297 329
Confidence

Strategy
Look at the first digit.
Look at the second digit.
Look at the third digit.
Try to figure out the
average.
Find the biggest number.
Find the smallest number.
Just get a sense of the
numbers.
Look for a number that is
not like other numbers.
Try to memorize specific
numbers.

Figure 1: Number set task procedure for Experiment 1.
First, a fixation cross was presented for 500 MS to focus
the participant’s attention. Then, a number set was shown
(details of the sets below). The number set was displayed
until the participant hit the spacebar to move on to the next
screen. Subsequently, two numbers were presented, an
actual value from the set and the mean value from the set.
The participant was then asked to indicate which of the two
numbers was in the presented set by pressing a computer
key. The two numbers and indication prompt remained on
the screen for 4 s. After responding, participants were asked
how sure they were of their answer. Confidence judgment
response options were presented as follows: 1) 0-25%, 2)
26-50%, 3) 51-75%, & 4) 76-100%. The confidence prompt
and response options remained on the screen until the
participant chose an answer.
There were four sets of stimuli, each preceded by a set of
instructions explaining the process outlined above to the
participant. The first six number sets were practice trials and
were not analyzed. Experimental trials included 40 sets of
four numbers, 40 sets of six numbers, and 40 sets of eight
numbers, with each set consisting of three digit numbers.
Within each set size, 10 sets were drawn from one of two
variance types, either 10% (low variance) or 20% (high
variance) of the set mean. This helped eliminate patterns,
such as repeating digits in numbers (e.g., “333), which may
have influenced participant strategy. For half of the choice

Example
The “1” in 125.
The “2 “in 125.
The “5” in 125.
Calculate mean value.
Scan set for highest value.
Scan set for lowest value.
Scan set values.
Find any value unlike other
values.
Memorize a few numbers.

Results and Discussion
Participants’ highest recognition was for sets of four
numbers (M = .84, SD = .14), then recognition declined as
set size increased to six (M = .69, SD = .15) and again as set
size increased to eight (M = .64, SD = .09).
Whether studying the number sets or viewing the
response screens, reaction time (see Figure 2) increased
from sets of four to sets of six and then decreased when set
size increased to eight.

374

often given smaller set sizes (e.g., four) than larger set sizes
(e.g., eight), but performed above chance regardless of set
size. The confidence level of the participants fell along with
their performance. Participants took more time to study and
respond to sets of four than sets of eight, indicating that they
were memorizing values. Whether studying the number sets
or viewing the response options, sets of six yielded the
longest reaction times. This may have been because the
participants were memorizing the numbers or studying them
down to the ones column, which would have taken longer
than scanning and may have detracted from their confidence
in their response.

Milliseconds

12000
10000
8000
6000

Study RT

4000

Resp RT

2000
0
Sets of 4 Sets of 6 Sets of 8

Experiment 2

Figure 2: Mean study and response reaction times for
Experiment 1.

Some possible limitations of Experiment 1 are that the
presence of unlimited study time and only two response
options may have inflated task performance. Experiment 2
provided the same experimental conditions except that
participants were given a limited amount of time to study
the number sets and a third response option was added. The
changes in study time and response options changes the task
demands and likely changes the strategy used for the task
(Cravalho et al., 2013).

Repeated measures ANOVA were used to analyze all
main variables. There was a significant overall decline in
number recognition as set size increased, F(2, 40) = 34.69, p
= .00, η2 = .63. As set size increased from four to six, there
was a significant decrease in accuracy, F(1, 20) = 62.10, p =
.00, η2 = .76, as well as a significant decrease in accuracy as
set size increased from six to eight, F(1, 20) = 4.44, p = .04,
η2 = .18.
There was not a significant overall decrease in study
reaction times as set size increased (F < 1), nor was there
significant decreases in reaction time according to contrasts
between set sizes. However, there was a significant overall
decrease in response reaction times as set size increased,
F(2, 40) = 3.52, p = .04, η2 = .15. Contrasts showed a
significant decrease in reaction time as set size increased
from four to six, F(1, 20) = 7.24, p = .01, η2 = .27, then a
significant increase in reaction time as set size increased
from six to eight, F(1, 20) = 6.23, p = .02, η2 = .24.
The most frequently used strategies, or those with mean
ratings closest to “always” (assigned a value of 4 on our
scale, with 1 indicating “never”), were to “just get a sense of
the numbers” (M = 3.29, SD = .96), to “try to memorize
specific numbers” (M = 2.81, SD = .98), and to “look at the
third digit” (M = 2.71, SD = 1.01). These data reflect the
likely pattern of participants trying to memorize numbers
from the sets of four, then using the more diagnostic
strategy of looking at the ones column of the numbers as set
sizes exceeded four. This former strategy use would support
the finding of Scholl (2001) that people individuate items
for sets smaller than four. The general pattern of scanning to
get a sense of the numbers was most likely used across all
set sizes.
Confidence in number recognition (with a rating of 4
representing “76%-100%” confidence in one’s answer)
decreased from sets of four (M = 3.49, SD = .53) to sets of
six (M = 3.02, SD = .58) and again when set size increased
to eight (M = 2.86, SD = .71).
Supported by the medium to large effect sizes, the results
demonstrate a clear effect of set size on all of the variables
examined. Participants recognized the actual value more

Method
Participants. Participants (N = 36) were undergraduate
students at a Midwestern state university. The average age
was 19.72 (SD = .91), 81% of the participants were female.
Procedure. The changes to the number sets task for
Experiment 2 were as follows. Instead of being given an
unlimited amount of time to study the presented sets, each
set was shown for 3 seconds. This change in Experiment 2
was made to standardize the experiment with previous work.
To change the response stimuli, three numbers were
presented when the participant was asked to indicate which
number was in the set (see Figure 3). In addition to an actual
value from the set and the mean value from the set, a
number that did not appear in the set nor was the mean
value of the set was presented. The presentation location of
the actual value, the mean value, and the unseen value was
also randomized so that the various values were presented in
three possible positions on the screen in one third of the
trials.

297

299

329

Figure 3: Sample response screen from Experiment 2.

375

p = .00, η2 = .76. As set size increased from four to six,
there was a significant decrease in number recognition, F(1,
35) = 104.32, p = .00, η2 = .75, as well as a significant
decrease as set size increased from six to eight, F(1, 35) =
13.27, p = .00, η2 = .28. There was a significant effect of
response type on number recognition, F(1, 70) = 591.01, p =
.00, η2 = .94, as well as a significant interaction between set
size and response type, F(4, 140) = 72.45, p = .00, η2 = .67.
There was a significant interaction as set size increased from
four to six, F(1, 35) = 95.18, p = .00, η2 = .73, but there was
not a significant interaction as set size increased from six to
eight, F(1, 35) = 3.59, p = .07, η2 = .09. Thus, as set size
increased from four to six, participants erred more by
choosing the unseen number, but as set size increased from
six to eight, they erred more by choosing the mean value of
the set.
There was a significant overall decrease in reaction times
as set size increased, F(2, 64) = 17.59, p = .00, η2 = .36.
There was also a significant decrease in reaction time as set
size increased from four to six, F(1, 32) = 27.36, p < .01, η2
= .46, but not as set size increased from six to eight, F(1,
32) = 1.22, p = .28, η2 = .04. There was a significant effect
of response type on reaction time, F(1, 64) = 51.65, p < .01,
η2 = .62, as well as a significant interaction between set size
and response type, F(2, 128) = 6.17, p < .01, η2 = .16. There
was also a significant interaction as set size increased from
four to six, F(1, 32) = 11.70, p < .01, η2 = .27, but not as set
size increased from six to eight, F(1, 32) = 1.18, p = .29, η2
= .04. Therefore, as set size increased from four to six,
reaction time for incorrect answers decreased sharply, but as
set size increased from six to eight, reaction time for
incorrect answers decreased at a more gradual rate. Reaction
time for correct answers varied slightly across all three set
sizes.
The most frequently used strategies were again to “just
get a sense of the numbers” (M = 3.39, SD = .73), to “try to
memorize specific numbers” (M = 2.92, SD = .94), and to
“look at the third digit” (M = 2.75, SD = .87). These data
reflect the same strategy patterns seen in Experiment 1.
Confidence ratings decreased from sets of four (M = 3.20,
SD = .36) to sets of six (M = 2.68, SD = .54) and again when
set size increased to eight (M = 2.31, SD = .57). There was a
positive relation between correct number recognition and
confidence judgment for set size of four, r(36) = .39, p =
.02, but not for set size of six or set size of eight. Zero-order
correlations indicated a negative relation between choosing
the mean (an incorrect response) and confidence judgment
for set size of four, r(36) = -.42, p = .01, but not for set size
of six or set size of eight. Finally, zero-order correlations
indicated a negative relation between choosing the unseen
number (an incorrect response) and confidence judgment for
set size of six, r(36) = -.37, p = .03, but not for set size of
four or set size of eight.
These results reveal a similar pattern of behavior as in
Experiment 1, supported by a larger magnitude of effect
sizes. One exception was that participants did not appear to

Note. Following the example in Figure 1, 297 is the mean
value, 299 is the unseen value, and 329 is the seen value.

Results and Discussion
Regardless of set size, participants correctly chose the
number from the set on more than 50% of trials (see Figure
4). As set size increased from four to six, the proportions for
the two incorrect choices (the mean value and the number
not seen in the set) each doubled. As set size increased from
six to eight, the proportion of mean value choices increased,
whereas the proportion of number not seen in the set choices
decreased slightly.

Proportion

100%
80%
60%

Seen

40%

Mean

20%

Unseen

0%
Sets of 4

Sets of 6

Sets of 8

Figure 4: Proportion of response options for Experiment 2.

Milliseconds

The general reaction time patterns (see Figure 5) were
consistent across set size. Reaction time was the fastest
when participants correctly chose the number from the set.
For incorrect answers, reaction times were slower when
participants chose the number not seen in the set than when
they chose the mean value. The overall pattern for each
response type was a decrease in reaction time as set size
increased,

5500
5000
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0

Seen
Mean
Unseen

Sets of 4

Sets of 6

Sets of 8

Figure 5: Mean reaction times for Experiment 2.
Repeated measures ANOVA were used to analyze all
main variables. There was a significant overall decline in
number recognition as set size increased, F(2, 70) = 111.79,

376

use a diagnostic strategy for sets of six. This is surprising
because such a strategy may have been ideal given the
additional response option. One reason for this result may
be the limited amount of time to study the numbers, unlike
in Experiment 1 when they had an unlimited amount of
study time. The negative relation between confidence and
choosing the unseen number, indicating that they knew
when they did not know the correct response, supports this
assertion.
The strategy for sets of six discussed above is reflected by
the significant interactions seen between sets size and
response type for number recognition and reaction time.
Although participants were accurate in their number
recognition for sets of six, they took less time to choose an
answer than for sets of four, signaling that they moved on to
a more general strategy as set size grew.

Eye Movement Data Processing. The first two authors
reviewed video playback of the first six participants’
fixations during the number sets task for reliability
purposes. Fixations were coded when participants viewed
number sets and when they viewed the response options.

Results and Discussion
Correct number recognition was highest for sets of four
numbers (M = .89, SD = .10), and then declined as set size
increased to six (M = .73, SD = .19) and eight (M = .73, SD
= .20). A repeated measures ANOVA demonstrated a
significant overall decline in number recognition as set size
increased, F(2, 26) = 5.26, p = .01, η2 = .29. As set size
increased from four to six, there was a significant decrease
in recognition accuracy, F(1, 13) = 6.87, p = .02, η2 = .35,
but not as set size increased from six to eight (F < 1).
Regardless of set size, or whether viewing a number set or
the corresponding response options, most fixations were
directed towards the tens column (see Figure 6). As set size
increased, fixations directed towards the tens column
decreased, whereas fixations directed towards the ones
column increased. Another pattern was that the overall
number of fixations increased along with set size.

Experiment 3

100%
Proportion

One explanation of the high task performance in
Experiments 1 and 2 is that the task design allowed
participants using an effective strategy to attend to and
encode individual values without much explicit processing.
A shortcoming of these previous experiments is that there
was no objective evidence for participant strategies;
participant strategies were inferred from their self-reports.
The strategy that was most often reported was to “just get a
sense of the numbers”, which appears to have been used as a
catch-all answer. Experiment 3 was a pilot study providing
similar experimental conditions as the previous experiments
but included the collection of eye tracking data as a
dependent measure. The addition of these data allow for
more direct insight into participant strategy use by providing
direct evidence for the attention to information during
encoding. It would also allow for triangulation with the
previously reported strategies of memorization and looking
at the third digit.

80%
60%

100s

40%

10s

20%

1s

0%

Method

Sets of 4

Participants. Participants (N = 14) were adults living in
northeastern Ohio, 57% of the participants were female.

Sets of 6

Sets of 8

Figure 6: Proportion of eye fixations for Experiment 3.

Procedure. The number sets task was identical to that in
Experiment 1 except as follows. The number sets task was
presented on a Tobii® T-60XL eye-tracking monitor using
Tobii® Studio. Tobii® Studio automatically notes the X
and Y coordinates of gaze every 16.7 MS, providing an
operational definition of a fixation. Participants were given
a 9-point calibration before beginning the task. Areas of
interest were defined around the hundreds, tens, and ones
columns and around whole numbers. There were three
practice trials. Experimental trials consisted of 10 sets of
four numbers (each set presented for 2 s), 10 sets of six
numbers (each set presented for 3 s), and 10 sets of eight
numbers (each set presented for 4 s). The trials were not
randomized within-participants and participants were not
asked to give confidence judgments or surveyed about their
strategies.

These data more clearly depict the shifts in strategy.
Regardless of set size, looking at the tens column was the
dominant strategy. However, once set size had past the
processing threshold of four (Scholl, 2001), more fixations
occurred in the ones column, which corroborates with the
strategy self-reports from Experiments 1 and 2. The third
most dominant strategy was scanning both the tens and ones
columns, which remained fairly stable in frequency across
set size, supporting the importance of more diagnostic
information when individuating number sets. This pattern,
along with the highest use of scanning the tens and ones
columns, indicates that participants were using the most
diagnostic strategies (i.e., processing more specific
cardinality information) when viewing sets of eight.

377

General Discussion

Dissociable systems. Neuropsychologia, 41(14), 19421958.
Morris, B. J., & Masnick, A. M. (in press). Comparing data
sets: Implicit summaries of the statistical properties of
number sets. Cognitive Science: A Multidisciplinary
Journal.
Masnick, A. M., & Morris, B. J. (2008). Investigating the
development of data evaluation: The role of data
characteristics. Child Development, 79(4), 1032-1048.
Scholl, B. J. (2001). Objects and attention: The state of the
art. Cognition, 80(1/2), 1-46.

We investigated whether participants used aggregation or
individuation strategies to recognize individual values from
sets of three-digit numbers. We showed participants sets of
varying size for unlimited (Exp. 1) and limited (Exp. 2 and
Exp. 3) amounts of time and then asked them to recognize a
number from the set amongst two (number seen and mean)
or three options (seen, mean, and unseen).
Previous research provided evidence that participants
aggregated over sets of numbers (Morris & Masnick, in
press). Given these results, we expected to see evidence that
participants erroneously recognized set means, rather than
actual values, particularly when set sizes were larger than
four. Our results suggest that task demands (e.g.,
recognizing a specific number in a set rather than comparing
two sets) and strategies influence number recognition. For
example, participants in all three experiments correctly
recognized numbers from sets at levels greater than chance
even as set size grew.
Our results provide evidence that participants were using
diagnostic strategies that supported individuation rather than
aggregation. For example, focusing on the tens or ones
column when recognizing a three-digit number in a set of
numbers may provide more information about unique
features than the hundreds column.
In addition, reaction time for sets of six was related to a
diagnostic strategy when time was not a factor, suggesting
that we may have an easier time individuating larger sets
when processing constrains are eased. In summary, our
results suggest that sets larger than four are effectively
individuated with diagnostic strategies and confidence in
strategy use was indicative of number recognition
performance. Future research should include the collection
of eye tracking data with more variations of the number set
task, including the inclusion of distracter tasks and new task
goals.

References
Chong, S. C., & Treisman, A. (2005). Attentional spread in
the statistical processing of visual displays. Perception &
Psychophysics, 67(1), 1-13.
Cravalho, P. F., Morris, B. J., Was, C.A., & Masnick, A.M.
(2013). Representing Number Sets: Encoding Statistical
Properties. In M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, & I.
Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of the thirty-fifth annual
conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 352357). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Dehaene, S., Spelke, E., Pinel, P., Stanescu, R., & Tsivkin,
S.. (1999). Sources of mathematical thinking: Behavioral
and brain-imaging evidence. Science, 284(5416), 970974.
Hyde, D. C. (2011). Two systems of non-symbolic
numerical cognition. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience,
5, 1-8.
Lemer, C., Dehaene, S., Spelke, E., & Cohen, L. (2003).
Approximate quantities and exact number words:

378

