UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Inductive Generalization in Early Childhood: The Contribution of Perceptual and
Representational Similarity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4ts8q6cq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Godwin, Karrie
Fisher, Anna

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Inductive Generalization in Early Childhood:
The Contribution of Perceptual and Representational Similarity
Karrie E. Godwin (kegodwin@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Anna V. Fisher (fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract
Inductive generalization is ubiquitous in human cognition;
however, the factors underpinning this ability early in
development remain contested. Two alternative perspectives
have been proposed for how children make inductive
inferences: a naïve theory account (Gelman & Markman,
1986; Markman, 1990) and a similarity-based account
(Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004; 2012). Although both theories
claim considerable empirical support, the debate is ongoing
and results of extant studies are often deemed inconclusive.
We report an experiment designed to evaluate the predictions
of each account. In this study, 2- to 5-year-old children were
asked to make inferences about highly familiar object
categories. The reported findings are not fully consistent with
either the naïve theory or the similarity-based approach.
Therefore, we propose a revised version of the similaritybased account, which can account for the reported findings.
Keywords: inductive reasoning; categories; representations;
cognitive development.

Introduction
The ability to generalize from the known to the unknown is
a critical component of human cognition. For example, by
10 months of age infants are able to generalize observable
object properties (e.g., Baldwin, Markman & Melartin,
1993), by 24 months of age children can generalize labels to
novel objects (e.g., Booth & Waxman, 2002; Jones &
Smith, 1998; Smith, Jones, & Landau, 1996), and during the
preschool years children begin to make inductive inferences
about unobservable properties (e.g., Fisher, Matlen, &
Godwin, 2011; Gelman & Markman, 1986; Sloutsky &
Fisher, 2004). Despite general agreement regarding the
importance of inductive generalization for human cognition,
there is little agreement regarding the developmental origins
of this ability.
Two alternative perspectives have been proposed for how
children make inductive inferences: a naïve theory account
(Gelman & Markman, 1986; Markman, 1990) and a
similarity-based account (Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004; 2012).
According to the naïve theory approach, from very early in
development people first identify category membership of
items under consideration and then generalize a known
property to items of the same kind: “by 2 ½ years, children
expect categories to promote rich inductive inferences…
and they can overlook conflicting perceptual appearances in
doing so” (Gelman & Coley, 1990, p. 802). Furthermore, it
has been suggested that the ability to make category-based

inferences is not a product of development and learning.
Instead, children are “initially biased” to recognize that
labels denote categories and make inferences on the basis of
shared category membership (Gelman & Markman, 1986, p.
207), an idea that has been highly influential in the literature
(e.g., Booth & Waxman, 2002; Gelman & Coley, 1990;
Jaswal & Markman, 2007; Kalish, 2006; Keil, 1989).
In contrast to the two-step account of inductive inference
suggested by the naïve theory approach, Sloutsky and Fisher
(2004) proposed a one-step similarity-based account called
SINC (Similarity, Induction, Naming, and Categorization).
According to SINC, children make inferences on the basis
of the overall similarity of presented entities computed over
all perceived object features. Within this approach, labels
are considered to be object features (rather than category
markers) that contribute to the overall perceptual similarity.
Therefore, according to SINC an inference can be labelbased without necessarily being category-based. Several
findings suggest that children rely primarily on perceptual
features of objects (but not category membership
information) to make inferences well beyond the preschool
years, possibly until 7 to 9 years of age (e.g., Badger &
Shapiro, 2012; Fisher & Sloutsky, 2005; Sloutsky, Kloos, &
Fisher, 2007).
Evidence in support of the naïve theory of inductive
generalization stems from the seminal study by Gelman and
Markman (1986). In this study researchers asked preschoolage children and college students to make inferences about
natural kinds when perceptual information was ambiguous
or conflicted with category membership (cf. Sloutsky &
Fisher, 2004). Labels were used to communicate category
information; for instance, participants were asked whether a
rock shared a non-obvious property with a stone or chalk.
The overall rate of category match choices was above
chance, both in preschool children and college students.
These findings were taken as evidence that even young
children hold a belief (or a naïve theory) that natural kind
objects share a number of unobservable properties if they
belong to the same category, and make inductive inferences
on the basis of this belief. Subsequent studies reported
similar findings in younger children and infants (e.g.,
Gelman & Coley, 1990; Graham, Kilbreath, & Welder,
2004).
The similarity-based approach explains these findings
through the contribution of the similarity of auditory
features (i.e., linguistic labels in this case) to inductive

2275

inference. A mathematical model based on the SINC
account successfully captured the pattern of findings
reported by Gelman and Markman (1986). Specifically,
when visual features of the stimuli were ambiguous (e.g.,
the target matched one of the test objects on the shape
dimension and the other test object on the texture and color
dimensions; for details see Fisher, 2007), identical auditory
features (such as linguistic labels) dramatically increased the
perceptual similarity between pairs of objects. Thus, the
same set of findings can have very different interpretations,
which contributes to the current theoretical stalemate
(Fisher, 2007; see Smith & Samuelson, 2006 for related
arguments). However, this debate can be advanced (if not
resolved) by removing linguistic labels from the paradigm.
Specifically, if highly familiar and readily identifiable
objects are used as stimuli, labels are not necessary to
communicate object kind. The present study was designed
to implement this solution.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants
Participants were 18 five-year-olds (Mage = 5.46 years, SD
= 0.34 years, 9 females, 9 males), 21 four-year-olds (Mage
= 4.44 years, SD = 0.26 years, 10 females, 11 males), 18
three-year-olds (Mage = 3.65 years, SD = 0.28 years, 10
females, 8 males), and 61 two-year-olds (Mage = 2.59 years,
SD = 0.12 years, 3 females, 3 males). Participants were
recruited from local schools, preschools, or the Phipps
conservatory in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Children were
tested individually by trained research assistants.

Design and Procedure
Visual Stimuli. The visual stimuli included 14 triads
displayed on a computer screen: 7 triads referred to artifacts
and the remaining 7 triads referred to animals (see Figure 1).
Item selection was based on a Familiarity Calibration
(described below), which ensured that children of this age
group could readily label the stimuli using common basic
level labels2.
Familiarity Calibration. A separate group of preschool
children (N = 10, Mage = 4.58 years, SD = 0.69) participated
in the calibration. The calibration consisted of a basic
naming task: Participants were presented with a series of
pictures displayed individually on a computer screen and
asked to identify the object in the picture.
Mean accuracy for correctly labeling the pictures selected
for the induction task approached ceiling (M = 0.91, SD =
0.07). Children’s high accuracy on the calibration suggests
that the stimuli chosen for this study were highly familiar to

1

Data collection with the 2-year-olds is currently in progress.
78% of the stimuli were included in this calibration, 19% of the
labels were calibrated in prior work (see Fisher, 2011).

preschool-age children, to the point that children could
spontaneously label the objects correctly.
All triads utilized in the Property Induction Task
consisted of a target item, category match, and a perceptual
match (e.g., bird-bird-bat). The triads were designed such
that category membership was in conflict with perceptual
similarity. To ensure the triads used in the Property
Induction task contained strong conflict a Similarity
Calibration (described below) was also conducted.
Similarity Calibration. A separate sample of 4-year-old
children (N = 20, Mage = 4.43 years, SD = 0.26, 10 Males, 10
Females) participated in the calibration study to ensure the
triads used in the Property Induction task contained strong
conflict between perceptual similarity and object kind. The
calibration study used the same visual stimuli as the
Property Induction task (see Figure 1). Children were
randomly assigned to one of two experimental conditions
(Kind vs. Perceptual similarity). In both conditions, a
simple matching task was administered in which children
were asked to match the target object to one of the test items
based on object kind or perceptual similarity (according to
the child’s condition assignment).
In both conditions, the experimenter introduced the game
to the children by explaining that the child’s task was to
identify which objects “go together.” Then the experimenter
delineated the matching rule based on the child’s condition
assignment. For example, in the Kind condition children
were told that the rule of the game was as follows: “objects
that are the same kind of thing go together.” The children
were then provided with an example: “…this is a lemon and
this is a lemon slice; they go together because they are the
same kind of thing”. In the Perceptual similarity condition
an analogous procedure was followed; however, the
matching rule and example were modified accordingly:
“The rule of the game is that objects that look similar go
together. For example, this lemon is yellow and round and
this tennis ball is yellow and round, so they go together,
because they look similar.” Akin to the Property Induction
Task, no labels were utilized in the matching tasks.
Children’s accuracy on the matching tasks was first
compared to chance (0.50). In both conditions performance
did not differ significantly from chance: MKind = 0.59 (SD =
0.25), MPerceptual Similarity = 0.65 (SD = 0.24); both ps > 0.075.
Next, accuracy rates were compared across the two
conditions and were found to be statistically equivalent,
independent-samples t(18) = 0.51, p = 0.61. The calibration
results confirm that the triads selected for the Property
Induction task successfully placed perceptual similarity in
conflict with object kind.
Property Induction Task. In the Property Induction Task
children were presented with 14 triads. Each triad included a
target, category match, and perceptual match (see Figure 1).
Category membership was communicated solely through
detailed color photographs and no labels were used (cf.
Smith & Heise, 1992).

2

2276

Familiarity Calibration: Participants were presented with a
series of 42 pictures displayed individually on a computer
screen. Children were asked to identify the object in the
picture. Two presentation orders were created. In Order 1
the items were pseudo randomized with the following
constraints: for any given triad, the target, category match,
and perceptual match could not occur on successive trials.
For Order 2 the items were administered in reverse order.
The presentation order was counterbalanced across
participants.

Results
Mean induction scores by age group and trial type are
displayed in Table 1. Children’s induction scores were
submitted to a mixed ANOVA with age (5-, 4-, 3-, and 2year-olds) as the between-subject factor and trial type
(Animals, Artifacts) as the within-subject factor. The effect
of trial type was not significant, F(1, 59) = 2.31, p = 0.13.
The interaction between trial type and age was also not
significant, F(3, 59) = 0.44, p = 0.72.
Table 1. Mean induction scores by age group and trial type

Figure1. Visual stimuli used in the Property Induction Task. No
labels were presented during the task. Each triad includes a target
(center), category match (left) and a perceptual match (right).
*Note. ‘Monkey’ is a common label that children apply to this item
and was therefore counted as a ‘correct’ response.

On every trial children were told that the target object had
a particular property. All properties were one-syllable blank
predicates chosen from the NOUN database (e.g., fisp, wilp,
etc.; Horst, 2009). Then, the children were asked to
generalize the target property to one of the test items (i.e.,
the category match or the perceptual match). For the animal
triads children were told that the target item possessed an
internal pseudo-biological property (e.g., “This one has fisp
cells inside”) and they were asked to generalize the property
to one of the test items. For the artifact triads children were
told what the target object was made of (e.g., “This one is
made of fupp”) and asked to generalize the property to one
of the test items. The screen location of the test items was
counterbalanced and the trials were presented in one of two
orders: In Order 1 the trials were randomized. For Order 2
the presentation order was simply reversed. Presentation
order was counterbalanced across participants.
Naming Task. After the Property Induction task, all
participants completed a Naming Task to ensure that
participants were familiar with all of the stimuli. The
naming task was identical to the procedure utilized in the

A significant effect of age was found, F(3, 59) = 11.15, p
< 0.0001. There was no significant difference in the
induction performance between 2-, 3-, and 4-year-old
children; Post-hoc Tukey: all ps > 0.141. Induction
performance of the 5-year-old children was significantly
higher than all other age groups; Post-hoc Tukey: all ps <
0.005. Additionally, only the 5-year-old children selected
category match items at above chance (0.50) level, onesample t(17) = 7.02, p < 0.0001. The rate of choices of
category match items in 4-year-old children approached
significance, one-sample t(20) = 1.81, p = 0.09; whereas
performance of 2- and 3-year-old children did not differ
from chance, one-sample ts < 1.10, ps > 0.29 (See Figure 2).
Preschool children’s difficulty on the Property Induction
task was clearly not due to lack of familiarity with the
stimuli as evidenced by children’s ability to label the stimuli
with high accuracy. For 3-, 4-, and 5-year-old children,
performance on the Naming Task3 approached ceiling levels
(M3-year-olds = 0.87, SD = 0.10; M4-year-olds = 0.85, SD = 0.26;
M5-year-olds = 0.95, SD = 0.06). Although the youngest
participants (2-year-olds) accuracy on the naming task was
3
Two children did not provide a verbal response and thus did not
contribute any Naming task data. Across Experiments 1 and 2,
0.3% of the Naming task trials were excluded due to experimenter
error.

2277

lower than the accuracy rates of the older children, they
were able to accurately label the majority of the stimuli (M2Critically, there was no
year-olds = 0.71 SD = 0.15).
significant difference in the naming accuracy between the 5year-olds and 4-year-olds, independent-samples t(37) =
1.51, p = 0.14, despite dramatic differences in their
induction performance (the effect size on the difference in
induction performance was large, Cohen’s d = 1.08).
Therefore, even though children were highly familiar with
the categories of objects used in the current study, only
kindergarten-age children were able to resolve the conflict
between different sources of information in favor of object
kind, whereas preschoolers were not able to do so and
performed at chance.

Figure 2. Summary of children’s performance on the Property
Induction Task and Naming Task across age groups. Error bars
represent the standard error of the means. Line indicates chance
performance (0.50)

Importantly, the results of Experiment 1 are not fully
consistent with either the naïve theory approach or the
similarity-based approach. Specifically, the naïve theory
approach predicts little to no developmental trend and above
chance category-based induction in all age groups; neither
of these predictions was supported by the findings. The
similarity-based approach predicts a developmental increase
in category-based induction, which was observed in the
reported data. However, the similarity-based approach also
predicts that perceptual similarity should have a larger
influence on performance than object kind information, and
this prediction was not supported for any of the age groups
tested in this study.

Experiment 2
To ensure that children’s poor performance on the Property
Induction Task stemmed from the presence of conflict and
not from children's inability to identify the object kind of the
chosen stimuli, we re-paired the items to remove the conflict
and presented children with a simple matching task in which
children were asked to match the target object to one of the
test items based on object kind or perceptual similarity.

Method
Participants
In this study participants included: 5-year-olds (N = 34, Mage
= 5.50, SD = 0.38, 16 Males, 18 Females); 4-year-olds (N =

32, Mage = 4.56, SD = 0.31, 15 Males, 17 Females); 3-yearolds (N = 36, Mage = 3.63, SD = 0.27, 17 Males, 19
Females); and 2-year-olds (N = 16, Mage = 2.64, SD = 0.34,
9 Males, 7 Females). None of the children from Experiment
1 participated in Experiment 2.

Design and Procedure
Matching Tasks: Kind and Perceptual Similarity. Children
were randomly assigned to either the No Conflict Kind
Matching condition or the No Conflict Perceptual Similarity
Matching condition. Visual stimuli were identical to those
utilized in the Property Induction task in Experiment 1.
However, for every triad the lures were repaired to remove
conflict between category membership and perceptual
similarity. Lures were repaired based on the following
constraint: lures from the animal triads were repaired with
other animal triads and lures from artifact triads were
repaired with other artifact triads. In other words, the
repairing of lures did not result in crossing ontological
boundaries. A full list of the repaired stimuli utilized in the
experiment is provided in Table 2.
The task instructions were identical to the instructions
utilized in the Similarity Calibration described above. The
children were asked to match the target object to one of the
test items based either on object kind or perceptual
similarity (according to the child’s condition assignment).
The location of the correct response and lure were
counterbalanced across trials. Two presentation orders were
used; the presentation orders were identical to those used in
the Property Induction Task in Experiment 1. Presentation
order was counterbalanced across participants.
Naming Task. After the experiment proper, all
participants completed the same Naming Task used in
Experiment 1. The Naming Task served to ensure that the
children in Experiment 2 were familiar with all of the
stimuli. Participants were presented with a series of 42
pictures displayed individually on a computer screen.
Participants were asked to identify the object in the picture.

Results
Performance on the Matching Tasks. First, we compared
children’s performance to chance (0.50). In the No conflict
Kind Matching condition all age groups performed
significantly above chance, all one-sample ts > 4.41, ps <
0.003. Similarly, 3-, 4-, and 5-year-old children performed
above chance in the No Conflict Similarity Matching
condition, all one-sample ts > 5.00, ps < 0.0001; however,
2-year-olds performance in this condition was not
significantly different from chance, one-sample t(7)< 1, ns.
Therefore, with the conflict removed, young children were
largely successful in matching the same pairs of objects
according to object kind and perceptual similarity (see
Figure 3).
Children’s scores on the matching task were submitted to
a two-way ANOVA with age (5-, 4-, 3-, and 2-year-olds)
and condition (No Conflict Kind Matching vs. No Conflict
Perceptual Similarity) as between-subject factors. The effect

2278

of condition was not significant indicating that children
were equally accurate at matching the stimuli according to
kind relations as they were by perceptual similarity; F(1,
110) = 2.12, p = 0.15. A main effect of age was found (F(3,
110) = 14.79, p < 0.0001). Five-year-olds’ scores were
significantly higher than the 2- and 3-year-old children (post
hoc Tukey: ps < 0.002), while there was no significant
difference in the performance of the 4- and 5-year-olds (post
hoc Tukey: p = 0.92). However, the interaction between
condition and age was not significant, F(3, 110) = 0.14, p =
0.93.

No Conflict Kind Matching
No Conflict Perceptual Similarity

Accuracy

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
5 yrs.

4 yrs.

3 yrs.

2 yrs.

Age

Table 2. Stimuli for the matching tasks in which conflict between
category-membership and perceptual similarity was removed.

Figure 3. Summary of children’s performance on the no
conflict matching tasks (Kind and Perceptual Similarity
matching) across age groups. Error bars represent the standard
error of the means. Line indicates chance performance (0.50)

Discussion

These findings suggest that results of Experiment 1
cannot be attributed to children’s inability to identify object
kind and perceptual similarity matches per se. Instead,
preschoolers’ difficulty in making systematic (i.e., different
from chance) inferences in Experiment 1 can be attributed to
their inability to resolve conflict between perceptual
similarity and object kind.
In line with the results obtained in Experiment 1, children
in Experiment 2 also exhibited highly accurate performance
on the Naming Task (M5-year-olds = 0.96, SD = 0.04; M4-year-olds
= 0.94, SD = 0.06; M3-year-olds = 0.86, SD = 0.10; M2-year-olds =
0.71, SD = 0.13). This result suggests that participants were
familiar with the stimuli utilized in the matching tasks.

Taken together, the results from this study suggest that
neither of the current theoretical accounts of inductive
generalization in young children can fully explain the
reported findings. As stated above, the naïve theory account
is unable to account for: (1) preschoolers’ failure to make
consistent category-based inferences in the presence of
perceptual conflict, and (2) developmental increases in
category-based responding. The similarity-based approach
is unable to explain the lack of perceptual similarity-based
responses, even in the youngest participants tested in this
study. Therefore, the reported findings call for a revision of
the current theoretical perspectives. Below, we briefly
outline a revised version of the similarity-based account,
which can capture the findings reported in this paper.
The basic premise of our revised similarity account is that
one can distinguish two forms of featural similarity:
perceptual and representational similarity. Perceptual
similarity refers to features that can be compared on-line
and in-the-moment. An attentional weighting parameter can
be used to specify why some features should make a larger
contribution to the overall similarity (i.e., based on
differential saliency; Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004; 2012).
Nonetheless, perceptual similarity refers to the features of a
directly observed entity.
Representational similarity, as the name implies, refers to
the featural overlap in mental representations. All of the
features that have been encoded and stored in memory
contribute to representational similarity. Representational
similarity includes properties that have been perceived
directly as well as properties that have come from
conversations, books, or other indirect sources.
Representational similarity in our view is synonymous
with semantic knowledge (or semantic memory). At the
same time, we see this type of knowledge as distinct from
what is often referred in the literature as conceptual
knowledge. Although this term can be used in the lean sense
as simply knowledge about concepts (e.g., Sloutsky, 2010),
proponents of the naïve theory approach often use this term

2279

to refer to knowledge that children may have “independent
of experience” (Gelman & Markman, 1986, p. 207). In
contrast, semantic knowledge is rooted in experience.
Therefore, conceptual knowledge is broader than semantic
knowledge: for instance, conceptual knowledge of what a
‘dog’ is may include semantic features (Clark, 1973), such
as ‘four legs’, ‘furry’, and ‘barks’, but it may also include an
essentialist belief that “there is some unobservable property
… the essence” that makes something a ‘dog’ (Gelman,
2003, p. 7). The latter belief would constitute conceptual
but not semantic knowledge.
We propose that inductive generalization early in
development is similarity-based, with both perceptual and
representational similarity contributing to the overall
similarity of presented entities. Developmental changes in
performance on induction tasks with familiar categories are
hypothesized to stem from: (1) developmental changes in
representational similarity (Godwin, Matlen, & Fisher,
2013) or from (2) changes in the relative contribution of
perceptual and representational similarity. These issues
remain to be addressed in future research.

Acknowledgements
We thank Malika Sinha, Manon Sohn, Amy Barrett, Laura
Pacilio, Anna Loiterstein, Rachel Walsh, and Jennifer Shin
for their help collecting data. We thank the children,
parents, teachers, and Phipps Conservatory for making this
work possible. This work was supported by a Graduate
Training Grant awarded to Carnegie Mellon University by
the Department of Education (R305B090023).

References
Badger, J. R. & Shapiro, L. R. (2012). Evidence of a transition
from perceptual to category induction in 3- to 9-year-old
children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 113,
131-146.
Baldwin, D. A., Markman, E. M., & Melartin, R. L. (1993).
Infant’s ability to draw inferences about nonobvious object
properties: Evidence from exploratory play. Child
Development, 64(3), 711-728.
Booth, A. E., & Waxman, S. R. (2002). Word learning is
‘smart’: Evidence that conceptual information affects
preschoolers’ extension of novel words. Cognition, 84, B11–
B22.
Clark, E. V. (1973). What's in a word? On the child's
acquisition of semantics in his first language. In T. E. Moore
(Ed.), Cognitive development and the acquisition of
language (pp. 65-110). New York: Academic Press.
Fisher, A. V. (2007). Are developmental theories of learning
paying attention to attention? Cognition, Brain, and
Behavior, 11, 635-646.
Fisher, A. (2011). Processing of perceptual information is more
robust than processing of conceptual information in
preschool-age children: Evidence from costs of switching.
Cognition, 119, 253-264.
Fisher, A., Matlen, B., & Godwin, K. (2011). Semantic
similarity of labels and inductive generalization: Taking a
second look. Cognition, 118(3), 432-438.

Fisher, A.V. & Sloutsky, V.M. (2005). When induction meets
memory: Evidence for gradual transition from similaritybased to category-based induction. Child Development, 76,
583-597.
Gelman, S. A. (2003). The essential child: Origins of
essentialism in everyday thought. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Gelman, S.A. & Coley, J.D. (1990). The importance of
knowing a dodo is a bird: Categories and inferences in 2year-old children. Developmental Psychology, 26, 796-804.
Gelman, S.A., & Markman, E. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183–209.
Godwin, K., Matlen, B., & Fisher, A. (2013). Development of
category-based reasoning in 4- to 7-year-old children: The
influence of label co-occurrence and kinship knowledge.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 115(1), 74-90.
Graham, S. A., Kilbreath, C. S., & Welder, A. N. (2004).
Thirteen-Month-Olds Rely on Shared Labels and Shape
Similarity for Inductive Inferences. Child Development,
75(2), 409-427.
Horst, J. S. (2009). Novel Object and Unusual Name (NOUN)
Database. Retrieved from:
http://www.sussex.ac.uk/wordlab/noun
Jaswal, V. K. & Markman, E. M. (2007). Looks aren’t
everything: 24-month-olds’ willingness to accept unexpected
labels. Journal of Cognition and Development, 8(1) 93-111.
Jones, S. S. & Smith, L. B. (1998). How children name objects
with shoes. Cognitive Development, 13(3), 323-334.
Kalish, C. W. (2006). Integrating normative and psychological
knowledge: What should we be thinking about? Journal of
Cognition and Culture, 6, 161-178.
Keil, F. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and cognitive development.
Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Markman, E., (1990). Constraints children place on word
meanings. Cognitive Science, 14, 57-77.
Sloutsky, V. M. (2010). From perceptual categories to
concepts: What develops? Cognitive Science, 34, 1244–
1286.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2004). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based model.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133 (2), 166
– 188.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2012) Linguistic labels:
Conceptual markers or object features? Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 111 65-86.
Sloutsky, V. M., Kloos, H., & Fisher, A. V. (2007). When
looks are everything: Appearance similarity versus kind
information in early induction. Psychological Science, 18,
179-185.
Smith, L. B. & Heise, D. (1992). Perceptual similarity and
conceptual structure. Percepts, Concepts and Categories. B.
Burns (Ed). Elsevier Science Publishers B. V., 233-272.
Smith, L.B., Jones, S. S., & Landau, L. (1996), Naming in
young children: A dumb attentional mechanism? Cognition,
60, 143 – 171.
Smith, L. B. & Samuelson, L. (2006) An attentional learning
account of the shape bias: Reply to Cimpian & Markman
(2005) and Booth, Waxman & Huang (2005). Developmental
Psychology, 42(6), 1339-1343.

2280

