UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interhemispheric integration of visual concepts in infancy

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2sk8d119

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Scott, Kimberly
Schulz, Laura

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interhemispheric integration of visual concepts in infancy
Kimberly M. Scott (kimscott@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Laura E. Schulz (lschulz@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
Abstract
Abstraction often requires appropriate integration of more concrete representations. During development, the more specific
or localized representations may arise first. Here we study the
special case of integration of visual representations from the
left and right hemispheres during infancy. We present failures
of interhemispheric integration in two domains, form perception and approximate number, in infants ranging from 8 to 18
months of age. In Experiment 1, infants succeeded in representing equality of two shapes only when both shapes were
presented in the same visual hemifield. In Experiment 2, infants represented 16 when shown 16 dots in one hemifield but
not when shown 8 dots in each hemifield. We argue that interhemispheric integration poses a particular and unusually lateresolved challenge in infant vision.
Keywords: visual invariance; interhemispheric integration;
corpus callosum; split-brain; approximate number system

Introduction
Any latent cause in the world can lead to myriad patterns
of observations. Recognizing an object in the visual world
requires achieving invariance over transformations–including
translations, rotations, scaling, and lighting changes–that can
drastically affect its retinal projection. Similarly, understanding more abstract concepts often requires recognizing the
identity or shared causes of superficially disparate manifestations: three voices, three bears, or three hugs; perceptual
causality or statistical covariance; a frown and a raised voice.
Assuming that in some cases these specific “views” may be
represented before the more general concepts, how do infants
integrate these distinct representations?
Newborns have already been demonstrated to have several forms of visual invariance such as size constancy (Slater,
Mattock, & Brown, 1990) and recognition of invariant positional relations (Antell & Caron, 1985; Milewski, 1979), although these progress with visual experience during the first
year (McKenzie, Tootell, & Day, 1980; Granrud, 2006; Gliga
& Dehaene-Lambertz, 2007). Visual adaptation and aftereffects suggest that high-level visual concepts including approximate number (Ross & Burr, 2010) and facial identity
(Webster & Maclin, 1999) may pose similar learning challenges, as they are first represented by spatially localized detectors. Split-brain patients likewise provide dramatic evidence for distinct spatially localized representations of highlevel visual concepts (for review see Gazzaniga, 2005).
Regardless of the exact computations involved, the relationships among localized detectors need to be learned or
refined to produce integrated representations. We propose

to study the special case of integration of visual concepts
from the left and right hemispheres. Late myelination of
the corpus callosum, which connects the two cereberal hemispheres (Yakovlev & Lecours, 1967), its continued development through adolescence (Giedd et al., 1999; Salamy, 1978),
and the separate critical period for the corpus callosum to affect visual development (Elberger, 1984) make this plausibly challenging in early childhood. Indeed, interhemispheric
transfer of a visual rule learned in a single hemisphere does
not occur spontaneously before 4 months of age (de Schonen & Bry, 1987), and children under 24 months have difficulty integrating information about shape across hemispheres
(Liegeois, Bentejac, & de Schonen, 2000). However, this effect is specific to face stimuli; the operant conditioning task
introduced additional demands; and the bilateral and unilateral presentations differed in visual angle from the fovea, allowing several alternative explanations of the apparent failure.
We first sought to confirm infants’ difficulty comparing
shapes from opposite visual hemifields. In Experiment 1, we
attempted to familiarize infants with matching shapes either
unilaterally or bilaterally by briefly presenting matching pairs
of shapes while infants fixated on a small video. This familiarization period was designed to affect their preference for
looking at matching shapes, which we measured before and
after familiarization.

Experiment 1: Is a square on the left the same
shape as a square on the right?
Methods
Participants Infant subjects were recruited at the Boston
Children’s Museum and parents provided informed consent
to participate. 48 infants between 8 and 14 months of age
(mean age 11 months 2 days) participated in this study. An
additional 33 infants were excluded due to fussiness, inattention, or experimenter error.
Procedure Each infant sat on a parent’s lap for the duration of the study, 1.5 m from a large monitor used to display all stimuli. Subjects were videorecorded using a camera positioned directly above the monitor. The experimenters
were positioned behind the monitor, hidden from the view
of the infant, and monitored the infant using a webcam positioned above the monitor while controlling the progression of
the study using Psychtoolbox extensions (Brainard, 1997) in

1395

MATLAB (Natick, MA).
The procedure consisted of (1) a baseline test of lookingtime to matching and non-matching pairs of shapes; (2) a familiarization period showing only matching shapes; and (3) a
final test of looking-time to matching and non-matching pairs
of shapes. Because the procedures for baseline and final tests
were identical we first address the familiarization period.
Familiarization The familiarization period was intended to
familiarize infants with the concept of two matching shapes if
possible. Images of matching shapes were flashed for 280 ms
each only while the infant was looking at a small, attractive
“fixation video,” which continued to play throughout familiarization1 . Infants’ attention to the monitor was maintained
by switching among two fixation videos and three pieces of
music as necessary. The familiarization period ended when
the infant looked away after being shown at least 100 images of matching shapes at a maximum rate of one per second. Example sequences for each condition are shown in Figure 1. Images were shown in random order with none presented more than twice to any infant and no overlap between
the shapes used for familiarization and testing.
In the ’bilateral’ condition, the images of matching shapes
were on opposite sides of the fixation video, at one and two
units from fixation (the position of the more distant shape
was consistent within subjects and counterbalanced). In the
’unilateral–peripheral’ condition, both matching shapes were
on one side of the central fixation video (side consistent
within subjects and counterbalanced), at distances of one and
two units from the fixation video as in the bilateral condition. In the ’unilateral–distance’ condition, the fixation video
was shifted towards one side (consistent within subjects and
counterbalanced) of the monitor to accommodate the placement of both shapes on one side of fixation at a distance of
three units from each other. We predicted that infants would
only recognize the identity of the two shapes when they were
presented unilaterally, whereas familiarization would not lead
to a representation of “matching shapes” when shapes were in
opposite hemifields.

Figure 1: Familiarization with matching shapes. (a) Bilateral
condition: one shape on either side of fixation, at distances
of one and two units. (b) Unilateral condition, matched to
the bilateral for peripherality of shapes since they were also
at one and two units from fixation. (c) Unilateral condition,
matched for distance (three units) between shapes.

Figure 2: Pairs of matching and non-matching shapes used
for baseline and test displays. (a) Test set A, (b) Test set B.
the infants saw a matching pair first (order 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6) and
half saw a nonmatching pair first (in order 2, 1, 4, 3, 6, 5); an
infant who saw a matching pair first at the baseline test also
saw a matching pair first at the final test.

Looking time tests Parents closed their eyes during the
looking-time measurements to avoid inadvertent bias. Each
test consisted of four trials2 (images shown in Figure 2). Before each trial, the infant’s attention was attracted to the monitor by a chime and a colorful spinning ball, displayed at the
center of the monitor. Once the child looked at the monitor, a
static image of a pair of shapes was displayed and remained
on the screen until the child looked away for at least 1 second.
The set of images used for the baseline test was counterbalanced and the opposite set was used at the final test. The
order of presentation was counterbalanced such that half of
1 Pilot data established that a coder blind to condition could correctly identify the location of the fixation video from the infant’s
gaze as a basic manipulation check.
2 An additional two trials were performed at the end of each testing period but not analyzed, in order to demonstrate the testing procedure to parents.

Video coding Two coders blind to experimental condition
recorded looking times until the first continuous 1-second
lookaway for each trial during the baseline and final tests
using SuperCoder (Hollich, 2005) or VCode (Hagedorn,
Hailpern, & Karahalios, 2008). The looking times recorded
by the two coders were averaged. A preference score for nonmatching shapes was computed for each subject by dividing
the sum of the looking times to nonmatching pairs (trials 1
and 3 or 2 and 4) by the sum of the looking times to all four
pairs (trials 1-4). Preference scores thus ranged from 0 to 1
with a score of 0.5 indicating equal looking times to matching
and non-matching pairs.
A shift in preference towards nonmatching shapes was
computed for each subject by subtracting the baseline from
the final preference score; a positive shift indicated that the
preference for nonmatching shapes increased over the course
of familiarization. Our goal was to assess the impact of familiarization on the infant’s preference for matching shapes.

1396

If he or she represented this concept, the preference would
shift due to familiarity, leading to greater differences between
baseline and test measurements in the unilateral conditions.

Results

Figure 3: Mean absolute value of the change in preference for
non-matching shapes between baseline and final looking time
tests, +/- s.e.m. N=16 per condition.
Our primary finding was that, as predicted, the absolute
value of the shift in preference was greater in the unilateral
conditions than in the bilateral condition (Wilcoxon signed
rank test, one-tailed, p < 0.05). This greater variance indicated a larger absolute effect of familiarization on preferences
in the unilateral condition.
To better understand the nature of the preferences potentially induced by familiarization, we also evaluated the correlation between subjects’ age and shift in preference. The
shift in preference was correlated with age in the unilateral
conditions (r = 0.46, p < 0.01, Spearman rank correlation)
but not in the bilateral condition (r = 0.07,p > 0.5, Spearman rank correlation). In the unilateral conditions, younger
infants showed familiarity preferences whereas older infants
showed novelty preferences, as shown in Figure 4.

Discussion
These findings suggest that infants shown identical shapes in
each hemifield did not represent the visual stimuli as pairs of
matching shapes; infants who saw the same images within
a single hemifield did. Successfully inducing familiarity
with matching shapes between the baseline and final measurements of preference would increase the average absolute
change in preference by adding a systematic shift to any random variation. We found this increase when both shapes were
presented in one visual hemifield, indicating that the consistent relationship between the two shapes was more readily
represented. This is in contrast to the bilateral field advantage adults exhibit when comparing visual stimuli (Sereno &
Kosslyn, 1991; Kraft et al., 2005).
Abundant evidence shows that the quality of the representation constructed by an infant affects the preference expressed for familiar stimuli. Younger infants (Hunter, Ames,

Figure 4: Difference in preference for non-matching shapes
between baseline and final test periods. A positive difference
indicates a greater preference for non-matching shapes at final test. Lines show least-squares linear fits for each condition.

& Koopman, 1983), more complex stimuli (Kidd, Piantadosi,
& Aslin, 2012), and less familiarization time (Houston-Price
& Nakai, 2004; Richards, 1997; Roder, Bushneil, & Sasseville, 2000; Rose, Gottfried, Melloy-Carminar, & Bridger,
1982) can all lead to familiarity rather than novelty preferences (for a review see Aslin, 2007). A constant amount
of familiarization as performed in Experiment 1 would therefore be expected to induce a shift from familiarity to novelty
preference with age. This is exactly what we found in the unilateral conditions, in support of the interpretation that the increased variance in change in preference was due to a true familiarity with the concept of “matching shapes.” In contrast,
the preference shifts between baseline and final testing of infants in the bilateral condition showed no such systematicity,
confirming that the shifts we did observe could be attributed
to random variation between two consecutive measurements.
The age trend observed does not indicate a change in interhemispheric integration over the age range studied; rather,
we are assuming that when shown matching shapes in one
hemifield all infants represent ”matching shapes” but express
this familiarity differently with age. Over the age range studied, we observed no evidence for a comparable representation of ”matching shapes” when the shapes were presented
in opposite hemifields. The condition difference cannot be
attributed to differences in peripherality of or distance between the matching shapes, since we observed comparable
trends when matching either for how peripheral and how distant from each other the matching shapes were.

1397

The question remains of whether infants in the bilateral
condition simultaneously perceive two clear but incomparable shapes, or have separate experiences of seeing each shape
as two separate people might. Experiment 2 addresses perceptual integration more directly in the case of approximate
numerical representations by familiarizing infants with 16
dots either all in one visual hemifield (16+0) or split evenly
between the two hemifields (8+8). We directly predict the
representation that would result from a failure to integrate
information: infants in the 8+8 condition will represent 8,
whereas infants in the 16+0 condition will represent 163 . We
also expect that younger infants will express these representations via familiarity preferences whereas older infants will
show novelty preferences. That is, we expect that infants in
the 8+8 condition will start off showing a familiarity preference for 8 and shift to a novelty preference for 16, whereas
infants in the 16+0 condition will start off showing a familiarity preference for 16 and shift to a novelty preference for
8.

Figure 5: Familiarization with 16 dots. (a) Bilateral (8+8)
condition: 8 dots on either side of fixation. (b) Unilateral
(16+0) condition, with all dots in one hemifield.

Experiment 2: Does 8 on the left plus 8 on the
right look like 16?
Participants Infant subjects were recruited at the Boston
Children’s Museum and parents provided informed consent
to participate. 36 infants between 12 and 19 months of age
(mean age 15 months 12 days) participated in this study.4 An
additional 12 infants were excluded due to fussiness, inattention, or experimenter error.
Procedure Infants were positioned as in Experiment 1. The
procedure consisted of (1) a familiarization period showing
images of 16 dots and (2) a final test of looking-time to images of 16 and of 8 dots.
Familiarization All infants were familiarized with images
of 16 dots while looking at the “fixation video” on a large
monitor as in Experiment 1. In the ’bilateral’ condition, 8
dots appeared on one side of the fixation video and 8 dots on
the other side. In the ’unilateral’ condition, the same images
were used but the fixation video was shifted to either the left
or right side. The side of fixation was counterbalanced between infants, so that each infant was familiarized with 16
dots in one consistent hemifield. Example sequences for each
condition are shown in Figure 5. We expected that this familiarization would induce familiarity with 16 dots in the 16+0
condition but with 8 dots in the 8+8 condition.
Looking time tests Looking time to a series of six images,
alternating between 16 and 8 dots as shown in the examples in
Figure 6, was measured as in Experiment 1. The density and
dot size were matched to those of the familiarization images.
3 We assume that infants can represent and distinguish these
quantities since since 6-month-old infants succeed (Xu & Spelke,
2000) with sufficiently long presentations (Wood & Spelke, 2005).
4 An additional 3 infants under 12 months were tested and did not
show clear familiarity preferences; however, their inclusion does not
change any of the qualitative findings reported here.

The order of presentation was consistent across all subjects to
reduce variance associated with decreasing looking time over
the six trials.

Figure 6: Test displays of 8 and 16 dots used in Experiment
2.
Video coding Two coders blind to experimental condition
recorded looking times as in Experiment 1. The looking times
to the 2nd through 5th trials were used to compute a preference score for 8-dot pictures as a proportion of the total looking time during these trials5

Results
As predicted, the correlation of preference for 8 dots with
age was greater in the unilateral (16+0) than in the bilateral
(8+8) condition (permutation test on Spearman rank correlations, p < 0.01). In the unilateral condition infants showed a
shift towards prefering 8 dots with age (r = 0.70, p < 0.005)
and in the bilateral condition they showed no significant shift
overall (r = −0.08, p = .3). However, preferences in the bilateral condition showed a significant positive quadratic trend
(permutation test, p < 0.05) indicating the possibility of two
shifts in preference: first from preferring 8 to preferring 16,
and then back to preferring 8–like infants in the unilateral
condition–as infants neared 18 months.
5 The first trial was not included in the analysis because of the
large variance in interest in the first static image displayed.

1398

proximate numbers (McCrink & Wynn, 2004) but they readily represent and compare multiple simultaneously presented
numerosities (Xu & Garcia, 2008; Gweon, Tenenbaum, &
Schulz, 2010). However, previous work has not directly addressed whether infants can represent nested or overlapping
numerosities (e.g., the number of balls and the number of
red balls) in addition to disjoint numerosities (the number of
red balls and the number of yellow balls). This limitation be
explored using standard psychophysical techniques in adults
and free-viewing presentations with infants and children.

General discussion

Figure 7: Preferences at test for images with 8 dots rather than
16 dots. In the unilateral condition, ’x’ represents an infant
shown the 16 dots on the left and ’+’ an infant shown the 16
dots on the right. Curves show a linear fit for the unilateral
condition and a quadratic fit for the bilateral condition.

Discussion
These results are consistent with the possibility that whether
infants see 16 dots as 16 dots depends on whether the dots are
presented to a single hemisphere. In the unilateral condition,
we predicted the observed trend from a familiarity preference
for 16 in to a novelty preference for 8 in older infants. In
the bilateral condition, we predicted that infants would represent 8 dots (twice), expressed as a familiarity preference in
younger infants shifting to a novelty preference in older infants. If, after this first shift, infants began to integrate the
two numerosities and represent ’approximately 16’, this preference would shift again to a novelty preference for 8 dots,
as observed. We hypothesize two orthogonal age trends comprising the quadratic trend observed in the bilateral condition: a shift from familiarity to novelty preference that reflects the mode of expression of a stable representation, and
later a change in the representation itself.
An increase with age in the precision of numerical representation could explain the age trend in the unilateral condition, but not the difference in correlation between conditions.
Whereas a hypothetical decreasing impact with age of peripherality on underestimation of numerosity, demonstrated
in adults (Valsecchi, Toscani, & Gegenfurtner, 2013), could
potentially explain this difference, it cannot account for the
quadratic trend in the bilateral condition.
Because of infants’ demonstrated capacities for flexible
combination of numerosities, we expect that the primary use
of single-hemifield numerosity estimates–without an additional deficit in integration–would not lead to the observed
pattern of results. Not only can infants predict the results
of dynamic addition and subtraction events over large ap-

Experiments 1 and 2 demonstrate deficits in processing of bilateral visual stimuli late in development, with consistent age
trends observed in two distinct domains: form perception and
approximate number.
There are several challenges that could prevent infants
from achieving representations of a stimulus covering the entire visual field. We focus here on the integration of putative single-hemifield representations, but early failure to
perceive or remember the content of both hemifields–for instance, due to exclusive allocation of attention to one hemifield at a time–could also explain the results presented here.
Adult data makes an attentional explanation unlikely without
substantial developmental change in the structure of attentional resources, as adults are actually more able to maintain
spatially separated attentional foci in different hemispheres
(Malinowski, Fuchs, & Müller, 2007) and may indeed use
independent resources for object tracking in each hemifield
(Alvarez & Cavanagh, 2005). Nevertheless, it will be important to establish whether both sides of the briefly presented
stimuli are seen and processed.
Additional open questions include the developmental trajectory of interhemispheric integration and the specificity of
these findings to vision rather than more abstract lateralized
representations.

Acknowledgments
We thank the Boston Childrens Museum and especially the
families who participated. Thanks to Kathryn Hanling, Dasul (Nia) Jin, Chloe Joray, Alice Lu, Rachel Magid, Shirin
Shivaei, Tracy Sorto, Yuzhou (Vivienne) Wang, and Jessica
Wass for help with data collection and coding and to Hyowon Gweon, Julian Jara-Ettinger, and the reviewers for helpful comments. This material is based on work supported
by the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No.
1122374 and by the Center for Brains, Minds, and Machines
(CBMM), funded by NSF STC award CCF-1231216.

References
Alvarez, G. A., & Cavanagh, P. (2005). Independent resources for attentional tracking in the left and right visual
hemifields. Psychological Science, 16(8), 637–643.
Antell, S. E., & Caron, A. J. (1985, January). Neonatal perception of spatial relationships. Infant Behavior and Development, 8(1), 15–23.

1399

Brainard, D. H. (1997). The psychophysics toolbox. Spatial
vision, 10(4), 433–436.
de Schonen, S., & Bry, I. (1987). Interhemispheric communication of visual learning: a developmental study in 3-6month old infants. Neuropsychologia, 25(4), 601–612.
Elberger, a. J. (1984, March). The existence of a separate,
brief critical period for the corpus callosum to affect visual
development. Behavioural brain research, 11(3), 223–31.
Gazzaniga, M. S. (2005, August). Forty-five years of splitbrain research and still going strong. Nature reviews. Neuroscience, 6(8), 653–9.
Giedd, J. N., Blumenthal, J., Jeffries, N. O., Castellanos,
F. X., Liu, H., Zijdenbos, A., . . . Rapoport, J. L. (1999).
Brain development during childhood and adolescence: a
longitudinal mri study. Nature neuroscience, 2(10), 861–
863.
Gliga, T., & Dehaene-Lambertz, G. (2007, March). Development of a view-invariant representation of the human head.
Cognition, 102(2), 261–88.
Granrud, C. E. (2006). Size constancy in infants: 4-montholds’ responses to physical versus retinal image size. Journal of experimental psychology. Human perception and
performance, 32(6), 1398–1404.
Gweon, H., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Schulz, L. E. (2010). Infants consider both the sample and the sampling process
in inductive generalization. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 107(20), 9066–9071.
Hagedorn, J., Hailpern, J., & Karahalios, K. G. (2008). Vcode
and vdata: illustrating a new framework for supporting the
video annotation workflow. In Proceedings of the working
conference on advanced visual interfaces (pp. 317–321).
Hollich, G. (2005). Supercoder: A program for coding preferential looking (version 1.5). Computer Software]. West
Lafayette: Purdue University.
Houston-Price, C., & Nakai, S. (2004, December). Distinguishing novelty and familiarity effects in infant preference
procedures. Infant and Child Development, 13(4), 341–
348.
Hunter, M. A., Ames, E. W., & Koopman, R. (1983). Effects
of stimulus complexity and familiarization time on infant
preferences for novel and familiar stimuli. Developmental
Psychology; Developmental Psychology, 19(3), 338.
Kidd, C., Piantadosi, S. T., & Aslin, R. N. (2012, January).
The Goldilocks effect: human infants allocate attention to
visual sequences that are neither too simple nor too complex. PloS one, 7(5), e36399.
Kraft, A., Müller, N. G., Hagendorf, H., Schira, M. M., Dick,
S., Fendrich, R. M., & Brandt, S. A. (2005). Interactions
between task difficulty and hemispheric distribution of attended locations: implications for the splitting attention debate. Cognitive Brain Research, 24(1), 19–32.
Liegeois, F., Bentejac, L., & de Schonen, S. (2000). When
does inter-hemispheric integration of visual events emerge
in infancy? A developmental study of 19- to 28-month-old
infants. Neuropsychologia, 38, 1382–1389.

Malinowski, P., Fuchs, S., & Müller, M. M. (2007). Sustained
division of spatial attention to multiple locations within one
hemifield. Neuroscience letters, 414(1), 65–70.
McCrink, K., & Wynn, K. (2004). Large-number addition
and subtraction by 9-month-old infants. Psychological Science, 15(11), 776–781.
McKenzie, B. E., Tootell, H. E., & Day, R. H. (1980). Development of visual size constancy during the 1st year of
human infancy. Developmental Psychology, 16(3), 163–
174.
Milewski, A. E. (1979). Visual discrimination and detection
of configurational invariance in 3-month infants. Developmental Psychology, 15(4), 357–363.
Richards, J. E. (1997). Effects of attention on infants’
preference for briefly exposed visual stimuli in the pairedcomparison recognition-memory paradigm. Developmental Psychology, 33(1), 22.
Roder, B. J., Bushneil, E. W., & Sasseville, A. M. (2000,
October). Infants’ Preferences for Familiarity and Novelty During the Course of Visual Processing. Infancy, 1(4),
491–507.
Rose, S. A., Gottfried, A. W., Melloy-Carminar, P., &
Bridger, W. H. (1982). Familiarity and novelty preferences
in infant recognition memory: Implications for information
processing. Developmental Psychology, 18(5), 704.
Ross, J., & Burr, D. C. (2010, January). Vision senses number
directly. Journal of vision, 10(2), 10.1–8.
Salamy, A. (1978). Commissural transmission: maturational
changes in humans. Science, 200(4348), 1409–1411.
Sereno, A. B., & Kosslyn, S. M. (1991). Discrimination
within and between hemifields: A new constraint on theories of attention. Neuropsychologia, 29(7), 659–675.
Slater, A., Mattock, A., & Brown, E. (1990, April). Size
constancy at birth: Newborn infants’ responses to retinal
and real size. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
49(2), 314–322.
Valsecchi, M., Toscani, M., & Gegenfurtner, K. R. (2013,
January). Perceived numerosity is reduced in peripheral
vision. Journal of vision, 13(13), 7.
Webster, M., & Maclin, O. (1999). Figural aftereffects in the
perception of faces. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 6(4),
647-653.
Wood, J. N., & Spelke, E. S. (2005, August). Chronometric
studies of numerical cognition in five-month-old infants.
Cognition, 97(1), 23–39.
Xu, F., & Garcia, V. (2008). Intuitive statistics by 8-monthold infants. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(13), 5012–5015.
Xu, F., & Spelke, E. S. (2000, January). Large number discrimination in 6-month-old infants. Cognition, 74(1), B1–
B11.
Yakovlev, P. I., & Lecours, A.-R. (1967). The myelogenetic
cycles of regional maturation of the brain. Regional development of the brain in early life, 3–70.

1400

