UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interaction Design and the Role of Spatial Ability in Moderating Virtual Molecule
Manipulation Performance

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4cx878m4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Barrett, Trevor
Hegarty, Mary

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interaction Design and the Role of Spatial Ability in Moderating Virtual Molecule
Manipulation Performance
Trevor J. Barrett (trevor.barrett@psych.ucsb.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, UCSB
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA

Mary Hegarty (mary.hegarty@psych.ucsb.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, UCSB
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA

orientation and configuration of 3D molecular models.
The literature suggests mixed effects of stereo viewing in
virtual environments. Some studies report significant
performance benefits from providing stereo viewing (Wang,
MacKenzie, Summers, & Booth, 1998; Arsenault & Ware,
2004); while other studies report null effects of providing
stereo (Khooshabeh & Hegarty, 2010; Barrett & Hegarty,
2013). The literature regarding colocation of haptic and
visual workspaces is similarly inconsistent, with some studies
reporting significant performance benefits (Ware & Rose,
1999; Barrett & Hegarty, 2013), and others reporting null
effects (van Liere, Martens, Kok & van Tienen, 2005).
Significant interactions between display and interface
technologies have also been reported (Ragan, Kopper,
Schuchardt & Bowman, 2012). The heterogeneity of findings
in the virtual interaction literature likely arises from
differences in experimental task demands. For example,
performance benefits from providing stereo viewing are
likely to be observed only when the added fidelity of the third
dimension provides relevant or necessary information
required for the particular task. Thus, we should be cautious
in generalizing the effects of display and interface
technologies, as their merit depends on the specific
characteristics of the task at hand.
Virtual technologies may also be differentially effective for
people of different spatial abilities. While it is widely
accepted that individual differences in spatial ability play an
important role in learning from 3D virtual environments, the
nature of aptitude-treatment-interactions (ATI) are widely
disputed in the literature (Hoffler, 2010). Two main ATI
hypotheses have been offered in studies of multimedia
learning, animation, and interactivity. The ability-asenhancer hypothesis predicts that high ability individuals are
uniquely able to utilize increased fidelity to improve
performance, whereas low ability individuals do not profit
due to cognitive overload. The ability-as-compensator
hypothesis predicts that individuals with high ability are able
to compensate for lower fidelity representations and do not
benefit from increased fidelity, whereas individuals with low
ability benefit from increased fidelity because rich external
representations can supplant or compensate for lack of
ability. Of course these two hypotheses are not mutually

Abstract
Virtual models are increasingly employed in STEM education
to foster learning about spatial phenomena. However, the role
of design and spatial ability in moderating performance are not
yet well understood. We examined the effects of display
fidelity (stereo vs. mono), interface location (colocated vs.
displaced), and spatial ability on performance during a virtual
molecule manipulation task. The results indicated a significant
beneficial effect of providing stereo viewing on response time,
while interface location had no effect. The effect of providing
stereo on performance was moderated by spatial ability.
Notably, providing stereo did not benefit higher spatial ability
participants, while those with lower spatial ability uniquely
benefited from using the higher fidelity stereo display.
Keywords: spatial cognition; individual differences; stereo;
colocation; display; interface; virtual; rotation

Computer-based virtual models are now an important
instructional medium in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) education (Trindade, Fiolhais &
Almeida, 2002). Three-dimensional (3D) virtual models have
shown promise in fostering meaningful learning; however,
the perceptual cues provided often vary from system to
system, leaving much to be understood regarding the impact
of interaction design on reasoning and learning. Effects of
virtual model design elements depend greatly on the given
task as well as individual ability level. Given the increasing
availability of new display and interaction technologies,
building generalizable theories will be essential in
understanding how to best design cognitively supportive
virtual environments for education and research.
Here, we examine the effects of display fidelity
(stereoscopic vs monoscopic viewing), interface location
(collocated vs displaced), and spatial ability on a virtual
object manipulation task. Regarding display fidelity, stereo
displays use binocular disparity to create the illusion of depth
when viewing 3D content, whereas traditional displays
provide only monocular depth cues. Regarding interface
location, motion tracked interfaces for manipulating virtual
objects may be displaced from the virtual image (e.g. typical
computer mouse position) or colocated with the virtual object
to minimize disparity between visual and haptic information.
In the virtual object rotation task studied in our experiment,
students used a direct manipulation interface to match the

672

exclusive, and may characterize different learning situations
or different degrees of fidelity in the display and interface for
a given task. Here, we examine the moderating role of spatial
ability on the effect of display (stereo vs. mono) and interface
(colocated vs. displaced) fidelity.
The task used in the present study is couched in organic
chemistry, a domain that depends greatly on understanding
representations of the 3D structure of molecules. Virtual
molecular models are commonly employed in chemistry
education (Barnea & Dori, 2000, Limniou, Roberts &
Papadopoulos, 2008), making organic chemistry
representations an excellent real world task domain for
studying learning in virtual environments. In a previous study
(Barrett & Hegarty, 2013), a more domain-specific task was
employed in which participants manipulated a virtual
molecular model to match the orientation of a simultaneously
displayed 2D diagram representing the 3D structure of the
molecule. We found a significant benefit of colocating the
visual and haptic information, but no effect of stereo viewing.
This task involved understanding disciplinary diagrams in
addition to virtual object rotation, so it is difficult to
generalize these findings to other object rotation tasks (e.g.
Ruddle & Jones, 2001).
In order to improve generalizability, the task in the present
study required manipulation of a virtual molecular model to
match the orientation and internal configuration of a
simultaneously displayed 3D model of the same molecule.
This task involved two manipulations of the virtual model: 1)
a global rotation of the entire molecule and 2) a local twisting
rotation of a bond within the molecule. The additional local
rotation made this task more complex than typical virtual
object rotation tasks that involve only a global rotation of a
3D model (e.g. Ruddle & Jones, 2001). By using 3D models
rather than 2D diagrams for target orientations, the present
task focused on the virtual manipulation itself, and was not
confounded by participants’ ability to interpret diagrams.
Klatzky, Wu, Sheldon & Stetten (2008) suggest that
interfaces providing perceptually mediated interaction foster
better performance and learning than cognitively mediated
interfaces. Perceptual mediation allows cognitively
demanding processes to be offloaded onto more automatic
systems; this frees up cognitive resources to be re-allocated
towards performance and/or learning. Typically, when we
directly perceive and manipulate physical objects,
stereoscopic depth cues and congruence between vision and
touch are present. Therefore, we expected that providing
stereo viewing and colocation would perceptually mediate
the interaction, and lead to better performance than the more
cognitively mediated monoscopic display and displaced
interface. In line with the ability-as-compensator hypothesis,
we predicted that low spatial ability participants should
differentially benefit from the increased perceptual mediation
afforded by stereo viewing and colocation, while high spatial
ability participants should receive little or no benefit. That is,
greater spatial working-memory resources (Shah & Mikake,

1996) should allow high spatial ability participants to more
effectively handle the increased cognitive demand of the
mono display and displaced interface. Further, increased
perceptual mediation should allow low spatial ability
participants to perform more similarly to participants with
high spatial ability.

Virtual Model System
The virtual model system allowed for colocated naturalistic
manipulation of a virtual molecular model in a stereoscopic
display. The display was mounted horizontally and faced
downward towards a mirror mounted at 45°, which projected
the virtual image to the viewer. When colocated, the interface
was placed on a stand in the same location as the virtual
image (behind mirror, see Figure 1a). When displaced, the
interface was located to the left and below the mirror in the
natural mouse location (38cm displacement, hands
occluded).
a)

b)

Figure 1: a) Mirrored display allowed for colocation of
haptic and visual workspaces. b) Example starting
orientation (left) and successful target match (right).
Nvidia 3D Vision provided stereo viewing. The hand-held
interface was cylindrical and roughly the same dimensions as
the virtual models. Two halves freely rotated about the long
axis of the interface, allowing for local rotations within the
model. A motion sensor tracked global rotations (yaw, pitch,
and roll), and an optical encoder tracked local rotations. (See
Stull, Barrett & Hegarty, 2012)

673

orientation match before proceeding. After the experimental
task, participants then completed the NASA-TLX, MRT,
VoV, computer use questionnaire, and post-experiment
questionnaire.

Method
Design
The study had a 2 (display fidelity: stereo vs. mono) X 2
(interface location: colocated vs. displaced) between subjects
design, with spatial ability measured as a continuous
moderating variable. Dependent measures included response
time (RT) and angular error, defined as the average angular
disparity of both sides of the model to the target orientation.

Results
Data from 11 students were excluded from the analyses as
their average error was over 2.5 standard deviations from the
group mean, suggesting they did not understand the task or
were unmotivated. The four interface condition groups had
approximately equal numbers of males and females and did
not significantly differ on the MRT, F(3, 127) = 0.2, p = .90,
VoV, F(3, 127) = 1.0, p = .28, computer experience, F(3, 127)
= 0.1, p = .97, or attitudes toward computers, F(3, 127) =
0.54, p = .65.
Overall, participants had an average RT of 52.8s (SD =
19.4). A significant effect of display fidelity (stereo vs.
mono) was found on RT, F(1, 127) = 15.6, p < .001, ηp² =
.11. Marginal means showed that participants with
stereoscopic displays were about 13s faster (M = 46.4s, SD =
18.8), than those with monoscopic displays (M = 59.1s, SD =
17.9). No significant effect of interface location (F(1, 127) =
2.2, p = .14), or interaction between display fidelity and
interface location (F(1, 127) < 0.1) was observed.

Participants
One hundred forty two college students (73 Female) (age: M
= 18.8, SD = 1.6) participated in the study in return for course
credit. None of the participants had studied organic
chemistry. All had normal, or corrected to normal vision.
Participants were randomly assigned to conditions.

Materials
There were 24 orientation matching trials. The starting
orientation of the model was such that the global angular
distance to each of the target orientations was maximized.
Half of the trials involved a local rotation of the model (via
rotation along the long axis of the hand-held interface). Six
different virtual molecular models were used. Participants
received the trials in the same order, in which two
consecutive trials never showed the same molecule.
Two spatial ability measures were administered: a mental
rotation test (MRT) (Vandenburg & Kuse, 1978), and a three
dimensional perspective taking test, Visualization of
Viewpoints (VoV) (Guay & McDaniels, 1976). Items from
the NASA Task Load Index (TLX) (Hart & Staveland, 1988)
assessed participants’ subjective experience of the task (on a
scale of 0 to 100) with regard to six criteria: mental demand,
physical demand, temporal demand, own performance,
effort, and frustration. Items from Waller’s (2000) computer
use questionnaire assessed attitudes and experience with
computers. A post-experiment questionnaire collected basic
demographic information.

75

RT (s)

60

45
30

62.9

55.2

47.3

45.5

Display
Stereo
Mono

15
0
Colocated

Interface

Displaced

Figure 2: Effects of display fidelity and interface location on
participant RT (M ± SE).
Overall, participants had an average angular error of 4.8°
(SD = 1.4). No significant effects of display fidelity (F(1,
127) < 0.1), interface location (F(1, 127) < 0.1), or
interaction between display fidelity and interface location
(F(1, 127) < 0.1) were observed.

Procedure
For the experimental task, participants manipulated the lower
model to match the orientation and configuration depicted by
the above target model. Participants were instructed to
respond quickly and accurately; pressing a response pad key
terminated the trial. The experimenter returned the interface
to the starting position and participants were told to grasp (but
not move) the interface before the next trial was
administered.
Prior to the experimental task, participants were first given
one minute to familiarize themselves with manipulating the
virtual model using the hand-held interface. Participants then
completed and received feedback on three practice trials that
used models distinct from those in the experimental task. If
unsuccessful, the experimenter demonstrated the successful

Angular Error °

6
4

4.78

4.79

4.81

4.78

Display
Stereo
Mono

2
0
Colocated

Interface

Displaced

Figure 3: Effects of display fidelity and interface location on
participant angular error (M ± SE).

674

In order to account for individual differences in
speed/accuracy prioritization, a composite performance score
was created by standardizing the sum of standardized RT and
angular error values. Note that lower values represent better
performance for this measure, i.e. shorter RT and less angular
error. Composite performance for the different experimental
groups is shown in Figure 4. A significant effect of stereo was
found on composite performance, F(1, 127) = 8.49, p = .004,
ηp² = .06. Participants provided with the stereo display had
better performance than those using the mono display by
0.5SD (SE = 0.12). There was no significant effect of
interface location (F(1, 127) = 1.31, p = .29), or interaction
between display fidelity and interface location on
performance (F(1, 127) = 0.37, p = .54).

spatial ability and those provided with stereo viewing were
more likely to have better performance. In addition, the
interaction of spatial ability and display fidelity (B = -.345,
SEB = .16) explained 3% additional variance in performance
(F(1,126) = 4.78, p = .031), suggesting the effect of stereo on
performance was moderated by spatial ability. To explore this
interaction, the conditional effects of display fidelity on
performance were plotted across the observed range of spatial
abilities. As shown in Figure 4, the effect of providing stereo
was evident for low spatial ability individuals, while no effect
of stereo was observed on those with high spatial ability. The
moderator value .34 defined the Johnson-Neyman
significance region, suggests a significant effect of stereo on
performance for individuals below the 63rd percentile of
spatial ability level. The conditional effects of display fidelity
plotted across spatial ability levels are shown in Figure 5.

0.39
0.5

0.10

Mono

0
-0.5

Display
Stereo

-0.21

-0.29

-1
Colocated

Interface

1

Composite Performance

Composite Performance

1

Displaced

Display
Stereo

0.5

Mono

0
-0.5
-1

Figure 4: Effects of display fidelity and interface location on
composite performance (Z ± SE).

10

25

50

75

90

Spatial Ability Percentile

We conducted a simultaneous multiple regression analysis
to examine how well the MRT and VoV scores predict
composite task performance. Together, MRT and VoV
explained approximately 18% of the variance in
performance, R = .424, F(2, 128) = 14.0, p < .001. Both MRT
(r = -.345, p = .029) and VoV (r = -.385, p = .003) were
significantly correlated with performance, Examination of
the partial regression coefficients revealed that MRT scores
uniquely explained 3% of the variance in performance and
VoV scores uniquely explained 6%. Scores on the MRT and
VoV spatial ability measures were moderately correlated (r
= .55, p < .001).
A composite spatial ability measure was created by
standardizing the sum of standardized MRT and VoV scores.
This measure was then used as a predictor in regression
models that examined the interaction of spatial ability with
display and interface fidelity.
To examine whether the relationship between performance
and display fidelity (stereo vs. mono) and interface location
(colocated vs. displaced) was moderated by spatial ability,
display fidelity and spatial ability were entered
simultaneously in to a regression model while controlling for
interface location (entered as covariate in model). Results
showed significant main effects of both spatial ability (B= .538, SEB = .010 p < .001) and display fidelity (B = -.438, SEB
= .154, p = .005) on performance. Participants with high

Figure 5: Conditional effects of display fidelity on
performance across spatial ability levels.
In order to estimate a possible moderating effect of spatial
ability on the effect of interface location we also conducted
an analysis with colocation as the predictor variable
(controlling for stereo), however no main effect or interaction
with spatial ability was observed.
Although males scored higher on both measures of spatial
ability (MRT: F(1,129) = 6.33, p = .013, ηp² = .05; VoV:
F(1,129) = 13.75, p < .001, ηp² = .10), there were no
significant differences between males and females on RT,
F(1,129) = 2.70, p = .10, accuracy, F(1,129) = 1.74, p = .19,
or composite performance, F(1,129) = 0.58, p = .81.
On the subjective measure of task load (NASA-TLX),
participants provided with the stereo display reported
significantly less temporal demand (M = 41.2, SD = 30.9)
than those with the mono display (M = 50.5, SD = 30.9),
F(1,127) = 6.2, p = .01, ηp² = .04 indicating that they were
aware of the increased efficiency observed with stereoscopic
displays. Participants who received the colocated interface
reported significantly less frustration (M = 32.7, SD = 40.1)
during the task than those with the displaced interface (M =
43.3, SD = 40.1). No significant differences were observed
on the remaining items, and no interactions were observed.

675

understudied, the literature regarding the nature of ATIs
spans several domains. Previous studies in other domains
have found ATIs supporting the ability-as-compensator
hypothesis by demonstrating that low ability individuals
benefited more than high ability individuals from the spatial
contiguity effect (Lee, 2007), and when viewing animations
rather than diagrams (Hays, 1996; Höffler & Leutner, 2011).
Other studies have found support for the ability-as-enhancer
hypothesis by demonstrating that high ability individual
uniquely benefit when afforded additional verbal information
(Mayer & Sims, 1994), visualization interactivity (Keehner,
Montello, Hegarty & Cohen, 2004), and 3D models in virtual
biology lessons (Huk, 2006).
The present finding that increased display fidelity
differentially benefited lower spatial ability participants,
combined with null effect on high spatial ability participants
suggests that increasing display fidelity at least partially
supplanted the moderating role of spatial ability during the
task. Given that spatial ability is a relatively constant trait and
the design of a virtual representation is engineered, perhaps
it is useful to interpret this finding as display fidelity
compensating for low spatial ability. Interpreting ability-ascompensator ATIs in this manner may offer important
implications for designers of virtual interactions and learning
environments who seek to improve task performance and/or
learning in individuals with lower spatial ability.
Given the limitation of only finding effects on RT, future
research needs to look at more complex tasks where the issue
of accuracy be of greater importance. This will be especially
important in order to produce stronger educationally relevant
design implications. While further studies are warranted to
test whether this ATI would generalize to complex tasks with
learning outcomes, this finding demonstrates a clear example
of interaction design differentially bolstering performance in
lower spatial ability participants.
Another important point to consider is that a threshold
likely exists where increasing fidelity of any aspect of the
interaction (that does not increase perceptual mediation) may
cognitively overload lower ability individuals, and reverse
the moderation of ability on performance. Once this threshold
is crossed, it is expected that ability would play the role of an
enhancer in moderating performance, and high ability
individuals would uniquely benefit. Investigating the nature
of this threshold for different taxonomies of perceptual and
information fidelity will be essential in clarifying the role of
various spatial abilities in virtual interaction and learning
environments. In any case, the present research highlights the
importance of considering individual differences in spatial
ability in the design of cognitively supportive virtual
interactions.

Discussion
We examined the effects of varying display and interface
fidelity and the role of spatial ability on performance during
a virtual molecule manipulation task in which global and
local rotations were required to match 3D target orientations.
Response times upwards of one minute were relatively high
for a virtual object rotation task, and suggested that the task
was challenging to participants. Overall, providing stereo
viewing lead to faster task completion. This suggests that
increased display fidelity afforded by stereo viewing
increased perceptual mediation of the interaction, decreased
demand on spatial cognitive processing, and allowed for reallocation of resources to benefit performance. This finding
was supported by subjective reports of feeling less rushed
when using the stereo display. All participants performed
with a high degree of near ceiling accuracy, which was
unsurprising given the lack of time constraint. Colocating the
visual and haptic workspaces did not significantly benefit
performance during the task. While interface location did not
affect performance, participants reported feeling less
frustrated when using the colocated interface.
As expected, spatial ability affected task performance;
individuals with higher spatial ability performed at a higher
level than those with lower spatial ability. Moreover, the
predicted interaction between spatial ability and display
fidelity on performance was observed, as demonstrated by a
differential effect of display fidelity across spatial ability
levels. Providing stereo viewing lead to increased
performance for participants in approximately the bottom
2/3rds of spatial ability, while no effect was found on
participants in the top 1/3rd of spatial ability. There was no
significant interaction between spatial ability and interface
location.
The more perceptually mediated stereo display benefited
participants with low to average spatial ability, whereas
participants with high spatial ability were able to effectively
compensate for the lower fidelity afforded by the mono
display. This finding was in line with the ability-ascompensator hypothesis. Higher spatial ability participants
may have been able to handle the increased demand on spatial
processing associated with using the cognitively mediated
mono display, so that the increased perceptual mediation of
the stereo display did not decrease cognitive demand to a
degree that impacted performance. In contrast, lower ability
participants appear to have lacked spatial processing
resources required to effectively handle the increased
demand associated with using the cognitively mediated mono
display, while the increased perceptual mediation of the
stereo display significantly decreased cognitive demand to
produce increased performance.
This work adds to the body of literature on aptitudetreatment-interactions
by
demonstrating
a
clear
compensating effect of spatial ability differentially
moderating performance with interactions of varying fidelity.
Although ATIs in virtual object manipulation are

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the National Science
Foundation, grant #1008650.

676

Lee, H. (2007). Instructional design of web-based
simulations for learners with different levels of spatial
ability. Instructional Science, 35, 467–479.
Limniou, M., Roberts, D., & Papadopoulos, N. (2008). Full
Immersive Virtual Environment CAVE™ in Chemistry
Education. Computers & Education, 51, 584-593.
Mayer, R. E., & Sims, V. K. (1994). For whom is a picture
worth a thousand words? Extensions of a dual-coding
theory of multimedia learning. Journal of educational
psychology, 86(3), 389.
Ragan, E. D., Kopper, R., Schuchardt, P., & Bowman, D. A.
(2013). Studying the Effects of Stereo, Head Tracking, and
Field of Regard on a Small-Scale Spatial Judgment
Task. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 886-896.
Ruddle, R. A., & Jones, D. M. (2001). Movement in cluttered
virtual environments. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments, 10(5), 511-524.
Shah, P., & Miyake, A. (1996). The separability of working
memory resources for spatial thinking and language
processing: an individual differences approach.Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 125(1), 4.
Stull, A. S., Barrett, T., Hegarty, M. (2012) Design of a
virtual reality system for the study of diagram use in
organic chemistry. Proceedings of the Workshop on
Technology-Enhanced Diagrams Research (pp. 33-41).
Canterbury, UK.
Trindade, J., Fiolhais, C., & Almeida, L. (2002). Science
learning in virtual environments: a descriptive
study. British Journal of Educational Technology, 33(4),
471-488.
Vandenberg, S. G., & Kuse, A. R. (1978). Mental rotations,
a
group
test
of
three-dimensional
spatial
visualization. Perceptual and motor skills, 47(2), 599.
van Liere, R., Kok, A., Martens, J. B., & van Tienen, M. H.
A. V. (2005). Interacting with molecular structures: user
performance versus system complexity. In Eurographics
Symposium on Virtual Environments, (Aalborg University,
Denmark) (pp. 147-156).
Waller, D. (2000). Individual differences in spatial learning
from computer-simulated environments. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 6(4), 307.
Wang, Y., MacKenzie, C. L., Summers, V. A., & Booth, K.
S. (1998, April). The structure of object transportation and
orientation in human-computer interaction. In Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems: Proceedings of
the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
systems (Vol. 18, No. 23, pp. 312-319).
Ware, C., & Arsenault, R. (2004). Frames of reference in
virtual object rotation. In Proceedings of the 1st
Symposium on Applied perception in graphics and
visualization (pp. 135-141). ACM.
Ware, C., & Rose, J. (1999). Rotating virtual objects with real
handles. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction (TOCHI), 6(2), 162-180.

References
Arsenault, R., & Ware, C. (2004). The importance of stereo
and eye-coupled perspective for eye-hand coordination in
fish tank VR. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual
Environments, 13(5), 549-559.
Barrett, T. J., & Hegarty, M. (2013) Interface design and
spatial cognition: A case of virtual molecule manipulation.
Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 157-162). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Barnea, N., & Dori, Y.J. (2000). Computerized molecular
modeling - The new technology for enhancing model
perception among chemistry educators and learners.
Chemistry Education: Research and Practice in Europe, 1,
109-120.
Guay, R., & Mc Daniels, E. (1976). The visualization of
viewpoints. West Lafayette, IN: The Purdue Research
Foundation (as modified by Lippa I., Hegarty M., &
Montello DR, 2002).
Hart, S. G., & Staveland, L. E. (1988). Development of
NASA-TLX (Task Load Index): Results of empirical and
theoretical research. Human mental workload, 1, 139-183.
Hays, T. A. (1996). Spatial abilities and the effects of
computer animation on short-term and long-term
comprehension. Journal of Educational Computing
Research, 14, 139–155.
Hegarty, M., & Kriz, S. (2008). Effects of knowledge and
spatial ability on learning from animation. Learning with
animation: Research implications for design, 3-29.
Höffler, T. N. (2010). Spatial ability: Its influence on learning
with visualizations—a meta-analytic review. Educational
psychology review, 22(3), 245-269.
Höffler, T. N., & Leutner, D. (2011). The role of spatial
ability in learning from instructional animations–Evidence
for an ability-as-compensator hypothesis. Computers in
human behavior, 27(1), 209-216.
Huk, T. (2006). Who benefits from learning with 3d models?
The case of spatial ability. Journal of Computer-Assisted
Learning, 22, 392–404.
Khooshabeh, P., & Hegarty, M. (2010). Inferring crosssections: When internal visualizations are more important
than properties of external visualizations. Human–
Computer Interaction, 25(2), 119-147.
Keehner, M., Montello, D. R., Hegarty, M., & Cohen, C.
(2004). Effects of interactivity and spatial ability on the
comprehension of spatial relations in a 3D computer
visualization. In annual meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society, Chicago, IL.
Klatzky, R. L., Wu, B., Shelton, D., & Stetten, G. (2008).
Effectiveness of augmented-reality visualization versus
cognitive mediation for learning actions in near
space. ACM Transactions on Applied Perception
(TAP), 5(1), 1.

677

