UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Intuitive Statistics: Identifying Children’s Data Comparison Strategies using Eye Tracking

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4dx8z25p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Morris, Bradley
Cravalho, Patrick
Junglen, Angela
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Intuitive Statistics:
Identifying Children’s Data Comparison Strategies using Eye Tracking
Bradley J. Morris (bmorri20@kent.edu), Patrick F. Cravalho (pcravalh@kent.edu),
Angela Junglen (ajungle1@kent.edu), Christopher Was (cwas@kent.edu)
Department of Educational Psychology, 405 White Hall
Kent, OH 44242 USA

	  
Amy M. Masnick (Amy.M.Masnick@hofstra.edu)
Department of Psychology, Hauser Hall
Hempstead, NY 11549 USA

	  	  
Abstract
People often compare sets of numbers informally, in
considering prices or sports performance. Children who lack
knowledge of formal comparison strategies (e.g., statistics)
may use intuitive strategies like estimation that create
summary values with approximations of means and variance.
There were two goals for this experiment: (1) to classify data
comparison strategies and (2) to evaluate whether children’s
strategy discovery and selection is effective. Using eye
tracking, we identified strategies used by 41 8-12-year-old
children when comparing number sets, by examining how the
properties of the data sets (e.g., mean ratios and variance)
influenced accuracy and confidence in differences. We
classified strategies from eye tracking patterns; these
strategies were associated with different levels of accuracy,
and strategy selection was adaptive in that selection was
related to the statistical properties of the sets being compared.
The results demonstrate that children are quite adept at
informally comparing data sets and adaptively select
strategies to match the properties of the sets themselves.

Keywords: Intuitive statistics, cognitive development,
eye tracking

Introduction
How does a shopper determine which store has the lowest
prices? This could be achieved by comparing sets of prices
using a formal statistical analysis like a t-test. However,
when comparing numbers in context (data), outside of a
research setting, such comparisons are more likely to occur
informally. Surprisingly, there has been relatively little
research investigating how people compare sets of numbers
(e.g., Morris & Masnick, in press) despite the rapidly
growing literature investigating comparisons between single
numbers (e.g., Dehaene, 2009). In the current paper, we
investigate the comparison of number sets in children using
eye tracking in order to classify and evaluate naïve
strategies for performing data comparisons.

Number representation and comparison
Numbers are represented as both a verbal category (e.g.
“twelve”, an exact value) and an activation function on an
approximate number system (Dehaene, 2009; Feigenson,

Dehaene, & Spelke, 2004; Opfer & Siegler, 2012).
Differences between single-digit numbers are detected more
quickly and accurately as the ratio of the numbers increases
(Dehaene, 2009). For example, reaction times are slower
and evaluations are less accurate when comparing 9 and 10
(9:10 ratio of numbers), than when comparing 3 and 9 (1:3
ratio of numbers). This distance effect is evidence that
numerical quantities are compared using approximate
representations. This effect is detected across species
(Brannon, 2003), across age of participants (Feigenson et
al., 2004), and across presentation formats (e.g., dots,
Arabic numbers, fractions; Buckley & Gillman, 1974;
Dehaene, 2001; Sprute & Temple, 2011).
Multi-digit number comparisons (e.g., 63 vs. 72)
demonstrate a unique distance effect in that two- and threedigit numbers produce distance effects for each place value
unit (i.e., tens vs. ones; Korvorst & Damian, 2008; Nuerk,
Weger, & Willmes, 2001). Eye tracking results demonstrate
more fixations when there is incompatibility between places
(e.g., 47 vs. 51), where one number has a larger value in the
tens column, but the other one has a larger value in the ones
column (Moeller, Fischer, Nuerk, & Willmes, 2009).
The Approximate Number System (ANS) allows children,
even infants, to discriminate quantities, although the
threshold at which accurate discrimination occurs changes
over development (Mou & vanMarle, in press). Specifically,
infants can distinguish quantities at a ratio of 1:2; by early
elementary school, children distinguish at a 4:5 ratio; and
adults discriminate quantities at a 9:10 ratio (Halberda &
Feigenson, 2008; Xu & Spelke, 2000). Children are also
adept at using the ANS to estimate solutions to problems for
which they lack formal solution strategies (Gilmore,
McCarthy, & Spelke, 2007). One explanation for the
increasing acuity is the strategies children (and adults) use
to compare quantities (Hyde, 2011; Mu & van Marle, in
press). That is, strategies are related to goals (e.g., accuracy)
and constrained by processing limitations (e.g., working
memory; Hyde, 2011).

Comparing number sets
There is evidence that when comparing number sets,
adults create and compare approximate summaries of the

2651

statistical properties of these sets, which include information
about means and variances (Morris & Masnick, in press;
Masnick & Morris, 2008; Obrecht, Chapman, & Suarez,
2010). For example, adults were asked to compare sets of 3digit numbers that varied in set size (4 or 8), ratio of means
(2:3, 4:5, or 9:10), and coefficient of variation (.10 or .20 of
mean). The results suggested that summaries were
compared much like single values in that accuracy and
confidence were higher and visual fixations shorter for
comparisons between high contrast sets (e.g., high mean
ratio, low variance) than low contrast sets (e.g., low mean
ratio, high variance; Morris & Masnick, in press). Children
as young as 8 show some perception of variance in data sets,
reducing their confidence in conclusions with more varied
data, though they do not change their confidence as much as
adults (Masnick & Klahr, 2003; Masnick & Morris, 2008).
One model suggests that summaries emerge from multiple
activation areas in the approximate number system (Morris
& Masnick, in press). More specifically, approximate means
emerge from the overlap between two or more values and
approximate variance could emerge from spread of values
within the set. Sets with large mean ratios and low variance
would constitute high contrast sets, in that they would create
summary activation areas that would be far apart on a
number line (low contrast sets would be close together).
In order to create the aforementioned summary
representations, a reasoner must use a strategy that encodes
information necessary to derive summary values. For
example, given two columns of three-digit numbers, when
an adult attends to the hundreds place value of both
columns, she can quickly detect differences given high
contrast sets (e.g., left has mostly 4s and 5s in the hundreds
column, while the right has mostly 7s and 8s, therefore the
right column is larger). However, if a second reasoner only
attends to the first three-digit numbers in each set, then he
will not encode the properties of the set, which will
influence the types of possible comparisons. Adults are
consistent in attending to the numeric properties of an entire
data set (Masnick & Morris, 2008; Morris & Masnick, in
press).
Children are often less consistent than adults,
demonstrating high variability in strategy use (Siegler,
2007). Although more variable, children often demonstrate
highly adaptive strategy use in that the selection of
strategies is related to processing goals (Siegler, 1996).
When solving complex addition problems, children discover
new strategies without conscious awareness and modify
their strategies to improve solution accuracy without explicit
feedback (Siegler & Stern, 1998). Thus, we investigated
naïve data comparison strategies of elementary school
children.
In the current study, we asked children to compare data
presented as columns of three-digit numbers (framed as the
distances two golfers drove a golf ball, when doing so
repeatedly), and to choose which golfer hit the ball farther.
We examined potential strategies for assessing such

differences between data sets, and then linked these
strategies to specific behavioral predictions. Table 1
summarizes the set of possible strategies and predicted
behavior, given each strategy, described in more detail
below. We suggested an additional strategy in which
participants sought the highest or lowest value. However, no
subject used this strategy and it was eliminated from our
coding.

Data Comparison Strategies
One possible approach for comparing sets of numbers is
to attend to only a subset of the number set. We suggest two
possible types of subset strategies. The use of any of these
strategies reduces information about set properties.
Strategy 1: Pairwise comparisons. One possible subset
strategy is to make paired comparisons, comparing
individual values within one set to the individual values
within the other set. This strategy would involve direct
comparisons within each pair of data, such as noting which
golfer had the longer drive on each trial. After comparing
each pair of drives, the Golfer with the most “wins” (e.g., 5
of 6 times one golfer had a longer drive) would be
determined to have hit the ball farther. From a processing
standpoint, such a strategy would require a series of
comparisons that determine the larger value and a simple
tally of the results. Even if used on all pairs in a data set,
such comparisons would ignore potentially relevant
information about the statistical properties of the set that
may influence the overall evaluation (e.g., mean ratios,
variance).
Strategy 2. Subset comparisons. A second strategy is
comparing a sample of values, such as comparing only the
first two drives in a set and ignoring the remaining numbers.
Using this strategy, comparisons for sets would operate
exactly as predicted in the comparison between two
numbers. From a processing standpoint, such a strategy
would not require any calculation.
Strategy 3: Calculation. Another possible strategy for
comparing sets is for reasoners to calculate values explicitly.
For example, one might compute a mean value for each
column and then compare these means. One might also add
the values and compare the sums (which would lead to the
same conclusion as computing means).
Strategy 4: Gist. Another strategy for comparing sets of
numbers is to summarize the statistical properties of the
numbers, including unique characteristics of sets
unavailable in individual number comparisons, such as
means and variances. This strategy would lead to a quick
decision, but one that was based on a rough estimation of
mean and spread of each data set. Such summaries likely
emerge from scanning a set of numbers because the
activation of multiple approximate magnitudes for each
member of the set results in a summary activation area in
regards to a number line. Sets with large mean ratios and
low variance would constitute high contrast sets, in that they
would create summary activation areas that would be far

2652

Table 1. Data comparison strategies, descriptions, and hypothesized response patterns
Strategy
Pairwise
Comparison

Accuracy
High with high
contrast sets.

Confidence
No change with
sample size.

Eye fixation pattern
Sequential pattern of fixations comparing pairs within each row
(e.g., fixations targeted between first two numbers in sets)
before moving on to next set until all pairs have been compared.

Subset
Comparison

High with high
contrast sets

No change with
sample size

Fixations directed to only a subset of pairs (e.g. first two, last
two). No fixations on more than half of all numbers in the sets.

Calculation

High; No change
with set
properties.
Increases as set
contrast
increases.

Decreases as sample
size increases

Long fixations on place values or entire numbers in each set

Increases with high
contrast sets, smaller
sample sizes.

Rapid scanning by place values of numbers; often associated
with decomposition of numbers (e.g., focus on hundreds place
value only)

Increases as set
contrast
increases.

Increases with high
contrast sets, smaller
sample sizes.

Initial scan strategy with additional information pickup. For
example, subjects may iteratively scan different place values
(e.g., tens) or whole number comparisons.

Gist

Gist +

apart on a number line. If the summary representations are
compared like single number representations, then a
distance effect for sets would be expected, and high contrast
sets would be associated with faster, more accurate
comparisons and low contrast sets with slower, less accurate
comparisons.
Strategy 5: Gist+. This strategy begins as the Gist strategy
described above. However, instead of terminating the search
and producing a response, subjects continue to search for
additional information, update information in working
memory, or process information. One key difference from
the Gist strategy is that, without detecting a clear difference
between the two sets, subjects may simply continue to scan
for more information. In some cases, this scanning might be
deliberate. For example, subjects may scan, then conduct
pairwise comparisons between whole numbers in the sets or
may search for the highest/lowest value before responding.
In other cases, the scanning may be incidental. For example,
additional scanning might not be directed towards specific
elements (e.g., iterative scans of tens columns), but might be
simply looking at various elements until they reach either
some criterion or simply terminate the search and produce a
guess.
Current paper. We investigated how children compare
number sets by presenting participants with sets of data (i.e.,
numbers in context) that varied systematically in the mean
ratio, relative variance, and number of observations. We
asked participants to compare these sets, and we measured
eye fixations, accuracy, and confidence in comparisons to
investigate set comparisons when the mean, variance and
number of observations were systematically manipulated.
From these data, we classified their comparison strategies,
evaluated the accuracy of strategies, and investigated
whether children’s strategy discovery and selection was
adaptive.

Method
Participants
Participants were 41 8-12 year-old children (M = 10.76,
SD = .46) who returned a signed parental consent form and
provided verbal assent to participate. One participant was
not included in the analysis because of problems with the
eye-tracking recording.

Procedure
Participants saw 36 data set pairs with the following
properties: (a) set size 4, 6, or 8, (b) low (9:10) or high (4:5)
ratio of means, and (c) either low or high variance. Numbers
were presented in 42-point Times New Roman font and
each column of numbers was centered within two columns
in a table. Within each number, an extra space was placed
between the hundreds, tens, and ones values and 1.5 spacing
was used between numbers in each column.
Participants were asked to determine which golfer (left or
right) hit the ball farther (accuracy) and rate their confidence
in this evaluation on a 4-point scale (1 = Not at all sure, 4 =
Totally sure). On each trial, participants first saw a fixation
slide in which a + was placed in the center of the screen for
1 second. After one second, participants saw a data slide
consisting of the two sets of data (positioned on the left or
right side of the screen) and were given unlimited time to
view the datasets. Participants were then asked to determine
which golfer, on average, hit the ball farther and how
confident they were in this difference (using the scale
positioned in front of them). Data sets were presented
sequentially in blocks by sample size (4, 6, or 8
observations) because pilot testing demonstrated that the
change in stimuli between presentations (e.g., presenting a
set of four, then a set of eight) resulted in a higher number
of fixations compared to blocked presentations. In this way,
blocked presentation controls for errant fixations and

2653

focuses attention on features associated with the stimuli, not
with the mode of presentation.
Data sets were presented on a Tobii® T-60XL eye
tracker. Participants were given a 9-point calibration before
beginning the task. Areas of Interest (AOIs) were recorded
around the hundreds, tens, and ones columns and around
whole numbers. Inter-rater reliability was 92% before
discussion, and all disagreements were resolved with the
first author.

difference between sets decreased F(2, 39) = 14, p = .001,
η2 = .45; more fixations in the hundreds column as variance
increased F(2, 39) = 8.8, p = .01, η2 = .39; and significantly
more fixations in the hundreds column for low contrast
compared to high contrast sets F(3, 39) = 12, p = .001, η2 =
.36. An additional ANOVA was run with fixation duration
as the dependent measure, and it yielded a similar pattern of
results.

Results

Low	  Variability	  
Mean Column	  Switches	  

Aggregated Results
Accuracy and Confidence. A 3-way repeated measures
ANOVA was run in which mean ratio (4:5; 9:10),
coefficient of variation (low, high) and sample size (4, 6, 8)
were independent variables, and accuracy (out of 3) was
the dependent measure. For accuracy, there was a main
effect for mean ratio, with lower accuracy for sets with
9:10 ratio (M = 2.33, SD = .4), and higher accuracy for 4:5
sets (M = Figure 1). There were no significant differences
for confidence ratings.

High	  Variability	  

20	  
15	  
10	  
5	  
0	  
4:5	  

9:10	  

Ratio of Mean Difference

Low	  Variability	  

High	  Variability	  

Figure 2. Mean number of column switches by condition.
Note. Error bars represent SE of Mean.

Mean Accuracy

3	  
2	  
1	  
0	  
4:5	  
9:10	  
Ratio of Mean Difference
Figure 1. Mean accuracy by condition.
Note. Error bars represent SE of Mean.
Eye Fixation Counts. Eye fixation counts were used to
explore the pattern of where people look for information in
this task. There were main effects for all variables in our 4way ANOVA in which mean ratio (4:5, 9:10), coefficient of
variation (low, high), sample size (4, 6, 8), and column
(hundreds, tens, ones) were all repeated measures
independent variables, and number of fixations with the
Areas of Interest defined by each of the six columns
(hundreds, tens, ones on the left and right sides of the
screen) was the dependent measure. A repeated measure
ANOVA demonstrated two main effects: a significant
overall increase in the number of fixations as set size
increased, F(2, 39) = 6.6, p = .01, η2 = .32, and significantly
more fixations in the hundreds column than in the tens or
one column, F(2, 39) = 21.8, p = .001, η2 = .61. There were
more fixations in the hundreds column as the mean

Column switches. Another measure of comparison was the
number of times people moved their eyes from one side to
the other. In reading comprehension research, regressions
are measured as fixations in which subjects re-read text, and
are an accurate index of text complexity (Rayner &
Pollatsek, 1989). Here, we considered looking at a column
of data repeatedly in a similar manner. Two raters counted
the number of times subjects switched fixations between
columns. The two coders agreed 95% of the time and
discrepancies were resolved through discussions with the
first author. We then examined the effect of data
characteristics on the frequency of fixation switches. A
mean ratio (4:5, 9:10) x coefficient of variation (low or
high) x sample size (4, 6, 8) repeated measures ANOVA
was conducted with the number of fixation switches as the
dependent measure. Overall, there were more column
switches given low mean ratios (F (1, 39) = 53.3, p < .01,
partial η2 = .44), and high variance (F (1, 39) = 36, p < .01,
partial η2 = .36). There was also an interaction in which
switches were more frequent with low contrast sets (F (2,
39) = 16.6, p < .01, partial η2 = .28; See Figure 2).

Strategy analysis
In order to investigate data comparison strategies, we
examined the patterns of eye motions to compare them to
the proposed patterns associated with strategies outlined in
Table 1. Two raters coded the eye movement patterns. They
had 87% agreement, and resolved discrepancies after
discussion with the first author.

2654

Analysis showed substantial variability across the set of
trials. Ninety-five percent of participants used at least 3
strategies during the experiment. The pairwise comparison
and calculation strategies were excluded from further
analyses because one participant used them each once. A
McNemar Chi-square was used to compare strategy use
between high and low contrast sets only. The use of the
Gist+ strategy was significantly higher for low contrast sets
while the use of the Gist strategy was significantly higher
for high contrast sets (40, df = 6, p = .002; See Figure 3).

Subset	  

Gist	  

Subset	  

Gist+	  

Mean Accuracy

3	  
2.5	  
2	  
1.5	  
1	  
0.5	  
0	  

Gist+	  

High	  Contrast	  

20	  
Strategy frequency

Gist	  

Low	  Contrast	  	  

Figure 4. Strategy accuracy by condition. Note. Error bars
represent SE of Mean

15	  
10	  

Discussion

5	  

Our results provide insights into how children make sense
of data. Recall that children were asked to compare a series
of data sets that differed in their statistical properties (e.g.,
mean ratio, variance). Adults are quite adept at such
comparisons (Morris & Masnick, in press); however, adults
likely have greater knowledge of number properties and
mathematical operations as well as greater experience with
such comparisons than children.
Our results provide four main findings. One, children
were highly accurate at comparing data sets even when
those sets were quite similar (e.g., 9:10 ratio of mean
difference with high variability). Most children attended to
highly relevant information when making comparisons. For
example, children were more likely to attend to the
information in the hundreds place value when making
comparisons.
Two, children used a variety of strategies to make these
comparisons. For example, nearly all children used at least
three different strategies during the experiment. Three,
changes in strategy use were associated with changes in the
statistical properties of the data sets. For example, the use of
a Gist strategy was more frequent with high contrast than
with low contrast sets and the use of the Gist+ strategy was
more frequent with low contrast set than high contrast sets.
This change may indicate a purposeful search for additional
information (e.g., tens column), re-activation of information
in working memory that was previously scanned (e.g.,
fixating on hundreds column for a second time), or simply
might indicate additional looking time associated with a
lack of certainty regarding any conclusion.
Finally, strategies were associated with accuracy. For
high contrast sets, there was no difference in accuracy;
however, strategy use was associated with accuracy for low
contrast sets. Specifically, the use of the subset strategy, in
which children attended to the first two numbers in the set,
was significantly less accurate than strategies in which

0	  
High	  Contrast	  

Low	  Contrast	  	  

Figure 3. Strategy frequency by condition. Note. Error bars
represent SE of Mean
A mean ratio (4:5, 9:10) x coefficient of variation low or
high) x sample size (4, 6, 8) repeated measures ANOVA
was conducted comparing accuracy by strategy codes. The
results indicate that there was no difference in strategy
accuracy for high contrast sets (F (1, 39) = 1.2, p > .10).
For low contrast sets, there was a significant relationship
between strategy and accuracy. Specifically, the comparison
strategy was associated with significantly lower accuracy
than the Gist or Gist+ strategies (F (1, 39) = 24.5, p < .01,
partial η2 = .23) and the Gist+ strategy was associated with
lower accuracy than the Gist strategy (F (2, 39) = 13.9, p <
.01, partial η2 = .15; See Figure 4). Unlike accuracy,
confidence ratings did not significantly differ by strategy or
sample size. The subset strategy was used more frequently
for high contrast sets than for low contrast sets. The subset
strategy was as accurate for high contrast sets as Gist and
Gist+ but was significantly less accurate for low contrast
sets F (2, 39) = 21, p < .001, partial η2 = .30.

2655

children attended to the entire set. For high contrast sets it is
highly probable that comparing any two individual values in
the set would be diagnostic of the overall differences
between sets. For low contrast sets, this strategy was
significantly less accurate because the comparison of two
values from the set are much less likely to be diagnostic of
set differences than in high contrast sets. The use of Gist
and Gist+ strategies would provide information about the
entire set, which would provide information about the
statistical properties of the set. Interestingly, for low
contrast sets the additional information gained from the
Gist+ strategy did not provide a significant increase in
accuracy above the Gist strategy. It is possible that children
either focused on irrelevant information in these additional
fixations or children exceeded their working memory
capacity with the additional information.
In sum, many 8-12-year-old children displayed an
intuitive understanding of the statistical properties of
number sets, using them to draw conclusions and evaluate
strategy
application.
This
nascent
understanding
demonstrates that the Approximate Number System may
support rapid, implicit comparisons between number sets
without the need for deliberate calculation. These findings
may be able to inform formal scientific and statistical
training by highlighting critical elements in creating
effective problem representations and developing effective
instructional tools.

References
Brannon, E. M. (2003). Number knows no bounds. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 7(7), doi:10.1016/S13646613(03)00137-2
Buckley, P. B., & Gillman, C. B. (1974). Comparisons of
digits and dot patterns. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 103(6), 1131-1136. doi:10.1037/h0037361
Dehaene, S. (2009). Origins of Mathematical Intuitions: The
Case of Arithmetic. The Year in Cognitive Neuroscience
2009: Annual New York Academy of Science, 1156, 232–
259. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04469
Dehaene, S. (2001). Précis of the number sense. Mind &
Language, 16, 16-36.
Feigenson, L., Dehaene, S., & Spelke, E. (2004). Core
systems of number. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8(7),
307-314. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2004.05.002
Gilmore, C. K., McCarthy, S. E., & Spelke, E. S. (2007).
Symbolic arithmetic knowledge without instruction.
Nature, 447(7144), 589-591. doi:10.1038/nature05850
Halberda, J., & Feigenson, L. (2008). Developmental
change in the acuity of the “Number Sense": The
Approximate Number System in 3-, 4-, 5-, and 6-yearolds and adults. Developmental psychology, 44(5), 1457.
Hyde, D. C. (2011). Two systems of non-symbolic
numerical cognition. Frontiers in human neuroscience, 5,
150, 1-8.

Korvorst, M., & Damian, M. F. (2008). The differential
influence of decades and units on multidigit number
comparison. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology,
61(8),
1250-1264.
doi:10.1080/17470210701503286
Masnick, A. M., & Klahr, D. (2003). Error Matters: An
initial exploration of elementary school children's
understanding of experimental error. Journal of Cognition
and Development, 4(1), 67-98.
Masnick, A. M., & Morris, B. J. (2008). Investigating the
development of data evaluation: The role of data
characteristics. Child Development, 79(4), 1032-1048.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2008.01174.x
Moeller, K., Fischer, M. H., Nuerk, H., & Willmes, K.
(2009). Sequential or parallel decomposed processing of
two-digit numbers? Evidence from eye-tracking. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 62(2),
323-334. doi:10.1080/17470210801946740
Morris, B. J., & Masnick, A. M. (in press). Comparing data
sets: Implicit summaries of the statistical properties of
number sets. Cognitive Science: A Multidisciplinary
Journal.
Mou, Y., & vanMarle, K. (in press). Two core systems of
numerical representations in infants. Developmental
Review.
Nuerk, H., Weger, U., & Willmes, K. (2001). Decade breaks
in the mental number line? Putting the tens and units back
in different bins. Cognition, 82(1), B25-B33.
doi:10.1016/S0010-0277(01)00142-1
Obrecht, N. A., Chapman, G. B., & Suárez, M. T. (2010).
Laypeople do use sample variance: The effect of
embedding data in a variance-implying story. Thinking &
Reasoning, 16(1), 26-44.
doi:10.1080/13546780903416775
Opfer, J. E., & Siegler, R. S. (2012). Development of
quantitative thinking. In K. Holyoak and R. Morrison
(Eds.), Oxford Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning.
Rayner, K., & Pollatsek, A. (1989). The psychology of
reading. Englewood Cliffs, NJ US: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Siegler, R. S. (2007). Cognitive variability. Developmental
Science, 10(1), 104-109.
Siegler, R. S. (1996). Emerging minds: The process of
change in children’s thinking. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Siegler, R. S., & Stern, E. (1998). Conscious and
unconscious strategy discoveries: a microgenetic
analysis. Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology:
General, 127(4), 377.
Sprute, L., & Temple, E. (2011). Representations of
fractions: Evidence for accessing the whole magnitude in
adults. Mind, Brain, and Education, 5(1), 42-47.
doi:10.1111/j.1751-228X.2011.01109.x
Xu, F., & Spelke, E. S. (2000). Large number discrimination
in 6-month-old infants. Cognition, 74(1), B1-B11.

2656

