UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Is a Diamond More Elegant than a Diamond?: The Role of Sensory-Grounding in Conceptual
Content

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6xf405cr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Gordon, Chelsea
Anderson, Sarah
Spivey, Michael

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Is a Diamond More Elegant than a Diamond?: The Role of Sensory-Grounding in
Conceptual Content
Chelsea L. Gordon (cgordon7@ucmerced.edu)
University of California at Merced, Department of Cognitive Science,
5200 North Lake Road, Merced, CA, 95343

Sarah E. Anderson (sec57@cornell.edu)
Nielsen Company, 53 Brown Rd. Ithaca, NY 14850

Michael J. Spivey (spivey@ucmerced.edu)
University of California at Merced, Department of Cognitive Science,
5200 North Lake Road, Merced, CA, 95343
Abstract
It has recently been suggested that much of the research in
embodied cognition can be explained by a “disembodied”
account in which conceptual and cognitive processes perform
their computations in a modular fashion and the sensory and
motor associations that show up in embodiment experiments
may arise merely from spreading activation from the
cognitive module to the sensory and motor systems (Mahon &
Caramazza, 2008). In such a model, the cognitive module
processes its information and accesses its representations
exactly the same way as it always would have, and the
embodiment effects are essentially epiphenomenal. We test
this idea by manipulating the sensory aspects of the
perceptual input that triggers the activation of a concept.
Throughout the history of conceptual representation research,
feature lists of concepts have been treated as a method for
accessing the semantic content of those conceptual
representations. When there are sensory differences in the
font of the written word that triggers accessing of a concept,
does the concept get accessed in a different way? Are
different conceptual features more prominent than others? We
find a series of conceptual features that are more prominent
when the concept is presented in one font versus the other.
Continuations of this research project involve reaction-time
priming experiments to see if these differential access effects
happen at the timescale of hundreds of milliseconds. Our
results are discussed in the context of competing or
compatible accounts of embodied and symbolic cognitive
processes.
Keywords: language, embodied
representation, psycholinguistics

cognition,

conceptual

Introduction
Converging evidence in the field of embodied cognition
suggests that low-level perceptual processes, such as
auditory and visual processing, are activated immediately
and automatically during higher-level tasks, such as
language and conceptual processing (Barsalou 1999;
Bergen, Lindsay, Matlock, & Narayanan 2007; CalvoMerino, Grezes, Glaser, Passingham, & Haggard 2006;
Thelen & Smith 1994; Zwaan 2004). There remains debate,
however, about the directness of this interaction. For
instance, traditional cognitive science predominantly

responds to findings in embodied cognition by suggesting
that the core of the phenomenon is a symbolic
representation and that after this process becomes active, the
activation merely spreads to sensory and motor associations
(Mahon & Caramazza, 2008). This view then implies that
sensorimotor groundings are peripheral, not central, to
conceptual representations. Furthermore, they argue that
embodied cognition could only be plausible in regard to
concrete concepts, since for abstract concepts such as
“justice”, it can be difficult to identify sensory and motor
information that grounds it to the world.
However, concepts are not spontaneously activated from
inside. Activating concepts, like flower, typically requires
the environment to deliver a sensory stimulus to the
observer. This stimulus will unavoidably have idiosyncratic
sensory properties that must be completely discarded in
order for the exact same symbolic concept (of flower) to get
activated in exactly the same way every time one sees a
flower or hears the word “flower”. The case is the same for
concepts such as “justice”. Whether reading the word,
hearing the word, or thinking the word, there is a contextual
situation made up of sensory information that brought the
concept to mind.
Moreover, evidence suggests that participants do not
summarily discard such idiosyncratic information, as is seen
in the phonemic categorical perception literature. For over a
decade, the evidence indicated that the process of phoneme
discrimination was discretely categorical (Liberman, Harris,
Kinney, & Lane, 1961). Take for example the categorical
perception of the phonemes “pah” and “bah”. These two
phonemes differ only on the dimension of voice onset time
(VOT): if VOT is between 0 and 30 ms, then the sound is
perceived as “pah”, and if VOT is between 30 and 60 ms,
the sound is perceived as “bah”. When participants are
asked to decide which of the two phonemes a sound is, this
difference appears discretely divided at the 30 ms boundary.
More recently, further investigation of categorical
perception has yielded more graded results. Just analyzing
data from the endpoint of a response (such as accuracy) runs
the risk of overlooking fine-grained details available before
a response is fully executed (Abrams & Balota, 1991).

2293

Therefore, by examining reaction times, the categorical
perception effect may not be as discrete as outcome-based
experiments suggest. When participants are asked to judge
which of the two phonemes the sound is, reaction times
reveal that the closer the stimulus’s VOT is to the boundary
between phonemes, the greater the increase in the
corresponding reaction time (Pisoni & Tash, 1974).
Although measurements of the overt response indicate that
the decision is a categorical one, the reaction time data
suggests that there is competition in the underlying system.
Similarly, evidence from eye-tracking converges with the
reaction time data and suggests that subtle variations of the
two phonemes around the VOT boundary are not
immediately discarded (McMurray & Spivey, 2000). Hence,
idiosyncratic differences in incoming stimuli create
competition that may result in reaction time differences.
Likewise, these effects do not disappear when the
phoneme is embedded within a word. When the VOT of
“pah” and “bah” phonemes is systematically varied within
the words “pear” and “bear”, eye movements vacillate
between the two options as the VOT comes closer to the
boundary (McMurray, Tanenhaus, & Aslin, 2002).
Although participants ultimately make one response and
click on one of the two available options, these eyemovements illustrate that the underlying process is sensitive
to the competition between the two responses. Therefore,
even in categorical speech perception, there is evidence that
continuous variation in the speech signal is not immediately
discarded (McMurray, Tanenhaus, Aslin, & Spivey, 2003),
and in fact lingers long enough to affect spoken word
recognition (McMurray et al, 2002).
A formal symbolic account of conceptual representation
would suggest that concepts are stable representations that
exist in long-term memory. This may be unlikely, since
accessing a concept in different contexts allows for great
variability. Because it is unlikely that we have a different
stable concept for every contextual situation, we must then
be accessing idiosyncratic feature combinations of concepts
in different situations. Chairs are a great example of this.
There are many types of chairs and often times contextual
information carries the majority of the load in determining
which chair features are accessed in a situation. For
example, if someone is told to sit on a chair while visiting
with a friend in the dining room, this person will recognize
that a dining chair, with (most likely) four legs and a back,
is what the friend is referring to. If, however, these friends
are standing near a bar and the same sentence is uttered, the
person will recognize that a bar stool is what is being
referred to. As Barsalou (1993) states, “Accessibility
appears to be the critical factor that underlies which features
are retrieved from knowledge of a category to construct a
concept on a particular occasion.”
Barclay et al. (1974) examined how concepts are highly
flexible in how they are accessed and interpreted. They
showed that the optimal retrieval cues differed according to
the context in which participants were given the word
“piano”. When the context involved moving the piano, the

optimal cues were related to the weight of it, but when the
context involved playing the piano, the optimal cues related
to musical properties.
Barsalou, Solomon and Wu (1999) provided evidence that
the way we access a concept does depend on the way in
which it is accessed via our perceptual systems. For
example, when participants are told to name features of an
object such as a watermelon or half of a watermelon, their
responses differ. Participants given the half watermelon
example were more likely to list features characteristic of
the inside of the watermelon. This is consistent with the idea
that participants are mentally simulating an image of the
object while asked to list the features. This suggests that the
way in which an object is perceived has a strong impact on
what aspects of that concept are accessed.
In our study, the idiosyncratic sensory properties of a
stimulus are manipulated to investigate the impact of such
differences on the activation of a concept. If idiosyncratic
sensory properties are not discarded when reading a word
that is intended to activate a concept, then systematic
differences in either the features themselves or the ranking
of these features can be expected. For example, think of the
features that come to mind when you read the following
word in Courier font: Justice. Now, when the only thing
that has changed is the font (Edwardian Script), you may
find a rather different set of features come to mind: Justice.
If the differences in the visual presentation of these two
fonts are not discarded when activating a concept, the
participants may be more likely to respond with
punishment-related features, for example, for the Courierfont version and equality-related features for the Edwardianfont version. The Courier font may imbue the concept with a
slight emphasis on its more concrete features and/or its more
literal features, whereas the Edwardian font may imbue the
concept with a slight emphasis on its more abstract features
and/or its more idealistic or emotional features. We expect
that some of these features evoked by our stimuli will show
up more often in one font versus the other.

Methods
Participants
We collected data from 174 participants online using
Amazon Mechanical Turk. Turk is becoming a favorable
way to collect data from diverse participants quickly and has
been found to produce data as reliable as those in traditional
in-lab methods (Buhrmester, Kwang & Gosling, 2011).
Participants ranged from 18 to 67 years of age and were
reimbursed 20 cents to their Amazon account for
completing the approximately 10 minute survey. We had to
discard data from 24 of these participants due to unfinished
surveys or participants attempting to complete the survey
more than once.

Design, Stimuli, and Procedure
Participants were asked to complete a questionnaire
consisting of fourteen words. In order to prevent participants

2294

from employing strategies, the study was between subjects,
and all of the words on each questionnaire were written in
the same font. The two fonts used were Courier and
Edwardian Script. There were 74 participants in the Courier
condition and 76 participants in the Edwardian condition.
We selected stimuli that were expected to show
systematic differences between the two font types. For
example, words like “diamond”, “dessert”, or “engagement”
might bring to mind fanciness or romance more strongly
when viewed in the Edwardian font. Words like “justice”,
“service”, or “duty” might bring to mind task or work force
related features more strongly when viewed in the Courier
font. Thus, we expected that some, but not all, of the
features for each stimulus would be more frequently listed
in one of the conditions. A full list of the stimuli in their
respective fonts is shown in Table 1. The stimuli were
randomized, so that any word order effects would be
avoided.
After clicking on a “show word” button, the word
appeared on the screen. Participants were instructed to focus
on the word until the answer boxes appeared, which
occurred 200 ms later. They were told to then list the first
four words that they thought of as associated to the target
word, in the order that they thought of the words.
Table 1: Stimuli used in experiment
Courier

Edwardian

Service

Patriot

Duty

Snow

Holidays

Wind

Autumn

Glass

Engagement

Diamond

Blue

Fire

Justice

Dessert

Service
Duty
Holidays
Autumn
Engagement
Blue
Justice

Patriot
Snow
Wind
Glass
Diamond
Fire
Dessert

Analysis
We performed analyses on overall frequency of the listed
associations between conditions, as well as on list order. We
extracted the five most frequently listed associates for each
of the stimuli, as long as they were listed in the overall
responses at least 20 times. For example, the five most
frequently listed words for “autumn” were color-related (red
or orange), cool or cold, leaves, fall, and season.
We performed a chi-square test on each of the wordassociate pairs to see if the overall frequency of these
differed between conditions. We performed this test on each
of the associate-word pairs for each of the stimuli, resulting
in 56 chi-square tests.
In order to examine list effects, each associate was given
a rank order score for each participant. Associates listed first
were given a score of 4, associates listed second were given
a score of 3, associates listed third were given a score of 2,
and associates listed fourth were given a score of 1. Those
not listed at all were counted as 0s. Because of the non-

normality of the data, we used nonparametric measures for
list order analysis. We performed the Wilcoxon rank sum
test with correction for ties on each of the word-associate
pairs to see which pairs differed between conditions. The
rank sum test used rank data to determine whether that
associate has an overall higher rank order score in either
condition. We performed this test on each of the associateword pairs for each of the stimuli, resulting in 56 rank sum
tests.
Many participants misunderstood “dessert” to be “desert”,
so we did not perform analyses on the data collected for that
target word. Also, “glass” was troublesome – because of its
polysemy, participants either treated it as a specific object
(that we drink from) or as a material. In order to ensure that
participants are accessing the same concept, we did not
incorporate those into our analyses either.

Results
There were seven word-associate pairs found to
significantly differ in their frequencies between conditions.
For the word “diamond”, the associate “necklace” occurred
more often in the Edwardian condition (χ2 = 5.94, p < .05),
and the associate “hard” occurred more often in the Courier
condition (χ2 = 3.93, p < .05). For the word “justice”, the
associate “judge” occurred more often in the Edwardian
condition (χ2 = 5.52, p < .05), and the associate “police”
occurred more often in the Courier condition (χ2 = 4.10, p <
.05). For the word “fire”, the associate “smoke” occurred
more often in the Courier condition (χ2 = 6.32, p < .05). For
the word “holidays”, the associate “family” occurred more
often in the Edwardian condition (χ2 = 4.40, p < .05). For
the word “service”, the associate “work” occurred more
often in the Courier condition (χ2 = 6.91, p < .01). These
results are shown in Table 2. Next we turned to list order
effects.
Among those associates that were not found to be
significantly different in their frequencies, two wordassociate pairs showed a difference in rank order scores
between conditions in the Wilcoxon rank sum test.
“Holidays” elicited the associated word “gifts” which scored
higher in the Edwardian condition (M=.500, SE=.051) than
in the Courier condition (M=.203, SE=.080); w = 2464.5, p
< .05. For the word “blue”, the associate “water” scored
higher in the Courier condition (M=.714, SE=.135) than in
the Edwardian condition (M=.388, SE=.106); w = 1066, p <
.05.
There were also many associated words elicited by the
target words that showed little to no difference between
conditions.
Table 2: Word-associate pairs found to be significantly
different between conditions. * denotes p < .05 and **
denotes p < .01.
Word	  
Blue	  
Holidays	  

2295

Associate	  
Water	  
Gifts	  

Font	  Condition	  
Courier	  
Edwardian	  

Wilcoxon	  
*	  
*	  

Word	  
Justice	  
Justice	  
Fire	  
Holidays	  
Service	  
Diamond	  
Diamond	  

Associate	  
Police	  
Judge	  
Smoke	  
Family	  
Work	  
Necklace	  
Hard	  

Font	  Condition	  
Courier	  
Edwardian	  
Courier	  
Edwardian	  
Courier	  
Edwardian	  
Courier	  

Chi-­‐Square	  
*	  
*	  
**	  
*	  
**	  
**	  
*	  

1.2

Word-Associate Pair Saliency Scores

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.0

0.2

Saliency Score

1.0

Courier
Edwardian

Judge

Police

Hard Necklace Work

Gifts

Family

Water

Smoke

Associate word

Figure 1: Bar chart of associations found to be significantly
different between conditions

Discussion
For the word “diamond”, the associate “necklace” scored
higher in the Edwardian condition, while the associate
“hard” scored higher in the Courier condition. This supports
our earlier hypothesis that the Edwardian font might invoke
more elegant features. We did not see a difference for the
words “expensive”, “ring”, or “stone”.
For the word “justice”, the associate “judge” scored
higher in the Edwardian condition and “police” scored
higher in the Courier condition. In this case, it might be the
case that the Edwardian font is calling to mind more
authoritative aspects (judges have more authority than a
police officer).
For the word “blue”, the associate “water” scored higher
in the Courier condition, while the associate “sad”
approached significance in the direction of a higher score in
the Edwardian condition. Perhaps there is more emotion
associated with the Edwardian font in this case. This might
also explain why “family” scored higher as an associate for
“holidays” in the Edwardian condition.
For the word “service”, the associate “work” scored
higher in the Courier condition, which might indicate the
more mundane features accessed in the Courier condition.
Our findings show that idiosyncratic sensory properties
may significantly alter the way that meanings get accessed,
suggesting that there may not be a context-free activation of
a concept. The sensory associations that accompany a
stimulus as it first gets processed by the perceptual system
may play a significant role in shading the meanings of
words and thus changing the way their concepts are
activated in the first place. If this is the case, then the idea

that sensorimotor grounding is nothing more than a
secondary spreading of activation (Mahon & Caramazza,
2008) is unlikely.
Furthermore, the difference in responses observed for
abstract concepts, such as “justice”, addresses the concern
that sensorimotor information is unable to make up such
concepts. Even the activation of abstract concepts may be
shaded by the sensory information present at the time of
activation.
This experiment was a step toward exploring the
relationship between sensory information and concepts and
whether this relationship is at all separable. If it is not, then
“disembodied” accounts of cognition should not be able to
fully account for these phenomena.
Casasanto and Lupyan (in press) provide an alternative
way of defining concepts by positing that all concepts are
constructed ad hoc and are thus never exactly the same. The
stability of concepts is only an illusion, and instead of
thinking about these as concrete things represented in our
minds, we should think about conceptualizing as a process
that we do with our minds. If, as our data suggests, even the
initial activation of a concept can be shaded by information
present in the environment, then perhaps this is a better way
of idealizing concepts.
Future experiments aim to explore our results using online
measures. An ongoing second experiment will compare
reaction times of responses to font-typical and font-atypical
associations discovered in this experiment. Participants will
either confirm or deny whether a word is an associate of one
of the targets words used in the first experiment. If
idiosyncratic differences in word presentation are not
discarded, than we should see faster reaction times for the
confirmation of font-typical association-target pairs than for
font-atypical association-target pairs. Following that, there
is possibility of using eye-tracking and/or mouse-tracking
methodologies to further elucidate the results of the first
experiments.
Additionally, there remains exploration to be done
regarding which target-association pairs appear to show
significant differences and which do not. Collecting
additional data for different types of words can help to shed
light on this question. For example, some concepts have a
very specific sensory association because of previous
experience, such as white and cold for snow. Other concepts
have less restriction on sensory associations, such as a chair,
which can be soft or hard and brown or pink. In addition,
collecting words of different categories (nouns or
adjectives) might provide further suggestions.
Finally, ongoing work using different fonts might elicit
more dramatic differences. Because Courier is often used as
a ‘default’ font, the words in the experiment are likely seen
more often in Courier font than in Edwardian font.
Additional versions of this study using only less commonly
used fonts might invoke a stronger effect.

2296

References
Abrams, R.A. & Balota, D.A. (1991). Mental chronometry:
Beyond reaction time. Psychological Science, 2, 153157.
Barclay, J. R., Bransford, J. D., Franks, J. J., McCarrell, N.
S., & Nitsch, K. (1974). Comprehension and semantic
flexibility. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 12(4), 471-481.
Barsalou, L. W., & Hale, C. R. (1993). Components of
conceptual representation: From feature lists to recursive
frames. In I. V. Mechelen, J. Hampton, R. Michalski & P.
Theuns (Eds.), Categories and concepts: Theoretical
views and inductive data analysis. San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Barsalou, L.W. (1999).
Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-609.
Barsalou, L. W., Solomon, K. O., & Wu, L. L. (1999).
Perceptual simulation in conceptual tasks. Cultural,
typological, and psychological perspectives in cognitive
linguistics: The proceedings of the 4th conference of the
International Cognitive Linguistics Association, 3, 209228.
Bergen, B., Lindsay, S., Matlock, T., & Narayanan, S. 2007.
Spatial and linguistic aspects of visual imagery in
sentence comprehension. Cognitive Science 31:733-764.
Buhrmester, M., Kwang, T., & Gosling, S.D. (2011).
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk: A new source of
inexpensive, yet high-quality, data? Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 6(3), 3-5.
Calvo-Merino, B., Grezes, D.E., Glaser, J., Passingham,
R.E., & Haggard, P. (2006). Action observation and
acquired motor skills: An fMRI study with expert
dancers. Cerebral Cortex, 15, 1243-1249.
Casasanto, D. & Lupyan, G. (in press). All Concepts are Ad
Hoc Concepts. In E. Margolis & D. Laurence (Eds.),
Concepts: New Directions. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Liberman, A., Harris, K., Kinney, J., & Lane, H. (1961).
The discrimination of relative onset-time of the
components of certain speech and nonspeech patterns.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 61, 379-388.
Mahon, B.Z., & Caramazza, A. (2008). A critical look at
the embodied cognition hypothesis and a new proposal for
grounding conceptual content. Journal of Physiology –
Paris, 102, 59-70.
McMurray, B., & Spivey, M. (2000). The categorical
perception of consonants: The interaction of learning and
processing.
Proceedings of the Chicago Linguistic
Society, 34, 205-220.
McMurray, B., Tanenhaus, M., & Aslin, R. (2002).
Gradient effects of within-category phonetic variation on
lexical access. Cognition, 86, B33-B42.
McMurray, B., Tanenhaus, M., Aslin, R. and Spivey, M.
(2003). Probabilistic constraint satisfaction at the
lexical/phonetic interface: Evidence for gradient effects of
within-category VOT on lexical access. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 32, 77-97.

Pisoni, D., & Tash, J. (1974).
Reaction times to
comparisons within and across phonetic categories.
Perception and Psychophysics, 15, 285-290.
Thelen, E., & Smith, L.B., editors. (1994) A dynamical
systems approach to development and cognition. Bradford
Books, MIT Press.
Zwaan, R.A. (2004). The immersed experiencer: Toward an
embodied theory of language comprehension. In B.H.
Ross (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation,
Volume 44 (35-62). New York: Academic Press.

2297

