UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Is Perceived Expressivity of Game Players a Cue to Game Outcome Prediction Accuracy?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5hd1w658

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Mui, Phoebe
Goudbeek, Martijn
Swerts, Marc

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Is Perceived Expressivity of Game Players a Cue to Game Outcome Prediction
Accuracy?
Phoebe Mui (h.c.mui@uvt.nl)
Martijn Goudbeek (m.b.goudbeek@uvt.nl)
Marc Swerts (m.g.j.swerts@uvt.nl)
Tilburg Center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), School of Humanities, Tilburg University
PO Box 90153, 5000 LE, Tilburg, The Netherlands

Abstract

Displays of Winning and Losing

Games can be won or lost, and the outcome of the game often
determines our facial expression. Thus, game players’ facial
expression possibly provides information about the game
outcome. The connection between such nonverbal cues and
accuracy at which game outcome could be deduced is
investigated in a perception experiment. Facial expressions of
Chinese and Dutch children playing a game, either alone or in
pairs, were shown to Chinese and Dutch judges who had to
evaluate their expressivity and game outcome. No one-to-one
mapping between perceived expressivity and guessing
accuracy across conditions was revealed. A positive
correlation was observed between expressivity and accuracy
for both Chinese and Dutch children playing in pairs as well
as alone, but only when they were winning. In fact,
nonexpressivity was consistently interpreted by judges as a
signal for losing. Our findings contribute to the identification
of conditions in which expressivity can reliably aid
perception.
Keywords: Expressivity; perception; facial expression;
perception accuracy

Introduction
We often form impressions about what has happened to
someone based on cues he or she displays. Suppose two
people come out of a job interview, one smiling and one
frowning. Without any other information, we can still
reasonably infer from the smile that the interview went well
for the former candidate, whereas the frown suggests that
the interview did not go smoothly for the latter candidate. In
situations as such, nonverbal cues expressed by a person are
informative signals of the event experienced by the person.
However, in real life, facial displays of people are often
more nuanced than those described in the example, and are
probably influenced by a number of factors.
This paper investigates the extent to which expressivity of
a person allows other people to correctly judge what event
this person has experienced. We regard expressivity as the
number of cues, as well the intensity of the cues, a sender
provides. In our study, we examine spontaneous nonverbal
displays of children who were playing a game. We
investigate the link between how expressive children were
perceived to be and how accurately their game outcomes
were inferred in different conditions. In doing so, we aim to
identify circumstances under which perceived expressivity
reliably aids inference about game outcomes.

Previous work found that different signals exist for winning
and losing. In their study on expressions of Olympic
athletes, Matsumoto and Willingham (2006) identified the
Duchenne smile (Ekman, Davidson, & Friesen, 1990) as the
distinguishing facial cue of victory. On the basis of this
finding, we find it plausible to assume that prototypical cues
of victory can be correctly interpreted as signals of winning.
However, no unique expression of defeat was found.
Displays of athletes who lost the medal match were most
commonly characterized by sadness, nothing, or contempt.
Recently, Furley and Schweizer (2014) showed that people
are capable of deducing from the nonverbal behaviour of
athletes whether they are trailing or leading in a sports
match. However, neither study reported any assessment of
expressivity of the displays, nor results of any perception
test. Hence, these studies shed little light on how perceived
expressivity is linked to game outcome prediction, as well
as how an absence of cues is interpreted. Is an absence of
facial cues considered nonexpressive? If so, are people more
likely to interpret this nonexpressivity as a signal of winning
or of losing? We seek to answer these questions in our study
by including an assorted array of nonverbal displays,
ranging from not expressive at all to very expressive. We
also assess perceived expressivity and guessing accuracy,
and–importantly–the relation between them.

Effect of Presence of Others
Consider the example of job candidates again. What would
happen if the candidates immediately ran into a good friend
after the interview? One could reasonably expect a change
in their nonverbal expressions. It is not hard to imagine that
the smiling candidate might beam radiantly with joy, so as
to show the friend how well the interview went. The
frowning candidate might sulk even more, as a means to
vent his or her dissatisfaction.
Indeed, in line with this intuitive conjecture, it has been
found that the expression of facial cues in gameplay
depends on the presence of others. Shahid, Krahmer, and
Swerts (2008) showed that game outcomes of children who
were playing in pairs were more accurately judged than
those who played alone. This factor of co-presence is also
investigated in our study.

2663

Effect of Culture

Method

Cultural display rules (Ekman & Friesen, 1969) are societal
expectations governing what expressive behaviour is
deemed appropriate, which may vary across cultures. Some
researchers argue that we are better at perceiving
expressions of people from our own cultural group
(Elfenbein & Ambady, 2002; Elfenbein, Beaupré, Levesque,
& Hess, 2007), whereas others have not observed such an
ingroup advantage (Matsumoto, Olide, & Willingham,
2009). Shahid et al. (2008) conducted their study with
Pakistani and Dutch children, and Pakistani and Dutch
judges. No ingroup advantage was found; however, judges
were more accurate in judging Pakistani children than when
judging Dutch children. The authors went on to claim that
Pakistani children were more expressive than Dutch
children. However, they could not explicitly state this claim
because expressivity was not assessed in their study.
As we are also interested in identifying groups of people
for which expressivity might serve as an informative cue of
game outcome, our study is conducted with two cultural
groups: Chinese and Dutch. These two groups are chosen as
higher self-reported emotion expressivity scores have been
recorded for Dutch than for Chinese (Matsumoto et al.,
2008). Moreover, differences between East Asians and
Western Caucasians in internal representations of facial
expressions (Jack, Caldara, & Schyns, 2012), and in
cognition and emotion in general (Markus & Kitayama,
1991), have been observed. Chinese and Dutch also differ
on other cultural characteristics (e.g., Bond et al., 2004;
Gelfand et al., 2011; Hofstede, 2001) which may influence
facial expression and perception, and yield data that can be
compared to previous work with Pakistani and Dutch.

Present Study
The overarching goal of our study is to determine if people
could correctly deduce a game outcome from the facial
expressions of the game player. We elicit nonverbal displays
of victory and defeat from Chinese and Dutch children who
either play a game alone or in pairs. Subsequently, we use
these nonverbal displays as stimuli in a perception study.
We ask Chinese and Dutch judges to rate the expressivity of
children, and to indicate whether the children had won or
lost. Finally, additional correlational analyses are conducted
to identify situations in which perceived expressivity of
game players is tied to guessing prediction accuracy.

Elicitation Task
We obtained video recordings of children participating in a
number guessing game. To investigate whether expressivity
would depend on game outcome, we ensured that children
experienced both winning and losing. Moreover, children
played the game either alone or in pairs, allowing us to
examine the possible effect of co-presence on expressivity.

Participants
Fifty-five Chinese (34 male) and 31 Dutch (23 male)
children took part in our study, with the informed consent of
their parents and school teachers. The Chinese children were
8-year-old pupils at a school in Suzhou, China. The Dutch
children were 8-year-olds attending a school in Tilburg, the
Netherlands.

Task and Material
We used a game paradigm to elicit expressions associated
with winning and losing. The game was a simple number
guessing game consisted of six rounds, set up in Microsoft
PowerPoint. In each round, six cards were displayed on the
screen but only the number on the first card was revealed.
The task of participants was to guess whether the number on
the next card would be higher or lower than the number
currently shown. They were told that the numbers could
range from one to ten, and that a round would be considered
a win only when all guesses within that round were correct.
A round would be considered a loss and would end right
away whenever an incorrect guess was made; an incorrect
guess made for the last card of the round resulted in a
completed round that counted as a loss, whereas an incorrect
guess made for any card before the last card resulted in an
incomplete round that also counted as a loss. As explained
in the next section, only completed rounds, both winning
and losing, were selected for the perception experiment.
Unbeknownst to participants, we designed the game in
such a way that both wins and losses were inevitable. The
level of difficulty for cards two to five were designed to be
easy (e.g., a card showing the number nine would be
followed by a lower number), based on sheer consideration
of the possible range of numbers (one to ten). In each round,
given that guesses made for cards two to five were correct,
the guess made for the sixth card (i.e., the last card) would
determine whether participants won or lost that round. To
ensure that both wins and losses were likely for all
participants, we manipulated the number shown on the last
card in each round. In the winning variant, the number on
the last card was a likely number given the preceding
number (e.g., eight preceded by two). On the contrary, in the
losing variant, the number on the last card was unlikely
given the preceding number (e.g., one preceded by two).
This manipulation resulted in at least two winning and two
(completed) losing rounds for all participants.

Procedure
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the two
conditions: playing alone (13 Chinese, 15 Dutch), or playing
with a same-gender classmate of their choice (21 Chinese
pairs, 16 Dutch pairs). They were seated in front of a
computer screen, above which a camcorder was placed.
An experimenter gave instructions to participants in their
native language (Chinese or Dutch). Once participants made
their guess, the number on the next card would be revealed,

2664

along with a tone which signalled whether their guess had
been correct or not. No time constraint was imposed; the
task was over as soon as six rounds of the game had been
completed. Participants who played in pairs could interact
with their partner if they so wished. All participants were
videotaped throughout the task.

Results
Video Recordings
The elicitation task described above gave rise to a
considerable number of video recordings, which would be
used in a subsequent perception experiment. Of all the
recordings available, we first excluded those obtained from
incomplete (losing) rounds. After all, expressions from
participants who lost the round due to the last guess (a
completed round) may not be comparable to those who lost
due to, for example, the second guess (an incomplete
round). Moreover, we decided to retain only the recordings
obtained from the second winning round and the second
losing round. This was done to reasonably rule out
unfamiliarity and boredom with the game as a confounding
factor for the expressions displayed by participants. Such a
selection resulted in two recordings per participant or pair;
56 recordings from participants who played alone (26
Chinese, 30 Dutch) and 74 from pairs (42 Chinese pairs, 32
Dutch pairs) were retained.
We edited the length of the recordings such that the onset
showed the moment at which participants had just guessed
what the number on the last card was. The recordings ended
with the moment at which participants’ response to seeing
the game outcome had subsided. On average, a video
fragment lasted 5 seconds. Moreover, for recordings
obtained from pairs, we randomly selected one participant
from the pair and cropped the recordings such that only one
participant was visible; the resulting recordings appeared to
be the same as those obtained from participants playing
alone. Audio was also removed from all recordings.
Examples of the stimuli in stills are shown in Figure 1.

Method
Participants
Judges were 109 Chinese and 108 Dutch university
students. The Chinese judges were undergraduates at
Nanjing University, China, who took part in the study in
exchange for 50 Chinese Yuan (about 6 Euros). The Dutch
judges were undergraduates at Tilburg University, the
Netherlands, who took part for partial course fulfilment.

Material and Procedure
Video recordings obtained from the elicitation task, edited
as described previously, served as stimuli for the current
perception test. The potential role of cultural background in
expressivity and perception was of key interest to our
research. Therefore, we ensured that recordings of Chinese
children were shown to both Chinese and Dutch judges in
the perception test; recordings of Dutch children were
shown in the same fashion.
Judges were seated at individual computers. After having
given informed consent, they learned that they would watch
video recordings of children who were either winning or
losing a game. After watching each recording, they needed
to answer two questions: whether the child had won or lost
(forced choice), and how expressive the child was on a scale
from 1 to 7 (1 = not expressive at all; 7 = very expressive).
All instructions were provided in the native language of the
judge (Chinese or Dutch).
Judges from both backgrounds watched recordings of
either Chinese or Dutch children throughout the test, the
assignment of which was random. Four video recordings
served as practice materials, which were not used as stimuli
in the actual experiment. As soon as judges completed the
practice and indicated that the task was clear, they were left
alone to complete the perception test. All recordings were
preceded by a number that appeared for two seconds on the
screen. When the recording was over, judges were given ten
seconds to indicate their responses to the two questions. The
entire perception test was set up in Microsoft PowerPoint;
the muted recordings played automatically in the middle of
the screen against a black background.

Results
Figure 1: Stills of portrayals. From left to right: Chinese,
loss; Dutch, loss; Chinese, win; Dutch, win.

Perception Test
The aforementioned video recordings were used as stimuli
in a perception test. After watching each recording, Chinese
and Dutch judges had to indicate whether they thought the
child had won or lost the game, and how expressive they
considered the child to be.

Our study employed a mixed design with four factors,
namely (1) nationality of children in recordings, (2)
nationality of judges who watched the recordings, (3) copresence: whether children played alone or in pairs, and (4)
game outcome: whether children in recordings won or lost.
The first two were between-subject factors, the latter two
within-subject. Dependent variables were mean guessing
accuracy (in percentages) and mean perceived expressivity
(on a scale from 1 to 7).

Descriptive statistics
Descriptive statistics concerning the between-subject factors
are shown in Table 1. Judges did not seem to give higher

2665

perceived expressivity ratings to children of the same
nationality. However, nationality played a role in how
accurately judges made their guesses. Chinese who watched
recordings of Chinese children (M = 65.1%, SE = 0.95)
made more accurate guesses than Chinese who observed
Dutch children (M = 61.6%, SE = 0.52), t (107) = 3.09, p =
.003, Cohen’s d = 0.74. Likewise, an ingroup advantage was
observed for Dutch judges. Dutch judges who observed
Dutch children (M = 68.5%, SE = 0.53) were more accurate
than Dutch who judged Chinese children (M = 66.0%, SE =
0.88), t (106) = 2.8, p = .005, Cohen’s d = 0.58. More
thorough analyses that take within-subject factors into
account are reported below.
Table 1: Means, standard errors, and 95% confidence
intervals of perceived expressivity and guessing accuracy as
a function of the between-subject independent variables.
Nationality
of judge

Nationality
of child

Mean

SE

95% CI

Perceived Expressivity
Chinese
Dutch

Chinese
Dutch
Chinese
Dutch

3.88
4.17
3.89
3.97

0.11
0.06
0.10
0.06

3.66 - 4.10
4.06 - 4.29
3.69 - 4.09
3.85 - 4.09

Guessing Accuracy
A mixed ANOVA was also conducted on mean guessing
accuracy, with the same independent variables as before.
Two significant interactions were observed. First, the two
nationality factors interacted with each other, F (1, 213) =
16.44, p < .001, η2p = .07. Overall, Dutch judges (M =
67.3%, SE = 0.51) were better at guessing than Chinese
judges (M = 63.4%, SE = 0.54), F (1, 213) = 27.45, p <
.001, η2p = .11. However, as suggested earlier, an ingroup
advantage seemed to exist. The interaction showed that
Dutch judges were better at guessing than Chinese judges,
but this advantage was more pronounced for guesses about
Dutch children than about Chinese children.
Second, co-presence interacted with game outcome, F (1,
213) = 648.33, p < .001, η2p = .75, the effect of which was
strong. Overall, judges made more accurate guesses for
children who played in pairs (M = 73.0%, SE = .57) than for
those who played alone (M = 57.6%, SE = .48), F (1, 213) =
429.70, p < .001, η2p = .67. Judges were also more accurate
when judging children who lost (M = 75.4%, SE = .78) than
those who won (M = 55.2%, SE = .70), F (1, 213) = 248.34,
p < .001, η2p = .54. However, as shown in Figure 2(b),
accuracy made for children who lost was higher than that
for children who won only in cases where children played
alone; game outcome did not make a difference in accuracy
for children who played in pairs. No other significant main
effect was observed.

Guessing Accuracy (%)
65.1
61.6
66.0
68.5

0.95
0.52
0.88
0.53

63.3 - 67.0
60.6 - 62.6
64.3 - 67.8
67.4 - 69.5

Perceived Expressivity
A 2 (nationality of child) x 2 (nationality of judge) x 2
(co-presence) x 2 (game outcome) mixed ANOVA was
conducted, revealing a number of significant effects. As
shown in Figure 2(a), game outcome interacted with copresence, F (1, 213) = 97.93, p < .001, η2p = .32. Overall,
judges regarded children who lost (M = 4.02, SE = .048) as
more expressive than those who won (M = 3.94, SE = .042),
F (1, 213) = 10.68, p = .001, η2p = .048. Judges also gave
higher expressivity ratings to children who played in pairs
(M = 4.77, SE = .043) than to those who played alone (M =
3.19, SE = .051), F (1, 213) = 1845.65, p < .001, η2p = .90.
However, as indicated in the interaction, children who lost
were considered more expressive than children who won
only when they played alone; winning or losing did not
make a difference for expressivity scores given to pairs.
In addition, a significant main effect of the nationality of
child was observed. Overall, Dutch children (M = 4.07, SE =
.043) were considered more expressive than Chinese
children (M = 3.89, SE = .075), F (1, 213) = 4.52, p = .035,
η2p = .021, the effect of which was relatively weak.

Perceived expressivity

Dutch

Chinese
Dutch
Chinese
Dutch

6

(b)
Win
Loss

5
4
3
2
1
0
In pairs

Guessing accuracy (%)

(a)

Chinese

100

Win
Loss

80
60
40
20
0

Alone

In pairs

Co-presence

Alone

Co-presence

Figure 2: (a) Perceived expressivity, and (b) guessing
accuracy, as a function of co-presence and game outcome.
Error bars represent standard errors.

Discussion
Our findings show that spontaneous nonverbal cues do
indeed depend on the presence of others, as well as on the
event experienced. These, in turn, play a part in how
correctly cues can be interpreted by others. Consistent with
earlier work conducted with Dutch and Pakistani (Shahid,
Krahmer, & Swerts, 2008), we found that children who
played in pairs and children who lost were perceived as
more expressive, compared to those who played alone and
those who won.
To directly assess the relation between guessing accuracy

2666

and expressivity that was conjectured by Shahid et al., we
made a point of creating a separate measure of perceived
expressivity. We found that Dutch children were judged as
more expressive than Chinese children overall, and that the
two groups did not differ in how accurately they were
judged; children’s nationality had no effect on guessing
accuracy. Shahid et al., however, concluded that Pakistani
children were more expressive just because the accuracy
was higher for Pakistani children than Dutch. Results from
our study are in line with previous studies which showed
that self-reported expressivity scores were higher for Dutch
than for Chinese (Matsumoto et al., 2008).
Interestingly enough, results obtained in our perception
study for the two dependent measures were largely in
parallel. When judges gave high ratings of perceived
expressivity, guessing accuracy appeared to be high as well.
On the basis of this mapping, one could speculate a positive
relationship between perceived expressivity and guessing
accuracy. It could well be that judges made correct guesses
when they perceived children to be expressing cues
informative for guessing. However, the neat mapping from
expressivity to accuracy was less discernible for recordings
of children playing alone. As indicated in Figure 2(b), the
lowest and highest accuracy scores (36.79% and 78.36%
respectively) were observed for recordings of children who
played alone; yet, expressivity ratings of these recordings
were less extreme and did not seem to correspond to the
accuracy scores.
Why, then, would expressivity appear to co-occur with
accuracy only in some cases? As an attempt to further
explore the relation between perceived expressivity and
accuracy, we conducted additional analyses of the video
recordings.

Correlational Analyses
Analyses of data obtained from the perception study were
conducted with judge as the unit of observation. Intrigued
by the perplexing relation between expressivity and
guessing accuracy, we decided to restructure the data for
conducting analyses with video recording (i.e., portrayal) as
the unit of observation. Our goal was exploratory in nature;
we would like to delineate the specific conditions under
which expressivity and accuracy were related, and to
understand what factors contributed to this relation.

Method
Data obtained from the perception study were transposed.
Rows and columns were switched such that video recording
was the unit of analysis; relations between ratings and
guesses for the recordings were the variables of interest. The
sample consisted of 130 video recordings (68 portrayals of
Chinese children, 62 portrayals of Dutch children).

Results
Nonparametric correlational analyses between perceived
expressivity and accuracy were carried out, as expressivity
was measured on an ordinal scale. Overall, a significant

positive association was observed between perceived
expressivity and accuracy, Spearman’s ρ = .42, p < .001.
Game outcomes of video recordings that scored higher on
expressivity were also more accurately guessed. Upon
closer inspection, we found that this relationship did not
significantly differ between recordings of Chinese
(Spearman’s ρ = .50, p < .001) and Dutch (Spearman’s ρ =
.32, p = .012) children, z = 1.23, ns. However, the
relationship between expressivity and guessing accuracy
only held for recordings of children playing in pairs
(Spearman’s ρ = .57, p < .001) but not alone (Spearman’s ρ
= .19, ns). It was also observed only for recordings of
children who won (Spearman’s ρ = .80, p < .001) but not of
recordings of children who lost (Spearman’s ρ = -.10, ns).
Next, we computed the analyses separately for recordings
of children playing in pairs and alone. Interestingly, for both
kinds of recordings, expressivity did correlate with guessing
accuracy, but only when the children were winning (in
pairs: Spearman’s ρ = .81, p < .001; alone: Spearman’s ρ =
.65, p < .001; z = 1.27, ns). No significant correlation
between expressivity and accuracy was observed for
recordings of children who lost.

Discussion
Based on the perception study which showed that the
patterning of expressivity ratings seemed to correspond to
the patterning of guessing accuracy in most conditions, we
hypothesised a positive relation between these two
variables. This hypothesis was investigated in a
correlational analysis, assessing correlation between
perceived expressivity and guessing accuracy for our whole
sample and for the different subgroups based on culture
(Chinese versus Dutch), co-presence (playing in pairs versus
playing alone) and game outcome (winning versus losing).
Overall, perceived expressivity had a strong positive
association with accuracy. However, this relationship was
absent for children who lost. We speculate that this could be
explained by the preferred guess judges opted for (i.e., a
bias in their judgment) in case of an absence of cues, the
implications of which are explained below.
The positive correlation between perceived expressivity
and accuracy for children who were winning implies that the
less expressive a child was regarded to be, the more likely
judges were to incorrectly guess that the child was losing. In
other words, an absence of cues was seen as a signal of
losing by judges; Matsumoto and Willingham (2006) also
found that a sizeable number of Olympic athletes who lost a
medal match displayed nothing. We believe that judges also
had this guessing preference when judging children who
were losing. A losing child who was perceived as expressive
(and thus signalling losing) was likely to be correctly judged
as losing. However, a losing child who was perceived as
nonexpressive (i.e., signalling neither winning nor losing)
was also likely to be correctly judged as losing. This
preference by judges explains the absence of a positive
correlation between expressivity and accuracy for children
who were losing.

2667

Why is an absence of cues considered a signal of losing?
Matsumoto and Willingham (2006) believed that athletes
who showed nothing after having lost the match were
controlling their facial displays intentionally, so as to not
signal their disappointment at the defeat. Indeed, athletes
participating in the Olympics are in intense public spotlight.
No matter how upset they might be, they still feel the need
to show good sportsmanship; openly displaying
disappointment or anger may fare less well for their public
image. Following this line of reasoning, it could well be that
people have learned to associate a lack of expression from
others with a negative game outcome. After all, there
appears to be little harm in expressing one’s joy when one
wins a game, whereas more is at stake when expressing
disappointment upon losing.
In our perception test, judges were faced with a forced
choice between winning and losing. In experiments on
judgment of emotion expressions, a neutral response option
is often available (Bänziger, Mortillaro, & Scherer, 2010).
What if a third option indicating uncertainty (such as “I
don't know”) was also available in our study? If
nonexpressivity is generally perceived and accepted as a
reliable signal of losing, children showing no particular
expression would still be regarded as having lost the game.
However, if people were to find nonexpressivity to be of
little informative value, they would probably opt for “I don’t
know” instead of “losing”. Additionally, measures of
confidence could be included. If judges would also indicate
how confident they are with their judgment, relationships
between perceived expressivity, prediction confidence, and
prediction accuracy could be examined. These are issues we
aim to address in future studies.

Conclusion
Results from our perception study and correlational analyses
provide evidence for a relationship between expressivity of
game players and prediction accuracy of game outcome. We
have shown that expressivity and prediction accuracy are
related to a number of factors, namely cultural background,
co-presence, and the game outcome. We have also shown
that high expressivity serves as a valuable cue of game
outcome. Winners who are expressive are often correctly
identified as winning, and losers who are expressive are also
correctly identified as losing. Importantly, low perceived
expressivity is seen as a signal for losing. Winners who are
nonexpressive are likely to be (incorrectly) regarded as
losing, and so are losers who are nonexpressive.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank three anonymous reviewers for their
valuable comments on the first version of this paper. We are
most grateful to all participants who took part in our studies.
We would also like to thank Yan Gu and Suleman Shahid
for their generous help in recruiting and videotaping the
child participants, and Manuela Luitjes for her assistance in
conducting the perception test.

References
Bänziger, T., Mortillaro, M., & Scherer, K. R. (2012).
Introducing the Geneva Multimodal expression corpus for
experimental research on emotion perception. Emotion,
12, 1161-1179.
Bond, M. H., Leung, K., Au, A., Tong, K.-K., de
Carrasquel, S. R., Murakami, F., . . . Lewis, J. R. (2004).
Culture-level dimensions of social axioms and their
correlates across 41 cultures. Journal of Cross-Cultural
Psychology, 35, 548-570.
Ekman, P. (1992). Facial expressions of emotion: New
findings, new questions. Psychological Science, 3, 34-38.
Elfenbein, H. A., & Ambady, N. (2002). On the universality
and cultural specificity of emotion recognition: A metaanalysis. Psychological Bulletin, 128, 205-235.
Elfenbein, H. A., Beaupré, M. G., Levesque, M., & Hess, U.
(2007). Toward a dialect theory: Cultural differences in
the expression and recognition of posed facial
expressions. Emotion, 7, 131-146.
Furley, P, & Schweizer, G. (2014). The expression of
victory and loss: Estimating who’s leading or trailing
from nonverbal cues in sports. Journal of Nonverbal
Behavior, 38, 13-29.
Gelfand, M. J., Raver, J. L., Nishii, L., Leslie, L. M., Lun,
J., Lim, B. C., . . . Yamaguchi, S. (2011). Differences
between tight and loose cultures: A 33-nation study.
Science, 332, 1100-1104.
Jack, R. E, Roberto, C., & Schyns, P. G. (2012). Internal
representations reveal cultural diversity in expectation of
facial expression of emotion. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 141, 19-25.
Hofstede, G. (2001). Culture’s consequences: Comparing
values, behaviors, institutions, and organizations across
nations (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self:
Implications for cognition, emotion, and motivation.
Psychological Review, 98, 224-253.
Matsumoto, D., Olide, A., & Willingham, B. (2009). Is
there an ingroup advantage in recognizing spontaneously
expressed emotions? Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 33,
181-191.
Matsumoto, D. & Willingham, B. (2006). The thrill of
victory and the agony of defeat: Spontaneous expressions
of medal winners of the 2004 Athens Olympic Games.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 568581.
Matsumoto, D., Yoo, S. H., Fontaine, J., Anguas-Wong, A.
H., Arriola, M., Ataca, B., . . . Grossi, E. (2008). Mapping
expressive differences around the world: The relationship
between emotion display rules and individualism versus
collectivism. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 39,
55-74.
Shahid, S., Krahmer, E. J., & Swerts, M. G. J. (2008). Alone
or together: Exploring the effect of physical co-presence
on the emotional expressions of game playing children
across cultures. In P. Markopoulus (Ed.), Fun and games.
Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer.

2668

