UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Joint inferences of belief and desire from facial expressions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4tm729mw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Wu, Yang
Baker, Chris
Tenenbaum, Josh
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Joint inferences of belief and desire from facial expressions
Yang Wu (yangwu@mit.edu), Chris L. Baker (clbaker@mit.edu),
Joshua B. Tenenbaum (jbt@mit.edu), Laura E. Schulz (lschulz@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
Abstract
Theory of mind research has looked at how learners infer an
agent’s unobservable mental states from observable
actions. However, such research has tended to neglect another
observable source of data: the agent’s reactions to events. In
particular, the agent’s facial reactions might provide
important information about her mental states that are
otherwise ambiguous given her actions. Here we present a
Bayesian framework and a behavioral study testing how
adults use an agent’s facial reactions to reason backward
about her beliefs and desires. We found that participants’ joint
inferences of belief and desire from facial expressions were
predicted by a Bayesian model analysis, based on integrating
the likelihoods of the observed facial reactions and the
observed action with their prior over mental states. We argue
that people’s naïve theory of emotional reactions is
structurally and causally intertwined with theory of mind in a
way that allows forward prediction and backward inference.
Keywords: Theory of mind; appraisal theory; emotion; facial
expression; Bayesian inference

Introduction
Human beings are adept at inferring others’ mental states
given sparse observations. One of the mysteries that has
intrigued cognitive scientists for decades is what
representations make this inference so efficient and accurate.
Many studies in theory of mind have focused on how people
infer beliefs and desires from observed actions. For example,
if Sally reaches for a container, what can we infer about her
beliefs and desires? A powerful basis for such inferences is
the assumption of rational action – that agents act to fulfill
their desires as efficiently as possible in accordance with
their beliefs about the world. If we know that Sally believes
there are cookies within the container, we may infer that
Sally wants cookies based on her reaching behavior;
conversely, if we know that Sally wants cookies, it is
plausible that she believes there are cookies in the container.
Studies suggest that even infants can infer the desire
underlying an observed action (when the belief is directly or
indirectly given by the context) or the belief underlying an
action (when the desire is directly or indirectly given) (e.g.
Csibra, Bıró, Koós, & Gergely, 2003; Gergely, Nádasdy,
Csibra, & Bíró, 1995; see Gergely & Csibra, 2003 for a
review). Other work suggests that adults and older children
can jointly infer an agent’s desires and beliefs given a
sequence of actions in which the agent approaches and
retreats from potential goals (Baker, Saxe, & Tenenbaum,
2011; Richardson, Baker, Tenenbaum, & Saxe, 2012).

Often, however, the information available to observers
about agents’ actions, beliefs, and desires may be much
more limited. We may for example arrive in the middle of a
scene, seeing someone we do not know engage in a single
action. For instance, we might see someone look up as
another person approaches. This information is relatively
sparse; inferring the agent’s belief and desire from the
action is nearly impossible, much like trying to solve one
equation with two unknown variables. The observation of a
simple action is not informative enough to discriminate
different mental states.
However, these kinds of actions are typically
accompanied by another kind of observable response: an
emotional reaction. Emotional reactions – often manifest as
facial expressions – intuitively seem to provide rich
evidence about agents’ mental states, arguably simplifying
the theory of mind inference. If, for example, the agent
frowns, we might infer that she knows the person and
doesn’t like him; if she smiles we might infer that she
knows and likes him, and if she has no emotional response,
we will probably infer that she doesn’t know the
approaching person at all.
There is of course a large literature looking at emotion per
se (e.g. Ekman, 1992; Lazarus, 1991; Vuilleumier, 2005).
However, this literature has remained relatively
disconnected from the theory of mind literature. Perhaps the
most relevant work connecting emotion to other cognitive
states comes from appraisal theory, a theory of emotion
suggesting that an individual’s evaluation of events plays a
crucial role in eliciting and differentiating emotions (e.g.,
Ellsworth & Scherer, 2003). Although different appraisal
theories differ in the appraisal dimensions that are at stake
(e.g. desirability, certainty, causal attribution, coping
potential), most of these theories make reference to the
agents’ beliefs and desires (either explicitly or implicitly) as
influences on people’s evaluation of events and thus the
generation of their emotional reactions (e.g. Lazarus, 1991;
Ortony, 1990; Scherer, 1984).
Critically however, appraisal theory is a scientific theory
of how emotions are generated within the individual. It does
not attempt to describe the analogous intuitive theory—how
either the individual herself might think about the causes of
her emotional states, or how observers might use an agents’
emotional reactions to reason backward about the mental
states (the beliefs and desires) that generated them via
appraisal. This is our goal here. We hypothesize that people
have an intuitive theory of emotional responses that is at
least coarsely analogous to appraisal theory, and they can

1796

use this intuitive theory to integrate observations of actions,
outcomes and emotional responses to make rational
inferences about agents’ mental states. We model this
intuitive theory formally and quantitatively evaluate its
predictions with human judgments in four experiments.
We begin by specifying a simple probabilistic generative
model of how an agent’s appraisal of a situation – her belief
and desire about an event – might lead to an emotional
reaction. We then use that to analyze how an observer might
reason backward (in a Bayesian fashion) from the emotional
reaction to the belief and desire that generated it. Our focus
in this paper is on the backward inference from the
emotional reaction to the mental states (belief and desire)
involved in the cognitive appraisal of the event. To preserve
this focus, we restrict our study to emotional reactions
revealed on others’ faces. We use facial expressions because
they are directly observable, because they can change
dynamically over time, and because the understanding of
facial expressions is less constrained by verbal fluency than
understanding emotion words or descriptions.
Additionally, facial expressions have been well-studied in
the literature. Considerable work has looked both at the
relationship between facial expressions and emotions and at
how people can use facial expressions to infer emotional
states (e.g. Calder et al., 2003; Ekman, 1993). Some studies
in this area (Carroll & Russell, 1996; Meeren, van
Heijnsbergen, & de Gelder, 2005) suggest that given
appropriate contextual cues, normal adults are very good at
inferring emotions from facial expressions, but they may
struggle if the facial expression is not well-predicted by the
context. Here we do not look at whether people can infer
emotions from facial expressions and context cues; instead
we study how, combined with theory of mind, facial
reactions can provide information about beliefs and
desires—the abstract causal factors underlying action,
emotion, and facial expressions.

Computational model
We take a Bayesian approach to characterizing the
structure of the knowledge relating emotional reactions to
classical theory of mind representations (beliefs, desires and
actions). Our approach is inspired by research describing
aspects of social reasoning as Bayesian inference over
generative models of the ways in which mental states cause
behavior (Baker, Saxe, & Tenenbaum, 2009; 2011). Fig. 1
expresses our model as a Bayesian network, which specifies
the structure of the causal processes by which beliefs and
desires influence emotional reactions. We focus on
scenarios in which an emotionally charged event occurs that
is the Outcome either of the agent’s Action or some external
cause. The agent’s reactions to the Outcome, and possibly
also the Action, are observed. The forward blue arrows to
the Reaction0 node and the forward red arrows to Reaction1
node capture their causal dependence on the Belief, Desire,
Action, and Outcome nodes. Reaction0 depends on the
agent’s evaluation of the expected outcome (prior to
observing the actual outcome), while Reaction1 depends on

Belief

Desire
Action

Reaction0

Outcome

Reaction1

Figure 1 Graphical model illustrating the relationship between
theory of mind and emotional reactions. Based on different
substructures of the model, we modeled people’s backward
inferences from emotional reactions to belief and desire, varying
whether only Reaction1 is observed (red arrows; Exps. 1,3) or
both Reaction0 and Reaction1 are observed (blue&red arrows;
Exps. 2,4), and whether the agent acts to cause the outcome
(including dotted arrows; Exps. 1,2) or merely observes it
(excluding dotted arrows; Exps. 3,4).

the agent's evaluation of the observed Outcome once it has
occurred. The model also specifies how beliefs, desires, and
actions are generated according to the familiar theory of
mind schema in which Belief and Desire cause Action, and
Belief and Desire themselves are generated from a contextspecific prior.
The informational content in these causal relationships
can be expressed in terms of probability distributions over
each variable in the network, conditioned on its parents.
Given these distributions, the model predicts that backward
inferences about Belief and Desire, given observable
information (e.g., Action, Outcome, and Reactions)
decompose into a product of forward causal dependencies
via Bayes’ rule:
P(Belief, Desire| Action, Outcome, Reaction0, Reaction1) ∝
P(Reaction1| Belief, Desire, Action, Outcome) x
P(Reaction0| Belief, Desire, Action) x
(1)
P(Action| Belief, Desire) x P(Belief, Desire).
To determine whether people’s generative, causal
knowledge supports backward belief and desire inferences
as predicted by our model, across several experiments, we
elicit people’s forward judgments about each component of
the right-hand side of the equation, including the conditional
probabilities P(R1|B,D,A,O), P(R0|B,D,A), and P(A|B,D), and
the prior P(B,D) (abbreviating each variable by its first
letter). We then compare people’s backward inferences
about belief and desire given observable information with
the Bayesian model predictions, computed from the
normalized product of the judged forward distributions,
according to Eq. 1.
We tested this model with four behavioral experiments
varying the context and the amount of information available
to participants. In Exps. 1 and 2, people observed the agent
perform an Action and generate a facial expression based on
the Outcome (Reaction1; see Fig. 1 and Eq. 1). Exp. 2 added
an additional observation of the agent’s reaction prior to
observing the Outcome but after acting (Reaction0), in order
to test whether additional facial information would produce
stronger inferences. In Exps. 3 and 4, the Outcome occurred
due to an external cause, and no Action was performed by
the agent. In these cases, only the agent’s reactions were

1797

informative about her mental states, and we hypothesized
that people’s inferences would reveal more fine-grained
facial processing. As before, we varied whether only
Reaction1 (Exp. 3), or both Reaction1 and Reaction0 (a
reaction to initial news of the possible outcome, prior to
observing it) were observed (Exp. 4). Our Bayesian model
can account for these manipulations across Exps. 1-4 simply
by removing terms from the product in Eq. (1)
corresponding to any variable not present in a given
scenario: when Reaction0 is not observed (Exps. 1,3),
P(R0|B,D,A) drops out of the product; when the agent does
not act to cause the outcome (Exps. 3,4), P(A|B,D) drops out.

Experiment 1
Methods
Scenario We presented a scenario (adapted from Young,
Camprodon, Hauser, Pascual-Leone, & Saxe, 2010) in
which two coworkers are visiting a chemical factory. One
coworker (Grace) finds an unlabeled container of white
powder and puts some in her colleague John’s coffee.
Grace’s desire and belief are unspecified but constrained to
two possibilities—Grace either wants John to die or live,
and either believes the powder is poison or sugar.
Design and stimuli There are eight possible combinations
of Belief, Desire, and Outcome, represented by Conditions
1-8 in Fig. 2(a). For each condition, we generated emotional
reactions in two different ways. First, we used the facial
morphing software Fantamorph 5.4.0 to create a set of
potential facial expressions. We manipulated two attributes
in our morphed pictures (see Fig. 2(a): Reaction1), based on
the assumption that if the outcome was consistent with
Grace’s desire, her expression should be positive (and if
inconsistent, negative), and that if the outcome was
inconsistent with Grace’s belief, her expression should be
surprised (and if consistent, there should be no surprise).
Second, to ensure that any effects we might find were not
due to arbitrary features of the stimuli, we generated a
separate set of stimuli by asking a professional actor, blind
to the experimental motivation, to produce his own facial
reactions given Belief, Desire, Action and Outcome in each
condition. Eight short movie clips were filmed
(http://web.mit.edu/yangwu/www/EmoToM).
Fig. 2(a) categorizes the conditions into two groups:
“congruent” and “incongruent”. In conditions 1-4, Grace’s
action of putting powder into John’s coffee is naively
congruent with the desires and beliefs used to generate her
facial reaction (i.e., expected to achieve her desired outcome,
according to her belief). In Conditions 5-8, the observed
action is incongruent 1 with the desires and beliefs
underlying the facial reaction; thus the observed action and
facial reaction provide conflicting evidence about Grace’s
mental states.
1

Pilot work suggested that people were able to reason about
mental states that were incongruent with observed actions and did
imagine narratives outside of the scenario (e.g., for Die&Sugar,
perhaps Grace was envisioning some other method of homicide;
for Live&Poison, perhaps she was acting under coercion).

Congruent desire and belief Incongruent desire and belief

(a)

Die
Live
Desire
Belief Poison/Crash Sugar/Safe

Die
Live
Sugar/Safe Poison/Crash

Reaction0
Outcome
Reaction1

Die

Live

Die

Live

Die

Live

Die

Live

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

&

Condition & 1

(b)
100
80
60
40
20
0

(c)

ˆ
P(B,D)

100
80
60
40
20
0

(e)
100
80
60
40
20
0

ˆ
P(A|B,D)

(d)
100
80
60
40
20
0

ˆ 0|B,D,A=True)
P(R

1,2 3,4 5,6 7,8
Condition

ˆ 1|B,D,A=True,O)
P(R

1

2

Die & Poison
Live & Sugar
Die & Sugar
Live & Poison

3

4
5
6
7
8
Condition
Figure 2 (a) Design of facial reaction stimuli for Exps. 1-4. The
Beliefs Poison&Sugar refer to the chemical-factory scenario used
in Exps. 1,2 while Crash&Safe refer to the plane-crash scenario
used in Exps. 3,4; Reaction0 was only used in Exps. 2,4. (b)-(e)
Typical pattern of people’s forward judgments (on an unnormalized 0-100 scale) about Prior, and Action, Reaction0 and
Reaction1 likelihoods (results are shown for the chemical-factory
scenario with the picture stimuli).

Participants and procedure All participants in this and
following experiments were recruited on Amazon
Mechanical Turk, with a drop rate of 13.1% (due to
answering the scenario comprehension questions incorrectly
or answering less than 50% of the test questions). The
numbers of participants reported are those included in the
final analyses.
Firstly we measured the prior over mental states given the
scenario, P(B,D), and the likelihood of Grace’s action given
each mental state, P(A|B,D). Fifty-seven participants rated
the prior plausibility of each combination of desire and
belief: (1) Grace wants John to die and believes the powder
is poison (in short, Die&Poison), (2) Grace wants John to
live and believes the powder is sugar (Live&Sugar), (3)
Grace wants John to die and believes the powder is sugar
(Die&Sugar), (4) Grace wants John to live and believes the
powder is poison (Live&Poison). The same participants also
rated the likelihood of Grace’s action given each of the four
possible mental states, P(A|B,D). All these and following
judgments were elicited on a 0-100 scale and thus are not
strictly speaking conditional probabilities. We treat them as
relative estimates of the corresponding probabilities, which
are effectively normalized and converted to probabilities
when processed through the Bayesian analysis of Eq. 1 to
produce the model’s posterior probability predictions.

1798

Die & Poison
Next,
we
determined
the (a)
Experiment 1: rModel,People=0.985
& Sugar
Model
People Live
likelihood of each reaction given
Die & Sugar
1
1
Live & Poison
Belief,
Desire,
Action,
and
0.5
Outcome, P(R1|B,D,A,O). One 0.5
hundred and six participants
0
0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
provided forward predictions in
(b)
Experiment 2: rModel,People=0.950
each condition, judging the
Model
People
plausibility that the given desire,
1
1
belief, action and outcome caused
0.5
0.5
each of all the emotional reactions.
0
0
Half of the participants rated the
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
picture stimuli (n=55); the other
Experiment 3: rModel,People=0.954
Die & Crashed
half rated the movie stimuli (n=51). (c)
Model
People Live & Safe
Lastly, we tested people’s
1
1
Die & Safe
Live & Crashed
backward inferences of Belief and
0.5
0.5
Desire given Action, Outcome and
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Reaction1, P(B,D|A,O,R1). One
hundred and one participants were
Experiment 4: rModel,People=0.953
asked to judge the plausibility of (d)
Model
People
1
1
the four mental states given
Grace’s action, the outcome, and 0.5
0.5
Reaction1 in each of the 8
0
0
conditions. Half of the participants
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
were tested with the picture stimuli
Condition Overall: rModel,People=0.957 Condition
(n=49); the other half were tested
Figure 3 Comparison of model predictions and human backward inferences in Exps. 1-4.
with the movie stimuli (n=52).
These judgments were also
the conditional action likelihood favors Die&Poison or
collected on a 0-100 scale but normalized to sum to 1 over
Live&Sugar, and this biases the backward posterior
all four possible belief-desire combinations, for comparison
inferences toward congruent mental states.
with model posterior probabilities.
People’s backward inferences tested with the picture
Results and discussion
stimuli are reported in Fig. 3(a). They correlated strongly
People’s prior over mental states given the scenario was
with the model predictions (r=0.985), consistent with
relatively uniform (Fig. 2(b)), indicating that the task
Bayesian inference over structured causal knowledge, as
instructions led them to consider all possible mental states.
measured in the forward tasks.
The action likelihood was rated higher for congruent mental
We performed the same analysis on the data from the
states than for incongruent mental states (Fig. 2(c)).
movie stimuli as on the picture stimuli data. For the sake of
For the picture stimuli, Fig. 2(e) arranges participants’
brevity we will not present those results here, because they
conditional likelihood ratings for each value of Reaction1 as
replicated those from picture stimuli in all respects; the
a function of Desire and Belief, given the Outcome from the
correlation between model predictions and participants’
corresponding condition. In each condition, the likelihood
judgments for these stimuli was r=0.908.
of the emotional reaction was rated the highest for the desire
Critically however, for both the pictures and the movies,
from which the reaction was generated. However, in all but
participants saw the agent’s emotional reaction at a single
one condition (Condition 2), the two beliefs received
time point: once Grace knows whether John lives or dies
roughly equal likelihood. For example, people judged that
after drinking the coffee. In Exp. 2, we look at whether
the emotional reaction in Condition 1 was as likely to have
people’s belief inferences are less biased by the action
been produced by Die&Poison as Die&Sugar, suggesting
likelihood if additional emotional reactions are observed.
that Reaction1 was informative about desires, but not beliefs.
Fig. 3(a) shows model predictions of people’s backward
Experiment 2
judgments for the picture stimuli, generated according to Eq.
Methods
1 (omitting the Reaction0 term), using the forward
Scenario Same as Exp. 1.
distributions measured as described above. The model infers
Design and stimuli We modified Exp. 1 by adding
the desire underlying the reaction due to the Reaction1
observations
of Grace’s facial reactions before observing the
likelihood function. However, the model strongly predicts
outcome
(Reaction
0), based on the expected outcome
that people’s belief inferences will be those most congruent
according
to
her
belief.
We assume that Reaction0 and
with the desire inferences—for example Poison in
Reaction
will
be
similar
when the expected and actual
1
Conditions 1,2,5,6, and Sugar in Conditions 3,4,7,8. These
outcomes
match,
but
when
Grace has a false belief (i.e.,
predictions result from conditioning on the observed Action;
there is a mismatch between actual and expected outcomes),

1799

the valence of Reaction0 and Reaction1 will be different. For
simplicity, for each pair of conditions sharing the same
mental state (and expected outcome), we select Reaction0 by
reusing Reaction1 from the condition where the expected
and actual outcomes match (e.g., Reaction0 in Conditions 1
and 2 reuses Reaction1 from Condition 1; see Fig. 2(a)). We
used only the picture stimuli in this and following
experiments because they produced the same results as the
movie stimuli in Exp. 1 and they are simple to manipulate.
Participants and procedure Fifty-eight participants rated
the likelihood of Reaction0, P(R0|B,D,A); 53 participants
made backward inferences about the probability of each
combination of Grace’s Belief and Desire given Action,
Outcome, Reaction0 and Reaction1, P(B,D|A,O,R0,R1).
Results and discussion
The likelihoods of Reaction0 are reported in Fig. 2(d). The
most obvious result is that the two positively valenced
reactions (those used in Conditions 1,2 and 3,4) were rated
higher given congruent than incongruent mental states. The
two negatively valenced reactions (those used in Condition
5,6 and 7,8) showed the opposite pattern. Since the
congruency of the mental states determines whether the
action would satisfy the desire according to the agent’s
belief, these results suggest that participants judged
Reaction0 likelihood based on the match between the
valence and the expected satisfaction of desires.
Model predictions of people’s backward inferences of
belief and desire P(B,D|A,O,R0,R1) were generated
according to Eq. 1 (see Fig. 3(b)), predicting reliable
inference of the desires underlying the reactions. The belief
inferences predicted by the model were no longer dominated
by the action likelihood, and were less certain (Conditions
5,6) or even flipped (Conditions 7,8) compared with Exp. 1
in the conditions where the valence contrast of the two
emotional reactions supported a different belief than that
favored by the likelihood of the observed action.
People’s backward inferences are reported in Fig. 3(b).
Participants’ responses correlated highly with our model
predictions (r=0.950).
In Exps. 1 and 2, backward inferences were lower for
incongruent mental states (Die&Sugar and Live&Poison),
due to the action likelihood. In Exps. 3 and 4 we remove
any effect of the action likelihood by making Grace only an
observer so that more fine-grained reasoning based on
emotional reactions could be revealed. In Exp. 3 we
provided participants with reactions at a single time point
(Reaction1) while in Exp. 4 we provided reactions at two
time points (Reaction0 and Reaction1).

Experiment 3
Methods
Scenario We presented a scenario similar to the one used
on the previous experiments, but instead of taking a tour in a
chemical factory, Grace is watching TV and learns that a
plane has crashed on a route often flown by her coworker
John. Grace either wants John to die or live, and either
believes John is on the crashed plane or a safe plane.

Design and stimuli Same as Exp. 1.
Participants and procedure Given the new scenario, 57
participants judged the prior over mental states P(B,D), and
46 rated the likelihood of Reaction1 given Belief, Desire and
Outcome, P(R1|B,D,O).
Results and discussion
The elicited prior and Reaction1 likelihood were similar to
those from Exp. 1 (r=0.926). Model predictions of people’s
backward inferences of belief and desire, P(B,D|O,R1) were
generated according to Eq. 1 (omitting the Reaction0 and
Action term). The model predicted that the desires would be
consistently inferred due to the Reaction1 likelihood
function. However, the model predicted that people’s belief
inferences, without the action likelihood biasing them
toward congruent mental states, would assign equal
probability to the two possible beliefs (see Fig. 3(c)).
People’s backward inferences of belief and desire correlated
highly with the model predictions (r=0.954, Fig. 3(c)).
These results suggest that when no action was performed
and only reactions to actual outcomes were observed, people
could recover the underlying desires, but were uncertain
about the beliefs, as predicted by our Bayesian model.

Experiment 4
Methods
Scenario Same as Exp. 3.
Design and stimuli Same as Exp. 2.
Participants and procedure Fifty participants rated the
likelihood of Reaction0, P(R0|B,D), in the new context; 57
participants made backward inferences about the probability
of each combination of Grace’s Belief and Desire given
Outcome, Reaction0 and Reaction1, P(B,D|O,R0,R1).
Results and discussion
The likelihood ratings of Reaction0 paralleled those in
Exp. 2 (r=0.950). Model predictions of people’s backward
inferences were generated according to Eq. 1 (omitting the
Action term). The predicted posterior probability of belief
and desire, P(B,D|O,R0,R1) suggested that in all conditions
participants would not only reason backward about desires
but also the beliefs from which the reactions were generated
(see Fig. 3(d)). People’s backward inferences qualitatively
confirmed these predictions, and correlated highly with the
model predictions (r=0.953).
As evident in Fig. 3(d), when participants were given
emotional reactions over two key time points and there was
no bias due to the action likelihood, people were able to
infer each unique combination of beliefs and desires from
the emotional reactions and the context. These responses
were well-predicted by the model.

General discussion
We proposed a Bayesian framework for modeling
people’s joint inference of belief and desire from emotional
reactions. To test our model, we measured people’s forward
judgments about the prior over mental states, the likelihood
of performing an action, and the likelihood of emotional
reactions; we then fed the forward data into our model,

1800

which accurately predicted people’s backward inferences
across multiple experiments and scenarios.
Across four experiments, our model predicted different
patterns of backward inferences (see Fig. 3). In Exp. 1, the
model predicted that people could infer agents’ desires
based on their observed emotional reactions to actual
outcomes, and beliefs based on the observed action. In Exp.
2, given additional reactions at a different time point (after
acting but before knowing the outcome), the model
predicted that people’s belief inferences would be less
biased by the action when contrasting reactions suggested
an alternative belief. In Exps. 3 and 4, when no action was
performed by the agent, the model predicted that desires
could be inferred but that beliefs could only be inferred
when reactions at two time points were available. These
model predictions closely captured people’s backward
inferences across the four experiments (r=0.957).
Our study also probes people’s naïve understanding of the
relationship between mental states and facial expressions.
Our original hypotheses were that the valence dimension of
facial expressions could reveal the state (satisfied or
unsatisfied) of desires, and the surprise dimension could
reveal the veracity (false or true) of initial beliefs. However,
our results support the former but not the latter hypothesis.
A possible explanation could be that since surprise plays a
role in intensifying valence (e.g. if a desirable event is
unexpected, the surprise magnifies the felt happiness;
Ortony, 1990), the combination of surprise and valence is
perceptually obscured with intensely valenced emotions.
Thus, people do not take the perceived surprise as a reliable
cue for an initial false belief. Additionally, surprise may
often be fleeting, hard to catch and easy to hide, perhaps
explaining why people do not infer a true belief from the
absence of a surprised facial expression. Further research is
needed to advance our understanding of the relationship
between expressions of surprise and attributions of belief.
Our study does suggest that observing facial expressions
over multiple time points can be informative about agent’s
belief. The absence of a valence change in the facial
expression between the expected and the actual outcome
suggested a true belief, and the presence of a valence change,
a false belief.
At least in adults, our naïve theory of emotional reactions
appears to be structurally and causally intertwined with
theory of mind in a way that allows forward prediction from
an agent’s beliefs and desires to her facial expressions, and
backward inference from facial expressions to beliefs and
desires. In future research we hope to investigate the ways
in which our ability to infer mental states from emotional
expressions in childhood changes over development.
Although our present model captures the structure of the
causal relationship between beliefs, desires, and emotional
reactions, the functional form is represented only implicitly
in the forward predictions elicited within our experiments.
In ongoing research, we are modeling people’s knowledge
of how emotions arise from beliefs, desires, actions, and
outcomes, and how facial reactions express these emotional

states – intuitive versions of classical problems studied by
psychologists. As a first step, this account accords well with
the scientific appraisal theory of emotions, suggesting that
the appraisal process is shared by both the scientific study of
emotions and people’s intuitive theories.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the Center
for Minds, Brains and Machines (CBMM), funded by NSF
STC award CCF-1231216.

References
Baker, C. L., Saxe, R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009). Action
understanding as inverse planning. Cognition, 113(3), 329-349.
Baker, C. L., Saxe, R. R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2011). Bayesian
theory of mind: Modeling joint belief-desire attribution. In
Proceedings of the thirty-second annual conference of the
cognitive science society (pp. 2469-2474).
Calder, A. J., Keane, J., Manly, T., Sprengelmeyer, R., Scott, S.,
Nimmo-Smith, I., & Young, A. W. (2003). Facial expression
recognition across the adult life span. Neuropsychologia, 41(2),
195-202.
Carroll, J. M., & Russell, J. A. (1996). Do facial expressions signal
specific emotions? Judging emotion from the face in context.
Journal of personality and social psychology, 70(2), 205.
Csibra, G., Bıró, S., Koós, O., & Gergely, G. (2003). One-year-old
infants use teleological representations of actions productively.
Cognitive Science, 27(1), 111-133.
Ekman, P. (1992). An argument for basic emotions. Cognition &
Emotion, 6(3-4), 169-200.
Ekman, P. (1993). Facial expression and emotion. American
Psychologist, 48(4), 384.
Ellsworth, P. C., & Scherer, K. R. (2003). Appraisal processes in
emotion. Handbook of affective sciences, 572, V595.
Gergely, G., & Csibra, G. (2003). Teleological reasoning in
infancy: The naıve theory of rational action. Trends in cognitive
sciences, 7(7), 287-292.
Gergely, G., Nádasdy, Z., Csibra, G., & Bíró, S. (1995). Taking the
intentional stance at 12 months of age. Cognition, 56(2), 165193.
Lazarus, R. S. (1991). Progress on a cognitive-motivationalrelational theory of emotion. American psychologist, 46(8), 819.
Meeren, H. K., van Heijnsbergen, C. C., & de Gelder, B. (2005).
Rapid perceptual integration of facial expression and emotional
body language. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 102(45), 16518-16523.
Ortony, A. (1990). The cognitive structure of emotions. Cambridge
university press.
Richardson, H. L., Baker, C. L., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Saxe, R. R.
(2012). The Development of Joint Belief-Desire Inferences. In
Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 923-928).
Scherer, K. R. (1984). On the nature and function of emotion: A
component process approach.
Vuilleumier, P. (2005). How brains beware: neural mechanisms of
emotional attention. Trends in cognitive sciences, 9(12), 585594.
Young, L., Camprodon, J. A., Hauser, M., Pascual-Leone, A., &
Saxe, R. (2010). Disruption of the right temporoparietal junction
with transcranial magnetic stimulation reduces the role of beliefs
in moral judgments. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 107(15), 6753-6758.

1801

