UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Magical Thinking: Outcome Bias Affects Children's Evaluation of Testimony

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1vv033dq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Oved, Iris
Heyman, Gail
Barner, David

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Magical Thinking:
Outcome Bias Affects Children’s Evaluation of Testimony
Iris Oved
(irisoved@gmail.com)

Gail Heyman
(gheyman@ucsd.edu)

David Barner
(barner@ucsd.edu)

Department of Psychology, 9500 Gilman Drive
San Diego, CA 92093 USA
Abstract
In a series of three experiments we examined how preschool
children assess testimony in relation to the relative desirability of
the outcome for themselves and for the individual providing the
testimony. The first two experiments reveal evidence for an
outcome bias: children are more likely to believe an extraordinary
claim when they have little to lose in doing so (Exp.1), and when
they stand to gain if the claim is true (Exp. 2). The final
experiment (Exp. 3) showed that children are less likely to believe
extraordinary claims when the person making the claim has
ulterior motives (e.g., stands to potentially gain from the child’s
belief). These data show that children’s beliefs acquired from
testimony are subject to outcome bias, and that children are
capable of exercising skepticism when the source of testimony is
likely to have ulterior motives.
Keywords: preschoolers; prediction; supernatural events;
child beliefs; belief acceptance; testimony.

Introduction
Beginning in childhood, much of what humans believe
about the world derives from indirect evidence, in the form
of testimony from other people. In day to day life, we rely
on testimony in order to inform a variety of activities like
navigation, food choice, and the selection of social partners,
where direct evidence is possible but impractical to acquire
first hand. We also use testimony to acquire information that
is very difficult, if not impossible, to learn oneself – like
knowledge of historical events (e.g., the holocaust),
scientific facts (e.g., cell structure), and religious beliefs.
Crucially, not all information that humans receive from
testimony is equally good. In some cases sources may be
poorly informed (e.g., a poorly trained doctor), while in
other cases they may seek to intentionally mislead, perhaps
for their own benefit (e.g., a used car salesman).
Consequently, in order to make effective use of testimony,
humans must learn to assess the credibility of sources, and
to evaluate the information that they provide.
Young children, who have relatively little direct
experience with the world, and relatively weak prior
knowledge against which to assess new information, are
both highly dependent on testimony and highly vulnerable
to misinformation. A growing body of research has
investigated how children assess testimony, focusing on the
strategies that they employ to assess the reliability of
sources (Kushnir & Sobel 2013, Gelman, 2009; Harris,
2007; Heyman, 2008). For example, these studies find that
children as young as 3 to 4 years differentially trust

informants based on factors like their age (Jaswal & Neely,
2006; VanderBorght, & Jaswal, 2009), and their previous
history of accuracy (Birch, Vauthier, & Bloom, 2008;
Corriveau & Harris, 2009; Jaswal & Neely, 2006), and that
they sometimes weigh the testimony over their own direct
perceptual experience (Jaswal, 2010).
There are also other factors that influence how humans
evaluate testimony when forming beliefs. In some cases,
beliefs that are fundamental to how we understand the world
are formed in direct contravention with expert testimony
and despite considerable physical evidence to the contrary
(e.g., climate change, evolution). In these cases many claims
are assessed on the basis of prior convictions, in conformity
with cognitive dissonance – i.e., ignoring evidence because
of the desire to hold mutually consistent beliefs (Festinger,
Riecken, & Schachter, 1956). Also, all else equal, humans
are more likely to endorse beliefs that predict positive
outcomes over beliefs that predict negative ones – a
tendency sometimes referred to as “outcome bias” or the
“valence effect” (Cohen & Wallsten, 1992; Granberg &
Brent, 1983).
In the present study, we investigated how children’s
developing ability to assess testimony is affected by their
own potential to gain – or to lose – if a claim is true. To test
this, we presented children with a situation in which they
heard extraordinary claims not directly supported by past
experiences (i.e., of supernatural abilities) and in which
these abilities had the potential to yield benefits or losses to
the child. Previous studies have explored children’s belief in
a range of supernatural phenomena as a window into their
assessment of testimony, including familiar fictional entities
like Santa Claus and the Easter Bunny, religious entities like
Angels, and also novel supernatural beings. These studies
have investigated differences between children who believe
in such entities and those who don’t (Woolley, Boerger, &
Markman, 2004), the role that physical evidence plays in
belief (Woolley, et al., 2004), and the properties children
ascribe to different beings (Shtulman, 2008). However,
relatively little attention has been given to whether children
are sensitive to the possible outcomes of beliefs – e.g.,
receiving chocolate eggs, or living eternally in heaven –
when assessing their truth. In one past study (Woolley et al.,
2004), children were introduced to a fictional character
called the Candy Witch. They were told that she would visit
them after Halloween to take their candy in exchange for
toys. Results showed not only that children were more likely

2717

to believe in the witch if their candy was indeed traded for a
toy, but also that they were more likely to believe if they
had a preference for toys over candy. Building on this, we
conducted three experiments in which a character named
Morla claimed that she could perform actions on candy or
stickers with her mind. We asked (1) how children’s belief
in this claim was affected by the amount they would gain or
lose if it were true, (2) how degrees of belief differed
according to whether the movement of items was framed as
loss or gain to the child, and (3) whether the source of
testimony stood to gain from the child’s belief in her claims.

Experiment 1
Our first experiment explored whether, when forming
beliefs, children are sensitive of the potential cost to
themselves should the claim be true. Preschoolers played a
game to win 8 candies, and then were required to place
either all 8 of these candies into a covered box, or only 2 of
the 8 (keeping 6). They were then told that a character
named Madame Morla (played by a second experimenter)
claimed that she could eat food just by thinking about it, and
that she would try to eat the candies the child had put in the
box from a second room (visible through a large window).
First, we asked whether children who stood to lose all 8 of
their candies (if Morla was telling the truth) would be less
likely to believe her claim than those who only stood to lose
2 of their candies. Second, we asked whether children’s
degree of belief would increase after seeing Morla attempt
to mentally transfer their candies from the covered box.

Participants
Participants were 32 4- and 5-year-olds (M=5;0, range= 4;0
to 5;11, 18 girls and 14 boys) recruited from the Child Study
Centre Database at the University of Toronto. There were
16 4-year-olds (M=4;4, range =4;1 to 4;10) and 16 5-yearolds (M=5;7 range=5;3 to 5;11).

Procedure
The experiment was carried out in a laboratory at the
University of Toronto in a two-room suite separated by a
wall with a two-way mirror. The child and the experimenter
sat together at a table in one room, with the child facing the
two-way mirror. Parents were seated behind the child to
prevent their reactions from cuing the child. The woman
playing Morla was in a darkened room behind the mirror.
The experimenter began by explaining to the child that
she had met someone special named Madame Morla. The
experimenter told the child, “Madame Morla says she can
eat food by thinking about it. She just thinks about eating
and the food goes right into her stomach. Madame Morla is
here today and we are going to find out if she really can eat
food by thinking about it.” While waiting for Madame
Morla to arrive, children played a game of Simon Says with
the experimenter, until they won 8 pieces of Hershey’s
Kisses candy, with the hope that the children would feel
ownership and attachment to the candy they had just won
(see Kahneman, Knetsch & Thaler, 1991). The experimenter

then said to the child, “Madame Morla must be here by
now” and brought out Madame Morla’s box to inspect. The
box was a standard shoebox (11.5" x 7" x 3.75") covered in
white wrapping paper. Children were randomly assigned to
put 2 of the 8 (Low Cost condition) or all 8 of the 8 (High
Cost condition) candies that they had just won in the special
box for Morla to try to eat. The experimenter explained that
if Morla could really eat just by thinking about it, then they
wouldn’t get their candies back, but that if she couldn't do it,
they would get their candies back because the candies would
still be in the box. Next, she collected their Before Ritual
Belief: “Do you think Madame Morla can eat candy by
thinking about it?” Children were then asked to rate their
belief by pointing to pictures on a scale (from Woolley,
Boerger & Markman, 2004) indicating ‘really sure’, ‘little
sure’, ‘not sure’. Next, the experimenter turned off the lights
making Madame Morla visible in the other room behind the
two-way mirror. The woman playing Morla carried out her
‘ritual’ of pretending to eat the candy by rubbing her
temples as if she was concentrating intensely and then
rubbed her stomach. The lights were then turned back on, so
Morla was no longer visible. We then gathered the
children's After Ritual Belief: “Do you think Madame Morla
ate the candy by thinking about it?”.
Finally, the children were shown the inside of the box
(still full of candy), revealing that Morla could not eat candy
by thinking about it. They were then debriefed and allowed
to keep the candy with the permission of their caregiver.

Results and Discussion
We examined whether children in the High Cost condition
would be less likely to believe in Morla compared to those
in the Low Cost condition. There was not a significant
effect of Cost on Before Ritual Belief, p = .35, but there was
a significant effect on After Ritual Belief χ 2 (1, 32) = 3.14,
p < 0.04. This suggests that children were more likely to
believe in Morla after they saw her ritualized performance
of the act when two candies were at stake than when eight
were at stake (Figure 3). Also, although there was no main
effect of age on belief, age did have a significant effect on
initial belief (χ 2 (1,32) = 3.46, p = 0.06), indicating that 4year olds were marginally more likely than 5-year-olds to
believe prior to observing the ritual.

2718

Figure 1. Belief ratings collapsed across age groups
in the low and high cost conditions before and after
observing the ritual in Experiment 1.

To compute the children’s degree of belief, a composite
score was created that took into account children’s belief
judgments and their certainty ratings (following Woolley,
Boerger, and Markman, 2004). Children who responded
“yes,” when asked if they believed received a score of 4 if
they rated themselves as “not sure,” a score of 5 for “a little
sure,” and 6 for “really sure.” Children who responded “no,”
received a score of 3 if they responded “not sure,” 2 if they
responded “a little sure,” and 1 if they responded “really
sure.” Thus, scores ranged from 1 to 6, with 1 indicating
that the child was really sure that Morla could not eat candy
by thinking about it, and 6 indicating that the child was
really sure that she could. The composite score was only
assessed and computed for the Before Ritual Belief. The
mean score was 3.5 (SD=1.7) for the age groups combined,
4.3 (SD=1.8) for 4-year-olds and 2.8 (SD=1.1) for 5-yearolds. There was a significant difference in the composite
score for 4- and 5-year-olds (t (15)=2.91, p = 0.007).
These findings indicate that while 4-year-olds are
generally more credulous than 5-year-olds prior to
observing a ritualized performance of a magical act,
participants are more likely to show increased belief after
observing such a ritualistic display when the truth of the
claim would result in a lower cost. It is noteworthy that the
ritual had this influence, since the ritual did not provide the
participants with evidence for the truth of the claim. When
the truth of a claim would entail a high cost to the child, 4and 5-year olds seem to ignore such observations.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 provides evidence that young children are
sensitive to the potential cost of an outcome when assessing
claims of supernatural abilities. In Experiment 2 we
investigate this question by making the outcome difference
between conditions more substantial. Specifically, we
investigated whether children are more likely to believe a
claim if it entails a personal gain as opposed to a personal
loss, and provided a behavioral post test to probe the
strength of their conviction. As before, children were
introduced to a novel magical being called Morla. They
were randomly assigned to one of two conditions, where
they either stood to gain stickers (because Morla attempted
to transfer them to the child’s box) or lose stickers (because
Morla attempted to transfer them out of the child’s box). As
before we measured self-reported belief in Morla's claim.
However, after Morla’s effort we also asked children to
choose the box they wished to take. This allowed us to test
whether their initially expressed beliefs were merely wishful
thinking, or reflected what they actually believed to be true.

Participants
Participants were 39 4-year-olds (M = 4;6, range = 4;0 to
5;1) recruited through the Language and Development Lab
at the University of California in San Diego and through
various preschools in the San Diego area.

Procedure
Participants were randomly assigned to one of two
conditions, Loss or Gain. Participants in the Loss condition
risked losing lost stickers (in the event Morla’s claim were
true) whereas participants in the Gain condition stood to
gain. As with Experiment 1, a female experimenter played
Morla, but instead of wearing a costume she dressed in plain
clothes.
In order to manipulate children’s condition while still
making them believe they had made a personal choice, we
used two boxes each of which had two compartments,
unbeknownst to the participants. One of the compartments
in each box contained stickers and one was empty.
Participants were told that one of the boxes contained
stickers and the other was empty, and that they could choose
a box. They were told that if they chose the box with
stickers, they could take the stickers home. When
participants assigned to the Loss condition chose a box, the
experimenter opened the compartment that contained the
stickers and told the participants that they would get to take
these stickers home. When participants who were assigned
to the Gain condition chose a box, the experimenter opened
the empty compartment of the chosen box and told the
participants they would not take any stickers home because
they chose the empty box.
The experimenter then introduced the participants to “a
friend of hers” named Morla and told them, “Morla says if
she thinks really hard about the stickers in this box she can
move them into this box. That means she says that she can
move the stickers without touching them.” To make sure
that loss or gain was salient to the participants they were
explicitly told about the possibility that they would lose or
gain stickers if Morla is really able to move stickers
mentally.
To measure the participants' Before Ritual Belief, they
were asked, “Do you think she can switch what’s inside the
boxes just by thinking about them?” After they had given a
clear answer, participants watched as the woman playing
Morla closed her eyes and appeared to concentrate very hard
for 10 seconds. Participants were then asked the same
question a second time to measure their After Ritual Belief.
Degrees of belief were measured on the same 6-point scale
used in Experiment 1.
After taking these verbal measures, a behavioral measure
was also recorded, in which the experimenter told
participants that they were allowed to choose again which
box they wanted to take home. Before the participants chose
a box, the experimenter asked them memory questions to
ensure the participants remembered which box originally
contained the stickers, and which box they had originally
chosen. Finally, the experimenter revealed the contents of
the boxes with the stickers in their original position. She
explained that Morla was not able to switch the contents
without touching the boxes. All participants were allowed to
keep the stickers.

2719

Results and Discussion
There was an effect of condition on the Before Ritual Belief
self-report measure (χ 2 (1, 39) = 3.14, p = .04, one tailed),
with 75% of participants in the Gain condition and 47% of
participants in the Loss condition expressing belief in
Morla’s claim. The same trend was seen in the After Ritual
Belief self-report measure, though this effect was not
significant (χ 2 (1, 39) = 1.28, p = .12, one- tailed), with 75%
in the Gain condition and 57% in the Loss condition
expressing belief. There was no effect of observing the
ritual on self-reports for either condition.
There was an effect of condition on the behavioral
measure ((χ 2 (1,39) = 5.77, p = .008, one tailed).
Approximately 75% of participants in the Gain condition
and 37% of participants in the Loss condition chose the box
that was the target location of Morla’s magical act,
suggesting belief in the magical ability. The behavioral
measures in each condition were not statistically different
from the self-report measures.
In summary, Experiment 2 found that children are more
likely to believe a person's claim about being able to
perform a magical act when the claim entails a gain to the
child than when it entails a loss. This finding supports the
hypothesis that children have an outcome bias when it
comes to believing surprising claims. Together,
Experiments 1 and 2 suggest a troubling vulnerability for
children, as framing outcomes favorably may permit people
with malicious motives to manipulate children’s beliefs
even when their claims are extraordinary.

Experiment 3
Experiments 1 and 2 demonstrate that young children’s
belief in extraordinary claims differs based on what they
stand to gain or lose if the claim is true. In Experiment 3 we
examine whether young children also consider what the
individual making the claim stands to gain or lose if the
child believes the claim. We did this by comparing an
Explicit Incentive condition in which participants were
explicitly told that Morla would benefit if they accepted her
claim, to a Control condition in which no such incentive
was described. Belief was again assessed through selfreported verbal and behavioral measures.

Participants
Participants were 23 4-year-olds (M = 4;6, range = 4;0 to
4;11, 11 females), recruited through the Language and
Development Lab at the University of California in San
Diego and through various preschools in the San Diego
area.

Procedure
Participants were randomly assigned to one of two
conditions, Control or Explicit Incentive. Those in the
Explicit Incentive condition were informed that Morla stood
to potentially gain from their belief in her claim; the
experimenter disclosed that Morla loves stickers, wants to

get as many stickers as she can, and consistently takes away
children’s stickers to keep them for herself.
The experimenter began by introducing herself and
Morla, and then told the participants that they could try to
win as many stickers as they can. The experimenter then
played Simon Says with the participant three times, so the
child won a total of three stickers. The experimenter then
declared that in the next game, the participant had two
choices: to either keep the stickers he or she won or take a
chance and try to win more stickers. The experimenter then
brought the child’s attention to two boxes on a table. The
participants were told that they can put their stickers in “a
box” (in the Control condition) or in “Morla’s box” (in the
Explicit Incentive condition) in order to try winning more
stickers. The experimenter then told the child that Morla
says that if the child puts his/her stickers in a box then she
will move the stickers and multiply them with her mind.
The child was reminded that if Morla is unable to do this
magical task, then the child would lose all of the stickers,
and that if Morla could perform the magic, then the child
would will a total of 10 stickers. Morla then leaves the room
and the participant is reminded of the two choices.
The first verbal measure was the participant’s response to
the question, “Do you believe she can make the stickers
appear in the other box and turn them into 10?” The
behavioral measure was the child’s decision in response to
the question, “Do you want to put your stickers in one of the
boxes or take your stickers home now?” (in the Explicit
Incentive condition, the child was asked if he or she wants
to put the stickers in Morla’s box or take home the stickers).
If the child chose to take home the stickers, the
experimenter wrapped up the session by asking a series of
questions: “Do you remember which of these boxes is
Morla’s box? Why did you decide to take the stickers
home? Do you think Morla wanted your stickers?”
If the child chose to put the stickers in a box, the stickers
were placed in the box and Morla was called back into the
testing room. The participant then watched as the woman
playing Morla closed her eyes, rubbed her temples, and
appeared to concentrate intensely for 10 seconds. When she
finished, she was thanked and asked to leave the room. The
participant was then asked: “Do you think she moved the
stickers and turned them into 10?” Next they were told,
“You get to pick one box to open and if there’s anything in
there, you get to keep it! Which box do you want to open?”
Lastly, the participants were asked whether they thought
Morla wanted to take their stickers in order to determine if
they were suspicious of Morla’s intentions. Following the
self-report verbal and behavioral measures, the experimenter
debriefed the child and explained that Morla cannot really
move stickers and multiply them. All participants were
allowed to keep the stickers after the experiment.

Results and Discussion
In the Explicit Incentive condition, in which Morla had a
clear motive for deceiving the child (so she could take their
stickers), 33% of the participants chose to take a risk of

2720

putting their stickers in Morla’s box (see Figure 3). In the
Control condition, in which Morla had no motive to deceive
the child, 73% of participants took the risk of putting their
stickers in the box (χ 2(1) = 3.57, p =.03) However, 83% of
participants in the Explicit Incentive condition expressed
belief during the After Ritual Belief report even though
Morla seemed deceptive. This was not significantly
different from the 73% of participants who verbally
expressed belief in Morla’s ability to do magic in the
Control condition, p = .27. Our data also revealed that 100%
of participants in the Control condition had a consistent
behavioral response to their verbal expression of belief after
putting their stickers in the box but only 40% in the Explicit
Incentive condition were consistent.

Figure 2. Verbal and behavioral data from Experiment 3.
Experiment 3 found an overall effect of condition on
the behavioral measure and in comparison of the
consistency between verbal and behavioral measures.
Children who were given explicit information about Morla's
position to gain from their trust were more skeptical in their
behaviors than children who were not given such
information.
There is a potential concern regarding the moral charge
of the situation. It could be argued that since Morla has bad
intentions she is a person that should be generally avoided.
If children are generally uncomfortable with Morla, they
may not want to play with her, and thus not put their
stickers in her box. Indeed, since there was no effect of
condition on verbal report, and only on the behavioral
measure, the behavior may not be indicative of skepticism.
This possibility will be taken into consideration in the
design of future versions of this experiment.

General Discussion
In the present research we investigated how preschool-aged
children evaluate extraordinary claims under conditions in
which they stand to lose or gain as a function of their truth.
Specifically, we examined their willingness to accept a
claim made by a character named Morla that she could
perform actions on candy or stickers using only her mind
(i.e. eat candy or move stickers). Of primary interest was
whether the participants' level of belief was influenced by
the extent to which children might benefit or lose from the
truth of the claim. Also of interest was the children’s ability

to take into consideration information about Morla having
motives for deceptively making her claim.
In Experiment 1 preschoolers were told that Morla could
eat candy just by thinking about it. They were required to
place either all 8 of their 8 candies or 2 of their 8 candies in
a box and then watched Morla try to eat the candies
mentally. Using children's verbal reports, we found that
before children observed Morla attempt to do her magic
about a third of the children believed that she would be
successful. After children observed Morla attempt to do her
magic this percentage increased significantly in the
condition where they stood to lose only 2 candies, but not
when they stood to lose all 8. Thus, children who stood to
lose more from the truth of the claim appear to have ignored
the observed ritual while children who only stood to lose a
little were influenced by the observation. This finding
supports the hypothesis that children have an outcome bias
when forming beliefs.
In Experiment 2 we added a behavioral measure of belief
to the verbal measures, and allowed children to change their
responses at the end of the study, at which point having the
belief could have no possible causal role in determining
which box actually contained stickers. This was done to
probe whether their initial statement of belief was merely
expressing a hope or desire, or whether it instead expressed
a conviction that Morla could in fact move objects mentally.
As before, Morla claimed that she could move stickers just
by thinking about it. In one condition the preschool
participants stood to gain stickers if Morla’s claim was true,
and in another they stood to lose stickers. The verbal
measure revealed that children were significantly more
likely to accept Morla’s claim when they stood to gain
stickers. Further, after Morla’s effort, when children were
given the option to change their response, children in the
gain condition again showed evidence of believing, and
chose the box into which Morla claimed she could move
stickers (effectively choosing the “empty” box). Together
Experiments 1 and 2 suggest that children are highly
vulnerable when it comes to believing claims they want to
be true.
In Experiment 3, we explored whether children become
skeptical of a claim that yields a benefit to them when the
person making the claim stands to gain from the child's
trust. As with Experiment 2, Morla claimed that she could
move stickers just by thinking about it, but this time we
examined the effect of telling participants about a potential
ulterior motive of Morla (i.e. Morla really likes stickers and
tries to steal them). Here we found a condition difference in
participants’ willingness to “bet” on Morla’s claim being
accurate, with only one third of participants taking the risk
in the ulterior motive condition and three fourths doing so in
the control condition in which Morla had no ulterior motive.
These results stood in contrast to their verbal reports of
belief, where participants in both conditions tended to
accept Morla’s claim (see Woolley, 2006 for a discussion of
verbal-behavioral dissociations).

2721

The findings from our first two experiments provide
evidence that children are influenced by the valence of
outcomes when assessing supernatural claims. These
findings suggest that in addition to using rational strategies
to evaluate testimony, they also consider how much they
want the outcome to be true. This suggests that an important
obstacle to teaching children critical thinking may be
children’s reduced motivation to question claims they want
to be true (see Heyman, Fu, & Lee, 2013 for a related
argument).
Results of Experiment 3 provide evidence that just as
preschool children are influenced by how desirable an
outcome is to them, they do take into consideration what
the individual making the claim stands to gain from their
belief. This finding suggests that even young children have
some understanding that people who stand to benefit from
their trust are more deserving of scrutiny.
One limitation of these experiments is that we cannot be
sure that the participants interpreted all of the words in the
questions we asked in the intended way. For example, they
may have interpreted “can” in the Before Ritual Belief
question, “Do you think Madame Morla can eat candy by
thinking about it?”, as though we were asking the child if it
is alright with her if Morla eats them. Future versions of the
experiment will eliminate this interpretation by instead
asking whether Morla is “able” to do the act.
New versions of the experiments are presently being
conducted with more consistency across the experiments so
that general lessons can be more clearly drawn. Firstly,
there will always be a behavioral measure of choosing a box
after the magical act was supposed to have taken place. To
avoid politeness concerns, in future versions the
experimenter will always be the one reporting a claim made
by the magical being, and the questions about belief will
always be asked when the magical being in absent. In all
three experiments, there will be the same magical act on the
same objects (moving stickers from one box to another), and
all of the experiments will involve the same boxes, each
with two compartments. Initial ownership over the stickers
will always be established in the same way (by correctly
guessing which box has stickers inside).

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Pierina Cheung for data analysis and to Dorothy
Colinco and Grace Kim for help with data collection.

Corriveau, K., & Harris, P. L. (2009). Choosing your
informant: Weighing familiarity and past accuracy.
Developmental Science, 12, 426–437.
Festinger, L., Riecken, H. & Schachter, S. (1956). When
Prophecy Fails.
University of Minnesota Press.
Minneapolis.
Gelman, S. A. (2009). Learning from others: Children’s
construction of concepts. Annual Review of Psychology,
60, 115–140.
Granberg, D. & Brent, E. (1983). When prophesy bends: the
preference-expectation link in U.S. presidential elections
1952-1980. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology. 45. 477-491.
Harris, P. L. (2007). Trust. Developmental Science, 10, 135–
138.Heyman, G. D. (2008). Children’s critical thinking
when learning from others. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 17, 344–347.
Heyman, G. D., Fu, G., & Lee, K. (2013). Selective
skepticism: American and chinese children's reasoning
about evaluative academic feedback. Developmental
Psychology, 49(3), 543-553.
Jaswal, V. K. (2010). Believing what you’re told: Young
children’s trust in unexpected testimony about the
physical world. Cognitive Psychology, 61(3), 248-272.
Jaswal, V. K., & Neely, L. A. (2006). Adults don’t always
know best: Preschoolers use past reliability over age when
learning new words. Psychological Science, 17, 757–758.
Shtulman, A. (2008). Variation in the anthropomorphization
of supernatural beings and its implications for cognitive
theories of religion. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 34, 1123-1138.
Sobel, D. & Kushnir, T. (2013). Knowledge Matters: How
Children Evaluate the Reliability of Testimony as a
Process of Rational Inference. Psychological Review.
VanderBorght, M., & Jaswal, V. K. (2009). Who knows
best? preschoolers sometimes prefer child informants over
adult informants. Infant and Child Development, 18(1),
61-71.
Woolley, J. D. (2006). Verbal-behavioral dissociations in
development. Child Development, 77(6), 1539-1553.
Woolley, J. D., Boerger, E. A., & Markman, A. B. (2004).
A visit from the candy witch: Factors influencing young
children’s belief in a novel fantastical being.
Developmental Science, 7, 456-468.

References
Birch, S. A. J., Vauthier, S. A., & Bloom, P. (2008). Threeand four-year- olds spontaneously use others’ past
performance to guide their learning. Cognition, 107,
1018–1034.
Cohen, G. & Wallsten T.S. (1992). The effect of constant
outcome value on judgments and decision making given
linguistic probabilities. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making. 5. 53-72.

2722

