UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Making sense of the abstract uses of the prepositions in and on

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2hx2371r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Jamrozik, Anja
Gentner, Dedre

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Making sense of the abstract uses of the prepositions in and on
Anja Jamrozik (a.jamrozik@u.northwestern.edu)
Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)

Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA
Abstract
Prepositions name spatial relationships (e.g., book on a table),
but also abstract, non-spatial relationships (e.g., Jordan is on a
roll)—raising the question of how the abstract uses relate to
the concrete spatial uses. The two most frequently extended
prepositions are in and on, and there has been no consensus
about what aspects of spatial meaning they retain when used
abstractly. We propose that what is preserved is the relative
degree of control between the located object (the figure) and
the reference object (the ground). Building on previous work
showing that this aspect of meaning can distinguish
conventional abstract uses of in and on (Jamrozik & Gentner,
2011), we found that it is also extended to the comprehension
and production of novel abstract uses. We discuss the
application of the findings to second language instruction.
Keywords: prepositions; metaphor; spatial language; abstract
language; semantics.

Introduction
Prepositions are used to name relationships
between entities. Although we think of
prepositions as naming spatial relationships (e.g.,
The cup is on the table), they also name abstract
relationships, such as the relationship between a
person and a state of mind (Mary is in a frenzy).
These abstract uses are common, making up
roughly 40% of preposition occurrences (Steen,
Dorst, Herrmann, Kaal, Krennmayr, & Pasma,
2010). Understanding how these abstract uses
arise, and how they relate to the concrete spatial
senses of the terms, is important for theories of
semantic structure and language change, for
computational theories of language processing,
and for applications such as machine translation
and second language learning. For all these
reasons, accounting for the abstract uses of
prepositions has been an important endeavor.
There have been some key advances in
understanding abstract extensions of prepositions.
For example, metaphoric extensions of the
preposition over have been explored within the
conceptual metaphor framework (Brugman &
Lakoff, 1988; Lakoff & Johnson, 1980).
However, a significant gap in this body of

knowledge is that there is no consensus account
for the abstract uses of in and on— the most
frequently extended prepositions in English
(Cameron, 2003). In previous work (Jamrozik &
Gentner, 2011) we proposed and tested such an
account. The basic idea of our continuum of
control account is that in and on differ in the
distribution of control within the figure-ground
relationship1. When used to name spatial
relationships, on tends to convey relatively greater
figure control of the relationship (e.g., a fly on the
plate), and in tends to convey relatively greater
ground control of the relationship (e.g., a fly in a
hand). In prior work, we found that this
distinction is extended to abstract uses: that is,
abstract uses of on convey greater figure control
than abstract uses of in.
Here we ask whether the continuum of control
account extends to novel abstract uses of in and
on. In Experiment 1, we ask whether this account
applies to the comprehension of novel abstract
uses (e.g., in a frive), improving on a prior study.
In Experiment 2, we turn to production: we ask
whether the continuum of control account predicts
the production of novel abstract uses.
We first review accounts of spatial uses of in
and on, and show that figure-ground control is
important for these uses. We then describe our
continuum of control account of abstract in and on
use and present our studies.
Importance of relative control for spatial uses
of prepositions
Early accounts of spatial uses of in and on (e.g.,
Bennett, 1975; Herskovits, 1986; Leech, 1969;
Miller & Johnson-Laird, 1976) focused on the
1

Following Talmy (1983), we use the terms figure and ground to
describe the participants in the relationship named by a preposition
(e.g., a figure is in a ground).

2411

geometry of spatial relationships. Broadly, these
accounts proposed that in names relationships that
involve inclusion of the figure by the ground, and
that on names relationships that involve contact
between the figure and ground. However, more
recent accounts (e.g., Coventry & Garrod, 2004;
Garrod, Ferrier, & Campbell, 1999; Garrod &
Sanford, 1989; Talmy, 1983) have stressed the
importance of functional relations, which concern
the current or possible interaction between a
figure and ground.
Garrod and Sanford (1989) proposed the
functional relations of containment and support
for in and on, respectively. Based on their idea
that both containment and support involve some
degree of control of the figure by the ground, they
named them control relations. More recent
accounts have also highlighted the importance of
control relations for uses of in and on (e.g.,
Coventry, Carmichael, & Garrod, 1994; Coventry
& Garrod, 2004; Feist & Gentner, 1998, 2003;
Garrod, Ferrier, & Campbell, 1999), but have
differed slightly in the way that they characterize
these relations. For example, Garrod and Sanford
(1989) and Coventry (e.g., Coventry, Carmichael,
& Garrod, 1994; Coventry & Garrod, 2004)
proposed that both in and on involve greater
ground than figure control, and that in involves
greater ground control than does on. Feist and
Gentner (2003) likewise proposed that in involves
greater ground than figure control, but suggested
that on involves a degree of figure control.
Empirical research has provided evidence that
both in and on involve a degree of ground control
(e.g., Coventry, Carmichael, & Garrod, 1994;
Garrod, Ferrier, & Campbell, 1999), but also that
on involves some degree of figure control (e.g.,
Feist & Gentner, 1998, 2003). These findings can
be integrated if control is conceptualized as a
continuum that ranges from full ground control of
the figure-ground relationship to full figure
control of the relationship. Under this continuum
of control view, on is closer to the figure control
end of the continuum than in.
The continuum of control account of abstract
uses of in and on
Our hypothesis is that abstract uses of in and on

preserve the continuum of control dimension from
the concrete spatial uses. Specifically, we propose
that abstract uses of in involve relatively greater
ground control and abstract uses of on involve
relatively greater figure control. Although the
continuum of control we propose is novel, the
hypothesis is related to an early proposal by
Garrod and Sanford (1989) that the functional
control relations of containment and support
might also be extended to non-spatial uses of in
and on, respectively. This idea is also related to
work on control in metaphorical extensions of
other prepositions, such as over (e.g., Jane has a
strange power over him) (e.g., Brugman &
Lakoff, 1988; Tyler & Evans, 2001).
In earlier work (Jamrozik & Gentner, 2011), we
found support for the continuum of control
account. We found that, like spatial uses,
conventional abstract uses of on (e.g., on a roll)
convey greater figure control than uses of in (e.g.,
in a hurry). The same pattern also held for
matched figure-ground pairs (e.g., a figure in time
vs. on time). We also found preliminary evidence
that the relative control aspect of preposition
meaning may also extend to new abstract uses.
In the present studies, we ask whether the
continuum of control account extends to novel
abstract uses. In Experiment 1, we test the
comprehension of novel abstract uses of in and
on. In Experiment 2, we test the production of
novel uses.
Experiment 1
In earlier work (Jamrozik & Gentner, 2011), we
provided evidence that the idea of relative control
extends to the comprehension of novel in and on
uses. We asked participants to interpret novel uses
of in and on, such as ‘Kate is on a cipe’, and
found that figures on a novel ground were
construed as having more control than figures in a
novel ground. This could come about in two
ways. One possibility is that participants interpret
novel uses through local analogical extensions
from particular conventional uses, as has been
proposed for novel extensions of verb
constructions (e.g., Bybee & Eddington, 2006). If
this is the case, people should be more likely to

2412

correctly interpret a novel use the more similar it
is to a frequent familiar phrase.
Another possibility is that people have
abstracted and stored a general relative-control
schema (perhaps through repeated analogical
extensions over varied uses of in and on). In this
case, people should be able to apply the relative
control schema regardless of whether the novel
uses are similar to frequent in and on phrases.
To test these two possibilities, in Experiment 1,
we altered the novel phrases to render them less
similar to common in and on phrases. We used
phrases that included an adjective between the
preposition and the ground (e.g., on an extreme
grore), which are much less frequent2, and should
be less likely to remind participants of common
familiar phrases.
If relative control is invoked in the
comprehension of novel abstract uses of in and
on, then participants should interpret novel figures
on ground as having greater control than figures
in ground, despite there being minimal similarity
to conventional phrases.

form ‘in/on a(n) modifier novel word’ (e.g., It’s
the third day of the mixing process and Kate is in
an absolute cipe). To disguise the purpose of the
task, these passages were interspersed with eight
filler passages, whose key sentence included a
novel word playing the role of a verb, adjective,
or noun, and also included a modifier before the
novel word. The key design factor (withinsubjects) was whether in or on was used in the
figure description. All order and assignment
factors were counterbalanced.
An example passage is presented below. The
participants’ task was to interpret the final
sentence describing the figure.
Context: Kate is a perfume maker who is very
skilled at discovering new scent combinations.
She works for a perfume company that creates
unusual fragrances made from rare plant oils.
Kate creates new scents for the company. The
process of mixing the plant oils is very
complicated. Kate has good days, when the scents
she creates are subtle and intricate, and bad days,
when her nose seems insensitive and the scents
she creates are boring.
Transcript from Tracy (a worker in the perfume
company):“It’s the third day of the mixing process
and Kate is in an absolute cipe.”
What does the transcript sentence mean?

Method

Thirty-two participants received either
partial course credit or payment for participation
in this experiment. All were native speakers of
English.
Participants

Participants were presented
with 16 passages that involved activities that
could be described with a novel “niche”
vocabulary (adapted from those used by Jamrozik
and Gentner, 2011). Each situation was described
with an introductory paragraph that was followed
by a target sentence describing a figure from the
situation that included a novel word (a plausible
non-word from the ARC Nonword Database;
Rastle, Harrington, & Coltheart, 2002). There
were eight experimental passages, whose key
sentence included in or on paired with a novel
ground. Each ground was modified by an
adjective to form prepositional phrases of the
Materials and Procedure

2

Based on data from COCA (Davies, 2008), the frequency of
prepositional phrases made up of in or on, a determiner, and a noun
phrase is eight times higher than that of phrases made up of in or
on, a determiner, an adjective, and a noun phrase.

Participants’ interpretations consisting of one
word or uninterpretable fragments were excluded
from coding (9 out of 256 interpretations were
excluded). Two trained undergraduate research
assistants, who were blind to condition, coded
participants’ interpretations for figure control. For
each of the eight test items, the coders read the
context descriptions (but not the transcript
sentences containing the prepositions) and rated
participants’ interpretations for figure control on a
scale from 1 (extremely low control of the
situation by the person) to 5 (extremely high
control of the situation by the person).
Results

As predicted, figures described as on a novel
ground were construed as having more control
than figures in a novel ground. For example,
participants who read that Kate, a perfumer, was

2413

on a novel ground gave interpretations such as:
“Kate has done a wonderful job mixing perfumes
for the past three days,” and “Kate is
concentrating on a new concoction- a big
breakthrough in scent,” but participants who read
that Kate was in a novel ground gave
interpretations such as: “Kate is struggling with
her own scents and the ability to create good new
ones”.
Participants’ interpretations of figures on
ground were rated as having more control (M =
3.34, SD = .63) than their interpretations of
figures in a ground (M = 2.48, SD = .52), t(31) =
5.29, p < .001, d = 1.47, with inter-rater reliability
of r = .779, p < .001. Item analyses revealed a
similar pattern of results. Interpretations of figure
on ground sentences were rated as having greater
figure control (M = 3.38, SD = .56) than
interpretations of the corresponding figure in
ground sentences (M = 2.49, SD = .36), t(7) =
4.28, p = .004, d = 1.88.
Discussion

Extending earlier findings (Jamrozik & Gentner,
2011), we found that figures on a novel ground
were construed as having more control than
figures in a novel ground even when modifiers
were added between the prepositions and the
novel grounds. Thus it is unlikely that novel uses
of in and on (e.g., in or on a cipe) are understood
through their similarity to particular frequent
conventional uses. Instead, this pattern suggests
that the relative control aspect of preposition
meaning are broadly extended to the
comprehension of novel uses, regardless of local
similarity to existing uses—consistent with there
being a general abstract schema.
Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we ask whether relative control
is extended to the production of novel abstract
uses of in and on. We ask whether people can use
information about relative control in a novel
figure-ground relationship to infer whether the
relationship should be labeled in or on. To do this,
we used novel words to name a situation (adapted
from Experiment 1),

We gave participants descriptions of figures
who were portrayed as having either low or high
control of a situation (adapted from Experiment
1), and asked them to choose whether the figure
would be best described as in or on a novel
ground. We predicted that participants would
describe high-control figures as on a ground and
low-control figures as in a ground.
Method

Thirty-two participants received either
course credit or payment for participation in this
experiment. All were native speakers of English.
Participants

The experimental materials
were adapted from Experiment 1. For the eight
test passages, each description of the situation was
followed by a description of a figure that either
had high or low control within that situation
(high-control figure vs. low-control figure).
Following this, a sentence described the figure as
‘_____ a novel ground’, and participants were
given a choice to fill in the blank with either in or
on. An example of a high control and a low
control figure description are presented below.
Materials and Procedure

[The introductory context paragraph was the
same as in Experiment 1]
[High control figure] Yesterday Kate was very
well rested and her sense of smell was very
sharp. She was easily discriminating between
the different smells and picking up the subtle
scents in the plant oils.
[Low control figure] Yesterday Kate had a cold
and she was sniffling throughout the day. She
was having trouble discriminating between the
different smells and picking up the subtle scents
in the plant oils.
Kate was _______ a tem during the mixing
process.
What word is missing? Circle one: in on

As in earlier studies, we included eight filler
passages involving other word choices to disguise
the purpose of the task. As in the test passages,
the final sentence of the filler passages contained
a novel word and a blank for participants to fill in
with one of two words. Some of the filler
sentences involved a choice between antonyms

2414

(e.g., It was clear that Adam’s new technique was
very [inventive/commonplace] because he made
plastic that could be strinched), but some did not.
The key design factor (within-subjects) was
whether figures were portrayed as having high or
low control of the situation. Again, all order and
assignment factors were counterbalanced.
Results

As predicted, participants were more likely to
describe high-control figures as on a ground and
low-control figures as in a ground. A mixedeffects logistic model, which included random
intercepts for participants and items, revealed a
significant influence of figure description on
preposition choice (β = 1.49, SE = .28, p < .001).
Low control figures were 4.45 times more likely
to be described as in a ground than high control
figures.
Discussion

In Experiment 2, we tested whether relative
control is carried forward to the production of
novel abstract uses of in and on. We found that, as
predicted, the extent to which a figure controls a
situation influences whether the figure is labeled
in or on a novel ground.
General Discussion
Building on our previous findings that relative
control of the figure-ground relationship can
distinguish conventional abstract uses of in and on
(Jamrozik & Gentner, 2011), we asked whether
this aspect of preposition meaning is extended to
the comprehension and production of novel
abstract uses. Our evidence indicates that the
answer is yes. In Experiment 1, we found that the
preposition used to connect a figure and a novel
ground influenced participants’ interpretations of
control within the figure-ground relationship:
figures described as on a novel ground were
construed as having more control than figures in a
novel ground. The novel figure-ground phrases
included an adjective between the preposition and
the ground (e.g., on an absolute cipe). Since
prepositional phrases of this form are relatively
rare, it is unlikely that people simply drew on
similar conventional phrases to interpret the novel

uses. In Experiment 2, we asked whether the
continuum of control principle is likewise
extended to the production of novel abstract uses.
Specifically, given a novel word used in a rather
novel situation, we asked whether people’s
choices of which preposition to use would be
influenced by relative control. Indeed, we found
that figures described as having high control were
more likely to be described as on a novel ground
than figures described as having low control.
Together, the current findings support the idea
that a continuum of control distinguishes abstract
uses of in and on, and that this aspect of meaning
can be extended to novel uses.
Application to second-language instruction

Learning the meanings of English prepositions
is very challenging for non-native speakers (e.g.,
Ijaz, 1986). Students are often told that abstract
uses of prepositions are idiomatic and are advised
to memorize them on a case-by-case basis (e.g.,
Yates, 1999). Teacher feedback can also reinforce
the idea that there are no patterns governing
abstract uses of prepositions. Students’ errors in
the use of abstract prepositions are often
considered ‘untreatable’ by educators, since they
cannot be overcome by imparting a set of rules
(Ferris, 2003). Instead, teachers often simply
supply the correct form (Ferris, 2006), reinforcing
the idea that case-by-case memorization is
required.
Our findings suggest, on the contrary, that there
is a general pattern underlying the diverse abstract
uses of the prepositions. This offers hope that
there may be an alternative way for students
learning English to master uses of in and on. We
are currently exploring whether teaching secondlanguage learners the idea of continuum of control
can help them acquire a productive understanding
of these prepositions in diverse contexts
(Tenbrink, Jamrozik, & Gentner, 2012).
Conclusions

Accounting for the many different uses of the
prepositions in and on has been a challenge for
accounts of language use. Our findings suggest
that there is an important regularity governing
their interpretations—the continuum of control

2415

principle. This aspect of preposition meaning
appears to be productively mapped from spatial
contexts to abstract contexts. Like spatial uses of
these prepositions, abstract uses of in involve
relatively greater ground control of the figureground relationship, and uses of on involve
relatively greater figure control of the
relationship. This distinction holds for
conventional abstract uses of in and on, and it is
also carried forward to the comprehension and
production of novel abstract uses.
Acknowledgments
The research described here was conducted in the
Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center (SILC)
at Northwestern University, a Center funded by
NSF grant SBE-0541957. We thank Brian Han,
Joseph Wilson, and Samantha Thomas for their
help in coding the data and the Cognition and
Language Lab.
References
Bennett, D. C. (1975). Spatial and temporal uses of English
prepositions. London: Longman Group.
Brugman, C. & Lakoff, G. (1988). Cognitive topology and
lexical networks. In S. Small, G. Cottrell, & M.
Tanenhaus (Eds.), Lexical ambiguity resolution (pp. 477507). Palo Alto, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Bybee, J. & Eddington, D. (2006). A usage-based approach
to Spanish verbs of becoming. Language, 82(2), 323-355.
Cameron, L. (2003). Metaphor in educational discourse.
New York, NY: Continuum.
Coventry, K.R., Carmichael, R. & Garrod, S.C. (1994).
Spatial prepositions, object-specific function and task
requirements. Journal of Semantics, 11, 289–309.
Coventry, K. R., & Garrod, S. C. (2004). Saying, seeing,
and acting: The psychological semantics of spatial
prepositions. New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Davies, M. (2008-). The Corpus of Contemporary American
English (COCA): 425 million words, 1990-present.
Available online at http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/.
Feist, M. I., & Gentner, D. (1998). On plates, bowls, and
dishes: Factors in the use of English IN and ON. In M. A.
Gernsbacher & S. J. Derry (Eds.), Proceedings of the
Twentieth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 345-349). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum
Feist, M. I., & Gentner, D. (2003). Factors involved in the
use of in and on. In R. Alterman & D. Kirsh (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twenty-fifth Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 390-395). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.

Ferris, D. R. (2003). Response to student writing:
Implications for second language students. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Ferris, D. (2006). Does error feedback help student writers?
New evidence on the short- and long-term effects of
written error correction. In K. Hyland & F. Hyland (Eds.),
Feedback in second language writing: Contexts and
issues (pp. 81–104). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Garrod, S., Ferrier, G., & Campbell, S. (1999). In and on:
Investigating the functional geometry of spatial
prepositions. Cognition, 72, 167-189.
Garrod, S. C., & Sanford, A. J. (1989). Discourse models as
interfaces between language and the spatial world.
Journal of Semantics, 6, 147-160.
Herskovits, A. (1986). Language and spatial cognition: An
interdisciplinary study of the prepositions in English.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Ijaz, I. (1986). Linguistic and cognitive determinants of
lexical acquisition in a second language. Language
Learning, 36(4), 401–451.
Jamrozik, A. & Gentner, D. (2011). Prepositions retain
aspects of spatial meaning in abstract contexts. In L.
Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 1590-1594). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Leech, G. N. (1969). Towards a Semantic Description of
English. London, UK: Longmans.
Miller, G. A., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1976). Language and
Perception. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Rastle, K., Harrington, J., & Coltheart, M. (2002). 358,534
nonwords: The ARC Nonword Database. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55A, 1339-1362.
Steen, G.J., Dorst, A.G., Herrmann, J.B., Kaal, A.A.,
Krennmayr, T., & Pasma, T. (2010). A method for
linguistic metaphor identification: From MIP to MIPVU.
Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Talmy, L. (1983). How language structures space. In H.
Pick & L. Acredolo (Eds.), Spatial orientation: Theory,
research, and application. New York, NY: Plenum Press.
Tenbrink, T., Jamrozik, A. & Gentner, D. (2012, August).
Spatial meaning and abstract contexts in English as a
second language. Poster presented at the 2012 Embodied
& Situated Language Processing Workshop, Newcastle
Upon Tyne, UK.
Tyler, A. & Evans, V. (2001). Reconsidering prepositional
polysemy networks: The case of over. Language, 77(4),
724-765.
Yates, J. (1999). The ins and outs of prepostions: A
guidebook for ESL students. New York, NY: Barron's
Educational Series.

2416

