UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mentally Accounting for Restricted Funds: How Gift Cards Change Preferences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1553q9kx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Reinholtz, Nicholas
Bartels, Daniel
Parker, Jeffrey

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mentally Accounting for Restricted Funds:
How Gift Cards Change Preferences
Nicholas Reinholtz (nsr2116@columbia.edu)
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, New York, NY 10027 USA

Daniel M. Bartels (bartels@uchicago.edu)
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave., Chicago, IL 60637 USA

Jeffrey R. Parker (jeffparker@gsu.edu)
Georgia State University
PO Box 3991, Atlanta, GA 30302 USA
depends on how well it represents the active goals of the
different accounts. Mental accounts, in this framework,
share properties with goal-derived categories (Barsalou,
1995). Transactions more typical or representative of an
account’s goal are more strongly associated with that
account and thus more likely to be booked there.
In this paper, we further explore the categorical nature of
mental accounts and test a novel prediction that comes
from this framework: Initiating a mental account should
change relative preferences for items that could be booked
to the mental account based on how well the items
represent the account’s goal. While Brendl et al. (1998)
propose a relatively passive process (how purchases are
booked), our hypothesis involves a more active process
regarding which purchases are made.
We test this prediction in situations where people decide
what to buy with gift cards. Our hypothesis is that gift
cards, which contain restricted funds, prompt their owner to
form a spending goal (i.e., “Spend the value of this gift card
at a permissible location”) around which a mental account
is initiated. Once the account is formed, preference should
increase for purchases more representative this spending
goal, as they will be more naturally booked to the open
account.

Abstract
Gift cards are a common form of restricted funds: The
balance of a closed-loop (brand-specific) gift card can only
be redeemed at the originating brand. We propose that this
restriction compels the recipient of a gift card to consider
how the funds can be spent, which leads to the formation of a
brand-specific spending goal and corresponding mental
account. Because purchases more representative of the
retailer will be more strongly associated with the spending
goal and mental account, we predict that individuals
shopping with retailer-specific gift cards have an increased
preference for products typical of the retailer.
Keywords: mental accounting; categorization; preference
construction; consumer behavior

Introduction
The concept of mental accounting was introduced by
Thaler (1985) to help explain human behavior inconsistent
with basic microeconomic tenants. For example, people
who have recently spent $50 on a basketball game are less
willing to purchase tickets to a theater show than people
who have recently received a $50 parking ticket (Heath &
Soll, 1996). In microeconomics, both of these situations
should be (roughly) equivalent: The decision maker is $50
poorer and has an opportunity to make another purchase.
However, mental accounting suggests that the two losses
come from different psychological accounts and are thus
treated differently. For those who spent $50 on a basketball
game, they are now considering spending even more
money from their already depleted “entertainment account”
on theater tickets. For those who received a $50 parking
ticket, their “entertainment account” is presumably still
fully funded.
A question that arises in mental accounting is which
purchases get booked to which accounts. To address this
question, Brendl, Markman, and Higgins (1998) proposed
that mental accounts are formed around active goals. The
account to which an individual transaction is booked

Gift Cards, Brands, and Purchases
Gift cards are big business: In 2011, 80% of holiday
shoppers reported planning to give a gift card over the
holiday season, and approximately $28 billion was spent on
gift cards in the United States (National Retail Foundation,
2011). The retail and service industries have long
distinguished between closed-loop and open-use gift cards
(Horne, 2007). Closed-loop (hereafter, brand-specific) gift
cards are issued by, and are only redeemable for purchases
from, a specific retailer. For example, Levi’s offers gift
cards that can only be redeemed at Levi’s stores. In
contrast, open-use gift cards are issued by an independent
party and are redeemable for purchases from nearly any

2835

purchase-typicality for different items of men’s clothing in
Macy’s. For prospective purchases from Macy’s, we expect
shirts, khakis, and jeans to be considered fairly equivalent
in terms of typicality. In contrast, an ad-hoc category
formed around the goal of purchasing from a focused brand
will likely contain only one or two highly brand-typical
purchases as well as other less brand-typical purchases. For
example, we expect jeans to be strongly associated with
Levi’s, but khakis and shirts to be only weakly associated.
The impact of using a brand-specific gift card should vary
depending on the relative focus, or generality, of a given
brand. Purchases made from focused brands should be
significantly more affected by the type of gift card used
than purchases made from general brands.
To better understand the underlying logic, imagine two
brands that sell four different products (e.g., jeans,
sweaters, shirts, and jackets). Further, assume that Brand A
is a general brand (i.e., people equally associate purchasing
all four product types with this brand), while Brand B is a
focused brand (i.e., people strongly associate purchasing
one product type, say jeans, with this brand). Shoppers
deciding what to purchase from Brand A should be largely
unaffected by the type of gift card they use. All four
potential purchases are equally associated with Brand A
and, ceteris paribus, the likelihood of each potential
purchase being chosen is fairly equal. Paying with an openuse gift card should not affect these likelihoods. More
importantly, paying with a brand-specific gift should not
affect these likelihoods either as the four potential
purchases all equally satisfy the brand-specific purchase
goal.
On the other hand, a shopper deciding what to purchase
from Brand B should be significantly affected by the type
of gift card they use. Again, only one potential purchase
(e.g., jeans) is strongly associated with the brand. Thus,
when shopping with an open-use gift card, the person may
be a bit more likely to choose jeans. However, when
shopping with a brand-specific gift card, the person should
have an active brand-specific purchase goal. Moreover, this
goal will be best satisfied by purchasing jeans, the most
strongly associated product. Consequently, the person
should be significantly more likely to choose the jeans (vs.
a sweater, shirt, or jacket) from the focused Brand B when
paying with a brand-specific (vs. open-use) gift card.
Critically, the impact of gift-card type on individual
choice is not merely a function of how typical a given
purchase is of the brand, but also whether this purchase is
more or less typical than each of the other potential
purchases contained in the shopper’s consideration set. If
all potential purchases are of equal typicality gift card-type
should not impact the choice. However, if one or two
potential purchases are significantly more typical than the
others, gift-card type is likely to impact the choice.

retailer. American Express (AMEX) has become a popular
source of open-use gift cards that can be used at any retailer
that accepts regular AMEX cards.
In our research, we compare purchases intentions for
people shopping with brand-specific gift cards to those
shopping with open-use gift cards. Since a brand-specific
gift card will impose a brand-specific purchase goal (and
mental account) the person will likely evaluate potential
purchases in terms of the degree to which they will satisfy
this goal, effectively constructing an ad-hoc category of
potential purchases. The process of generating ad-hoc
categories is almost automatic and is hypothesized to be an
important component of planning. Like natural categories,
exemplars in ad-hoc categories tend to vary in their
strength of association with the category (Barsalou, 1995).
For example, if a person forms an ad-hoc category of
places to go on vacation, Paris is likely to be more strongly
associated with this category than, say, Green Bay.
Following this logic, we expect that the extent to which any
potential purchase satisfies the brand-specific purchase goal
is a function of the degree to which that type of purchase is
typical of (associated with) the brand. Thus, we expect that
purchasing jeans at Levi’s (jeans are highly associated with
Levi’s) will better fulfill the goal of purchase from Levi’s
than purchasing a less associated product, such as a
sweater.
In contrast, although a person who receives an AMEX
(open-use) gift card may choose to shop at Levi’s, she will
not do so with the imposed goal to purchase from Levi’s.
Instead, she may have a more general goal to purchase
clothing. Likewise, this person will not have a mental
account set up specifically for purchases from Levi’s.
Consequently, the degree to which a potential purchase is
associated with the retailer should have significantly less of
an effect on purchases made with open-use gift cards.
In sum, we predict that receiving a brand-specific gift
card initiates a goal to purchase from that brand and funds a
corresponding mental account. The active purchasing goal
leads to the creation of an ad-hoc category of purchases that
satisfy this goal to various degrees. The better a given item
satisfies the brand-specific purchase goal, the more likely
the item is to be chosen. Thus, our reasoning suggests that
the likelihood of making purchases that are highly typical
of (strongly associated with) the brand will be significantly
higher when a person is paying with a brand-specific,
versus open-use, gift card.

Brand-Purchase Associations
Brands vary in their focus/breadth. Whereas some brands
are strongly associated with a variety of purchases (e.g.,
department stores), others are strongly associated with only
a few, perhaps only one, type of purchase (e.g., specialty or
boutique shops). We refer to these as general and focused
brands, respectively. An ad-hoc category formed around the
goal of purchasing from a general brand will be comprised
mostly of products with similar brand typicality. For
example, we would not expect large differences in

Purchase-Typicality Gradients
In order to quantify brand breadth as defined above, we
introduce the concept of a typicality gradient. We propose

2836

sell jeans, sweaters, jackets, khakis, belts, and t-shirts. We
recruited 69 participants to rate all possible purchases (e.g.,
jeans from Levi’s) on three typicality dimensions: typicality
of purchase, frequency of purchase, and exemplify of
purchase. Participants responded to the questions, one at a
time, in blocks consisting of all six products for a single
brand (shown on the same screen) for a single question.
The order of the individual questions and question blocks
were randomized across participants. To screen for
attention, we computed a Cronbach’s alpha for each
participant’s responses across question types and removed
participants whose scores were lower outliers (alphas more
than 1.5 × IQR below the first quartile). We dropped
responses from seven respondents (median alpha = 0.89, all
alphas > 0.65). To compute a typicality index, we averaged
the responses for each product-brand pair for each person
and then averaged these scores across the sample. The
purchase-typicality structure for these well-known brands
was very consistent across people, supporting previous
arguments that brands function as categories (Joiner, 2007).
From this study, we identified several brand pairs with
significantly different purchase typicality gradients across a
subset of their products. These brand pairs and their
corresponding purchase-typicality gradients are reported in
Table 1 and the results for Levi’s and J.Crew are illustrated
in Figure 1.

that a reasonable measure of brand breadth is the slope of
the typicality ratings of potential purchases to the brand.
That is, if the potential purchases are organized in
decreasing (or increasing) order of brand-typicality, the
greater [lesser] the slope of those ratings, the more focused
[general] the brand is, for our purposes.
As a concrete example, consider Figure 1, which presents
a portion of the results from the current Study 1. As can be
seen, the slope of typicality ratings is substantially steeper
for Levi’s than for J.Crew, indicating that Levi’s is the more
focused of the two brands. Jeans are very strongly
associated with the Levi’s brand and sweaters are
associated to a much lesser degree. Accordingly, we would
predict a brand-specific gift card to increase the relative
purchase share of jeans and to decrease the relative
purchase share of other items from Levi’s. However, we
would predict little difference in purchase shares for the
products in J.Crew regardless of gift-card type.

Rated Typicality

8

Brand

7

JCrew
Levis

Table 1: Purchase typicality gradients for different brand
pairs (standard errors shown in parentheses).

6

Levi’s
J.Crew

5
Jeans

Jackets

Khakis

Sweaters

Product Type
WholeFds
Safeway

Figure 1: Typicality by product category for Levi’s and
J.Crew. Error bars show standard errors.

Fossil
Target

In what follows, we present five studies that find support
for these predictions. Study 1 is an extensive norming
study, designed to measure the perceived typicality for
existing products from different brands. Study 2 finds that
purchase typicality is more predictive of purchase
intentions for participants presented a brand-specific gift
card when shopping at a focused (vs. general) brand. Study
3 tests the generalizability of the results by using different
brands from those in Study 2 and finds that these patterns
are strongest amongst those most familiar with the brands.
Studies 4 and 5 find that the observed effects can occur
even when participants encounter a novel brand (e.g., a
restaurant) if appropriate typicality cues are available to the
participant (e.g., calling a menu item “world famous” vs.
“today’s special”).

Jeans
8.91 (.04)
7.01 (.23)
Organic
Veg.
8.41 (.19)
5.88 (.29)
Watches
8.10 (.19)
6.61 (.22)

Jackets
7.06 (.22)
7.49 (.15)
Vitamins
7.12 (.22)
6.20 (.22)
Sunglss.
6.36 (.28)
7.21 (.20)

Khakis
6.01 (.30)
7.91 (.17)
FreshBaked
6.98 (.25)
6.98 (.25)
Belts
5.51 (.27)
7.23 (.18)

Sweaters
4.97 (.23)
8.10 (.16)
Frozen
Food
6.51 (.28)
8.18 (.17)
Shoes
4.10 (.25)
7.40 (.19)

Study 2
In this study, we examine whether possessing a brandspecific (vs. open-use) gift card will influence purchase
intentions. We focus on a single brand pair: Levi’s (a
focused brand) and J.Crew (a general brand). Our
prediction is that possessing a brand-specific Levi’s gift
card (vs. an open-use gift card) should increase preferences
for jeans relative to other available products. At J.Crew,
however, possessing a brand-specific (versus an open-use)
gift card should have little effect on preferences.

Method
We conducted a 2 (store: Levi’s vs. J.Crew) × 2 (gift card:
brand-specific vs. open-use) between subjects experiment
with 339 participants. Participants were first asked to:
“Imagine you were just given a $200 [gift card to Levi’s /
gift card to J.Crew / AMEX gift card] by someone close to

Study 1
To determine the typicality of different purchases, we
identified six pairs of brands which share an overlapping
selection of products. For example, Levi’s and J.Crew both

2837

those shopping with an AMEX gift card. Indeed, this is
what we find (βbrand-specific = 13.6 vs. βopen-use = 8.9, t(165) =
3.18, p < .01). In contrast, we neither expected nor found a
difference on the test statistic for those in the broad brand
(J.Crew) condition (βbrand-specific = -20.2 vs. βopen-use = -18.1,
t(170) = .41, p > .68).

you. Please take a minute to write a few sentences about
this person and why he or she would have given you this
gift card.”
Participants then responded to the main dependent
measure: “Now imagine you find yourself a few days later
at [Levi’s / J.Crew]. How likely would you be to buy
something from each of the following product categories?
Please allocate 100 points based on how likely you would
be to buy from each category (0 = very unlikely, 100 = very
likely).” Participants then allocated the 100 points, using a
constant sum allocation, across four product categories:
jeans, jackets, khakis, and sweaters.

Study 3
Whereas Study 2 used a within-subject measure of relative
purchase likelihood (i.e., a constant sum tradeoff), Study 3
uses a between-subject measure of purchase intentions.
Further, Study 3 expands the number of brand-pairs under
examination to three and examines the moderating role of
brand familiarity. A store-branded gift card should only
lead to an increase in preference for brand-typical products
when one is familiar with the brand.

Results
As a preliminary test of our predictions, we conducted a
MANOVA analysis on the purchase intentions for both
retailers, with gift-card type as the independent measure.
The type of gift card significantly affected the distribution
of purchase intentions for those in the narrow brand
(Levi’s) condition (F(3,163) = 3.49, p < .02), but not in the
broad brand (J.Crew) condition (F(3,168) = 1.33, p > .26).
The distributions of purchase intentions are shown in
Figure 2.

Method
We conducted a 2 (gift card: brand-specific vs. open-use) ×
2 (brand: A vs. B) × 2 (product: more typical of brand A vs.
more typical of brand B) × 3 (brand pair replicates:
Levi’s/J.Crew, Fossil/Target, Whole Foods/Safeway)
between-subjects design with a within-subject replication
(N = 331). Participants completed the same gift-card
manipulation as in Study 2. Following the manipulation,
participants were instructed: “Now imagine you find
yourself a few days later at [Store Name]. How likely
would you be to buy [Product Type]?” Participants then
rated their likelihood of purchasing the target product on a
9-point scale anchored at “Very Unlikely” and “Very
Likely.” Each participant completed the procedure twice,
once with an open-use gift card and once with a brandspecific gift card (order was randomized and replicates
came from different brand pairs). Participants then
indicated how familiar they were with each brand on a 1-7
scale (anchored at “not at all familiar” and “very familiar”).

60
50
Levis

30
20

Card

10

Branded
60

AMEX

50
JCrew

Purchase Likelihood

40

40
30
20

Results

10

To determine whether the within-subject replications
influenced purchase intentions, we conducted a four-way
ANCOVA with gift-card type, product typicality, brand
familiarity, and response order as independent variables.
This analysis revealed no significant effects of response
order or its interactions (all Fs < 1) so we collapsed across
this factor for the remaining analysis.
A three-way ANCOVA on the remaining variables
revealed a significant three-way interaction between giftcard type, product typicality, and brand familiarity
(F(1,654) = 4.34, p < .04). The effect of owning a storebranded gift card was different for those with high- and
low-brand familiarity. The same interaction we observed in
Study 2 occurs for people with high (median or above)
brand familiarity (F(1,422) = 8.26, p < .01). These people
tend to increase their preference for high-typicality
products when shopping with a brand-specific (versus
AMEX) gift card. However, for those with below-median

Jeans Jackets Khakis Sweaters

Product Type

Figure 2: Purchase intentions by condition. Error bars show
standard errors.
We also created a test statistic for each participant by
regressing the participant’s purchase intentions obtained
from this study onto the average purchase-typicality ratings
obtained in in Study 1. The slope of this within-participant
regression served as our between-participant test statistic.
This test statistic indicates the extent to which the average
purchase-typicality scores (from Study 1) predict the
individual participants’ purchase intentions. A higher value
on the test-statistic (i.e., a more positive slope) shows that
the participant had a stronger inclination toward highly
typical products. Thus, for the narrow brand, Levi’s, we
should expect larger values on the test statistic for
participants shopping with a brand-specific gift card than

2838

familiarity, the interaction between gift-card type and
product typicality disappears (F(1,232) < 1). Instead, we
observe a marginally significant main effect of owning a
store-branded gift card (F(1, 232) = 3.10, p < .08),
suggesting that possessing a store-branded gift card will
increase the likelihood of purchasing any product from the
target store—not just the ones that are highly typical. This
makes sense: If a person is not familiar with a given brand,
she is also likely to be unfamiliar with the typicality of
purchases from that brand. Additionally, it is doubtful that a
person would spend an open-use gift card on an unknown
brand, which would explain the uniform increase in
purchase intentions observed in the brand-specific gift-card
condition.

Results
To compare the rankings of the target menu items between
conditions, we created a test statistic by subtracting each
participant’s ranking of the “world famous” item from her
ranking of the “today’s special” item. Higher values on this
test statistic indicate a stronger preference for the “world
famous” item (e.g., if a participant rates the “world
famous” item first and the “today’s special” item third, the
test statistic for this participant would be 3 – 1 = 2).
Because this test statistic is not distributed normally (there
can be no zero value), we compared the two conditions
using a Wilcoxon test. As predicted, this test revealed that
participants in the restaurant-branded gift-card condition
had a stronger relative preference for the “world famous”
(vs. “today’s special”) item (M = .41) compared to those in
the open-use condition (M = -.21; W(119) = 1391, p =
.035).

Study 4
An important question is raised by the results of Study 3 is
whether brand-specific gift cards influence preferences
only when the person is familiar with the brand. Our
predictions turn on the person’s ability to evaluate potential
purchases in terms of their typicality to the brand, rather
than on how familiar the person is with the brand. Studies 4
and 5 examine how environmental cues allow people
unfamiliar with the brand to infer the relative typicality of
potential purchases. For instance, if a person is visiting a
new restaurant and sees one item described as “world
famous,” she is likely to infer that this item is frequently
purchased at the restaurant. Moreover, if she is making her
purchase with a brand-specific gift card, this “world
famous” option should be more representative of her newly
created, restaurant-specific mental account, increasingly the
likelihood she will choose this dish.

Study 5
Study 5 also tests whether people will use environmental
cues to infer the typicality of potential purchases from an
unknown brand when shopping with a brand-specific gift
card. In contrast to Study 4, this study was first person
(participants imagined themselves in the scenario) and used
naturally occurring brand-product associations to test our
hypothesis. Specifically participants were asked to imagine
that they were at a German beer hall and were deciding
what dish they would order for their meal. One of these
dishes (bratwurst) was expected to be significantly more
associated with German beer halls than the others.
Accordingly, we predicted that those participants told they
were shopping with a brand-specific gift card would
indicate a greater likelihood of choosing this dish than
those shopping with an open-use gift card.

Method
One hundred twenty-six participants were recruited to
participate in a larger battery of online studies. Seven
participants were dropped for failing an attention check
question before the target study. Participants read a scenario
in which a person (“Dave”) was visiting a new city and was
going to eat dinner at a restaurant he had not previously
visited. Participants were told that Dave would be paying
for dinner with a gift card his friend had recently given him
for his birthday. The type of gift card varied between
participants: restaurant-branded versus an AMEX gift card.
All participants were then shown a menu for the restaurant
and asked to rank the five items on the menu in terms of
how likely Dave would be to purchase each. One item on
this menu was labeled “world famous” and a second was
labeled “today’s special” (the items associated with these
labels were counterbalanced between participants). Our
prediction was that participants with a brand-specific (vs.
AMEX) gift card would be more influenced by the “world
famous” versus “today’s special” purchase-typicality cue
and thus be more likely to purchase the “world famous”
than the “today’s special” item.

Method
One hundred sixty-one participants were recruited to
participate in a larger battery of online studies. Six
participants were dropped for failing an attention check
question related to this study. All participants were asked to
imagine that a friend had suggested they try a local German
beer hall and that this friend had given them a gift card.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of three gift
card conditions: (i) brand-specific, (ii) open-use (AMEX),
or (iii) open-use with a brand-specific business card. The
latter condition, which was designed to control for priming
effects, presented participants with both the AMEX gift
card and a business card for the beer hall that was virtually
identical in appearance to the gift card in the brand-specific
condition. Participants were asked to indicate on 1 to 9
scales how likely they would be to purchase each of four
dishes: (i) a chicken sandwich with fries, (ii) a hamburger
with fries, (iii) a bratwurst with fries, and (iv) nachos
(chicken or vegetarian). We predicted that participants in
the brand-specific gift card condition would indicate a
greater likelihood of purchasing the bratwurst relative to

2839

Markman, & Higgins, 1998). We also find that—for the
brands that we test, anyway—brand categories, or the
associations between products and brands, tend to be
represented similarly across people: There is considerable
agreement between people on the typicality of different
purchases. Also, the fact that purchases made with brandspecific gift cards were appreciably affected by the “world
famous” versus “today’s special” labels in Studies 4 and 5
offer preliminary insight into how brand categories are
formed—people readily drew inferences about purchase
typicality even from these relatively sparse cues. Moreover,
these purchase typicalities can have a predictable influence
on purchase intentions in some situations. Specifically,
highly typical items are more likely to be purchased when a
person is shopping with a brand-specific gift card, and thus
has an active goal to purchase from the given brand. These
results point to some of the potentially profound behavioral
and economic implications of understanding how people
construct and use mental representations of products,
purchases, and brands.

those in the two open-use conditions. As this was not a
constant sum task and, therefore, tradeoffs were not forced,
we did not predict differences across gift-card conditions in
the likelihood of ordering any of the other three dishes.

Results
As expected, no significant differences were found across
gift-card conditions in the likelihood of ordering any of the
three non-bratwurst dishes (Fs ≤ 1.86, ps ≥ .15, controlling
for age and gender in this and subsequent ANOVAs). In
contrast, a significant effect was found for the bratwurst
dish (F(1,150) = 4.82, p < .001), with participants in the
brand-specific condition being significantly more likely to
order the bratwurst (M = 5.83) than those in either the
open-use (M = 4.68; F(1,150) = 5.30, p < .03) or the openuse, business card (M = 4.30; F(1,150) = 8.81, p < .004)
conditions. Thus, natural brand-product correlations
allowed the participants to infer the relative typicality of the
products, resulting in brand-specific gift cards once more
influencing preferences.

Acknowledgements

General Discussion

We thank Charlene Chen, Don Lehmann, Oleg Urminsky,
George Wu and his lab group, and members of hocag for
their valuable comments and feedback.

In line with common intuition, we find that some brands
are strongly associated with purchases from one or a few
product categories (“focused brands”), while other brands
have a more uniform purchase association profile (“general
brands”). For focused brands, we found that people indicate
a higher preference for items perceived to be typical when
shopping with a brand-specific gift card. We propose that
receiving a brand-specific gift card initiates a purchasing
goal which is better satisfied by purchasing products more
strongly associated with the brand. The results of Studies 2
and 3, which use well-known brands, are consistent with
this proposed process. Studies 4 and 5 found that brandspecific gift cards also influence purchases from unfamiliar
brands when purchase typicality can be inferred from
external cues.
This research has both practical and theoretical
implications. On the practical side, it is important for
retailers to understand how people shopping with gift cards
may have different purchase motivations than people
shopping with other funds. This research suggests that if
retailers can predict when people will be shopping with gift
cards, they may be able to tailor their product offerings
accordingly. For example, if a person is shopping at Levi’s
with a gift card, or at a time of year when gift cards are
more commonly used (e.g., right after the holidays), the
retailer might steer this person to the store’s signature line
of jeans or toward clothing in which the branding is more
prominent. Also, our findings may imply that highermargin, high-typicality goods might sell better at times
when gift card redemption is higher.
These studies also examined implications derived from
theorizing about ad hoc categories (Barsalou, 1995) and
mental accounting (Henderson & Peterson, 1992). In
particular, the current studies help extend the goalrepresentativeness view of mental accounting (Brendl,

References
Barsalou, L. W. (1995). Deriving categories to achieve
goals. Goal Directed Learning. MIT Press, Cambridge
MA, 121-176.
Brendl, C. M., Markman, A. B., & Higgins, E. T. (1989),
Mental accounting as self-regulation: Representativeness
to
goal-derived
categories.
Zeitschrift
für
Sozialpsychologie, 29, 89-104.
Cheema, A. & Soman D. (2006). Malleable mental
accounting: The effect of flexibility on the justification of
attractive spending and consumption decisions. Journal
of Consumer Psychology, 16(1), 33-44.
Heath, C., & Soll, J. B. (1996). Mental budgeting and
consumer decisions. Journal of Consumer Research,
23(1), 40-52.
Henderson, P. & Peterson, R. (1992). Mental accounting
and categorization. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 51, 92-117.
Horne, D. R. (2007). Gift cards: Disclosure one step
removed. Journal of Consumer Affairs, 41(2), 341-350.
Joiner, C. (2007). Brands as categories: Graded structure
and its determinants. Advances in Consumer Research,
34, 500.
National Retail Federation (2011). Eight in ten holiday
shoppers plan to give gift cards this holiday season,
according to NRF. Retrieved December 10, 2011 from
http://www.nrf.com/.
Thaler, R. H. (1985). Mental accounting and consumer
choice. Marketing Science, 4(3), 199-214.

2840

