UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Metaphoric Iconicity in Signed and Spoken Languages

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0r65g5r0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Yap, Defu
Staum Casasanto, Laura
Casasanto, Daniel

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Metaphoric Iconicity in Signed and Spoken Languages
Defu Yap
(yapd@uchicago.edu)

Laura Staum Casasanto
(lcasasanto@uchicago.edu)

Daniel Casasanto
(casasanto@uchicago.edu)

Department of Psychology, University of Chicago
5848 S. University Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637 USA
Abstract

Metaphoric iconicity in gestures

Since Saussure, the idea that the forms of words are arbitrarily
related to their meanings has been widely accepted. Yet, implicit
metaphorical mappings may provide opportunities for iconicity
throughout the lexicon. We hypothesized that vertical spatial
metaphors for emotional valence are manifested in language
through space in signed languages and through the spatialized
dimension of pitch in spoken languages. In Experiment 1, we
analyzed the directions of the hand motions constituting words in
three signed languages, and related them to the valence of their
English translation equivalents. The vertical direction of signs
predicted their valences. On average, signs with upward
movements were the most positive in valence, and signs with
downward movements the most negative. Signs with non-vertical
movements were intermediate in valence. Experiment 2 extended
this type of analysis to a tonal language, Mandarin Chinese. The
pitch contours of Chinese words predicted the valence of their
English translation equivalents. These results demonstrate a
previously unrecognized source of non-arbitrariness in
language, revealing that implicit space-valence metaphors are
encoded in the forms of words in both signed and spoken
languages.
Keywords: Metaphoric iconicity; Conceptual metaphor;
Valence

Introduction
Since Saussure (1959), the idea that words’ forms are
arbitrarily related to their meanings has been widely
accepted. According to Saussure, the meaning of “tree” is
unmotivated by the letters a-r-b-r-e in French, since in
principle it can be represented by any other letters in other
languages, such as t-r-e-e in English.
The documented exceptions to arbitrariness tend to fall
into a narrow range of categories, such as ideophones (e.g.,
Bang! and tinkle sound like their referents; Nuckolls,	  2004),
phonaesthemes (e.g., words having to do with noses like
snout and sniffle tend to start with the sound /sn/; Bergen,
2004), the bouba-kiki phenomenon (Maurer et al., 2006) and
iconic signs in signed languages (e.g., the sign for two in
American Sign Language is two extended fingers). These
kinds of iconic relationships rely on concrete qualities of the
referent being echoed in the form of the word, so only
certain meanings are eligible to participate in them. 	  
Beyond these special exceptions, are form-meaning
relationships in languages truly arbitrary? If not, what are
the sources of non-arbitrariness in language? Are there
constraints that influence form-meaning relationships
systematically throughout our lexicons? 	  

Iconic form-meaning relationships are common in the
gestures we produce when we speak (McNeill, 1992). Iconic
gestures depict some concrete aspect of the referents of the
words they accompany (e.g., raising the hand to indicate
that a rocket went higher). In a special class of iconics
called metaphoric gestures (McNeill, 1992), concrete
objects or relationships are depicted with the hands in order
to represent some aspect of an abstract idea (e.g., raising the
hand to indicate that a students’ grades went “higher”;
Cienki, 1998; Sweetser, 1998).
In metaphoric gestures, abstract ideas that we can never
see or touch can nevertheless be represented with the hands
via conceptual metaphor (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980). People
often talk about abstract, non-spatial entities using spatial
words (e.g., a long time, a high price, or a close friendship).
Beyond talking in linguistic metaphors, there is a growing
body of evidence suggesting that people also think in mental
metaphors (Casasanto & Bottini, 2013, for review): implicit
associations between non-linguistic representations in
abstract target domains and relatively concrete source
domains like space, force, and motion (Lakoff & Johnson,
1980). Although target domains like time are nearly
impossible to depict gesturally, per se, their source domains
can often be depicted: A long time can be indicated by a
long-distance sweep of the hand; a distant time can be
represented by gesturing toward a far-away point in space
(see Cienki & Müller, 2008, for numerous examples of
metaphorical gestures).

Metaphoric iconicity in languages
Although the evidence for metaphoric iconicity in gestures
is strong, this type of iconicity is generally assumed not to
extend to language. Even signed languages, which share a
modality with hand gestures and therefore have the potential
to express spatial iconicity, have been characterized as
exhibiting largely arbitrary form-meaning mappings, in part
for historical reasons having to do with establishing
American Sign Language (ASL) as a full-fledged language,
and not a simple system of pantomimes (Klima & Bellugi,
1979). Taub (2001) noted that signed languages’ potential
for iconicity is expanded by their ability to depict aspects of
metaphoric source domains in sign, as in gesture. She and
others have shown metaphoric iconicity in a number of ASL
signs (see also Emmorey, 2001). In a multiple-choice test,
non-signers were able to match the meanings of some
metaphoric signs in ASL to their English glosses (O’Brien,
1999).

1808

Taub (2001) reviewed a set of signs motivated by the
metaphor Good is Up / Bad is Down, which spatializes
emotional valence on a vertical continuum, and is evident in
many spoken languages (e.g., feeling on top of the world or
down in the dumps (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980). Taub (2001)
describes several signs related to the notion of improvement
or deterioration that make use of vertical motions to express
positive or negative valence, consistent with the mental
metaphor Good is Up.
We propose that rather than being a set of isolated cases,
the examples of metaphoric iconicity in signed languages
that have been described to date are only the tip of the
iceberg. Metaphors for ubiquitous qualities such as positive
and negative emotional valence may generate iconic
relationships throughout the lexicon, making true
arbitrariness of the sign vanishingly rare. In the domain of
valence, ASL provides some metaphor-congruent examples:
the sign for “bad” moves downward and the sign for
“happy” moves upwards. However, there are also some
signs that show the reverse mapping. For instance, the sign
for “good” moves downward, and the sign for “insult”
moves upward: it is not possible to infer from hand-picked
examples like these whether spatial direction is correlated
with the valence of words in the ASL lexicon, in general.
Spoken languages could also encode space-valence
mappings in the forms of words. Since pitch is
metaphorically mapped onto a vertical spatial continuum in
many languages and cultures (Dolscheid, Shayan, Majid &
Casasanto, 2013), including in Mandarin Chinese, lexical
tones in Mandarin could also be a source of metaphoric
iconicity. Indeed, even though signed languages have more
iconic form-meaning mappings than spoken languages,
examples of metaphoric iconicity can be observed in the
lexical tones of Mandarin. For instance, 能 (capable; néng)
is a positive word and 恨 (hate; hèn) is a negative word, and
they have a rising and falling tone, respectively. Like in
ASL, there are also exceptions, such as 仇 (hatred; chóu), a
negative word with a rising tone, and 爱 (love; ài) a positive
word with a falling tone.
Because it is possible to find some examples that support
our proposal and others that contradict it, we designed a
quantitative study of corpora of signed languages
(Experiment 1) and of Mandarin (Experiment 2) to
determine whether there is any widespread systematic
metaphoric iconicity in these languages. We hypothesized
that vertical spatial metaphors for valence should be
manifested in language through space in signed languages
and through the spatialized dimension of pitch in spoken
languages. We predicted that, on average, signs with upward
“lexical movements” (Brentari & Padden, 2001) and
Mandarin words with rising pitch contours should be the
most positive in valence, consistent with the spatial
metaphor Good is Up. By contrast, downward movements
and pitch contours should be the most negative in valence
(Bad is Down). Sign movements and pitch contours that do
not move upward or downward should be intermediate in
valence, on average. Valence ratings were taken from a

corpus of English words (Badley & Lang, 1999) that
included some expressly evaluative words like “improve,”
but a great majority of non-evaluative words that range in
valence from the strongly positive (e.g., leader, admired,
adorable) to the strongly negative (e.g., blackmail, derelict,
evil). These words have no spatial meanings, and do not
need to be used in metaphorical constructions to convey
positive or negative valence.

Experiment 1a: Space and valence in ASL
Method
Materials We searched an online ASL dictionary
(http://www.handspeak.com) for all 1034 of the words in
the ANEW corpus (Affective Norms of English Words;
Bradley & Lang, 1999): a set of words that were rated for
valence on a 9-point scale by a large number of English
speakers, and which have been used as stimuli in many
experiments. We found 606 ANEW words that had clear
translation equivalents in ASL. To ensure that the list of
signs to be analyzed was constructed in an unbiased manner,
translation equivalence was determined on the basis of the
English glosses provided by the ASL dictionary; the
experimenter was blind to the forms of the signs during list
construction. The duration of each silent sign video was two
seconds.
Sign Analysis The goal of the sign analysis was to
determine the relationship between the vertical direction of
the “lexical movement” phase of each sign and the valence
of its English translation equivalent. The lexical movement
phase of a sign is an invariant part of its phonology
(Brentari & Padden, 2001), and part of the meaning-bearing
portion of the sign. Like the stroke phase of a gesture, the
movement phase can be identified on the basis of its form
(McNeil, 1992; Kita, Van Gijn & Van de Hulst, 1998). A
sign begins from a location and handshape that is a “hold”
or starting position and entails a movement to a separate
location or a change in the handshape. The directions of the
preparation and retraction phases (i.e., “transitional
movements”) are generally not meaningful, and their
directions were not analyzed.
All 606 signs were randomized and coded by one of the
authors (D.Y.) who was naïve to all signed languages. He
was also blind to the signs’ translation equivalents in
English, and therefore to their meanings. The movement
phase of each sign was coded for its vertical direction:
Upward, Downward or Non-vertical. Signs with horizontal
movement phases or “holds” were coded as Non-vertical
signs.
Some signs constitute a series of multiple movements
and were coded as compound signs. Compound signs with
movements in more than one direction were coded based on
the direction that appeared to be dominant. For instance, the
ASL sign for curtain consists of two movements that begin
with a right closed fist moving to the right from the left

1809

closed fist, followed by a downward movement with open
palms from both hands. It was coded as a Downward sign.
The signs were then randomized again and 25% of the
signs were selected for a second blind coding to determine
the intra-rater reliability. The intra-rater agreement rate was
91% (139 out of 153 signs; Kappa = .83, p = .001).

Results
On average, signs with Upward movements (n = 59) were
the most positive in valence, followed by Non-vertical signs
(n = 346) and then by Downward signs (n = 201; figure 1).
There was a significant relationship between the vertical
direction of the signs and the valence of their ANEW
translation equivalents, F(2,603) = 4.54, p = .01. Upward
signs were more positive than Downward signs, p = .007.

Experiment 1b: Space and valence in LSF
To generalize this novel result, we conducted the same
analysis in French Sign Language (LSF).

Method
Materials The ANEW words were translated into French by
a native speaker. We searched the LSF dictionary
(http://www.lsfdicoinjsmetz.fr/index.php?page=motsalphalsf) for all of the
ANEW words, and found 490 that had clear translation
equivalents in LSF. Thirty words were translated twice into
30 nouns and 30 verbs because the ANEW corpus did not
specify the word class. The duration of each silent sign
video was three seconds.
Sign Analysis The signs were analyzed in the same way
as in Experiment 1a. The intra-rater agreement was 92%
(Kappa = .86, p = .001; 113 out of 123 signs).

Results and discussion
The relationship between sign movement direction and
valence in LSF replicated the results in ASL (see Figure 2).
Upward signs were the most positive (n = 78), followed by
Non-vertical signs (n = 277) and Downward signs (n = 135).
There was a significant relationship between the vertical
direction of the signs and the valence of their ANEW
translation equivalents, F(2,487) = 4.55, p = .01. Upward
signs were more positive than Downward, signs, p = .003.

Figure 1. Valence ratings of the ANEW translation
equivalents for ASL signs with downward (left), upward
(right) and non-vertical (middle) strokes. The error bars
show the standard error of the mean.
In summary, the vertical direction of the ASL signs
predicted the valence ratings of their ANEW translation
equivalents. Signs with upward movements were the most
positive in valence, and signs with downward movements
the most negative. Signs with non-vertical strokes were
intermediate in valence.
These results support our hypothesis that the implicit
mental metaphor Good is Up is manifested in the
conventionalized forms of ASL words. Testing this
hypothesis using English valence norms, rather than
collecting new norms for these words in ASL, avoids
circularity: Native ASL raters could be biased by the signs’
movement directions, online, as they performed the ratings.
Translation equivalence between ASL and English words is
unlikely to be exact, but importantly, any noise introduced
by inexact translations works against our hypothesis.

Figure 2. Valence ratings of the ANEW translation
equivalents for LSF signs with downward (left), upward
(right) and non-vertical (middle) strokes. The error bars
show the standard error of the mean.
Half of the 30 ANEW English words that were
translated twice were coded with the same direction. After
excluding 15 pairs of French signs with different directions
and the duplicate signs with the same direction, there was a
significant relationship between the vertical direction of the
signs and the valence of their ANEW translation

1810

equivalents, F(2,487) = 4.55, p = .03. Upward signs were
more positive than Downward signs p = .007.
The vertical direction of the LSF signs predicted valence
ratings of their ANEW translation equivalents, replicating
our findings in ASL.

Analysis of the BSL corpus showed a similar
relationship between space and valence as shown for ASL
and LSF, in a genetically unrelated sign language.

Experiment 2: Pitch and valence in Mandarin
Although iconicity in signed languages has been discussed
in the linguistic literature, iconicity in spoken languages is
considered to be rare (cf., Perniss, Thompson & Vigliocco,
2010). Mandarin Chinese is a tonal language with four basic
lexical tones: (1) a high, level tone, (2) a rising tone, (3) a
low falling tone (but with a rising tail in single characters)
and (4) a high falling tone. Figure 4 (based on Speer, Shih &
Slowiaczek, 1989) shows the four tones with the
corresponding tone contours.

Experiment 1c: Space and valence in BSL
Although ASL and LSF are not mutually intelligible, they
are genetically related. We sought to generalize these
findings further by testing our hypothesis in a third,
genetically unrelated language, British Sign Language
(BSL).

Method
Materials
We
searched
the
BSL
dictionary
(http://www.signstation.org/index.php/bsldictionary/desktop-dictionary) for all of the ANEW words
(Bradley & Lang, 1999), and found 458 that had clear
translation equivalents in BSL. The duration of each silent
sign video was two seconds.
Sign Analysis The signs were analyzed in the same way
as in Experiments 1a-b. The intra-rater agreement was 96%
(Kappa = .92, p < .001; 110 out of 115 signs).

Results and discussion
The BSL results replicated the results of ASL and LSF.
Upward signs were consistently the most positive in valence
(n = 65), followed by Non- vertical signs (n = 281) and
Downward signs (n = 112). Overall, there was a marginally
significant relationship between the vertical direction of the
signs and the valence of their ANEW translation
equivalents, F(2,455) = 2.33, p = .099. Upward signs were
significantly more positive than Downward signs, p = .03.

Figure 4. Pitch Contours of the four lexical tones in
Mandarin Chinese. Each lexical tone is schematized along a
vertical axis of five units (Speer, Shih & Slowiaczek, 1989).
In some multisyllabic words, a group of characters (e.g.,
子) assume the neutral tone. The pitch value of a neutral
tone is influenced by its preceding tone. For instance, the
neutral tone following the four lexical tones are [55-2], [353], [21-4] and [51-1] respectively (Duanmu, 2007).

Method
Materials The entire ANEW corpus of 1034 words was
translated into Chinese characters and their respective
pinyin
using
the
Goggle
Translator
(http://translate.google.com/#en/zh-CN/).
A
native
Mandarin speaker then reviewed the list and edited 176
words.

Figure 3. Valence ratings of the ANEW translation
equivalents for BSL signs with downward (left), upward
(right) and non-vertical (middle) strokes. The error bars
show the standard error of the mean.

Tone analysis The four lexical tones were classified into
three vertical pitch movement categories according to their
respective pitch contours as shown in Figure 4. Tone 1 is
defined as a Level pitch contour because its pitch value
remains at 5. Tone 2 (rising tone) is defined as an Upward
pitch contour that moves up two pitch values (from 3 to 5).
Tones 3 and 4 fall one pitch value (from 2 to 1) and 4 pitch
values (from 5 to 1) respectively and thus are defined as
Downward pitch contours.

1811

The pitch analysis of multisyllabic words considers the
entire word as a continuous pitch contour because we want
the level of analysis to be as similar to the natural speech
stream as possible. Therefore, the overall pitch movement is
defined as the sum of all the individual tone’s vertical pitch
movements. The pitch transition of two tones is also
included in the calculation of the overall pitch movement. A
resulting positive sum constitutes an Upward pitch contour,
and a negative sum a Downward pitch contour. A sum of 0
constitutes a Level pitch contour. For example, a 2-character
word, 食品 (tone 2 and tone 3) as shown in Figure 4, would
result in the value of (5 – 3) – 3 + (1 – 2) = -2 which
classifies it as a continuous Downward pitch contour.

Results and discussion
The vertical pitch contours of the Mandarin pinyin were
analyzed at three levels: (1) the entire corpus, (2)
monosyllabic words, and (3) multisyllabic words.
Entire corpus Valence ratings for the Mandarin Chinese
words’ ANEW translation equivalents were highest for
words with Upward pitch contours (n = 226), followed by
Level (n = 227) and Downward (n = 581) pitch contours
respectively. The vertical pitch contours predicted the
valence of the words’ ANEW translation equivalents, F(2,
1031) = 5.52, p = .004. Words with Upward pitch contours
were more positive in valence than words with Downward
pitch contours, p = .001.

Figure 5. Valence ratings of the ANEW translation
equivalents for Mandarin tones with downward (left),
upward (right) and level (middle) pitch contours. The error
bars show the standard error of the mean.
Monosyllabic words
The analysis of 133 monosyllabic
(single character) words replicated results in the whole
corpus. Valence ratings in ANEW are highest in Upward
pitch contours (n = 70; 5.50 +/- .21), followed by level pitch
contours (n = 31; 4.59 +/- .29) and downward pitch contours
(n = 32; 4.24 +/- .33). The vertical pitch contours predicted
the valence of the words’ ANEW translation equivalents,
F(2, 130) = 6.82, p = .002. Words with Upward pitch
contours were more positive in valence than words with

Downward pitch contours, p = .001.
Multisyllabic words
The analysis of 861 multisyllabic
(more than one character) words based on the overall pitch
contours also provided converging results. Valence ratings
in ANEW are highest in Upward pitch contours (n = 156;
5.51 +/- .15), followed by Level pitch contours (n = 196;
5.25 +/- .15) and Downward pitch contours (n = 549; 5.04
+/- .09). The vertical pitch contours predicted the valence of
the words’ ANEW translation equivalents, F(2, 898) = 3.62,
p = .03. Words with Upward pitch contours were more
positive in valence than words with Downward pitch
contours, p = .009.
Pitch contour was a significant predictor of the words’
ANEW translation equivalents. Words with rising tones
were the most positive, words with falling tones the most
negative, and words with level tones intermediate in
valence. The Mandarin Chinese corpus replicated the
findings of the three signed languages and demonstrated the
same vertical spatial metaphors for valence.

General Discussion
Here we demonstrate a previously undiscovered
relationship between form and meaning, in three signed
languages and a spoken language. The vertical direction of
signs predicted the valence ratings of their ANEW
translation equivalents for all three signed languages. On
average, signs with upward lexical movements were the
most positive in valence, and signs with downward
movements the most negative. Signs with non-vertical
movements were intermediate in valence. Likewise, in
Mandarin Chinese, a tonal spoken language, words with
upward pitch contours were more positive in valence than
words with downward pitch contours, and words with level
pitch contours were intermediate.
Why is this particular non-arbitrariness preserved in the
lexicon, across signed and spoken languages? One possible
reason is that metaphoric iconicity makes words easier to
learn. Activating mental metaphors via simple motor actions
can improve word learning. In one study (Casasanto & de
Bruin, submitted), students learned the definitions of
positive and negative words better after moving vocabulary
flash cards in a vertical direction consistent with the Good is
Up metaphor. The same principle could facilitate the
learning of metaphor-congruent words in signed languages
and tone languages. (See also Imai et al., 2008; Kantartzis et
al., 2011, for evidence that literal sound-meaning
correspondences can benefit word learning).
If metaphoric iconicity improves word learning, why
isn’t non-arbitrariness more pervasive in languages? That is,
why don’t all positive words have upward movements or
tones, and all negative words downward movements / tones?
One possible explanation is that there may be many weak
iconic (and other) constraints on word forms. Thus, the
spatial metaphors described in this study (Good is Up and
Bad is Down) could be the source of one such constraint,
but they operate in the context of many others.

1812

Another reason that iconicity in language might be
limited: perhaps both arbitrary and non-arbitrary mappings
have roles to play in language. Computational analyses and
findings from an artificial language learning study
demonstrated that both arbitrariness and non-arbitrariness
facilitate word learning via complementary functions
(Monaghan, Christiansen & Fitneva, 2011). Specifically,
non-arbitrariness facilitates the generalization of words to
semantic categories while arbitrariness facilitates the
mapping of words to specific meanings.
Form-meaning relationships are not as arbitrary as was
once assumed. Beyond special cases like onomatopoeia,
implicit metaphorical mappings may provide opportunities
for multiple kinds of non-arbitrariness, throughout the
lexicons of signed and spoken languages. We tested for
exactly one form-meaning relationship, motivated by one of
the hundreds of mental metaphors that scaffold our
thoughts, and found evidence for it in every language we
tested. Perhaps there are (many) other such relationships.
Perhaps languages are shaped by a lattice of weak iconic
constraints, which can potentially be identified through
blind, quantitative testing methods like we introduce here. A
better understanding of the extent of iconic (or other nonarbitrary) constraints on form-meaning relationships is the
first step toward discovering how and why these
relationships are preserved in language -- and how they have
shaped the evolution of languages, and perhaps of the
language faculty itself.

References
Bergen, B. K. (2004). The psychological reality of
phonaesthemes. Language, 290-311.
Bradley, M. M., & Lang, P. J. (1999). Affective norms for
English words (ANEW): Instruction manual and affective
ratings (pp. 1-45). Technical Report C-1, The Center for
Research in Psychophysiology, University of Florida.
Brentari, D., & Padden, C. (2001). Native and foreign
vocabulary in American Sign Language: A lexicon with
multiple origins. In D. Brentari (Ed.), Foreign vocabulary in
sign languages: A cross-linguistic investigation of word
formation (pp. 87-119). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Casasanto, D. (2008). Conceptual affiliates of metaphorical
gestures. Paper presented at the International Conference on
Language, Communication, & Cognition. Brighton, UK.
Casasanto, D., & Bottini, R., (2013). Spatial language and
abstract concepts. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive
Science. doi: 10.1002/wcs.1271
Casasanto, D., & de Bruin, A. (Submitted). Metaphors we learn
by: Directed motor actions improves word learning.
Casasanto, D., & Dijkstra, K. (2010). Motor Action and
Emotional Memory. Cognition, 115(1), 179-185.
Cienki, A. (1998). Metaphoric gestures and some of their
relations to verbal metaphoric expressions. In Jean-Pierre
Koenig, ed. Discourse and Cognition: Bridging the Gap.
Stanford, CA: Center for the Study of Language and
Information, 189-204.

Cienki, A., & Müller, C. (2008). Metaphor and Gesture.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Dolscheid, S., Shayan, S., Majid, A., & Casasanto, D. (2013).
The Thickness of Musical Pitch: Psychophysical Evidence
for Linguistic Relativity. Psychological Science, 24 613–621.
Duanmu, San (2007). The Phonology of Standard Chinese.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Emmorey, K. (2001). Space on hand: The exploitation of
signing space to illustrate abstract thought. In M. Gattis
(Ed), Spatial schemas and abstract thought, pp. 147 - 174,
The MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
Kita, S., Van Gijn, I., & Van der Hulst, H. (1998). Movement
phases in signs and co-speech gestures, and their transcription
by human coders. In Gesture and sign language in humancomputer interaction (pp. 23-35). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Imai, M., Kita, S., Nagumo, M., & Okada, H. (2008). Sound
symbolism facilitates early verb learning. Cognition, 109(1),
54-65.
Kantartzis, K., Imai, M., & Kita, S. (2011). Japanese sound‐
symbolism facilitates word learning in English‐speaking
children. Cognitive Science, 35(3), 575-586.
Klima, E. S., & Bellugi, U. 1979. The signs of language.
Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Maurer, D., Pathman, T., & Mondloch, C. J. (2006). The shape
of boubas: Sound–shape correspondences in toddlers and
adults. Developmental Science,9(3), 316-322.
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and mind: What gestures reveal
about thought. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Monaghan, P., Christiansen, M. H., & Fitneva, S. A. (2011).
The arbitrariness of the sign: Learning advantages from the
structure of the vocabulary. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 140, 325.
Nuckolls, J. B. (2004). Language and nature in sound
alignment. Hearing cultures: Essays on sound, listening and
modernity, 65-85.
O’Brien, J. (1999). Metaphoricity in the signs of American
Sign Language. Metaphor and Symbol, 14, 159–177.
Perniss, P., Thompson, R. L., & Vigliocco, G. (2010). Iconicity
as a general property of language: Evidence from spoken and
signed languages. Frontiers in psychology, 1.
Saussure, F. D. (1959). Course in General Linguistics, edited
by Charles Bally and Albert Sechehaye, in collaboration with
Albert Riedlinger. Translated by Wade Baskin. New York:
Philosophical Library.
Speer, S. R., Shih, C. L., & Slowiaczek, M. L. (1989). Prosodic
structure in language understanding: evidence from tone
sandhi in Mandarin. Language and Speech, 32(4), 337-354.
Sweetser, E. (1998). Regular metaphoricity in gesture: Bodilybased models of speech interaction. In Actes du 16e Congrès
International des Linguistes. Elsevier: (CD-ROM).
Taub, S. F. (2001). Language from the body: Iconicity and
metaphor in American Sign Language (Vol. 38). Cambridge
University Press.

1813

