UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Metaphorical Framing Influences How We Think about Emotions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6mq735mj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Reali, Florencia
Arciniegas, Catalina

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Metaphorical Framing Influences How We Think about Emotions: Some Evidence
from Spanish
Florencia Reali (f.reali96@uniandes.edu.co)
Catalina Arciniegas (c.arcinegas959@uniandes.edu.co)
Departamento de Psicología, Universidad de los Andes.
Cra. 1 Nº 18A- 12, Edificio Franco, Bogotá, 111711. Colombia
Abstract
Conceptual metaphor theory proposes that the conceptual
structure of emotions emerges through metaphorization from
concrete concepts such spatial orientation and physical
containment. Primary metaphors for emotions have been
described in a wide range of languages. Here we show the
results of a corpus analysis revealing that certain metaphors
such as EMOTIONS ARE FLUIDS IN CONTAINERS and
EMOTIONS ARE BOUNDED SPACES are quite natural in
Spanish. Moreover, the corpus data reveals that BOUNDED
SPACE source domain is more frequently mapped onto
negative emotions. Second, we consider the question of
whether the instantiation of metaphorical framing influences
the way we reason about emotions. A questionnaire
experiment was conducted to explore this question focusing
on the case of locura (madness). Our results show that when
madness is framed as a fluid filling a container (the body)
people tend to rate symptoms as less enduring and as more
likely to be caused by social and environmental factors
compared to when it is framed as an enclosed space.
Keywords: conceptual metaphor; cognitive linguistics;
corpus analysis; emotion concepts; Spanish.

Introduction
In the last few decades Conceptual Metaphor Theory
(CMT) (Kövecses, 2000; Lakoff, 1987; Lakoff & Johnson,
1980; 1999) has provided a new framework for conceiving
the cognitive mechanisms involved in the structuring of
conceptual systems. According to CMT, a few concrete
concepts constitute basic domains that emerge directly from
perceptual schemas such as spatial orientations or physical
containment. In turn, abstract concepts emerge through
metaphorization from concrete ones. Conceptual metaphors
allow the mapping of inferential structure from source
(more concrete) domains onto target (more abstract)
domains (Casasanto, 2010; Kövecses, 2000; Lakoff, 1987).
Along these lines, basic emotions are not considered
feelings separated from thought but concepts endowed with
a complex conceptual structure. Emotions are thought to be
grounded – embodied – in physiological or physical
experiences, such as an increase in heart rate or a change in
body posture associated with particular moods (e.g.,
ANGER IS HEAT or HAPPY IS UP) (Lakoff &
Johnson,1980; Lakoff, 1987). Along these lines, primary
metaphors might be universal because they emerge from
physiological experiences or basic perceptual schemas
(Kövecses, 2010; Lakoff, 1987).
One of the methodological approaches used to study the
metaphorical structuring of concepts has been the analysis
of linguistic expressions that are used in everyday discourse.

Such methodological decision is based on the fundamental
assumption that metaphorical expressions are systematically
tied to the conceptual system (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980;
Sauciuc, 2013). In the case of emotions – such as anger,
lust, happiness or hope – the cross-cultural ubiquity of
certain linguistic expressions has been taken as evidence
that certain schemas are embodied and provide grounding
for emotion concepts.
Metaphors for emotions have been described in a wide
range of languages including English, Spanish, Chinese,
Hungarian, Zulu, Polish among others (see Kövecses, 2010
and Soriano, 2003, for a review). Although the same
metaphor – that is, the same mapping between source and
target domains– may be said to exist in many languages, the
corresponding linguistic expressions of the metaphor may
not be exactly the same (Barcelona, 2001). For example,
contrasting studies of ANGER metaphors in Spanish and
English have shown cross-linguistic differences at the level
of conceptual elaboration, linguistic conventionalization and
degree of linguistic exploitation (Soriano, 2003).
In the present study, we focus on the study of expressions
of the following conceptual metaphors in Spanish:
EMOTIONS ARE FLUIDS IN CONTAINERS and
EMOTIONS ARE BOUNDED SPACES. We decided to
concentrate on these two metaphors because of the
following reasons. The metaphor EMOTIONS ARE
FLUIDS IN CONTAINERS is one of the most studied
examples cross-linguistically, especially in relation to the
concept of ANGER (Kövecses, 2010). We were also
interested in studying the metaphor EMOTIONS ARE
BOUNDED SPACES because of previous work showing
that it is extremely frequent in Spanish, at least in the case
of some negative emotions (Reali et al., 2013). Lakoff
(1987) described these two conceptual metaphors in an
analysis of the case study ANGER. He proposed that the
metaphor ANGER IS THE HEAT OF A FLUID IN A
CONTAINER emerges from the combination of two
embodied metaphors: ANGER IS HEAT, and THE BODY
IS A CONTAINER FOR THE EMOTIONS (Lakoff,
1987:383). In the same work he proposes that the metaphor
EMOTIONS ARE BOUNDED SPACES is a general
metaphor that applies to anger as well as to other emotions
(Lakoff, 1987: 396-397). Figure 1 depicts a possible sketch
of conceptual schemas associated to these metaphors.
How commonly are emotions described in terms of
bounded spaces or fluids filling containers in Spanish? The
first goal of this study is to compare the patterns and
frequency of use of these metaphorical expressions in

2823

naturally occurring Spanish discourse. The next section
presents the results of a corpus analysis conducted to
address this issue.

issue. For this purpose we focus on the case study of the
concept of locura (madness). Our results show that the
simple instantiation of metaphorical expressions in
reference to a fake case of madness influences the way
people tend to conceptualize its different aspects and,
crucially, its outcome.

Corpus Analysis

Figure 1: The left diagram represents the conceptual
metaphor EMOTIONS ARE FLUIDS IN CONTAINERS
while the right diagram represents the conceptual metaphor
EMOTIONS ARE BOUNDED SPACES.
The second goal of the paper is to explore whether the
metaphors we use in reference to emotions work as a
structuring principle for conceptual reasoning, affecting the
way we perceive situations and events. A basic assumption
of CMT is that metaphorical representations are automatic
and become a structuring principle for one´s conceptual
system. Source to target domain mapping might be built into
the knowledge retrieval function of the brain (Sauciuc,
2013). A consequence of this is that the metaphors we use in
everyday language highlight the cues we pay attention to
and hide those we ignore, affecting our perception of
people, situations and events (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980;
1999). In other words, the inferential structure of our
conceptual system might be constrained by the metaphors
we use.
Over the last few decades, a growing bulk of empirical
work has demonstrated that metaphorical framing influences
a range of cognitive domains – other than emotions – such
as time perception (Casasanto, 2010), social cognition
(Landau, Meier & Keefer, 2010), memory (Faucey &
Boroditsky, 2010; Faucey & Boroditsky, 2011), problem
solving (Thibodeau & Boroditsky, 2011) and political
attitudes (Landau, Sullivan & Greenberg, 2010; Matlock,
2012; Matlock et al., 2012). For example, a recent study by
Thibodeau and Boroditsky (2011) has shown that even very
subtle variations in the metaphorical framing used to
describe crime as a social matter influence participants´
opinions about effective strategies to solve the problem.
Another example is the work by Faucey and Matlock (2012)
showing that the wording of political messages affects
political attitudes, including judgments about whether or not
candidates will be elected. A thorough revision of metaphor
related behavior can be found in Bergen (2012).
Along these lines, the second goal of this study is to
explore whether the instantiation of subtle metaphorical
framing in the description of emotions influences how
people reason about them. In the third section of this paper
we show results of an experiment designed to explore this

The current analysis was aimed to measure how often
certain metaphorical expressions of emotion occur in
Spanish. In recent years, identification of metaphor and
metonymy in corpora has benefited from the development
of criteria and methods for direct search and extraction
(Stefanowitsch & Gries, 2006). One way in which
metaphors can be studied is through the identification of
occurrences of lexical items from the source domains
(Stefanowitsch, 2006). The researcher identifies the
instantiations of a source domain of interest by searching for
specific lexical items from it. In a second step, the
researcher identifies the metaphorical mapping in place
including the target domain (see Stefanowitsch, 2006, for
examples). The goal of our analysis was to determine
whether certain source domains of interest – namely
bounded space and fluid filling a container – are typically
mapped onto emotions (target domains), and second, the
relative frequency with which these domains map onto
negative emotions, positive emotions or both.

Method
We used the Corpus del Español (Davies, 2002), an
online resource that contains over 100 million words in
more than 20,000 Spanish texts from the 1200s to the 1900s.
For the purpose of this study we restricted the search to
sources dating from 1900 and on.
We were interested in identifying expressions from the
source domains bounded spaces and fluid filling containers.
Because there are potentially dozens of lexical items
semantically related to these conceptual domains, we opted
for searching for a priori chosen idiomatic expressions that
are commonly used in Spanish to refer to emotions.
Crucially, the chosen expressions contain lexical items from
the source domains of interest. Specifically, we searched for
the following formulas:
(source domain: FLUID)
a. (Y) se llena(o) de X [Y filled of X]
b. (Y) se inunda de X [X inundates Y ]
c. (Y) se rebosa de X [Y overflowed with X]
(source domain: BOUNDED SPACE)
a. caer en X [to fall in X]
b. al borde de X [at the edge of X]
c. salir de X [get out of X]
Cases of interest were those in which X is an emotion (and,
in the case of source domain fluid filling a container, Y
corresponds to the body). The analysis was designed to

2824

determine: 1. the proportion of sentences containing these
lexical formulas that happen to be metaphorical, 2. among
these, the proportion of instances in which the target domain
corresponds to an emotion, and 3. whether target emotions
are positive or negative in valence. We extracted all
sentences containing the a priori chosen lexical items – from
source domain FLUID we identified phrases containing the
expressions llena(o) de, inunda and rebosa, and from
BOUNDED SPACES we extracted cases containing the
expressions caer en, al borde de and salir de. If the total
number of hits surpassed a hundred, we randomly selected a
hundred sentences for analysis using the online interface
resource of the corpus. Each sentence was subsequently
analyzed to determine whether the expressions were
metaphoric and whether the target domain was a (positive or
negative) emotion.
For the purpose of metaphor identification we used the
following criterion. An individual expression was
considered a metaphor if: a. one or more of the lexical items
from the source domain were mentioned in reference to a
target domain that is not to do with the source domain sense
per se and, b. the target domain sense can be said to be
related to the more concrete source domain sense via a
cross-domain mapping instantiated by the lexical items from
the latter. For example, the sentence “No has de caer en la
desesperación” (tr. you shall not fall into despair) would be
classified as metaphorical – source domain: bounded space;
target domain: despair; lexical items from the source
domain: caer en (fall into). If the target was an emotion,
then the expression was considered an emotion metaphor.

Results and Discussion
We extracted a hundred randomly selected sentences
containing the expressions of interest with the exception of
inunda and rebosa that elicited only a total of 25 and 75
sentence hits respectively. Then, we counted the number of
metaphorical expressions. Among these, emotion metaphors
were identified and classified according to whether the
emotion was positive or negative. Results are displayed in
Figure 2. The expressions from the source domain
BOUNDED SPACES were classified as follows: 47.7%
were tagged as literal expressions, 0.3% as positive emotion
metaphors, 13.5% as negative emotion metaphors, and
38.5% as other (emotion unrelated) metaphors. The range of
negative emotions identified as target domains included:
despair, rage, hate, guilt, madness, loneliness, depression,
melancholy and anxiety, among others. There was only one
expression tagged as positive emotion metaphor (see
example 1.d below). The difference in the relative frequency
of negative and positive emotion metaphors was highly
significant (X2=37.1; p<.0001). The following are examples
taken from the corpus:
(1)
Negative emotion metaphor examples
a. No vamos a caer en la desesperación. [We will not
fall in despair.]

Estamos al borde de la locura. [We are at the edge
of madness]
c. Lo que me interesa es salir de esta horrible
ansiedad en que me hallo. [I am interested in
getting out from this horrible anxiety where I am
at.]
Positive emotion metaphor examples
d. Estar despierto implicaba salir de tan maravilloso
estado de ánimo. [Being awake implied getting out
from such a marvelous mood.]
Second, expressions containing lexical items from the
source FLUID were analyzed. Among sentences containing
lleno(a) de, inunda or rebosa, 36.5% were tagged as literal
expressions, 24% as positive emotion metaphors, 9.5% as
negative emotion metaphors, and 30% as other (emotion
unrelated) metaphors. The range of negative emotions
identified as target domains included: despair, rage, hate,
guilt, sadness, melancholy, anxiety, rage and hate, among
others. The range of positive emotions identified included
joy, hope, love, faith, affection, passion and satisfaction,
among others. The difference between negative and positive
emotion metaphors was significant (X2=5.8; p=.016). The
following are examples taken from the corpus:
(2)
Negative emotion metaphor examples
a. Gracián corrió hacia la iglesia totalmente
enloquecido lleno de odio. [Gracián ran towards
the church totally insane, full of hate.]
b. No quiero proseguir porque me rebosa la
amargura. [I don´t want to go on because sadness
overflows me].
Positive emotion metaphor examples
c. Se acomodó con dos almohadas, lleno de ilusión
como quien compra un billete de lotería. [He got
comfortable between two pillows, full of hope as
someone who buys a lottery bill.]
d. Y ese convencimiento me inunda de esperanza y
alegría. [Such conviction inundates me with hope
and joy.]
e. El gozo le rebosa. [Joy overflows her (or him)]

2825

b.

The data reveals that emotion metaphors represent a
significant proportion of the expressions in Spanish
containing the a priori chosen lexical formulas,
suggesting that the metaphorical mapping between the
source domains of interest and emotion is quite natural
in Spanish. Our data also reveals that BOUNDED
SPACE source domain is more frequently mapped onto
negative emotions, while FLUID source domain is
more frequently mapped onto positive emotions. Why
are negative emotions associated to BOUNDED
SPACE schemas?

Survey Experiment: Metaphorical Framing
of Locura

Figure 2: Results from the corpus analysis. Frequency
patterns (emotion metaphors, other metaphors and literal
meaning) of expressions containing lexical items associated
to BOUNDED SPACES and FLUID source domains.
Analysis of linguistic expressions show that people talk
about many concepts implying positive/negative valence
metaphorically in terms of high/low vertical positions
respectively (see Landau et al., 2010 for a review),
providing evidence for the psychological reality of the
conceptual metaphors GOOD IS UP and BAD IS DOWN.
Moreover, Lakoff and Johnson (1980) proposed that the
fundamental metaphor SAD IS DOWN might be grounded
in physical experiences, as they put it “drooping posture
typically goes along with sadness and depression, erect
posture with a positive emotional state” (Lakoff & Johnson,
1980:15). Along these lines, the source domain BOUNDED
SPACES is frequently instantiated in the form of spaces
located down in the vertical axis (as in fall into despair). It
is therefore possible that when emotions are framed this
way, negative inferences might be automatically elicited
through the activation of spatial schemas in which emotions
are located down, or the body is moving downwards.
We now turn to the question of whether the instantiation
of different metaphorical framings of emotions influence the
way we reason about them. Given the observed frequency
patterns, we can draw specific predictions. For example,
framing emotions as bounded spaces might elicit more
negative conceptual inferences, such as more pessimistic
prognosis about the outcome of the symptoms.
In order to address this issue we focus on the case study
of locura (madness) in Spanish. We chose madness as a
case study because the semantic spectrum of the term locura
in Spanish is quite wide and its signification depends on
discourse factors to a great extent. The concept of locura is
associated to a range of emotional states broadly related to
delusion, anxiety and rage. Moreover, it is used in various
thematic contexts including psychiatric discourse and
colloquial conversation. The experiment described below
was designed to explore whether the metaphorical framing
of locura has any measurable effect on how people
conceptualize and reason about different aspects of it.

We focused on the question of whether subtle instantiations
of metaphors influence people´s conceptualization of
madness. This study used a paradigm similar to the one
developed by Thibodeau and Boroditsky (2011). In their
study, subtle differences in metaphorical framing were
manipulated in a description about a hypothetical case of
local crime – crime as a virus vs. crime as a beast.
Participants in Thibodeau and Boroditsky´s study were
provided with a fake report about increasing crime rates in a
certain city and asked to propose a solution. Their results
showed that the use of metaphors influenced peoples´
opinions about the strategies to solve the problem.
In our study, participants were exposed to descriptions of
a fake case of a woman suffering from symptoms that are
commonly associated with mental insanity. The concept of
locura (madness) was metaphorically described either as a
fluid filling a container or as a bounded space. Crucially,
the symptoms described were the same across conditions.

Method
Participants Sixty-four students from Universidad de
Andes (Bogotá, Colombia) participated in the study
voluntarily or in exchange for extra course credits. All
participants were 18 or older and declared that their native
language was Spanish.
Materials Each participant was presented with one of two
versions of a description of a fake case of a woman
suffering symptoms of mental insanity. Each version of the
paragraph differed only in the choice of metaphorical
framing. In one condition, madness was framed as a fluid
filling a container (the body), while in the second condition
it was metaphorically described as a bounded space. The
rest of the paragraph consisted in the listing of four typical
symptoms of schizophrenia taken from the fourth edition of
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM IV; American Psychiatric Association, 2000). The
symptoms were the same in the two conditions. The
paragraph read as follows (the translation is provided
afterwards): Laura es una empresaria exitosa de 38 años
que se la lleva bien con sus compañeros y familiares. Hace
un mes Laura {entró en la/se llenó de} locura. Al principio,
sus amigos y familiares notaron comportamientos extraños
en ella, pero asumieron que estaba {tropezando
con/saturada por} una etapa difícil. Ahora, los familiares y
amigos de Laura han acudido a un psiquiatra pues ella ha
empezado a {caer en/inundarse de} alucinaciones e ideas
delirantes. Su psiquiatra y familia están haciendo lo posible
para que Laura {salga de/expulse} la locura {donde se ha
adentrado/que contiene}. Específicamente, Laura ha
descuidado su higiene, pierde el hilo de la conversación
cuando habla, se ha apartado de sus amigos, ha empezado
a creer que hay personas que la espían y oye voces cuando
no hay nadie alrededor. [Translation: Laura is a successful
38-year-old business woman who gets along well with her

2826

mates and family. A month ago Laura {entered in/was
filled by} madness. At first, her friends and family noticed
she was behaving strangely, and assumed that she was
{tripping over/ overwhelmed by} difficult circumstances.
Recently, Laura´s friends and family have consulted a
psychiatrist since she started {to fall into/get inundated
with} hallucinations and delusional ideas. Her psychiatrist,
together with her family, are doing all they can to help
Laura {getting out from/draining} the madness she {has
entered in/contains}. Specifically, Laura has overlooked
her personal hygiene, loses the thread of the conversation,
started avoiding her friends, thinks there are people spying
her and hears voices when there is nobody around.]
Lexical items in bold correspond to the bounded-space
metaphor and underlined lexical items correspond to the
fluid-in-a-container metaphor condition.
Procedure Questionnaires corresponding to the two
conditions were evenly distributed across subjects.
Participants were instructed to read the paragraph, then turn
the page and not go back once the page had been turned.
The paragraph was followed up with Likert-like questions
listed in the second page of the survey. Specifically,
participants were asked to rate ten statements that were
preceded by the following instruction: “In a scale from 1 to
7, where 1 = “completely disagree” and 7 = “completely
agree”, please indicate how much you agree with the
following statements”. The statements were the following
(text in parenthesis below has been added here for
systematization purposes): 1. Laura will recover (perception
of recovery likelihood); 2. I would allow Laura to take care
of my children (perception of reliability); 3. What happens
to Laura was caused by her near environment (perception
of likelihood of environmental causes). 4. Laura is a danger
to society (perception of dangerousness). 5. Laura should be
under the care of a caregiver (perception of disability). 6.
Laura will be able to recoup with the help of her friends and
family (perception of importance of social support for
recovery). 7. Laura is a danger to herself (perception of
dangerousness to herself). 8. Her recovery will take a long
time (perception of symptoms persistence). 9. Laura has
control over what happens to her (perception of selfcontrol). 10. The only possible treatment for Laura is a
medical treatment (perception of the role of organic causes).

Results and Discussion
Each participant was exposed to one of the two conditions.
Participants´ mean ratings per question item were compared
across conditions. Rating scores correspond to levels of
participants´ agreement with statements described above.
The effect of metaphor condition on participants´
responses was evaluated using multivariate analysis of
variance (MANOVA), showing a significant multivariate
effect for responses as a group (Roy’s largest root =.462;
F(10,53)= 2,45; p<.017). Results of univariate analyses are
shown in Table 1. The effect of metaphor condition reached

significance for three of the question items and approached
significance for another one. People judged recovery from
madness to be more likely in the fluid-in-a-container
framing condition (p=.008). Moreover, they judged
environmental causes to be more plausible and social
support more likely to influence recovery in the fluid-in-acontainer framing condition compared to the bounded-space
framing condition (p=.002 and p=.002, respectively). In
addition, there was a marginally significant difference
across conditions in the ratings of the fifth statement
(p=.063), suggesting that the bounded-space framing
condition was associated to a greater perception of
disability. There was no other significant difference across
conditions in the rest of the questionnaire items (all p>0.1).
Taken together these results suggest that when madness is
framed as a bounded space people have lower – more
pessimistic – expectations regarding the likelihood of
recovery. Also, participants exposed to this metaphor
assigned less importance to environmental causes and social
support, compared to participants in the fluid-in-a-container
framing condition.
Table 1: Participants´ mean ratings across conditions
Question item
Perception of…
Likelihood of recovery
Laura´s reliability
Role of environmental
causes
Laura´s dangerousness
Laura´s disability
Role of social support
in recovery
Laura´s dangerousness
to herself
Symptoms´ persistence
Laura´s self-control
Role of organic causes

Mean ratings
BS-met

FC-met

F(1,62)

p-value

4.7(1.5) 5.7(1.1)
1.3(0.6) 1.7(1.3)

13.14
2.64

.008**
.11

3.2(1.2) 4.2(1.4)
3.5(1.5) 3.0(1.4)
5.9(1.1) 5.3(1.3)

17.01
3.06
5.06

.002**
.24
†
.063

5.1(1.8) 6.2(1.0)
4.8(1.5) 4.8(1.6)

21.39
<1

.002**
.93

4.7(1.4) 5.0(1.4)
2.2(1.2) 2.7(1.7)
5.2(1.7) 4.8(1.6)

1.23
5.06
2.25

.43
.12
.37

Note: BS-met = bounded space metaphor; FC-met= fluid in container
metaphor. Standard deviations (SDs) are displayed between brackets.

In sum, the bounded space metaphor seems to elicit a more
negative, pessimistic view of the situation described in the
passage. This is somehow consistent with the corpus data,
which shows that the BOUNDED SPACE source domain is
most frequently mapped onto negative emotions.
Why is that the case? One possible explanation is that the
metaphor EMOTIONS ARE BOUNDED SPACES is
frequently instantiated in the form of its special case
“emotions are low bounded spaces” (as in fall into X or at
the edge of X). Previous work in social cognition and
cognitive linguistics has examined metaphors involving the
source concept of verticality, in particularly high and low
vertical position. For example, conceptual metaphors such
as SAD IS DOWN has been proposed to be grounded in
physiological or physical factors associated to feeling sad,
such as a drooping posture or lying down. More recently,
the primary metaphors BAD IS DOWN and GOOD IS UP
have been shown to transfer to attitudes: Meier and

2827

Robinson (2004) found that evaluations of positive/negative
words were faster when presented on a high/low position in
the computer screen respectively (see Landau et al., 2010
for a review on related results). Similarly, the mapping of
spatial schemas onto emotions might be often instantiated in
the form of the body moving along the vertical axis, as in
falling into emotion or getting up from it. Actually, some of
the metaphorical expressions used in the materials of our
study belong to this kind. It is therefore possible that
negative inferences might be elicited though the automatic
activation of spatial schemas in which emotions are
represented low in the vertical axis or the body moving
downwards. As a result, framing emotion as a bounded
space might elicit more pessimistic prognosis or less
encouraging expectations regarding the role of
environmental and social factors in recovery.
Taken together, the results are consistent with the view
that metaphorical representation is automatic and becomes a
working structuring principle for conceptual systems,
affecting our perception of people, situations and events.

Conclusion
In sum, the results suggest that the way we talk about
emotions affects the way we reason about them. Choosing
the appropriate words to describe moods and attitudes might
not be just a matter of style. Rather, linguistic framing could
shape the way we conceptualize and draw inferences about
different aspects of how people feel and behave.

Acknowledgments
We thank specially Daniela Alvarez Lleras for her help in
the making of Figure 1. This research was funded by
Vicedecanatura de Investigaciones, Facultad de Ciencias
Sociales, Universidad de Los Andes, Bogotá, Colombia.

References
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev.).
Washington, DC: Author.
Barcelona, A. (2001). On the systematic contrastive analysis
of conceptual metaphors: case studies and proposed
methodology. In M. Pütz, S. Nieineier & R. Dirven (Eds.)
Applied Cognitive Linguistics II: Language Pedagogy
(pp. 117-146). Berlin/New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Bergen, B. (2012). Louder than words: The new science of
how the mind makes meaning. New York: Basic Books.
Casasanto, D. (2010). Space for thinking. In Bergen, B.,
Evans, V. and Zinken, J. (Eds.), Language, cognition and
space: State of the art and new directions (pp. 453-461).
London: Equinox Publishing.
Croft, W. (1993). The role of domains in the interpretation
of metaphors and metonymies. Cognitive Linguistics, 4,
335-70.
Deutscher. G. (2010). Crying Whorf. In Through the
language glass (pp. 129-156). New York: Metropolitan
Books Henry Holt and Company.

Faucey, C.M., & Boroditsky, L. (2011).Who dunnit? Crosslinguistic
differences
in
eye-witness
memory.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 18, 150–157.
Faucey, C.M., & Boroditsky, L. (2010). Subtle linguistic
cues influence perceived blame and financial liability.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 17 (5), 644-650.
Fausey, C.M., & Matlock, T. (2011). Can grammar win
elections? Political Psychology, 32, 563–574.
Kövecses, Z. (2000). Metaphor and Emotion. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Kövecses, Z. (2010). Metaphor and culture. Acta
Univesitatis Sapientiae, Philologica, 2: 197-220.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire and dangerous things.
Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh.
New York: Basic Books.
Landau, M.J., Sullivan, D., & Greenberg, J. (2009).
Evidence that self-relevant motivations and metaphoric
framing interact to influence political and social issues.
Psychological Science, 20, 1421-1427.
Landau, M. J., Meier, B., & Keefer, L. (2010). A metaphorenriched social cognition. Psychological Bulletin, 136,
1045-1067.
Davies, Mark. (2002) Corpus del Español: 100 million
words,
1200s-1900s.
Available
online
at
http://www.corpusdelespanol.org.
Meier, B. P., & Robinson, M. D. (2004). Why the sunny
side is up. Psychological Science, 15, 243–247.
Matlock, T. (2012). Framing political messages with
grammar and metaphor. American Scientist, 100, 478483.
Matlock, T., Sparks, D., Matthews, J.L., Hunter, J., &
Huette, S. (2012). Smashing new results on aspectual
framing: How people describe car accidents. Studies in
Language, 36, 700-721.
Reali et al. (2013). How we think about depression: The
role of contextual and metaphorical framing. Paper
presented at ICCL-12, Edmonton, AB, CA.
Sauciuc, G.A. (2013). The role of metaphor in the
structuring of emotion concepts. Journal of Cognitive
Semiotics, 1-2: 244-267.
Soriano Salinas, C. (2003). Some anger metaphors in
Spanish and English: A contrastive review. International
Journal of English Studies 3: 107–122.
Semino, E. (2006). A corpus-based study of metaphors for
speech activity in British English.In Stefanowitsch A.,
and Gries, S.T. (Eds.), Corpus based approaches to
metaphor and metonymy(pp.36-62). Mouton de Gruyter.
Stefanowitsch, A., & Gries, S.T. (2006). Corpus based
approaches to metaphor and metonymy. Berlin: Mouton
de Gruyter.
Thibodeau, P.H., & Boroditsky, L. (2011). Metaphors we
think with: The role of metaphor in reasoning. PLoS ONE
6(2): e16782.

2828

