UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Minimality Criteria in Spatial Belief Revision

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4467r0d7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Bucher, Leandra
Thorn, Paul

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Minimality Criteria in Spatial Belief Revision
Leandra Bucher (leandra.bucher@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Justus Liebig University, Experimental Psychology and Cognitive Science, Otto-Behaghel-Straße 10F,
35396 Giessen, Germany

Paul D. Thorn (thorn@phil-fak.uni-duesseldorf.de)
Heinrich Heine University, Institute for Philosophy, Universitaetsstr. 1,
40204 Duesseldorf, Germany

Knauff, 2011; Bucher & Nejasmic, 2012; Knauff, Bucher,
Krumnack, & Nejasmic, 2013; Mikheeva, Bucher,
Nejasmic, & Knauff 2013; Nejasmic, Bucher, & Knauff,
2013). Such work follows the general approach of positing
mental models as the basis for relational reasoning
(Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991; Knauff, 2009).
In a prototypical task that is used to study spatial belief
revision, participants are provided with two (or more)
statements, Si, about object arrangements. For example:

Abstract
Agents typically revise their beliefs when confronted with
evidence that contradicts those beliefs, selecting from a
number of possible revisions sufficient to reestablish
consistency. In cases where an individual’s beliefs concern
spatial relations, belief revision has been fruitfully treated as a
decision about which features of an initially constructed
spatial mental model to modify. A normative claim about
belief revision maintains that agents should prefer minimal
belief revisions. Yet recent studies have rebutted the
preceding claim, where minimality is understood to consist in
modifying the position of the fewest objects, showing instead
that reasoners prefer revisions that modify the position of an
object x while retaining the position of an object y, when the
agent’s new evidence is a relational statement of the form
‘xRy’. We here present cases where the preceding effect is
reduced, and show an effect of minimality as measured by the
number of initial premises preserved.

(S1) “The apple is left of the mango.”
(S2) “The mango is left of the pear.”
The example description results in the arrangement (or
mental model M):
(M) Apple – Mango – Pear
Participants are then told that they cannot be entirely sure
that the description is correct, but that a third statement (the
“fact”, F) – subsequently given (and partly contradicting)
the initial description – is incontrovertibly true and has to be
taken into account. For example:

Keywords: Relational reasoning; Spatial reasoning; Spatial
cognition; Belief revision; Mental models

Belief Revision as Variation
of Spatial Mental Models

(F) “The pear is left of the apple.”

Whenever one’s beliefs are contradicted by compelling
evidence, one is apt to revise one’s beliefs in order to
maintain the consistency. For example, suppose, you believe
that Bob is a baker from Bavaria, and you then come across
conclusive evidence that Bob is not from Germany.
Presumably, you will adopt the belief that Bob is not from
Germany, and retract the belief that Bob is from Bavaria.
Although there are many possible revisions that would
allow you to achieve consistency in this case, it is very
likely that you will continue to believe that Bob is a baker.
If you revise your beliefs in this way, then your revision will
be accord with a normative principle that states that one
should minimize the changes made to one’s belief set when
revising one’s beliefs in the face of new (contradicting)
evidence (Gärdenfors, 1992; Harman, 1986; Krumnack,
Bucher, Nejasmic, & Knauff, 2011).
In the domain of spatial belief revision, and particularly in
research concerning the revision of beliefs about spatial
relations between objects, belief revision has been described
as a process of modifying of spatial mental models (Bucher,
Krumnack, Nejasmic, & Knauff, 2011; Bucher, Nejasmic,
Bertleff, & Knauff, 2013; Krumnack, Bucher, Nejasmic, &

The task of the participants is to revise the initially
constructed model (M) such that it coheres with the “fact”
(F). Multiple revisions (Ri) are possible in order to
reestablish consistency, and take the fact into account, e.g.:
(R1) Pear – Apple – Mango
(R2) Mango – Pear – Apple
Both revised arrangements (R1 and R2) preserve the initially
constructed model (M) to the same extent, and each revision
preserves one of the initial statements: R1 preserves S1, and
R2 preserves S2. From the viewpoint of logic, R1 and R2 are
equally acceptable. Nevertheless, multiple studies
(discussed below) have found that reasoners have a clear
preference for R1.

Preferred Spatial Model Revision
The preference for R1, in the preceding example, is based on
linguistic cues that are provided in the expression of binary
relations of the form xRy, in particular by the functional
asymmetry between x and y (with the “pear” as x, and the
“apple” as y, in the above example). The asymmetry is often

1952

represented via a distinction between figure and ground,
target and anchor, or (in the favored terminology of the
present paper) “to-be-located object” (LO) and “reference
object” (RO) (Miller & Johnson-Laird, 1976; Talmy, 1983;
Landau & Jackendorff, 1993). The location of the LO is
specified relative to the RO, and reasoners treat the LO as
more flexible and relocatable than the RO (Logan, 1994;
1995).
R1 results from the relocation of the pear (the LO of the
fact F) within the initial model (M), while R2 results from
the relocation of the apple (the RO of the fact F). In tasks of
the above type, reasoners relocate the LO in order to revise
their initial arrangement, about 80-90% of the time. The
preference has been termed the “LO principle” and the “LO
preference” (Bucher, Krumnack, Nejasmic, & Knauff, 2011;
Bucher & Nejasmic, 2012; Bucher, Nejasmic, Bertleff, &
Knauff, 2013; Knauff, Bucher, Krumnack, & Nejasmic,
2013; Krumnack et al., 2011; Knauff, Bucher, Krumnack, &
Nejasmic, 2013; Mikheeva, Bucher, Nejasmic, & Knauff,
2013). The LO principle is a strong effect, and there are
only a few factors that are known to modulate (but do not
override) the effect (e.g., Nejasmic, Bucher, & Knauff,
2013).

Please note that participants could have reached an
equally correct solution, by choosing to relocate the LO
(without the attached object), leaving the (formerly)
attached object in its original position. However, among 768
drawings of revised arrangements (drawn by 24 participants,
each of whom completed 32 revision tasks), there was not a
single drawing that depicted an alternative solution of this
sort. In a second experiment that was similar to the
preceding, participants had to select an arrangement from
several revised arrangements (instead of drawing the
arrangements) (Bucher & Nejasmic, 2012; experiment 2).
The result was analogous to the first experiment. Revisions
were preferably based on the LO principle, indicated by the
choice of respective arrangements by participants. Overall,
the results suggest that revisions in these experiments did
not follow a principle of minimality that is based on the
number of objects relocated. If participants’ revisions had
been based on such a minimality principle, they would have
relocated ROs (instead of LOs) in half of the items
presented in these experiments. Subjects were, apparently,
unmotivated by the (proposed) normative principle stating
that they should prefer revisions that minimized the number
of relocated objects.

Challenging the LO Principle

Minimality Criteria in Spatial Belief Revision

In a recent study (Bucher & Nejasmic, 2012), participants
were asked to revise arrangements of a similar kind to the
one in the example above, but with a small modification: an
additional object was ‘attached’ (above or below) to either
the object in the leftmost or the rightmost position.
Arrangements and subsequently presented counter-facts
were counterbalanced across the experiments such that in
half of the items the additional object was ‘attached’ to the
object which corresponded to the LO of the counter-fact.
Participants of a first experiment of this type were asked to
draw initial and revised arrangements (Bucher & Nejasmic,
2012; experiment 1). Hence, participants were completely
free to generate whatever solution they had in mind. The
assumption was that participants were inclined to keep their
revisions as minimal as possible, with minimality referring
to the number of objects that are relocated in order to revise
an initial arrangement. The surprising finding was that
participants not only stuck to the LO principle (i.e., chose to
relocate the LO in almost 90% of the cases, regardless of
whether there was another object ‘attached’ to the LO or
not), but in addition, they relocated the ‘attached’ object
along with the LO. See the following example for
illustration:

The prescription to opt for minimal belief revisions is not
unambiguous. So the question remains of whether human
agents are to any extent influenced by a ‘minimality norm’.
The aim of the present study is to test the ‘minimality norm’
by applying an alternate minimality criterion. The study
reported in the above section ‘defined’ minimality in terms
of the number of relocated objects, and the results suggest
that subjects did not strive to minimize such changes (or that
the impetus was rather weak in comparison to the effect of
the LO principle). In the present study, we look at
minimality as measured by the number of initial premises
preserved.
We present two experiments, where we administered
tasks similar to the ones described above: two initial
statements describe a spatial layout of three horizontally
arranged objects. The arrangement must then be revised
after a third statement (the “fact”) is presented. In half of the
items, the LO revision permits the subject to preserve one of
the initial statements (LOpreserve condition), in the other
half, the LO revision entails the rejection of both initial
statements (LOreject condition). The question was whether
participants try to preserve one of the initial statements. If
so, the effect of the LO principle should be reduced in the
LOreject condition.
The first experiment allowed participants to generate their
arrangements freely in drawing tasks. In the second
experiment, participants accomplished a verification task,
selecting the respective arrangements among several
arrangements simultaneously presented on a computer
screen.

Initial arrangement:

Hammer – Pliers – Saw
Drill

Counter-fact:
"The Hammer is right of the Saw”
(with the “Hammer” as the LO of the fact)
Preferred revision:

Pliers – Saw – Hammer
Drill

1953

Experiment 1: Drawing Spatial Arrangements
Participants received two statements about the arrangement
of three objects, presented on PowerPoint slides via video
projection. The task was to draw the arrangements (in
specially prepared booklets). Subsequently, participants
received a “fact” inconsistent with the previous information,
and were asked to draw a revised arrangement.

Method
Participants Twenty-three participants (11 male; age: M =
23.57; SD = 7.24), all undergraduate students (among them
8 students in psychology) from the University of Giessen,
gave written informed consent to participate. Participants
were tested in small groups (n = 6-10) and received course
credit or were paid at a rate of 8 Euros per hour for
participation.
Materials, Procedure, and Design Verbal descriptions of
horizontal one-dimensional spatial arrangements of three
small, equal-sized, disyllabic-termed objects (in German),
belonging to one of two categories (fruits or tools) were
presented. The descriptions consisted of two statements
(premises), expressing a binary relation between x and y of
the form xRy. Premises were presented in a sequential
manner, displayed one at a time, with a display duration of
10s each. The premises contained the relational expressions
“directly left of” and “directly right of”. The occurrence and
combination of the relational expressions were counterbalanced across the experimental items, such that all
possible combinations of the two types of relational
expression occurred equally often.
There were no
instructions dictating how to interpret ‘directly left/right of’
and ‘directly below/above’. An example description
(resulting in the arrangement Mango - Apple - Pear) is
provided below:
1st premise: “Mango directly left of apple.”
2nd premise: “Pear directly right of apple.”
The description was followed by the prompt “Please
sketch the arrangement of the objects.” with display
duration of 20s, allowing the participants to sketch the
arrangement. The prompt “Please turn the page.” with a
duration of 3s, and a blank slide with the duration of 2s were
shown before a third statement (fact) was presented for 10s.
The instructions that the participants received at the
beginning of the experiment included the statement that they
cannot be sure whether the information about the object
arrangement provided by the first two statements is correct,
but that the fact (presented in red letters to contrast it from
the initially presented premises which were black) should be
taken as incontrovertible. The fact – again expressing a
binary relation of the form xRy – provided information
about the relation between the central object and an object at
an outermost position (leftmost in half of the items;
rightmost in the other half). The relations specified by the
fact statements were (in half of the items) “directly below”

and (in the other half of the items) “directly above”. For
example:
Contradicting fact: “The apple is directly above the
mango.”
In half of the items, the fact presented the central object of
the initial arrangement as object x (the to-be-located object,
LO, of the binary relation), in the other half as object y (the
reference object, RO). Accordingly, in half of the items, one
of the outermost positioned objects instantiated object y
(RO), in the other half, object x (LO).
The fact was followed by the prompt “Please sketch the
arrangement of the objects.” with display duration of 20s,
and subsequently, the prompt “Please turn the page.” with a
duration of 3s. There was a blank slide presented for 2s
before the next item was presented. The task of the
participants was to follow the prompts, i.e., to sketch the
object arrangements and turn the page, when instructed by
the presented slides. Participants used a pencil to sketch
their arrangements in specially prepared booklets.
Participants were instructed to draw the object arrangement
according to the description of the first two premises, and
then re-draw the arrangement, after the fact had been shown,
thereby taking the fact into account (i.e., such that the
drawing was consistent with the fact). In each trial, there
were several ways to achieve consistency with the fact,
among them the revision by relocation of the fact’s LO:
LO revision:

Apple
Mango – … – Pear

In half of the items, relocation of the LO entails that the
information provided by exactly one of the two premises
(ratio 50:50) was preserved in the resulting revised
arrangement. These items are referred to as “LOpreserve”
items. In the other half of the items, relocation of the LO
entails that the information provided by neither of the initial
premises was preserved in the resulting revised arrangement
(as is the case in the above example).These items are
referred to as “LOreject” items.
Sixty-four experimental items were presented, preceded
by four practice items (not analyzed). Each group received
the items in a different randomized order. Descriptions were
provided using Microsoft PowerPoint (Version 2007)
running in the windows XP environment on a standard
personal computer. PowerPoint slides were presented on a
large screen via video projector. Drawings for each trial
were analyzed after the experimental session.
Percentage values for correctly drawn arrangements were
calculated. The drawings produced after the fact statement
had been presented were of special interest. We were
interested in the solutions participants offered, and whether
the solutions differed between LOpreserve and LOreject
tasks.

1954

Result
Mean percentage rate of correctly drawn initial
arrangements was 91.56 % (SD = 6.47). Erroneous trials
were excluded from further analyses. All drawings of the
initial arrangements were horizontally aligned, with roughly
equally sized small spaces between the objects. The
drawings thus reflect that participants were disposed to
interpret the expression “directly left/right of” as implying
adjacency and horizontal alignment. Differences in the
response patterns within LOpreserve and LOreject test
conditions (see below) provides further evidence that
participants tended to adopt this interpretation of such
relational expressions. Mean percentage rate of correctly
drawn revised arrangements was 96.63 % (SD = 3.62).
Erroneous trials were excluded from further analyses.
For the revision phase an ANOVA with the factors
Condition (LOpreserve, LOreject) × Revision Type (LO,
Non-LO) was conducted, and revealed a main effect of
Revision Type, F(2,22) = 20.49; p < .001 η2part = .48], and a
significant interaction [F(2,22) = 6.49; p = .019; η2part = .23].
LO revisions were performed significantly more often than
Non-LO revisions (t(22) = 4.81; p < .001). In the
LOpreserve condition, there were significantly more LO
revisions than in the LOreject condition (t(22) = -2.54; p =
.019). The results are depicted in figure 1.

Initial Model: Pflaume – Kiwi – Apfel
(Plum – Kiwi fruit – Apple)
LO revision:

Kiwi
Pflaume – … – Apfel

RO revision:

Pflaume – Kiwi
Apfel

HY revision:
Figure 2. Example of LO, RO, and HY revisions, in
response to fact: Kiwi is above Apple. (HY revision is an
actual subject drawing.)
In order to investigate the interest of participants in HY
revisions, we conducted a second experiment which
required participants to select (or verify) different solutions.
In the ‘revision phase’ of the experiment, we presented
subjects with all three revised model types (LO, RO, and
HY).

Experiment 2: Selecting Spatial Arrangements
Experiment 2 resembled experiment 1. The crucial
difference was that experiment 2 required verification of
constructed and revised arrangements where in experiment 1
participants needed to generate the required arrangements.

Method

Figure 1. In the LOpreserve condition, participants
generated more LO revisions than in the LOreject condition.
Error bars showing standard deviations.
The LO effect was mitigated in the LOreject condition.
Apparently, participants were more inclined to apply
alternative strategies in tasks where the preferred strategy
(to relocate the LO) led to the rejection of both initial
premises. 10.54% of subject responses represented an
(unexpected) alternative revision type (what we call a
“hybrid” revision, HY) that represents a sort of compromise
between a model resulting from an LO and an RO
relocation. The remaining Non-LO revisions reflected
(expected) RO relocations. Examples of the three types of
response are depicted in figure 2. All correct drawings of
revisions, participants provided, were easily and
unambiguously identifiable as belonging to one of the three
revision types.

Participants Twenty participants (4 male; age: M = 25.60;
SD = 4.54), all undergraduate students (among them 1
student of psychology) from the University of Giessen, gave
written informed consent to participation. Participants were
tested individually, and received course credit or were paid
at a rate of 8 Euro per hour for participation.
Materials, Procedure, and Design The same verbal
descriptions in experiment 1 were presented. Premises
occurred on a computer screen, displayed one at a time, in a
self-paced manner. Subsequent to premise presentation, the
correct spatial arrangement and an incorrect arrangement
(correct arrangement inverted), were presented. For
example:
1st premise: “Mango directly left of apple.”
2nd premise: “Pear directly right of apple.”
Correct arrangement:
Mango - Apple - Pear

Incorrect arrangement:
Pear - Apple - Mango

Participants were instructed to select the correct object
arrangement, and indicate their choice by pressing a left or
right response button with the left or right hand,
accordingly. Left and right locations for correct and
incorrect arrangements were counter-balanced across the
experiment. The number of correct decisions and
corresponding decision times were recorded.

1955

Subsequently to the construction phase, a third statement
(fact) was presented. The facts resembled the facts presented
in experiment 1. Participants were then presented with three
object arrangements, among which they had to select a
revised arrangement, indicating their choice by pressing the
respective left, central, or right response button. In fact, all
three arrangements were consistent with the presented
“fact”. However, the arrangements differed from the initial
arrangement according to the position of the three objects,
representing an LO, RO, or HY revision. The locations
where LO, RO, and HY revisions were displayed were
counter-balanced. The revised arrangements chosen, along
with corresponding response times, were recorded.
Sixty-four experimental, preceded by 4 practice trials (not
analyzed), were presented in a random order. All stimuli
were generated and presented using Superlab 4.0 (Cedrus
Corporation, San Pedro, CA, 1999) with an RB-530
response box running on a standard personal computer
connected to a 19’’-monitor.

Figure 3. In the LOreject condition, HY and RO revisions
were chosen more often than LO revisions. LO revisions
were chosen more often in the LOpreserve compared to the
LOreject condition. Error bars showing standard deviations.

Result
Mean percentage rate of correctly selected initial
arrangements was 89.69 % (SD = 11.34). Erroneous trials
were excluded from further analyses. Mean percentage rate
of correctly selected revised arrangements was 99.89 % (SD
= 3.42). Note that participants had to select among correct
revisions, and errors were due to presses of “wrong” answer
keys. Erroneous trials were excluded from further analyses.
For the revision phase, separate ANOVAs for revision
rates and revision times were calculated, respectively with
the factors Condition (LOpreserve, LOreject) × Revision
Type (LO, RO, HY).
The ANOVA for selection rates revealed a significant
interaction Condition × Revision Type [F(2,18) = 4.94; p =
.012; η2part = .21], and a marginally significant main effect of
Revision Type [F(2,18) = 3.25; p = .070; η2part = .15].
Follow-up tests revealed significantly more selections of
HY than LO revisions (t(19) = -5.80; p < .001) and more
RO than LO revisions (t(19) = -2.54; p = .02) in the LO
reject condition (see figure 3). Choices of HY and RO
revisions were comparable (p > .40) as were revision
choices in the LOpreserve condition (p > .50).
LO revisions were significantly more frequent in the
LOpreserve than in the LOreject condition (t(19) = -3.22; p
= .005; There was also a marginally significant preference
for RO revisions in the LOreject compared to the
LOpreserve condition (t(19) = 1.79; p = .09). HY models
were chosen comparably often in both conditions (p > .15).
The ANOVA for revision times revealed a main effect of
Condition [F(1,19) = 7.68; p = .012; η2part = .29]. Revisions
in the LOreject condition took significantly longer than in
the LOpreserve condition (6.21s; SD = 2.52 vs. 5.29s; SD =
2.11; t(19) = 2.77; p = .012). LOreject condition tasks were
apparently more difficult to solve.

Figure 4. Mean revision times were lower in the LOpreserve
than the LOreject condition. Error bars showing standard
deviations.
In the LOreject condition, participants provided more
Non-LO solutions than in the LOpreserve condition,
although (unlike in experiment 1), participants were more
likely to consider the HY solution. In fact, there was a slight
preference for selecting HY models. However, LO revisions
were still more frequent in the LOpreserve than in the
LOreject condition, suggesting an effect of minimality, as
measured by the number of initial premises preserved.

Discussion
In the case of (spatial) belief revision, it seems reasonable
(from an epistemological perspective) to keep changes as
small as possible, i.e., to make the revision ‘minimal’. The
preceding prescription is complicated by the fact that it is
not always clear what counts as “minimal” in a given
context. The aim of the current study was to assess whether
naive subjects exhibit any preference for minimal spatial
belief revisions, where minimality is understood in terms of
preserving initial premises.
Results of previous studies suggest that reasoners have a
strong preference for LO revisions in the context of spatial
belief revision (e.g., Bucher et al., 2011; Knauff et al.,
2013). Indeed, a recent study showed that the preference for
LO revisions supersedes the influence of the putative norm
that states that agents should prefer revisions that minimize

1956

the number of objects that are relocated (Bucher &
Nejasmic, 2012).
The present study investigates whether the number of
initial premises preserved, could serve as an appropriate
minimality criterion in spatial belief revision. To that end,
we conducted two experiments where we varied the number
of premises that are preserved when a spatial model is
revised according to LO relocation versus RO relocation.
The results show an effect of minimality. In a first (drawing)
experiment, the LO effect was reduced in the condition
where the LO revision entails the rejection of both premises
of the initial description (as opposed to one premise).
Participants make more Non-LO revisions in an LOreject
condition than in an LOpreserve condition. Many of the
Non-LO revisions were (as expected) RO revisions, but
many of the Non-LO revisions were (unexpectedly) HY
revisions (a compromise between an LO and an RO
revision). In a second experiment, participants were required
to select one of three possible revision types (LO, RO, or
HY). While all three models were selected in almost equal
measures in the LOpreserve condition, LO revisions were
less often selected in the LOreject condition. This result also
suggests an influence of a minimality norm as measured by
number of initial premises preserved.
While the effect of the LO principle was strongly present
in experiment 1, when participants had to generate the
solutions “actively”, the effect failed to be present in
experiment 2, where possible solutions were given. In fact,
in experiment 2, there was a slight preference for selecting
HY revisions. Presumably, participants adapted their
revision strategy to the conditions of the experiment, and
learned to select a solution that is appropriate under both
test conditions. Nevertheless, participants were still inclined
to select the ‘pure’ LO revisions more frequently in the
LOpreserve condition, and the ‘pure’ RO revisions more
frequently in the LOreject condition. We note, moreover,
that subjects (in experiment 2) found trials under the
LOreject test condition more difficult than those under the
LOpreserve test condition, as reflected by longer response
times. This may reflect a tension between a ‘basic’
preference for LO revisions, and sensitivity to other
considerations, such as minimality, in the course of spatial
belief revision.
Finally, we want to point out that HY revisions reflect a
tendency to preserve features of the initially constructed
spatial arrangement (model), rather than the precise content
of initial premises (which express, e.g., x directly left of y,
and z directly right of y). When participants select a revised
spatial arrangement, it appears that they proceed by
modifying the initially constructed spatial model. They do
not re-construct the revised model ‘from scratch’ by
reflection on the verbatim content of the given premises.
This finding is in accord with previous findings about
spatial mental models (e.g., Mani & Johnson-Laird, 1982),
and provides evidence for the claim that spatial belief
revision can indeed be described as a modification of spatial
mental models.

References
Bucher, L. & Nejasmic, J. (2012). Relocating multiple
objects during belief revision. In C. Stachniss, K. Schill,
& D. Uttal (Eds.), Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence:
Spatial Cognition. Berlin, Germany: Springer.
Bucher, L., Krumnack, A., Nejasmic, J., & Knauff, M.
(2011). Cognitive processes underlying spatial belief
revision. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Bucher, L., Nejasmic, J., Bertleff, S., & Knauff, M. (2013).
Plausibility and visualizability in relational belief
revision. In: M Knauff, M Pauen, N Sebanz, I Wachsmuth
(eds) In: Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Gärdenfors, P. (1992). Belief revision. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Harman, G. (1986). Change in view. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction.
Hove: Erlbaum.
Knauff, M. (2009). A neuro-cognitive theory of deductive
relational reasoning with mental models and visual
images. Spatial Cognition and Computation, 9, 109-137.
Knauff, M., Bucher, L., Krumnack, A., & Nejasmic, J.
(2013). Spatial belief revision. Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 147-156.
Krumnack, A., Bucher, L., Nejasmic, J., & Knauff, M.
(2011). Efficiency and minimal change in spatial belief
revision. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Landau, B., & Jackendoff, R. (1993). 'What' and 'where' in
spatial language and spatial cognition. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 16, 217-265.
Mani, K. & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1982). The mental
representation of spatial descriptions. Memory &
Cognition, 10, 181–187.
Mikheeva, M., Bucher, L., Nejasmic, J., & Knauff, M.
(2013). Spatial reasoning in native speakers of Russian
and German. In: M Knauff, M Pauen, N Sebanz, I
Wachsmuth (eds) In: Proceedings of the 35th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Miller, G.A., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1976). Language and
Perception. Cambridge: Havard University Press.
Nejasmic, J., Bucher, L., & Knauff, M. (2013). Grounded
spatial belief revision. In: M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N.
Sebanz, I.Wachsmuth (eds) In: Proceedings of the 35th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Talmy, L. (1983). How language structures space. In H. L.
Pick & L. P. Acredolo (Eds.), Spatial orientation: Theory,
research and application. London, UK: Plenum.

1957

