UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling sentence processing difficulty with a conditional probability calculator

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/439786hs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Chen, Zhong
Hunter, Tim
Yun, Jiwon
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling sentence processing difficulty with a conditional probability calculator
Zhong Chen (zc77@cornell.edu)

Tim Hunter (timh@umn.edu)

Department of Linguistics, Cornell University Institute of Linguistics, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
Ithaca, NY, 14853 USA
Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA

Jiwon Yun (jiwon.yun@stonybrook.edu)

John Hale (jthale@cornell.edu)

Department of Linguistics, Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, NY 11794 USA

Department of Linguistics, Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, 14853 USA

Abstract
We present the conditional probability calculator CCPC for
predicting word-by-word processing difficulties in human sentence comprehension. This system, in conjunction with
weighted grammars and the linking hypothesis Entropy Reduction (Hale, 2006), derives the subject-object asymmetry in
Italian relative clauses, including the animacy effect of head
nouns.

and its Entropy on the model defined by the probabilistic
rules. Changes in this Entropy value before and after a given
word reflect the processing cost on disambiguation and can
be graphed as in Figure 2. Section 3-5 of Yun et al. (In press)
present this method in a tutorial fashion.
MG file
suﬃx: .pl

Keywords: sentence processing; computational modeling;
Entropy Reduction; Italian; relative clauses

hmg2mcfg

hmg2mcfg

MCFG file
suﬃx: .mcfg

Introduction
The computational modeling of incremental sentence comprehension has attracted increasing attention in recent years.
Proposals such as Surprisal (Hale, 2001; Levy, 2008) and
Entropy Reduction (Hale, 2003, 2006) use probabilistic
information about syntactic structures to derive word-byword processing difficulty predictions, for instance regarding different types of relative clauses (RCs). However, the
relationship between these comprehension difficulty metrics/predictions and any specific syntactic disambiguation decisions is often hard to visualize. In this paper, we demonstrate a freely available software system, CCPC1 , which allows psycholinguists to calculate the probability of alternative
completions of initial substrings from user-supplied weighted
grammars. A key feature of this system is the ability to enumerate syntactic alternatives that are in play at a given point,
essentially visualizing the contents of a ranked parallel parser
state. In addition to our earlier modeling efforts on East Asian
languages (Yun et al., 2010; Chen et al., 2012; Yun et al.,
In press), this conditional probability calculator allows us to
make correct predictions about the subject-object asymmetry
in Italian RCs and model the effect of head-noun animacy.

Modeling Procedure
Our modeling procedure starts from a user-prepared grammar. This includes expressive Minimalist Grammars (MGs)
in the style of Stabler (1997) that model the relationship between fillers and gaps in RCs. Using CCPC (Figure 1), we
convert a MG to an equivalent Multiple Context Free Grammar (MCFG) (Seki et al., 1991). We weight the MCFG
rules by attestation counts of relevant structures in the corpus. Using the resulting weighted grammar (WMCFG), the
CCPC calculates the “remainder set” of syntactic alternatives
1 http://conf.ling.cornell.edu/compling/software.htm

Dictionary file
suﬃx: .dict

train, or
uniform.awk,
or . . .

visualize
(with -o)

visualize
(without -o)

WMCFG file
suﬃx: .wmcfg

Listing of n-best
derived strings
and X-bar structures

Listing of n-best
derived strings
parse

Derivation structure of
a single sentence
intersect

Figure 1: Overview of the system workflow and the dependencies among various kinds of inputs and outputs

Processing Predictions
The Subject-Object Asymmetry in Italian Relatives
Using an explicit grammar fragment for Italian RCs, the
CCPC predicts that the widely-observed subject relative advantage holds in Italian (Di Domenico & Di Matteo, 2009).
Figure 2 illustrates the predicted disambiguation costs at each
word, quantified by reductions in Entropy. The comparison
between subject relatives (SRs) and object relatives (ORs)
suggests early processing difficulty in ORs at the embedded
subject “il pagliaccio”, as compared to the embedded verb
“guarda” in SRs. This is roughly compatible with the English
modeling results using Surprisal (Hale, 2001; Levy, 2008).
However, CCPC makes it possible to understand the Entropy
Reduction account in terms of specific syntactic disambiguation decisions. The Italian SR prefix is more ambiguous because the omitted phrase before the verb “guarda” can either
be an extracted subject or a dropped pro. Therefore, less disambiguation work has been done in the SR than in the OR.
This Italian RC example illustrates a general method for
deriving processing predictions from grammars. These predictions can reflect distributional factors. We leverage the
Turin University Treebank (Bosco et al., 2000) to estimate
a handful of parameters: the rate of noun phrase postmodification by relative clauses vs complement clauses, the

1856

in incremental sentence comprehension. We demonstrate this
system by modeling the subject-object asymmetry in Italian
relative clauses. Incorporating frequency information about
functional features like animacy allows us to take an initial
step toward rich conceptual structure.

1.3

SRC
ORC

Acknowledgments

1.0

1.14

We thank Cristiano Chesi for giving us access to the Siena
University Treebank. This work was supported by the NSF
CAREER Award 0741666.

0.95
0.88

0.6

References

0.4

0.8

0.83 0.83

Belletti, A., & Chesi, C. (2011). Relative clauses from the
input: syntactic considerations on a corpus-based analysis
of Italian. In STiL-Studies in Linguistics (Vol. 4).
Bosco, C., Lombardo, V., Vassallo, D., & Lesmo, L. (2000).
Building a Treebank for Italian: a Data-driven Annotation
Schema. In Proceedings of the 2nd LREC (pp. 99–105).
Chen, Z., Jäger, L., & Hale, J. (2012). Uncertainty reduction as a predictor of reading difficulty in Chinese relative
clauses. In Y.-O. Biq & L. Chen (Eds.), Proceedings of the
13th International Symposium on Chinese Languages and
Linguistics (IsCLL-13) (pp. 245–261). Taipei, Taiwan.
Chesi, C., Lebani, G., & Pallottino, M. (2011). A Bilingual Treebank (ITA-LIS) suitable for Machine Translation:
what Cartography and Minimalism teach us. In STiLStudies in Linguistics (Vol. 2, p. 165-185).
Di Domenico, A., & Di Matteo, R. (2009). Processing Italian relative clauses: working memory span and word order
effects on RTs. Journal of General Psychology(136), 387406.
Hale, J. (2001). A probabilistic Earley parser as a psycholinguistic model. In Proceedings of the 2nd NAACL.
Hale, J. (2003). The information conveyed by words in sentences. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 32(2), 101–
123.
Hale, J. (2006). Uncertainty about the rest of the sentence.
Cognitive Science, 30(4).
Levy, R. (2008). Expectation-based syntactic comprehension. Cognition, 106, 1126-1177.
Seki, H., Matsumura, T., Fujii, M., & Kasami, T. (1991).
On multiple context-free grammars. Theoretical Computer
Science, 88(2), 191-229.
Stabler, E. (1997). Derivational minimalism. In C. Retoré (Ed.), Logical aspects of computational linguistics.
Springer-Verlag.
Traxler, M., Morris, R. K., & Seely, R. E. (2002). Processing subject and object relative clauses: Evidence from eye
movements. Journal of Memory and Language, 47, 69-90.
Yun, J., Chen, Z., Hunter, T., Whitman, J., & Hale, J. (In
press). Uncertainty in processing relative clauses across
East Asian languages. Journal of East Asian Linguistics.
Yun, J., Whitman, J., & Hale, J. T. (2010). Subjectobject asymmetries in Korean sentence comprehension. In
S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the
32nd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.

0.2

Entropy Reduction (bit)

1.2

1.4

choice between transitive and intransitive verbs, and the rate
of subject omission. The selection of this parameterization,
rather than some other one, is a consequence of the grammar
fragment itself.

0.16

0.12 0.12
0.07

0.0

0

Il
Il

0

ragazzo
ragazzo

0

0

0

[che
[che

guarda il pagliaccio]
il pagliaccio guarda]

baciò
baciò

la
la

0

ragazza
ragazza

Figure 2: Predicted reading difficulty of Italian RCs

Modeling the effect of Head Noun Animacy
The generality of our approach allows a theorist to explore the
role of “formalist” as well as “functionalist” features, such as
animacy, in sentence processing. The animacy feature is interesting because of its differential influence on RC comprehension across languages. For example, Traxler et al. (2002)
report that the difficulty of processing English ORs is reduced
when the head noun of the OR is inanimate. However, Belletti
and Chesi (2011) find that participants of a Italian sentence
production task are immune to the change of head noun animacy in ORs. Using CCPC as discussed above, the Entropy
Reduction metric correctly derives this observed result from
a combination of grammatical assumptions and corpus distributions.
We rewrite the Italian grammar fragment so that the animacy information is encoded by subcategorized rules. The
animacy-tagged Siena University Treebank (Chesi et al.,
2011) allows us to obtain frequency distributions of noun
phrase animacy both in matrix clauses and in RCs. Table 1
compares the ER predictions for the RC region, suggesting
that the processing difficulty of ORs will not be reduced with
an inanimate head noun phrase.
Table 1: Predicted processing difficulty for the RC region
SR
OR
SR
OR

Head-NP
+anim
+anim
−anim
−anim

Embedded-NP
−anim
−anim
+anim
+anim

ER
1.39
1.58
1.93
2.15

Diff.
0.19
0.22

Conclusion
The conditional probability calculator CCPC, along with a
complexity metric, can predict processing difficulty profiles

1857

