UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling word learning and its impact in reading comprehension

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4mm9h3nn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Author
Vale-Lisboa, Juan

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Developmental Changes in the Semantic Organization of Living Kinds
Layla Unger (LUnger@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15214 USA

Anna V. Fisher (Fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15214 USA

Christopher J. MacLellan (CMaclell@cs.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Human-Computer Interaction Institute, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15214 USA
Abstract
Semantic knowledge contains information about both
individual concepts and relationships between concepts.
Relationships come in many forms, including taxonomic and
thematic, and are critical for converting collections of
attributes known about each entity into an interconnected web
of semantic knowledge. According to computational
modeling studies, increasing knowledge about entities and
their relationships should support increasing elaboration in the
organizational structure of semantic knowledge. In contrast,
extant empirical research has presented a static picture of the
developmental trajectory of semantic organization, in which
concepts remain organized according to thematic relations
into adulthood. The current developmental study introduces
methodological innovations designed to overcome limitations
that may have skewed the developmental trajectory described
in prior studies. The picture that has emerged from this study
reflects dramatic changes in semantic organization from
preschool age to adulthood, in which an initially limited grasp
of multiple types of relations expands and becomes
increasingly robust with age.
Keywords: Semantic Knowledge; Cognitive Development

Introduction
Over the course of development, children learn a substantial
amount of information about both entities in the world
around them, and the relationships between these entities.
These relationships play a critical organizational role by
converting individual collections of attributes known about
each entity into a structured, interconnected network of
semantic knowledge. The relationships that link entities fall
into many types. For instance, thematic relationships link
entities based on their co-occurrence in the same
environment, whereas taxonomic relationships capture the
degree to which entities are of the same kind based on
shared properties. Computational models suggest that
semantic development entails an increasingly rich
organization of concepts into a network of clusters of related
entities (Kemp & Tenenbaum, 2008; McClelland & Rogers,
2003). Early clusters are diffuse and strongly influenced by
more superficial relations, such as environmental cooccurrence or perceptual similarity. With access to
increasingly rich information, the networks become
organized into discrete clusters according to kind-based

relations. For example, given a small number of features for
a set of animals, Kemp and Tenenbaum’s (2008) structure
learning algorithm identified crude divisions between water
animals, land herbivores, land carnivores, insects, and birds.
Given increasingly large numbers of features, the algorithm
identified both fine-grained structures within these groups,
such as a distinction between water mammals, water
reptiles, and fish, and links between different groups (see
also Hills, Maouene, Maouene, Sheya, & Smith, 2009;
McClelland & Rogers, 2003).
This trajectory is consistent with evidence about the types
of relationships that children recognize presented by studies
using match-to-sample tasks, in which children are asked to
identify which of multiple entities matches a target entity
according to some criterion. This research has revealed that
when task demands are low, children can make principled
choices according to both thematic and taxonomic relations
from an early age (Nguyen, 2007). This ability grows
dramatically over the course of development: With age,
children can succeed on higher-demand versions of the task,
flexibly switch between making choices based on different
relations, and provide articulate justifications for their
choices (e.g., Blaye, Bernard-Peyron, Paour, & Bonthoux,
2006; Fisher, 2011).
The increasing competence in identifying different kinds
of relationships among entities is particularly pronounced in
children’s understanding of taxonomic relationships (Blaye
et al., 2006; Hashimoto, McGregor, & Graham, 2007).
However, empirical investigations of the organizational
structure of the semantic knowledge network have revealed
a static developmental picture, in which concepts remain
organized according to thematic relations throughout
childhood and even into adulthood (Crowe & Prescott,
2003; Storm, 1980; Winkler-Rhoades, Medin, Waxman,
Woodring, & Ross, 2010). The paradoxically static
developmental trajectory revealed by these studies may in
part stem from aspects of their methodology that limited the
scope of their data to capture only a narrow facet of
semantic organization. The following section describes
these limitations, and the methodological approach of the
present study designed to overcome them.

1646

Past and Present Methodological Approaches
Unlike match-to-sample tasks, studies that investigate the
underlying organizational structure of semantic knowledge
collect pairwise similarity judgments for a full set of
presented entities. This approach allows researchers to go
beyond assessing whether participants can recognize a given
type of relation by deriving a picture of the structure of the
subset the semantic knowledge network that represents these
entities. Examinations of this structure can reveal the
influences of different types of relationships, relationships
that vary in strength, and overlapping relationships (as when
entities are both taxonomically and thematically related).
The majority of these studies have used the semantic
fluency paradigm to collect similarity judgments (Crowe &
Prescott, 2003; Storm, 1980; Winkler-Rhoades et al., 2010).
In this paradigm, participants are asked to list as many items
as they can think of from a target category, such as
“Animals”, within a short period of time. The proximity of
items to each other across lists is taken as a measure of their
perceived similarity and therefore the proximity of their
corresponding conceptual representations in semantic
knowledge. These data are then submitted to analyses
designed to derive representations of the structure
underlying semantic organization. For example, hierarchical
cluster analysis identifies local clusters of items linked by
short distances, that are in turn embedded within higher
order clusters of items linked by greater distances. An
examination of the relationships that apparently determine
whether concepts are closely linked is taken to reveal the
relationships that organize semantic knowledge. For
example, Crowe and Prescott (2003) determined that the
hierarchical clustering solutions for children aged 5 to 10
were all predominantly organized according to thematic
relationships. Similarly, Storm (1980) found no significant
differences between hierarchical clustering solutions for age
groups ranging from Kindergarten to Adults, although the
relationships that governed these solutions were not clear.
This static developmental trajectory for semantic
organization from early childhood to adulthood stands in
stark contrast to the pronounced changes observed in both
computational modeling studies and developmental studies
that used match-to-sample tasks. However, it is possible
that the semantic fluency task may yield skewed data due to
two critical limitations. First, over 90% of the animals
participants listed across studies were mammals. Data
collected from within a taxonomic category have limited
potential to reveal distinctions between concepts based on
taxonomic relations, thus contributing to the apparent
absence of taxonomic relations from semantic organization.
Second, participants may invoke a response strategy in
which they intentionally search for items associated with the
same environment. In fact, the semantic fluency task has
been used to investigate the development of children’s
ability to flexibly invoke response strategies (Snyder &
Munakata, 2010). From this perspective, participants may
draw on a biased sample of the relations that organize
semantic knowledge when completing this task.

To overcome these limitations, this project developed a
methodological approach that does not rely on spontaneous
production data. Instead, this methodology entails the
selection of a predetermined set of items drawn from
overlapping taxonomic and thematic groups. For example,
the set of stimuli used in this study includes items such as
‘seaweed’ (thematically related to other water items, and
taxonomically related to other plants), and ‘chicken’
(thematically related to other farm items, and taxonomically
related to other birds). Participants were asked to arrange
these items on a grid in a task modeled on the Spatial
Arrangement paradigm introduced by Goldstone (1994).
Participants arranged items multiple times according to
three different sorting prompts, in which they were asked to
put together things that “go together”, “are the same kind of
thing”, or “match”. The use of multiple prompts was
designed to allow participants to draw on multiple relations
when making arrangement judgments, as past research has
demonstrated that prompt wording influences the
relationships on which participants focus (Lin & Murphy,
2001; Waxman & Namy, 1997). The proximity of items to
each other on sorting trials was taken as an index of the
proximity of their corresponding mental representations.
This task was administered to participants from five age
groups, ranging from pre-school age children to adults. In
order to track the development of semantic organization
across this range, data were submitted to analyses designed
to assess participants’ sensitivity to different types of
relationships, and to analyses designed to derive a picture of
the structure underlying semantic organization.

Method
Participants
The total sample of 90 participants included 18 participants
in each of five age groups: Preschool (Mage = 4.5 years, SD
= 0.83), Kindergarten (Mage = 5.6 years, SD = 0.52), First
Grade (Mage = 6.5 years, SD = 0.44), Second Grade (Mage =
7.6 years, SD = 0.72), and Adults (Mage = 19 years, SD =
1.84). Approximately half of the participants in each age
group were female.

Materials
The materials included a game board, a stimulus sheet, 15
stimulus cards, and a camera. The game board was a 10 x 10
grid of 2.5” squares. The stimuli were a set of 15 plants and

1647

Table 1: Plants and animals used in sorting task.

Farm
Water
Wild/Zoo

Birds
Chicken
Turkey
Penguin
Ostrich
Eagle

Mammals
Pig
Whale
Beaver
Lion
Kangaroo

Plants
Corn
Lettuce
Seaweed
Water Lily
Cactus

the game board. The average duration of each sorting trial
was approximately 4 min.

Results
Because no effects of prompt wording were observed across
the sample (F(2,34)=1.33, p=.28), the following analyses
are presented for data collapsed across sorting trials for each
participant.

Scoring
Figure 1: Images used in picture sorting task,
presented in the configuration used for the stimulus
sheet.
animals that were calibrated with a separate group of adult
participants to be cross-classifiable into one of three
taxonomic groups (mammal, bird, or plant) and one of three
thematic groups (farm, water, and wild/zoo). The
assignment of stimuli to thematic groups was based on the
results from a questionnaire in which a separate group of
adult participants rated the degree to which each possible
pair of a broader range of 20 plants and animals belonged to
each of the thematic groups on a 7-point Likert scale. Each
of the five stimuli assigned to a given thematic group were
those that achieved a rating of ≥ 5.5 for that group when
paired with each of the other four (see Table 1).
The selected items were presented as black and white line
drawings intended to reduce the superficial visual similarity
of items to each other, particularly for items from the same
group. The stimuli were arranged in a random order on the
stimulus sheet (see Figure 1). Additionally, each organism
was depicted individually on a separate stimulus card.

Procedure
Participants were tested individually in a quiet space. To
begin, participants were told that they were going to play a
game in which their job was to help a character, Zibbo,
organize his favorite things in “a few different ways”. The
experimenter then showed participants the stimulus sheet,
named each organism, and removed the sheet from view.
The experimenter then administered three sorting trials.
Each sorting trial began with a prompt to put together plants
and animals that: “Go together”, “Are the same kind of
thing”, or “Match”. The order of these prompts was
counterbalanced across three between-subjects versions of
the task that were otherwise identical. The experimenter
then placed one of the 15 stimulus cards on a central square
of the game board, and then named and presented each of
the remaining cards to the participant for the participant to
place on the board. Each sorting trial presented stimuli in a
different, pre-determined, pseudo-random order in which no
more than two organisms from the same taxonomic or
thematic group were presented consecutively. During a
given trial, participants were allowed to move cards that
they had placed earlier in the trial. After each trial, the
experimenter took a photograph of the game board to record
the locations of the 15 cards, then removed the cards from

The photographs taken following each sorting trial were
scored by treating the 10x10 game board as a coordinate
plane and calculating the Euclidean distance between each
card. The range of possible distances was 1 (cards adjacent)
to 12.73 (cards on opposite corners of the board).

Sensitivity Analyses
To determine the extent to which participants in each age
group were sensitive to different types of relationships, each
of the pairwise distances between the 15 stimuli (121 in
total) were assigned to one of four Relationship conditions:
1) Both taxonomic and thematic, 2) Taxonomic, 3)
Thematic, and 4) Unrelated. This assignment was
determined on the basis of the allocation of stimuli to
groups given in Table 1. These data were then submitted to
a set of ANOVAs in order to assess the effect of
Relationship on the full sample as a whole and on each age
group. Bonferroni-corrected pairwise comparisons were
used to further explore condition differences.
First, the data were submitted to a 4 x 5 Mixed ANOVA,
with one within-subjects factor of Relationship (4 levels),
and one between-subjects factor of age group (5 levels).
This analysis revealed an overall main effect of
Relationship, F (2.27, 188.41) = 120.21, p < .001, no main
effect of Age, F (4, 83) = 1.35, p = .26), and a significant
interaction between Relationship and Age, F (9.08, 188.41)
= 10.71, p < .001). Pairwise comparisons between
Relationship conditions revealed that all conditions were
significantly different from each other (all ps < .05).
Data for each age group were then submitted to separate
Repeated Measures ANOVAs, with Relationship as the
within-subjects factor. The effect of Relationship was
significant in all age groups, all Fs > 7.52, ps < .01.
Pairwise comparisons were used to further explore these
differences (see Figure 2). Adults differentiated between
pairs of items from all four Relationship conditions, with
both taxonomically and thematically related pairs placed
closest (mean distance = 2.16), followed by taxonomically
related pairs (mean=2.85), then thematically related pairs
(mean=3.76), with unrelated pairs placed farthest from each
other (mean=4.27), all ps < .01.
In contrast, Preschoolers placed items that were both
taxonomically and thematically related (mean distance
=2.96) closer together than all other pairs of items
(means=3.40, 3.33, 3.42 for thematic, taxonomic, and
unrelated pairs, respectively), all ps < .05, but did not
differentiate between pairs from any other conditions, all ps

1648

Thematic
Unrelated

Taxonomic & Thematic
Taxonomic

Thematic
Unrelated

Figure 2: Mean distances between pairs of items in each
Relationship condition for each age group.
> .9. Kindergarteners only placed items that were both
taxonomically and thematically related (mean=3.15) closer
than unrelated items (mean=3.85), p < .05. First and Second
Grade students showed an intermediate pattern in which
they placed items that were both taxonomically and
thematically related (means=2.72 and 2.38) closer than all
other pairs of items, all ps < .001, and placed items that
were taxonomically related (means=3.47 and 2.91) closer
than unrelated items (means=3.90 and 3.61), all ps < .05.
For Second Grade students, the differences between
taxonomic and thematic pairs (mean distance = 3.36) and
between thematic and unrelated pairs were marginally
significant, ps = .07 and .06, respectively.

First Grade

Second Grade

Adults

Taxonomic & Thematic
Taxonomic

1649

Preschool

For these analyses, the full set of average pairwise distances
between the 15 items for each age group were first
submitted to hierarchical cluster analysis, with distance
between clusters calculated using the Average method. This
form of analysis assigns items that are linked by short
distances to local clusters that are in turn embedded within
higher-order clusters of more distantly linked items. The
resultant hierarchical clustering solutions are presented as a
dendrogram for each group in Figure 3. These dendrograms
are composed of nodes (represented by vertical lines), and
arcs linking these nodes (represented by horizontal lines).
The 15 items appear as the external nodes of each
dendrogram. These external nodes are connected by arcs to
form internal nodes that group the 15 items into hierarchical
clusters. The height of the nodes captures both the similarity
of items within a cluster and the distinctiveness of items in
different clusters. Shorter nodes reflect greater similarity.
Qualitative assessment of these dendrograms reveals
dramatic changes across age groups. The dendrogram for
adult participants is highly organized at all hierarchical
levels. At the highest level, the items are split according to a
plants-versus-animals distinction, and within the animals

Kindergarten

Structure Derivation Analyses

Figure 3: Dendrograms for each age group.

cluster, items are further split according to a mammalsversus-birds distinction (though note that Whale violates
this distinction, and is clustered thematically with Penguin).
Within these three overarching taxonomic groups, items are
grouped into local clusters of both taxonomically and
thematically related items. In contrast, dendrograms for the
Preschool participants primarily contain local clusters of
items that are both taxonomically and thematically related
and are in turn embedded within idiosyncratic higher order
clusters that do not reflect any readily classifiable
relationships. Higher order structure begins to emerge in the
dendrogram for Kindergarten participants, in which both
local and higher order structure are governed by both
thematic and idiosyncratic, non-classifiable relationships.
The organization of the dendrogram for First Grade students
is more principled: The influence of tight links between
taxonomically and thematically related items is evident in
local clusters, and the influences of purely taxonomic and
purely thematic links are evident in both local and higher
order clusters. This trend towards principled organization at
multiple levels becomes more apparent in the dendrogram
for Second Grade students, which is first split into two
higher-order clusters that capture a plants-versus-animals
distinction. Within the plants cluster, items are organized
into local clusters of both taxonomically and thematically
related items. The animals cluster includes a thematic water
cluster (Whale, Penguin, and Beaver), a taxonomic bird
cluster (Turkey, Ostrich, Eagle), and clusters of both
taxonomically and thematically related items.
To quantitatively assess developmental changes apparent
in the dendrograms, the hierarchical clustering solutions for
each age group were compared to each other following the
Fowlkes and Mallows (1983) method. In this method, each
solution to be compared is cut at multiple levels to produce
a set of flat partitions that contain 2 to n-1 clusters, where n
is the number of items. The two solutions are then compared
in terms of their similarity at each partition level k, where
similarity is the degree to which the items are partitioned
into the same clusters. The result of this comparison is the
B(k) statistic, which ranges from 0 (minimally similar) to 1
(maximally similar). Values for B(k) can be computed both
for the comparison itself, and to determine the range of B(k)
that would be expected if the similarities between partitions
were produced by chance. When the observed value of B(k)
exceeds this range for a given partition level, one can
conclude that the hierarchical clustering solutions are
Table 2: Proportion of levels on which dendrograms are
similar.

Adult
2nd
1st
K
Pre-K

Adult
--7/13
7/13
0/13
0/13

2nd

1st

K

Pre-K

--1/13
0/13
1/13

--7/13
6/13

--6/13

---

similar at that level. The outcomes of this analysis are
summarized in Table 2.
In contrast with findings reported by Storm (1980) and
Crowe and Prescott (2003), findings summarized in Table 2
revealed that none of the age groups’ hierarchical clustering
solutions were similar to each other at more than half the
partition levels. The age groups that were similar to each
other at approximately half the partition levels included the
youngest participants (Preschool, Kindergarten) and the
oldest participants (Second Grade and Adults); participants
in the middle of this range (First Grade) reached this
criterion for comparisons to both the youngest participants
and Adults. Conversely, the youngest and oldest age groups
were not similar at all or all but one partition level.

Discussion
Different lines of inquiry into the developmental trajectory
of semantic organization have yielded conflicting findings.
Computational modeling studies have indicated that, over
the course of learning, semantic organization progresses
from a crude division of concepts into internally
unstructured groups to a rich, interconnected network of
concepts that captures both the structure of relations within
and links between the original groups (Hills et al., 2009;
Kemp & Tenenbaum, 2008; McClelland & Rogers, 2003).
Similarly, empirical studies that have investigated the
recognition of different types of relationships, such as those
that have used match-to-sample tasks, suggest that an early,
tenuous grasp of multiple types of relationships grows
increasingly robust with age. This trajectory appears
particularly pronounced with respect to taxonomic
relationships (Blaye et al., 2006; Hashimoto et al., 2007).
Conversely, empirical studies of the structure underpinning
semantic organization have indicated that this structure
remains unchanged over the course of development,
remaining governed by the same relationships even into
adulthood (Crowe & Prescott, 2003; Storm, 1980; WinklerRhoades et al., 2010).
The findings presented here provide evidence that the
static developmental trajectory suggested by prior studies
that used the semantic fluency paradigm is likely an artifact
of their methodological approach. These studies’ use of
spontaneous production data may have provided a biased
sample of the relationships that govern semantic
organization by restricting the range of items submitted to
structure derivation analyses and invoking participants’ use
of response strategies based on specific relationships. The
present study was designed to overcome these limitations by
using a task that incorporates a pre-determined set of items
that are cross-classifiable into both taxonomic and thematic
groups. The findings that emerged from this approach
indicate that adults recognize an increasing degree of
differentiation from unrelated to thematically related,
taxonomically related, and both thematically and
taxonomically related items. The structure of semantic
organization for this sample is highly principled, with
increasingly fine-grained taxonomic groups that are sub-

1650

divided into clusters of both taxonomically and thematically
related concepts. Conversely, Preschool-age children
differentiate between items that are strongly linked on the
basis of both taxonomic and thematic relationships versus
all other items, but do not differentiate between items that
are linked by only a single type of relationship versus
unrelated items. Similarly, the structure of semantic
organization at this age consists of local clusters of both
taxonomically and thematically related concepts that are
embedded within higher order clusters that are not governed
by any discernable relationships. The intermediate age
groups show a transitional pattern between these two
endpoints. From the sensitivity analyses, Kindergarten
students appear to treat pairs of items that are both
taxonomically and thematically related as less distinct than
Preschool children, and only differentiate between these and
unrelated pairs. The structure derivation analyses revealed
that children at this age are beginning to recognize some
degree of higher order structure that is primarily influenced
by thematic relationships. Children in First and Second
Grade begin to recognize links between items that are based
on a single relationship. Principled organization at multiple
hierarchical levels according to both taxonomic and
thematic relationships also emerges during this time. The
influence of these relationships at higher order levels is
particularly pronounced in Second Grade, when the overall
structure becomes divided according to a plants-versusanimals distinction.
It should be noted that the generalizability of this pattern
to non-living entities is currently unknown. However,
because taxonomic and thematic relations are comparably
characteristic of associations across all ontological
categories, there is no a priori reason to predict that the
development of semantic organization will follow a
different trajectory in other domains.
Overall, the picture that has emerged from this study
therefore captures three developmental patterns. First, an
early recognition of strong links between items that are
related along multiple dimensions matures into a
recognition of links between items that are related along
only a single dimension. Second, higher order structure
becomes increasingly governed by discernable relationships.
Third, taxonomic relationships are gradually prioritized over
thematic relationships, in terms of both the degree to which
taxonomically related items are differentiated from other
pairs of items, and the influence of taxonomic relationships
on higher order structure. This picture is in line with both
the increasing richness of semantic organization revealed in
computational modeling studies and the expanding ability to
recognize multiple types of relationships, particularly
taxonomic, revealed in empirical match-to-sample paradigm
studies.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a Graduate Training Grant
awarded to CMU by the Department of Education, Institute
of Education Sciences (R305B040063). We thank Charles

Kemp, David Pfau, Andrew Bauer, and Erik Thiessen for
their valuable input and comments. We thank the children,
parents, teachers, and participating schools and institutions
for making this project possible: Sacred Heart Elementary
School, Community Day School, and Phipps Conservatory.
Finally, we thank Manon Sohn for her help collecting data.

References
Blaye, A., Bernard-Peyron, V., Paour, J.-L., & Bonthoux, F.
(2006). Categorical flexibility in children: Distinguishing
response flexibility from conceptual flexibility. European
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 3, 163-188.
Crowe, S. J., & Prescott, T. J. (2003). Continuity and
change in the development of category structure: Insights
from the semantic fluency task. International Journal of
Behavioral Development, 27, 467-479.
Fisher, A. V. (2011). Processing of perceptual information
is more robust than processing of conceptual information
in preschool-age children: Evidence from costs of
switching. Cognition, 119, 253-264.
Goldstone, R. (1994). An efficient method for obtaining
similarity data. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments,
& Computers, 26, 381-386.
Hashimoto, N., McGregor, K. K., & Graham, A. (2007).
Conceptual organization at 6 and 8 years of age: Evidence
from the semantic priming of object decisions. Journal of
Speech, Language and Hearing Research, 50, 161-176.
Hills, T. T., Maouene, M., Maouene, J., Sheya, A., & Smith,
L. (2009). Categorical structure among shared features in
networks of early-learned nouns. Cognition, 112, 381396.
Kemp, C., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2008). The discovery of
structural form. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 105, 10687-10692.
Lin, E. L., & Murphy, G. L. (2001). Thematic relations in
adults' concepts. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 130, 3-28.
McClelland, J. L., & Rogers, T. T. (2003). The parallel
distributed processing approach to semantic cognition.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4, 310-322.
Nguyen, S. P. (2007). Cross-classification and category
representation in children's concepts. Developmental
Psychology, 43, 719-731.
Snyder, H. R., & Munakata, Y. (2010). Becoming selfdirected: Abstract representations support endogenous
flexibility in children. Cognition, 116, 155-167.
Storm, C. (1980). The semantic structure of animal terms: A
developmental study. International Journal of Behavioral
Development, 3, 381-407.
Waxman, S. R., & Namy, L. L. (1997). Challenging the
notion of a thematic preference in young children.
Developmental Psychology, 33, 555-567.
Winkler-Rhoades, N., Medin, D., Waxman, S. R.,
Woodring, J., & Ross, N. O. (2010). Naming the animals
that come to mind: effects of culture and experience on
category fluency. Journal of Cognition and Culture, 10,
205-220.

1651

