UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Naming and remembering atypically colored objects: support for the processing time
account for a secondary distinctiveness effect

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/15c711m6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Westerbeek, Hans
Van Amelsvoort, Marije
Maes, Alfons
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Naming and remembering atypically colored objects:
Support for the processing time account for a secondary distinctiveness effect

!

Hans Westerbeek (h.g.w.westerbeek@tilburguniversity.edu)
Marije van Amelsvoort (m.a.a.vanamelsvoort@tilburguniversity.edu)
Alfons Maes (maes@tilburguniversity.edu)
Marc Swerts (m.g.j.swerts@tilburguniversity.edu)

Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Tilburg University, The Netherlands

!!
!

Abstract
The secondary distinctiveness effect is the effect that stimuli
that are unusual or different from stored knowledge are remembered better than common stimuli. We investigate the
processing time explanation for this effect, i.e., that distinctive
stimuli receive more attention and thus more processing time
during encoding, by combining methodology from object
recognition with memory tasks. Participants in our experiment name common and distinctive items (typically and atypically colored objects), and then memory is tested. Our results
replicate the secondary distinctiveness effect, as recognition
scores are higher for atypically colored objects than for typical ones. Crucially, analyses of response times in the naming
task show that atypically colored objects are processed significantly slower than typical ones. We take these findings as
providing support for the processing time hypothesis for the
secondary distinctiveness effect.
Keywords: Memory, secondary distinctiveness, color,
processing time, object recognition

Introduction
Items that are unusual or distinctive are remembered better
than common items (e.g., Hunt & Worthen, 2006). Over the
years, this distinctiveness effect has been replicated many
times, and remains a field of investigation in current experimental psychology (e.g., Michelon, Snyder, Buckner,
McAvoy, & Zacks, 2003; McDaniel & Bugg, 2008). The
distinctiveness effect is often divided into two types
(Schmidt, 1991). Primary distinctiveness is the effect that
items that are different from the other items presented in the
same (experimental) setting are remembered better (e.g.,
because they belong to a different semantic category;
Schmidt, 1985). For example, a dog in a list of fruits is recalled better than an orange in that same list.
Secondary distinctiveness is the effect that items that are
felt as being unusual as compared to general knowledge are
more memorable than common items. For example, a picture of something that is unusual in reality (like a green lion)
is more memorable than a picture of something that is normal. Because such secondary distinctive items are regarded
as 'strange', the secondary distinctiveness effect is sometimes called a 'bizarreness' effect (e.g., McDaniel & Bugg,
2008).
This effect has been replicated using a wide variety of
research designs and stimulus materials, in order to explore
the conditions under which it occurs. Research designs for
example vary in how memory is tested (e.g., Graesser, Woll,
Kowalski, & Smith, 1980), whether stimuli are learned in-

tentionally or implicitly (e.g., Nicolas & Marchal, 1998),
and in the time span between learning and testing (e.g.,
O'Brien & Wolford, 1982; McDaniel & Einstein, 1986).
With regard to stimulus materials, a notable distinction can
be made between studies that present participants with sentences describing situations that are secondary distinctive
(e.g., "The goldfish was eating out of the bowl on the sofa";
McDaniel and Einstein, 1986), and studies that use pictures
of objects that are different from stored knowledge (e.g., a
dog with a watering can as a head, or a candle with wicks on
its sides; Michelon et al., 2003; Gounden & Nicolas, 2012).
While significant advances have been made in understanding the boundary conditions of the secondary distinctiveness effect, scholars have reached little consensus on the
various explanations for the effect. The (not mutually exclusive) accounts can be roughly distinguished into those that
propose that secondary distinctive stimuli are encoded differently than common ones (e.g., Kline & Groninger, 1991),
and accounts stating that secondary distinctive stimuli contain more (distinctive) cues that can be helpful in retrieval
(e.g., McDaniel & Einstein, 1986).
One intuitive encoding-based explanation for the secondary distinctiveness effect is the processing time hypothesis (e.g., Kline & Groninger, 1991; Gounden & Nicolas,
2012). According to this account, secondary distinctive
items attract more attention than common ones during learning, and as a consequence more time is spent on the distinctive items, leading to superior memory for these stimuli.
However, studies have often been unable to provide empirical data to support the processing time hypothesis. In
these studies, presentation time of items during encoding is
manipulated. For instance, McDaniel and Einstein (1986)
investigated this hypothesis by presenting common and secondary distinctive sentences either for seven or for fourteen
seconds, and did not find that presentation time modulated
the secondary distinctiveness effect in a recognition task.
Gounden and Nicolas (2012) presented drawings of normal
or abnormal objects for a half, one, or three seconds. Similar
to the aforementioned study, processing time did not interact
with the secondary distinctiveness effect. That is, a secondary distinctiveness effect was obtained, but it was not
modulated by presentation time. Kline and Groninger
(1991) report results that do suggest that the secondary distinctiveness effect can be modulated by processing time, but
the direction of the effect is unclear: secondary distinctive
items were not found to be processed longer than common
items.

3096

The aforementioned studies manipulated presentation
time to investigate a potential modulating role of processing
time on the secondary distinctiveness effect. However, presentation time is not necessarily the same as processing
time. In the current research, it is reasoned that manipulations of presentation time make it difficult to ascribe modulations of a secondary distinctiveness effect to differences in
processing time. This is not only because presentation time
and processing time are not necessarily the same concepts,
but also because one cannot know how quickly common and
distinctive items are processed. Also, processing time is
likely to vastly differ between different kinds of stimuli.
Presentation times in experiments can be too short to obtain
the 'necessary' encoding effect for secondary distinctive
items. They can also be too long, such that distinctive items
that are potentially harder to process get sufficient processing time anyway, nullifying a potential modulation of the
memory effect.
A solution is to consider secondary distinctive items that
are known to require more processing time than common
items. Studies in the field of object recognition provide evidence that pictures of secondary distinctive objects require
more time to be processed. In object recognition, it is well
established that pictures of objects that have an atypical
color (e.g., red banana) are less quickly processed (i.e., recognized and named) than pictures of typically colored objects (e.g., Naor-Raz, Tarr, & Kesten, 2003; Tanaka, Wayward, & Williams, 2001; Therriault, Yaxley, & Zwaan,
2009). Objects that have an atypical color are secondary
distinctive: they are unusual compared to stored knowledge,
which contains information about the default color of an
object (Naor-Raz et al., 2003). So, object recognition studies
show that processing atypically colored objects takes more
time, but we do not know whether this influences memory.

The current experiment
We want to investigate the processing time hypothesis as
an explanation for the secondary distinctiveness effect, taking an interdisciplinary approach by combining methodology from object recognition with procedures from memory
research. We administer a naming task with pictures of typically and atypically colored objects as encoding task, so we
can measure processing time (i.e., naming latency) for
common and secondary distinctive items. Consecutively,
memory is tested in old/new recognition tests. In that way,
we can investigate whether a difference in processing time
is associated with better memory for these items.

Experiment
In this experiment, we asked participants to name typically
and atypically colored everyday objects. As the participants
were not instructed about the successive memory tests, our
paradigm entails incidental learning. Directly after naming,
the memory task − an old/new recognition task − was administered to test whether incidental learning was successful. Secondary distinctiveness effects are often found when
there is a sufficient delay between encoding and testing
(e.g., McDaniel & Einstein, 1986; Michelon et al., 2003),
and therefore the memory task was re-administered two
weeks later.

Method
Participants Forty undergraduate students (all speakers of
Dutch, eight men and thirty-two women, median age 22
years) participated for course credit. They were not instructed about the fact that their memory would be tested. None
of the participants were color blind, which was assessed in a
test after the experiment.

!

Materials Seventy-six everyday objects were selected on
the basis of stimuli used in object recognition studies (e.g.,
Therriault et al., 2009). These were all color-diagnostic objects (i.e., objects that have one or a few typical colors associated with them). For each object a high quality photo was
selected and edited, such that the object was seen on a plain
white background. For the atypically colored versions, further photo editing was done to change the objects' color.
Atypical colors were determined by rotating colors across
the various objects, such that the number of objects in each
color (red, blue, yellow, orange, green, brown, pink) was the
same in both typicality conditions. Figure 1 presents some
examples of objects in typical and atypical colors, as we
used them in the experiment.
The seventy-six objects were equally distributed over two
lists. In each list of thirty-eight objects, half of the objects
was typically colored, and the other half was atypical. We
ensured that an object never appeared in more than one color within each list. Of both lists, as second version was assembled in which color typicality was reversed: objects that
were typically colored in one version were atypical in the
other and vice versa. This resulted in two versions of two
lists of objects.
The lists were matched for color frequency, whether the
objects are easily named (nameability), whether the typically colored pictures matched mental prototypes (prototypicality), how frequent the object's name is in the language
(Dutch), the length of the name in syllables, and the lu8minosity (i.e., brightness) of the pictures. We also made sure

Figure 1: Some examples of stimulus materials used in the experiment,
in typical colors (left) and in atypical colors (right).

3097

that luminosity was not different for typical and atypical
objects within each list. Nameability and prototypicality of
the typically colored objects were determined by pretests.
Name frequencies were assessed using an on-line corpus
(Keuleers, Brysbaert, & New, 2010). Luminosity was measured using MATLAB.

Responses were recorded with a head-mounted microphone. Stimulus randomization, timing, and voice recording
were administered using E-Prime (Schneider, Eschman, &
Zuccolotto, 2002). Reaction times were measured by analyzing the audio recordings in Praat (Boersma & Weenink,
2012).

Procedure The experiment was performed in a dimly lit
sound proof cabin, to minimize distraction. Participants
were randomly assigned to one of the stimulus lists. They
were instructed that they would get to see a number of pictures on a computer screen, and that they had to name the
depicted objects as fast as possible. The instructions did not
mention that memory would be tested after the naming task.
The objects appeared in a random order, one by one. The
presentation time for each object was exactly 3000 ms, preceded by a fixation cross (800 ms) and followed by a blank
screen (1000 ms). The first three items were filler objects,
after which the thirty-eight stimulus objects were presented
in a random order.
Immediately after the naming task, the participants had to
perform a second task. They were instructed that the photos
from the first task would be shown once again, but that new
objects would be mixed in. Participants had to say out loud
(and as quickly as possible) whether each object was part of
the naming task ("yes") or not ("no"). The new objects were
the objects from the list that the participant did not name.
The old and new objects were presented in a random order.
The participants were asked to return to the lab about two
weeks later, but they were not instructed about the purpose
of this second meeting. All participants returned to the lab
and performed the old/new recognition task again. Due to
practical constraints, the delay between the tasks ranged
from 11 to 18 days across participants (the median delay
was 15 days, most participants returned after 14, 15 or 16
days). After this task, color blindness was assessed.

Research design and statistical analysis For the naming
task, we compared response times for typically and atypically colored objects in a within-participants design. For the
recognition task, we compared hits, false alarms and recognition scores in a similar within-participants design. Response times and recognition data were analyzed using repeated measures ANOVAs, both on participants means (F1) as
on item means (F2).

!

Mean processing time (ms)

1500

1000

!

Results
Naming task Despite the pretests, five of the seventy-six
objects (blackberry, celery, pickle, red cabbage, sprout)
yielded disproportionally high numbers of incorrect responses or non-responses, and were excluded from all
analyses (especially the atypically colored versions of these
objects turned out to be problematic). Response times for
incorrect responses were also discarded. An outlier analysis
on response times for correctly named objects, in which we
removed response times that were faster than 500 ms or
longer than 2500 ms, resulted in discarding of 0.3 percent of
the data.
Analysis of the processing time in the naming task, shown
in Figure 2, revealed a main effect of color typicality:
F1(1,39)=92.29, p<.001, ηp²=0.703; F2(1,70)=65.97, p<.001,
ηp²=0.485. Typically colored objects were named significantly faster (M=1119 ms, SD=119 ms) than atypically colored ones (M=1282 ms, SD=167 ms).

!

Recognition tasks As is common practice in analyzing responses for old/new tasks, we corrected for response bias by
calculating a recognition score (e.g., McDaniel & Einstein,
1986). This recognition score corrects the percentage of hits
(i.e., the participant saying that an object was seen when it
actually was) for the percentage of false alarms (i.e., the
participant saying that an object was seen while it actually
was not), and is calculated as (Phit−Pfalse alarm)/(1−Pfalse alarm).
Results of the immediate recognition task showed no effects of color typicality on hits, false alarms, and on recognition scores; all p's > .07. Performance was near perfect as
hit rates and recognition scores were both well above 95
percent.

500

0

Table 1: Results of the delayed recognition task,
in percentages, collapsed over participants.
Standard deviations are in parentheses.
Atypically
colored

Typically
colored

Figure 2: Mean processing times (in milliseconds) in the
naming task, for atypically and typically colored objects.
Error bars represent standard deviations.

3098

Typically
colored objects

Atypically
colored objects

Hits

67.5 (16.6)

82.8 (10.2)

False Alarms

20.9 (16.3)

26.4 (15.4)

Recognition Score

59.8 (18.6)

76.5 (14.7)

Results of the delayed recognition task are shown in Table
1. Analyses of hit rates revealed a main effect of color typicality, such that there were significantly more hits for atypically colored objects: F1(1,39)=35.85, p<.001, ηp²=0.479;
F2(1,70)=27.89, p<.001 ηp²=0.285. A weaker, marginally
significant effect was found for false alarms: F1(1,39)=4.27,
p=.046, ηp²=0.099; F2(1,70)=3.46, p=.07. Importantly,
recognition scores were higher for atypically colored objects
than for typically colored ones: F1(1,39)=27.17, p<.001,
ηp²=0.411; F2(1,70)=20.24, p<.001, ηp²=0.2241.
Those items that were recognized best in the delayed
memory task, often required more time to be recognized in
the naming task: processing times in the naming task were
significantly correlated with recognition scores in the delayed memory task (Pearson r=.34, n=142, p<.001). Regarded per condition, processing times and recognition
scores were significantly correlated for typically colored
objects (r=.27, n=71, p=.025), and marginally significant for
atypically colored ones (r=.23, n=71, p=.053). In both conditions, items that were recognized best in the delayed
memory task were associated with longer processing times
in the naming task.

Discussion
We report an experiment in which participants first named
typically and atypically colored objects, followed by tests of
memory for these objects. Atypically colored objects are
secondary distinctive: they are different from stored representations of everyday normal objects. We combine an object naming task with an old/new recognition memory task,
in order to investigate the processing time hypothesis of the
secondary distinctiveness effect. In the naming task, we
found that when the color of an object is atypical (e.g., red
banana), the object is recognized less quickly than when its
color is typical (e.g., red strawberry), replicating results
found in object recognition studies (e.g., Therriault et al.,
2009). Atypically colored objects were remembered better
than typically colored ones as shown in a recognition task
that was administered two weeks after the naming task.
We thus found that items that received longer processing
in encoding lead to better recognition during the delayed
memory test. These results are taken to support a processing
time explanation for the secondary distinctiveness effect.
The underlying mechanisms facilitating the secondary
distinctiveness effect are subject to debate. The processing
time hypothesis explains the effect in terms of mechanisms
that occur during encoding of items: distinctive items are
processed longer than common ones, and therefore are more
memorable (e.g., Kline & Groninger, 1991; Gounden &
Nicolas, 2012). Alternative accounts focus on different
mechanisms for common and distinctive items at retrieval
(e.g., Wadill & McDaniel, 1998). Our experiment contributes to this debate by showing that secondary distinctive

items for which a memory effect is obtained (i.e., better
recognition in a delayed memory test) indeed receive more
processing time during encoding.
Although we have focused on an encoding-based account
of the secondary distinctiveness effect, and our results lend
support to this account, we do not rule out the importance of
retrieval processes. We take the present results to indicate
that differential processing at encoding may account for at
least a portion of the secondary distinctiveness effect, but
this does not preclude effects of differences in retrieval. In
fact, the correlation we find between processing time in
naming and recognition score in memory is significant, but
not very strong, leaving variation to be explained by retrieval-based interpretations of the superior memory for
secondary distinctive items over common items. This can be
researched for example by measuring retrieval times. Our
research design however did not allow us to do that, as response times in the old/new recognition task not only reflect
retrieval, but also the perceptual process of recognizing the
objects on the screen. And, as we have seen, typically and
atypically colored objects significantly differ on that measure.
Our findings give rise to further questions. One question
concerns the nature of the distinctiveness effect that can be
obtained with atypically colored stimuli. Changing the color
of stimuli is arguably a very subtle manipulation of secondary distinctiveness. More extreme manipulations may
however boost retrieval based effects. This is suggested by a
cue-based explanation of the effect, which states that distinctive items provide more cues that can be used during
retrieval, and that therefore the secondary distinctiveness
effect occurs (e.g., Wadill & McDaniel, 1998). When, for
example, stimuli are distinctive because they consist of two
objects 'fused' into one (e.g., Michelon et al., 2003), or because they possess multiplied protruding attributes (e.g.,
Gounden & Nicolas, 2012; Nicolas & Marchal, 1998), such
items also have more cues to be used during retrieval. Our
stimuli however were minimally different: the only difference between common and distinctive items was their color.
Accordingly, secondary distinctive items did not contain a
higher number of cues or attributes that distinguished them
from common items, but only attributes with a different
'value'. This makes it less likely that these cues may lead to
differential effects during retrieval. Further research may
therefore address the hypothesis that different encoding of
distinctive and normal stimuli only accounts for secondary
distinctiveness effects when stimuli that are minimally different from common stimuli are used. Only in such a case,
during retrieval no higher number of cues is available for
distinctive stimuli.
Other directions for future research concern the experimental design of our study. The recognition memory task
was administered twice for each participant: directly after

1

Initial analyses concerning whether the number of days between the initial and delayed memory test affected recognition scores showed a
weak correlation between the number of days and the size of the color typicality effect (r=0.28, p=.08), indicating that the effect was
slightly stronger for participants who were at the longer end of the delay spectrum than participants who were at the shorter end. This
means that a part of the variation in recognition scores could be attributed to the length of the delay, even though delay did not exert a significant main effect on recognition scores. We did not add this delay as a covariate in analyses of effects of color typicality, because color
typicality was manipulated within participants, and was therefore impossibly confounded by delay.

3099

the naming task and two weeks later. We opted for this design so that we could determine from the immediate memory test whether using a naming task as an incidental learning
paradigm was successful. However, it is yet unclear what
the role of the immediate memory task is in the results we
found in the delayed task. Educational psychologists point
out that initial testing significantly improves outcomes in a
successive test (i.e., test-enhanced learning; Roediger &
Karpicke, 2006). Although we have no reasons to assume
that such a testing effects may interact with a secondary
distinctiveness effect, in future studies we will not administer an immediate test.
Additionally, in future work the naming task may be replaced by other tasks which do not involve retrieving the
verbal label for the objects, but measure how quickly visually presented objects are recognized in another way. For example, a verification task can be used (e.g., Therriault et al.,
2009, experiment 1b). By doing so, processing time of visually presented objects is measured more directly than with a
naming task, as potential effects caused by retrieving the
verbal label from memory or producing a response can be
avoided. For example, naming latencies for atypically colored objects may be longer because participants suppress
mentioning the object's color. This is however unlikely, as
our instructions stressed responding as quickly as possible
(encouraging brief responses), and as participants had no
trouble suppressing mentioning color (and hardly ever did
so).

Acknowledgements
We thank Karin van Nispen, Eva van den Bemd, and four
anonymous reviewers for commenting on an earlier version
of this paper, and Ruud Mattheij for his assistance in using
MATLAB.

References
Boersma, P. & Weenink, D. (2012). Praat: Doing phonetics
by computer, version 5.3.06.
Gounden, Y. & Nicolas, S. (2012). The impact of processing
time on the bizarreness and orthographic distinctiveness
effects. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 53,
287−294.
Graesser, A. C., Woll, S. B., Kowalski, D. J., & Smith, D. A.
(1980). Memory for typical and atypical actions in
scripted activities. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Learning and Memory, 6(5), 503−515.
Hunt, R. R. & Worthen, J. B. (2006). Distinctiveness and
Memory. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Keuleers, E., Brysbaert, M., & New, B. (2010). SUBTLEXNL: A new measure for Dutch word frequency based on
film subtitles. Behavior Research Methods, 42, 643−650.
Kline, S. & Groninger, L. D. (1991). The imagery
bizarreness effect as a function of sentence complexity
and presentation time. Bulletin of the Psychonomic
Society, 29(1), 25−27.
McDaniel, M. & Bugg, J. (2008). Instability in memory
phenomena: A common puzzle and a unifying
explanation. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 15,
237−255.

McDaniel, M. A. & Einstein, G. O. (1986). Bizarre imagery
as an effective memory aid: The importance of
distinctiveness. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 12(1), 54−65.
Michelon, P., Snyder, A. Z., Buckner, R. L., McAvoy, M., &
Zacks, J. M. (2003). Neural correlates of incongruous
visual information: An event-related f MRI study.
NeuroImage, 19(4), 1612−1626.
Naor-Raz, G., Tarr, M. J., & Kersten, D. (2003). Is color an
intrinsic property of object representation? Perception,
32(6), 667−680.
Nicolas, S. & Marchal, A. (1998). Implicit memory, explicit
memory and the picture bizarreness effect. Acta
Psychologica, 99(1), 43−58.
O'Brien, E. J. & Wolford, C. R. (1982). Effect of delay in
testing on retention of plausible versus bizarre mental
images. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 8(2), 148−152.
Roediger, H. L. & Karpicke, J. D. (2006). Test-enhanced
learning: Taking memory tests improves long-term
retention. Psychological Science, 17(3), 249−255.
Schmidt, S. R. (1985). Encoding and retrieval processes in
memory for conceptually distinctive events. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 11(3), 565−578.
Schmidt, S. R. (1991). Can we have a distinctive theory of
memory? Memory and Cognition, 19(6), 523−542.
Schneider, W., Eschman, A., & Zuccolotto, A. (2002). Eprime 2.0 user's guide. Psychology Software Tools, Inc.,
Pittsburg.
Tanaka, J., Weiskopf, D., & Williams, P. (2001). The role of
color in high-level vision. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
5(5), 211−215.
Therriault, D., Yaxley, R., & Zwaan, R. (2009). The role
of color diagnosticity in object recognition and
representation. Cognitive Processing, 10(4), 335−342.
Waddill, P. J. & McDaniel, M. A. (1998). Distinctiveness
effects in recall: Differential processing or privileged
retrieval? Memory and Cognition, 26, 108–120.

3100

