UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Observed motor actions affect valence judgments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9r53250z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
de la Fuente, Juanma
Casasanto, Daniel
Santiago, Julio

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Observed motor actions affect valence judgments
Juanma de la Fuente (jdelafuente@ugr.es)
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Granada
Campus de Cartuja s/n, 18071 Granada, Spain

Daniel Casasanto (casasanto@uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Chicago
5848 S. University Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637

Julio Santiago (santiago@ugr.es)
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Granada
Campus de Cartuja s/n, 18071 Granada, Spain
Abstract

Yet, despite widespread linguistic and cultural
conventions linking “good” with “right,” left-handers
implicitly associate “good” with “left” (Casasanto, 2009;
2011). Casasanto (2009) proposed that this implicit
association arises from patterns of manual motor fluency:
People tend to associate “good” with the side of space on
which they can perform actions more fluently, typically
with their dominant hand. To test this proposal, Casasanto
& Chrysikou (2011) tested whether changing someone’s
patterns of manual motor fluency could change their
associations between space and valence (i.e., positivity and
negativity), accordingly. They assigned right-handers to
perform a bimanual fine motor task while wearing a
cumbersome ski glove on one of their hands. After this
motor training task, participants who had worn the glove
on their left hand, preserving their natural
right-handedness, associated “good” with “right.” By
contrast, participants who had worn the glove on their right
hand associated “good” with “left,” like natural
left-handers. This study validated the proposal that
space-valence associations depend on asymmetries in
manual motor fluency, and also showed that these
associations can be rapidly changed by new patterns of
motor experience.
Is motor experience the only way to influence people’s
space-valence associations? Since the advent of Social
Learning Theory (Bandura, 1977), it has been clear that
people learn not only directly through acting on the
environment themselves, but also vicariously by watching
others act (i.e., observational learning). The goal of the
present study was to determine whether associations
between space and valence depend exclusively on one’s
own hands-on experience, or whether they can also be
influenced by seeing someone else acting more or less
fluently with their right and left hands. In Experiment 1 we
tested whether space-valence associations could be
changed through vicarious motor experience. In
Experiment 2 we changed the viewer’s position relative to
the actor to determine the perspective from which
observational learning of space-valence associations
occurred.

Right-handers tend to associate “good” with the right side of
space and “bad” with the left. This implicit association
appears to arise from the way people perform actions, more
or less fluently, with their right and left hands. Here we
tested whether observing manual actions performed with
greater or lesser fluency can affect observers’ space-valence
associations. In two experiments, we assigned one
participant (the actor) to perform a bimanual fine motor task
while another participant (the observer) watched. Actors
were assigned to wear a ski glove on either the right or left
hand, which made performing the actions on this side of
space disfluent. In Experiment 1, observers stood behind the
actors, sharing their spatial perspective. After motor training,
both actors and observers tended to associate “good” with
the side of the actors’ free hand and “bad” with the side of
the gloved hand. To determine whether observers’
space-valence associations were computed from their own
perspectives or the actors’, in Experiment 2 we asked the
observer to stand face-to-face with the actor, reversing their
spatial perspectives. After motor training, both actors and
observers associated “good” with the side of space where
disfluent actions had occurred from their own egocentric
spatial perspectives; if “good” was associated with the
actor’s right-hand side it was likely to be associated with the
observer’s left-hand side. Results show that vicarious
experiences of motor fluency can shape valence judgments,
and that observers spontaneously encode the locations of
fluent and disfluent actions in egocentric spatial coordinates.
Keywords: Handedness; emotional valence;
perspective; observational learning; embodiment.

space;

Introduction
Across many languages and cultures, the right is associated
with positive and the left with negative evaluation (Hertz,
1917). In Spanish, the word “diestro” meaning
“right-handed” also means “able,” whereas the word
“zurdo” meaning “left-handed” derives from the word
“zocato” meaning “ugly” and “clumsy”. English speakers
use positive and negative idioms like “my right hand man”
and “two left feet,” and similar expressions have been
reported in English, Italian, Arabic, and Chinese
(McManus, 2002).

385

order). Responses were given orally and without visual
support from the diagram sheet, which was removed from
view before they responded in order to prevent manual
responses (e.g., pointing). After completing this task,
participants answered the following six debriefing
questions (three filler questions and two relevant
questions: (1) Are you studying English or French? (2) If
you had to choose, would you say that today it will be
rainy or sunny? (3) Why do you think you placed the good
animal in the box that you did? (4) If you had to choose
between keeping animals in the zoo or letting them stay
free, what would you choose? (5) Do you think that the
side of your dominant hand might have influenced your
decision to place the good animal in the box that you
chose? (6) What do you think this experiment was trying to
evaluate? None of the participants suspected that the
dominoes task was predicted to influence their
performance on the diagram task, or that the experiment
was designed to evaluate the influence of the actor on the
observer. After the debriefing questions, participants
completed the EHI (Oldfield, 1971) to assess their
handedness.

Experiment 1: Observational learning of
space-valence associations
Method
Participants Students from the Arts Department of the
University of Granada (N = 96; 48 female; average age:
24.7 years; range 18-39 years) volunteered to participate
after providing informed written consent. All participants
were right-handed. Their average score on the Edinburg
Handedness Inventory (EHI; Oldfield, 1971) was 0.89.
Materials and Procedure Participants were tested in pairs
and performed a two-part motor training experiment. Each
participant was randomly assigned to either the role of
“actor” or “observer.” Actors and observers received
instructions individually in separate rooms. Observers
were told that the aim of the experiment was to test if the
presence of a close observer affected negatively the actor’s
performance on a psychomotor task. Actors were told that
their progress would be closely monitored and evaluated
by the person observing them.

Results and Discussion

Training phase Actors performed the task used in
Casasanto and Chrisykou (2011) Experiment 2. In what
was ostensibly a test of psychomotor speed, participants
arranged dominos upright on a 120 cm X 60 cm surface,
on 80 equally spaced spots, as quickly as possible for 12
minutes. The 80 spots were separated by 12 cm. To induce
an asymmetry in manual motor fluency, we assigned
participants to wear a bulky ski glove on one hand, with
the other glove dangling from the same wrist.
Manipulating the dominoes was thus much more difficult
with the gloved hand than with the free hand. The actor
completed the task while sitting at a table. The observer
stood behind the actor, facing the same direction (see fig.
1, left).

Actors 92% of actors who wore the glove on their left
hand (preserving their natural right-handedness) placed the
good animal on the right (Sign Test, 22 vs. 2, p=0.00003).
By contrast, 83% actors who wore the glove on their right
hand (reversing their usual asymmetry in manual motor
fluency) placed the good animal on the left, like natural
left-handers (Sign Test, 20 vs. 4, p=0.001). The difference
between the preferences of the right- and left-ski glove
groups was highly significant (Wald=9.64, df=1, p=0.002).
This finding replicates Casasanto & Chrysikou’s (2011): a
brief experience of a reversed motor fluency changed a
clear good=right bias into an equally clear good=left bias.
Observers The observers’ responses were very similar to
the actors’. 87% of observers who watched an actor
wearing the glove on the left hand placed the good animal
on the right (Sign Test, 21 vs. 3, p=0.0002). By contrast,
79% of observers who watched an actor wearing the glove
on their right hand placed the good animal on the left (Sign
Test, 19 vs. 5, p=0.007). The difference between the
preferences of the two groups of observers was highly
significant (Wald= 8.82, df=1, p=0.003).

Test phase. After completing the dominoes task and
removing the glove, participants returned to their separate
rooms, where each completed a Spanish version of the
“Bob goes to the zoo” task adapted from Casasanto (2009,
Experiment 3). The observer completed the task before the
actor.
Participants were presented with a diagram, in the center
of which was the head of a cartoon character named Juan,
seen from above, with one empty box on his left and
another on his right. Participants were told that Bob was
planning a trip to the zoo and that he loved pandas and
thought they were good, but he hated zebras and thought
they were bad (or vice versa, as animal-to-valence
assignment was counterbalanced). Participants were asked
to place the good animal in the box corresponding to good
things, and the bad animal in the box corresponding to bad
things (question order was also counterbalanced, to avoid
confounding space and valence with numerical or temporal

Comparisons of actors and observers The strength of the
good-is-right bias did not differ between the group of
actors that wore the glove on their left hand and the group
of observers who watched them (Wald=0.20, df=1, p=0.66)
by Fisher’s Exact test; likewise, the strength of the
good-is-left bias did not differ between between the group
of actors that wore the glove on their right hand and the
group of observers who watched them (Wald=0.26, df=1,
p=0.87) by Fisher’s Exact test. We also compared the

386

Figure 1. Experimental set up and summary of main results from Experiments 1 and 2. The boxes in the diagrams were
blank when presented to the participants. The words “good” and “bad” above indicate the modal responses given by actors
(top row of boxes) and observers (bottom row of boxes) in Experiment 1 (left) and Experiment 2 (right).
numbers of actor-observer pairs who agreed in their
answers, placing the good animal on the same side of
space: 79% of actor-observer pairs agreed in the left ski
glove condition, and 71% of pairs agreed in the right ski
glove condition. The difference between these conditions
was not significant (Wald= 0.68, df=1, p=0.41) by Fisher’s
Exact test. In each condition, the percentage of pairs who
agreed was greater than chance (Left ski glove condition:
Sign Test, 19 vs. 6, p= 0.02; Right ski glove condition:
Sign Test, 17 vs. 6, p= 0.03; fig. 1, left).

observed from their own egocentric perspective, in terms
of a relative spatial coordinate system centered on their
own body, or from the actor’s perspective using a relative
coordinate system centered on the actor’s body. We
conducted Experiment 2 to distinguish these possibilities,
and thereby constrain hypotheses about the mechanisms by
which this observational learning effect arises.

Experiment 2: Space-valence associations
from whose perspective?
Experiment 2 was identical to Experiment 1, with one
important difference: the observers watched the actors
while standing in front of them, face-to-face, rather than
behind them. If observers’ space-valence associations were
computed from the actors’ perspectives then the results of
Experiment 2 should closely match those of Experiment 1:
Pairs of actors and observers should tend to agree on which
side of the diagram is the “good” side and which is the
“bad” side. Alternatively, if observers’ space-valence
associations were computed from their own egocentric

In summary, the actors’ data show that space-valence
associations can be changed (at least temporarily) by brief
changes in manual motor experience (see also Casasanto &
Chrysikou, 2011). The observers’ data show that nearly
identical changes in space-valence associations can be
effected by brief observation of another person’s fluent and
relatively disfluent manual motor actions. Since the actor
and observer shared the same spatial perspective in
Experiment 1, however, it was not possible to determine
whether the observers were understanding the actions they

387

perspectives then the results of Experiment 2 should differ
from those of Experiment 1: Pairs of actors and observers
should systematically disagree about which side of the
diagram is the “good” side and which is the “bad” side. It
is difficult to predict the results. When describing spatial
arrangements, English speakers usually take an egocentric
perspective (Tversky & Hard, 2009), but the mere presence
of another person who is interacting with the objects in the
scene (an actor) increases the proportion of speakers who
take the perspective of the actor, specially when attention
is driven toward his or her actions (Tversky & Hard,
2009). In Experiment 2, the observer watches, paying close
attention to, how the actor interacts with the dominoes,
which should favour taking the spatial perspective of the
actor. However, the observer does not need to describe the
scene. Moreover, there is a high degree of flexibility in
perspective choice (Gardner, Brazier, Edmonds, &
Gronhom, 2013; see also Stocker, 2012).

Comparisons of actors and observers The patterns of
responses in the actor groups now differed significantly
from their corresponding observer groups (Left ski glove
condition: Wald=8.84, df=1, p=0.003; Right ski glove
condition: Wald=8.23, df=1, p=0.003; fig. 1, right).
In summary, changing the point of view of the observer
caused a dramatic change in the actor-observer agreement
between Experiment 1 and Experiment 2. When actors
wore the ski glove on the right hand they tended to
associate “good” with “left,” whereas their observers
tended to associate “good” with “right” (and vice versa, for
actors who wore the glove on the left hand).

General Discussion
In two experiments, we showed that people’s associations
between space and valence are strongly influenced by
manual motor fluency – but not necessarily by the fluency
with which they, themselves, can perform manual actions.
Participants assigned to be “actors,” who first performed a
bimanual fine motor task with either their right or left hand
encumbered by a bulky glove, associated “good” with the
side of their free hand and “bad” with the side of their
gloved hand in a subsequent diagram task. Observers who
stood behind the actors during the motor task and shared
their spatial perspective showed a nearly identical pattern
of responses as the actors. Observers who stood
face-to-face with the actors, whose spatial perspectives
were reversed from the actors’, showed nearly the opposite
pattern of responses from the actors they observed: If an
actor wore the left glove, and therefore gave a
good-is-right response, the observer was likely to give a
good-is-left response on the subsequent diagram task.
Together, these results show that space-valence
associations can be rapidly changed on the basis of
asymmetries in manual motor fluency, no matter whether
these motor asymmetries are experienced first-hand
through motor action or second-hand, through action
observation, thereby supporting an important role of
observational learning (Bandura, 1977).
One previous study has examined the roles of
observation and perspective taking in the computation of
space-valence mappings. Participants saw a static picture
of a man facing away from the viewer (shared spatial
viewpoint) or facing toward the viewer (opposite spatial
viewpoint; Kominsky & Casasanto, 2013). In one
experiment, which was essentially a manipulation check,
the man in the picture was wearing a sling on either his
right or left hand, indicating that his arm was impaired, and
implying that motor actions on that side of space would be
relatively disfluent. Empty boxes were placed
symmetrically on the man’s left and right, as in the “Bob
goes to the zoo” task described here. Participants were
explicitly asked to take the man’s perspective, and to
indicate which boxes he would associate with “good” and
“bad.” Responses indicated that, when asked to take the
man’s perspective, they assigned “good” to the side of

Method
Participants Students from the Arts Department of the
University of Granada (N = 96; 68 female; average age: 21
years old, age range: 18-30 years) volunteered to
participate after providing informed written consent. All
participants were right-handed (Mean EHI: 0.85).
Materials and procedure Materials and procedures were
identical to Experiment 1, with one exception: the observer
in Experiment 2 stood in front of the actor, face-to-face.

Results and Discussion
Actors The actors’ results were similar to those of
Experiment 1. 96% of actors who wore the glove on their
left hand placed the good animal on the right (Sign Test, 23
vs. 1, p=0.000003). By contrast, 80% actors who wore the
glove on their right hand placed the good animal on the left
(Sign Test, 19 vs. 5, p=0.007). The difference between the
preferences of the right- and left-ski glove groups was
highly significant (Wald= 8.236, df=1, p=0.004).
Observers Unlike Experiment 1, the observers’ responses
in Experiment 2 were strikingly different from the actors’.
Only 12.5% of observers who watched an actor wearing
the glove on the left hand placed the good animal on the
right (Sign Test, 21 vs. 3, p=0.0003); whereas the actors
who wore the left ski glove showed a good=right bias, the
observers who watched them showed a good=left bias.
Likewise, only 4.2% of observers who watched an actor
wearing the glove on their right hand placed the good
animal on the left (Sign Test, 23 vs. 1, p=0.000003). The
difference between the patterns of responses in the two
groups of observers was highly significant (Wald= 8.85,
df=1, p=0.003).

388

space nearest his free arm and “bad” to the side of space
nearest his impaired arm. This pattern of responses was
found no matter whether the man was facing toward or
away from the viewer. Whether or not the participant (i.e.,
the observer) and the man shared a viewpoint,
space-valence mappings were computed from the man's
perspective rather than the participants’ own.
Kominsky and Casasanto’s (2013) study left open a
question addressed by the present study: do observers
spontaneously compute space-valence mappings from
other people’s spatial perspectives or from their own? The
data from Experiment 2 offer a clear answer. Unlike
Kominsky and Casasanto’s participants, here the observers
in Experiment 2 tended to spatialize “good” and “bad” on
the basis of the fluent and disfluent actions they saw
construed from their own egocentric spatial perspective.
A further question remains regarding the mental
representations underlying observers’ responses: did
responses reflect observers’ covert motor simulations of
the actors’ actions, or did they reflect (non-motoric)
associations between locations in space and positive or
negative outcomes? These accounts are not mutually
exclusive. On the first of these possibilities, observers may
have been covertly mirroring the actors’ actions, and
simulating the hedonic consequences of their simulated
right- and left-hand actions. Covert (and sometimes overt)
mirroring of others’ actions is common, and appears to be
highly automatic (Chartrand & Bargh, 1999). When actors
fumbled with dominoes using a gloved right hand,
observers who shared their spatial viewpoint (Experiment
1) would have covertly simulated performing this disfluent
action with their own right hand; by contrast, observers
assigned to the opposite spatial viewpoint (Experiment 2)
would have simulated performing the disfluent action with
their own left hand. On the basis of actions and ipsilateral
simulations of actions, actors and observers who were
facing the same direction would compute similar
space-valence associations; on the basis of actions and
contralateral (i.e., mirror-wise) simulations of actions,
actors and observers who were facing the opposite
directions would compute opposite space-valence
associations.
While this motor account would be consistent with
“embodied” theories of action understanding (e.g., Buccino
et al, 2001), a plausible spatial alternative exists. Perhaps
observers learned to associate negative outcomes (i.e.,
clumsy actions, frustrated actors, falling dominoes) with
one side of egocentric space, and positive outcomes (i.e.,
fluent actions, neatly arranged dominoes) with the other
side. This alternative account does not require any motor
simulation in the observers, nor does it require observers to
infer the hedonic consequences of simulated actions – a
process that seems likely to be more subtle and less
reliable than perceiving the hedonic consequences of real
actions and their outcomes. This spatial account is not
without supporting evidence in the literature on imitation
(e.g., Watanabe, Higuchi, & Kikuchi, 2013). Actually,

Catmur and Heyes (2011) showed that both motor
simulation and spatial compatibility have independent and
dissociable effects on action production.
The present data do not discriminate between the motor
and spatial accounts, though other experimental data could,
in principle, tease them apart (e.g., only the motor account
requires covert, limb-specific motor simulation, which
could potentially be detected by electromyography of the
observers’ arms, or by Mu-rhythm suppression in their
electroencephalography signal). Further studies are needed
to determine the extent to which the effect of vicariously
experienced motor fluency on space-valence associations
is mediated by spatial or motoric representations in the
observer.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Grants P09-SEJ-4772,
Junta de Andalucía and European Regional Development
Fund (ERDF), and PSI2012-32464, Spanish Ministery of
Economy and Competitivity, to JS and DC, and by an NSF
award (#1257101) and a James S. McDonnell Foundation
Scholar Award (#220020236) to DC. This paper was
written while JS was Leverhulme Visiting Professor
(VP-1-2012-032) at University College London, hosted by
Gabriella Vigliocco.

References
Bandura, A. (1977). Social Learning Theory. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Buccino, G., Binkofski, F., Fink, G. R., Fadiga, L.,
Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., Rizzolatti, G. (2001). Action
observation activates premotor and parietal areas in a
somatotopic manner: An fMRI study. European Journal
of Neuroscience, 13, 400–404.
Casasanto D. (2009). Embodiment of abstract concepts:
Good and bad in right- and left-handers. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 138, 351–367. doi:
10.1037/a0015854.
Casasanto, D. (2011). Different Bodies, Different Minds:
The body-specificity of language and thought.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 20(6),
378–383.
Casasanto D., Chrysikou E. G. (2011). When left is
“right”: Motor fluency shapes abstract concepts.
Psychological
Science,
22,
419–422.
doi:
10.1177/0956797611401755.
Catmur, C., & Heyes, C. (2011). Time course analyses
confirm independence of imitative and spatial
compatibility. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 37(2), 409–21.
doi:10.1037/a0019325
Chartrand, T. L., & Bargh, J. a. (1999). The chameleon
effect: The perception-behavior link and social
interaction. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 76(6), 893–910.

389

De La Fuente, J., Casasanto, D., Román, A., & Santiago, J.
(2011). Searching for cultural influences on the
body-specific association of preferred hand and
emotional valence. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T.
Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin,
TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Gardner, M., Brazier, M., Edmonds, C., & Gronholm, P.
(2013). Strategy modulates spatial perspective-taking:
Evidence for dissociable disembodied and embodied
routes.
Frontiers
in
Human
Neuroscience.
doi:10.3389/fnhum.2013.00457
Hertz, R. (1973). The pre-eminence of the right hand: A
study in religious polarity. (Originally published 1909).
In R. Needham (Ed.), Right & left: Essays on dual
symbolic classification (pp. 20-41). Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Kominsky, J. F., & Casasanto, D. (2013). Specific to
whose body? Perspective-taking and the spatial mapping
of valence. Frontiers in Cognitive Sciences, 4:266.
doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00266.
McManus, I. C. (2002). Right hand, left hand: The origins
of asymmetry in brains, bodies, atoms and cultures.
London, UK / Cambridge, MA: Weidenfeld and
Nocolson / Harvard University Press.
Oldfield R. C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of
handedness:
The
Edinburgh
inventory.
Neuropsychologia 9, 97–113.
Stocker,
K.
(2012).
Toward
and
embodiment-disembodiment
taxonomy.
Cognitive
Processing, 13 (Suppl. 1), S347-S350.
Tversky, B., & Hard, B. M. (2009). Embodied and
disembodied cognition: Spatial perspective taking.
Cognition, 110, 124-129.
Watanabe, R., Higuchi, T., & Kikuchi, Y. (2013).
Imitation behavior is sensitive to visual perspective of
the model: An fMRI study. Experimental Brain
Research, 228(2), 161–71.

390

