UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
On the Nature of Moral Judgment

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4nk5r5q2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Author
Ramlakhan, Nalini

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

On the Nature of Moral Judgment
Nalini Elisa Ramlakhan (NaliniRamlakhan@cmail.carleton.ca)
Institute of Cognitive Science, Carleton University,
1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6

Abstract
I critically examine the existing data in emotion research to
show that empathy is not necessary for moral judgment. I
argue that other emotions, such as disgust, are responsible for
moral judgment, and that humans are able to make moral
judgments without empathy. Autistic individuals are of
interest because they are said to lack empathy, yet display
some form of morality. Thus, empathy cannot be the core
motivator in moral judgment.
Keywords: empathy, morality, moral judgment, autism,
emotion, disgust, intuition.

Introduction
Empathy is the ability to vicariously share the emotions of
others. Empathy involves imagining another’s psychological
state while maintaining a self-other differentiation; it is
knowing another person’s state of mind without their state
of mind being the same as yours (Howe, 2013). Empathy as
a whole involves both a cognitive component, recognizing
what another person is feeling, and an affective component,
vicariously sharing an emotion very similar to what you
think another individual is feeling.
It is widely agreed that empathy as delineated is needed
for moral judgment. Some researchers, such as David Howe
(2013), claim that “empathy oils the wheels of social life”
(p. 15). Other emotion researchers, such as Abigail Marsh
(in press) and Simon Baron-Cohen (2011), argue that
empathy is at the core of morality. Recently, this view has
been criticized, notably by philosopher Jesse J. Prinz.
In this paper, I examine whether empathy plays a
significant role in moral judgment, while examining which
emotions are responsible for moral judgment. Although the
question of whether empathy is responsible for moral
development is an important one, this paper focuses only on
moral judgment. I argue that empathy does not play a key
role in moral judgment, and other emotions, such as disgust,
are responsible for moral judgment. Furthermore, I argue
that, despite lacking empathy, autistic individuals display
instances of morality, thus empathy cannot be considered
the core of moral judgment.

Moral Judgment
By ‘moral judgment’, I simply mean the judgments that
individuals believe to be moral, where a moral judgment
overrides other judgments. Moral judgment occurs when an
individual judges whether another individual or group of
individuals have transgressed a norm that is considered to
override other norms. An action is usually considered a

moral transgression if the impermissibility of the action still
holds if an authority figure said that it is permissible to
commit the act (e.g., murdering someone for their car even
if the Prime Minister said that it is permissible to do so).
Moral norms override other norms. However, in many
cultures, moral judgment is tied to religious authority, where
moral norms are viewed as sacred and are usually
commanded by an authority figure (e.g., imams or pundits).
In these cases, moral norms override other norms, but are
bound by an authority figure. For instance, eating pork in
Islamic cultures or beef in Hindu cultures is viewed as a
moral transgression because God prohibits the consumption
of these animals. This norm trumps other norms and is
considered moral rather than conventional because the
judgment that it is wrong to consume pork in Islamic
cultures or beef in Hindu cultures overrides other norms.
There are also moral judgments that are dissociated from
affect. These are moral judgments based solely on reason.
An example of a moral judgment dissociated from affect is
making the judgment that stealing from independently
owned markets is morally wrong because it takes away from
a family’s livelihood. It is possible to make this judgment
without having an accompanying emotional reaction to the
situation; you don’t need to feel the emotion of anger or
guilt when making this judgment. Rather, you may reach
this judgment through reason alone. My paper is not
concerned with judgments of this nature. This paper focuses
only on moral judgments that are caused or accompanied by
affect (e.g., moral judgments caused by emotion and moral
judgments that cause corresponding emotions).

Emotion
An emotion can be thought of as a feeling that consists of
specific representational or propositional content
accompanied by a specific sensational reaction. To
experience an emotion is to feel a certain way about
something (representational or propositional content) and
have a corresponding feeling. For example, if I say that
murder is wrong and would feel guilty if I murdered
someone or sad if someone else is murdered, I am
experiencing either guilt or sadness in response to some
propositional content. Therefore, if I am feeling guilty or
sad, there is something that I am feeling guilty or sad about.
Furthermore, this paper concerns both lower-level and
higher-level emotions. Lower-level emotions include
primitive emotions, such as happiness, sadness, disgust,
fear, and anger. Lower-level emotions tend to be universal
and basic, and can also be found in primates. Higher-level

1240

emotions consist of more complex emotions, such as guilt
and empathy. These are emotions that require higher-level
cognitive processes, such as mind-reading and mirroring,
and are less instinctual than lower-level emotions.

Moral judgments: theories of how they are
made
Haidt’s Social Intuitions Model of morality is grounded in
intuition. Haidt’s model is based on basic intuitions that all
humans have, and he claims that these intuitions guide
moral judgment. Furthermore, intuition and emotion are
conflated in this model. For Haidt, intuitions include various
automatic and uncontrollable cognitive processes, including
emotional appraisals and the automatic processes that occur
outside the control of consciousness and reasoning (Haidt,
Bjorklund, & Murphy, 2000).
Haidt’s approach is based on the ‘affective primacy
principle’. This principle, first articulated by William Wundt
and later expanded on by Robert Zajonc, claims that minds
are always perceiving and evaluating and that higher-level
thinking is influenced by affective reactions, such as liking
or disliking something (Haidt, 2007). That is, affective
reactions precede higher-level thinking, where our affective
system pushes us toward approaching or avoiding the
situation or thing in question. Some theorists who endorse
affective primacy have an evolutionary approach to
morality, where it is agreed that the emotional building
blocks of morality were already in place long before
language and the ability to engage in conscious reasoning
came about in humans (Haidt, 2007). On this view, moral
judgment is much like perception-fast, automatic, and
controlled by lower-level processes. Others who endorse
affective primacy do not have an evolutionary approach to
morality, but still view moral judgment as a fast and
automatic process.
To avoid confusion and ambiguity between ‘affect’ and
‘cognition’, where such a distinction appears to imply that
affective reactions do not involve any sort of mental
computations, Haidt draws a distinction between moral
intuition and moral reasoning. On Haidt’s model, moral
intuition can be thought of as the fast and automatic affectladen processes in which an evaluative feeling appears in
consciousness without any awareness of having gone
through steps of reasoning (Haidt, 2007).
By contrast, moral reasoning involves conscious, mental
activity that consists in transforming information about
individuals, situations, and individuals’ actions in order to
reach a moral judgment (Haidt, 2007). This process is more
effortful and less intuitive.
Haidt’s model takes the affective primacy principle as its
starting point. Haidt claims that moral judgments are simply
gut reactions or intuitions. Rarely do we do invoke
conscious reasoning when we make a moral judgment
because we are guided by our intuitions. When conscious
reasoning is invoked, it is after the first automatic process
has run (the affective process of moral intuition), and moral
reasoning can be seen as a post-hoc process. In the process

of moral reasoning, we search for justifications to support
our initial reaction to the situation.
The following is an example of Haidt’s that illustrates that
individuals are guided by emotions when making a moral
judgment:
Julie and Mark are brother and sister. They are traveling
together in France on summer vacation from college. One
night they are staying alone in a cabin near the beach. They
decide that it would be interesting and fun if they tried
making love. At the very least it would be a new experience
for each of them. Julie was already taking birth control pills,
but Mark uses a condom too, just to be safe. They both
enjoy making love, but they decide not to do it again. They
keep that night as a special secret, which makes them feel
even closer to each other. What do you think about that, was
it OK for them to make love? (Haidt, 2001, p. 814)
Haidt and colleagues (2000) conducted a study on moral
judgment using the above scenario. When participants were
asked if it was OK for Mark and Julie to make love, most
individuals said no, it was not okay and they viewed it as a
moral transgression. When pressed to explain why, most
individuals claimed that the act is gross or disgusting. On
their initial reaction, only 20% of the participants said that it
was OK for Mark and Julie to make love. After the
experimenter ‘argued’ with the participants, claiming that
their judgment had no rational basis to be viewed as a moral
transgression since no harm occurred, 32% of the
participants said that it was OK for Mark and Julie to make
love.
Haidt claims that because we do not invoke conscious
moral reasoning and are instead guided by intuitions when
making moral judgments, individuals experience moral
dumbfounding. Dumbfounding occurs when an individual
feels a quick flash of an emotion or intuition, say a flash of
revulsion at the thought of incest, and reaches the
conclusion that incest is wrong even if there are no negative
consequences that follow the act. Then, “when faced with a
social demand for a verbal justification, one becomes a
lawyer trying to build a case, rather than a judge searching
for the truth” (Haidt, 2001, p. 814). When affect is primary,
we are often morally dumbfounded. Here, reasoning is
viewed as an ex post facto process (Haidt, Bjorklund, &
Murphy, 2001).
Further support for the affective primacy principle comes
from studies that suggest that individuals have instant
implicit reactions to stories of moral violations. Some
examples that Haidt gives are from his studies that show
that eliciting disgust in individuals will cause individuals to
judge an action as a moral transgression. For example, most
individuals claim that a man who masturbates into a chicken
carcass and then cooks the chicken for dinner is immoral or
has committed an immoral act. Participants in his study also
found it immoral if someone cleaned their toilet with their
nation’s flag. In Haidt and colleagues’ 2000 study
mentioned above, only 13% of participants said that it
would be OK for a woman to eat the flesh of a dead human,
where the flesh was fully cooked so the woman would not

1241

be harmed in any way. When the experimenter ‘argued’
with the participants about their justification for viewing the
act as a moral transgression, some participants changed their
mind, which increased the number of participants who
viewed the act as permissible to 28%. Haidt states that the
scenarios “were carefully constructed so that no plausible
harm could be found, and most participants directly stated
that nobody was hurt by the actions in question” (Haidt,
2001, p. 817). Thus, there was no one to empathize with.
The scenarios were devoid of empathy, but acted on other
emotions, and were designed to trigger intuitive judgments.
The typical answer of an act causing harm given by
individuals when attempting to justify an act as morally
impermissible could not be used to justify their judgments.
As we know, we sometimes shy away from our initial
reaction to a moral situation and may change our judgment.
On Haidt’s model, there are at least three ways in which our
immediate intuitive responses can be overridden. The first is
through conscious verbal reasoning, where we weigh the
cost and benefits of each action that can be taken. The
second is by reframing a situation which would then trigger
a second flash of intuition that may compete with the first.
The third is through social reasoning, where we engage in
conversation with others where they may raise arguments
that would change our initial response (this is what occurred
in the study mentioned above). However, according to
Haidt, it is moral intuition, and not moral reasoning, that
guides our initial moral judgment. Haidt claims that “moral
reasoning is often like the press secretary for a secretive
administration—constantly generating the most persuasive
arguments it can muster for policies whose true origins and
goals are unknown” (Haidt, 2007, p. 1000). For Haidt,
moral judgment is not dissociable from affect, where affect
is always primary.
To further emphasize the role that intuition and emotion
play in moral judgment, Wheatley and Haidt (2005) created
a study where 63 subjects (37 females, 26 males) were
hypnotized to feel disgust when they heard the words ‘take’
or ‘often.’ Participants heard a story about a student council
president named Dan who organizes and facilitates facultystudent discussions. The scenario included one of two
versions of the following sentence: “He [tries to take]/[often
picks] topics that appeal to both professors and students in
order to stimulate discussion” (Haidt, 2007, p. 1000). 22 out
of the 63 participants who felt a pang of disgust upon
hearing these words while reading the scenario condemned
Dan, and then engaged in post-hoc reasoning in an attempt
to justify why he should be condemned. They were unable
to find a reason, and their initial gut reaction was overridden
by controlled processes. What is more, Wheatley and Haidt
(2005) found that one third of the participants in the
hypnotic disgust condition came up with post-hoc
justifications, claiming that ‘Dan seems snobby’ or ‘that
he’s up to something.’ According to Haidt, “they invented
reasons to make sense of their otherwise inexplicable
feeling of disgust” (Haidt, 2007, p. 1000). This emphasizes
the role that moral intuition usually plays in moral

judgment. While moral reasoning sometimes plays a role, it
is preceded by intuition on Haidt’s model. Furthermore,
Haidt claims that the system responsible for affective
primacy is a rather ancient system, whereas the system
responsible for moral reasoning is new cognitive machinery
that was shaped by adaptive pressures.
Haidt’s model of moral judgment goes beyond what has
been discussed here. For instance, he provides an
evolutionary account of morality, and he discusses what he
believes to be the five domains, or foundations, of moral
judgment. However, we are concerned with how moral
judgments are made, and while the evolution of moral
judgment is important, it does not concern us here.
However, it is worth mentioning the following, though it is
merely speculative. Empathizing requires what appears to
be uniquely human cognitive abilities. While there is talk of
a mirror neuron system (which many believe is a precursor
for empathy) in macaque monkeys, empathizing requires
higher-level cognitive abilities, such as putting yourself in
someone else’s shoes, and imagining how they are feeling,
and then vicariously sharing that emotion. Unlike other
emotions that are automatic and have been shaped by
evolution over many, many years, empathy is relatively new
compared to other emotions. This could explain why we see
forms of morality in many animals that are similar to human
morality (e.g., sharing, caring, harm prevention, etc.). All
this speculation is meant to say is that if the Social
Intuitions Model is correct, then empathy would play a very
little, if any, role in moral judgment.
Similar to Haidt, Shaun Nichols argues that affect or
emotions, such as disgust, play a role in moral judgment and
in the survival of norms throughout history. In Sentimental
Rules, Nichols (2004) argues that affective responses, such
as disgust, play a significant role in treating certain disgust
violations as immoral rather than morally neutral. If a norm
is backed by an affective response, the norm will be
maintained and survive. For instance, Nichols shows that
certain etiquette norms that were around in the Medieval era
that were not continuously backed by an affective response
are no longer around, while those that were backed by an
affective response are still around in contemporary etiquette.
The key point here is that affect plays a significant role in
determining how we treat certain violations, and there
appears to be a “striking connection between our emotions
and our norms” (Nichols, 2008, p. 268). Here, affect and
moral judgment go hand in hand, where emotions elicit a
moral judgment, or a moral judgment is accompanied by
emotion. An example given by Nichols (2004) is individuals
finding it immoral when a guest at a dinner party spits into
his glass and drinks it. Although no one is being harmed and
there is clearly no moral violation, the disgust elicited by the
act leads to the judgment that the act is immoral.
Alternatively, we may judge the act as a moral transgression
because we think that it is disgusting.
Furthermore, as Nichols points out, in our society we have
norms that prohibit the gratuitous display of bodily fluids.
These norms are closely linked with disgust responses, and

1242

are what makes these norms moral rather than conventional.
For instance, many find it immoral when others wipe their
nose on their cap or clothing, or re-swallow saliva (Nichols,
2008). Borrowing Haidt’s example, in Western culture we
find it immoral if a man masturbates into a chicken carcass
and then cooks it for dinner despite the fact that no one is
being harmed. It is evident that the disgust elicited by the
scenario is what leads to the judgment that the act is
somehow immoral. Furthermore, in many Eastern cultures,
a woman who is menstruating would be considered immoral
if she partook in a religious ceremony, or served food to
others. Menstruation is viewed as dirty or unclean, thus
eliciting disgust in many individuals who are a part of that
culture. What is more, while such actions are considered
immoral, individuals would not find it immoral if the fork is
placed on the wrong side of the knife at the dinner table (a
conventional transgression). Here, we can see how affect
plays a role in determining whether we treat a transgression
as moral or conventional.
According to Nichols, if a norm is not affectively backed,
we would not consider it a moral transgression. Harm
norms, in just about every culture, are closely linked to our
emotional responses to suffering (Nichols, 2008). For
instance, children usually regard hitting another child or
pulling a school mate’s hair as morally wrong, and usually
refer to the victim’s suffering for justification. These
examples emphasize the importance of emotion in moral
judgment. Furthermore, we see how moral judgments can be
made without empathy, and are instead guided by other
emotions that are elicited by the act in question.
The view proposed by Nichols, that affectively-backed
norms survive throughout history, is called the affective
resonance hypothesis. According to Nichols, this hypothesis
claims that “norms that prohibit actions to which we are
predisposed to be emotionally averse will enjoy enhanced
cultural fitness over other norms” (Nichols, 2008, p.269).
As we have seen so far, this hypothesis is plausible, and
accounts for the survival of norms throughout history and
the norms that are intact in our society. Further support for
the affective resonance hypothesis comes from the fact that
we view affectively-backed norms more seriously than
norms that are not backed by affect (e.g., spitting into a
glass and then drinking it vs. placing the fork on the wrong
side of the table).
It is also important to note that when disgust or pains at
seeing another suffer is accompanied by the judgment ‘X is
wrong’, it is not clear that empathy plays a role. When we
are disgusted by something, rarely do we have anything or
anyone to empathize with. For example, we do not
empathize with anyone when we view a man masturbating
into a chicken carcass as a moral transgression, nor do those
in other cultures empathize with anyone when they view a
woman who is menstruating that serves food as immoral. It
may be the case that we do sometimes empathize with
others when we make moral judgments that are elicited by
others’ suffering. However, this need not be the case. If we
are bothered by another’s suffering and view an act as a

moral transgression because of it, there are other emotions,
such as distress or anger, which can be responsible. For
example, if I see you pull someone else’s hair and view it as
a moral transgression, it may be because I get distressed
when I witness confrontations, or that I am a conflict
resolver. I do not need to empathize with the victim in order
to judge your action as a moral transgression.
According to Nichols, the reason why harm norms survive
throughout history is because humans have an aversive
response to seeing others suffer. He claims that, “norms are
more likely to be preserved in the culture if the norms
resonate with our affective systems by prohibiting actions
that are likely to elicit negative affect,” and it is clear that
“our normative lives would be radically different if we had a
different emotional repertoire” (Nichols, 2008, p. 272).
Nichols (2008) puts forth a version of sentimentalism that
differs from traditional accounts of sentimentalism, such as
subjectivism and emotivism. However, like other
sentimentalists, Nichols (2008) maintains that given the
empirical research on moral judgment, “core moral
judgment is mediated by affective response” (p. 263).
Nichols claims that all normal individuals have an affective
mechanism that is implicated in core moral judgment, and
responds to harm or distress in others.
Unlike traditional sentimentalist accounts of moral
judgment, Nichols claims that affective responses do not
always suffice to explain moral judgment. Rather, moral
judgment is also dependent on a body of information that
specifies a class of transgressions (Nichols, 2008). This
body of information, however, is affectively-backed, where
the norms are not the emotions, but rather, norms that have
been backed by negative affect survive throughout history.
Recall that this is the affective resonance hypothesis. We
see how Nichols’ maintains a sentimentalist view of moral
judgment, showing how affect is the core of moral
judgment, and responsible for the survival of norms
throughout history. This suggests that for norms that do not
appear to rest on emotion (appear more rationalized) or are
not congruent with emotion, they are still caused by
emotion. For Nichols, the emotions that are present in the
affective resonance hypothesis are universal and innately
specified, and include the basic emotions, such as anger,
disgust, fear, and sadness. What is important to take out of
this discussion is that emotions, like disgust, that guide
moral judgment do not require that empathy be elicited.
The following is a dilemma used in philosophy to
examine moral judgment. In the Trolley Dilemma,
individuals are posed with the following situation: there is
an out-of-control trolley heading in the direction of five
hikers. The trolley is unable to stop, and will result in killing
the five hikers who are unaware that the trolley is headed in
their direction. On another track, there is one individual who
will not be hit and killed by the trolley if it continues on the
track it is on, but would be killed if the trolley was
redirected. The question is whether it is morally right to pull
a lever that will redirect the trolley on the track where the
single individual resides, thus killing him and saving the

1243

lives of the five hikers. Most people claim that pulling the
lever is a morally right action. When posed with a slightly
different version of this dilemma, the Footbridge Dilemma,
where the only way to save the five hikers is to physically
push a large man off of a bridge because he is the only
object heavy enough to stop the trolley from running over
and killing the five hikers, most people respond that this
would be a morally wrong action. While the consequences
of both actions are the same, one act is viewed as morally
preferable while the other is not.
Some, such as John Mikhail (2008), may try to justify this
through moral reasoning, claiming that we invoke the
doctrine of double effect when attempting to make a moral
judgment. The doctrine of double effect is the doctrine that
states that an action is permissible if the consequences of the
action are foreseen but not intended, but impermissible if
they are both intended and foreseen. However, it may be
that we experience revulsion when thinking of harming an
innocent person. That is, in the Footbridge dilemma, we
experience disgust at the thought of physically pushing the
large, innocent man off of the footbridge, which is why we
judge the act as impermissible. In the Trolley Dilemma, we
do not experience the same emotion because we are not
asked to imagine physically pushing someone onto a trolley
track. Here, we can see that affect may be responsible for
our moral judgment, where a judgment is either
accompanied by emotion (we judge that harming an
innocent man is wrong because it is repulsive), or as Haidt
proposes, an emotion causes a moral judgment (we feel
disgusted at harming an innocent person which drives the
judgment that it is wrong) where we then engage in post-hoc
reasoning, attempting to justify why one action is
permissible although the other is not, despite the fact that
the consequences are the same.
Thus far, we have explored two theories, one proposed by
Haidt and one by Nichols, that suggest that affect plays a
significant role in making moral judgments. This is not to
say that other emotion researchers deny this. Of course,
Marsh, Baron-Cohen, and others would agree that affect
plays a considerable role in moral judgment. However, they
would also hold that empathy is one of the most significant
emotions that play a role in moral judgment. Neither Haidt
nor Nichols explicitly denies that empathy plays a role in
moral judgment. What I have tried to illustrate is that
emotions other than empathy, predominantly disgust in the
given examples, are responsible for moral judgment. What
is more, in the examples given above, it is not evident that
empathy is invoked when making moral judgments or when
viewing transgressions as moral transgressions. In the
examples provided by Haidt, there is no one to empathize
with, and no one is being harmed in the given situations.
The same applies to the examples given by Nichols. Thus,
we see that moral judgments can be made without invoking
empathy, and that disgust plays a significant role in
motivating moral judgment.

Examples from Autism
Autism is a spectrum disorder, so I will not be making any
specific claims about autism here. Rather, I will be giving a
brief and general account of autism with regard to what we
are concerned with in this paper. Individuals with autism
show the following impairments: an impairment in
reciprocal social interactions, which includes lack of
awareness of others’ feelings; lack of imitative abilities;
lack of social play; extreme literal-mindedness; lack of
appropriate social behaviours, such as not meeting one’s eye
gaze when speaking; and obsessive insistence on routine
and order (McGeer, 2008). Given the characterization of
impairments in autistic individuals, it is clear that they lack
empathy as I have defined it above.
Philosopher Victoria McGeer examines what lessons we
can learn from autism with regard to morality. McGeer
discusses how autistic individuals interact with others in an
attempt to examine their ability to make moral judgments.
One individual McGeer takes particular interest in is
Temple Grandin. Grandin is a successful professor of
animal science, and a livestock equipment designer.
Growing up, Grandin had a speech impediment that made
speaking very difficult for her. Although she was able to
hear and understand sentences, her words, though she tried
to utter them, rarely ever made it out of her mouth, and
came out as a stutter when they did. Grandin also had
auditory and tactile problems. Despite the issues in
childhood, adolescence, and even today, Grandin has
progressed, and continues to progress, finding different
ways to deal with her impairments.
In reviewing a passage from Grandin, McGeer claims that
Grandin is aware that she “lacks the normal emotional
profile of other human beings, specifically ‘the feeling of
attachment’ that drives others, for instance, to endanger
themselves for the sake of a comrade, dead though he may
be” (McGeer, 2008, p. 232). What is important here is
Grandin’s acknowledgement that she lacks the sort of
empathic connection that many scholars believe is
responsible for morality. However, individuals with autism,
like Grandin, appear to have a sense of duties and
obligations that are binding on all individuals.
McGeer claims that there must be some other source of
“autistic moral concern, since empathy in the sense of
affective attunement with other people seems clearly beyond
the scope of their experience” (McGeer, 2008, p. 234). Let
us explore a few examples of morality in autistic
individuals, and determine what else could be responsible
for their morality.
McGeer (2008) gives the example of an autistic individual
who was unable to fathom that every home did not have a
well-tuned piano. This individual, who has a love for pitch
and music, thought that there should be an amendment
requiring every home to have a well-tuned piano. In his
eyes, he is attempting to make the world a better place from
what he thinks is important to him. In this case, it is possible
that this individual was distressed, be it personal or other-

1244

oriented, at the fact that not everyone had a well-tuned
piano.
Then, there is also Grandin, who appears to want to know
what the ‘right’ thing to do is, and Grandin has made
extraordinary efforts to understand what this could be. In
order to make her behaviour socially acceptable and to
display some sort of morality, Grandin has built up a storage
of memories and experiences, watched numerous television
shows and movies, and has read many newspaper articles in
an attempt to guide her social behaviour in a morally
praiseworthy way. While lacking empathy does make it
challenging for autistic individuals to act in morally
appropriate ways, as they lack the ability to share emotions
with others or to understand others’ emotions and point of
view, it appears that this “does nothing to undermine their
interest in so acting; it does nothing to undermine their
moral concern” (McGeer, 2008, p. 234). One explanation
for this could be that for high functioning autistic
individuals, such as those with Asperberger’s syndrome
who understand that people have separate minds but have
difficulty understanding others’ emotions, have difficulty
perspective taking because they project their own view
point, which is very different from others’ view point, onto
others.
One explanation offered by McGeer is that given that
autistic individuals have a need and desire for rulefollowing and routines, the moral agency displayed in
autistic individuals is a result of abiding by the social and
moral rules that they have been taught, even if not fully
sharing our understanding of what those rules are meant to
serve. To illustrate this line of reasoning, McGeer tells the
story of an autistic man who was playing a game of
scruples, a board game where the players listen to stories
and say what they would do in the given situation. This
individual was given a story about a woman who had no job
and no financial support and had several young children.
The owner of the store saw the woman stealing a small
amount of groceries from his store. When asked what he
would do in the situation, the young man replied that
“everyone has to go through the checkout line. It is illegal
not to go through the checkout line. She should be arrested”
(McGeer, 2008, p. 240). According to McGeer he was
unable to understand that a milder response was called for.
While it is clearly an open question how deep the moral
understanding of autistic individuals are and whether their
morality is ‘genuine’, it is clear that they are capable of
making moral judgments based on their passion for rules,
order, and routine. Recall that moral judgment is the
judgments that individuals believe to be overriding. Given
their desire for order and rule-following, it is no surprise
that autistic individuals’ moral judgments do not stray far
from societal norms. In the same way that a Hindu would
consider it immoral to eat beef or a follower of Islam to
pork because God said it is wrong, an autistic individual
would say it is wrong to stray from the rules that society has
set in place. Although speculative, it could be the case that
the motivation behind the way in which autistic individuals

make moral judgments and display moral agency is their
rule-following behaviour (concern for social order).

Conclusion
In this paper, I have shown that contrary to popular belief,
empathy is not necessary for moral judgment, and plays a
marginal, if any, role in moral judgment. Other emotions,
such as disgust, are responsible for moral judgment and play
a significant role in how we view transgressions.
Furthermore, I have shown that despite lacking empathy,
autistic individuals display instances of moral judgment, and
their morality is more than likely guided by concerns for
social order or rule-following behaviour. Thus, empathy is
not necessary for moral judgment.

References
Baron-Cohen, S. (2011). The science of evil. New York:
Basic Books
Haidt, J. (2001). The emotional dog and its rational tail: A
social intuitionist approach to moral judgment.
Psychological Review, 108, 814-34
Haidt, J. (2007). The new synthesis in moral psychology.
Science, 316, 998-1001
Haidt, J., & Bjorklund, F. (2008). Social intuitionists answer
six questions about moral psychology. In Walter SinnottArmstrong (Ed.), Moral psychology: Intuition and
Diversity vol. 2. Cambridge: MIT Press
Haidt, J., Bjorklund, F., & Murphy, S. (2000). Moral
dumbfounding: when intuition finds no reason.
Unpublished manuscript, University of Virginia
Howe, D. (2013). Empathy: What it is and why it matters.
New York, New York: Palgrave Macmillan
Marsh, A.A. In press. Empathy and moral deficits in
psychopathy. In T. Schramme (Ed.) Being immoral:
Psychopaths and moral indifference. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press
McGeer, V. (2008). Varieties of moral agency: lessons from
autism (and psychopathy). In Walter Sinnott-Armstrong
(Ed.), Moral psychology: The neuroscience of morality:
emotion, disease and development vol. 3. Cambridge:
MIT Press
Nichols, S. (2001). Mind reading and the cognitive
architecture underlying altruistic motivation. Mind and
Language, 4, 425-455
Nichols, S. (2004). Sentimental rules: On the natural
foundations of moral judgment. New York: Oxford
University Press
Prinz, J. (2011). Is empathy necessary for morality? In A.
Coplan & P. Goldie (Eds.), Empathy: Philosophical and
psychological perspectives. New York: Oxford University
Press
Nichols, S. (2008). Sentimentalism Naturalized. In Walter
Sinnott-Armstrong (Ed.), Moral psychology: Intuition and
Diversity vol. 2. Cambridge: MIT Press
Wheatley, T., & Haidt, J. Hypnotic disgust makes moral
judgments more severe. Psychological Science, 16, 780784

1245

