UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
On the automaticity of reduction in dialogue: Cognitive load and repeated multimodal
references

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2w83m8rz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Masson, Ingrid
Goudbeek, Martijn
Krahmer, Emiel

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

On the automaticity of reduction in dialogue:
Cognitive load and repeated multimodal references
Ingrid Masson-Carro (i.massoncarro@tilburguniversity.edu)
Martijn Goudbeek (m.b.goudbeek@tilburguniversity.edu)
Emiel Krahmer (e.j.krahmer@tilburguniversity.edu)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Tilburg University, The Netherlands

reduction is facilitated by automatic processes that mainly
confer cognitive benefits to the speakers, or whether reduction stems from more cognitively demanding processes,
helping to make utterance processing easier for the listeners.

Abstract
In conversation, speakers are likely to refer to the same objects more than once. These repeated references are reduced
with respect to their initial counterparts, both in speech and
gestures. In this paper we investigate the effect of cognitive
load on the reduction of multimodal referring expressions. We
report an experiment in which native speakers of Dutch engaged in a director-matcher task where repeated references
were elicited, and a time constraint was imposed in order to
increase the load. Our results show that articulatory, lexical,
semantic, and gestural reduction took place irrespective of the
cognitive demands. Nevertheless, we found that cognitive
load moderated the extent to which these utterances were reduced, with reduction being less pronounced for speakers experiencing higher load. A subsequent perception experiment
revealed that speakers with an increased load produced referring expressions that proved more informative to naïve listeners.

When do we reduce what, and why?
Reduction in repeated references has been consistently observed at the acoustic, lexical, syntactic, semantic, and discourse levels, and also in the number and appearance of the
gestures that accompany speech. In speech, words in repeated references are shorter and less articulatory precise than
words in initial references (Bard et al., 2000; Bard & Aylett,
2004); there is a decrease in the number of words contained
in the reference phrases (Krauss & Weinheimer, 1964; Clark
& Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986), and also in their semantic content
(Hoetjes et al., 2011). Furthermore, repeated references are
accompanied by fewer co-speech gestures than initial references, and these gestures are less precise, and in some cases
smaller, than their first-mention counterparts (Gerwing &
Bavelas, 2004; Holler et al., 2011; Hoetjes et al., 2011).
This reduction seems rather natural: it would be hard to
maintain a conversation in which each object is referred to
every single time with a full description. In this light, reduction can be seen as an instrument that contributes to the
fluidity of our communicative exchanges with others. However, the mechanisms underlying reduction are less clear.
For example, what is the degree of audience design involved
in reduction? Do speakers reduce their utterances because it
is easy for themselves (speaker-oriented benefits), or for the
sake of more successful communication with their interlocutors (addressee-oriented benefits)?
One hypothesis is that reduction is tightly coupled with
the knowledge that accrues between interlocutors as the
conversation unfolds, known as common ground (e.g., Clark
& Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986; Brennan & Clark, 1996; Galati &
Brennan, 2010). Assuming that the goal of referential communication is for an addressee to identify a target, it is plausible that when a target is often referred to, fewer words are
needed to achieve understanding. Compatible views argue
that already expressed information becomes “more predictable” in conversation and is therefore shortened (e.g., Levy
& Jaeger, 2007). Early studies show that acoustic reduction
(i.e., faster articulation of words) does not occur, or occurs
at a slower pace, when there is no addressee (Krauss &
Weinheimer, 1964), or in a decontextualized setting –e.g.,
repeating lists of words (Fowler, 1988). Similarly, retelling

Keywords: Reduction, referring expressions, gesture, cognitive load

Introduction
In face-to-face dialogue, speakers often produce referring
expressions (e.g., “that large red block”) to talk about objects that are present in their immediate, shared physical
context. These expressions do not only consist of speech,
but may also include hand gestures that complement or
emphasize what is being said in words (e.g. saying “that
large red block” -while tracing a shape in the air). When
speakers engage in conversation, it is likely that they mention some objects more than once. These subsequent references are known as “repeated references” or “repeated mentions”. Previous research has shown that referring several
times to an object results in reduction of the repeated mentions, both regarding speech (e.g., Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs,
1986; Bard & Aylett, 2004) and co-speech gestures (e.g.,
Hoetjes et al., 2011). Nevertheless, the dialogical context
and the role of the addressee strongly mediate the extent to
which speakers reduce their utterances. For example, reduction might be suppressed when retelling the same story to a
new (naïve) listener with whom no common ground is
shared (Galati & Brennan, 2010), or enhanced after receiving positive feedback from the addressee (Holler & Wilkin,
2011). In this study we look at the influence of cognitive
load on the reduction of repeated referring expressions, to
find out more about how speakers and addressees communicate in moments of high load. Concretely, we ask whether

976

a story to a same (old) addressee results in acoustic, lexical
and semantic reduction of the utterances, whereas retelling
the same story to a new addressee does not (Galati & Brennan, 2010). Thus, it is safe to say that the communicative
setting plays an important role in mediating reduction.
However, repeated references might also become reduced
simply because their antecedent is more “accessible” in the
speaker's memory (e.g., Ariel, 1990), making retrieval easier, which is in turn associated with faster articulation (Lam
& Watson, 2010). Some studies have supported this view.
For example, Bard et al. (2000) found that words in repeated
mentions were shorter and less intelligible than words in
initial mentions, regardless of whether they had been produced towards a new or an old addressee. This opens the
discussion on the extent to which reduction is mediated
more strongly by speaker-internal or speaker-external (contextual) constraints.
Previous research suggests the existence of two types of
processes at play in dialogue, namely fast automatic priming
processes that mainly confer benefits to the speaker, and
slower processes that might be more cognitively costly –
such as dual process model was originally proposed by Dell
and Brown (1991), and later by Bard et al. (2000). One way
to tap into these dialogue processes is by manipulating the
degree of cognitive load experienced by speakers, based on
the premise that when the load experienced is high, processes that take more cognitive resources to operate will suffer.
Several studies employing cognitive load paradigms have
shown that audience design (i.e., adapting to one’s addressee during conversation, for example by making use of
shared knowledge) seems to be offset when speakers are
under high cognitive load (e.g., Horton & Keysar, 1996),
even in cases where taking the perspective of the listener
would be appropriate, for example when instructing a child
how to perform a task (as opposed to an adult) (Roßnagel,
2000). In other words, increasing cognitive load can present
a barrier to audience design. Given that reduction in referential communication largely depends on the quality of the
interaction with the addressee, it is possible that cognitive
load may affect the reduction process. The only study exploring reduction and cognitive load that we are aware of is
that by Howarth and Anderson (2007), who asked speakers
and addressees to participate in a referential collaborative
task, whilst being subject to a time-pressure constraint. In
their study, articulatory reduction in repeated mentions took
place irrespective of cognitive demands, suggesting that it is
an automatic process, related to, but separate from, addressee adaptation. It remains to be seen whether this result holds
for aspects of speech production beyond articulation and,
importantly, whether and how cognitive load affect the use
of gestures in repeated mentions. So far, most studies dealing with cognitive load only looked at the gesture rate,
which is the proportional use of gestures with respect to
speech, yielding mixed results. On the one hand, gesture has
been argued to reduce cognitive load for the speaker, e.g.,
by facilitating speech planning (Kita, 2000), but can also

increase it, if these gestures are communicatively intended
(Mol et al., 2009).

The present study
Our knowledge of how cognitive load affects the processes underlying dialogue is limited. Previous studies suggest that reduction is heavily mediated by the interaction
with an addressee (e.g., Krauss & Weinheimer, 1964), but
we also know that increasing the cognitive load in speakers
can present a barrier to audience design (e.g., Horton &
Keysar, 1996; Goudbeek & Krahmer, 2011). This leads to
the hypothesis that if audience design is affected by increasing cognitive load, reduction (as a form of audience design)
might as well be, unless reduction stems from more automatic processes designed to confer cognitive benefits to the
speaker. In the present study, our main goal is to investigate
whether (and how) cognitive load affects the reduction of
multimodal repeated references. Most studies (e.g., Howarth
& Anderson, 2007; Bard et al. 2000) have looked at articulatory reduction only (word-length, intelligibility), but repeated references to objects are also lexically, semantically
and gesturally reduced. Thus, a comprehensive analysis
needs to widen the scope and include all the levels at which
reduction has been found to occur in speech and gestures.
Our study attempts at performing such an analysis.

Experiment I: production
Method
In Experiment I, participants completed a director-matcher
task in which repeated references to a series of eight target
objects were elicited. The experiment followed a mixed
design, with repetition as the within-subjects variable, and
cognitive load (operationalized as time pressure –see
Howarth & Anderson, 2007) as the between variable.
Participants Eighty-two students from Tilburg University
(M = 21.1 years; SD = 5.85, 46 female, 36 male), all of
them native speakers of Dutch, took part in this experiment,
in exchange for course credit. Participants carried out the
experimental task in pairs, therefore data from forty-one
dyads were collected.
Stimuli The materials consisted of four monochrome sets of
abstract pieces: a green, a red, a blue, and a yellow set. Each
consisted of single Lego and Duplo blocks, and of composite pieces built specifically for the task by gluing together
various single pieces to form complex shapes. Of these
composite figures, we selected two target pieces per color
set, summing to a total of eight pieces that the speakers
would have to describe to the matchers (Figure 1). Additionally, using these pieces, we created twelve models (three
per color set) that the matchers would ultimately assemble
(see: procedure). The directors were guided through both
tasks by computerized written step-by-step instructions.

977

Data analyses
Speech Verbatim transcriptions of the first, second, and
third mentions to the target pieces were selected from the
retrieval task. These references were annotated in terms of
their duration in msec, number of words, and word duration
(in msec). We also performed analyses to explore the type
of information contained in the referring expressions. We
looked at two variables: semantic content and common
ground. To measure the semantic content, we annotated the
occurrence of meaningful units in the speech, coded as “attributes”. Based on all the director’s descriptions we configured a list of attributes that were consistently used to describe the blocks, such as size (e.g., “small”), shape (e.g.,
“oval”), position (“above”), etc. To measure common
ground, we created a scheme to evaluate whether speakers’
descriptions took into account the addressee's knowledge
and perspective. We considered a referring expression as
making use of some basic common ground information
when the speaker would mention a piece as an already
known one (e.g., “remember the piece you just retrieved?
Take it again”), when the speaker would refer to elements in
the working space available to both (e.g., “take the piece in
front of you, left side of X”), or when a conceptual pact was
created (Brennan & Clark, 1996) (e.g., “take the castle”).

Figure 1: (right) the 8 targets; (left) example of all pieces
contained in one of the four Lego sets (blue). The two target
pieces are circled in red.
Procedure Participants were randomly assigned the roles of
director and matcher, and sat at opposite sides of a table
(Fig. 2). Both participants had visual access to the working
space, but the matchers could not see the director’s screen.
Each dyad had to accomplish twelve semi-randomized
trials. Each trial corresponded to the assembly of one of the
twelve models, and consisted of two parts. The first part of a
trial was the target piece retrieval task, where the director
was asked to describe four pieces (the two target pieces,
plus two fillers) to the matcher, who had to retrieve those
pieces from one of the buckets by her side and position them
on the working space. Thus, this manipulation elicited twenty-four key references per speaker (three references per
target piece). Once all the pieces were successfully retrieved, the director would press a button on the computer to
proceed with the second part of the trial, where the director
had to instruct the matcher on how to assemble a model with
the pieces retrieved.

Gesture All iconic gestures (McNeill, 1992) accompanying
the referring expressions were identified. First, the number
and the duration of the gestures were determined, and we
computed the gesture rate (number of gestures in proportion
to words). Then, gesture size was annotated on a five-point
scale that judged the size of the stroke from small (1) to big
(5). We also annotated whether a gesture was performed
with one or two hands, and whether there was repetition of
the gestural stroke (e.g., tracing the same shape repeatedly).
Statistical analyses The statistical procedure was Repeated
Measures ANOVA, with “repetition” (three levels) and
“target piece” (eight levels) as the within-subjects variables,
and “cognitive load” as the between-subjects variable.

Results
The referential task generated a total of 884 referring expressions. Our analyses show that speakers produced shorter
referential phrases when referring to an object for the second and third time, than for the first time [F (2, 78) = 73.15,
p <.001, ηρ² = .65]. Likewise, repeated mentions contained
fewer words [F (2, 78) = 59.03, p <.001, ηρ² = .6], and these
words were articulated faster (i.e., had a shorter duration)
than words contained in initial references [F (1, 82) = 9.51,
p <.005, ηρ² = .1]. Complementing these results, our semantic analysis reveals that repeated references contained a
lower amount of semantic attributes than initial ones [F (2,
78) = 37.37, p <.001, ηρ² = .49]. Lastly, repetition also led to
an increase in the use of common ground information [F (2,
78) = 45.2, p <.001, ηρ² = .53], which is consistent with
previous research (e.g., Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986) (see
Table 1).

Figure 2: Experimental setup
Participants in the “low load” condition could devote as
much time as needed to the task, whereas participants in the
“high load” condition had 120 seconds to accomplish each
trial (for both tasks). The length of this period was established during pilot research and was implemented by means
of a timer present on the screen of the instructor, counting
down from 120 to 0. When 0 was reached, participants were
directed to the next trial automatically. Therefore, the objective was to retrieve the pieces as quickly as possible in order
to have time left to assemble the model.

978

Table 1: Mean values of the dependent speech and gesture
variables (for first, second and third references).

Regarding our cognitive load manipulation, we find a marginal effect of load on word-length [F (1, 82) = 3.31, p
=.057, ηρ² = .04], indicating that speakers who performed
the task under high cognitive load articulated words faster
than speakers in the low load condition. This is not surprising, given that we expect participants in the high
load condition to “hurry” in their descriptions, in order
to complete the task in time, which ultimately leads to
a faster articulation. With respect to the influence of cognitive load on reduction, we find interactions between repetition and cognitive load with respect to the mean number of
words contained in a referential phrase [F (2, 78) = 4.1, p
<.05, ηρ² = .09], the duration of the referential phrases [F (2,
78) = 5.8, p <.005, ηρ² = .13], and the amount of common
ground information [F (1, 39) = 8.5, p <.01, ηρ² = .17]. Lack
of space prohibits a further explanation of the these interaction effects, but generally they suggest that, even though
reduction still takes place, the extent to which it occurs is
mediated by the cognitive state of the speaker (see Fig. 3).

Figure 3: Overview of the results from Experiment I.
Asterisks (*) indicate significant interactions between
repetition and cognitive load.

Experiment II: perception

Reduction in gesture
Method

With respect to gesture, we found that fewer referring expressions were accompanied by gestures in repeated mentions, as compared with initial mentions [F (1, 39) = 4.38, p
<.05, ηρ² = .1]. Cognitive load seems to influence the extent
of this reduction, as evidenced by the interaction between
repetition and cognitive load [F (1, 39) = 5.2, p <.05, ηρ² =
.11], with references produced by speakers under cognitive
load being more often accompanied by gestures than the
references produced by speakers in the low load condition
(see Figure 3). The rest of the variables analyzed were not
affected by cognitive load, although nearly all show an
effect of repetition: the mean number of gestures per reference phrase [F (2, 78) = 7.91, p <.001, ηρ² = .16], their duration [F (2, 78) = 73.8, p <.001, ηρ² = .51], their size [F (2,
78) = 13, p <.001, ηρ² = .25], and gestural repetition [F (2,
78) = 14.7, p <.001, ηρ² = .27].

In order to find out how communicative were the descriptions produced by speakers under the different experimental
conditions from Experiment I, we conducted a perception
test in which naïve participants had to attend to a number of
referring expressions extracted from the production experiment footage (Experiment I), and match these expressions to
the right target pieces, based on the principle that more
communicative referring expressions would lead to higher
percentages of correct answers.
Participants Ninety-seven Dutch students from Tilburg
University (age M = 21.2 years; SD = 2.4, 73 female, 24
male), took part in this experiment in exchange for course
credit. None of them had participated in Experiment I.

979

Stimuli The stimuli consisted of video and audio fragments
containing referring expressions produced by the speakers
from Experiment I. We selected one initial and one repeated
(third) reference per speaker, and exported each of the
fragments into three formats: a) audiovisual, b) video-only,
and c) audio-only. We discarded data from nine participants
who did not agree with their video recordings being shown
to third parties, leaving us with referring expressions produced by 32 speakers. This created a total of 192 clips (64
clips per condition).

from these patterns. First, we hypothesize that negative
feedback from the addressees, or trouble in retrieving the
correct piece during first trials, might have led speakers to
produce longer and larger gestures in second trials. Further
analyses of addressee feedback should clarify this. Second,
these results show us that the reduction of gestural behaviours does not exactly parallel that of speech, suggesting
that we are dealing with two independent, yet complementary processes (e.g., de Ruiter, 2000).
With respect to our main research question, we found reduction in the repeated references produced by speakers
from both experimental conditions, suggesting that reduction takes place regardless of the degree of cognitive load
experienced by the speaker. Nevertheless, as shown by the
interactions in our data, cognitive load moderated the extent
to which speakers reduced their utterances. Thus, for speakers under high load, reduction was less pronounced. This
occurred for nearly all variables analyzed in speech, and for
the percentage of referring expressions accompanied by
iconic gestures. Nevertheless, at least for speech, only first
references show differences across experimental conditions
when there is an interaction effect (recall Figure 3), with
speakers from both conditions reaching a similar end-level
of reduction. Hence, we can conclude that both groups of
speakers reduced their utterances to the same extent.
The question remains: is reduction mainly facilitated by
speaker-internal or speaker-external processes? Some research posits that speakers reduce their utterances so that
they are easier to process for their addressees, as a form of
addressee adaptation (e.g., Fowler, 1988). Our results do not
support this hypothesis, at least not if we consider this type
of adaptation as being cognitively costly. Instead, our results
are consistent with theories that view (articulatory) reduction as arising from generic language processes that are
rather automatic (Dell & Brown, 1991; Bard et al., 2000).
Thus, we contribute to these models by establishing that, not
only articulatory, but also lexical and semantic reduction are
part of the set of dialogical processes that take few cognitive
resources to operate. We are nonetheless cautious about our
results regarding the production of co-speech gestures: even
though reduction in the amount of gestures was not influenced by cognitive load, speakers under high load tended to
accompany their repeated references with gestures more
often than speakers in the low load condition. This could
imply that speakers under load may have benefitted from
producing representational gestures (see, e.g., Kita, 2000).
Lastly, our common ground analyses show that, whereas
the amount of shared information used by speakers increases with repetition for both groups, there are crucial differences in initial mentions, where participants in the low load
condition provided their addressees with twice as much
shared information than participants under high load. This
shows a reluctance of speakers under load to adapt to their
addressees in first mentions –consistent with Horton &
Keysar (1996) and with Bard et al.’s (2000) dual model.
Experiment II aimed at complementing the results from
our objective semantic analyses, by testing whether expres-

Procedure The perception test was administered online.
When participants signed up to take part in the experiment
they received a link to the online task, which randomly
directed each new participant to one of the three experimental conditions (speech and gesture, gesture-only, or
speech-only). Each participant attended to sixty-four clips
containing referring expressions. The participants’ task was
to click on the picture that they thought corresponded to the
speaker’s description, being given four options (the target,
plus three distractors of the same color set).
Statistical analyses We conducted a Repeated Measures
ANOVA, with “repetition” (two levels) and “cognitive
load” (two levels) as the within-subjects variables, and
“condition” (three levels) as the between-subjects variable.

Results
As expected, participants who viewed clips in the “videoonly” condition (M = .49, SE = .01) were less accurate at
selecting the correct target than participants who attended to
the clips in the “audiovisual” condition (M = .83, SE = .01)
or in the “audio-only” condition (M = .81, SE = .01) [F (2,
94) = 173.6, p <.001, ηρ² = .78]. Further, our results show
that initial and repeated references were equally informative
to participants, despite the decrease in the mean number of
semantic attributes we found in our previous objective analyses. Interestingly, accuracy rates were higher when the
participants viewed fragments produced by speakers under
high load (M = .77, SE = .01) than when they viewed fragments produced by speakers in the low load condition (M =
.64, SE = .009) [F (1, 94) = 233.04, p <.001, ηρ² = .71].

Discussion
The present study explored the effect of cognitive load on
the production of multi-modal referring expressions. Experiment I was able to replicate previous research, showing that
repeated referring expressions are reduced with respect to
initial ones in their speech (e.g., Bard et al., 2000; Howarth
& Anderson, 2007). With respect to gestures, we observed
reduction in the number of gestures produced by speakers in
repeated references, in line with Hoetjes et al., (2011). Nevertheless, an interesting pattern arises for the mean duration
of the gestures, their size and repetition, where we face an
inverted “v-shaped” effect, with an increase in second mentions (increase in duration, in size, and in repetition), and a
posterior decrease in third ones. We draw two conclusions

980

sions produced in repeated references, or under cognitive
load, would be any less (or any more) informative to naïve
addressees. The results showed that referring expressions
produced by speakers under cognitive load proved more
communicative to the naïve judges, than utterances produced in low load. While this was an unexpected finding,
we have two possible explanations. First, it can be that
speakers in the low load condition tended to produce longer
descriptions filled with hesitations, which might have made
it more difficult for the listener to process them. Another
explanation is that in the low load condition, speakers made
more use of visually-based common ground with their addressees –e.g., by mentioning the spatial location of an item
on the matcher’s workspace, leading to descriptions equally
rich in semantic attributes but not very communicative to
naïve listeners without visual access to the workspace. Further analyses should help clarify this issue.
We conclude that, even though the reduction of repeated
information might result into ease of processing for the
addressee, this might not be the main motivation underlying
it. We suggest that reduction could instead be a speakerinternal, load-lowering instrument that allows for a more
efficient organization and packaging of thoughts.

Fowler, C. A. (1988). Differential shortening of repeated
content words produced in various communicative contexts. Language and Speech, 31(4), 307-319.
Gerwing, J., & Bavelas, J. (2004). Linguistic influences on
gesture's form. Gesture, 4, 157-195.
Goudbeek, M. & E. Krahmer (2011). Referring under load:
Disentangling preference-based and alignment-based content selection processes in referring expression generation. Proceedings of the Workshop on Production of Referring Expressions (Pre-CogSci 2011). 20 July 2011,
Boston, Massachusetts.
Hoetjes, M., Koolen, R., Goudbeek, M., Krahmer, E., &
Swerts, M. (2011). GREEBLES Greeble greeb. On reduction in speech and gesture in repeated references. In L.
Carlson, C. Hoelscher & T. F. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 3250-3255). Boston.
Holler, J., & Wilkin, K. (2011). An experimental investigation of how addressee feedback affects co-speech gestures
accompanying speakers’ responses. Journal of Pragmatics, 43, 3522–3536.
Holler, J., Tutton, M., & Wilkin, K. (2011). Co-speech gestures in the process of meaning coordination.
In Proceedings of the 2nd GESPIN - Gesture & Speech in
Interaction Conference, Bielefeld, 5-7 Sep 2011.
Horton, W. & Keysar, B. (1996). When do speakers take
into account common ground? Cognition 59, 91-117.
Howarth, B. & Anderson, A.H. (2007). Introducing objects
in spoken dialogue: the influence of conversational setting
and cognitive load on the articulation and use of referring
expressions. Language and Cognitive Processes, 22, 272296.
Kita, S. (2000). How representational gestures help speaking. In D. McNeill (Ed.), Language and gesture (pp. 162–
185). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Krauss, R. M., & Weinheimer, S. (1964) Changes in the
length of reference phrases as a function of social interaction: A preliminary study, Psychonomic Science, 1, 113114.
Lam, T. Q., & Watson, D. G. (2010). Repetition is easy:
Why repeated referents have reduced prominence.
Memory and Cognition, 38(8), 1137-1146.
Levy, R., & Jaeger, T. F. (2007). Speakers optimize information density through syntactic reduction. In Proceedings of the twentieth annual conference on neural information processing systems (pp. 849–856). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and mind. What gestures reveal
about thought. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mol, L., Krahmer, E., Maes, A. & Swerts, M. (2009).
Communicative gestures and memory load. In N.A.
Taatgen & H. van Rijn (Eds.), Proceedings of the 31st
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX.
Roßnagel, C. (2000). Cognitive load and perspective-taking:
Applying the automatic-controlled distinction to verbal
communication. European Journal of Social Psychology, 30,
429 445.

Acknowledgments
We thank Kristel Bartels for the help in transcribing the
Dutch dialogues. We received support through the Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen
(KNAW), via a grant awarded to the first author.

References
Ariel, M. (1990). Accessing noun phrase antecedents,
London/New York, Routledge.
Bard, E. G., Anderson, A. H., Sotillo, C., Aylett, M.,
Doherty-Sneddon, G., & Newlands, A. (2000). Controlling the intelligibility of referring expressions in dialogue.
Journal of Memory and Language, 42, 1-22.
Bard, E. G., & Aylett, M. P. (2004). Referential Form,
Word Duration, and Modeling the Listener in Spoken Dialogue. In John C. Trueswell and Michael K. Tanenhaus,
eds. Approaches to Studying World-Situated Language
Use: Bridging the Language-as-Product and Languageas-Action Traditions. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Brennan, S., & Clark, H. (1996). Conceptual pacts and lexical choice in conversation. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 22, 1482-1493.
Clark, H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1-39.
De Ruiter, J. P. (2000). The production of gesture and
speech. In McNeill, D. (Ed.),Language and Gesture (pp.
248-311). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dell, G., & Brown, P. (1991). Mechanisms for listener adaptation in language production: Limiting the role of the
“model of the listener”. In D. J. Napoli & J. A. Kegl
(Eds.), Bridges between psychology and linguistics: A
Swarthmore Festschrift for Lila Gleitman (pp. 111–222).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

981

