UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Over/Under Confidence: Effects of Culture and Number of Options

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1wj3n8n8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Burns, Bruce
Luo, Luming

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Over/Under Confidence: Effects of Culture and Number of Options
Bruce D. Burns (bruce.burns@sydney.edu.au)
School of Psychology
University of Sydney, NSW 2006 Australia

Luming Luo (lluo1019@uni.sydney.edu.au)
School of Psychology
University of Sydney, NSW 2006 Australia

(Yates, Lee, Shinotsuka, Patalano & Sieck, 1998). That is,
East Asians are generally found to be more overconfident in
their probability estimates. This suggests that decisionmaking under uncertainty may be influenced by cultural
factors. Most of this research has examined calibration
through the general knowledge format, which suggests that
East Asians tend to engage in a more dichotomous style of
probabilistic thinking, which would imply a tendency
towards responding to uncertainty in either an extreme or
conservative fashion. However, there are methodological
issues in the general knowledge format with regards to
sampling and the number of alternatives provided, the
limitations and implications of which will be discussed.

Abstract
Greater over-confidence in answers to multiple choice general
knowledge questions has been found for people in East Asian
countries compared to English-speaking countries. A
drawback of this research is difficulty in establishing the
equivalence of samples across countries, so we compared
students at the same university whose first language was
either East Asian, English, or Other. Our earlier research
using Chinese speaking students suggested under-confidence;
however we had presented questions with four response
options rather than two. Therefore here we also manipulated
the number of response options. We found that the East Asian
group consistently performed worse at a given level of
confidence than the other groups, but that they displayed
under rather than over-confidence for 4-option items. Thus
our results were consistent with findings of greater confidence
for people with East Asian roots, but whether this manifests
as over-confidence, under-confidence, or better calibration
could depend on the question’s structure.

Cultural Calibration of Probabilistic Information

Keywords: Confidence, decision making, culture.

Introduction
In today’s progressively globalised world, understanding
cultural differences in decision-making is a valuable and
increasingly relevant area of research. Thus evidence of
differences in probabilistic thinking using cross-national
samples is important. For example, studies have
predominantly found similarities in degrees of overconfidence between English speaking countries, but greater
over-confidence in East Asian samples. However
methodological issues with this research have been raised
and this paper will attempt to address some of these.

Cultural Differences in Probabilistic Thinking
One of the most intriguing findings in cross-cultural
research today is the illustration of the existence of cultural
differences in cognition and reasoning styles (Ji, Zhang &
Nisbett, 2004). Notably, it has been suggested that East
Asians reason in a holistic and relational manner, whereas
Westerners tend to reason in an analytic fashion (Nisbett,
2003; Nisbett, Peng, Choi & Norenzayan, 2001). It is
perhaps unsurprising then, that previous research has also
demonstrated qualitative cultural differences in the way
people perceive uncertainty and utilise probabilistic
information.
The most robust findings of cultural differences in
probabilistic thinking are found in the calibration literature

The accuracy of probability judgments is vital as it
underpins the quality of decisions (Yates, Zhu, Ronis,
Wang, Shinotsuka & Toda, 1989). Lichtenstein and
Fischhoff (1977) underscored ‘calibration’ as a facet of
probability assessment accuracy, and subsequently, most
research has focused on this aspect of probability judgment.
Calibration refers to the extent to which probability
judgments regarding the occurrence of certain events are
congruent with the relative frequencies of their actual
occurrence (Lichtenstein & Fischhoff, 1981). In other
words, it measures the degree of concordance between
subjective confidence and objective accuracy. Wellcalibrated probability assessments are valuable as they
facilitate the accurate interpretation of the judgment being
communicated, which allows for more reliable decisionmaking.
Assessing Calibration. General knowledge questions are
the most widely used tool for assessing calibration. They
generally require the participant to first select an answer
from one or more alternatives and then qualify this through
indicating a subjective degree of certainty that their choice
is correct. They are considered an appropriate method for
assessing calibration as they provide an objective measure,
where the performance criterion can be clearly defined
(Keren, 1991).
The calibration literature reveals two major findings: a
susceptibility to give unrealistically high estimates,
particularly for general knowledge questions, which is
interpreted in the literature as overconfidence (e.g.,
Fischhoff, Slovic, & Lichtenstein, 1977; Lichtenstein &

1964

Fischhoff, 1977); and an effect for the difficulty of the task
on degree of confidence, whereby a more difficult task
usually elicits a higher degree of overconfidence (e.g.,
Arkes, Christensen, Lai & Blumer, 1987; Keren, 1991). The
latter phenomenon has been labeled the ‘hard-easy effect’
(Gigerenzer, Hoffrage & Kleinbolting, 1991). Both of these
findings are fairly robust and studies which have attempted
to ameliorate this through varying response format,
instructions given and offering rewards, have still found the
same effects (e.g., Lichtenstein & Fischhoff, 1977;
Lichtenstein & Fischhoff, 1981).

Bicultural individuals are of particular interest because
they complement cross-cultural comparisons in helping to
isolate the causal role of culture, whilst allowing for greater
internal validity through permitting greater equivalence of
groups (Hong, Morris, Chiu & Benet-Martinez, 2000). This
defines bicultural individuals as those who have internalised
two cultures to the extent that both have influences on their
thoughts, feelings and behaviour (Hong et al., 2000). One
way of defining biculturalism has been in terms of
bilingualism, though this is not unproblematic (Portes &
Rumbaut, 2001).

Main Findings in Cross-Cultural Comparisons of
Calibrations. The most consistent finding in the crosscultural calibration literature is that East Asians demonstrate
a more marked overconfidence in general knowledge tasks,
as reflected in their calibration curves. Phillips and Wright
(1977) developed the Probability Assessment Questionnaire
(PAQ), designed to give an assessment of whether
probability estimates are well calibrated. The PAQ is in the
format of a two-alternative general knowledge
questionnaire, where participants select their answer and
then provide a confidence estimate on a 50-100% scale.
They found that in the PAQ, British participants produced
less extreme probabilities and were better calibrated than the
Asian participants, who demonstrated a greater degree of
overconfidence in their judgments. Moreover, these
differences could not be predicted through the availability of
probabilistic expressions in the different languages. These
findings were also corroborated by those of Wright and
Phillips (1980), and Wright and Phillips (1978), who found
that although their British, Hong Kong, Malaysian and
Indonesian sample all demonstrated overconfidence in the
PAQ, the British sample were the most accurately
calibrated.
The most dominant explanation for these differences is
the claim that performance on calibration tasks reflects a
tendency by East Asians to adopt a ‘black-and-white’ style
of thinking, whereby the world is viewed dichotomously in
terms of certainty or total uncertainty, whilst the Westerners
are more predisposed to engage in ‘probabilistic thinking’
where the world is viewed in terms of degrees of probability
(Wright, 1981). It is this difference which is assumed to
account for a tendency of Asian subjects to use 100%
assessments overconfidently, which could be labeled as the
‘certainty illusion’ (Wright, 1981).

Methodological Issues: Does the Number of Options
Matter? The current literature using general knowledge
questions as a measure for calibration has a possible
limitation in that the majority of general knowledge tasks
tend to use a dichotomous response option with a half-scale,
where participants must indicate their level of certainty on a
50-100% scale. Few studies have examined confidence
judgments on a full-range scale with multiple response
options, and in fact, all cross-cultural studies testing general
knowledge appear to have used a two-alternative format.
The number of alternatives made available to the assessor is
an important consideration as it defines the type of
probability scale used and the relative significance of each
chance level (Keren, 1991). Although the overconfidence
effect has been found to remain even if the full-range
response scale has been provided (Gigerenzer, Hoffrage, &
Kleinbolting, 1991), this has still only been established in a
dichotomous response-option format. It has been suggested
that probability assessments are sensitive to the number of
alternatives provided (Keren, 1991). Pallier, et al (2002)
used a 5-response option scenario for a general knowledge
task and still found overconfidence in their sample.
However Luo (2011) gave Chinese-Australian bicultural
university students general knowledge question with four
response options and found under-confidence rather than
over-confidence in their confidence judgments.

Extending Cross-National Studies
Much of the previous literature exploring cultural
differences in cognitive processing has used largely
homogenous cross-national samples (Benet-Martinez, Leu,
Lee & Morris, 2002). However, this is subject to difficulties
in controlling for important variables such as sample
characteristics, task equivalence, and experimenter
attributes. A novel way of addressing these issues and
controlling for these variables is the use of a bicultural
sample.

The Present Study. This study had two aims: (i) to test for
the existence of overconfidence in a bi-cultural East Asian
sample, and (ii) to test the effects of varying the number of
alternatives a question presents to participants.
According to the Australian Bureau of Statistics, in 2011
27% of Australians were born overseas and a further 20%
had at least one overseas-born parent. Amongst foreign-born
Australians, China is the third-most common place of birth.
Accordingly, Australian university samples contain a large
number of students whose first language is East Asian.
However in order to gain admission they must meet the
same criteria as other students in terms of academic
excellence and English-language competence. Thus they are
reasonably matched to their fellow students whose first
language is English. Therefore they provide an opportunity
to test the effects of culture on over-confidence if we make
the assumption that students with an East Asian first-

1965

language will at least to some extent be culturally East
Asian, even after living in an English speaking country.
Luo (2011) found that under-confidence characterized a
Chinese bicultural sample, but as all her participants
responded to 4-option general knowledge questions it was
impossible to ascertain whether this inconsistency with
previous research was due to their biculturalism or the
number of response options. So in this study we
systematically varied the number of options to be either 2 or
4. If there are cultural effects on overconfidence, then they
should be robust across factors such as number of options.

eight of the items were presented with two alternative
answers and eight were presented with four alternative
answers. Whether the first or second set of eight questions
were 4-option or 2-option items was varied across
participants. Thus across participants all questions were
presented about equally often with either two or four
possible answers. In between answering each item
participants made an estimate of a quantity which formed
part of a different experiment. The experiment was
completed on-line and took under 15 minutes to complete.
Participants were urged not to look up the answers to
questions, and there is no evidence that they did so.

Method
Results
Participants
Participants were first-year psychology students at the
University of Sydney, Australia. A total of 793 completed
the experiment, but only the 774 who attempted all 16
general knowledge items were included in analyses in order
to avoid introducing any biases due to differences in
questions responded to. The average age of the sample was
19.53 years and 65.5% were female. In response to a
question about their first language, 445 (57.5%) indicated
English and 144 (18.6%) indicated an East Asian language
(114 Chinese, 6 Japanese, 25 Korean). A further 185
indicated some other first language, of which the most
common were Arabic (35) and Vietnamese (31). Exactly
how to define our Asian sample was unclear given that the
definition has varied between studies. The most common
claims seem to be about people from East Asian counties, so
we decided a priori to create the groups we did.

Materials and Procedure
We adopted a modified version of the general knowledge
task used in Willaby’s (2010) study. We used this particular
set of questions because we had access to data showing
them to be difficult (mean number of questions correct was
58.14%) and the easy-hard effect predicts that hard
questions augment overconfidence effects. Previous studies
have provided participants with two alternatives, and as a
consequence, the calibration curves have been measured on
a 50-100% scale. We were interested in exploring whether
the same pattern of overconfidence extended below 50%,
and whether the number of response options had an effect.
Therefore, half the questions given participants had four
options, such that the calibration curve was measured from
25-100%. An example of a 4-option item is:
The Ring of Fire is located around what ocean?
•Atlantic •Pacific •Southern •Indian
Percent probability that chosen answer is correct _____%
The 2-option version of this item presented the correct
response (Pacific) and one other randomly selected response
option (in this case, Atlantic).
Participants answered 16 general knowledge questions.
The 16 items were always presented in the same order, but

Two types of calibration have been defined in the literature,
calibration-in-the-small and calibration-in-the-large (Yates
et al., 1989). We will present the data in both ways.

Calibration-in-the-large
Calibration-in-the-large is a single index measure of
judgment accuracy. It refers to the extent, over all
occasions, to which the average assigned probability
judgment matches the proportion of times that the target
event actually occurs (Yates et al., 1989). In relation to
general knowledge questions, calibration-in-the-large serves
as a better measure of overconfidence than calibration-inthe-small (Yates et al., 1989). It is often calculated using the
Bias statistic, which is the difference between the average
confidence that the chosen answer is correct and the
proportion of correct answers (Yates, 2010).
The Bias statistic represents the degree to which the
participants are calibrated overall and is calculated for each
participant by subtracting the percentage of questions
correct from his or her mean probability estimate across all
questions. Rather than calculate just the difference, for
greater informativeness we present in Table 1 both the mean
percent corrects and the mean probability (confidence)
estimates. Given that only participants who attempted every
item are included in the analysis, the difference between
these two means would be the mean Bias statistic. A
positive difference in favour of confidence is generally
taken to indicate over-confidence, whilst a negative
difference indicates under-confidence. Perfect calibration
would be demonstrated by a zero difference.
Table 1 breaks participants into three groups based on
what they reported to be their first language: English, an
East Asian language, or Other language. A 2x2x3 Mixeddesign MANOVA was run with factors for number of item
response options (2 vs. 4), bias (%correct vs. %confidence)
and first language (English, East Asia, or Other). There was
a main effect of option, F(1,771) = 186.78, p < .001,
indicating that participants were both more confident and
more likely to be correct when an item was presented with 2
rather than 4 options, which effectively makes an item
easier. There was a main effect for bias, F(1,771) = 43.53,
p < .001, demonstrating that overall confidence was lower
than the estimated proportion correct, that is, our

1966

participants displayed under-confidence overall. There was
a main effect of language, F(2,771) = 31.37, p < .001, as
well as a two-way interaction between language and bias,
F(2,771) = 12.67, p < .001. There was also a two-way
interaction of options by bias, F(2,771) = 15.73, p < .001,
but no language by options interaction, F(2,771) = 0.54, p =
.582. The three-way interaction was not significant,
F(2,771) = 0.53, p = .590.
Table 1: Mean percentages correct and percents
confidence (SDs in parentheses) for 4-option and 2-option
items, for participants whose first language was English, an
East Asian language, or Other language.
4-option items
Correct Confiden
ce
64.55
55.20
(24.62) (20.55)

2-option items
Correct Confiden
ce
76.18
71.90
(19.91) (14.58)

East
Asian
(n=144)

52.00
(26.60)

50.23
(18.70)

64.67
(22.58)

66.25
(13.19)

Other
(n=185)

58.38
(22.55)

52.47
(19.51)

73.38
(20.42)

70.66
(13.89)

Total
(n=774)

60.76
(24.91)

53.65
(20.04)

73.37
(20.97)

70.54
(14.31)

First language

English
(n=445)

To examine the effect of language, the same analysis was
conducted including only the English and East Asian
groups. The same pattern of significant results was found, in
particular there was an interaction between language and
bias, F(1.587) = 24.48, p < .001. The same analysis with
East Asian and Other groups also showed the same pattern
of results, again with a significant language by bias
interaction, F(1,327) = 6.63, p = .010. This suggests that the
East Asian effect is not simply a bilingual effect.

Calibration-in-the-small
Calibration-in-the-small refers to the degree to which the
proportion of correct responses for each subjective
confidence category correspond to the mean confidence
level represented by each category; this allows for a
discrepancy between confidence and accuracy to be
calculated for each category (Yates et al., 1989). For
example, calibration-in-the small would compare, say, for
all cases where the person assigned 60% certainty, how
close the proportion of correct answers were to 60%. An
identity line can be drawn for which confidence and
correctness are in perfect synchrony. In the context of
general knowledge questions, overconfidence is evident
when the calibration curve sits to the right of the identity

line (see Figure 1), whereas under-confidence is evident
when it sits to the left.
Although calibration-in-the-large is considered a better
measure, previous studies examining cultural differences
have predominantly used calibration-in-the-small to
demonstrate that East Asian participants showed more
marked overconfidence. Calibration-in-the-small can be
used to provide an indication of the consistency of under or
overconfidence effects. Therefore, in this study we also
calculated the calibration curves representing calibration-inthe-small in order to create a point of comparison with other
studies. To simplify the graphs only the English and East
Asian groups will be shown.
The calibration curve was formed through calculating the
average proportion across all questions that a particular
category was selected and led to a correct response. For 4option items nine categories were created for each question:
25%, 25-29%, 30-39%, 40-49%, 50-59%, 60-69%, 70-79%,
80-89%, 90-99% and 100%. The extreme responses (25%
and 100%) were represented as their own categories because
they may have special meaning for participants.
Figure 1 is consistent with the finding from the
calibration-in-the-large measure that the East Asian group
tended to perform more poorly for a given level of
confidence, but it augments this finding by showing that this
is consistent for every level of confidence. However both
groups tended to display over-confidence when absolute
confidence levels were high but under-confidence when
absolute confidence was low. The reason why calibration inthe-small suggests overall under-confidence for the Englishlanguage group and East Asian language group was because
most of their confidence judgements were low, as is shown
in Figure 2.
The calibration curves were calculated for 2-option items
using seven categories: 50%, 50-59%, 60-69%, 70-79%, 8089%, 90-99% and 100%. Again extreme values were their
own categories.
Figure 3 demonstrates again that for each confidence
judgement category the East Asian group tended to perform
more poorly than the English group. However, as the
calibration-in-the-large data suggests, this leads the East
Asian group towards better calibration rather than overconfidence. As for 2-option items, under-confidence appears
to be more likely to be displayed at higher absolute
confidence levels than lower ones. The calibration in-thesmall finding of overall under-confidence is driven by the
predominance of lower confidence judgements shown in
Figure 4.

Discussion
Overall our results are consistent with the general finding
that, to the extent that first-language reflects culture, an East
Asian group will have poorer performance for each given
level of performance than a culturally Western group. This
finding is an important extension of previous findings
because by using a bicultural East Asian group our groups

1967

Figure 1: Calibration curves for 4-option items for monolingual
and East Asian language speakers. The identity line represents
perfect calibration between confidence and correctness.

Figure 3: Calibration curves for 2-option items for
monolingual and East Asian language speakers. The
identity line represents perfect calibration between
confidence and correctness.

Figure 2: Proportionate use of each confidence category for 4option items for English and East Asian groups.

Figure 4: Proportionate use of each confidence
category for 2-option items for English and East Asian.

were better matched than in cross-national studies. All our
participants had the same materials, similar high levels of
English language skills, and the intelligence to be admitted
to the same major Australian university. They had all lived
in the same country and despite unmeasured variation in
how long the East Asian participants had lived in Australia;
we still found cultural effects on confidence calibration. The
finding that the East Asian group was differentiated from a
group with some other non-English first language argues
against our findings being due simply to bilingualism or
being part of an immigrant group.
The effect of number of options is also an important
finding because it suggests that despite the difference we
found for the East Asian group, it may not be accurate to
characterize this group as having greater overconfidence.

Our results suggest that whether the confidence difference
manifests itself as over-confidence, under-confidence or
better calibration depended on the nature of the task and
where you looked on the calibration curve. The general
similarity of the groups displayed in the frequency data
shown in Figures 2 and 4 also tends to argue against the
East Asian sample being more prone to black-white
thinking. Thus, our results could contribute to trying to
determine the reasons for the cross-cultural differences.
Our overall finding of under-confidence is surprising
given that overconfidence is considered as a fairly robust
finding in other studies. The findings from this study do not
appear to support those found in the calibration literature: a
pervasive susceptibility to give unrealistically high
estimates, or the ‘easy-hard effect’, which would predict,

1968

given the demonstrated difficulty of this set of questions,
greater evidence of overconfidence at the low ends of the
calibration curves. However, few studies have examined
confidence judgments on a full-range scale with multiple
response options. Pallier et al. (2002) used a difficult
general knowledge task which provided five alternatives,
with a full scale (20-100%) and also found overconfidence
in their sample. Nevertheless, the findings of this study may
suggest that when scales are extended through an increase in
the number of response options, overconfidence is less
likely to occur.

Limitations and Future Directions
The extent to which first language reflects culture for
immigrant groups could be challenged, especially because
we did not collect any information about culture or how
long participants had lived in Australia. We think it a
reasonable assumption that first language and culture are
correlated, but future research should collect measures of
acculturalisation and would predict that such measures
would mediate any East Asian confidence effects. Our data
also does not allow us to rule out that this effect could be
due to language rather than culture.
Why we found evidence of under-confidence in native
English-speakers whereas studies in the US and UK have
indicated overconfidence is hard to say. We assumed that
Australian could be bracketed together with other native
English speaking nations, but perhaps this is not the case. It
could alternatively be due to something about our items, the
online presentation, or the university. If our methodology
was responsible for the discrepancy then it adds to the point
made by the 2-option/4-options effect, that blanket
assertions of over-confidence may fail due to seemingly
unimportant variations in how the task is presented. Further
examination of such methodological factors may yield clues
for understanding miscalibrations of confidence.

References
Arkes, H, R., Christensen, C., Lai, C., & Blumer, C. (1987).
Two methods of reducing overconfidence. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 39, 133-144.
Benet-Martinez, V., Leu, J., Lee, F., & Morris, M. W.
(2002). Negotiating bicuturalism: Cultural frame
switching in biculturals with propositional versus
compatible cultural identities. Journal of Cross-Cultural
Psychology, 33, 492-516.
Fischhoff, B., Slovic, P., & Lichtenstein, S. (1977).
Knowing with certainty: The appropriateness of extreme
confidence. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 3, 552-564.
Gigerenzer, G., Hoffrage, U., & Kleinbolting, H. (1991).
Probabilistic mental models: A Brunswikian theory of
confidence. Psychological Review, 98, 506-528.
Hong, Y.-Y., Morris, M. W., Chiu, C.-Y., & BenetMartinez, V. (2000). A dynamic constructivist approach
to culture and cognition. American Psychologist, 55, 709720.

Lichtenstein, S. B., & Fischhoff, B. (1977). Do those who
know more also know more about how much they know?
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 20,
159-183.
Lichtenstein, S. B., & Fischhoff, B. (1981). The effects of
gender and instructions on calibration. decision research.
Technical Report, PTR-1092-81-7, Euguene, OR.
Luo, L. (2011). Probabilistic thinking in Australian-Chinese
biculturals. Unpublished honours thesis, the University of
Sydney.
Keren, G. (1991). Calibration and probability judgments:
Conceptual
and
methodological
issues.
Acta
Psychologica, 77, 217-273.
Ji, L.-Y., Zhang, Z., & Nisbett , R. E. (2004). Is it culture or
is it language? Examination of language effects in crosscultural research on categorisation. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 87, 57-65.
Nisbett, R. E. (2003). The geography of thought: How
Asians and Westerners think differently…and why. New
York, NY: The Free Press.
Nisbett, R. E., Choi, I., Peng, K., & Norenzayan, A. (2001).
Culture and systems of thought: Holistic versus analytic
cognition. Psychological Review, 108, 291-310.
Pallier, G., Wilkinson, R., Danthiir, V., Kleitman, S.,
Knezevic, G., Stankov, L., & Roberts, R. D. (2002). The
role of individual differences in accuracy of confidence
judgments. The Journal of General Psychology, 129, 257299.
Phillips, L. D., & Wright, G. N. (1977). Cultural differences
in viewing uncertainty and assessing probabilities. In: H.
Jungermann and G. de Zeeuw (eds.), Decision making
and changes in human affairs. Amsterdam: D. Reidel.
Portes, A., & Rumbaut, R. G. (2001). Legacies: The story of
the immigrant second generation. Berkley: University of
California Press.
Willaby, H. (2010). Luck feelings, luck beliefs, and decision
making. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, the University
of Sydney.
Wright, G. N. (1981). Cultural and task influences on
decision
making
under
uncertainty.
Current
Anthropology, 22, 290-291.
Wright, G. N. & Phillips, L. D. (1980). Cultural variation in
probabilistic thinking: Alternative ways of dealing with
uncertainty. International Journal of Psychology, 15, 239257.
Yates, J. F. (2010). Culture and probability judgment. Social
and Personality Psychology Compass, 4, Supp, 174-188.
Yates, J. F., Lee, J.-W., Shinotsuka, H., Patalano, A. L., &
Sieck, W. R. (1998). Cross-cultural variations in
probability judgment accuracy: Beyond general
knowledge overconfidence? Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 74, 89-117.
Yates, J. F., Zhu, Y., Ronis, D. L., & Wang, D.-F.,
Shinotsuka, H., & Toda, M. (1989). Probability judgment
accuracy: China, Japan and the United States.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
43, 145-171.

1969

