UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Overspecification and the Cost of Pragmatic Reasoning about Referring Expressions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9gj1c78f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Baumann, Peter
Clark, Brady
Kaufmann, Stefan

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Overspecification and the Cost of Pragmatic Reasoning about Referring
Expressions
Peter Baumann (baumann@u.northwestern.edu)
Department of Linguistics
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA

Brady Clark (bzack@northwestern.edu)
Department of Linguistics
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA

Stefan Kaufmann (stefan.kaufmann@uconn.edu)
Department of Linguistics
University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA
Abstract
In current approaches to pragmatic reasoning the comprehension and production of referring expressions is modeled as a
result of the interlocutors’ mutual perspective-taking under the
additional assumption that speakers try to minimize their articulatory effort or production cost. The latter assumption is
usually not tested and instead built into the experimental tasks
of referential language games by artificially restricting the set
of possible referring expressions available to identify a referent. We present two language game experiments: a production experiment, in which the speakers were allowed to freely
choose a referring expression, and a comprehension experiment to replicate earlier findings with our stimuli. Our results
show that while listeners easily perform pragmatic reasoning,
speakers resort to overspecification when the effort of pragmatic reasoning becomes too high.
Keywords: Pragmatics; Language games; Referring Expressions; Language Production; Language Comprehension

Introduction
In a complex situation, like a room full of people, one may be
able to identify a single person upon hearing a rather short description, like “the man with a hat”, even in cases in which the
man in question is not the only one with a hat and despite the
fact that he certainly has many other characteristics besides
wearing a hat. This amazing efficiency of human communication has made reference and the use of referring expressions
a central topic in linguistic pragmatics. The most influential descriptive account for the efficiency of human communication was formulated by Grice (1975) in the form of his
Maxims of Conversation, and since then, a number of proposals have been made to provide more quantitative models of
pragmatic reasoning based on the Gricean maxims or more
general principles of human cognition and interaction. The
most prominent examples are game-theoretic models based
on strategic reasoning (e.g. Benz & Van Rooij, 2007; Franke,
2011; Jäger, 2011) and Bayesian models grounded in social cognition (e.g. Frank & Goodman, 2012; Goodman &
Stuhlmüller, 2013). In both classes of models it is assumed
that the speaker and hearer reason about each other’s perspectives: the hearer is assumed to interpret a speaker’s expression
as referring to the referent for which the expression is ‘optimal’ under the perspective of the speaker, who in turn chooses

the referring expression to be ‘optimal’ under the hearer’s perspective, etc.
A trivial solution to this recursive reasoning process is for
the speaker to choose a referring expression that explicitly
mentions all features of the intended referent and is thus
absolutely unambiguous in the given context. Since such
an expression can hardly qualify as efficient, however, the
above models make the crucial additional assumption that
the speaker incurs a cost for producing an utterance, thus all
things being equal, speakers have a preference for the most
economic (i.e. shortest and least effortful) expression.
While theoretically appealing, production costs are notoriously hard to quantify, as the articulatory effort of speech
production1 is negligible (Moon & Lindblom, 2003; Locke,
2008). And anecdotally one may even be tempted to reject
the notion of production costs altogether: people talk a lot.
However, we do not argue against a possible role for production costs in pragmatic reasoning. Instead, we show that
speakers’ behavior cannot be explained in terms of this factor alone: Under certain conditions, speakers do use costlier
forms than would be required to identify the intended referent, which suggests that the process of pragmatic reasoning
(often termed implicature) is itself effortful (like any other
reasoning process) and thus incurs a cost for the speaker.
In language comprehension, it is well established that pragmatic reasoning can be effortful: in reading, sentences involving implicatures take longer to process than sentences without implicatures (Hamblin & Gibbs, 2003), and in referential
language games, target identification is less accurate when
the message involves an implicature than when it does not
(e.g. Degen & Franke, 2012).
In language production, on the other hand, the speaker has
the option of reducing the need for pragmatic inference by
overspecification, i.e. saying more than is strictly necessary.
And indeed, there is plenty of empirical evidence that speakers do make use of overspecification. In particular, research
on the production of referring expressions (e.g. Koolen,
1
Typological analyses of language efficiency (e.g. Piantadosi,
Tily, & Gibson, 2012) are typically based on arguments involving
processing restrictions in comprehension rather than production.

1898

Gatt, Goudbeek, & Krahmer, 2011) has identified a number of
properties of referents and their surroundings that can lead to
a speaker making use of overspecification: in the above scenario of a room full of people one can easily imagine someone
referring to the man in question by the expression “the bald
man with a red hat”, even if that man was in fact the only one
wearing any hat.
However, in empirical research on pragmatic reasoning
about referring expressions, in particular in referential language games (e.g. Degen & Franke, 2012; Frank & Goodman, 2012; Degen, Franke, & Jäger, 2013), the speakers’ option of overspecification is often ignored. Instead the theoretical assumption that production costs influence the choice of
referring expressions is built into the experimental tasks by
artificially restricting the set of possible referring expressions
available to identify a referent.
In this paper, we argue that such a restriction of the possible
alternatives of referring expressions misses crucial features of
human communication, since speakers in real-life situations
are not constrained in their choice of forms. To show this, we
present two referential language game experiments: a production experiment, in which we allow the speakers to freely
choose a referring expression, and a comprehension experiment to replicate earlier findings with our stimuli. Our results
demonstrate that while listeners easily perform pragmatic reasoning, speakers resort to overspecification when pragmatic
reasoning is involved. This shows that also in language production, pragmatic reasoning can be effortful, and that this
effort or cost of pragmatic reasoning can outweigh a possible
production cost for the speaker.

Related Work
In this section we introduce referential language games as a
common method for investigating pragmatic reasoning about
referring expressions and then briefly review some relevant
studies from the vast literature on the generation of referring
expressions and their take on overspecification.

Pragmatic Reasoning in Language Games
Referential language games2 (Wittgenstein, 1959; Lewis,
1969) have been used to empirically test recursive reasoning
about referents and referring expressions in (simple) visual
contexts.
As an example, consider the situation sketched by the three
pictures shown in Figure 1. If in this context, a speaker
said (1), a listener could infer that she is referring to the picture in the middle.
(1)

My friend is the one wearing sunglasses.

This follows under the assumption that if the speaker had
wanted to refer to the right picture, she would have used an
expression like (2), which unambiguously identifies the intended referent.
2

Also known as signaling games.

Figure 1: Example of the visual context of a language game.

(2)

My friend is the one wearing a hat.

It has been shown that (adult) listeners can easily perform
this kind of pragmatic reasoning (e.g. Stiller, Goodman, &
Frank, 2011; Degen & Franke, 2012), which is similar to the
calculation of scalar implicatures (Grice, 1975).
In the general form of a language game experiment, speakers and listeners see a visual display of several potential referents, from which the speaker picks (or is given) a referent
to talk about, while the listener does not know the referent.
The speaker then chooses a referential description, and if the
listener can identify the intended referent, communication is
successful, otherwise it fails.
Language games are particularly suitable for the study of
pragmatic reasoning as they allow for an easy manipulation of
the depth of (recursive) pragmatic reasoning required for successful communication by changing the distribution of features across the different referents. In Figure 1, the target referent (middle), shares one feature with each of its two competitors: like the competitor to its right, the target is wearing
sunglasses, and like the competitor to its left, it is not wearing a hat. So upon hearing a sentence like (1), the hearer
must employ pragmatic reasoning and strengthen the heard
utterance to mean “the one wearing sunglasses, but no hat”.
One interesting feature of language games is that it is possible to experimentally manipulate the set of possible referential descriptions or messages that the speaker has at her disposal, and this feature has been exploited in several studies of
pragmatic reasoning: Degen and Franke (2012) and Degen et
al. (2013) provide their speakers with a fixed set of four (visual or linguistic) messages describing only one feature and
have them choose the best one to identify a given referent
out of an array of three potential referents varying along two
feature dimensions. Similarly, Frank and Goodman (2012)
simulated a ‘speaker condition’ by asking their participants
which one of two features they would choose to describe a
simple geometric object out of an array of three objects varying along those two feature dimensions.
Speaker cost in language games In addition to restricting
the set of possible referring expressions, one can also associate individual referring expressions with explicit or implicit production costs. The explicit approach was explored
by Rohde, Seyfarth, Clark, Jäger, and Kaufmann (2012), who
showed that when referring expressions are assigned an explicit dollar value, hearers take the cost of referring expres-

1899

sions into account and reason about the speaker’s set of possible expressions and their respective production costs. Degen
et al. (2013) chose a more implicit approach to assigning
speaker costs to referring expressions by embedding the referential language game into an artificial language learning task:
in their artificial language, referring expressions differed in
length, and during the learning phase participants had to enter
the expressions by clicking on a virtual keyboard. This rather
cumbersome method of entering their answers was chosen
to increase the participants’ awareness of possible production costs for speakers. In the following referential language
game, participants drew more pragmatic inferences if an unambiguous alternative referring expression was of high cost
than when it was of low cost.
In all referential language games reviewed so far, speakers
were faced with a forced-choice task. One may argue that
such a task is highly artificial and quite likely to miss crucial
aspects of a real speaker’s communicative situation with its
potentially infinite choices of expression. If we put ourselves
in the position of the speaker who wants to talk about the
referent in the middle picture of Figure 1 we may ask: Would
we actually use sentence (1) in this context? Or would we
rather say something like (3)?

and size on the degree of overspecification, and so the experiment consisted only of conditions in which either color or size
or both were unique features of the target object. Crucially,
there was no ‘ambiguous’ condition, which would have involved pragmatic reasoning.

(3)

Using Amazon Mechanical Turk, 96 participants were recruited for the experiment. All participants were naive to the
purpose of the experiment and reported to be native speakers
of English.

My friend is the one wearing sunglasses and no hat.

Sentence (3) exemplifies one crucial aspect of human communication that is ignored in such forced-choice tasks: the
speaker has the option of overspecification, i.e. of saying
more than is minimally required for a successful identification of the intended referent.

Overspecification in the Generation of Referring
Expressions
The fact that speakers have the option for overspecification and often make use of it has become a well-established
fact in the psycholinguistic literature on referring expressions
(e.g. Pechmann, 1989; Engelhardt, Bailey, & Ferreira, 2006).
Numerous studies have shown that the properties (or features)
of referents form preference hierarchies and that properties
listed high on these hierarchies, such as color, tend to be used
by speakers even if they are not necessary to identify an intended referent (Koolen et al., 2011).
Most of these studies involve rather complex visual contexts from which a specific referent is to be identified. This
makes the comparison to the rather simple visual scenarios
used in the study of pragmatic reasoning somewhat difficult.
One notable exception is an experiment reported by Gatt, van
Gompel, Krahmer, and van Deemter (2011): as in the above
mentioned language games, the visual display consisted of
three objects, which differed along two feature dimensions,
namely color and size, and participants were given an open
prompt to answer. The results showed that participants made
significant use of overspecification, especially if the redundant feature was color. However, the authors of this study
were primarily interested in the differential effects of color

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 is a production experiment in which we remedy the shortcomings of previous work on pragmatic reasoning in referential language games by providing speakers with
an open prompt instead of a forced choice, thus not imposing any artificial restrictions on the speakers’ choice of referring expressions. However, like in the signaling games above,
the speakers’ choice of referring expressions was naturally restricted by the visual scenes, which are rather simple and vary
only along two feature dimensions.
In contrast to the experiments reviewed in the section on
overspecification of referring expressions, we used features
for which no preference is established and which are generally low on any preference hierarchy, such as optional accessories of persons or animate beings.

Participants

Materials and Design
We designed two sets of arrays of three pictures, like the one
in Figure 1. The individual pictures differed by the presence
or absence of two accessories, in this case a hat and a pair
of sun glasses, and the accessories were chosen so that their
most natural way of linguistic expression is by means of a
post-nominal prepositional phrases (e.g. “smiley with a hat”).
The pictures in the arrays were assembled according to two
conditions: (1) the implicature condition (Figure 2, top) and
(2) the simple condition (Figure 2, bottom). In the simple
condition, the target picture (indicated by a grey frame) had
one unique present feature (hat) in the context, by which it
could easily be referred to (e.g. “smiley with a hat”).
In the implicature condition, the target picture shared one
present and one absent feature with each of its two competitors: like the competitor to its right, the target is wearing a
hat, and like the competitor to its left, it is not wearing sunglasses. The target referent can be identified through pragmatic reasoning by just mentioning its one present accessory
(e.g. “smiley with a hat”), as the competitor referent with
the same accessory also has a second accessory (sunglasses),
which could be used to uniquely identify it. Alternatively, the
target referent could be identified by an overspecifying referring expression mentioning both features (e.g. “smiley with
a hat and no sunglasses”). Crucially, overspecification here
requires mentioning the absence of an accessory (e.g. “with
no sunglasses”).

1900

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Proportion of Overspecification

implicature

Figure 2: Sample stimuli of Experiment 1. Implicature condition (top): target picture (in grey frame) shares one present
(hat) and one absent (sunglasses) feature with each of its two
competitors. Simple condition (bottom): target picture has
one unique present feature (hat).
We employed a one-shot within-subject design: each participant completed only two trials (cf. Frank and Goodman
(2012), who also used single trial experiments for a task very
similar to ours): one in the implicature condition and one in
the simple conditions. The two accessory dimensions and
array sets were counter-balanced across participants and the
order of the three pictures was randomized within the array.

Procedure
The two trials were presented on a single web page. Each trial
consisted of a three-picture array with one picture marked by
a grey frame as in Figure 2. Under the picture array there
was a text line with the words “Pick the” followed by an open
prompt and a period. The participants’ task was to fill in the
blank so that another person could identify the target picture
with the grey frame.
Participants were instructed to imagine that they were communicating with another person over an instant messaging or
chat system and that they wanted their partner to pick the picture with the grey frame out of the three pictures in the array.
They were told that their partner saw the same three picture,
but without the frame and in a possibly different order. This
instruction was emphasized by the fact that the target picture
appeared in a randomized position within each trial. In addition, participants were asked to complete the initial two words
into a correct sentence of English.

Condition

Figure 3: Results of Experiment 1: Proportions of overspecification by condition. Error bars are standard errors.

culated the proportion of overspecification as the number of
trials with both features explicitly mentioned divided by the
total number of trials. This proportion is shown in Figure 3.
As expected, the proportion of overspecification is higher in
the implicature condition (46.2%) than in the simple condition (6.5%). A logistic regression was fit to an indicator variable of overspecification per trial with the condition variable
as a categorical predictor. It confirmed that the difference
between the simple and the implicature condition is highly
significant (β = −2.52, SE = 0.47, p < .0001).

Discussion
The fact that in the simple condition only 6.5% of the responses contained more information than necessary is in line
with the claim that there may be a production cost for the
speaker (as assumed by Degen et al., 2013) and that all
things being equal speakers have a preference for the most
economic (i.e. shortest and least effortful) expression. However, the effect of this preference is significantly reduced
when pragmatic reasoning is involved, as in the implicature
condition participants opted for overspecification in 46.2%
of their answers. This suggests that speakers have an incentive for avoiding the need for pragmatic inference, which can
easily outweigh the cost for articulatory effort (or longer expressions).

Results
The individual answers were manually assessed for correctness, i.e. whether or not it was possible to identify the intended referent from the answer. Out of 192 responses, only
8 (≈ 4.2%) did not allow for a unique identification of the
target picture and were excluded. For the remaining 184 trials, we manually annotated which features (present or absent)
were explicitly mentioned in the response. From this we cal-

simple

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 is a comprehension experiment. The main goal
of this experiment is to replicate with our (visual) stimuli the
well-established finding that participants are able to employ
pragmatic reasoning in the identification of a referent based
on a referring expression (e.g. Degen & Franke, 2012; Frank
& Goodman, 2012; Stiller et al., 2011).

1901

Procedure

(4)

Figure 4: Results of Experiment 2: Proportions of correct target identification by condition. Error bars are standard errors.

Results
The proportions of correct target choices are shown in Figure 4. As expected, participants were able to correctly identify the intended target in the implicature condition and chose
it in 91.7% of the cases. This number is even higher than the
one reported by Degen and Franke (2012)3 and not considerably lower than 96.7% of correct responses in the unambiguous simple condition.

General Discussion
In models of pragmatic reasoning it is generally assumed that
the speaker and hearer reason about each other’s perspectives
and that this recursive reasoning process leads to ‘optimal’
or ‘rational’ communication under the additional assumption
that speakers try to minimize their articulatory effort or production cost. What is not included in this effort or cost calculation is the cognitive effort it takes for the speaker to find the
optimal referring expression. In line with evidence showing
3
In the ‘simple implicature condition’ of the comprehension experiment, Degen and Franke (2012) report a proportion of target
choice of ≈ 82%, which is averaged across six trials per participant.

simple
Condition

In the simple condition, this sentence allows for an immediate
unique identification of the target picture, while in the implicature condition pragmatic reasoning must be employed for a
successful target identification.
Participants were asked to select the ‘best’ picture given the
sentence and made their selection by clicking on a radio button under one of the pictures. Like in Experiment 1, participants were instructed to imagine that they are communicating
with another person over an instant messaging or chat system
and that they both saw the same three pictures, however in
possibly different orders, and that they wanted to identify the
picture their partner was referring to by the given sentence.

As a replication of earlier findings (e.g. Degen & Franke,
2012; Frank & Goodman, 2012; Stiller et al., 2011), we
showed that participants were able to perform simple pragmatic inference in a comprehension task involving the visual
stimuli used in Experiment 1.

0.6

implicature

Pick the smiley with the hat.

Discussion

0.4
0.0

The two trials were presented on a single web page. Each
trial consisted of the picture array and a sentence like (4).

0.2

Proportion of Correct Target

Using Amazon Mechanical Turk, 60 participants, all reported
English native speakers, were recruited for the experiment.
The visual arrays were the same as in Experiment 1 (without the gray frame around the target picture) with the same
two conditions: (1) the implicature condition (Figure 2, top)
and (2) the simple condition (Figure 2, bottom).

0.8

1.0

Participants, Material and Design

that pragmatic reasoning is effortful in language comprehension, our results show that pragmatic reasoning is also effortful in language production, and that this cognitive effort of
pragmatic reasoning should be taken into account when determining the speaker cost for a referring expressions: as a
speaker has the option of overspecification, she can employ it
whenever the effort of pragmatic reasoning becomes too high.
This suggests that speakers readily incur an extra cost in order
to obviate the need for pragmatic inference. We can think of
different possible explanations for this behavior. One is that
pragmatic inference requires an effort on the listener’s part,
and that cooperative speakers use costly forms to share the
burden. Another possible explanation is that pragmatic reasoning, with its reliance on implicit assumptions about mutual beliefs about the situation, is a source of uncertainty and
error, which speakers have an incentive to avoid. Finally, our
results are also compatible with the assumption of audience
design, in the sense that speakers choose a maximally explicit referring expression that minimizes the listener’s burden of pragmatic inference and maximizes the likelihood of
successful communication. Our present study was not designed to decide between these possibilities; we leave this
question to future work. Here we only show that speakers use
costly forms to short-cut pragmatic inference.
For the hearer, on the other hand, there is no way to avoid
the cost of pragmatic inference (other than letting communication fail) once the speaker has used a form that requires it,
and we showed in Experiment 2 that hearers generally make
the effort of pragmatic reasoning. Based on this asymmetry, we argue that the model of the speaker that the hearer is
reasoning about, must be different from the behavior of an
actual speaker in the same communicative situation, as an actual speaker can always resort to overspecification, while a
hearer needs to assume that the speaker chose the least effortful referring expression and perform all pragmatic inferences

1902

licensed by that expression. This suggests that in their current
form, models of pragmatic reasoning about referring expressions (e.g. Franke, 2011; Frank & Goodman, 2012) may
be adequate models of how a hearer comprehends referring
expressions, but they may be less adequate for the speaker
or the production of referring expressions in general (for a
similar observation, see Gatt, van Gompel, van Deemter, &
Krahmer, 2013).
More generally, our results challenge the tacit assumption
that utterances requiring pragmatic reasoning are ubiquitous
(e.g. Breheny, Katsos, & Williams, 2006). Instead we would
argue that such utterances may not be as common as previously assumed. These utterances need to be produced by a
speaker, and a speaker always has the option of overspecification.

Acknowledgments
We thank the audiences of the 27th Annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing and the University
of Connecticut LingLunch for valuable feedback, and three
anonymous reviewers for their excellent comments.

References
Benz, A., & Van Rooij, R. (2007). Optimal assertions, and
what they implicate: A uniform game theoretic approach. Topoi, 26(1), 63–78.
Breheny, R., Katsos, N., & Williams, J. (2006). Are generalised scalar implicatures generated by default? an online investigation into the role of context in generating
pragmatic inferences. Cognition, 100(3), 434–463.
Degen, J., & Franke, M. (2012). Optimal reasoning
about referential expressions. In S. Brown-Schmidt,
J. Ginzburg, & S. Larsson (Eds.), Proceedings of the
16th Workshop on the Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue (pp. 2–11). Paris.
Degen, J., Franke, M., & Jäger, G. (2013). Cost-based
pragmatic inference about referential expressions. In
M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, & I. Wachsmuth
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 376–381). Berlin:
Cognitive Science Society.
Engelhardt, P. E., Bailey, K. G., & Ferreira, F. (2006). Do
speakers and listeners observe the Gricean Maxim of
Quantity? Journal of Memory and Language, 54(4),
554–573.
Frank, M. C., & Goodman, N. D. (2012). Predicting
pragmatic reasoning in language games. Science,
336(6084), 998–998.
Franke, M. (2011). Quantity implicatures, exhaustive interpretation, and rational conversation. Semantics and
Pragmatics, 4(1), 1–82.
Gatt, A., van Gompel, R., Krahmer, E., & van Deemter,
K. (2011). Non-deterministic attribute selection in
reference production. In K. van Deemter, A. Gatt,
R. van Gompel, & E. Krahmer (Eds.), Proceedings of

the Workshop on Production of Referring Expressions:
Bridging the Gap between Empirical, Computational
and Psycholinguistic Approaches to Reference (PRECogSci’11). Boston.
Gatt, A., van Gompel, R., van Deemter, K., & Krahmer, E.
(2013). Are we Bayesian referring expression generators? In A. Gatt, R. van Gompel, E. G. Bard,
E. Krahmer, & K. van Deemter (Eds.), Proceedings
of the Workshop on Production of Referring Expressions: Bridging the Gap between Cognitive and Computational Approaches to Reference (PRE-CogSci’13).
Berlin.
Goodman, N. D., & Stuhlmüller, A. (2013). Knowledge and
implicature: Modeling language understanding as social cognition. Topics in Cognitive Science, 5(1), 173–
184.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole &
J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Speech Acts. Academic Press.
Hamblin, J. L., & Gibbs, R. W. (2003). Processing the meanings of what speakers say and implicate. Discourse
Processes, 35(1), 59–80.
Jäger, G. (2011). Game-theoretical pragmatics. In J. van
Benthem & A. ter Meulen (Eds.), Handbook of Logic
and Language (p. 467-491). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Koolen, R., Gatt, A., Goudbeek, M., & Krahmer, E. (2011).
Factors causing overspecification in definite descriptions. Journal of Pragmatics, 43(13), 3231–3250.
Lewis, D. (1969). Convention: A Philosophical Study. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Locke, J. L. (2008). Cost and complexity: Selection for
speech and language. Journal of Theoretical Biology,
251(4), 640–652.
Moon, S.-J., & Lindblom, B. (2003). Two experiments on
oxygen consumption during speech production: vocal effort and speaking tempo. In XVth International
Congress of Phonetic Sciences. Barcelona, Spain.
Pechmann, T. (1989). Incremental speech production and referential overspecification. Linguistics, 27(1), 89–110.
Piantadosi, S. T., Tily, H., & Gibson, E. (2012). The communicative function of ambiguity in language. Cognition,
122(3), 280–291.
Rohde, H., Seyfarth, S., Clark, B., Jäger, G., & Kaufmann, S.
(2012). Communicating with cost-based implicature:
A game-theoretic approach to ambiguity. In S. BrownSchmidt, J. Ginzburg, & S. Larsson (Eds.), The 16th
Workshop on the Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue. Paris.
Stiller, A., Goodman, N. D., & Frank, M. C. (2011). Ad-hoc
scalar implicature in adults and children. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 2134–2139). Boston.
Wittgenstein, L. (1959). Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Blackwell.

1903

