UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Pierced by the number line: Integers are associated with back-to-front sagittal space

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7740d93z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Marghetis, Tyler
Youngstrom, Kendall

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Pierced by the number line: Integers are associated with back-to-front sagittal space
Tyler Marghetis*

Kendall Youngstrom

tmarghet@ucsd.edu
Department of Cognitive Science
University of California, San Diego

kyoungst@ucsd.edu
Department of Cognitive Science
University of California, San Diego

Abstract

enculturation into spatial practices; indeed, its orientation
switches in cultures where numbers and words are read
right-to-left (Shaki, Fischer, & Petrusic, 2009).
The horizontal number line is but one in a system of
spatial-numerical associations, including a bottom-to-top
association with vertical space (e.g. Hartmann, Grabherr, &
Mass, 2012). Spatial dispositions may even play a role in
more complex tasks: Mental arithmetic, for instance,
induces systematic dispositions to respond spatially, with
addition biasing responses rightward and subtraction biasing
responses leftward (Knops et al, 2009), even during exact,
symbolic calculation (Marghetis et al, 2014).

Mathematical cognition, paragon of abstraction, is marked by
systematic associations between number and space, often
described as “mental number lines.” In three experiments, we
demonstrate a novel effect: a sagittal (back-to-front) number
line for negative and positive integers. In a paradigm
requiring full-body movements, participants judged numerical
magnitude (Exp. 1-2) and parity (Exp. 3). Across all three
experiments, participants associated numerical magnitude
with locations in front of and behind the body. Responses to
negative integers were faster when moving backward than
forward; responses to positive integers, faster forward than
backward. This sagittal number line appears to require the
involvement of negative numbers (Exp. 1-2) and is most
pronounced when judging magnitude (Exp. 3). In sum,
reasoning about integers induces systematic dispositions to
act along the sagittal axis. Such dispositions may reflect our
mathematical habitus, habits of action and thought that reflect
and enact our conceptual systems.*
Keywords:
numerical
cognition;
space;
embodiment; integers; sagittal number line

A back-to-front sagittal number line?
These spatial dispositions seem to reflect asymmetries in
spatial experience. The vertical axis is oriented in virtue of
the asymmetry of our bodies, as well as by experiential
correlations between more and up (Lakoff & Núñez, 2000).
And while our bodies are bilaterally symmetric, the
horizontal axis is oriented by cultural practices such as
reading and counting (e.g., Shaki, Fischer, & Petrusic,
2009). It is surprising, therefore, that little attention has been
given to dispositions along an especially prominent axis: the
sagittal axis, running from behind the body to the front.
The sagittal axis, after all, is striking in its asymmetry.
Things in front can be seen, heard, touched; things behind
are far more difficult to access. The sagittal axis, moreover,
is associated with another abstract domain: Time (see Núñez
& Cooperrider, 2013, for review). In English, language
typically reserved for sagittal space is used to talk about
time (e.g. look forward to the future); co-speech gestures
also reflect this pattern; and temporal reasoning induces
dispositions to move forward or backward (ibid). Language,
gesture, and thought all enact a sagittal timeline.
What about number? In English, decreasing or increasing
counting is most often described spatially as counting down
or up, but also sometimes as counting backward or forward.
But there is little evidence that we actually conceptualize
number using the sagittal axis, using a back-to-front sagittal
number line (SNL). Some suggestive evidence comes from
the so-called “vertical” SNARC, perhaps more accurately
described as a radial effect: Responses to smaller numbers
are faster in near space, and to bigger numbers, in far space
(Ito & Hatta, 2004). However, this radial SNARC effect has
always been tested with response buttons placed directly in
front of the body, thus confounding location along the
sagittal axis with distance from the body; larger numbers
may just prime responses that are farther away. Hartmann et
al (2012) tried to find evidence for an unambiguously backto-front representation of number. Their Swiss participants

SNARC;

Introduction
“[Space] provides a location for all things that
come into being. […] [E]verything that exists
must of necessity be somewhere, in some place
and occupying some space, and that which
doesn’t exist somewhere, whether on earth or in
heaven, doesn’t exist at all.” – Plato, Timaeus
Mathematics is paradigmatically abstract, and its objects are
beyond the reach of perception and interaction. And yet we
still manage to engage in mathematical reasoning—for
some, with more than a modicum of success and confidence.
This may depend, in part, on weaving mathematics into
concrete practices, habits, and concepts (Kitcher, 1984;
Lakoff & Núñez, 2000). Indeed, numbers are tightly linked
to space in both action and thought (Hubbard et al, 2005). A
now-classic finding is the “SNARC” effect: among literate
individuals from cultures that read left-to-right, smaller
numbers induce dispositions to act in left space, and larger
numbers, in right space (Dehaene et al, 1993). Negative
integers, too, induce spatial dispositions, although taskdemands influence whether they are located to the “left” of
zero, in line with their relative numerical magnitude, or
mixed in with positive integers on the basis of their absolute
value (e.g. Fischer, 2003; Ganor-Stern & Tzelgov, 2008).
This horizontal “mental number line” reflects a lifetime of
*

Corresponding author.

946

Pierced by the number-line

generated significantly higher random numbers (1-30) while
experiencing upward (compared to downward) or rightward
(compared to leftward) motion—but not while experiencing
forward (compared to backward) motion. In contrast, Seno
et al (2011) reported that Japanese and Chinese participants
generated significantly higher numbers while experiencing a
visual illusion of backward movement, compared to an
illusion of forward motion—a reversal of the way numbers
are described in English. It is unknown whether this effect
extends to Western populations.
These results suggest that a sagittal representation of the
natural numbers, if it exists, may be fragile or taskdependent. Upon reflection, the sagittal axis is an unlikely
model of the natural numbers: the body divides space
categorically; natural numbers are undivided. The integers,
on the other hand, share many structural properties with the
sagittal axis: positive and negative are separated by zero;
front and back, by one’s body. Might we use the sagittal
axis to conceptualize the integers?

2

In the Integer task, participants judged whether integers
from -9 to 9 (not including 0) were greater or less than 0. In
the Whole Number task, they judged whether positive
integers from 1 to 9 (not including 5) were greater or less
than 5. The Whole Number task was thus similar to the
classic SNARC paradigm (Dehaene et al, 1993).
Each task consisted of two blocks. In one block,
participants moved forward for greater numbers (i.e. greater
than 0 or 5), and backward for lesser numbers; response
assignment reversed in the other block; block order was
randomly assigned.
Each trial begin when an image of a shoe appeared on a
computer monitor, approximately four feet ahead of the
participant, which prompted the participant to depress a
foot-pedal with their right foot. Once the foot-pedal was
depressed, a central fixation cross appeared for 500ms,
followed by single-digit numeral. The numeral disappeared
when participants lifted their foot to begin their response, or
after 5000ms. Reaction time was measured, via the footpedal, from stimulus onset to response initiation (Fig. 1).
Response direction was recorded online by an experimenter
in the room. Participants were instructed to begin moving
only once they had made their decision; if participants
changed direction after initiating their response, the trial was
discarded. In each block, each number was presented 10
times, in random order. Each block began with 8 practice
trials, for a total of 176 trials in the Whole Number task and
376 trials in the Integer task. Participants were allowed to
rest between tasks. The entire experiment took
approximately 30 minutes.

The current study
Three experiments investigated the possible existence of a
back-to-front sagittal number line (SNL). Participants
judged the magnitude (Exp. 1 and 2) or parity (Exp. 3) of
positive and negative integers, and responded by stepping
forward or backward in space. We foresaw a number of
possible outcomes. For one, there could be no systematic
association between numbers and sagittal space; the
spatialization of number might be exhausted by known
horizontal, vertical, and radial dispositions. Second, both
natural numbers and integers alike might prime forward and
backward motion, perhaps due to so-called Polarity
Correspondence (Proctor & Cho, 2006): Numbers and the
sagittal axis both have a clear orientation, so responses
might be facilitated when their “polarity” is aligned. Finally,
if there is a specifically numerical association between
integers and sagittal space, then we may find evidence of
selective, systematic spatial dispositions: forward for
positive numbers, backward for negative numbers, with zero
mapped to the natural origin of the body.

Results
Four participants did not complete both tasks and were
replaced before analysis. Overall accuracy was quite high
(M = .97). A 2x2x2x2 mixed-design ANOVA, with
Magnitude (greater or less than reference), Direction
(forward or backward), and Task as within-subjects factors,
and Task Order as a between-subjects factor, revealed only
one significant effect, a two-way interaction between
Magnitude and Direction, F(1,29) = 5.3, p < .029, ηp2 = .15.
Participants responded correctly to larger numbers more
often when moving forward than backward (M = .982 vs.
.971), and to smaller numbers more often when moving
backward than forward (M = .973 vs. .969).
Before analyzing response times, incorrect trials were
removed, followed by trials with reaction times that were

Experiment 1
Participants
Undergraduate students (n=32, mean age = 21, 22 women)
participated in exchange for partial course credit.

Procedure
In a fully within-subjects design, each participant completed
two tasks—the Integer and Whole Number tasks—with task
order counterbalanced between participants. In both tasks,
participants had to judge the relative magnitude of visuallypresented single-digit numbers. They responded by stepping
forward or backward onto rectangular, colored targets on the
floor (Fig. 1, left panel). Targets were approximately two
feet in front of (yellow) or behind (red) a central foot-pedal
and were described by their color, not their location.

Figure 1: Procedure for all three experiments. Reaction
time was recorded via foot-pedal.

947

Pierced by the number-line

slower than three standard deviations above each
participant’s mean response time in each condition (3% of
trials). In addition, one participant was removed due to
exceptionally low accuracy, answering only 73% of the
trials correctly (accuracy > .92 for all other participants).
We again conducted a 2 (Magnitude) x 2 (Direction) x 2
(Task) x 2 (Task Order) mixed-design ANOVA.
Participants were faster overall during the Integer than the
Whole Number task (M = 441ms vs M = 466ms), F(1,29) =
4.2, p = .05, ηp2 = .13. They were also faster to respond to
smaller than to larger numbers (M = 448ms vs M = 458ms),
F(1,29) = 12.0, p = .002, ηp2 = .29. And there was a
marginally significant effect of direction, with faster
responses backward than forward (M = 448ms vs M =
458ms), F(1,29) = 4.1, p = .053, ηp2 = .12.
Only two other effects approached significance. There
was a two-way interaction between Magnitude and
Direction, F(1,29) = 4.4, p = .046, ηp2 = .13. Backward
responses were faster for smaller than for larger numbers (M
= 433ms vs. 462ms), while forward responses were faster
for larger than for smaller numbers (M = 453ms vs. 463ms).
This interaction, however, was complicated by a 4-way
interaction between all four factors. It is easy to see why:
the two-way interaction between Magnitude and Direction
was driven almost entirely by the Integer task, and only
when the Integer task was completed first (Fig. 2). This was
confirmed by four follow-up 2 (Magnitude) x 2 (Direction)
ANOVAs, performed for each Task and Order. When the
Integer Task was performed first, the two-way interaction
between Magnitude and Direction was highly significant
(F(1,15) = 9.9, p < 0.007, ηp2 = .40), with responses to
negative numbers an average of 49ms faster when moving
backward than forward (t(15) = -3.0, p = 0.01) but responses

3

to positive numbers an average of 44ms faster when moving
forward (t(15) = -2.5, p = 0.02; see Fig. 1a). By contrast, the
interaction did not even approach significance when the
Integer task was performed second, or for the Whole
Number task ever (all Fs < 1.1, ps > .3, ηp2s < .071).
To further characterize this selective association between
Magnitude and Direction, we performed a regression
analysis of reaction times on the Integer Task, when it was
performed first, adapting an approach used to analyze the
classic horizontal SNARC (Fias et al, 1996). For each
subject and number, we calculated the difference between
backward and forward responses (dRT). If dRT is positive,
backward responses are faster than forward responses. Then,
for each subject, we regressed dRT onto numerical
magnitude. The slopes of these linear regression lines index
the orientation and intensity of the association: negative
slopes indicate that smaller numbers are associated with the
back, larger numbers with the front. As predicted, the slopes
of these regressions were negative for nearly everybody
(13/16, p = 0.02, binomial test), and overall the slopes were
significantly different from zero (Mβ = -7.7, t(15) = -3.4, p =
.004). There was evidence, therefore, that nearly every
participant associated negative numbers with the space
behind them, positive numbers with the space ahead.

Discussion

Figure 2: In Experiment 1, the relation between numerical
magnitude and response direction differed by task (rows)
and order (columns). (a) When participants completed the
Integer task first, there was a highly significant interaction.
(b-d) In no other case was there an interaction.

948

Experiment 1 demonstrated a novel effect: a sagittal number
line. Negative numbers were associated with the space
behind the body, and positive numbers with the space in
front. This effect, moreover, was restricted to the Integer
task; there was no evidence of systematic spatial
dispositions during the Whole Number task, which did not
involve negative numbers. In fact, note that the stimuli in
the Whole Number task (1 to 9) were identical to the
greater half of the stimuli on the Integer task (i.e. integers
greater than 0). The exact same numbers, therefore, were
associated with front space when they were processed in the
context of negative numbers (Integer task; Fig. 2a, right
bars) but had no associations—or even a slight association
with the rear—when processed on their own during the
Whole Number task (Fig. 2c, d). The SNL, therefore, may
be limited to instances where both positive and negative
integers are considered together as part of the task.
However, the two tasks differed in more ways than the
mere presence of negative integers. First, stimuli in the
Whole Number task ranged only from 1 to 9 (range = 8)
while those in the Integer task ranged from -9 to 9 (range =
18). Second, participants could succeed at the Integer task
simply by checking for the presence of a minus sign (e.g. -4
vs 4), while the Natural Number task required access to the
magnitude represented by the numeral. This categorical
strategy for the Integer task may have induced associations
between space and magntiude based entirely on the
dimensions’ “polarity” (cf. Proctor & Cho, 2006).
To remove these two confounds, the Whole Number task
in Experiment 2 used numbers from 11 to 29, judged
relative to 20. These numbers have the same range as those

Pierced by the number-line

in the original Integer task, and their relative magnitude (i.e.
greater or less than 20) can be determined from the first
digit alone (e.g. 11 vs. 21). If the interaction in Experiment 1
was an artifact of a categorical strategy rather than evidence
of sagittal representation of the integers (i.e.. an SNL), then
we should find an analogous interaction for this modified
Whole Number task. If, on the other hand, the interaction
reflected selective spatial dispositions for positive and
negative integers, then we should find the effect only when
the task involves negative integers.

4

participant’s mean response time in each condition (5% of
trials).
Reaction times were analyzed with a 2 (Magnitude) x 2
(Direction) x 2 (Task) mixed-design ANOVA. Once again,
there was a main effect of Direction: backward responses
(M = 441ms) were faster than forward responses (M =
458ms), F(1,30) = 21.3, p < .001, ηp2 = .42. The only other
significant effect was a three-way interaction between Task,
Magnitude, and Direction, F(1,30) = 9.72, p = 0.004, ηp2 = .24.
Follow-up analysis of each individual task, using 2
(Magnitude) x 2 (Direction) repeated-measures ANOVAs,
revealed that this was driven by a significant two-way
interaction for the Integer task, F(1,15) = 5.82, p = .029, ηp2 =
.28, which approached but did not reach significance for the
Whole Number task, F(1,15) = 4.45, p = .052. When moving
backwards during the Integers task, participants were
significantly faster to respond to negative than to positive
integers (M = 442ms vs. 404ms), t(15) = -2.357 p = 0.02; by
contrast, when moving forwards they were faster to respond
to positive than to negative integers (M = 422ms vs. 458ms),
t(15) = 2.19, p = .04 (Fig. 3).
As in Experiment 1, we performed a regression analysis
to further character the association between numerical
magnitude and sagittal space. For each subject and number,
we calculated the difference between backward and forward
responses (dRT) and regressed dRT onto numerical
magnitude for each subject. The slopes of these linear
regression lines index the direction of the association
between number and space: negative slopes indicate that
smaller numbers are associated with the space behind the
body, larger numbers with the space in front. For the Integer
task, as predicted, the mean slope across participants was
significantly less than zero, β = -5.8, t(15) = -2.45, p = .027.
Approximately 70% of participants (11/16) had a negative
slope, comparable to what is typically found for the classic
horizontal SNARC (e.g., Cipora & Nuerk, 2013). For the
Whole Number task, by contrast, slopes were not
significantly different from zero, β = 2.7, t(15) = 1.9, p = .08.

Experiment 2
Participants
Undergraduate students (n = 32, mean age = 21, 22 women),
who had not participated in the first experiment, participated
in exchange for partial course credit.

Procedure
In a between-subjects design, participants completed
either an Integer task or a modified Whole Number task. The
procedure for the Integer task was identical to Experiment 1.
For the Whole Number task, the procedure was modified in
two ways: the stimuli ranged from 11 to 29 (instead of 1 to
9) and numbers were compared to 20 (instead of 5). The
tasks were therefore matched in two ways. First, participants
could complete the task by attending only to the most
rightward symbol (“1” or “2”; presence or absence of a
negative sign). Second, the stimuli had an identical range.

Results
Overall accuracy was quite high (M = .96), and did not
differ by task, t(30) = 0.66, p = .51. A 2x2x2 mixed-design
ANOVA, with Task as a between-subjects factor, and
Magnitude (greater or less than) and Direction (forward or
backward) as within-subjects factors, revealed no significant
main effects or two-way interactions (all Fs > 2.2, ps > .15).
There was, however, a marginally significant three-way
interaction between Task, Direction, and Magnitude, F(1,30)
= 3.9, p = .057. To unpack this three-way interaction, we
conducted follow-up 2 (Magnitude) x 2 (Direction) withinsubjects ANOVAs for each task separately. For the Integer
task, there was a significant interaction between Magnitude
and Direction, F(1,15) = 7.28, p = .017. Accuracy was higher
for negative numbers when moving backwards than forward
(M = .97 vs. .93); accuracy was higher for positive numbers
when moving forward than backwards (M= .98 vs. .94). For
the Whole Number task, by contrast, there was no such
interaction, F(1,15) = 0.47, p = .51. Thus, there was a taskspecific interaction between space and numerical
magnitude, with better accuracy when negative numbers
were mapped to the space behind the participants, and
positive numbers mapped to the space in front.
We next analyzed reaction times. As in Experiment 1,
before analyzing response times, incorrect trials were
removed, followed by trials with reaction times that were
slower than three standard deviations above each

Figure 3: In Experiment 2, negative integers were
associated with the space behind the participant, and
positive integers with the space in front.

949

Pierced by the number-line

Discussion

5

performed a 2 (Magnitude) x 2 (Direction) x 2 (Task:
Magnitude vs. Parity) mixed-design ANOVA. There was a
significant main effect of Direction, F(1,30) = 10.2, p = .003,
ηp2 = .25. The only other significant effect was the predicted
two-way interaction between Magnitude and Direction,
F(1,30) = 4.66, p = .04, ηp2 = .13. Backward responses were
faster for negative integers (M = 475ms vs. 489ms), while
forward responses were faster for positive integers (M =
504ms vs. M = 489ms). Crucially, there was no three-way
interaction with Task. Indeed, separate regression analyses
for each task found that the mean slope was less than zero in
both tasks (Magnitude: β = -3.5; Parity: β = -1.0), that is,
increasing integers were associated with back-to-front
sagittal space regardless of the task. Though the slope was
more negative for the Magnitude task, suggesting a more
pronounced association, this difference was not significant
(t(30) = -1.16, p = .25). Moreover, there was no difference
between tasks in the number of participants with negative
slopes (12 vs. 11, p > .9, Fisher Exact test).

Experiment 2 replicated the main finding of Experiment 1—
a back-to-front SNL—and ruled out a number of
deflationary accounts of the difference between the first
Whole Number and Integer tasks. Furthermore, the lack of a
reliable interaction on the Whole Number task in
Experiment 2 reinforces the genuinely numerical quality of
the SNL. Since stimuli in both tasks had an identical range
(-9 to 9 and 11 to 29), it is unlikely that they differ solely in
depth of processing (e.g. due to the Distance Effect). And
since participants could complete both tasks by attending
only to the leading symbol, it is unlikely that the effect in
the Integer task was due solely to a categorical strategy or
Polarity Correspondence (Proctor & Cho, 2006). Integers
are spontaneously, systematically associated with sagittal
space, but only when negative integers are involved.

Experiment 3
The classic SNARC effect is thought to reflect automatic
activation of spatial information during number processing.
Associations between number and horizontal space appear
even if the task does not require participants to process
numerical magnitude—for instance, deciding if numbers are
even or odd (Dehaene et al, 1993). Is the SNL similarly
automatic, or does it require explicit attention to magnitude?
To answer this question, Experiment 3 introduced a Parity
task (i.e. even vs. odd) for negative and positive integers. If
the SNL is automatic—activated autonomously when
processing integers—then numerical magnitude should
interact with spatial location during both Magnitude (greater
or less than 0) and Parity (even vs. odd) tasks.

General Discussion
Are we pierced by a number line? Three experiments
suggest that the answer is yes. We established and then
twice-replicated a novel effect: Negative numbers were
associated with the space behind the body, and positive
numbers, the space in front. These sagittal spatial
dispositions, it seems, require the presence of negative
numbers; in two experiments, we failed to find evidence of
sagittal dispositions for positive numbers on their own.
There was also a recurring main effect of stepping
direction, with consistently faster responses backward. This
was likely due to our particular experimental set-up, though
we cannot exclude the possibility that undergraduate
students have a targeted aversion to numbers.
We turn now to two issues. First, how might these spatial
dispositions relate to other spatial-numerical associations?
Second, where might such dispositions come from, and
what impact might they have?

Participants
Undergraduate students (n = 32, mean age = 20, 26 women),
who had not participated in the first two experiments,
participated in exchange for partial course credit.

Procedure
In a between-subjects design, participants participated in
one of two tasks. The Integer task was unchanged from
Experiments 1 and 2. In the new Parity task, participants
had to determine the parity (even vs. odd) of integers
ranging from -9 to 9, not including zero. All other details of
the design (number of trials, timing, etc.) were identical to
the Integer task. Task assignment was counterbalanced.

Relation to other spatial dispositions
The multiplicity of linear construals of number—
horizontal, vertical, and now sagittal—evokes the varied
spatial construals of time (e.g Núñez & Cooperrider, 2013).
In external spatial representations of time, the spatial axis
does not include the body—such as when temporal
sequences are conceptualized as a left-to-right path in front
of the speaker. All previously documented mental number
lines fall into this category: they involve paths outside the
body, whether left-to-right, right-to-left, or bottom-to-top. In
internal spatial representations, by contrast, the body is part
of the representation. Time, for instance, can be
conceptualized as running from back to front, with “now”
identified with the body. The SNL appears to be the first
linear representation of number of this sort, with the body
dividing positive from negative integers and perhaps
anchored to zero. Núñez and Cooperrider suggest that, for
time, external representations may require extensive cultural

Results
Accuracy was high and did not differ between tasks (both
Ms = .96, t(15) = 0.07, p = .9). A mixed-design ANOVA with
Magnitude and Direction as within-subjects factors, and
Task as a between-subjects factor, revealed only a main
effect of direction, F(1,30) = 6.25, p = 0.02, ηp2 = .17.
Once again, incorrect trials were removed, followed by
trials with reaction times more than three standard
deviations from the participant’s mean response time in
each condition (5% of trials). To analyze reaction times, we

950

Pierced by the number-line

scaffolding, while internal representations may appear more
spontaneously. That seems unlikely for the integers, where
even an internal representation—an SNL—is likely to
require extensive cultural support.

6

sociotechnical ecosystem. But these spatial dispositions—
our mathematical habitus—may nevertheless play a central
role in enacting our mathematical conceptual systems.

Acknowledgments

Origins and implications

We are indebted to Ben Bergen for guidance, Esther Walker
for help with experimental set-up, and the *CL for feedback.

Where could this SNL come from? On a deflationary
account, participants may merely have guessed the purpose
of the experiment. While we cannot rule this out entirely,
the repeated null findings for the natural numbers, for which
there are well known spatial associations, make it unlikely
the effect was driven entirely by participants surmising the
study’s purpose. The SNL could derive from conventional
expressions (e.g. “count backward or forward”), though this
is unlikely given how infrequent they are. An SNL could
also emerge from explicit analogical reasoning. The sagittal
axis and the integers share considerable structure: a single
dimension; a privileged reference point; transitive relations
between elements. These similarities might make them
particularly ripe for structural alignment. Lastly, both
integers and time might tap into a more general association
between sagittal space and sequences, especially sequences
with a privileged reference point (e.g. now, zero). Sagittal
dispositions might therefore exist for various sequences of
all kinds (e.g. temperature, intimacy).
The existence of an SNL may have a variety of
implications. Spatial dispositions may scaffold the
acquisition of number concepts, supporting children’s early
sense-making. The SNL might thus be a productive target
for educational intervention, much like recent interventions
that improved arithmetic by training associations between
numbers and horizontal space (e.g. Siegler & Ramani,
2009). There is evidence, however, that external spatial
dispositions like the horizontal SNARC play a negligible
role during complex mathematics (Cipora & Nuerk, 2013),
perhaps because they are displaced by dispositions
associated with arithmetic or algebraic manipulation
(Marghetis et al, 2014; Goldstone et al, 2010). We thus
hypothesize that internal spatial construals like the SNL
may play a critical role in more advanced mathematics.

References
Bourdieu, P. (1977). Outline of a Theory of Practice.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cipora, K., & Nuerk, H. C. (2013). Is the SNARC effect
related to the level of mathematics? QJEP, 66, 1974-1991
Dehaene, S., Bossini, S., & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental
representation of parity and numerical magnitude. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 371-396.
Fias, W., Brysbaert, M., Geypens, F., & d’Ydewalle, G.
(1996). The importance of magnitude information in
numerical processing. Mathematical Cognition, 2, 95–110
Fischer, M.H. (2003). Cognitive representation of negative
numbers. Psychological Science, 14, 278-282.
Ganor-Stern, D. & Tzelgov, J. (2008). Negative numbers are
generated in the mind. Experimental Psychology, 55, 157.
Goldstone, R. L., Landy, D., & Son, J. Y. (2010). The
education of perception. TopiCS, 2, 265-284.
Hartmann, M., Grabherr, L., & Mast, F.W. (2012). Moving
Along the Mental Number Line. JEP: HPP, 38, 1416-27.
Hubbard, E.M., Piazza, M., Pinel, P., & Dehaene, S. (2005).
Interactions between number and space in parietal cortex.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience 6, 435–448.
Ito, Y., & Hatta, T. (2004). Spatial structure of quantitative
representation of numbers: Evidence from the SNARC
effect. Memory & Cognition, 32, 662-673.
Kitcher, P. (1984). The Nature of Mathematical Knowledge.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Knops, A, Thirion, B, Hubbard, E, Michel, V, & Dehaene, S
(2009). Recruitment of an area involved in eye
movements during mental arithmetic. Science, 324, 1583.
Lakoff, G., & Núñez, R. (2000). Where mathematics comes
from. New York: Basic Books.
Marghetis, T., Núñez, R., & Bergen, B. (2014). Doing
arithmetic by hand. QJEP.
Núñez, R., & Cooperrider, K. (2013). The tangle of space
and time in human cognition. TiCS, 17, 220-229.
Proctor, R.W., &
Cho,
Y.S.,
(2006).
Polaritycorrespondence: A general principle for performance of
speeded binary classification tasks, Psychological
Bulletin, 132, 416-442.
Seno,T, Taya,S, Ito,H, Sunaga,S (2011). The mental number
line in depth revealed by vection. Perception, 40, 1241-44
Shaki, S., Fischer, M., & Petrusic W. (2009). Reading habits
for both words and numbers contribute to the SNARC
effect. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16, 328-31.
Siegler, R., & Ramani, G. (2009). Playing linear number
board games—but not circular ones—improves lowincome preschoolers’ numerical understanding. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 101, 545.

Conclusion
Three studies demonstrated that negative numbers are
associated spontaneously with the space behind the body,
positive numbers with the space in front. These spatial
dispositions were only evident when the task involved both
positive and negative number. This is, to our knowledge, the
first evidence of a sagittal number line for the integers.
Reasoning about integers, therefore, is not entirely
abstract, but induces systematic dispositions to act. We may
even be tempted to say about the integers what Bourdieu
said about honor: that they are "nothing other than the
cultivated disposition, inscribed in the body schema and the
schemes of thought" (Bourdieu, 1977:15). Of course, this
goes too far. The integers outstrip the dispositions we have
internalized from a lifetime of experience; they depend on
notational systems, axioms, diagrammatic practices, a

951

