UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Predicting How People Feel: Ownership Matters for Preschoolers

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0bc4z63m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Pesowski, Madison
Friedman, Ori

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Predicting How People Feel: Ownership Matters for Preschoolers
Madison Pesowski (mlpesows@uwaterloo.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of Waterloo, 200 University Avenue West
Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1 CAN

Ori Friedman (friedman@uwaterloo.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of Waterloo, 200 University Avenue West
Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1 CAN

Abstract
Ownership is central in our thinking about other people and
objects. We consider ownership when deciding whether we
are permitted to use an object and when predicting how
owners would feel if their property was lost or broken.
Recognizing and understanding ownership is not just evident
in adults. Even young children appreciate ownership and its
consequences. In this experiment, we show that children aged
three years (N = 40) predict that an individual would be
sadder when her property went missing than when someone
else’s property went missing. These findings show that young
children have a rich appreciation of ownership, and grasp
relations between ownership and psychological states.
Keywords: cognitive development; social development;
children; emotion; ownership; developmental psychology

Introduction
Our emotions often depend on ownership. We are upset
when our property is damaged or broken; we are elated
when we find lost belongings; and we are angry when our
objects are used by others without permission. Knowing
how ownership provokes emotions is important because it
allows us to anticipate people’s emotional reactions when
situations occur involving their property. For example, we
would predict that our neighbour will be angry and upset
after his car is stolen, and that he would be sad if we lost a
tool he let us borrow. These examples highlight an
important role of ownership in social cognition: We use
ownership to predict and understand the subjective states of
other people.
Young children understand how basic emotions are
caused. However, it is unknown whether children appreciate
the effect of ownership on emotions. When told scenarios in
which a character experiences a positive or negative
outcome, children as young as 3 can predict when the
character will feel happy, sad, and angry (Borke, 1971). For
example, 3-year-olds can correctly predict that a character
eating a favorite snack will be happy, and that a character
who is not permitted to play will feel sad (Borke, 1971).
Similarly, children aged 2-years and older can predict that a
character whose desires are fulfilled will feel happy, and
those whose desires are not obtained will be unhappy (Stein

& Levine, 1989; Wellman & Bartsch, 1988; Wellman &
Woolley, 1990).
When examining children’s understanding of the causes of
emotions, some studies have asked children scenarios
concerning ownership of property (Arsenio, 1988; Borke,
1971). However, these studies did not manipulate
ownership. For example, children were asked to imagine
their cookie had been eaten by someone else, or that one of
their toys was broken (Brody & Harrison, 1987).
Additionally, scenarios requiring children to judge another’s
emotions involved ownership, such as predicting how a
child would feel after the child’s toy had been stolen
(Arsenio, 1988). However, because the relationship between
ownership and emotions has not been directly examined, it
is possible that children would have been able to correctly
infer emotions even if ownership information had not been
provided. For instance, perhaps a child would have been
upset simply because the toy he was playing with was taken
away or broken, but not because the boy was the owner of
the toy. Likewise it is possible that children would have
deemed the character as sad when a cookie was eaten by
someone else- not because the cookie belonged to someone
in particular, but because the person who ate the cookie
experienced a positive outcome of the situation (i.e.,
enjoying the cookie) while others did not.
Beginning between 3- and 4-years of age, children can
also generate explanations of emotions, such as happiness,
sadness, anger, surprise, and fear (Denham & Zoller, 1991;
Harris et al., 1987; Russell & Widen, 2002; Strayer, 196;
Widen & Russell, 2004; see also Fabes et al., 1991). While
later at 7-years-old and beyond, children can explain the
causes of more complex emotions such as jealousy, pride,
guilt, shame, and embarrassment (Harris et al. 1987; Widen
& Russell, 2010).
When explaining the causes of emotions, children’s
explanations have included the concept of ownership. To
explain why people feel happy, sad, and angry, preschoolers
refer to materials and the ownership of goods (Fabes et al.,
1991; Strayer, 1986; Widen & Russell, 2002; Widen &
Russell, 2004). For example, when asked to explain the
cause of a peer’s spontaneous emotion, children offer
explanations such as, “He’s mad because she took his toy”
(Fabes et al., 1991) and the child is happy because he was

2771

given a new bike (Strayer, 1986). Although children’s
explanations of emotions include aspects of ownership,
these responses were often grouped under broader
categories, such as material goods which do not only focus
on owned objects (Fabes et al., 1991; Stayer, 1986). For
example, the “material goods” category could include any
interactions with an object or property. Because of this, it is
unknown in what ways or how often children directly infer
ownership as the cause of emotions.
Ownership has also been overlooked in accounts of how
young children predict emotions. Some accounts claim that
children predict emotions by learning scripts about the kinds
of events that lead to various emotions (Gove & Keating,
1979; Hughes, Tingle, Sawin, 1981; Widen & Russell,
2010, 2011). For example, 3-year-olds predict that
happiness follows from positive events (e.g., receiving a
favorite snack) and that sadness follows from negative
events (e.g., not being allowed to play; e.g., Borke, 1971).
Other accounts claim that children predict the causes of
emotions by considering people’s mental states, such as
their goals, desires, and beliefs (Wellman & Bartsch, 1988;
Wellman & Woolley, 1990). However, ownership is not
specifically referenced in either theory. Thus, if children do
consider ownership when reasoning about emotions, this
may require revision or expansion of these theories.
The current experiment seeks to examine children’s
understanding of the direct causal impact ownership has on
a person’s emotional state. The current experiment explores
3-year-olds’ ability to predict that individuals are more
upset when an object they own (compared to an object
owned by someone else) goes missing.

Test. After the participants were familiarized with the
scale, they were told a story about a girl who was at a park
with her teddy bear. The girl placed her teddy bear on a
bench which also had someone else’s teddy bear on it. After
the girl placed her bear on the bench, she left to play. When
she returned, she discovered that one of the bears was
missing. For half of the participants, the girl’s bear was
missing, and for the other participants the other person’s
bear was missing. The emotion scale was then shown and
the children were asked how the girl felt. Once children
indicated an emotion, the story continued and the girl
discovered the bear’s locations were reversed (e.g., if the
girl’s bear went missing first, it was now present and the
other bear was missing). Children were again shown the
emotion scale and asked to indicate how the girl felt. Below
is the script; text varying between conditions appears in
brackets:
Look here is a girl and she is at the park.
And look this is her teddy bear. It belongs
to her. She wants to go and play so she
puts her teddy bear on the bench. And
look! There is another teddy bear on the
bench. This teddy bear belongs to
someone else. Which one is the girl’s
bear? Now the girl goes to play on the
slide. She comes back and look! The
[girl’s/other] bear is gone! But the
[other/girl’s] bear is there. How does the
girl feel? Now the girl goes to play on the
swings and she comes back. And look!
The [other/girl’s] bear is gone! But the
[girl’s/other] bear is there. How does the
girl feel?

Experiment 1
Methods
Participants. Forty 3-year-olds participated (M = 3;5;
range = 3;0 to 3;11 years; 19 males; 21 females). One
additional child was excluded from analysis for failing to
successfully complete the training task.
Materials and Procedure. Training. First, children were
introduced to a simple emotion scale displaying a sad face, a
happy face, and a “just okay” face which showed no
emotion (see Figure 1). The experimenter pointed at each
face and labelled it in a fixed order (e.g., “This face is
happy. This face is sad and this face is just ok.”). To be
included in the experiment, children were first required to
pass comprehension questions by correctly indicating the
appropriate faces (e.g., “Which one is sad? Which one is
just ok? Which one is happy?”).

To ensure children were not relying on visual cues to judge
the girl’s emotion, the girl was presented facing backwards
and her face was not shown. Before the girl left to play,
children were asked a comprehension question inquiring
which bear belonged to the girl. Two children failed the
comprehension question but provided the correct response
after the story and question were repeated.

Results
Children’s responses indicating the girl was happy received
a score of 1. Responses indicating sadness were scored -1.
All other responses (e.g., “I don’t know”), including choices
of the neutral emotion, were given a score of 0.
Scores were entered into a 2 x 2 ANOVA with the trialtype as a within-subjects factor and trial-order as a between
subjects factor. This analysis found a main effect of trial2
type, F(1,38) = 15.23, p < .001, ηp = .29, with children
indicating that the girl was sadder when her bear was
missing than when the other bear was missing. There was no

Figure 1. Emotion scale used in the training task

2772

Mean emotion rating

effect of trial-order, F(1,38) = 0.53, p = .473, and no trialtype by trial-order interaction, F(1,38) = 1.92, p = .174.
Follow-up analyses examined whether scores in each
trial-type departed from the chance score of 0. When the
girl’s bear was missing (and the other bear present), scores
were lower than expected by chance (M score = -0.30, SD =
.88), t(39) = -2.15, p = .038. When the other bear was
missing (and the girl’s bear present), scores were greater
than expected by chance (M score = 0.48, SD = .78), t(39) =
3.83, p < .001 (see Figure 2). In sum, children identified the
girl as happy when the other bear was missing and her bear
was present, but as sad in the reverse scenario.
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
-0.5

Owner's
Missing
Other's
Missing

Figure 2. Children’s mean emotion ratings of how the
character feels upon learning hers or someone else’s
property is missing

Discussion
In this experiment, we found that preschoolers understand
basic causal relations between ownership and emotions.
Specifically, children considered the potential loss of
property in their predictions of emotions. Three-year-olds
appreciate that owners are sad when their property is
missing but do not show the same negative emotional
response when the missing object belongs to another person.
It might seem puzzling that children predicted that the
character would be happy when the other object was
missing. However, rather than enjoying someone else’s
misfortune, children may have based the prediction on the
character’s relief that her own property was present.
These are the first findings to show that children
appreciate how ownership influences people’s emotions.
Previous research hinted at this with findings that children
sometimes refer to property and ownership in their
explanations of emotions (Fabes et al., 1991; Strayer, 1986;
Widen & Russell, 2002), and because researchers
sometimes mentioned ownership in the scenarios told to
children when asking them to predict emotions (Arsenio,
1988; Borke, 1971, Brody & Harrison, 1987). However,
although the concept of ownership was present in these
previous studies, the causal relationship between emotions

and ownership was unknown because ownership was not
directly manipulated.
The present research highlights the novel role of
ownership in children’s developing social cognition.
Previous research on ownership in children has focused on
their understanding of the normative and moral implications
of ownership. For instance, this research has shown that
preschoolers appreciate that non-owners should not deprive
owners of their property (Rossano, Rakoczy, & Tomasello,
2011), and that owners typically have priority over nonowners in deciding how their property may be used (Kim &
Kalish, 2009; Neary & Friedman, 2014). The current
findings, in contrast, reveal that children use ownership to
predict and understand other people’s subjective states.
Specifically, we showed that very young children use
ownership to predict emotions. In our study, children
differentiated between how people feel about events that
impact their own property and property belonging to others.
This extends our understanding of how children predict
emotions.
These findings are also important because they suggest
that children are sensitive to when other people are deprived
of their property. This finding is broadly consistent with
previous findings showing that 3-year-olds are sensitive to
other people’s ownership rights (e.g., Rossano et al., 2011;
for a review see Nancekivell, Van de Vondervoort, &
Friedman, 2013), though some studies have found that
children this age are more concerned with their own
ownership rights (Kanngiesser & Hood, 2014). The findings
likewise raise questions about the developmental relation
between understanding of ownership and understanding of
emotions. Perhaps young children’s developing notions of
ownership rights depend on their ability to predict the
emotional consequences of depriving people of their
property. For example, predicting the girl would be sad if
her property went missing may help children acknowledge
ownership rights and the relation between owners and their
objects.

Future Directions
The current experiment examined whether children
appreciate that owners will be sad when their property is
missing. However this is one possible event of what could
happen to objects we own. Future research could investigate
children’s predictions of how owners feel when other events
occur with their property. For example, research could
examine children’s predictions of how owners feel when
their property is used by someone else without permission.
Given that we looked at the basic emotions of happiness and
sadness, future research could also explore children’s
understanding of the connections between ownership and
other more complex social emotions, such as envy.
Likewise, future research could compare predictions about
the emotional consequences of ownership with predictions
about other relations to objects, like temporary possession.

2773

Furthermore, our research explored one causal direction
involving children’s understanding of how ownership
impacts emotions; yet the reverse relationship also exists.
Emotions can be used as cues to infer ownership. For
example, if there was a broken coffee cup on the ground, we
would probably infer that the person in the room who is
upset is the owner of the cup. Examining children’s
understanding of the bidirectional relations between
ownership and emotions (e.g., using ownership to predict
emotions, and considering emotions when inferring
ownership) would provide greater insight into the
development of these abilities needed for successful social
interactions.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by a grant from the Social Sciences
and Humanities Research Council of Canada awarded to
OF.

References
Arsenio, W.F. (1988). Children’s conceptions of the
situational affective consequences of sociomoral
events. Child Development, 59, 1611-1622.
Borke, H. (1971). Interpersonal perception of young
children: egocentrism or empathy? Developmental
Psychology, 5, 263-269.
Brody, L. R., & Harrison, R. H. (1987). Developmental
changes in children's abilities to match and label
emotionally laden situations. Motivation and
Emotion, 11, 347-365.
Denham, S.A, & Zoller, D. (1991). “When my hamster
died, I cried”: Preschoolers’ attributions of the causes
of emotions. The Journal of Genetic Psychology, 152,
371-373.
Fabes, R.A., Eisenberg, N., Nyman, M., & Michealieu, Q.
(1991). Young children’s appraisals of others’
spontaneous emotional reactions. Developmental
Psychology, 27, 858-866.
Gove, F. L., & Keating, D. P. (1979). Empathic roletaking precursors. Developmental Psychology, 15, 594600.
Harris, P., Olthof, T., Terwogt, M., Hardman, C. (1987).
International Journal of Behavioral Development, 10,
319-343.
Hughes Jr, R., Tingle, B. A., & Sawin, D. B. (1981).
Development of empathic understanding in
children. Child Development, 52, 122-128.
Kanngiesser, P., & Hood, B. M. (2014). Young children's
understanding of ownership rights for newly made
objects. Cognitive Development, 29, 30-40.
Kim, S., & Kalish, C. (2009). Children’s ascriptions of
property rights with changes of ownership. Cognitive
Development, 24, 322-336.
Nancekivell, S. E., Van de Vondervoort, J. W., &
Friedman, O. (2013). Young children's understanding
of ownership. Child Development Perspectives, 7, 243247.

Neary, K.R., & Friedman, O. (2014). Young children give
priority to ownership when judging who should use an
object. Child Development, 85, 326-337.
Rossano, F., Rakoczy, H., & Tomasello, M. (2011).
Young children’s understanding of violations of
property rights. Cognition, 121, 219-227.
Russell, J.A., & Widen, S.C. (2002). Words versus faces
in evoking preschool children’s knowledge of the
causes of emotions. International Journal of
Behavioral Development, 26, 97-103.
Stein, N. L., & Levine, L. J. (1989). The causal
organisation of emotional knowledge: A developmental
study. Cognition & Emotion, 3, 343-378.
Strayer, J. (1986).Children’s attributions regarding the
situational determinants of emotion in self and others.
Developmental Psychology, 22, 649-654.
Wellman, H. M., & Bartsch, K. (1988). Young children's
reasoning about beliefs. Cognition, 30, 239-277.
Wellman, H.M., & Woolley, J.D. (1990). From simple
desires to ordinary beliefs: the early development of
everyday psychology. Cognition, 35, 245-275.
Widen, S.C., & Russell, J.A. (2004). The relative power
of an emotion’s facial expression, label, and behavioral
consequence to evoke preschoolers’ knowledge of its
cause. Cognitive Development, 19, 111-125.
Widen, S.C., & Russell, J.A (2010). Children’s scripts for
social emotions: causes and consequences are more
central than are facial expressions. British Journal of
Developmental Psychology, 28, 565-581.

2774

