UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Predictability and syntactic production: Evidence from subject omission in Russian

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/73n8q71x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Author
Kravtchenko, Ekaterina

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Predictability and syntactic production: Evidence from subject omission in
Russian
Ekaterina Kravtchenko (eskrav@gmail.com)
Department of Linguistics; University of California, Santa Cruz; 1156 High Street
Santa Cruz, CA 95064 USA

Abstract

ments that are less contextually predictable. The most robust
evidence for this hypothesis, in online production2 , currently
exists at the phonetic and phonological levels; for example,
involving effects of predictability on variation in syllable duration, or degree of articulatory detail (Aylett & Turk, 2004;
Bell et al., 2003; Bell, Brenier, Gregory, Girand, & Jurafsky,
2009). Jaeger (2010) demonstrates that this holds for omission of some functional elements, namely the optional complementizer that. This finding suggests that syntactic reduction as well is sensitive to the reduced element’s predictability
in context.
However, omission of more complex constituents may
present a different case. One may expect non-functional, or
semantically contentful elements (i.e. those that contribute
more to utterance meaning) to be less subject to omission
due to functional pressures on production alone. Null subjects specifically are often argued to serve distinct syntactic
or semantic functions (Carminati, 2002). There is likewise
evidence that function (closed-class) and content (open-class)
items may be subject to somewhat different pressures in production, with production of function words more sensitive to
predictability from the preceding context (Bell et al., 2009).
The question asked in this paper is whether pressure for robust (low-error) and efficient communication may partially
account for whether or not speakers choose to omit optional
constituents in Russian. Clause subjects can be optionally
elided in Russian, although this is primarily restricted to colloquial speech and text (Zdorenko, 2009), where up to 32%
of subjects are omitted. It is also restricted to contexts where
the referent can be recovered in discourse (Franks, 1995). A
representative example, where an embedded clause subject is
omitted, is shown in (1):

The quantitative study of the role of communicative efficiency
in language production and comprehension has gained increasing attention recently. However, in online production most
investigation has focused on the phonetic/phonological level,
leaving open the question of whether the communicative pressures involved extend to the syntactic level. I present a corpus study which investigates the omission of optional clause
subjects in Russian. If speakers communicate efficiently, then
they are expected to preferentially omit elements that are more
predictable, given preceding context. However, at the syntactic level this has only been directly demonstrated for omission
of functional elements. The present study shows that even
when other predictors of subject omission are taken into account, contextual predictability remains a significant predictor
of whether an optional subject, a relatively complex syntactic
constituent, is pronounced. This supports the hypothesis that
the drive towards efficient communication is a general principle of language production.
Keywords: Psycholinguistics; language production; information theory; subject omission; Russian.

Introduction
A long-standing question in the language sciences concerns
whether language is optimized for efficient communication
(Givón, 1979; Hawkins, 2004; Piantadosi, Tily, & Gibson,
2011; Zipf, 1949). In the past most claims along these lines
have been limited to either qualitative typological studies or
appeals to intuition (Jaeger & Tily, 2011). The recent rise of
information-theoretic approaches (Aylett & Turk, 2004; Genzel & Charniak, 2002; Hale, 2001; Levy & Jaeger, 2007) has
led more recently to more formal and quantitative notions of
efficiency. Under this approach, it is proposed that optimal
communication of a message involves keeping the contextual
probability of upcoming elements maximally uniform – close
to, but not exceeding an arbitrary ‘channel capacity’1 . This
refers to a limit on rate of information transfer beyond which
the likelihood of error becomes unacceptable (Jaeger, 2010;
Levy & Jaeger, 2007).
Under this framework, elements that are more contextually predictable carry less information (i.e. are redundant),
with information defined in terms of probabilities: I(Word)
= -log2 P(Word|Context). This approach predicts that, subject
to constraints of a speaker’s grammar, the intended meaning,
and other pressures on language production, speakers will be
more likely to omit those elements that are redundant. Speakers will conversely be more likely to pronounce those ele-

(1) Maša pozvonila Pete, potomu čto ona/ zabolela
she/ fell-ill.FEM
Masha called.FEM Petia, because
“Mashai called Peter j , because [shei ] was sick.”
Main clause subjects are also frequently omitted in casual
speech, given appropriate context, although isolated sentences may be infelicitous, unless the subject referent is contextually salient. The use of null subjects in Russian appears to reflect constraints found in other languages on use
of null, or reduced, referential expressions (Franks, 1995;
2 A number of studies have demonstrated that more stable or conventionalized linguistic forms can reflect similar pressures (e.g., Piantadosi et al., 2011); it is not however clear that these findings can
be straightforwardly generalized to online production, as they may
result from distinct learning or acquisition biases.

1 The

term ‘channel capacity’ is imported from information theory, but the channel in question may be conceived of as referring
to the communication channel between two interlocutors (Jaeger,
2010).

785

Table 1: Passage summary by genre. This table shows averages for each document type, along with standard deviation values.

Length (Words)
Length (Sentences)
# Data Points
Subject Omission

Plays [8]
374.6
(121.6)
55.4
(22.4)
44.9
(14.0)
36.6% (14.5)

Interviews [8]
426.1
(43.0)
40.6
(9.2)
42.3
(9.1)
20.4% (15.4)

Blogs [8]
438.0
(84.6)
37.0
(12.9)
48.5
(16.0)
28.3% (19.8)

Total [24]
412.5
(89.8)
44.3
(17.2)
45.3
(13.0)
28.5% (17.3)

Materials

Gordishevsky & Avrutin, 2003). Previous quantitative investigations suggest that null elements are typically reserved for
more accessible or topical referents (Givón, 1983; Gundel,
Hedberg, & Zacharski, 1993; Kameyama, 1985); similar proposals have also been made by e.g. Ariel (1990).
The
optional
omission
of
syntactic
constituents has previously been investigated using an
information-theoretic framework (Resnik, 1996). Although
not directly addressing the role of contextual predictability,
Resnik’s work suggests that speakers are more likely to
leave out optional objects in English (as in ‘I ate [dinner]’)
if their meaning is more predictable, or inferable given the
preceding verb. Resnik shows that verbs which have a more
restricted set of (probable) direct objects, or that are more
informative as to the identity of their objects, such as ‘eat’
or ‘drink’ (as opposed to ‘take,’ or ‘see’), are also more
likely to be produced without those objects. Resnik’s study
does not however directly look at the information carried
by the objects (i.e. how predictable the objects themselves
are in context). In this study, a verb’s entropy with respect
to the semantic properties of its objects (i.e. how much
uncertainty there is, upon encountering the verb, regarding
the identity of the object that follows it) only correlates
with how likely those objects are to be explicitly mentioned.
Similarly, Brown and Dell (1987) show that more inferable
instruments are more likely to be omitted, but do not directly
measure the predictability of the omitted material. The
work described here, therefore, presents for the first time a
direct investigation of the role of contextual predictability
in the omission of complex syntactic constituents, and the
first quantitative investigation of its role in the omission of
subjects.
Finally, work investigating communicative pressures on
production cross-linguistically has to date has been sparse.
In general, most work in linguistic production has been limited to English (Jaeger & Norcliffe, 2009), and work on comprehension to a few well-investigated and typically closely
related languages (Anand, Chung, & Wagers, 2011), leaving
open the question of whether postulated production pressures
or preferences, as well as their observed interactions, are universal, or language-specific. This study helps address this
question by looking at pressures on omission of clause subjects in Russian.

A corpus of 24 brief passages was created using material from
8 personal blogs, 8 interviews, and 8 plays3 , by 21 different authors. Each passage was selected from the beginning
of the text, to avoid discontinuity effects. Only passages
with subject omission present were considered (register effects on omission, and corresponding rates, are discussed in
Zdorenko, 2009). Although source selection was limited and
non-randomized, the overall rate of subject omission is comparable to that typically found in personal speech (∼20-35%),
as shown in Table 1.
All animate subjects, and concrete inanimate subjects mentioned in the text – i.e., those that might be plausible candidates for omission – were included in the experiment, for a
total of 1085 data points. The subsequent analysis was restricted crucially to cases where dropping or pronouncing the
subject did not categorically alter or substantially bias meaning, as alternation in those cases would not be optional. Subjects with contrastive focus, where contrast with the preceding subject is intended, were excluded, as omission instead
strongly implies co-reference with it. It was additionally restricted to the canonical subject cases (Nominative or Dative),
as other ‘subjects’ (9 data points; 0.8%) are typically analyzed as impersonal constructions, or are difficult to distinguish from topicalization.

Measuring Probability Experimentally
In order to obtain a measure of subject predictability, given
preceding material, an experiment was conducted, based on
the design of a similar study measuring the effects of predictability on use of English referring expressions (Tily &
Piantadosi, 2009)4 . 70 native speakers of Russian were recruited online to participate in a ‘guessing game,’ where they
were presented with 2 corpus passages, each from a different genre and in counterbalanced order. Passage text was
revealed to participants incrementally, as they were asked
to guess the identity of upcoming concealed subjects, by
clicking on any previously mentioned referent, or on ‘Someone or Something New,’ if they believed that no previously
3 Although dialogue in plays is arguably artificial, one would expect roughly the same pressures on production to play out – this
is in fact supported by Manin (2006), which looked at the relation
between contextual predictability and word length in a variety of
literary texts.
4 The code for running the experiment was obtained from Harry
Tily upon request, and used with minimal modification.

786

Table 2: This table shows the beta coefficients associated with each main effect in the model, as well as corresponding standard
errors, z-values, significance levels, and contribution to log-likelihood. (z) indicates the predictor was centered and standardized.

Intercept
Information
Last Mention Form: Null
Coreferent with Preceding Subj.: Yes
Last Mention Function: Subj.
Distance in Words to Last Mention (z)

Coef β

SE(β)

−1.20
−0.30
0.45
1.33
0.60
−0.34

0.27
0.12
0.19
0.22
0.28
0.11

z

p

pχ2

−4.4
−2.4
2.4
6.0
2.1
−3.1

<.0001
<.05
<.05
<.0001
<.05
<.01

0.015
0.021
1.6e-09
0.031
0.002

• Coreferent with preceding subject: Whether the clause subject in question is coreferent with the preceding subject (1)
or not (0).

mentioned referent was a plausible continuation. After each
guess, participants were given immediate accuracy feedback,
as well as ‘points’ for accurate guesses5 , and passage text up
to the next guessing point was revealed. Given free word order in Russian, and the consequent impossibility of determining the ‘position’ of an omitted subject, the guessing point in
each case was the clause onset.
Following Manin (2006) and Tily and Piantadosi (2009),
average guessing accuracy for each data point, across participants, was used as a proxy for predictability. A measure of
the information carried by each subject was obtained using
the following equation:

• Distance to last mention in words: The distance to the most
recent coreferent mention in words.
• Number of previous mentions: The number of times the
referent has previously been mentioned in the discourse.
• Number of preceding referents: The number of individual
referents introduced in the preceding discourse.
These predictors were chosen, following Tily and Piantadosi (2009), based on the expectation that the same factors
which facilitate the use of pronouns also facilitate omission
(cf. Gundel et al., 1993; Kameyama, 1985). Thus more
salient subjects (Ariel, 1990) – e.g., those mentioned most
recently, those having fewest competing referents, and those
mentioned more times in the discourse – were expected to be
preferentially omitted. Similarly, subjects whose most recent
mention was null, or in parallel syntactic position (Arnold,
1998; Gordon, Grosz, & Gilliom, 1993), were expected to be
preferentially omitted. As genre was collinear with the other
predictors, it was not included in the analysis.
Different overt subject forms (pronouns, names, descriptions) were collapsed in the model7 . Subjects of conjoined
clauses were included in the analysis – it should be noted,
however, that the effect of information content on subject
omission remains if this data is removed from the analysis (β
= -0.29, z = -2.3, p < .05). Given the difficulty of determining
‘correct’ guesses for plural referents, only singular referents
were considered. Similarly, only those that were previously
mentioned in the discourse were included, given that a correct ‘Someone or Something New’ guess for a previously unmentioned referent does not indicate that the participant has
accurately guessed the concealed subject’s identity. A total
of 720 utterances (362 overt and 358 null subjects), from an
initial 1085 (66.4%), were included in the model.

I(Subjecti ) = -log2 P(Response = correct + 1)
Here, Subjecti is the subject of the ith clause in the data set,
and P(Response = correct) reflects the probability of participants accurately guessing this subject’s identity, given preceding context. 1 was added to the count of participants that
accurately guessed the subject’s identity, given the relatively
high number of subjects that were never accurately guessed
– as the log transformation otherwise produced an infinitely
high measure of information for these cases6 .

Corpus Study
To test whether more predictable subjects are preferentially
omitted, the dataset was first additionally annotated for several control predictors:
• Form of last mention: Whether the most recent coreferent
mention is null (1) or overt (0).
• Grammatical function of last mention: Whether the grammatical function of the most recent coreferent mention is
subject (1) or other (0).
5 Points were given in order to encourage participants to make accurate guesses, rather than guessing randomly, or repeatedly guessing ‘something new.’ Some form of accuracy feedback was unavoidable without purposefully omitting the previously concealed and referentially unambiguous subjects, which would substantially disrupt
the flow and interpretability of the passage.
6 It should be noted that using either the raw predictability measure (average accuracy), or setting an arbitrary upper bound for the
information measure (4 bits) instead, produced the same results in
the subsequent analysis.

7 Crucially, if the analysis is restricted to null subjects and pronouns only (# utterances: 656), a marginally significant effect of
Information, in the same direction, remains (β = -0.24, z = -1.9, p =
.06) – suggesting that the results below generalize to the more specific pronoun/zero alternation.

787

Probability of subject omission

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00
0

1

2

3

Information content (smoothed negative log probability)

Figure 1: This plot shows the probability of subject omission as a function of information content. The points represent average
omission likelihood for each ‘information’ value, with size proportional to the number of cases. The line represents a logistic
regression curve, with the shaded region corresponding to the 95% confidence interval.
ing material. Crucially, this effect holds after controlling for
other likely predictors of subject omission. This suggests that
online production of syntactic constituents is subject to the
same pressure for communicative efficiency as is production
of more functional, non-constituent elements at other levels
of processing.
These findings are most straightforwardly compatible with
theories of efficient communication that make reference to
omission or reduction of highly predictable, or redundant, elements in online language production. The theory of Uniform Information Density (UID; Jaeger, 2010), for example,
makes the prediction that these effects should be present at
all levels of production, while most similar theories (e.g.,
Aylett & Turk, 2004; Jurafsky, Bell, Gregory, & Raymond,
2001) do not make reference to production beyond the phonetic/phonological levels. This study therefore provides further direct evidence that the effects of predictability on production extend to the syntactic level, including to the omission of full syntactic constituents. The findings are also compatible with theories of efficient reference production specifically (Arnold, 2008), which propose that speakers use less informative or reduced expressions for those referents that their
addressees are more likely to expect in context, and that using such expressions is in general more efficient, in terms of
speaker effort.
In that light, it is worth noting that the control predictors
used in this study are themselves taken by e.g. Arnold to be
cues for expected reference. The Expectancy hypothesis for
reference production is outlined further in Arnold (2008), but
would predict that any properties which increase the likeli-

A generalized mixed-effects logistic regression analysis,
arrived at using χ2 -test model comparison, showed that
speakers preferentially omit more predictable subjects (β =
-0.30, z = -2.4, p < .05). Passage was included as a random intercept, to adjust for passage and author-specific subject omission rates. A summary of the model can be found in
Table 2. This effect holds after controlling for other expected
predictors of subject omission (number of previous mentions
and number of preceding referents did not contribute significantly to model fit, and were therefore excluded). All control predictors behave as expected: subjects are more likely
to be omitted when the form of last mention is ‘null,’ when
they are coreferent with the preceding subject, and when the
grammatical function of the last mention is subject. They are
less likely to be omitted as distance in words to last mention
increases. The probability of subject omission, as a function
of information content, is plotted in Figure 1.
In summary, speakers are significantly more likely to omit
subjects when they are are more predictable in context. Further, the effect of information carried by the referent, on likelihood of subject omission, continues to hold after other likely
predictors of subject omission are controlled for.

Discussion
The corpus study described in this paper tested the hypothesis that the choice to omit optional subject constituents in
Russian is subject to communicative pressures – specifically,
the pressure to avoid overly redundant elements in speech
and text. The analysis demonstrates that this is indeed the
case: speakers are more likely to omit subjects whose identity is easier for comprehenders to guess, based on preced-

788

hood of subsequent mention of a particular referent – such
as parallelism of grammatical function and recency of mention (Arnold, 1998, 2008) – should correlate with higher rates
of subject omission. With respect to the present study, then,
including these control predictors in the model provides a
stronger test of whether contextual predictability (information content) has a unique influence on production. In contrast
to the reference-specific account outlined above, Uniform Information Density more generally goes beyond the claim that
specific cues in discourse play a role in shaping production,
but rather makes a broader claim that production is driven by
predictability-based pressures at all levels.
From a methodological standpoint, following Manin
(2006) and Tily and Piantadosi (2009), the task in this experiment might be seen as an alternative method for estimating the probabilities associated with linguistic events in
context. Potentially supplementing corpus and elicited production methods for providing probability estimates, it may
in principle provide a more accurate estimate of the probabilities that comprehenders subjectively assign to various
linguistic events. For example, there appear to be systematic differences between probability estimates obtained using corpus studies and traditional cloze tasks (Smith & Levy,
2011); it remains unclear which provides a better representation of speakers’ subjective probabilities, in either production or comprehension. These issues notwithstanding, the
methodology used in this study may also be a more feasible
option for obtaining similar probability estimates for linguistic events in languages where no suitably large corpora are
available.
Finally, currently there is poor consensus on what precisely causes any given language to display a conventionalized or systematic pattern of subject omission (such as
that found in some Romance languages). Although richness
of subject-verb morphological agreement appears to play a
role (Chomsky, 1982), it is neither a sufficient nor necessary criterion (Jaeggli & Safir, 1989), with many languages
that demonstrate no morphological agreement nevertheless
demonstrating extensive pro-drop8 – including, for example, Chinese and Japanese. I propose that the average contextual predictability, or information content, of pronouns
may play a role in the licensing and frequency of pro-drop
cross-linguistically. Pronouns may in general be considered
good candidates for elision, as they are relatively uninformative, and in some languages effectively replicate grammatical
information provided by the verb. Conventionalized omission (or reduction) of relatively uninformative linguistic elements would, on average, increase efficiency of communication. There is, for example, evidence that average predictability is a unique predictor of phoneme deletion in English
(Cohen Priva, 2008), and word length cross-linguistically
(Piantadosi et al., 2011).
A language in which the intended reference of a pronoun

is, on average, easier to predict from preceding context (due,
for example, to more predictable patterns of co-reference),
might then be more likely to license systematic subject omission. Cross-linguistically, null pronouns often preferentially
or obligatorily co-refer with preceding subjects, to a greater
extent than overt pronouns (Carminati, 2002)9 . This is in
line with the account proposed here, as one would expect
any given language to preferentially use the less informative (i.e. null) form for the more predictable pattern of coreference. For subjects, this is typically to co-refer with preceding subjects (Chambers & Smyth, 1998; Smyth, 1994). In
short, effects of average contextual predictability could potentially both help predict which languages are more likely to
license subject omission, and account for why null subjects,
to a greater extent than their overt counterparts, preferentially
co-refer with preceding subjects. This hypothesis is in line
with recent resurged interest in functional explanations for typological patterns (Jaeger & Tily, 2011), and may be reserved
for future work.
Summarizing, theories of efficient communication such as
Uniform Information Density (UID) predict that the probability of omission of an optional linguistic element is inversely correlated with the information that it carries in context. Further, UID specifically predicts that these pressures
should play an active role at all points in discourse where
speakers have a choice between different ways of formulating a message, and that their influence is not limited to any
specific level of processing, or only to functional linguistic
elements. The findings described in this paper support this
hypothesis, and demonstrate that more predictable syntactic
constituents are preferentially omitted, when they are more
predictable given preceding context. This provides direct evidence that communicative pressures on production extend to
the syntactic level, and, crucially, that UID is indeed a general
principle of production.

Acknowledgments
I am very grateful to Pranav Anand for extensive assistance with all aspects of this project, as well as to Adrian
Brasoveanu and Jaye Padgett for their assistance with methods, and feedback on earlier versions of this manuscript. I
also thank four anonymous CogSci reviewers.

References
Anand, P., Chung, S., & Wagers, M. (2011). Widening the
net: Challenges for gathering linguistic data in the digital
age. White paper 121, SBE 2020: Future Research in the
Social, Behavioral & Economic Sciences. NSF.
Ariel, M. (1990). Accessing noun phrase antecedents. London: Routledge.
9 Although it has been proposed that null and overt pronouns
demonstrate a division of labor, with overt pronouns in pro-drop
languages preferentially co-referring with objects or non-topical elements (Carminati, 2002), the evidence on this has been mixed, and
suggests rather that null subject pronouns may have a stronger preference for co-reference with subjects (e.g., Ueno & Kehler, 2010).

8 Here I will use the term pro-drop to refer only to referential
subject omission.

789

Arnold, J. E. (1998). Reference form and discourse patterns.
Doctoral Dissertation, Stanford University.
Arnold, J. E. (2008). Reference production: Productioninternal and addressee-oriented processes. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 23(4), 495-527.
Aylett, M., & Turk, A. (2004). The smooth signal redundancy
hypothesis: a functional explanation for relationships between redundancy, prosodic prominence, and duration in
spontaneous speech. Language and Speech, 47, 31-56.
Bell, A., Brenier, J. M., Gregory, M., Girand, C., & Jurafsky,
D. (2009). Predictability effects on durations of content
and function words in conversational English. Journal of
Memory and Language, 60(1), 92-111.
Bell, A., Jurafsky, D., Fosler-Lussier, E., Girand, C., Gregory, M., & Gildea, D. (2003). Effects of disfluencies,
predictability, and utterance position on word form variation in english conversation. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 113(2), 1001-1024.
Brown, P. M., & Dell, G. S. (1987). Adapting production to
comprehension: The explicit mention of instruments. Cognitive Psychology, 19(4), 441-472.
Carminati, M. (2002). The processing of Italian subject pronouns. Doctoral Dissertation, UMass, Amherst.
Chambers, C. C., & Smyth, R. (1998). Structural parparallel
and discourse coherence: a test of centering theory. Journal
of Memory and Language, 39, 593-608.
Chomsky, N. (1982). Some concepts and consequences of the
theory of government and binding. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Cohen Priva, U. (2008). Using information content to predict phone deletion. In Proceedings of the 27th West Coast
Conference on Formal Linguistics.
Franks, S. (1995). Parameters of Slavic morphosyntax. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Genzel, D., & Charniak, E. (2002). Entropy rate constancy
in text. In Proceedings of ACL-2002 (p. 199-206).
Givón, T. (1979). On understanding grammar. New York,
NY: Academic Press.
Givón, T. (1983). Topic continuity in discourse: An introduction. In T. Givón (Ed.), Topic continuity in discourse:
A quantitative cross-linguistic study (p. 1-41). Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Gordishevsky, G., & Avrutin, S. (2003). Subject and object
omissions in child Russian. In Proceedings of IATL 19.
Gordon, P. C., Grosz, B. J., & Gilliom, L. A. (1993). Pronouns, names, and the centering of attention in discourse.
Cognitive Science, 17(3), 311-347.
Gundel, J. K., Hedberg, N., & Zacharski, R. (1993). Cognitive status and the form of referring expressions in discourse. Language, 69, 274-307.
Hale, J. (2001). A probabilistic earley parser as a psycholinguistic model. In Association for computational linguistics
(p. 1-8).
Hawkins, J. A. (2004). Efficiency and complexity in grammars. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Jaeger, T. F. (2010). Redundancy and reduction: Speakers
manage syntactic information density. Cognitive Psychology, 61(1), 23-62.
Jaeger, T. F., & Norcliffe, E. (2009). The cross-linguistic
study of sentence production: State of the art and a call for
action. Language and Linguistic Compass, 3(4), 866-887.
Jaeger, T. F., & Tily, H. (2011). Language processing complexity and communicative efficiency. WIRE: Cognitive
Science, 2(3), 323–335.
Jaeggli, O., & Safir, K. J. (1989). The null subject parameter
and parametric theory. In O. Jaeggli & K. J. Safir (Eds.),
The null subject parameter (p. 1-44). Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
Jurafsky, D., Bell, A., Gregory, M., & Raymond, W. (2001).
Probabilistic relations between words: Evidence from reduction in lexical production. In J. Bybee & P. Hopper
(Eds.), Frequency and the emergence of linguistic structure
(p. 229-254). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Kameyama, M. (1985). Zero anaphora: The case of
Japanese. Doctoral Dissertation, Stanford University.
Levy, R., & Jaeger, T. F. (2007). Speakers optimize information density through syntactic reduction. In B. Schlkopf,
J. Platt, & T. Hoffman (Eds.), Advances in neural information processing systems 19 (p. 849-856). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Manin, D. (2006). Experiments on predictability of word in
context and information rate in natural language. Journal
of Information Processes, 6(3), 229-236.
Piantadosi, S., Tily, H., & Gibson, E. (2011). Word lengths
are optimized for efficient communication. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 108(9), 3526.
Resnik, P. (1996). Selectional constraints: An informationtheoretic model and its computational realization. Cognition, 61, 127-159.
Smith, N. J., & Levy, R. (2011). Cloze but no cigar: The
complex relationship between cloze, corpus, and subjective
probabilities in language processing. In Proceedings of the
33th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Smyth, R. (1994). Grammatical determinants of ambiguous
pronoun resolution. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research,
23, 197-229.
Tily, H., & Piantadosi, S. (2009). Refer efficiently: Use less
informative expressions for more predictable meanings. In
Proceedings of the workshop on the production of referring
expressions: Bridging the gap between computational and
empirical approaches to reference.
Ueno, M., & Kehler, A. (2010). The interpretation of null and
overt pronouns in Japanese: Grammatical and pragmatic
factors. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society (p. 2057-2062).
Zdorenko, T. (2009). Subject omission in Russian: a study
of the Russian National Corpus. Language and Computers,
71(1), 119-133.
Zipf, G. (1949). Human behaviour and the principle of least
effort. Cambridge, MA: Addison-Wesley.

790

