UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Preschoolers infer contrast from adjectives if they can access lexical alternatives

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/67j663tj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Horowtiz, Alexandra
Frank, Michael

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Preschoolers infer contrast from adjectives if they can access lexical alternatives
Alexandra C. Horowitz

Michael C. Frank

ahorowit@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

mcfrank@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Abstract

a novel term with respect to a set of possible objects (e.g.
Clark, 1990; Diesendruck & Markson, 2001; Akhtar, Carpenter, & Tomasello, 1996). Although both reference disambiguation and implicature are inferences about speakers’ lexical choices, a critical difference between them is the space of
possible alternative interpretations. In reference disambiguation tasks, the possible alternatives are typically objects that
are physically present and hence easy to reason about; in implicature tasks, the possible alternatives are typically unsaid
lexical choices that may be hard to summon to mind. We refer
to this idea (that implicatures are challenging because of the
difficulty bringing to mind the relevant alternative possible
utterances) as the linguistic alternatives hypothesis (Barner
& Bachrach, 2010).
In support of this hypothesis, Barner, Brooks, and Bale
(2011) found that preschoolers could make implicatures from
familiar scales such as numbers and from explicit descriptions (“the cat and the cow are sleeping” when three animals
were pictured sleeping), but not from quantifiers (“some of
the animals are sleeping”). In addition, even when the quantifiers were strengthened by “only” (“only some of the animals are sleeping”), they still failed to make the implicature—
indicating that the implicature per se was not the problem (because if it were, adding “only” would have helped children
restrict their interpretation of “some”), but rather that children’s difficulty in considering the alternative “all” may be
responsible. In our current work, we further investigate the
linguistic alternatives hypothesis as a potential explanation of
children’s performance in other types of pragmatic tasks.
In our previous work, we investigated preschoolers’ inferences about implicit dimensions of contrast from adjective
use (Horowitz & Frank, 2012). The intuition driving this
paradigm was that if a novel item is described as “tall,” it
is likely that others of that kind may vary by height; if it’s
described as “red,” others may vary by color. Older 4-yearolds were able to make this kind of contrast inference from
both color and size terms, but younger 4-year-olds exhibited
a bias to match by color regardless of the adjective used. This
result may also be related to children’s ability to access the
appropriate linguistic alternatives. Although children are familiar with color names, they may not recognize color use as
contrastive because there is not a particular implied contrast
item per se (“red” implies that others may be “not red,” but
not that another item will necessarily be a specific color). So
our task may have been difficult for younger children because
they could not bring to mind the appropriate color alternative.
In our current work, we modify our task to use scalar
properties with familiar implicit alternatives to children (e.g.

When speakers use modified noun phrases (e.g. “the long
book”), they provide information not only about a salient feature of a single item (that this book is long), but also about
implicit contrasts with possible alternatives (books can vary by
length: some may be short). We investigate the development of
preschoolers’ ability to detect implicit contrasts from speakers’
use of adjectives and make inferences about category structure. In Experiment 1, we found that adults and preschoolers
can make contrast inferences from adjective use in a supportive
frame, and this ability improves over the preschool years. In
Experiment 2, we reduced the cues to contrast and found that
adults still inferred implied contrast from adjective use alone,
but preschoolers did not. Perhaps the issue for preschoolers
was an inability to consider alternatives from explicit descriptions (e.g. bringing to mind “short” from hearing “long”). Experiment 3 tested this hypothesis by reading preschoolers a
book containing relevant opposite pairs immediately prior to
the task. After reading the book, older 4-year-olds were able
to make contrast inferences reliably, suggesting that increasing
children’s access to lexical alternatives may boost their ability
to make contrast inferences.
Keywords: Pragmatics; adjectives; language development.

Introduction
A challenge for children learning language is not only to learn
the explicit meanings conveyed by semantic content, but also
to pick up on available, but implicit, information. For example, if I ask “where’s my left shoe?” a listener can learn not
only that I am missing my left shoe (explicit), but also that
I’m likely not missing its pair (implicit). Thus, speakers can
provide cues about unstated information through their word
choices. The goal of the current work is to investigate children’s sensitivity to this kind of implicit information.
Although children have accumulated a substantial vocabulary by age 5, they still show surprising difficulties in making pragmatic inferences. Consider the scalar implicature that
“some of the horses jumped over the fence.” For adults this
utterance typically implicates that SOME BUT NOT ALL of the
horses jumped, or else the speaker would have used the word
“all” (Grice, 1975). In contrast, 5- to 6-year-olds are happy
to accept the interpretation that “some” means SOME AND
POSSIBLY ALL (e.g. Papafragou & Musolino, 2003; Noveck,
2000). Adults infer implicatures y across a number of lexical
scales (e.g. <OR/AND>, <MIGHT/MUST>), while children
find these inferences challenging despite knowing the meanings of the individual lexical items.
Why do children fail to make scalar implicatures despite
their familiarity with the component words? This failure is
especially puzzling given children’s proficiency in making
other forms of pragmatic inference, such as in simple word
learning tasks where they can disambiguate the referent of

625

“clean”/“dirty”, “wet”/“dry”) in order to determine whether
their performance depends on the familiarity of linguistic alternatives. In Experiment 1, we found that adults (Experiment 1a) and preschoolers by age 3.5 (Experiment 1b) reliably made contrast inferences with these terms in a supportive context (contrasting with the younger children’s failures with color terms in our previous work). In Experiment 2, adults’ performance was sustained when framing
cues supporting contrast were reduced (Experiment 2a), but
preschoolers were at chance without these framing cues (Experiment 2b). In Experiment 3, before performing the same
task as in Experiment 2b, we read a book highlighting the
scalar opposites used in the test items (exposing children to
the relevant linguistic alternatives for the later inferences).
This exposure increased older children’s contrast judgments.
Overall, our findings support the hypothesis that children’s
performance in pragmatics tasks relates to their ability to consider lexical alternatives.

Figure 1: Example trial shape set. In the contrastive language
conditions (Experiments 1a and 1b), the first sentence was
modified from “This is a tibu” to “This is a special kind of
tibu.” All other expressions remained the same.

Results and Discussion

Experiment 1a: Adults

Responses were coded as correct if participants selected the
shape that differed along the referenced dimension. In other
words, we considered a response to be a correct contrast
judgement if the participant selected the shape that differed
by feature in feature adjective trials (e.g. heard “broken” and
selected the shape that was unbroken), and differed by size in
size adjective trials (e.g. heard “small” and selected the shape
that was big).
Participants selected the contrasting dimension more often
than chance and at nearly identical rates for both adjective
types (p < .001 in exact binomial tests for feature and size
terms; see Figure 2). Our results indicate that participants
used the adjective referenced to make inferences about properties of novel category members, suggesting that adjectives
are informative indicators of relevant property information to
adults. They were able to consider the labeled property in
order to infer that other novel category members are likely
to differ along the referenced dimension. We next turned to
investigate children’s sensitivity to implicit information from
adjective word choice.

We first wanted to confirm adults’ sensitivity to implicit contrast information conveyed though adjective use before investigating children’s performance. We described a novel shape
in a contrastive framing referencing either a feature or size
adjective (e.g. “broken” or “small”), and asked adults to infer what other category members look like. If adults detect an
implied dimension of contrast from adjective use, they should
infer that other shapes are likely to vary along that property.
This is precisely what we found.

Methods
Participants A planned sample of 128 adult participants
was recruited from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk online crowdsourcing service. Three subjects were excluded for failing to
complete the task. All participants reported that they were native speakers of English and were informed that the task was
designed for children.
Stimuli Participants were presented with cartoon images of
items from outer space. They participated in a single trial featuring a set of three pictures: one referenced exemplar shape
and two test shapes that each differed from the exemplar only
by feature or only by size (Figure 1). Participants were randomly assigned to one of four sets of test shapes.

Experiment 1b: Children
In Experiment 1b, we modified the task into a four trial storybook for children. Because young children are very familiar with feature and size opposites, we used a wide sample
of 3- to 4-year-olds, broken into half-year age brackets. If
children are sensitive to implicit contrasts conveyed through
adjectives, they should select the image contrasting along the
referenced dimension. If they do not recognize variable property cues from adjective use, then they should select at random or choose the image that matches (rather than contrasts
with) the stated adjective.

Procedures Participants read a story online in which a cartoon character, Allen the Alien, introduced them to a novel
shape from outer space and said something about it, e.g.
“This is a special kind of tibu. This is a [broken] tibu.” Half
of participants were presented with a feature adjective (e.g.
“broken”) and half were presented with a size adjective (e.g.
“small”). They were then shown the two test shapes and
asked, “What do you think [tibus] usually look like?”, and
prompted to select one of the two images. We measured the
proportion of participants who selected the picture that contrasted with the named property.

Methods
Participants We recruited 96 3- to 5-year-old children from
the Bing Nursery School at Stanford University and the San

626

Proportion Correct Contrast Judgement

Proportion Correct Contrast Judgement

Feature

1.00

Size

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

1.00

Feature
Size

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00
3.0 - 3.5

Experiment 1a

3.5 - 4.0

4.0 - 4.5

4.5 - 5.0

Age

Experiment 2a

Condition

Figure 3: Preschoolers’ mean proportion correct performance
in Experiment 1b. Yellow bars depict feature adjective trials
and red bars depict size trials. The dashed line represents
chance (0.5). Error bars represent standard error.

Figure 2: Adults’ mean proportion correct performance in
Experiments 1a and 2a. Feature trials are plotted in yellow
and size trials in red. The dashed line represents chance (0.5).

and were prompted to point to one of the test images. The
experimenter averted her eyes as children indicated their responses. Children also participated in a posttest following the
test trials in order to demonstrate their knowledge of the adjectives used in the study. Test sessions took about 10 minutes
to complete and were video-recorded.

Jose Children’s Discovery Museum. Twenty-four children
were recruited to each of four age groups: age 3.0 – 3.5 (M
= 3;3), age 3.5 – 4.0 (M = 3;8), age 4.0 – 4.5 (M = 4;3), and
age 4.5 – 5.0 (M = 4;8). About half of each age group was
recruited from each location.
Stimuli We adapted the adult task into a physical book that
the experimenter read with children. Each child participated
in two training trials with pictures of familiar objects before
undergoing four test trials comprised of the individual test
sets used with adults. For each child, two of the test trials
referenced a feature adjective, and two of the test trials referenced a size adjective. Test image sets were presented in
one of two orders, and adjective type and image presentation
were counterbalanced across participants.
Procedures We tested children individually in a quiet room
at the nursery school or museum. They sat next to the experimenter at a table and were read a printed storybook with the
images from Experiment 1a. Children were introduced to the
character Allen the Alien and completed two training trials
with common images to familiarize them with the task. If
they did not select the correct image during a familiarization
trial, they were prompted until the correct image was chosen.

Results and Discussion
Preschoolers in our task did show sensitivity to implied contrast dimensions conveyed through adjective use. Only the
youngest children in our sample (ages 3 – 3.5 years) did not
reliably select the adjective contrast above chance. By age
3.5, children were able to infer category membership from
word choice cues, choosing the image contrasting by feature
when a feature term was referenced and the image contrasting by size when a size term was referenced, and performance
increased with age (Figure 3).
We analyzed our results using a logistic mixed model, predicting correct responses as an interaction between age and
contrast type with random effects of participant and shape.
Children increasingly made more correct contrast judgments
with age (β = 1.51, p < .0001). There was no significant effect of contrast type (feature vs. size adjectives), and there
was no interaction between age and contrast type, suggesting
that participants across ages did not differ in their responses
to different property types. Overall, these analyses show that
children demonstrate an increasing sensitivity to implicit contrast information from adjectives.
The posttest data reveal that children overwhelmingly were
knowledgeable about the terms we used in our task. Correct
identifications averaged 90% ages 3.0 – 3.5, 95% ages 3.5 –

The training trials were followed by four test trials. In each
test trial, children were first shown an image of a single exemplar shape and heard Allen say something about it, e.g. “This
is a special kind of tibu. This is a broken tibu.” The experimenter then uncovered two test pictures, one that differed by
the exemplar only by feature, and one that differed from the
exemplar only by size. Children were asked, “What do you
think tibus usually look like? What do most tibus look like?”

627

4.0, 96% ages 4.0 – 4.5, and 98% ages 4.5 – 5.0. These scores
indicate that children’s comprehension is improving with age,
but that even the youngest children knew the terms we used.
Our results from Experiment 1b indicate that preschoolers
by age 3.5 were sensitive to the adjective provided as an indicator of implicit contrast. Although each of the two test
images were equally similar to the exemplar because each
differed by only a single property, children avoided selecting the property match (i.e. selecting the picture that was the
same property as the one referenced, e.g. hearing “broken”
and selection the other broken image) and instead selected the
image differing along the referenced dimension (e.g. hearing
“broken” and selecting the picture that was unbroken). This
suggests that preschoolers are able to consider the pragmatic
implications of word choice in our task to infer that the adjective selection conveys information about a relevant property
dimension of interest: remarking on a novel shape’s size implies that size is salient and may vary across category members, while reference to a feature highlights that the feature
property may vary by individual.
We next turned to investigate the robustness of these inferences. If listeners are sensitive to adjective choice generally,
then they should be able to maintain inferences about implicit
contrasts from the minimal cue of a modified noun phrase. If
their recognition of the informativeness of adjective choice is
more fragile, they may rely on a supportive linguistic framing (e.g. highlighting property salience with “This is a special
kind of tibu...”) to guide a contrastive interpretation.

differed along the referenced property dimension. Adults performance was significantly about chance (p < .001 in exact
binomial tests for feature and size terms) and did not differ by
adjective type. They showed only a slight decrease in performance in this adjective only framing from the contrastive language framing in Experiment 1a (see Figure 2). These results
indicate that adjective use in our task is a strong indicator of
relevant property information of novel category members for
adults. Their nearly equal performance across Experiment 1a
and 2a suggests that adjectives provided salient cues to implicit contrast dimensions on their own without the necessity
of additional semantic support.

Experiment 2a: Adults

Procedures Procedures were identical to Experiment 1b
with the exception that the referential phrase was minimized
by removing the phrase “special kind of” to reduce contrast
cues other than the adjective. Instead, they heard only “This
is a [tibu]. This is a [broken tibu],” isolating the adjective as
the only available indicator of category membership.

Experiment 2b: Children
We reran Experiment 1b with the contrastive framing removed in order to examine children’s sensitivity to adjective
use alone. Although 3.5-year-olds reliably inferred contrasts
from properties referenced in Experiment 1b, children a full
year older still had difficulty succeeding in the present experiment without the support of contrastive framing.

Methods
Participants A new sample of 41 children was recruited
from Bing Nursery School. Because of the presumed increased difficulty of this task, we recruited children from the
old age groups: 4.0- to 4.5-year-olds (M = 4;3) and 4.5- to
5.0-year-olds (M = 4;8).
Stimuli Stimuli were identical to Experiment 1b.

In order to test the extent of adults’ sensitivity to implicit contrasts, we reran Experiment 1a with the framing cues to contrast removed. We found that adults were just as likely to form
contrast inferences from adjective use alone as they were with
the supportive framing.

Results and Discussion

Methods

Although preschoolers showed increasing contrast selections
from adjective use with age in Experiment 1b, they were essentially at chance when the contrastive language framing
was removed. We analyzed our results using a logistic mixed
model, predicting correct responses as an interaction between
age and contrast type with random effects of participant and
shape, and we found no significant effects and no significant
interaction. In post-hoc followup tests, older 4s showed a significant feature contrast bias (p = .001, exact binomial test),
but this contrast was not reliable in the full model when controlling for participant and item effects, and may have been
driven primarily by the “broken” and “clean” items. Although
adults remained attentive to implicit contrast information in
both the contrastive language and adjective only framings,
children performed substantially worse without the additional
linguistic cues to guide their contrast judgements.
One explanation for the discrepancy in children’s performance from Experiment 1b to Experiment 2b is that they require more information than an adjective alone to cue a con-

Participants A new planned sample of 128 adult participants were recruited from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk online
crowd-sourcing service. Two subjects were excluded for failing to complete the task. All participants reported that they
were native speakers of English and were informed that the
task was designed for children.
Stimuli Stimuli were identical to Experiment 1a.
Procedures Procedures were identical to Experiment 1a
with the exception that the referential statement was reduced
by removing the phrase “special kind of” so that listeners
heard only “This is a [tibu]. This is a [broken tibu].” This subtle change allowed us to examine listeners’ inferences from
adjective use without drawing attention to it via the framing.

Results and Discussion
As above, we measured the proportion of correct contrast
judgments for which participants selected the test picture that

628

Proportion Correct Contrast Judgement

Experiment 2b
1.00

Experiment 3

art pairs of familiar images depicting the size and feature
scalar contrasts portrayed in the test book (e.g. small/big,
broken/fixed). Opposite pairs were labeled consecutively to
maximize the salience of a given contrast dimension.

Feature
Size

0.75

Procedures Children were told that they would be reading
two books for the session. The procedure was identical to that
of Experiment 2b with the addition of the opposites training
book immediately preceding the test book. The experimenter
read the training book with children, labeling the picture in
a neutral way on each page (e.g. “This is a small teddybear.
This is a big teddybear.”). Although the properties used in
both books were the same, no child explicitly noted any connection between the books.

0.50

0.25

0.00
4.0-4.5

4.5-5.0

4.0-4.5

4.5-5.0

Age

Results and Discussion
Increasing preschoolers’ access to relevant linguistic alternatives helped older 4s select property contrasts for both feature and size adjectives. These results suggest that supporting
children’s abilities to bring relevant alternatives to mind plays
a strong role in their pragmatic inferences. Beyond relying
on rich semantic framing cues to intended meaning, which
are not always available in natural speech, reminding children of different types of modifiers increases their likelihood
of forming contrast inferences from adjectives alone.
Older children selected the contrast property for both feature and size terms more often than chance (p < .001 and
p < 0.01 respectively in exact binomial tests) and younger
children for feature terms (p = .01 in exact binomial test),
though younger children’s performance did not differ across
feature and size trials. A logistic mixed model predicting correct responses as an interaction between age and contrast type
with random effects of participant and shape revealed no significant effects or interaction, however.
When we combine results with those of Experiment 2b, we
find a three-way interaction between experiment, adjective
type, and age, such that older children show improved contrast inferences for size terms only after the opposites book
(β = 2.60, p = 0.04). Increased access to lexical alternatives
seemed to help older children reliably select the dimension
contrast according to the property.
Our results from Experiment 3 suggest that exposing children to a book of unrelated pictures with the scalar alternatives used in our test trials helped older children to select
opposites more consistently, without any framing cues. An
alternative hypothesis, that the initial book served to train
children to always select named opposites, is not supported
because we did not see a change in performance for the
youngest children. In addition, anecdotally none of the children remarked on any relationship between the books, even
though they conveyed the same adjective properties. Instead,
we believe that the opposites book served to make the lexical scales more accessible to children so that, at least for the
oldest children in our task, they could spontaneously infer implicit contrast information from an adjective produced alone.

Figure 4: Preschoolers’ mean proportion correct performance
in Experiments 2b and 3. Feature adjective trials are plotted
in yellow and size trials in red. The dashed line represents
chance (0.5). Error bars show standard error.

trast inference. Although adults can conjure implicit contrast
information from individual word choices, children may rely
on the combination of informative lexical selections with the
addition of supportive linguistic framing.
Another reason for children’s shift in performance across
experiments is not that they necessarily need contrast intentions to be explicitly conveyed, but rather that they require an
awareness of what lexical alternatives could have been used
in place of the ones chosen. Extending the linguistic alternatives hypothesis to our current task, children’s contrast inferences may not relate to framing per se, but rather their access
to scalar alternatives. We investigated this idea in Experiment
3 by increasing the availability of property contrasts.

Experiment 3
In Experiment 3, we provide a test of the linguistic alternatives hypothesis by increasing preschoolers’ access to the relevant lexical alternatives. Before the experimental procedure,
the experimenter read a seemingly unrelated book featuring
the opposites referenced in the test trials (see Figure 5). This
exposure to linguistic alternatives boosted older 4-year-olds’
contrast selections.

Methods
Participants A new sample of 38 children from Bing Nursery School. Participants were grouped into two age groups:
4.0- to 4.5-year-olds (M = 4;3) and 4.5- to 5.0-year-olds (M
= 4;8).
Stimuli Stimuli were identical to Experiment 1b and 2b
with the addition of a separate training book read prior to
the testing procedure. The training book consisted of clip

629

2010). In future work, we hope to identify how each of these
contributions may impact children’s inferences about implied
contrast from word choice.
The ability to infer implicit information can allow children
to learn about the world more efficiently. When children can
recognize implied contrasts conveyed through word choices,
they can learn not only about a particular instance (e.g. “This
is a small tibu”), but can also form inferences about additional
information conveyed about the speaker’s knowledge or perspective of the world from their word choices (e.g. tibus are
likely to vary by size). In order to form these inferences, children may need enough experience with language and particular property comparisons to recognize pragmatic opportunities. This hypothesis could explain both why children fail
to compute scalar implicatures for weak quantifiers (Barner
et al., 2011) and why they failed to form contrast inferences
in our previous work with color terms (Horowitz & Frank,
2012). Informative underlying cues to meaning are constantly
conveyed through speech, and children sensitive to these cues
will be able to learn more effectively and efficiently from their
interactions.

Figure 5: Examples of training pairs used in Experiment 3.
The teddybears depict a size contrast (small – big) and the
piggybanks depict a feature contrast (broken – fixed).

General Discussion
We set out to investigate whether the linguistic alternatives
hypothesis might be applied to pragmatic tasks beyond computing scalar implicatures. Our results suggest that children’s
performance in our tasks is related to their ability to consider
relevant lexical alternatives. In Experiment 1, participants robustly selected the image contrasting with the property referenced when supported by contrastive language framing. In
Experiment 2, adults maintained performance but preschoolers were at chance when framing was reduced. We suggest
that children were unable to recognize implicit property variability from adjective use alone. In Experiment 3, we helped
increase 4-year-olds’ access to lexical alternatives by previewing the task with a book of opposites, and found that this
boosted older childrens contrast inferences.
The inferences measured in our task are fairly counterintuitive: a correct contrast judgment requires selecting the property contrast instead of the property match, although both
choices are available in each set. Our findings that young
children are able to make contrast inferences demonstrates
that they are sensitive to the pragmatic implications of speakers’ word choices.
Their diminished success in the adjective only condition
but recovered contrast inferences after the opposites exposure further suggests that the linguistic alternatives hypothesis may explain this pattern of performance; children can
form pragmatic inferences when they recognize word choice
as conveying implicit contrasts with relevant implicit alternatives, but fail when they cannot access implied lexical alternatives spontaneously from adjective use alone. In other words,
children can recognize adjective use as conveying information about implicit contrast dimensions, but unlike adults,
they may need additional cues supporting these inferences
until they gain enough experience to form these inferences
on their own.
The opposites exposure may help children in a few ways.
Visually, images of familiar objects may make contrasts more
salient. Aurally, hearing named opposites may help children
better retrieve these terms, attend to the relevant property categories, or select matches for these specific lexical items. Attentionally, portraying contrast pairs may support children’s
ability to make comparison judgements (Christie & Gentner,

Acknowledgments
Special thanks to the staff and families at the Bing Nursery
School and the San Jose Children’s Discovery Museum.

References
Akhtar, N., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (1996). The role
of discourse novelty in early word learning. Child Development, 67, 635–645.
Barner, D., & Bachrach, A. (2010). Inference and exact
numerical representation in early language development.
Cognitive Psychology, 60, 40–62.
Barner, D., Brooks, N., & Bale, A. (2011). Accessing the unsaid: The role of scalar alternatives in children’s pragmatic
inference. Cognition, 118, 84–93.
Christie, S., & Gentner, D. (2010). Where hypotheses
come from: Learning new relations by structural alignment. Journal of Cognition and Development, 11, 356–
373.
Clark, E. V. (1990). On the pragmatics of contrast. Journal
of Child Language, 17(02), 417–431.
Diesendruck, G., & Markson, L. (2001). Children’s avoidance of lexical overlap: A pragmatic account. Developmental Psychology, 37, 630.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. 1975, 41–58.
Horowitz, A., & Frank, M. C. (2012). Learning from speaker
word choice by assuming adjectives are informative. In
Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Noveck, I. A. (2000). When children are more logical than
adults: Experimental investigations of scalar implicature.
Cognition, 78, 165–188.
Papafragou, A., & Musolino, J. (2003). Scalar implicatures:
Experiments at the semantics–pragmatics interface. Cognition, 86, 253–282.

630

