UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Previously Encountered Options Affect Risky Decisions in Choices Between Pension Funds

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3sm9t1h1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Smith, Sarah
Harris, Adam

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Previously Encountered Options Affect Risky Decisions in Choices Between Pension
Funds
Sarah Smith (sarah.smith.10@ucl.ac.uk) and Adam J. L. Harris (adam.harris@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Cognitive, Perceptual and Brain Sciences, University College London,
26 Bedford Way, London, WC1H 0AP

Abstract
The evidence that available options influence risk preference
raises concerns about using risk attitude measures to guide
investment choice. A between-participants test found those
who first made choices between high (low) risk pension funds
subsequently preferred higher (lower) risk funds when offered
a choice from a larger range of funds. A within-participants
test, with a fourteen-day break between conditions, found the
same participants selected a lower risk fund after they
experienced making choices between low risk funds, than
they did after they experienced making choices between high
risk funds. Effects were not influenced by order, or attenuated
by a bias warning. Results are consistent with theories that
suggest risky decision making involves similar processes to
those involved in psychophysical perception (e.g. Decision by
Sampling), although there was also evidence of sensitivity to
absolute values. From an applied perspective, customers’ risk
preferences are susceptible to manipulation.
Keywords: financial risk attitude; Decision by Sampling;
sequential context effects; prospect relativity.

Background
Having people save into investment funds that secure
good pensions is a goal of the UK Government (HM
Treasury, 2012). The concept of personal risk attitude is
embedded in this effort. European regulations require
investment advisers to measure a client’s risk attitude before
giving advice (Financial Services Authority, 2011). This has
resulted in a proliferation of risk profiling tools that ask
people a series of questions to derive a risk attitude
diagnosis. Yet, studies show that context can have profound
effects on revealed risk preferences. For example, Stewart,
Chater, Stott and Reimers (2003) found that valuations and
choices between gambles almost entirely depended on
whether you had a set of choices that were high or low. In
their Experiment 1A, participants were asked to make a
series of evaluations of the type, ‘how much would you pay
for a percentage (e.g. 60%) chance of winning an amount of
money (e.g. £400)?’. One condition was given low prices to
choose from, the other, high prices (for this gamble the low
prices were £60, £80, £100 or £120, and the high: £160,
£180, £200 or £220). Participants chose the middle options
most frequently, despite them being considerably higher in
the high price condition. In Experiment 4, participants were
asked to choose one from a set of ‘p chance of winning x’
prospects. Risk attitude was found to be solely a function of
the set of prospects offered. Stewart et al. suggested that
participants have no sense of the absolute risk in each
prospect, but rather choose a prospect by how it relates to
the others presented. This casts doubt on whether risk

attitude is sufficiently stable to be measured at one point and
then generalised to future decisions.
Building on Stewart et al. (2003, Expt. 4), Vlaev, Chater
and Stewart (2007) tested whether a significant real-world
risky decision – a hypothetical pension fund choice - might
by affected by context, and whether context would affect
perceived risk appetite. First, they piloted ways of
communicating investment risk. An investment mean
variance (IMV) measure (Figure 1) that presents risk as the
variation between the minimum and maximum possible
outcomes of a fund, calculated to 95% confidence limits
with an average in between, was rated highest for
comprehensibility and produced more stable risk attitude
results than other measures, over a three-month period.
Using the IMV in a series of tests on working age
participants, Vlaev et al. asked participants to choose a fund
from a range constrained to high (low) risk. If participants
had a stable knowledge of their underlying pension fund
preferences, one would expect them to choose the fund
closest to that preference from the range available, such that
there would be a large number of people choosing the least
risky option in the high risk range and the most risky option
in the low risk range. Contrary to this (as in Stewart et al.,
2003, Expt. 4), Vlaev et al found the proportion of times the
lowest option in the high range was selected was
significantly lower than the proportion of times the options
below it were selected in the low range. On the other hand,
there was a general skew towards low risk funds. This
evidence of some absolute preference suggests that choice is
not solely prospect dependent.
Vlaev et al. (2007) also found that constraining the range
did not affect reported risk attitude; and participants who
self-reported as more risk seeking picked a more risky fund
from the range offered. One possible interpretation of these
results is that participants overlay their own rank, in terms
of their risk attitude, onto an ordered range of options in
order to identify their preferred fund (e.g., "I'm typically a
risk-seeking person, so I'll choose an option in the upper
quartile"). If so, the absolute level of fund riskiness is
irrelevant: the fund’s location in the decision making range
is what matters. Indeed, our perceptions of how our
behaviour ranks compared to other people’s behaviour has
been shown to play a role in judgments involving risk in
other contexts. Wood, Brown and Maltby (2012) found
participants’ perceptions of the risks related to alcohol
consumption were predicted by where an individual ranked
herself in a range of how much she thought her peers drank.
Whether and how social ranking influences judgments of

1479

financial risk seem important questions for understanding
how people select investments.

Figure 1. Investment Mean Variance
Measure, (Vlaev et al., 2007).
Findings such as those reviewed above have been
interpreted as suggesting that the process by which we judge
risk may be similar to the process by which we judge
psychophysical stimuli like sound or weight (Birnbaum,
1992; Parducci, 1965; Stewart, Chater, & Brown, 2006).
Adaptation Level Theory (Helson, 1964), for example,
suggests that we judge an instance of heaviness relative to
an ‘adaptation level’ derived from a weighted sum of recent
instances of heaviness. Something is heavy by comparison
with the adaptation level, not in any absolute sense.
Alternatively, Range Frequency Theory (Parducci, 1968)
contends that we make judgments in a psychological range
constructed from the values and frequencies of stimuli
presented. The value given to an instance is a function of its
position in both the range and rank of instances presented.
Decision by Sampling Theory (Stewart et al., 2006) makes
similar predictions to RFT but offers an explanation of the
actual decision process (Stewart & Simpson, 2009). It
suggests that decisions involve: sampling; making binary
comparisons; and monitoring frequencies. A target prospect
is identified, and a relevant attribute of that prospect is
compared with the same attribute of another prospect
sampled from the immediate context or from memory. If the
comparison is favourable, the accumulator for the target
prospect goes up by one point. When the accumulator tallies
reach threshold, the prospect with the highest tally is
selected. Significantly, DbS argues that samples used to
score or rank a prospect in working memory are drawn from
both the decision environment and from long term memory.
One of the features of psychophysical perception is that it
is subject to sequential effects, such that we evaluate an
instance of psychophysical stimuli by comparing it to the
last instance we experienced (Garner, 1954, Helson, 1947).

Despite an initial failure to show evidence for sequential
effects (Stewart et al., 2003, Experiment 5), more recent
findings suggest that they might be predicted to occur in
risky decision making. For example, in a sequential series of
pairwise choices between risky prospects, Stewart, Reimers
and Harris (in press) observed that the shape of participants’
revealed utility functions – and thus the amount of risk they
were willing to take – were affected by the distribution of
amounts that appeared in the sequence of prospects. And
Ungemach, Stewart and Reimers (2011) observed that the
amounts of money that people had just been exposed to – in
the course of their grocery shopping – affected preference in
a subsequent choice between two risky prospects (see
Stewart, 2009, for further examples). Testing for sequential
effects in investment choices would be a useful extension.
Relativistic theories of judgment contend that judgment is
constructed in context from the instances/prospects
available: we do not have internal tables of value from
which we can look up our preferences. Given this, it should
not be possible to attenuate context effects arising from the
instances/prospects themselves. If, however, the results
represent more shortcut heuristics, it might be possible to do
so. It has been demonstrated that certain anchoring effects
can be attenuated by explicit forewarnings of bias (e.g.,
Epley & Gilovich, 2005; Simmons, LeBoeuf, & Nelson,
2010), and others by ‘consider the opposite’ strategies
(Mussweiler, Strack, & Pfeiffer, 2000). Attenuation would
reveal itself as an interaction, such that any difference in
choice caused by context would be attenuated if a person
had received a forewarning. The question of whether
context effects arise from a heuristic is important both for
understanding the nature of the effects, and for applied work
to protect people from manipulation
With the aim of extending previous work on context
effects we undertook two studies designed to test: 1)
whether making a series of choices from part of a range of
risky prospects influences a subsequent choice from the full
range 2) whether a forewarning attenuates any context
effects; and 3) the effects at the individual participant level.

Study 1
Study 1 tested, between subjects, whether making a series
of choices from part of a range affects a subsequent choice
from the full range. We looked for effects on self-reported
risk attitude and risk rank, and tested for any residual
evidence of absolute preference guiding choice.

Method
Participants. Two hundred and seventy four U.S. - based
Amazon Mechanical Turk workers, (95 female), aged 18-81
years (Mean = 30, SD = 10).
Design and Materials. We used a scenario in which
participants are asked to imagine that they have decided to
save $300 per month into their pension, and they must
choose a fund to invest their money into. The funds on offer
contain different combinations of bonds that are risk-free

1480

but give modest returns and stocks that are more risky but
can give higher returns. Funds from the IMV were presented
in US dollars. This provided plausible pension amounts
since in 2012 the US median income from pension savings
was $12,000 a year (American Association of Retired
Persons, 2013). There were four conditions. Three had a
prior experience task which involved choosing your
preferred fund in each of a set of eight equally balanced
pairwise choices constructed from the IMV using either a)
the seven lowest risk funds, 'Low-risk', b) the seven highest
risk funds, 'High-risk', or c) funds from across the full range,
'Neutral'. In the fourth ‘No experience,’ condition
participants did no prior experience task. The dependent
variable was a subsequent investment choice from the full
IMV set of 11 funds (Figure 1). Hereafter this is referred to
as the investment choice. Next, we asked participants to
estimate their risk rank using a question adapted from Wood
et al. (2012): ‘You chose this fund ___ (participant choice is
inserted). Out of 100 people how many do you think would
have chosen a more risky fund than you?’. And finally
participants reported their risk attitude using the measure
found most predictive of real world behaviour by Dohmen,
Falk, Huffman, Sunde, Schupp, & Wagner (2011), ‘How do
you see yourself? Are you generally a person who is fully
prepared to take risks in financial matters or do you try to
avoid taking risks in financial matters?’.
Procedure. The test was conducted online. Participants read
the scenario and were randomly directed to one of the four
conditions. Participants in the High-risk, Low-risk, and
Neutral conditions completed the appropriate prior
experience task. Each of the eight pairwise choices appeared
on a separate screen and their order was randomised. All
participants saw the scenario for a second time and were
asked to choose a fund for their pension savings from the
full IMV range. Afterwards they were asked to report their
risk rank, demographics and their risk attitude.
Results
Mean responses are presented in Table 1. Investment
choice is reported as the percentage of stocks in the chosen
fund, hence 100% represents the most risky choice.
Table 1: Mean investment choice (percentage of
stocks in the chosen fund) by condition in Study 1.

Experience significantly affected investment choice, F
(3,273) =3.58, p = .014. Planned contrasts found a
difference between the High-risk and Low-risk conditions, t
(270) = 2.47, p = .014; a marginal difference between the
Low-risk and Neutral conditions, t (270) = 1.93, p = .055;

and not between the Neutral and High-risk conditions, t
(270) = .570, p = .569. There was no difference between the
No experience condition and the Low-risk condition, t (270)
= -.178, p = .859, but there was a difference between the No
experience condition and the High-risk condition, t (270) = 2.64, p = .009. The difference in choices between the High
and Low-risk conditions is further demonstrated by looking
at the distribution of choices. As implied in Figure 2, more
participants in the High-risk condition (44) chose a fund
with more than 50% risk, than participants in the Low-risk
condition (34), X2 (1) = 3.74, p = .06.

Figure 2: Cumulative frequency of investment choice by
condition in Study 1.
We scored participants’ selections in the pairwise
choices presented in the prior experience task. Picking the
higher risk option scored 1, otherwise 0. Because the choice
sets were equally balanced, if context alone determines
choice then scores should not differ between conditions.
They did, F (2,203) =22.57, p <.001. Low-risk (Mean = 7.4,
SD = 0.97); Neutral (Mean = 6.8, SD = 0.98); High-risk
(Mean = 6.1, SD = 1.31). A planned contrast showed that
participants in the Low-risk condition chose the higher risk
option significantly more frequently than participants in the
High-risk condition, t (203) = 6.72, p < .001. This result
demonstrates sensitivity to absolute values. Finally,
experience did not affect reported risk rank, F (2,270) =
0.198 p = .96, or reported risk attitude, F (2,270) = 0.291, p
= .59. However, we found strong correlations between
investment choice and risk attitude, r = .41, p < .001; and
risk rank, r = -.38, p < .001.
Validation, Study 1A. We replicated Study 1 results in a
study with 100 UCL psychology students, (81 female), aged
from 18-40 years (Mean = 20.2, SD = 3.4), omitting the
Neutral condition. Mean responses were: No experience
(Mean = 57%, SD = 20%); Low-risk (Mean = 60%, SD =
21%); High-risk (Mean = 71%, SD = 19%). Experience
significantly affected investment choice, F (2,95) = 4.251, p
= .017. More participants in the High-risk condition chose a
fund with over 50% risk (24, 73%) than in the Low-risk
condition (13, 38%), X2 (1) = 6.59, p = .014. Use of Amazon
Turk is validated by this consistent result.

1481

Discussion
There was no suggestion that investment choices
following exposure to solely high risk funds were riskier
than those following exposure to a broad range of funds
(Neutral condition). Likewise, there was no suggestion that
exposure to low risk funds affected investment choices
compared to those made following no prior exposure to any
funds. We did, however, observe that exposure to low risk
funds consistently led to lower risk investment choices than
exposure to high risk funds.
The overall finding therefore appears to be that where
participants had recently experienced high risk samples (the
High-risk and Neutral conditions), investment choices were
riskier compared to conditions where they did not
experience any high risk samples (the Low-risk and No
experience conditions). A speculative explanation for this
slight asymmetry in the results would be that if samples in
the world at large are typically of relatively low risk
prospects, then the Low-risk condition provides a context
similar to that already in participants’ heads in the No
experience condition.
In the pairwise choices, participants in the Low-risk
condition chose a riskier option more often, demonstrating
sensitivity to absolute values. Study 2 sought to extend these
results by repeating Study 1 in a within-participants design
over a two-week period, and testing whether a warning
about the potential for these effects would attenuate them.

Procedure. Participants read the pension selection scenario
and were randomly directed to the warning or not and then
to the high risk or low risk pairwise choices, before
selecting a pension fund from the full range. Fourteen days
later participants were re-contacted. Those who had been in
the warning condition saw the warning again, otherwise not.
Participants completed the opposite set of pairwise choices
from that done fourteen days earlier, and then made a
pension fund selection from a full range.

Results
Mean responses are presented in Table 2. Participants
selected a lower risk investment fund after they experienced
the Low-risk context, than they did after they experienced
the High-risk context, F (1,149) = 17.17 p <.001. Around
40% of participants (60) picked a fund with 50% stocks or
less after experiencing the High-risk condition, whereas half
of them did (81) after experiencing the Low-risk condition,
X2 (1) = 5.80, p =.02 (Figure 3). This mirrors the results
found between participants in Study 1. There were no
effects of order.
Table 2: Mean investment choice (percentage of
stocks in the chosen fund) by condition in Study 2.

Study 2
Method
Participants. One hundred and fifty-three U.S.-based
Amazon Mechanical Turk workers (103 female), aged 1972 years (Mean =38, SD=14.4).
Design and materials. We used a 2 (prior experience) x 2
(warning) design, with prior experience (high or low)
manipulated within-participants and warning manipulated
between-participants. The order was counterbalanced. The
pension scenario and investment fund selection task were as
in Study 1. Previous experience question sets were increased
to fifteen pairwise questions constrained to high risk and
low risk contexts. We used the risk rank and risk appetite
questions from Study 1. The following bias warning was
constructed.
Research has shown that judgments about what we want are often biased
by the range of choices we are offered. For example, someone who
would like a Medium sized drink but is offered Super-large; Extra-large;
or Large will choose Extra-large because it is the middle choice, rather
than Large which is closer to their true preference. The bias occurs
because when faced with a decision we take the information that is most
readily available and adjust from there. We anchor ourselves too
strongly to that starting point and don't adjust enough to get as close as
possible to our real preferences. When it comes to important decisions
like choosing investments this bias can be dangerous, because instead of
choosing our true preference, we can be swayed by how choices are
presented.

There was no effect of warning, F (1,149) = .21 p = .64,
nor was there any interaction between context and warning,
F (1,149) = 1.37 p = .24. Numerically the effect is in the
opposite direction to an attenuation of the effect by the
warning (Table 2), with a greater difference between
contexts in mean investment choice in the 'Warning'
condition than the 'No Warning' condition. Context effects
at the level of individual participants are shown in Figure 4.
30% (45) picked exactly the same investment fund both
times. Of those who chose different investment funds, more
(as predicted) picked a less risky fund after experiencing the
low risk context (72, 47%) than picked a more risky fund
after experiencing the low risk context (36, 23%), X2 (1) =
12.00, p = .001.
Participants were asked to report risk attitude and risk
rank after both tests. As in Study 1, these consistently
predicted investment choice: risk attitude r (153) = 0.45 p
<.001, and r (153) = 0.50 p <.001; risk rank, r (153) = -0.40
p <.001 and r (153) = -0.60 p <.001. There were strong
correlations between first and second investment choices, r
(153) = 0.51 p < .001; reported risk attitudes r (153) = 0.64
p <.001; and risk rankings, r (153) = -0.55 p <.001.

1482

Figure 3: Cumulative frequency of investment choice by
condition in Study 2.

Figure 4: Changes in investment choices invoked by the
different risk contexts in Study 2.

Discussion
Overall we found evidence of context effects within
participants. As in Study 1 we found reported risk attitude
and risk rank predict investment choice even though
absolute preference is labile. We found no evidence that a
warning can attenuate prospect relativity effects.

General Discussion
We found systematic effects of previously experienced
prospects on the selection of an investment fund. These
effects violate Expected Utility theory. They seem similar to
the sequential effects found in psychophysics, where the
experience of a stimulus affects perceptions of subsequently
experienced instances of similar stimuli. We tested whether
previous experience of one range of prospects influences
evaluation of riskiness - as measured by the choice of an
investment fund - in another range of prospects and found
that it does. This is consistent with the DbS model where
options in the immediate choice context are ranked with
samples drawn from memory. A participant who has just

experienced a set of low risk prospects will have them
readily available as samples in memory. When these
samples are added to those in the choice context they will
skew the operational range to lower risk. If preference is
then determined by locating one’s preferred rank in a range,
rather than by identifying an absolute value, then this
participant will make a lower risk investment choice than a
participant with the same preference who has just
experienced a set of high risk prospects (funds containing
50% stocks seem riskier when compared with 20% and 30%
stocks than when compared with 70% and 80% stocks).
Participants’ self-reported perception of their risk
appetite and rank were not affected by previous experience
of risky prospects, yet did predict investment choice. This
indicates that it is the distribution in which preference is
located that has been affected by previous experience – not
the rank of the preference. Wood et al. (2012) argue that the
location of preference derives from a DbS-type process of
social ranking in which we compare ourselves with other
people. The question of whether and how social ranking
applies to less public behavior, such as personal investment
choice, begs investigation.
We found that a bias warning did not attenuate the
effects of previous experience. This provides further
evidence for the assertion that relative judgment is a core
underlying principle in decision making under risk.
However, rank within context is not the whole story. We
found participants were also sensitive to absolute values.
For example, in Study 2, 29% of participants chose the same
investment fund two-weeks later, despite experiencing a
different context. This suggests that the context effects in
Study 1 are driven by a strong effect on part of the
population, rather than more moderate effects on all.
Evidence of absolute preference is consistent with the
findings of Vlaev et al. (2007). They argued that Range
Frequency Theory (Parducci, 1965) can accommodate an
element of absolute preference if it is allowed that some
prior knowledge about income, expenditure, or savings,
determines the range of considered options. DbS similarly
suggests that sensitivity to absolute values reflects
comparisons with instances in memory specific to an
individual. Stewart et al. (2003) found little sensitivity to
absolute values. However, in these studies, the constrained
range was presented as the whole available range. In the
current studies the boundaries of the range underlying the
pairwise choices was not as salient, and the investment
choice was made from a wider range. The conditions under
which people are and are not sensitive to absolute values is
an important question for further research. We should also
note that, in Study 2, 23% of participants’ investment
choices moved in the opposite direction to that predicted.
Individual variation in susceptibility to context effects is
another important future research direction.
A criticism that might be leveled at our studies is that
participants' choices were not incentive compatible. This
was a deliberate decision. There is inherent difficulty in
making hypothetical long-term investment choices incentive

1483

compatible: the amounts of money involved are large and,
unlike simple gambles, outcomes cannot be played out. It
could be argued that financial incentives (at least those
practical in a study not conducted over the period of a
lifetime) would reduce ecological validity. In the real world,
when someone selects a pension fund for future savings they
do not yet have any actual money at stake, and will not
discover the full outcome of their decision for 30 years.
Furthermore, psychologists argue that it is fair to assume
that participants presented with a hypothetical scenario will
be honest about what they would choose (Tversky &
Kahneman, 1992). Consistent with this argument, Stewart et
al. (2003) found the same context effects in tests both with
and without compatible financial incentives.
From an applied perspective, our findings show that by
manipulating prior experience you can influence choice.
This has implications for the design of risk attitude tests.
Indeed it is questionable whether it is helpful for regulation
to enforce the measurement of such a labile attribute. Prewarning people of potential bias did not attenuate prospect
relativity effects. This has implications for the type of
advice that can usefully be given to consumers, who
increasingly have to select their investment funds from
ranges presented to them by online fund retailers.

References
American Association of Retired Persons (2013) Sources of
Income for Older Americans. www.aarp.org. Retrieved
14/4/2014. From http://www.aarp.org/content/dam/aarp/
research/public_policy_institute/econ_sec/2013/sourcesof-income-for-older-americans-2012-fs-AARP-ppi-econsec.pdf.
Birnbaum, M. H. (1992). Violations of monotonicity and
contextual effects in choice-based certainty equivalents.
Psychological Science, 3, 310-314.
Dohmen, T., Falk, A., Huffman, D., Sunde, U., Schupp, J. &
Wagner, G.G., (2011). Individual risk attitudes:
measurement,
determinants
and
behavioural
consequences. Journal of the European Economic
Association, 9, 522–550.
Epley, N. & Gilovich, T. (2005). When effortful thinking
influences judgmental anchoring: Differential effects of
forewarning and incentives on self-generated and
externally-provided anchors. Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, 18, 199–212
Financial Services Authority (2011). Assessing suitability:
Establishing the risk a customer is willing and able to
take and making a suitable investment selection.
www.fca.org.uk. Retrieved 6/12/2013. From http://
www.fca.org.uk/static/documents/final-guidance/fsafg11-05.pdf
Garner, W. R. (1954). Context effects and the validity of
loudness scales. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 48,
218-224.
Heath, C., & Tversky, A. (1991). Preference and belief:
Ambiguity and competence in choice under uncertainty.
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 4, 5-28.

Helson, H. (1947). Adaptation-level as frame of reference
for prediction of psychophysical data. The American
Journal of Psychology, 60, 1-29.
HM Treasury (2012). Speech by the Financial Secretary to
the Treasury, Mark Hoban MP; Barclays Citizenship
Day. www.gov.uk. Retrieved 6/12/2013. From
https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/speech-by-thefinancial-secretary-to-the-treasury-mark-hoban-mpbarclays-citizenship-day
Mussweiler, T.,Strack, F., & Pfeiffer, T. (2000).
Overcoming the inevitable anchoring effect: considering
the opposite compensates for selective accessibility.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 11421150
Parducci, A. (1965). Category judgment: A range frequency
model. Psychological Review, 72, 407–418.
Simmons, J.P., LeBoeuf, R. A. & Nelson, L. D., (2010). The
effect of accuracy motivation on anchoring and
adjustment: Do people adjust from provided anchors?
Journal of personality and Social Psychology, 99, 917932
Stewart, N., Chater, N., & Brown, G. D. A. (2006) Decision
by sampling. Cognitive Psychology, 53, 1-26
Stewart, N., Chater, N., Stott, H. P. & Reimers, S. (2003).
Prospect relativity: How choice options influence
decisions under risk. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 132, 23-46
Stewart, N., Reimers, S., Harris, A.J.L. (in press). On the
origin of utility, weighting, and discounting functions:
How they get their shapes and how to change their
shapes. Management Science.
Stewart, N. and Simpson, K. (2008). A decision-bysampling account of decision under risk. In Chater, N. and
Oaksford, M. (Eds) The probabilistic mind: Prospects for
Bayesian cognitive science, (261–276). UK, Oxford
University Press.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in prospect
theory: Cumulative representation of uncertainty. Journal
of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 297–323
Ungemach, C., Stewart, N., & Reimers, S. (2011). How
incidental values from our environment affect decisions
about money, risk, and delay. Psychological Science, 22,
253-260.
Vlaev, I., Chater, N. & Stewart, N. (2007). Relativistic
financial decisions: context effects on retirement saving
and investment risk preferences, Judgement and Decision
Making, 2, 292-311.
von Neumann, J. & Morgenstern, O. (1944). Theory of
Games and Economic Behaviour, Princeton University
Press
Wood, A. M., Brown, G. D. A., & Maltby, J. (2012). Social
norm influences on evaluations of the risks associated
with alcohol consumption: Applying the rank based
Decision by Sampling model to health judgments. Alcohol
and Alcoholism, 47, 57-62.

1484

