UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Reciprocal and Multiplicative Relational Reasoning with Rational Numbers

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8mw1q07z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
DeWolf, Melissa
Holyoak, Keith

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Reciprocal and Multiplicative Relational Reasoning with Rational Numbers
Melissa DeWolf (mdewolf@ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angles
Los Angeles, CA, USA

Keith J. Holyoak (holyoak@lifesci.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angles
Los Angeles, CA, USA

Abstract
Developmental research has focused on the challenges that
fractions pose to students in comparison to whole numbers.
Usually the issues are blamed on children’s failure to properly
understand the magnitude of the fractional number because of
its bipartite notation. However, recent research has shown
that college-educated adults can capitalize on the structure of
the fraction notation, performing more successfully with
fractions than decimals in relational tasks, notably analogical
reasoning. The present study examined whether this fraction
advantage also holds in a more standard mathematical task,
judging the veracity of multiplication problems. College
students were asked to judge whether or not a multiplication
problem involving either a fraction or decimal was correct.
Some problems served as reciprocal primes for the problem
that immediately followed it. Participants solved the fraction
problems with higher accuracy than the decimals problems,
and also showed significant relational priming with fractions.
These findings indicate that adults can more easily identify
relations between factors when rational numbers are
expressed as fractions rather than decimals.
Keywords: Relational reasoning; number concepts; fractions;
decimals; priming; mathematics education

Introduction
Mathematical and Relational Reasoning
The core of a deep conceptual understanding of
mathematics is the realization that mathematics is a system
of relations between quantities (Richland, Stigler &
Holyoak, 2012). For example, understanding addition
requires grasping the commutative property, a + b = b + a.
This property essentially expresses an interchangeable
relation between the two addends and their sum. Not only is
this understanding important for the concept of addition, but
more broadly it provides an important stepping stone for
more complex relations, such as the commutative property
in multiplication and various algebraic expressions.
Although it might seem obvious that developing a strong
conceptual understanding of any topic within mathematics is
important, the American education system often focuses on
memorization of rote procedures (Stigler & Hiebert, 1999;
Rittle-Johnson & Star, 2007). This emphasis on procedures
rather than conceptual understanding may have detrimental
consequences for many areas within mathematics.

Fractions as Relations
One area of particular difficulty for students involves the
procedural and conceptual understanding of rational
numbers, and more specifically fractions. Fractions are
closely linked to relational reasoning in that fractions are
themselves relational expressions. Much of the research
directed at how children and adults understand fractions has
focused on how people mentally represent magnitudes of
fractions, and associated misconceptions about how their
parts (numerators and denominators) affect their sizes (see
Siegler, Fazio, Bailey & Zhou, 2013, for a review). For
example, Staflyidou and Vosniadou (2004) found that
middle-school students typically have a misunderstanding
that the value of a fraction increases when the numerator
and denominator increase; or conversely, that the value of
the fraction increases as the numerator and denominator
decrease.
Even
among
highly-educated
college
undergraduates, there is evidence that people do not
represent fraction magnitudes with the same automaticity as
the magnitudes of either whole numbers or decimals
(DeWolf, Grounds, Bassok & Holyoak, 2013).
The
multiple difficulties associated with fractions raise the
question, what are fractions good for?
A potential answer to this question may be found in the
very aspect of fractions with which students seem to
struggle the most: their bipartite (a/b) format. This format
allows fractions to represent relational expressions.
Decimals, by contrast, typically represent a one-dimensional
magnitude. DeWolf, Bassok and Holyoak (2013, under
review) found that the relational format of fractions is
actually especially helpful for reasoning about relations
between numbers and the sets or quantities that they are
meant to represent. Adults were better able to identify
particular relationships (part-to-part ratio or part-to-whole
ratio) between rational numbers and a set of visuallydisplayed items when the rational number was shown as a
fraction rather than as a decimal. The fraction format allows
for direct mapping between numbers within the fraction
(numerator and denominator) and the sets or quantities they
are meant to represent.
It thus seems that fractions are useful for understanding
relations between values and quantities. They may also be
useful in understanding relations between numbers
themselves, especially when used in complex expressions.

2139

For example, specific multiplicative and division
relationships exist between whole numbers. Children learn
about these relationships before they learn about fractions,
when they are memorizing their multiplication and division
tables. For example, children learn early on that any even
number is divisible by 2; and conversely, that multiplying
any number by 2 results in an even number.
Fractions often utilize and highlight these relationships.
For example, we know that 6/8 can be reduced because both
the numerator and denominator are divisible by 2, and
therefore we can express the same relationship with an
equivalent fraction (3/4). Conversely, we know that 6/7 is
not reducible because the numerator and denominator do not
share any common factors.
Because fractions inherently express a division
relationship, using them when computing a multiplication or
division problem involves understanding not only the
relations within the multiplication and division problem
itself, but also how these relate to the relations within the
fraction. Over the course of learning, students and teachers
often seem to have trouble with multiplication and division
with fractions. Students may get confused because of the
differing procedures between fraction multiplication and
fraction addition—in the latter case one needs to find a
common denominator, but in the former case this is not
necessary (Siegler et al., 2011, 2013). Even communitycollege students seem to have difficulty determining
whether to obtain common denominators or multiply each
number individually (Stigler et al., 2010). Similarly, a wellknown procedure for fraction division is the “invert and
multiply” technique, in which one keeps the first factor,
changes the division sign to a multiplication sign, and
inverts the second factor. Even prospective teachers show
little understanding of this strategy and have difficulty
explaining why this technique works (Tirosh, 2000).
At the essence of all of these errors is a lack of true
conceptual understanding of multiplication. Such
understanding goes beyond simply conceptualizing
multiplication as repeated addition (which does not fit well
with the differences in procedures across arithmetic and
multiplication with fractions). Thompson and Saldanha
(2003) proposed that understanding multiplication
conceptually requires grasping multiple reciprocal
relationships between the two factors, n and m, and their
product nm (e.g., nm is n times as large as m; or conversely,
n is 1/m times as large as nm). Thus, multiplication with
fractions involves a relationally rich context.
Multiplication with decimals, the magnitude equivalents
of fractions, is usually taught as a more natural extension of
multiplication with whole numbers. The procedures for
decimal multiplication are essentially identical to wholenumber multiplication, with the extra aspect that place value
in the final product is based on the number of decimal digits
in the two factors (Hiebert & Wearne, 1985). Over the
course of learning, students at times struggle with assessing
this place value, but in general seem to do better in adapting
the procedures for decimal multiplication as compared to
fraction multiplication (Behr & Post, 1992).

The main goal of the present study was to assess whether
college-educated adults demonstrate conceptually rich
understanding of multiplication with rational numbers.
Given its closer linkage to multiplication with whole
numbers, it would be expected that multiplication with
decimals should be easier (or at least no more difficult) than
multiplication with fractions. However, if highly-educated
adults show a deeper conceptual understanding of the
important relations between the division and multiplication
relationships involved in fraction multiplication, then
fraction multiplication might actually have an advantage
over decimal multiplication.

Relational Priming
To provide a sensitive measure of possible differences in
performance between fraction and decimal multiplication
for highly-educated adults, we adapted a relational priming
paradigm previously employed with verbal relations
(Spellman, Holyoak & Morrison, 2001) to create an implicit
measure of whether adults use the relationships within
multiplication equations to their advantage. In a productverification task, we primed certain multiplication equations
by first showing their reciprocal equation. For example, the
equation 8 X 12/8 = 12 was preceded by the equation 12 X
8/12 = 8. The two fractions used are reciprocals, and the
equations themselves are reciprocally related. If participants
were able to isolate the important relationships in the first
equation, then relations might be primed for use in
determining whether the second equation is correct. For
comparison, we also used decimals in place of the fractions
in the multiplication problems. We thus tested whether
fraction notation better highlights reciprocal relationships
compared to a different type of notation, decimal numbers.
In Experiment 1, we tested the difference in priming when
problems with presented with fractions compared to
decimals. In Experiment 2, we examined whether this
difference in priming would also hold when the equivalent
fractions do not have identical whole number parts to those
numbers in the rest of the expression (e.g., 8 X 3/2 = 12,
rather than 8 X 12/8 = 12).

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Participants were 60 undergraduates from the
University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) (mean age =
20; 47 females) who received course credit. Thirty
participants were randomly assigned to two betweensubjects conditions.
Design and Materials The study was a 2 (number type:
fractions vs. decimals) X 2 (trial type: first trial vs. primed
trial) X 2 (problem type: true vs. false) design, with number
type as a between-subjects factor and trial type and problem
type as within-subjects factors.

2140

The stimuli were all multiplication problems with the
form A X B/D = C, where B/D was either shown as a
fraction or as its equivalent decimal rounded to two decimal
places (e.g., 12 X 1/6 = 2 or 12 X .17 = 2). There were a
total of 240 problems, half of which were correct.
Half of the trials consisted of prime pairs (a prime
followed by its primed reciprocal). Correct primed pairs
were of the form A X B/A = B and B X A/B = A, where B/A
and A/B share a reciprocal relationship. For such pairs, if
the participant correctly identifies the first trial in the pair as
being true, and implicitly or explicitly recognizes the
reciprocal relationship between the two pairs, then the
second problem can be solved without needing to do any
calculation to verify the product. Incorrect primed pairs
followed the same superficial relationship, but the product
was incorrect for both trials (e.g., A X B/A = C and C X A/B
= A). The same reciprocal relationship holds between B/A
and A/B, but the internal multiplicative relationship within
each problem does not hold. The order of appearance of the
trials within each primed pair was random, so that some
participants were primed with the A/B version of the
equation and some were primed with the B/A version.
The unprimed trials included a variety of foils and fillers.
The true fillers followed the same form as the true prime
trials, but some used other equivalent fractions as the second
multiplier for variety (e.g., 8 X 3/2 = 12). In addition, false
trials included perceptual foils related to the true trials (e.g.,
A X A/B = B instead of A X B/A = B). As with the prime
trials, half of the unprimed trials were correct. Problem
order was varied so that participants saw true trials followed
by true trials, false trials followed by false trials, and true
trials followed by false trials and vice versa. Accordingly,
any priming effect could not be attributed to a general bias
to hit the same key twice in succession, but rather could be
attributed to the relational similarity between the primed
trial and its preceding trial.
Procedure Stimuli were displayed with Macintosh
computers using Superlab 4.5, and response times and
accuracy were recorded. Participants were instructed that
they would need to decide whether a series of multiplication
problems were correct or incorrect. If the problem was

correct, they were instructed to hit the a key; if it was
incorrect they were to hit the l key. Participants were told
that the answers were shown rounded to the nearest whole
number. As we were particularly interested in potentially
subtle response time differences, participants were
instructed to respond as quickly as possible while
maintaining high accuracy. There was no time limit for
responding. They were first given four practice trials that
used only whole numbers. After the practice trials, they
were given a chance to ask remaining questions before
starting the test trials.

Results
Accuracy Across all problem types, participants were more
accurate for fraction problems than decimal problems (90%
vs. 78%; t(58) = 5.30, p < .001). Accuracy for each
participant was averaged for each trial of each of the true
and false primed pairs. Mean accuracy values for prime
pairs (i.e., the prime problem on trial 1 and the primed
problem on trial 2) are shown in Figure 1. A 2 (number
type) X 2 (trial type) X 2 (problem type) mixed factors
ANOVA yielded a strong effect of number type favoring
fractions over decimals (94% vs. 78%; F(1, 58) = 41.19, p <
.001). There was no effect of trial type (F(1, 58) = .117, p =
.733), indicating there was no general priming effect on
accuracy. Also, there was no significant interaction between
number type and trial type (F(1, 58) = .094, p = .761), and
thus no differential priming effect for fractions over
decimals in accuracy; nor was there a reliable 3-way
interaction (F(1, 58) = .093, p = .762).
Response Times Across all problem types, response times
for fraction problems were faster than response times for
decimal problems (2.76 s vs. 4.03 s; t(58) = 3.93, p = .001).
Response times for each participant were averaged over
each trial for each of the true and false primed pairs.
Response times for incorrect answers were excluded from
the analyses. Mean response times are shown in Figure 2. A
2 (number type) X 2 (trial type) X 2 (problem type) mixed
factors ANOVA yielded a significant 3-way interaction
(F(1, 58) = 8.27, p = .006). There was also a significant 2way interaction for the true primed pairs (F(1, 58) = 10.72,

Figure 1. Percent correct for pairs of prime trials for true
and false expressions, separated by number type
(fraction or decimal) for Experiment 1.

Figure 2. Response times for pairs of prime trials for
true and false expressions, separated by number type
(fraction or decimal) for Experiment 1.

2141

p = .002), indicating a differential priming effect for
fractions compared to decimals. Planned comparisons
revealed that for fraction problems, the second (primed) trial
was significantly faster than the first (prime) trial (2.21 s vs.
2.58 s; t(1, 29) = 3.08, p = .004). By contrast, the decimal
problems showed no significant difference for the primed
trial relative to the priming trial (3.84 s vs. 3.58 s t(29) =
1.72, p = .10). Thus, response times show a significant
speed-up consistent with a priming effect for fractions, but
revealed no reliable priming effect for decimals.
For the false prime trials, there was no effect of trial type
(F(1, 58) = 3.158, p = .081) or number type (F(1, 58) = .08,
p = .778), nor a significant 2-way interaction (F(1, 58) =
.537; p = .467). Thus, the priming effect on response times
for fractions was only observed when the problems were
correct.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants Participants were 87 UCLA undergraduates
(mean age = 20; 70 females) who received course credit.
Twenty-nine participants were randomly assigned to three
between-subjects conditions.
Design, Materials and Procedure The design and
materials were the same as used in Experiment 1, with the
exception that an additional between-subjects condition was
added. This additional fraction condition contained true
prime problems that were identical to the original fractions
problems except that the fraction did not match one-to-one
with the other whole numbers in the problem. We term this
condition “non-matching” fractions. The original fraction
condition from Experiment 1 will be referred to as the
“matching” fractions condition. For example, a problem in
the matching fractions condition would be 12 X 8/12 = 8;
for non-matching fractions, the corresponding problem
would be 12 X 4/6 = 8; for decimals, 12 X .67 = 8. The
fractions in the non-matching condition were created by
either multiplying the original fractions by 2/2 or 3/3 or by
reducing the fractions by the same factors. Because of these
additional constraints, the set of problems used in
Experiment 2 was slightly different from that used than
Experiment 1, in order to increase the number of fraction
problems in which equivalent fractions were possible to use.
The non-matching and matching fractions conditions were
identical for the foil problems and the false prime problems.
The foil problems and false prime problems were identical
to those used in Experiment 1. The procedure was also
identical.

Results
Accuracy Across all problem types, participants were more
accurate for the two types of fraction problems than for

decimal problems (F(2, 84) = 8.17, p = .001). Planned
comparisons showed that matching fraction accuracy was
greater than decimal accuracy (91% vs. 83%; t(56) = 3.20, p
= .002), and non-matching fraction accuracy was also
greater than decimal accuracy (90% vs. 83%; t(56) = 3.10, p
= .003). There was no difference between matching fraction
and non-matching fraction accuracy (91% vs. 90%; t(56) =
.42, p = .68).
As in Experiment 1, accuracy for each participant was
averaged for each trial of each of the true and false primed
pairs. Mean accuracy values for prime pairs are shown in
Figure 3. A 3 (number type) X 2 (trial type) X 2 (problem
type) mixed factors ANOVA yielded a significant 3-way
interaction (F(1, 84) = 3.685, p = .029). There was also a
significant 2-way interaction for true prime pairs (F(1, 84) =
3.90, p = .024), indicating a differential priming effect. The
non-matching fractions showed a significant increase in
accuracy from the first trial to the second primed trial (85%
vs. 90%; F(1, 84) = 9.17, p = .003). There was no difference
in accuracy between primes and primed trials for matching
fraction problems (94% vs. 94%; F(1, 84) = .264, p = .61)
or decimal problems (85% vs. 83%; F(1, 84) = .756, p =
.39).
For false prime trials, there was no interaction between
trial type and number type (F(1, 84) = .832, p = .44),
indicating no differential priming effect between fractions
and decimals. There was no main effect of trial type (F(1,
84) = .018, p= .89), implying no increase in accuracy from
the first trial to the primed trial across number types. There
was, however, a significant effect of number type (F(1, 84)
= 13.57, p < .001), which followed the same pattern as for
overall accuracy: there was no difference in accuracy for
matching fractions and non-matching fractions (93% vs.
94%; t(56) = .74, p = .47), but both matching fractions and
non-matching fractions had higher accuracy than decimals
(93% vs. 82%; t(56) = 3.601, p = .001; 94% vs. 82%; t(56)
= 4.335, p < .001).
Response Time Across all problem types, response times
for matching and non-matching fraction problems were
faster than those for decimal problems (F(2, 84) = 5.140, p
= .008). Decimals were slower than matching fractions
(4.42 s vs. 3.22 s; t(56) = 2.72, p = .009) and non-matching
fractions (4.42 s vs. 3.42 s; t(56) = 2.37, p = .021). There
was no difference in response time for matching and nonmatching fractions (3.22 s vs. 3.42 s; t(56) = .596, p = .55).
Figure 4 shows the response times for true prime and false
prime trials by number type. A 3 (number type) X 2 (trial
type) X 2 (problem type) mixed factors ANOVA did not
yield a significant 3-way interaction (F(1, 84) = .227, p =
.797). There was, however, a significant differential
priming effect, as indicated by a 2-way interaction between
trial type and number type (F(1, 84) = 3.76, p = .027).
Decimals did not show a significant decrease in response

2142

Figure 3. Percent correct for pairs of prime trials for true
and false expressions, separated by number type
(matching fraction, non-matching fraction, or decimal)
for Experiment 2.

Figure 4. Response times for pairs of prime trials for
true and false expressions, separated by number type
(matching fraction, non-matching fraction, or decimal)
for Experiment 2.

time from the first trial to the second primed trial (4.55 s vs.
4.55 s; F(1, 84) = 0, ns.). However, both matching fractions
(3.45 s vs. 3.01 s; F(1, 84) = 14.73, p < .001) and nonmatching fractions (3.91 s vs. 3.64 s; F(1, 84) = 5.58, p =
.02) showed a significant decrease in response time.
Relative to Experiment 1, fractions showed a slightly
stronger priming effect in Experiment 2. In Experiment 1,
the true primed trials for the decimal condition showed a
trend towards increased response time (negative priming);
however, no such trend was observed in Experiment 2. Most
importantly, priming of reciprocal relations was observed
for non-matching as well as matching fractions, but not for
decimals.

full double-digit multiplication, or break down the equation
into something a little simpler, such as 10 X .83 + 2 X .83.
Any of these strategies will most likely be less precise or
take somewhat longer than the optimal fraction strategy.
The finding that there was a significant speed-up in
solving primed fraction problems, but no parallel speed-up
in solving primed decimal problems, also provides evidence
that adults possess a deep understanding of the reciprocal
relationship between fractions. Whereas reciprocals are
superficially obvious with fractions (4/7 vs. 7/4), decimal
reciprocals are much less apparent (.57 vs. 1.75). This
superficial similarity may have contributed in part to the
priming in Experiment 1. But even in Experiment 2, where
the non-matching fractions were less transparently related to
the whole numbers in the problems, participants still
recognized and exploited the reciprocal relation between
problems. Beyond this, participants showed a deeper
understanding of what the reciprocal relation means when
represented with fractions. They apparently recognized that
corresponding expressions were mathematically equivalent
and therefore did not require additional verification. For
fraction problems, encountering the two reciprocal
equations in succession provided an easily recognizable hint
for participants, whereas the same juxtaposition of decimal
problems did not provide any help.
In summary, the present findings support the hypothesis
that fractions have an important relational component,
which college students have learned and use to increase
efficiency in evaluating multiplication problem. Thompson
and Saldanha (2003) have argued that a high-level fraction
schema, which includes understanding of reciprocal and
division relationships, requires integration with a strong
multiplication schema. That is, because a fraction is
inherently a relational expression, important operational
relations such as multiplication and division must be
understood. This relational knowledge allows recognition
of numbers that are known to share common factors, or that
can be simplified or reduced to make a computation easier.
Recent research on the acquisition of fractions has
generally aimed to understand why children and even adults

Discussion
Our results demonstrate an advantage for fractions over
decimals in verifying whether a multiplication problem is
correct, and in implicitly identifying reciprocal relations
between problems. College students were considerably
faster and more accurate when judging whether
multiplication problems with fractions were correct,
compared to otherwise identical problems with decimals.
This result highlights the importance of the relational
structure of a fraction. Because division and multiplication
are inverse operations, highly-educated people are able to
view a fraction as if it were simply a type of division
operation. This ability then enables them to detect whether
there are any reducible relationships between the first factor
and the divisor to simplify the expression. For example, in
the problem 12 X 5/6 = 10, one can either multiply 12 X 5
and then divide that product by 6; or conversely, divide 12
by 6 and multiply that quotient by 5. In the latter case, the
problem simplifies to 2 X 5. Thus, there are several
different ways to compute the equation. With a flexible and
deep understanding of the relations within the problem, very
simple strategies for verification can be used. In the case of
decimal multiplication, there is no corresponding way to
simplify the problem. In the corresponding example, 12 X
.83 = 10, one must either estimate the answer, perform the

2143

have trouble integrating their knowledge about fractions
with their knowledge about whole numbers. Focus on this
issue has perhaps contributed to a failure to appreciate that
fractions are inherently different from other types of
numbers (even other rational numbers, such as decimals).
Fractions have many different meanings (e.g., part/whole,
ratio, proportion, subset/set, or quotient). It may be useful
to evaluate whether children understand the relational
importance of fractions in other contexts beyond magnitudes
(Stafylidou & Vosniadou, 2004).
In addition, when fractions are conceptualized as
relational expressions, they become a stepping-stone to
algebra. There is already some evidence suggesting an
important link between algebra and fraction understanding.
A survey of Algebra I teachers found that poor fraction
knowledge is one of two major difficulties facing math
students as they begin learning algebra (NORC, 2008). In
addition, the National Mathematics Advisory Panel (2008)
found that learning of fractions is essential for mastering
algebra and more complex mathematics. Fractions have a
dual status that poses particular challenges for students: a
fraction is at once a relationship between two quantities and
also the magnitude corresponding to the division of the
numerator by the denominator. Similar dualities arise in
algebra, as when students must understand that an algebraic
expression such as 4a at once represents the operation 4 X a
and the product of that operation (Sfard & Linchevski,
1994; Empson, Levi, & Carpenter, 2011). Thus, fractions
provide the first opportunity for students to master this
concept of a dual expression.
In summary, the current study provides evidence that
highly-educated adults demonstrate a flexible understanding
of fractions as relational expressions. They are able to
capitalize on this understanding in order to solve
multiplication verification problems, exhibiting priming
based on the reciprocal relationship. Fractions, then, can be
usefully distinguished from other rational numbers, in that
they provide a unique opportunity for students to learn
important multiplicative and reciprocal relationships.

Acknowledgments
Preparation of this paper was supported by NSF Fellowship
DGE-1144087 and grant number R305C080015 from the
Institute of Education Sciences. We thank Austin Chau,
Queenie Cui, Eugene Goh, Andrew Molica, and Marvin Lopez
for help with collecting and analyzing data.

References
Behr, M., & Post, T. (1992). Teaching rational number and
decimal concepts. In T. Post (Ed.), Teaching mathematics
in grades K-8: Research-based methods (2nd ed.) (pp. 201248). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
DeWolf, M., Grounds, M. A., Bassok, M., & Holyoak, K. J.
(2014). Magnitude comparison with different types of
rational numbers. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 40, 71-82.
DeWolf, M., Bassok, M., & Holyoak, K. J. (2013). Analogical
reasoning with rational numbers: Semantic alignment

based on discrete versus continuous quantities. In M.
Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, & I. Wachsmuth (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 388-393). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
DeWolf, M., Bassok, M. & Holyoak, K. J. (under review).
Rational numbers as relational models: Analogical reasoning
with fractions and decimals.
Empson, S. B., Levi, L., & Carpenter, T. P. (2011). The
algebraic nature of fractions: Developing relational thinking
in elementary school. In J. Cai & E. Knuth (Eds.), Early
algebraization: A global dialogue from multiple perspectives
(pp. 409-428). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin
Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-17735-4
Hiebert, J. & Wearne, D. (1985). A model of student’s decimal
computation procedures. Cognition and Instruction, 2(3),
175-205.
National Mathematics Advisory Panel (2008). Foundations for
success: The final report of the National Mathematics
Advisory Panel. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Education.
National Opinion Research Center (NORC) (2007). Final
Report on the National Survey of Algebra Teachers for the
National Math Panel. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Education.
Richland, L. E., Stigler, J. W., & Holyoak, K. J. (2012).
Teaching the conceptual structure of mathematics.
Educational Psychologist , 47, 189-203.
Sfard, A., & Linchevski, L. (1994). The gains and the pitfalls
of reification: The case of algebra. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 26, 191-228.
Siegler, R. S., Fazio, L. K., Bailey, D. H., & Zhou, X. (2013).
Fractions: The new frontier for theories of numerical
development. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17(1), 13–19.
Siegler, R. S., Thompson, C.A., & Schneider, M. (2011). An
integrated theory of whole number and fractions
development. Cognitive Psychology, 62, 273- 296.
Spellman, B. A., Holyoak, K. J., & Morrison, R. G. (2001).
Analogical priming via semantic relations. Memory &
Cognition, 29, 383-393.
Stafylidou, S., & Vosniadou, S. (2004). The development of
student’s understanding of the numerical value of fractions.
Learning and Instruction, 14, 508–518.
Stigler, J. W., Givvin, K. B., & Thompson, B. (2010). What
community college developmental mathematics students
understand about mathematics. The MathAMATYC Educator,
10, 4-16.
Thompson, P. W., & Saldanha, L. A. (2003). Fractions and
multiplicative reasoning. In J. Kilpatrick, G. Martin, & D.
Schifter (Eds.), Research companion to the principles and
standards for school mathematics (pp. 95-114). Reston, VA:
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Tirosh, D. (2000). Enhancing prospective teachers’ knowledge
of children’s conceptions: The case of division of fractions.
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 31(1), 5-25.

2144

