UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Reintroducing the Cyborg Concept to Explain Internet-Related Safety Issues

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4c0769xj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Berolotti, Tommaso
Magnani, Lorenzo

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Reintroducing the Cyborg Concept to Explain Internet-Related Safety Issues
Tommaso Bertolotti (bertolotti@unipv.it)
Department of Humanities, Philosophy Section
University of Pavia, ITALY

Lorenzo Magnani (lmagnani@unipv.it)
Department of Humanities, Philosophy Section
University of Pavia, ITALY
Abstract

we will later return on its recent use, it is worth sparing a
few words on the Haraway’s contentions. As presented by
Haraway herself, the theory is deeply embedded in Feminist
arguments. Nevertheless some of her takes may be discussed
and accepted regardless of one’s sharing the ideology they
are meant to support. Haraway inserted in her definition of
cyborg a trait that was seminal (or concerning an elite) at the
time of her writing, but that is fully developed now: the strict
dependance of our cyborgean nature on social cognition.

This paper advocates a re-introduction of the notion of cyborg
in order to acquire a new perspective on studies concerning the
development of human cognition in highly technological environments. In particular, we will show how the notion of cyborg
properly engages cognitive issues that have a powerful resonance especially as far as social cognition is concerned, and
may consequently provide a new tool for tackling the emergent
safety issues concerning sociality mediated by the Internet, and
the moral panic occasionally surrounding it.
Keywords: Cyborg; Social Network Websites; CyberBullying; Internet Safety; Distributed Cognition.

A cyborg is a cybernetic organism, a hybrid of machine
and organism, a creature of social reality as well as a
creature of fiction. Social reality is lived social relations, our most important political construction, a worldchanging fiction (Haraway, 1991, p. 149).

A Quick and Critical History of the Cyborg
The concept of cyborg was not coined in science-fiction, but
by two scientists at the Rockland State Hospital, Orangeburg,
N. Y.:
For the exogenously extended organizational complex
functioning as an integrated homeostatic system unconsciously, we propose the term “Cyborg.” The Cyborg deliberately incorporates exogenous components extending the self-regulatory control function of the organism
in order to adapt it to new environments. (Clynes &
Kline, 1960, p. 27)

Haraway’s further insight about the relationship between
cyborgs and boundaries is perhaps the one that is most useful
to the actual discourse. Her pivotal claim is that high-tech
culture, epitomized by the actualization of the cyborg,
openly challenges the dualisms that have been determining
the practical and intellectual lives of human beings for
millennia: “some of those troubling dualisms are self/other,
mind/body, culture/nature, male/female, civilized/primitive,
reality/appearance, whole/part, agent/resource, maker/ made,
active/passive, right/wrong, truth/illusion, total/partial,
God/man” (p. 177). With this respect, it is extremely interesting to consider how the actual “being cyborgs” impacts
our perception of the World, the way we make sense of our
perceptual judgements and how we direct attention: it is
the issue explored by Verbeek as augmented intentionality
(2008), essential to phenomenology and cognitive science.
As noticed by (Waite & Bourke, 2013), this denotation of
the cyborg is most fitting to investigate actual phenomena
such as the use of social networking websites (SNS), considering to what extent they habitually collapse dualisms
and dichotomies such as the real/virtual one, which was
left relatively unharmed in previous modalities of virtual
pro-sociality (i.e. forums, chatrooms) which would foster
a juxtaposition of different social worlds rather than a
homogenous blend.

Cyborgs (obtained by endowing men with transparent implants) were advocated for allowing man’s adaptation to new
environments – think of outer space – that either could not be
adapted, or would require a major genetic (hence hereditary)
adaptation, spontaneous or induced. It is important to note
that since the beginning the notion of cyborg was connoted by
what, today, could be seen as an ecological-cognitive necessity (Magnani, 2009). The cyborg’s eco-cognitive nature derives from the stress on adaptation and on the cognitive functions: the artifactual additions have always been considered
as something that ought to be transparent to one’s cognition
and often capable of expanding one’s cognitive capabilities
(Pino, 2010).
We will now briefly review two insightful positions in
cyborg-related studies, which will be crucial for the rest of
our argument: Donna Haraway’s feminist theory (Haraway,
1991) and Andy Clark’s cognitive-oriented approach (Clark,
2003).

Andy Clark’s Brilliant Intuitions and the Explosion
of the Cyborg Concept

Haraway’s Uncomfortable Cyborg
The untarnished fertility of Haraway’s Cyborg Manifesto was
recently shown by a paper interestingly exploring the cyborglike features of Facebook (Waite & Bourke, 2013). While

One of the largest debate in cyborg-related studies has been
on where to set the line dividing what is a cyborg an what is

922

not (yet) a cyborg. Inclusive and exclusive positions would
argue about the use of extensions to one’s physical and cognitive capabilities (esthetic or prosthetic) and the possibility
(or lack thereof) to detach the extension. The most remarkable and successful attempt to go beyond this debate (and its
dangerous scholasticism) was carried out by philosopher and
cognitive scientist Andy Clark. His fundamental goal was
to perform a gestalt shift and discard the iconic view (highly
influenced by decades of sci-fi interweaving with philosophy
and cognitive science) of the cyborg as an esthetically intriguing mixture of man and machine, and rather focus on the fact
that:

two sections we will first define this kind of cyborg (whose
main characteristics are being diffused and being hybridized
with forms of artificial cognition), and then show some of its
possible applications in reframing a common safety concern
such as cyber-bullying.

Introducing the Diffused-AC Cyborg (DACC)
The Internet, and those devices that rely on it to the point of
being meaningless offline, empower us to become this peculiar kind of cyborg.
Thanks to the Internet, our “selves” today largely consist
of an externally stored quantity of data, information, images,
and texts that concern us as individuals (sometimes produced
by ourselves, sometimes not), and the result is a “cyborg” of
both flesh and electronic data that relate to us. The “implant
places” of this kind of cyborg consists in a series of devices
we use actively and passively (from smartphones and computers to GPS receivers and highway cameras), which contribute
to create a mutual interaction between our offline and online
presence, making the two less and less separable. To have
a better picture of this mechanisms, we could say that most
alterations (of any kind, physical, geographical, emotional)
of our offline variables provoke a modifications in our online
presence, which first of all cause in their turn a series of modifications of the original physical variables,3 and secondarily
(but not of least importance) they interfere with other online
presences causing modifications in the physical variables of
other people.
The “traditional” idea of cyborg focused on the connection
between a human being and high-tech artifacts. Andy Clark
suggested that the high in high-tech is not qualitatively crucial
in defining a cyborg. Our take is that two elements, relating
to contemporary available technologies, do indeed matter in
the individuation of at least a peculiar kind of cyborg concept whose explanatory power could much benefit the current
debate. These are:

what is special about human brains, and what best explains the distinctive features of human intelligence, is
precisely their ability to enter into deep and complex
relationships with nonbiological constructs, props, and
aids. This ability, however, does not depend on physical wire-and-implant mergers, so much as on our openness to information-processing mergers. Such mergers
may be consummated without the intrusion of silicon
and wire into flesh and blood, as anyone who has felt
himself thinking via the act of writing already knows
(Clark, 2003, p. 5).
Clark’s contention, explained by the oxymoronic expression depicting human beings as “natural-born cyborgs,” is coherent with his studies concerning the extended mind and the
distribution of cognition (Clark, 2008), and cannot be overlooked firstly because of the naturalization of the cyborg he
performed. From his view we can sensibly contend that, if we
look for a cyborg, a student massively relying on her iPhone
should be a satisfactory instance. From the perspective of
distributed cognition, we can admit that there is indeed no
qualitative shift from using pen and paper to spell out a complicate choice, to relying on one’s smartphone to evaluate the
best course of action.1
Nevertheless, our epistemologically critical view on
Clark’s theory is that albeit being coherent from a cognitive
perspective, his convincing expansion of the concept of cyborg eventually exploded it, defusing the explanatory power
concerning a cyborg that is not made of human plus any kind
of cognitive enhancement, but rather depending on a peculiar kind of highly-technological endowments.2 In the next

1. Technologies that diffuse and de-localize the activity of the
subject, yet without transporting her in a cognitively separate world;
2. Technologies that let the user rely on more or less complex
forms of artificial cognition.
This can be summed up by the notion of a Diffused and
Artificially-Cognizing Cyborg (hence DACC). Let us analyze
it in greater detail, starting with its diffused nature.
Since the early 2000’s the virtualization of the Internet usage, first understood as the creation of a decoupled universe,
witnessed an inverted trend. Popular websites and services
such as MSN, Myspace and later Facebook and Twitter dramatically impacted our cyborgean nature in a way that would

1 (Magnani, 2007) carried out a thorough reflection about the increasing hybridization of human beings, considering its philosophical and cognitive implications. One of the cores of the analysis,
resonating in this paper, concerned the lack of knowledge possessed
by users facing with ever more intelligent devices – a lack of awareness coupled with a similar lack of the necessary technical skills that
would humans to responsibly navigate the technological present.
2 Paradoxically, Clark himself anticipated certain scenarios that
materialized a decade later, such as the “Datagate” scandal concerning the NSA, or the ethically arguable conditions of Amazon workers, whose efficacy is measured by tracking devices they have to
wear and which monitor their movements. The paradox rests in the
fact that the concept of cyborg was not used to achieve a better understanding of these situations, while it could have been of great use,
as claimed by this paper.

3 Consider this example. You develop an interest in apiculture
(offline), and browse for some manuals on the internet (online). Being intercepted by some e-seller, your new interest modifies your
online profile, and makes the e-seller’s algorithms recommend you
a book on mead brewing. You would have never though of that but
you buy it and become a passionate mead brewer (offline).

923

not affect our virtualization but rather the organism-side of
the cyborg. Indeed, the text-and-image-based interfaces of
websites such as Facebook, Twitter, Amazon, Wikipedia (or
even the infamous Ask.fm) are scarcely impressing, and require far less ability than most video-games, no matter how
intuitive the latter can be.4 Yet, the former subtly play an incredible role in turning users into diffused cyborgs – not only
at the cognitive level, but also at the perceptual and emotional
one. As (Waite & Bourke, 2013) contend, referring to social
networking sites:

the “real world” one – but blends us in a real super-cyborg
(just similar to the sociobiological notion of super-organism)
not only as we epistemologically partake of an objectified
shared knowledge base more real than any collective unconscious (real inasmuch it is hard stored on data servers), but
also because by functions such as tagging and commenting
one’s possession over texts and images becomes in some
cases undistinguishable from the possession of other users.5
Such widening of the field of our analysis, and of the agent
it concerns, requires the introduction of the second element
defining the DACC cyborg, namely the reliance on forms of
Artificial Cognition. The Artificial Cognition capabilities displayed by the technologies we connect through (and with)
can be extremely modest,6 still they represent the possibility
to react smartly to modifications in one’s environment. Such
cognitive capabilities to “make sense” of a given environment
in order to pursue a certain scope may be perceived by users
as randomness: this is especially true if we consider all of the
cases in which an artificial system suggests something to the
user, for instance, Amazon’s recommendations or Facebook’s
People you might know.
The historical division between organic and inorganic –
to rely once again on dualisms – would correspond to the
division between constructor and constructed (in the lexicon of cognitive niche theory): decision making processes
(connected with cognition) could be only ascribed to biological organisms. As shown macroscopically by the actual
debate about the development of autonomous killer drones
(Krishnan, 2009), the computational revolution introduced
constructed constructors, artificially cognizing, non-biologic
systems able to make autonomous assessments and forecasts,
and initiate courses of actions (from simple safety recognition devices to elaborate financial applications capable of determining the fate of entire nations). The presence of such
artifactual cognizers becomes further complicate once, as cyborgs, we start becoming hybridized with them, originating
holistic beings that embed a biologic brain and several artificial forms of auxiliary cognition on which our primary cognition (often unawarely) relies. The awareness of being hybrid
not only with artifactual extensions, but also with artifactual
cognitive extensions interestingly relates with the cognitive
literature concerning an agent’s will: according to Benjamin
Libet, the results of his famous experiment suggested that initiating a voluntary act was an unconscious cerebral process
put in motion before the person consciously knew that she
wanted to act: an involuntary neural impulse would be the
process, not free will, as was widely held (Libet, Gleason,
Wright, & Pearl, 1983). From this perspective, an individuals feeling of conscious free will is just a superficial, after-

In one instance, Facebook is a website clearly identifiable as virtual online space, but simultaneously, it is
thoroughly embedded in, and informed by the material
lives of the individuals without whom it would not exist in its current, recognizable form.[. . . ] More than a
‘space’ or a ‘destination’, Facebook can be conceived of
as a virtual network of interacting ‘digital bodies’ (p. 4).
Waite and Bourke, referring to a research they conducted
in a Australian rural community, stressed the cyborgean nature of social networking itself: phones and computers are
the gateways to a world that is not self-standing (as a Second
Life, or World of Warcraft would be), but augments the material reality that people live in everyday. Anticipating some
conclusive remarks of this paper, it must be acknowledged
how the subtlety displayed by social networking websites,
and other kinds of pro-social technologies, in determining
our existence as cyborgs begs for a cognitive and philosophical analysis. If being cyborgs meant for instance carrying
around powerful implanted weaponry, then the effects would
be apparent to anyone: conversely, we are mostly unaware
of the effects of our diffused social cyborgization apart from
brief moments of wonder after some peculiar coincidences,
or – we will see it in the next section – when the outcomes
become violent. As already suggested by (Bertolotti & Magnani, 2013), evolutionarily oriented cognitive studies cannot
be spared from having their said about the matter inasmuch as
pro-social technology are effective by reproducing and simulating our social-cognitive affordances (for instance our inclination towards gossip), making the cyborgization of our
selves utterly transparent.
Another reason justifying the cognitive interest in the diffused cyborg is still spelled out by (Waite & Bourke, 2013),
in their contention that Facebook itself, as most SNS, can
be conceptualized as a massive, loosely bordered, cyborg –
blending human and cybernetic parts. In this sense, it may be
valuable to add that the dualism-collapsing might of the cyborg does not only concern the human/machine dichotomy,
but the self/other one as well. The diffused cyborg that prosocial technology is turning us into does not only absolve us
from the physical boundaries – still replicating and augmenting a kind of sociality that is based upon the functioning of

5 This uncertainty is legally reverberated by the Terms and Conditions users must subscribe to, usually yielding the ownership of
texts and datas to the SNS: albeit legally meaningful, this just enforces the notion of a super-cyborg (specifically a network-cyborg)
transcending the individual (yet cyborgized) selves into a greater entity.
6 It is why we prefer this expression to the more demanding Artificial Intelligence.

4 Cognitive correlations between culture and ease of use of deter-

minate web design were proposed by (Faiola & Matei, 2005): these
studies further corroborate contentions about the distribution of cognitive tasks between users and the Internet.

924

the-fact explanation of other internal processes and does not
reflect the actual mechanism that generates action. It is then
extremely thought provoking to read the hybridization of humans (whose will is already cognitively compound) with external artificial cognizers in the light of Daniel Dennett’s review of Libet’s experiment:

weather), or eCommerce: basically, just as SNS make human
beings into social DACCs, advanced eCommerce platforms
such as Amazon turn consumers into DACC consumers, because of the integration between the buyer’s desires, her possibilities and their processing operated by the website. The
same can be said of most contemporary and foreseen “augmented” experiences, as they will rely on a diffusion of the
self through the internet in order to achieve a maximized experience in her real life, but this can happen only if massively
supported by transparent artificial decision makers assisting
the user, ranging from contemporary artificial cognition to a
full blown artificial intelligence.

Once you distribute the work done by the homunculus (on this case, decision making, clock-watching, and
decision-simultaneity judging) in both space and time in
the brain, you have to distribute the moral agency around
as well. You are not out of the loop; you are the loop
(Dennett, 2003).
In agreement with Clark’s takes, once could contend that
the loop has not changed qualitatively, but just became wider
so to accommodate the new artificial cognitive wirings that
instead of being in the person’s nervous system, or in the
interplay between a person and some cognitive delegations
around her (epistemic mediators such as paper and pencil),
are diffusely allocated partially in her device and partially in
some servers around the globe.
Consider the SNS user: we showed how it can be convincingly framed as a diffused cyborg, but that was not the end
to it. In order to function, the super-cyborg relies on a series
of standalone algorithms handling searches (and their priorities), reports, suggestions, order of the news. Facebook, for
instance, actively impacts the “real lives” of its cyborg users
(who in turn are users because of the impact that Facebook
has in their real lives), but they are not necessarily aware
of how, in their being cyborgs, their lives are partially determined by the artificial cognitive processes implanted in
the network they holistically partake of, for instance deciding which updates are more “important” and showing them
first. One picture seen on Facebook can trigger an unthinkable chain reaction in a user’s life, but it was the system (hybridized with the user) that picked what picture would be
more relevant for the user to see first.
Such reflections can be easily extended to most contemporary technologies mediating pro-sociality by the Internet.
Whereas the diffusion of remote communication systems
(mail, telephone, text messages, emails. . . )7 turned human
beings into diffused cyborgs (it’s not impossible, in agreement with Clark’s idea, to imagine a Renaissance man as cyborg made up of body, paper, and ink as he would engage in
correspondence with his fellows over Europe), contemporary
technologies add the artificial cognition element, determining
users as Diffused and Artificially-Cognizing Cyborgs. This is
not only true as far as social cognition is concerned, but also
the reliance on geo-localization and guiding devices (assessing road conditions and making forecasts about traffic and
7 It can be argued that also the reception of emails and text messages depend on services establishing the priority of their recovery,
but they do not rank the relevance. The SPAM filters, conversely,
can be considered as a kind of pro-social mediator inasmuch as they
perform kinds of guessing and establish a course of action affecting
the users real-life.

Cyber-bullies as Cyborg-bullies
The aim of this last section is to show the utility of the reintroduction of the (DACC) cyborg notion in the current debate, by
applying it to the widespread issue in Internet-related safety
known as cyber-bullying. Cyber-bullying – that is bullying
carried out through means related to the Internet, that is via
Instant-Messages, Social Networks and so on – has received
ever-growing attention by the media, and by political and intellectual actors.8
The standard, and not fruitless, approach usually involves
a techno-ethical reflection, dealing with processes of eempowerment, digital literacy and pedagogical issues, together with a psychological and social enquiry connecting
the dimension of real-life bullying with its online counterpart (Rigby & Smith, 2011; Sontag, Clemans, Graber, & Lyndon, 2011; Kowalski, Limber, & Agatston, 2012). The latter
research shows interesting but relatively unpractical correlations between online and offline bullying, leaving vast percentages in which the two phenomena do not overlap that are
still to be efficaciously explained in order to find a long-term
solution to the threat. A viable idea would be, indeed, to
reframe cyber-bullying as cyborg-bullying, of course understanding the cyborg in its DACC conceptions described so far.
A number of reasons seem to favor this perspective shift:
1. The rupture of moral proximity brought about by computer
screens and anonymous avatars is often advocated as one
of the causes of the lack of empathy which results in particular verbal violence, threats and so on that would not be
carried out so openly in real life. Our claim is that this
presumed moral gap is a biased artifact of the analysis, informed by the honest (but untrue) answers of the subjects:
what is perceived as a distance between the virtual world
and real life is actually caused by the loss of references of
the biological organisms (with the evolutionary inherited
endowments concerning sub moralities and the enforcement of coalitions (Bingham, 1999; Magnani, 2011)), and
the acquisition of the new references (social, too) pertaining to the DACC cyborg. Empirical research carried out
to study “the transferability of basic interpersonal affect,
8 Also a EU report, deriving from a number of studies and a workshop reuniting experts from different disciplines, was released on the
matter (Rizza & Pereira, 2013).

925

or affinity/disaffinity, from nonverbal to verbal communication accompanying the alternative communication channels of [Face to Face] versus [Computer Mediated Communication]” (Walther, Loh, & Granka, 2005, p. 56) seem
to confirm that moral proximity is indeed not impaired by
the lack of physical presence:

Considering all this, it might be indeed interesting to consider instances of Internet-related violence such as cyberbullying (but the paradigm can easily accomodate other examples) as clashes between cyborgs. This is particularly interesting as far as the incidents – albeit they induce serious
real-life consequences – sometimes involve no real-life relationship between the victim and the aggressor who, in their
real-life existences, have no connection whatsoever.

Although concerns about the lack of cues in CMC
may persist with regard to determining participants
identity, or the reduction of message equivocality, as
functions of bandwidth and interface design, affinity
issues may be different and readily translatable from
one cue system to another. (p. 58).

Conclusion
Conferences, workshops and studies focusing on (real or perceived) emergencies relating to Internet safety, such as cyberbullying, have been ever increasing in the recent past, also
as the media coverage becomes more and more intensive.
Most analyses (and the solutions they inform) tend to concentrate on the aging distinction between an online and an
offline world. This dualism more or less explicitly serves the
purpose of reiterating pedagogical and moral axiologies tacitly connecting online and offline with safe and unsafe, fundamentally reverberating the dualism between good and evil.
The effort to make the Internet a safer place (Beauchere,
2013) can only be integrated with the awareness that we are
not users separate from it, but rather our cognitive endowments were prone to seamlessly connected with the possibilities offered by the new technologies, especially (so far) in as
much as social cognition is concerned.
Such a seamless connection between humans and technology has been studied since long as defining the dualismcollapsing notion of cyborg, but the issues at stake might
benefit from the explanatory power of a particular concept:
the Diffused and Artificially-Cognizing Cyborg (DACC). This
concept describes, and fosters the reflection on how contemporary human beings, thanks to a number of devices mediating their Internet use, experience the cyborgization not as a
virtualization but as an augmentation of their real-lives, actualized by the diffusion of their selves beneath the geographical and chronological constraints, but still connecting with
similarly diffused humans, and whose interactions are sensibly determined by a transparent layer of artificial cognitive
processing.
If Internet-related unpleasant issues can be interestingly reframed as clashes between cyborgs, the protean essence of the
cognitive links bonding humans and the Internet are so unapparent that the lack of awareness concerning one’s cyborg
nature can be seen as the cause of many of the direst consequences of Internet use. Therefore, future efforts to establish
digital literacy should first of all aim at teaching users to be
aware of, and to explore, their very being cyborg.

2. Considering what we exposed so far, we could indeed see
how this configuration equals setting a ring, a fight arena
between human beings that became DACCs, as they obtained an ubiquitous access to their social cognition (and
its enhancement by bits of artificial cognition) and, in return, paid the price of forsaking (at least as long as they
act-as-DACCs) the real lives subdivision that separate them
but also protect them, and the groups they belong to, from
each other (Bertolotti & Magnani, 2013; Debatin, Lovejoy,
Horn, & Hughes, 2009).
3. Many instances of cyber-bullying and cyber-violence
seem affected by an element of randomness and selfrighteousness, where on the one hand it becomes hard to
tell the aggressor from the victim, and on the other hand the
perpetrated violence embeds instances of extreme moral
reactions following a perception of relevance that is different from that of the “real life.” The perceived randomness
depends on the artificial cognitive processes embedded in
the DACC, presenting certain information instead of others
to users. Furthermore, as the boundaries between DACC
and groups of DACCs do not reflect those between reallife humans (because of their diffused nature, as seen in
the previous section), a user might find that a remote event
justifies her moral and violent intervention against another
DACC, who is not “remote” in the cyberspace they connect within. Such a view does not justify, but explains why
teenagers engage in violent mobbing aggressions against
“peers” they never met on websites such as Ask.fm, or why
so many Twitter users thought they had to pursue the public shaming and threatening of Alicia Ann Lynch, a 22year-old from Michigan, who tweeted and Instagrammed
a photo of herself at work dressed as a Boston Marathon
bombing victim for Halloween 2013.
4. The different perception of relevance is also due to the fact
that whereas real-life human beings cope with a diversity of
truth regimes, where truth is generally perceived as less reliable as it gets further from its source, DACCs can rely on
a copy-and-paste truth regime, which does not let distance
(both chronological and physical) defuse the truth-value,
and hence the pragmatic relevance, of the information they
stumble upon (Bertolotti, 2011).

References
Beauchere, J. (2013). Online ‘safety’ as a state of being. Microsoft on the Issues. (Entry date: November, 11 accessible
at http://bit.ly/1eiOJCE)
Bertolotti, T. (2011). Facebook has it: the irresistible violence of social cognition in the age of social networking.
International Journal of Technoethics, 2(4), 71–83.

926

Bertolotti, T., & Magnani, L. (2013). A philosophical
and evolutionary approach to cyber-bullying: Social networks and the disruption of sub-moralities. Ethics and
Information Technology, 15(4), 285–299. Available from
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10676-013-9324-3
Bingham, P. M. (1999). Human uniqueness: a general theory.
The Quarterly Review of Biology, 74(2), 133–169.
Clark, A. (2003). Natural-Born Cyborgs. Minds, Technologies, and the Future of Human Intelligence. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (2008). Supersizing the mind. embodiment, action, and cognitive extension. Oxford/New York: Oxford
University Press.
Clynes, M., & Kline, N. (1960, September). Cyborgs and
space. Astronautics, 26–27; 74–76.
Debatin, B., Lovejoy, J. P., Horn, A. K., & Hughes, B. N.
(2009). Facebook and online privacy: Attitudes, behaviors, and unintended consequences. Journal of ComputerMediated Communication, 15(1), 83–108.
Dennett, D. (2003). Freedom Evolves. New York: Viking.
Faiola, A., & Matei, S. A. (2005). Cultural cognitive style and
web design: Beyond a behavioral inquiry into computermediated communication. Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication, 11(1), 375–394.
Haraway, D. (1991). A cyborg manifesto: Science, technology, and socialist-feminism in the late twentieth century.
In D. Haraway (Ed.), Simians, cyborgs and women: The
reinvention of nature (pp. 149–182). New York, NY: Routledge.
Kowalski, R. M., Limber, S. P., & Agatston, P. W. (2012). Cyberbullying: Bullying in the Digital Age (2nd ed.). Malden,
MA.
Krishnan, A. (2009). Killer robots: Legality and ethicality of
autonomous weapons. Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
Libet, B., Gleason, C. A., Wright, E. W., & Pearl, D. K.
(1983). Time of conscious intention to act in relation to
onset of cerebral activity (readiness-potential): the unconscious initiation of a freely voluntary act. Brain, 106, 623–
642.
Magnani, L. (2007). Morality in a Technological World.
Knowledge as Duty. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Magnani, L. (2009). Abductive Cognition: The Epistemological and Eco-Cognitive Dimensions of Hypothetical Reasoning. Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer.
Magnani, L. (2011). Understanding Violence. Morality, Religion, and Violence Intertwined: a Philosophical Stance.
Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer.
Pino, B. (2010). Re-assessing ecology of tool transparency
in epistemic practices. Mind & Society, 9(1), 85–110.
Rigby, K., & Smith, P. K. (2011). Is school bullying really on
the rise? Social Psychology of Education, 14(4), 441–455.
Rizza, C., & Pereira, A. G. (Eds.). (2013). Social networks
and Cyber-bullying among teenagers: EU Scientific and
Policy report. Publications Office of the European Union.

Sontag, L. M., Clemans, K. H., Graber, J. A., & Lyndon,
S. T. (2011). Traditional and cyber aggressors and victims:
A comparison of psychosocial characteristics. Journal of
Youth and Adolescence, 40(4), 392–404.
Verbeek, P.-P. (2008). Cyborg intentionality: Rethinking
the phenomenology of human–technology relations. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 7(3), 387–395.
Waite, C., & Bourke, L. (2013). Using the cyborg to re-think
young people’s uses of facebook. Journal of Sociology.
(Published Online, DOI: 10.1177/1440783313505007)
Walther, J. B., Loh, T., & Granka, L. (2005). Let me count
the ways: The interchange of verbal and nonverbal cues
in computer-mediated and face-to-face affinity. Journal of
Language and Social Psychology, 24(1), 36–65.

927

