UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Relating a Task-Based, Behavioral Measure of Achievement Goals to Self-Reported Goals
and Performance in the Classroom

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/968870zq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Richey, J. Elizabeth
Bernacki, Matthew L.
Belenky, Daniel M.
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Relating a Task-Based, Behavioral Measure of Achievement Goals to
Self-Reported Goals and Performance in the Classroom
J. Elizabeth Richey (jes1235@pitt.edu)1
Matthew L. Bernacki (matt.bernacki@unlv.edu)2
Daniel M. Belenky (dbelenky@andrew.cmu.edu)3
Timothy J. Nokes-Malach (nokes@pitt.edu)1
1

Department of Psychology, Learning Research and Development Center, 3939 O’Hara St.
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA
2

Department of Educational Psychology & Higher Education, CEB 311
Las Vegas, NV 89154 USA

3

Human-Computer Interaction Institute, 2602H Newell Simon Hall, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

approach, and performance avoidance (Elliot &
McGregor, 2001).
Performance-approach goals are associated with a
mixture of positive behaviors such as effort and
persistence, and negative feelings and behaviors such as
shallow processing and test anxiety (Elliot, McGregor, &
Gable, 1999; Elliot & McGregor, 2001). They positively
predict classroom achievement measured by tests and
grades in a subset of studies, while other studies have
shown no relationship (Hulleman et al., 2010;
Linnenbrink-Garcia, Tyson, & Patall, 2008). In contrast,
performance-avoidance goals are consistently associated
with negative feelings such as test anxiety; negative
behaviors such as disorganization and shallow processing;
and negative achievement outcomes (Elliot & McGregor,
2001; Elliot, McGregor, & Gable, 1999;).
Mastery-approach goals have consistently been
associated with greater interest, more enjoyment of the
learning process, and productive learning behaviors such
as deeper processing and persistence (Elliot, McGregor,
& Gable, 1999). As with performance-approach goals,
there is mixed evidence for their relationship to classroom
achievement (i.e., tests and grades). Recent reviews of the
literature have found positive associations with
achievement for only a subset of the studies reviewed,
while other studies have shown no relationship (Hulleman
et al., 2010; Linnenbrink-Garcia, Tyson, & Patall, 2008).
Like performance-approach goals, mastery-avoidance
goals have been associated with positive behaviors
including engagement and help-seeking as well as
negative feelings and behaviors such as test anxiety,
disorganization, and surface processing (Elliot &
McGregor, 2001).
Most of the achievement goal data collected in
classroom settings has relied on self-report questionnaires
(Linnenbrink-Garcia, Tyson, & Patall, 2008). Although
many achievement goal scales are reliable (Hulleman et
al., 2010), self-report measures are subject to many

Abstract
Achievement goals are a powerful construct for understanding
students’ classroom experiences and performance, yet most
work examining achievement goals relies on self-report
measures gathered through questionnaires. The current work
aims to assess achievement goals using a task choice
embedded within a typical classroom activity. Results show
the behavioral measure of achievement goals predicts
performance on the task, while self-reported achievement
goals do not. Self-reported achievement goals predict
quarterly grades, while the behavioral measure of
achievement goals does not. This work supports the viability
of a behavioral measure and suggests the achievement goals
that students adopt at a task level may be different from their
general class achievement goals. Using complementary
achievement goal measures may improve understanding of
how achievement goals relate to student behaviors and
academic achievement.
Keywords: achievement goals; motivation; measurement;
performance; learning

Introduction
In recent years, educational researchers have used
achievement goals to predict behaviors and learning
outcomes in academic environments (for reviews, see
Hulleman, Schrager, Boddman, & Harackiewicz, 2010,
and Linnenbrink-Garcia, Tyson, & Patall, 2008).
Achievement goals are a construct defined by whether
learners assess their competence using normative
standards, i.e., judging achievement relative to others, or
using intrapersonal standards, i.e., judging achievement
relative to one’s self (Elliot & McGregor, 2001). These
two types of goals have been labeled performance
(normative) and mastery (intrapersonal) goals.
Achievement goals are also defined by whether the
learner strives to attain positive outcomes (approach
goals) or evade negative outcomes (avoidance goals).
Crossing these two dimensions produces four distinct
goals: mastery approach, mastery avoidance, performance

1287

limitations including issues of context effects, goal
specificity (e.g., domain- vs. task-level), timing of the
goal assessment, external validity, and difficulties in
accurately assessing one’s own cognitions. Although
questionnaires have provided a great deal of insight into
the predictive value of achievement goals for performance
and learning outcomes (e.g., tests, grades, SATs), the
creation of a behavioral measure (e.g., task choice,
strategy selection) could improve understanding of how
achievement goals relate to student behaviors, classroom
goal adoption, and academic achievement (Fulmer &
Frijters, 2009). A behavioral measure could also help to
clarify the inconsistent performance outcomes associated
with mastery-approach and performance-approach goals
(e.g., Linnenbrink-Garcia, Tyson, & Patall, 2008).
The current work assesses a behavioral measure that
infers achievement goals through a task choice embedded
within a typical classroom activity. After reviewing the
literature supporting the need for such a measure, we
present the relationships between our behavioral data and
students’ performance on an embedded task, their broader
content knowledge, and their self-reported achievement
goals. Finally, we explore how this measure could deepen
our understanding of the performance and learning
outcomes associated with different achievement goals.

play roles in determining which achievement goals are
activated at a given moment (Pintrich, 2003), then
achievement goal measures that are distinctly separate
from typical instructional tasks (e.g., completing a
questionnaire before or after class) might reflect different
goals compared to measures administered within the
context of typical classroom activities. There may also be
a misalignment in goal specificity, such that the goals
students have for individual tasks might differ from the
goals they have for the course or domain. Students may
not understand the meaning of items, be sensitive to
differences among items, or carefully consider the options
when responding, any of which could decrease the
external validity of the measure. Furthermore, students’
goals change throughout the course of the semester (Fryer
& Elliot, 2007), and it is unclear what time scales are
appropriate when relating achievement goal measures to
measures of other variables such as feelings, behaviors
and outcomes. Finally, self-report measures assume that
goals are consciously accessible, which contradicts
evidence that many people have poor metacognitive
awareness (Metcalfe, Eich, & Castel, 2010).

Behavioral goal measures
Several lines of research have recently used behavioral
data captured in computer learning environments to infer
achievement goals. In a laboratory setting, Zhou and
Winne (2012) gave participants a multimedia-enhanced
article to study, instructing them that they could use tags
to take notes on the article or follow hyperlinks to
additional information to enhance their learning. The
information built into the tag system and the hyperlinks
was aligned to the four achievement goal constructs (e.g.,
a mastery-approach tag stated, “I want to learn more
about this,” while a mastery-approach hyperlink was
labeled, “Find more information about this”). The authors
tracked how frequently participants used tags and
hyperlinks aligned with each of the four constructs to
create behavioral measures of participants’ goals.
Achievement goals inferred through behavioral traces
were not associated with self-reported achievement goals.
The authors then used individual achievement goals to
predict performance on a test about the content of the
article. In each regression model, a behavioral goal was
entered first and its corresponding self-reported goal was
entered second (e.g., behavioral mastery-approach goal at
step one and self-reported mastery-approach goal at step
two). Behavioral measures of mastery approach,
performance approach, and performance avoidance were
all positive predictors of performance, and no selfreported goal explained any additional variance in its
respective model.
This work provides an important first step toward
assessing behavioral indicators of achievement goals, and
it suggests that behaviorally inferred achievement goals
might be better predictors of task performance than selfreported goals. However, as each goal was analyzed in

Theoretical framework
There have been two distinct approaches to achievement
goal research (Barron & Harackiewicz, 2001). The first
takes a dispositional approach by assessing goals using
self-report measures, typically at the domain level in
classroom settings, and assumes that achievement goals
are relatively stable over time (e.g., Elliot & McGregor,
2001). The second is a more dynamic perspective that
views goals as subject to quick changes and manipulation
through experiments and classroom interventions (e.g.,
Elliott & Dweck, 1988). In the present study, we
investigate the potential value of both perspectives in
predicting outcomes, as well as the possibility that they
measure different things. Although we do not question the
well-established internal reliability of self-reported
achievement goals or their myriad relationships to the
aforementioned achievement outcomes, there may be a
gap between questionnaire responses and the goaldirected behaviors students demonstrate when engaging in
classroom activities.

Self-reported goal measures
Despite the significant contributions of data from selfreport questionnaires to our understanding of student
motivation, there are several disadvantages of such an
approach that suggest a need for complementary measures
(Filmer & Frijters, 2009). First, there may be a
misalignment between the context targeted by a
questionnaire and achievement goals activated during the
tasks in which students engage during a course. If
individual, task, domain, and environmental contexts all

1288

isolation from the other goals and all four behavioral
goals were significantly, positively correlated to task
performance, it is unclear that participants’ use of
different tags or hyperlinks represented distinct goals.
Given the fairly consistent past findings relating to
performance-avoidance goals, it is particularly surprising
that performance-avoidance goals were associated with
positive performance outcomes. Since the behavioral
traces from which these goals were inferred reflected
participants’ highlighting of text and seeking additional
information through hyperlinks, it may be that such
behavioral traces reflected general study strategies or
engagement with the text. Additionally, participants may
have had little context to guide their responses to the selfreport questionnaire in a laboratory setting.
Attempting to replicate Zhou and Winne’s (2012)
findings using data from an intelligent tutoring system,
Otieno, Schwonke, Salden, and Renkl (2013) assessed
traces of students’ behaviors in a classroom setting. The
authors used students’ access of hints, which they
characterized as reflecting a focus on solving problems, as
an indicator of performance-approach goals and students’
access of glossary terms, which they characterized as
reflecting their focus on understanding principles, as an
indicator of mastery-approach goals. Like Zhou and
Winne (2012), they found no significant correlations
between self-reported goals and their behavioral measures
of goals. However, they found that their two behavioral
goal measures were strongly, negatively correlated. Hint
use (indicating performance-approach goals) was
negatively associated with performance on a series of
principle-based post-tests while glossary use (indicating
mastery-approach goals) was positively associated with
immediate post-test performance. Self-reported goals
were generally less predictive of performance, with the
exception of self-reported mastery-approach goals
predicting delayed post-test performance. This work
addresses some of the limitations in Zhou and Winne’s
(2012) study by assessing goals in a classroom context
and clearly differentiating between behavioral measures,
but the connections between learners’ use of resources
and the constructs targeted by self-reported achievement
goal questionnaires are less clear. Further, the relationship
between goals contradicts most findings using selfreported measures; while Otieno et al. (2013) found
mastery-approach and performance-approach goals to
correlate negatively, most past work has found no
correlation or a moderate, positive correlation between the
two (Barron & Harackiewicz, 2011).

administered in the context of an academic task should
more accurately reflect the achievement goals students
experience when engaged in class activities. In the present
study, we assessed achievement goals through a goalframed task choice embedded in a classroom activity.
Task choice has been used more broadly to assess other
motivational constructs (e.g., Atkinson, 1964), and it has
been predicted using a two-dimension achievement
motivation framework (Nicholls, 1984). Students’ task
choice selections should reflect their achievement goals as
they relate to achievement on the task itself, permitting an
examination of the relationship between self-reported
achievement goals, task choice, task outcomes, and class
grades. We tested the following hypotheses:
(H1)

Self-reported goals will weakly predict taskbased goals, as these two constructs are related
but are being assessed at different levels (task vs.
domain) and in different contexts.

(H2)

Task-based goals will predict task performance
better than self-reported goals, as a result of task
choice occurring in a more similar context to the
task completion and assessment.

(H3)

Self-reported goals will predict grades, which are
a reflection of many different activities and
choices amassed over time.

Methods
Participants
One hundred and one students from four science classes
at an urban, public middle school participated in the
study. Students were enrolled in two seventh grade (51
students) and two eighth grade classes (50 students), with
a different teacher for each grade. Participation occurred
as part of regular classroom activities, with students
receiving participation credit for completing the materials.
Twenty-five students (2 seventh graders, 23 eighth
graders) were absent on the day the task-based measure
was administered or did not complete the task materials
and were therefore excluded from analyses examining
task goals or task performance (remaining n = 76).
Sixteen students (8 seventh graders, 8 eighth graders)
were absent on the day the self-report measure was
administered or did not complete it and therefore were
excluded from analyses examining self-reported
achievement goals (remaining n = 85). For analyses
relating self-reported achievement goals to task
achievement goals, a total of 38 students (12 seventh
graders, 26 eighth graders) were excluded because they
were missing one or both measures (remaining n = 63).

The Present Study 1
Given Pintrich’s (2003) argument for the role of context
in activating achievement goals, a behavioral measure
1

Partial results of this work were shared during a roundtable
presentation at the 2012 Annual Meeting of the American
Educational Research Association, Vancouver, Canada.

1289

Table 1: Framing of packet choices for task-based behavioral measure of achievement goals
Achievement goal
Mastery Approach

Label
Packet A

Performance Approach

Packet B

Performance Avoidance

Packet C

Description
The first stack contains an activity that will focus on helping you improve your
understanding of the concepts in this unit. You should choose this if you want to try
to completely understand the concepts in this unit.
The second stack contains an activity that will focus on helping you perform better
than other students typically perform in this unit. You should choose this if you
want to try to perform better than other students.
The third stack contains an activity that will focus on helping you avoid performing
worse than other students typically perform in this unit. You should choose this if
you want to try to avoid performing worse than other students.
comparative strength of the relationship between
performance on the packets and the two goal measures
(H2), and the comparative strength of the relationship
between end-of-quarter grades and the two goal measures
(H3). We report effect sizes (R2 or partial eta squared, np2)
for all significant main effects, and we interpret effects as
small when R2 or np2 < .06, medium when .06 < R2 or np2 <
.14, and large when R2 or np2 > .14.

Materials
Our primary behavioral measure of achievement goals
took the form of students' choices among three sets of
activities labeled Packet A, Packet B, and Packet C (Table
1). The descriptions for each packet appeared on a
teacher-read script, a slide projected at the front of class,
and on the cover page of the packets themselves.
Achievement goal labels were not present in the
descriptions. The choices posed by our behavioral
measure were aligned to Elliot and Murayama's (2008)
Achievement Goals Questionnaire-Revised (AGQ-R),
with options corresponding to constructs of mastery
approach, performance approach, and performance
avoidance. We excluded mastery avoidance in response to
younger students' difficulty in conceptualizing its
meaning. Aside from the cover pages stating the
descriptions, all packets contained identical materials.
Each teacher selected a popular science article about a
curriculum-appropriate topic to be used in the task. The
packets also included five comprehension questions to be
completed after students read the article.
Additional measures included students’ performance on
the packet comprehension questions; their quarterly
content grades, which were based on quiz, test,
homework, and project scores; and their responses on 7point Likert scales to the 12-item (three per construct)
AGQ-R framed around science class.

Self-reported goals and task choice
To assess the relationship between packet choice and
students’ self-reported endorsements of mastery approach,
performance approach, and performance avoidance on the
AGQ-R, packet choice was recoded into dichotomous
variables for each choice (e.g., coded as either “chose
mastery packet” or “did not choose mastery packet), and
logistic regression was used to assess whether selfreported goals predicted the likelihood of choosing a
particular packet. Self-reported mastery-approachperformance-approach, and performance-avoidance goals
were all included in the models; mastery avoidance was
excluded from all regressions throughout the analyses
because there was no corresponding option among the
packet choices.
The logistic regression model predicting likelihood of
choosing a particular packet was not significantly better
than a constant-only model for mastery-approach packets,
Χ2(3, N = 63) = 2.42, p = .49, performance-approach
packets, Χ2(3, N = 63) = 3.89, p = .27, or performanceavoidance packets, Χ2(3, N = 63) = 4.74, p = .19.
Although we must use caution interpreting a model that is
not significant, we examined the models for significant
variables and found only a marginally significant variable,
self-reported performance-approach goal endorsement,
Wald’s χ2 (1, N = 63) = 3.14, p = .08, Exp (B) = 2.92,
within the model predicting performance-approach packet
selection. These results suggest performance approach as
measured by the AGQ-R may weakly predict
performance-approach task choice whereas the AGQ-R
mastery-approach and performance-avoidance measures
were not related to their behavioral counterparts. These
results are generally consistent with previous findings
relating behaviorally inferred achievement goals to selfreported achievement goals (Zhou & Winne, 2012; Otieno
et al., 2013).

Procedure
Three days prior to the administration of the task-based
measure, students completed the AGQ-R during science
class. On the day of the task-based measure, students
were told they would complete a reading comprehension
task in class. They were asked to choose among three
versions of the task based on their goals. To decrease
pressure to be seen choosing a particular packet by their
peers, and to prevent students from examining the packets
before making their choices, they were told to write down
their choices. The teachers then handed out packets based
on the choice each student indicated.

Results
Analyses focused on the relationship between students’
packet choices and responses on the AGQ-R (H1), the

1290

Table 3: Summary of multivariate regression analysis for
AGQ-R ratings predicting content grades.

Predicting task performance
Overall, students demonstrated a preference for the
mastery-approach packet (N = 40) over the performanceapproach packet (N = 17) and the performance-avoidance
packet (N = 19). These frequencies were significantly
different, Χ2(2, N = 76) = 12.82, p < .01. This distribution
of responses might seem to suggest students were inclined
to choose the packet they considered most desirable to the
teacher, or the first packet in the list; however, this pattern
is consistent with past work showing the majority of
students express a dominant mastery goal (Van Yperen,
2006). Furthermore, if packet choice were based on
desirability or list order, we would not expect it to predict
task performance. Performance was measured by the
number of correctly answered questions from the reading
and ranged from zero to five. A one-way analysis of
variance (ANOVA) revealed packet choice had a large
effect on performance on the packet comprehension
questions, F(2,72) = 8.61, p = .00, np2 = .19, with students
who chose the mastery-approach packet (M = 3.05, SD =
1.61) and the performance-approach packet (M = 3.71, SD
= 1.00) scoring better than those who chose the
performance-avoidance packet (M = 1.89, SD = .94).
By comparison, a multivariate regression analysis
predicting task performance with students’ self-reported
mastery-approach,
performance-approach,
and
performance-avoidance goals indicated the three AGQ-R
predictors explained none of the variance (R2 = .04,
F(3,62) = .77, p = .52). Within the model, no goals were
significantly predictive of performance (Table 2).
While achievement goals indicated by packet choice
were highly predictive of performance on the subsequent
task, students’ self-reported achievement goals did not
predict performance. This suggests the AGQ-R might not
reflect specific task achievement goals as accurately as
achievement goals inferred through a behavioral measure
incorporated in the task.

Achievement goal
Mastery Approach
Performance Approach
Performance Avoidance
*p < .05

B
-.168
.315
-.028

SE B
.190
.309
.263

SE B
.136
.199
.163

β
.093
.429*
-.027

p < .01). Within the model, only performance approach
was significantly predictive of content grade (Table 3).
These results are consistent with work demonstrating
self-reported achievement goals for a domain can predict
grades. The difference in predictive power between our
behavioral measure and the AGQ-R might stem from
framing the measure around a specific task (behavioral
measure) versus a domain (AGQ-R). The results suggest
achievement goals indicated by packet choice do not scale
up to the domain level and predict grades.

Discussion
Although more research must be conducted to assess the
strength of these findings, this work demonstrates the
difference
between
context-based,
task-specific
achievement goals and more stable, domain-general
achievement goals, as well as the value of each for
predicting different levels of achievement. Self-reported
achievement goal measures have made significant
contributions to the field of motivation research, but they
are subject to limitations stemming from context,
specificity, timing, external validity, and students’
metacognitive skills. Researchers should continue
investigating alternative measures that can be integrated
into achievement tasks. Very little research examines the
extent to which achievement goals can be inferred from
behavioral data, although important first steps are being
made (Otieno et al., 2013; Zhou & Winne, 2012).
The data suggest our behavioral measure can predict
achievement at the task level on which the achievement
goals were measured. Relationships between task-framed,
behavioral measures and domain-framed, self-reported
measures must be further explored, but the absence of
correlation is consistent with limited prior work on this
issue. Nearly half of all students selected a masteryapproach packet. While this is consistent with past work
on dominant achievement goals (Van Yperen, 2006), it is
also possible that students were biased toward selecting
the mastery-approach packet because it was the first
option listed. Future work should randomize the order of
packet choices across classes to see if this bias persists.
Students were permitted to select only one packet,
creating a dichotomous assessment of achievement goals
that cannot capture the multiple goals many students
possess. However, this framework forces students to act
on the dominant achievement goal activated in the task
context. While students might endorse multiple selfreported achievement goals with equal strength, this
forced-choice design may better capture the achievement

Table 2: Summary of multivariate regression analysis for
AGQ-R ratings predicting task performance
Achievement goal
Mastery Approach
Performance Approach
Performance Avoidance
*p < .05

B
.093
.426
-.026

β
-.156
.288
-.026

Predicting grades
A one-way ANOVA indicated packet choice was not
associated with students’ content grades for the quarter
during which they completed the task, F(2,76) = 1.77, p =
.18. By comparison, a multivariate regression analysis
predicting content grade with students’ self-reported
achievement goals indicated the three AGQ-R predictors
explained 20.1% of the variance (R2 = .23, F(3,81) = 8.03,

1291

goal most relevant to a student at a particular moment.
Repeated measures could provide a richer picture of
students’ goal orientations as they relate to different
contexts (see Bernacki, Nokes-Malach, & Aleven, 2013).
There was no significant relationship between goal
choice and self-reported goals. Given that more than a
third of students were excluded from the analysis due to
missing data, and that task choice was not equally
distributed across the three options, a larger sample size
might be necessary to detect significant relationships
between self-reported goals and packet choice. The failure
for self-reported measures to predict packet choice might
reflect students’ inability to consciously access their
goals, or it might be a result of the domain framing of the
AGQ-R (i.e., students self-reported their goals for science
class, and not for a specific task in science class). If the
latter were the case, we would expect a model predicting
task choice with responses to a task-framed AGQ-R to
yield greater reliability. Future work should examine the
different scales of achievement goals as task-based versus
domain-based and explore how data from this task-based,
behavioral achievement goal measure might change from
task to task and across the academic year. The differences
between Likert scale responses (AGQ-R) and a forced
choice (task choice) might also explain the lack of
relationship between measures.
Better understanding the relationship between selfreported achievement goals and behaviorally inferred
achievement goals is of particular importance. If
behavioral measures assumed to indicate students’
pursuits of achievement goals consistently fail to correlate
with self-reported assessments of achievement goals, we
must question whether such behavioral measures reflect
the same constructs as the self-report assessments.

Elliot, A. J., & McGregor, H. A. (2001). A 2 x 2
achievement goal framework. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 80, 501–519.
Elliot, A. J., McGregor, H. A., & Gable, S. L. (1999).
Achievement goals, study strategies, and exam
performance: A mediational analysis. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 91, 549–563.
Elliot, A. J. & Murayama, K. (2008). On the measurement
of achievement goals: Critique, illustration, and
application. Journal
of
Educational
Psychology, 100, 613-628.
Elliott, E., & Dweck, C. S. (1988). Goals: An approach to
motivation and achievement. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 54, 5-12.
Fulmer, S. M., & Frijters, J. C. (2009). A review of selfreport and alternative approaches in the measurement
of student motivation. Educational Psychology Review,
21, 219-246.
Fryer, J. W., & Elliot, A. J. (2007). Stability and change
in achievement goals. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 99, 700-714.
Hulleman, C. S., Schrager, S. M., Bodmann, S. M., &
Harackiewicz, J. M. (2010). A meta-analytic review of
achievement goal measures: Different labels for the
same constructs or different constructs with similar
labels? Psychological Bulletin, 136, 422-449.
Linnenbrink-Garcia, L., Tyson, D.F., & Patall, E.A.
(2008). When are achievement goal orientations
beneficial for academic achievement? A closer look at
moderating factors. International Review of Social
Psychology, 21, 19–70.
Metcalfe, J., Eich, T. S., & Castel, A. D. (2010).
Metacognition of agency across the lifespan. Cognition,
116, 267–282
Nicholls, J. G. (1984). Achievement motivation:
Conceptions of ability, subjective experience, task
choice, and performance. Psychological Review, 91,
328-346.
Otieno, C., Schwonke, R., Salden, R., & Renkl, A.
(2013). Can help seeking behavior in intelligent
tutoring systems be used as online measure for goal
orientation. In M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, & I.
Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 11031108). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Pintrich, P. (2003). A motivational science perspective on
the role of student motivation in learning and teaching
contexts. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 667–
686.
Van Yperen, N.W. (2006). A novel approach to assessing
achievement goals in the context of the 2 x 2
framework: identifying distinct profiles of individuals
with different dominant achievement Goals. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 1432-1445.
Zhou, M., & Winne, P. H. (2012). Modeling academic
achievement by self-reported versus traced goal
orientation. Learning and Instruction, 22, 413-419.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Grant SBE00354420
from the National Science Foundation to the Pittsburgh
Science of Learning Center (http://www.learnlab.org). We
thank teachers Paul Ronevich and Brian Rose for their
insightful feedback and assistance in developing materials
and conducting this research.

References
Atkinson, J. (1964). An introduction to motivation.
Princeton, NJ: Van Nostrand.
Barron, K., & Harackiewicz, J. (2001). Achievement
goals and optimal motivation: Testing multiple goal
models. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
80, 706–722.
Bernacki, M. L., Nokes-Malach, T. J., & Aleven, V.
(2013). Fine-grained assessment of motivation over
long periods of learning with an intelligent tutoring
system: Methodology, advantages, and preliminary
results. In R. Azevedo and V. Aleven (Eds.),
International handbook of metacognition and learning
technologies. Berlin: Springer.

1292

