UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Representing Time in Scientific Diagrams

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5381501r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Bechtel, William
Burnston, Daniel
Sheredos, Benjamin
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Representing Time in Scientific Diagrams
William Bechtel (bechtel@ucsd.edu)
Daniel Burnston (dburnston@ucsd.edu)
Benjamin Sheredos (bsheredos@ucsd.edu)
Department of Philosophy and Center for Circadian Biology, University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA, 92093-0119 USA
Adele Abrahamsen (aabrahamsen@ucsd.edu)
Center for Research in Language and Center for Circadian Biology, University of California,
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 USA
Abstract

tively for graphical representations of the parts and operations of a mechanism. We refer to these as mechanism diagrams, and they are of particular interest as they play crucial
roles in developing, evaluating, and presenting mechanistic
explanations. Biologists often begin by identifying a system
that in relevant conditions generates a phenomenon of interest and then seek a mechanistic account of how it does so.
This involves identifying its parts, determining the operations they perform, and showing how, when organized appropriately, the parts and operations generate the phenomenon of interest (Bechtel & Abrahamsen, 2005; Bechtel &
Richardson, 1993/2010; Machamer, Darden, & Craver,
2000). This practice is often supported by mechanism diagrams in which icons or glyphs (Tversky, 2011) specify
parts of the mechanism and arrows indicate the operations
by which parts affect other parts or are transformed into
other types of parts. However, these mechanism diagrams
do not stand alone. To relate parts and operations represented in the diagram to a phenomenon, researchers need to
represent both how the phenomenon is realized in time and
how the mechanism operates in time. We will examine both.
Circadian rhythms are approximately 24-hour oscillations
generated endogenously within organisms that regulate a
host of physiological, behavioral, and cognitive functions.
They are found in organisms ranging from bacteria and fungi to plants and animals. Much early research focused on the
phenomenon of circadian rhythmicity as observed in animals’ fluctuating levels of activity. During the last few decades of the 20th century, circadian researchers began tracing
these rhythms to intracellular molecular mechanisms involving feedback relations between proteins and the genes from
which they are transcribed and translated.
Challenged to understand how individual cells maintain
an approximately 24-hour oscillation and how populations
of cells synchronize their activity, circadian rhythm researchers have developed a variety of diagram formats.
Most straightforward is to map time to one of the two spatial dimensions (or hours to one dimension and days to the
other), but this comes at the cost of pre-empting a resource
and hence limiting what else can be included. If, a circle is
used instead to represent a 24-hour duration, that opens up
several ways to incorporate other kinds of information. We
will display and discuss examples of how these formats display timing either of a phenomenon or of an operation with-

Cognitive scientists have shown increased interest in diagrams in recent years, but most of the focus has been on spatial representation, not conventions for representing time. We
explore a variety of ways in which time is represented in diagrams by one research community: scientists investigating
circadian rhythms at the behavioral and molecular levels. Diagrams that relate other variables to time or indicate a mechanism’s states across time use one or two spatial dimensions or
circles to represent time and sometimes include explicit time
markers (e.g., the hours on a clockface).
Keywords: Circadian rhythms; diagrams; mechanistic explanation; time

Introduction
A number of cognitive scientists have become interested in
the interaction between human reasoning and external visualizations. Projects in such areas as knowledge representation, human-computer interaction, and situated cognition
have all focused on how information can be represented in a
range of distinct formats and used as reasoning tools. Experimental and theoretical work on diagrams in particular has
made great strides in recent years (Cheng, 2002, 2011;
Gooding, 2010; Hegarty, 2004, 2011; Nersessian, 2008;
Tversky, 2011). Still, significant challenges remain in understanding visualization. Our focus is on how diagrams
support reasoning in complex empirical domains (Sheredos,
Burnston, Abrahamsen, & Bechtel, 2013). A critical challenge researchers face in developing diagrams is how to
represent multiple aspects of a problem space. For instance,
while two-dimensional diagrams readily support spatial reasoning tasks, many tasks require reasoning about time, and
representing time and integrating both spatial and temporal
information pose special challenges.
Our strategy in this paper is to examine published diagrams from a field in empirical science that has dedicated
significant attention to ways of representing events in time:
chronobiology, the study of circadian and other biological
rhythms. What is learned here has broader implications.
The term diagram is used in both inclusive and restricted
senses. In its inclusive sense, indicated by the etymology of
the word, diagrams are visuospatial representations. All the
figures in a scientific paper, including line graphs, typically
count as diagrams. Sometimes the term is used more restric-

164

in a mechanism. We turn in the last section to mechanism
diagrams that use both spatial dimensions to represent the
parts and operations of a mechanism, and consider techniques that nonetheless can incorporate changes of state in
the depicted mechanism over time.

row. Viewers can choose to focus on the left side to track
activity across days, but can also view the entire actogram to
better detect any patterns of activity that straddle midnight.
Figure 2 specifically addresses the question of whether
oscillations in the running-wheel activity of a mouse are the
same in constant darkness as in normal conditions. It shows,
visually, that endogenous oscillations get entrained by the
external Zeitgeber (“time-giver”) of the day-night cycle,
nudging the observed oscillation more precisely to 24 hours.
Here is how. A bar at the top indicates which hours this nocturnal animal was exposed to light (white) vs. dark
(black)—but only for the first few days (labeled LD). It can
be seen that the mouse maintained a precise 24-hour cycle
of activity across those days. Thereafter it was placed in
constant darkness (DD), and this revealed a free-running
period that was slightly less than 24 hours. Activity thus
began a bit earlier each day, which shows up in the actogram as a distinctive diagonal pattern. To further explore the
impact of external cues, on just one of the dark days the
researchers delivered a light pulse (arrow labeled LP) at the
time activity would have begun. The sudden rightward shift
of the activity pattern demonstrates that a pulse of light is
sufficient to reset the start of activity (by delaying it several
hours), after which the free running pattern resumes.

Representing Time on One or More Dimensions
The most straightforward way to represent time in a diagram
is to dedicate one spatial dimension to time. Often a bar or
line graph is set up with time on the abscissa and a dependent variable from an experiment on the ordinate. When the
phenomenon of interest involves oscillation in time—as it
often does in circadian research—such graphs will display
this as an oscillatory pattern in space (left to right). In Figure 1, for example, Hardin, Hall, and Rosbash (1990) used a
line graph to display the repeated rise and fall of the relative
abundance of mRNA due to transcription activity of the
clock gene period in fruit flies. It can be seen that this oscillation across five days has a period of approximately 24
hours. These particular data came from flies kept in constant
darkness, demonstrating a key circadian phenomenon: that
the daily oscillation is endogenous.

Figure 2. Hardin et al.’s (1990) line graph of changes
over a 120-hour period in the relative abundance of per
mRNA in fruit flies kept in constant darkness.
But are oscillations in darkness exactly the same as those
under a normal day-night cycle? Although the line graph
offers a direct, visually compelling display of the overall
phenomenon of circadian oscillation, using it to address this
question would require a close reading of the relevant data
points, from which each day’s period would be calculated
for comparison. Instead, circadian researchers adopted a
representational format—the raster plot—that makes comparison across successive days visually accessible. When
used to display an organism’s activity (rather than molecular
concentrations), as in the top panel of Figure 2, such a plot
is called an actogram. Here both spatial dimensions represent time, but on different scales. Time within each day proceeds horizontally, as in the line graph, but successive days
are stacked vertically. Activity at a given time on a given
day is indicated by a hash mark and lack of activity by white
space. In this example, each horizontal row displays activity
from two days (48 hours) rather than a single day, with the
second day’s activity re-plotted as the left half of the next

Figure 1. Actogram (top) and phase response curve (bottom) from Lowrey and Takahashi (2004).
Thus, the top panel of Figure 2 makes visually apparent
(a) entrainment to the day-night cycle (activity aligned to
the light-dark bar, the same in each row); (b) the slightly
shorter endogenous period revealed by constant darkness
(activity beginning earlier each day); and (c) the resetting of
the oscillation’s phase—but not of its period—by a pulse of
light (rightward shift of activity onset on the day of the light
pulse). This last phenomenon can be further explored by
manipulating the time at which a light pulse is delivered and
then visualizing the effects of pulse timing on phase. A different diagram format is especially suitable for revealing
these effects: the phase response curve. As shown in the
bottom panel of Figure 2, this is a specialized line graph in

165

which the ordinate indicates by how much (within a 3-hour
window) the phase is advanced or delayed, depending on
the time of the light pulse—construed here on the abscissa
not as clock time, but as circadian time, in which a day is
based on the free-running period and an hour is 1/24 of that
period. This brings an extra complexity in representing time,
requiring chronobiologists to make additional inferences to
determine the clock time at which a pulse will have the effect plotted. Students can struggle to make these inferences.
An alternative to using hash marks, as in the actogram, is
using color to indicate activity. Typically cold colors are
used for low activity and warm colors for high activity; accordingly these are often referred to as heat maps. Figure 3
presents two heat maps from Ueda (2007), which compare a
normalized measure of the expression of 101 genes in the
mammalian suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) under light-dark
(LD) vs. total darkness (DD) conditions. (The gray regions
of the DD bar indicate times that normally would have light,
but are dark in this condition.) Each horizontal line shows
the expression activity of a different gene, and the genes are
placed in order of their time of maximum activity (red).
Visually, the heat map makes it obvious that (a) the expression of each gene oscillates even without external light cues
and (b) there are different populations of genes active during
different parts of the day. Thus, circadian researchers have
developed a variety of graphical conventions for conveying
non-temporal measures when one or both spatial dimensions
are preempted for representing time.

fluorescent marker (GFP) to report expression of the clock
gene Per1 in the SCN, regarded as the central mammalian
clock. Data were obtained from mice with normal VIP
genes (VIP+/+) or lacking one (VIP+/-) or both (VIP-/-) copies
of the gene. The top panel shows the oscillation in Per1
expression in numerous SCN neurons for each condition.
The loss of synchrony in the VIP-/- mutant is apparent, but
the Rayleigh plots at the bottom make this even clearer by
abstracting away from the detail in the line graphs to focus
only on the time at which Per1 expression reaches 50% of
maximum for each neuron (each indicated by a blue arrowhead on a 24-hour clockface—clearly much less clustered in
the null mutant). The data also are analyzed statistically to
characterize synchronization: the red arrow in each Rayleigh
plot points to the mean time expression reaches 50% of
maximum (its mean phase), and its length is inversely proportional to the standard deviation. The very short arrow in
the right panel indicates both the change in the mean phase
and that the phases are much more variable across individual neurons.

Figure 4. Ciarlegio et al.’s (2009) line graphs showing
oscillations of Per1 expression in neurons of normal
and mutant mice (top) and Rayleigh plots highlighting
phase (bottom).
Figure 5 shows a different way to use a clock face.
Relógio (2011) surrounded theirs with color-coded concentric rings, each tracking concentrations of one protein to

Figure 3. Ueda’s (2007) heat maps showing levels of
expression of 101 SCN genes in light-dark vs. total
dark conditions.

Representing Time on a Circle
Since rhythmic activities regularly return the system to the
same state, a circle offers an alternative way to represent
time. This, of course, is the representational format that has
long been used in mechanical clocks, albeit typically using
the circle to represent 12 rather than 24 hours.
Rayleigh plots, such as shown in the bottom panel of Figure 4, illustrate this strategy. Ciarleglio et al. (2009) used a

Figure 5. Relógio et al.’s (2011) use of concentric
circles around a clock face to represent concentrations of clock proteins across 24 hours.

166

indicate expression of the corresponding clock gene. The
darkened region of each ring indicates when expression of
that gene is relatively high in experimental studies, while
the small yellow circle indicates time of peak value in a
simulation. This visualization makes it evident that the variables reached maximum values in the simulation within but
towards the end of the phase of peak expression determined
by experimental studies, making clear the model’s fit to the
data.

into the cytosol and translated there into CRY); another arrow (top) represents CRY’s later translocation into the nucleus. The figures differ in which operations within these
spatial compartments are emphasized: Figure 6 shows the
dimerization of CRY with PER in the cytosol, whereas Figure 7 incorporates the authors’ research on the roles of two
other proteins: FBXL21 in stabilizing CRY in the cytosol
and FBXL3 in causing the degradation of nuclear CRY. The
more important difference for us is the day-night bar at the
bottom, which links operations in the cytosol to daytime and
those in the nucleus to night. As long as this convention is
regarded as simply showing when different operations are at
maximum, it captures important timing information. But it
is ambiguous regarding the timing of gene expression
(which is daytime) and invites false inferences (e.g., that
CRY is available in the cytosol only during the day).

Representing Time in a Mechanism Diagram
We turn now to diagrams of mechanisms, in particular,
those proposed to explain such relations as are diagrammed
in Figures 1-5. Figure 6 is a fairly typical mechanism diagram; it shows the parts, operations and organization of the
molecular mechanism thought to be responsible for circadian rhythms in mammals. Parts are represented by various
glyphs (colored boxes for genes, correspondingly colored
circles and ovals for proteins, white rectangles for promoters, etc.). Arrows show that the operation of a part has an
effect on another part. Dark lines indicate spatial compartments (the cytoplasm and the nucleus). Incorporating time is
a challenge. The various activities occur at different times of
day. The operation associated with each arrow takes time,
and each cycle of activity that returns the mechanism to the
same state takes approximately 24 hours, but nothing else
about timing is shown.

Figure 7. Hirano et al. (2013)’s use of a light-dark
bar in a mechanism diagram to indicate time of day
when different operations are performed.
The strategy of Figure 7 works only when the focus is on
changes involving one component of the full mechanism
shown in Figure 6. A related approach that allows for additional parts and operations is to duplicate the mechanism
diagram, with appropriate modifications and time markers
for each state of interest, and arrange the variations in a circle. In the four panels of Figure 8, for example, Ye, Selby,
Ozturk, Annayev, and Sancar (2011) showed the state of
key parts of the same mechanism at two times during the

Figure 6. Lowrey and Takahashi's (2011) mechanism diagram of the intracellular circadian oscillator in animals.
One strategy for bringing time into a mechanism diagram
is to position different states of the mechanism around a
single circle that is marked so as to track time within the 24
hours of one complete cycle. The following diagrams illustrate different ways circadian biologists have instantiated
this strategy, each with its own compromises. In Figure 7,
Hirano (2013) achieved a visually simple–but conceptually
complex–diagram by extracting the CRY cycle from Figure
6 and adding time markers. There are similarities: a single
arrow (bottom) suffices to represent the sequence of operations involved in gene expression (transcription of the gene
Cry in the nucleus, resulting in mRNA that is transported

Figure 8. Ye et al.’s (2011) representation of four stages in
the daily cycle of the mammalian circadian mechanism.

167

day and two during the night, focusing especially on the
CRY-PER relationship. (Note that panel C is to the right of
D, making the arrangement cyclic.) As one moves between
panels, the key changes are indicated. For example, as the
end of day approaches (moving from panel A to panel B),
the PER:CRY dimer enters the nucleus and dissociates into
PER and CRY. The red X indicates that Bmal1 is not being
transcribed. With the shift to early night (panel C), CRY
binds to BMAL1 and CLOCK on the Per and Cry E-boxes,
stopping their transcription, while Bmal1 transcription resumes. Finally, these proteins are removed from the E-box
(panel D). (For visual simplicity, the conventional rectangular glyphs for the Per and Cry genes are combined into one.)
One of the challenges in constructing mechanism diagrams is that parts engage in different classes of operations
(e.g., movement, promotion of a reaction, phosphorylation)
that aren’t clearly distinguished by most diagrammatic conventions. For example, the proteins shown in Figure 6 are
synthesized in the cytoplasm and transported into the nucleus. On the other hand, the promoter boxes don’t themselves
move, but rather enable transcription of the downstream
gene. Such heterogeneity in the nature of the operations
makes it difficult to convey timing information about the
different operations in one cohesive way. Some mechanisms, though, can be understood by simply following the
transformations of one part. The core mechanism in the circadian clock of cyanobacteria, for example, involves the
sequential phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of the
protein KaiC at two sites, S431 and T432 (often labeled S
and T). The states constitute a cycle that is naturally represented as points around a circle; in Figure 9, for example, a
lowercase p placed before the S and/or T indicates which
sites are phosphorylated in each state.

Figure 10. Golden et al.'s (2007) representation of the
stages in KaiC phosphorylation showing the circadian
times at which KaiC is in each state.
Even though the core mechanism of the cyanobacterial
clock consists in the phosphorylation and dephosphorylation
of KaiC, this cycle is also thought to be embedded in a transcription-translation feedback cycle (i.e., a negative feedback loop akin to those in Figs. 6-8, but involving KaiA/B/C
rather than mammalian clock proteins). Keeping the two Kai
cycles distinct but related in a single diagram is challenging,
since they involve some of the same parts and operate on the
same time-scale. Pattanayek et al. (2011) developed the solution in Figure 11. They show the cycle of phosphorylation
and dephosphorylation of Kai C in the upper right (‘PTO’),
embedded in the larger cycle involving alternation of the
chromatin that regulates the transcription and translation of
the three Kai genes (‘TTFL’). Like other diagrams that
stretch the available representational resources, this one
carries the risk of inviting false inferences. With no realistic
way to mark clock time, for example, it appears that the
PTO operates during only one stage of the TTFL. In fact,
both of these cycles traverse their sequence of states over a
24-hour period but interact: only when the PTO is in the

Figure 9. Hogenesch and Ueda’s (2011) mechanism diagram of the four stages of KaiC phosphorylation in the
cyanobacterial circadian clock.
Although the cycle in Figure 9 is assumed to take 24
hours, the phases of circadian time at which KaiC is in the
different states is not indicated. By rotating the image about
135°, Golden, Cassone, and LiWang (2007) were able to
show the states around a 24-hour clock face (Figure 10).
They also show the roles of two other proteins, KaiA and
KaiB. When bound to KaiC, KaiA facilitates the phosphorylation of KaiC whereas KaiB inhibits the activity of KaiA.
The shape of the KaiC icon also makes it visually obvious
that it is a hexamer, and the faint icons within the clock circle represent the fact that individual monomers can be exchanged between hexamers.

Figure 11. Pattanayek’s (2011) mechanism diagram
combining the PTO mechanism involving KaiC phosphorylation and a TTFL.

168

Cheng, P. C.-H. (2011). Probably good diagrams for learning:
Representational epistemic recodification of probability
theory. Topics in Cognitive Science, 3, 475-498.
Ciarleglio, C. M., Gamble, K. L., Axley, J. C., Strauss, B. R.,
Cohen, J. Y., Colwell, C. S., & McMahon, D. G. (2009).
Population encoding by circadian clock neurons organizes
circadian behavior. Journal of Neuroscience, 29, 16701676.
Golden, S. S., Cassone, V. M., & LiWang, A. (2007). Shifting
nanoscopic clock gears. Nature Structural and Molecular
Biology, 14, 362-363.
Gooding, D. C. (2010). Visualizing scientific inference. Topics
in Cognitive Science, 2, 15-35.
Hardin, P. E., Hall, J. C., & Rosbash, M. (1990). Feedback of
the Drosophila period gene product on circadian cycling of
its messenger RNA levels. Nature, 343, 536-540.
Hegarty, M. (2004). Mechanical reasoning by mental
simulation. Trends in Cognitive Science, 8, 280-285.
Hegarty, M. (2011). The cognitive science of visual-spatial
displays: Implications for design. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 3, 446-474.
Hirano, A., Yumimoto, K., Tsunematsu, R., Matsumoto, M.,
Oyama, M., Kozuka-Hata, H., Nakagawa, T.,
Lanjakornsiripan, D., Nakayama, K. I., & Fukada, Y.
(2013). FBXL21 regulates oscillation of the circadian clock
through ubiquitination and stabilization of cryptochromes.
Cell, 152, 1106-1118.
Hogenesch, J. B., & Ueda, H. R. (2011). Understanding
systems-level properties: timely stories from the study of
clocks. Nature Reviews Genetics, 12, 407-416.
Machamer, P., Darden, L., & Craver, C. F. (2000). Thinking
about mechanisms. Philosophy of Science, 67, 1-25.
Nersessian, N. (2008). Creating scientific concepts. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Pattanayek, R., Williams, D. R., Rossi, G., Weigand, S., Mori,
T., Johnson, C. H., Stewart, P. L., & Egli, M. (2011).
Combined SAXS/EM based models of the S. elongatus
post-translational circadian oscillator and its interactions
with the output His-kinase SasA. PLoS One, 6, e23697.
Relógio, A., Westermark, P. O., Wallach, T., Schellenberg, K.,
Kramer, A., & Herzel, H. (2011). Tuning the mammalian
circadian clock: Robust synergy of two loops. PLoS
Computational Biology, 7, e1002309.
Sheredos, B., Burnston, D., Abrahamsen, A., & Bechtel, W.
(2013). Why do biologists use so many diagrams?
Philosophy of Science, 80, 931-944.
Tversky, B. (2011). Visualizing thought. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 3, 499-535.
Ueda, H. R. (2007). Systems biology of mammalian circadian
clocks. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative
Biology, 72, 365-380.
Ye, R., Selby, C. P., Ozturk, N., Annayev, Y., & Sancar, A.
(2011). Biochemical analysis of the canonical model for the
mammalian circadian clock. The Journal of Biological
Chemistry, 286, 25891-25902.

appropriate state does the TTFL proceed to synthesize new
Kai proteins. For a reader with the right background
knowledge, Figure 11 aptly conveys how the two cycles in
the overall mechanism are related to each other.

Conclusion
By examining a variety of diagrams from circadian rhythm
research, we have identified a number of ways researchers
have solved the problem of representing time. The simplest
strategy is to use one spatial dimension to represent time
and the other for another variable. Sometimes the two spatial dimensions are both used to represent time, but on different time scales. In that case, other conventions must be
adopted to show the amount of activity at each time. Given
the importance of the 24-hour cycle for circadian research,
representing time in a circle and using a clock face to indicate specific times offers a powerful way to convey information about the phases of different activities. It is more
challenging to represent time in mechanism diagrams,
which depict the parts, operations, and organization of a
mechanism. This is especially true when the mechanism
consists of multiple feedback loops. We identified a number
of strategies adopted by circadian researchers, such as displaying the states or operations of a mechanism in a circle
and adding day/night or time markers.
The diagramming strategies we have identified in scientists’ practice pose additional questions for cognitive scientists. Creating as well as consuming the different types of
diagrams requires cognitive activities that cognitive science
researchers can elucidate. Since each type of diagram involves selectively representing spatial and temporal information, each requires viewers to make appropriate inferences. This can cause novices, and sometimes even experts,
to make errors. Studying these errors can help elucidate the
reasoning involved. Moreover, diagrams do not function in
isolation: different diagrams complement each other’s limitations. Learning how scientists produce, understand, misunderstand, and bring together different kinds of diagrams
provides indispensable access to scientific reasoning.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge the support of National Science Foundation grant 1127640 and numerous contributions by the members
of the Center for Chronobiology at UCSD.

References
Bechtel, W., & Abrahamsen, A. (2005). Explanation: A
mechanist alternative. Studies in History and Philosophy of
Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 36, 421-441.
Bechtel, W., & Richardson, R. C. (1993/2010). Discovering
complexity: Decomposition and localization as strategies in
scientific research. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 1993
edition published by Princeton University Press.
Cheng, P. C.-H. (2002). Electrifying diagrams for learning:
principles for complex representational systems. Cognitive
Science, 26, 685-736.

169

