UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Semantic Networks and Order Recall in Verbal Short-Term Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3k3288j4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Poirier, Marie
Saint-Aubin, Jean
Mair, Ali
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Semantic Networks and Order Recall in Verbal Short-Term Memory
Marie Poirier (m.poirier@city.ac.uk)
Memory Research Unit, City University London, Northampton Square, London, U.K., EC1V 0HB

Jean Saint-Aubin (Jean.Saint-Aubin@umoncton.ca)
Psychology Department, Moncton University, Moncton Campus,
Pav. Léopold-Taillon, 18 ave Antonine-Maillet, Moncton, NB, Canada, E1A 3E9

Ali Mair (Ali.Mair.2@city.ac.uk)
Memory Research Unit, City University London, Northampton Square, London, U.K., EC1V 0HB

Gerry Tehan (gerry.tehan@usq.edu.au)
Department of Psychology, University of Southern Queensland, Springfield Campus
PO Box 4196, Springfield Central, QLD 4300, Australia

Anne Tolan (Anne.Tolan@acu.edu.au)
Department of Psychology, Australian Catholic University, PO Box 456, Virginia,
QLD 4014, Australia

Postle, 2011; Hamilton & Martin, 2007;, R. C. Martin,
2006; Majerus, 2009; and Thorn & Page, 2009).
Nevertheless, there has been little work on factors
associated with semantic LTM. The study reported here
aimed to test a hypothesis that suggests that semantic LTM
plays an important role in immediate memory for order.

Abstract
In a recent paper, Acheson, MacDonald, and Postle (2011)
made an important but controversial suggestion: They
hypothesised that a) semantic information has an effect on
order information in short-term memory (STM) and b) that
order recall in STM is based on the level of activation of
items within the relevant long-term memory (LTM) network.
However, verbal STM research typically has led to the
conclusion that factors such as semantic category have a large
effect on the number of correctly recalled items and little or
no significant impact on order recall (Poirier & Saint-Aubin,
1995; Tse, 2009). Both of the studies reported here tested the
hypotheses advanced by Acheson et al. Results show that as
predicted, manipulating the putative activation of list items
significantly impacts the recall of item order.

The Role of LTM in Short-Term Recall:

Keywords: Short-term memory; working memory; order
recall; immediate memory; activated long-term memory.

Short- and Long-term Memory
We are all familiar with the experience of reading material
from an area known to us. Expressions, arguments and ideas
are recognised; our previous knowledge significantly
supports our grasp of the paper. In important ways, this
example illustrates one of the most fundamental functions
that memory performs: allowing the past to support and
guide our present interactions with the world. This paper is
about the interaction between semantic knowledge and the
last few seconds of our most recent past – the content of
short-term memory (STM).
Until relatively recently, little systematic consideration
was given to how the lexical/semantic properties of verbal
items affect performance in STM tasks. However, current
work bears witness to the growing interest in this area, with
research systematically exploring the relationship between
language organisation in long-term memory (LTM) and
verbal short-term recall (e.g. Acheson, MacDonald, &

The study of LTM contributions to verbal short-term recall
has typically relied on a classic task: immediate serial recall.
In this task, a small number of verbal items are presented —
usually between 5 and 7—and participants must attempt to
recall these items, in their order of appearance, immediately
after list presentation. It is now well established that word
frequency/familiarity has a positive influence on immediate
serial recall, as does concreteness and lexicality (see SaintAubin & Poirier, 1999a for a review). This is also true at a
sub-lexical level; when trying to remember non-words,
items containing more familiar phonemic components are
better recalled (Thorn & Frankish, 2005). Currently, it can
be argued that there are two general classes of views that
address these findings. The first are typically known as
redintegration accounts while the second suggest that verbal
STM relies more directly on long-term representations.
Redintegration. From this perspective immediate recall is a
two-step process. It is first assumed that participants encode
verbal material into phonological forms, as suggested by the
well know articulatory loop / working memory model (e.g.
Baddeley, 1986). In the absence of rehearsal, these
representations are thought to rapidly become degraded
either by decay or through interference. At the point of
recall, a retrieval mechanism produces a phonological
representation as a candidate for output. The memory trace
may or may not be degraded (but see Roodenrys & Miller,

1186

2008). If the trace is intact then recall will not be
problematic. However, if the trace is degraded a second step
is initiated. Long-term lexical/phonological information is
accessed in an attempt to reconstruct the item (e.g. accessing
knowledge of words to complete a fragmented trace,
somewhat like filling in the gaps in cr_ _odi_e). This
reconstruction process is often referred to as redintegration
(Hulme, Maughan, & Brown 1991; Schweickert, 1993). It
has been used to explain lexicality, word frequency,
concreteness and imageability effects upon serial recall.
However, recent ideas about the contribution of long-term
representations to memory over the short-term have started
to move away from dual process accounts (i.e. degradation
of phonological short-term memory followed by
redintegration). For example, Thorn, Frankish and
Gathercole (2009), after reviewing their work on
phonotactic and lexical frequency, conclude that long-term
knowledge impacts immediate recall accuracy in two ways:
by strengthening the representations that support
performance and by influencing the reconstruction process.
Psycholinguistic and LTM Network Models. Over the
past few decades, the redintegration hypothesis was the
dominant view of LTM effects on short-term recall.
Currently however, another class of models is becoming
increasingly influential. Although the models in this group
are more heterogeneous, they suggests that the LTM
representations and the systems involved in language
processing are more closely related to short-term recall than
the redintegration hypothesis suggests (e.g. Acheson &
MacDonald, 2009). In its typical form, the redintegration
hypothesis restricts the influence of LTM representations to
the retrieval stage of short-term recall. The psycholinguistic
and LTM network models we refer to here propose that
there is considerable overlap between STM tasks and
language processing; hence the semantic, lexical, and
sublexical networks that are widely thought to underlie
language representations are viewed as supporting STM. In
essence, these models are mostly moving away from the
classic suggestion that verbal STM relies on a separate
system. Rather, the premise is that processing linguistic
information for recall involves the activation of the relevant
long-term networks; in turn, the characteristics of these
networks will influence performance.
Burgess and Hitch (2006), for example, offer a
computational / network model of verbal STM where items
are represented within lexical and phonological interconnected networks. More recently, in order to explain the
effects of a number of lexical and sub-lexical variables,
Roodenrys (2009) proposed that an interactive network
model was necessary where various levels of representation,
including letter, phonemic, and lexical levels are activated
and compete with each other. Other recent models explicitly
include semantic levels of representation also. This group
holds the computational model proposed by Gupta (2003,
2009), the conceptual models proposed Cowan (1999;
Cowan & Chen, 2009) and Majerus (2009), the

psycholinguistic models proposed by Martin & Gupta
(2004) and R.C. Martin (2006) and from cognitive
neuroscience, the proposal of Acheson, et al. (2011).
Choice amongst the models described above depends on
a number of developments, one of which is a better
understanding of how semantic memory influences STM
performance. Assuming the latter models are appropriate,
then semantic LTM should influence STM performance in
predictable ways. As of yet however, there has been little
detailed investigation of semantic LTM effects in short-term
recall in healthy adults. Exceptions include the work on
categorical similarity and the recent work of Acheson et al
(2011).
Categorical Similarity. Poirier and Saint-Aubin (1995;
Saint-Aubin & Poirier, 1999a; 1999b; Saint-Aubin,
Ouellette, & Poirier, 2005) re-examined the widely held
idea that similarity amongst list items in immediate serial
recall had an adverse effect upon STM for order recall.
While this finding is relatively consistent when
phonological similarity is manipulated, Poirier and SaintAubin argued that this was not necessarily the case with
semantic similarity. In their experiments, they explored
semantic similarity effects for both item and order memory
by using lists of items that were either from one semantic
category or unrelated to each other. They found that
categorical similarity was advantageous to item memory but
had little effect upon order memory; in effect, across
conditions, order errors were proportional to the number of
items recalled. As there are more items recalled for
categorised lists, there is a proportional increase in order
errors. In explaining their results, they suggested that the
taxonomic category could be used as an extra retrieval cue
supporting recall.
However, assuming semantic LTM underpins STM
performance suggests another explanation of the semantic
category effect and generates further predictions. The latter
relate to the associative links that exist between the
members of a given semantic category.
Associative Links and Co-occurrence. Saint-Aubin et al
(2005) suggested that increased access to same category
items might depend on their long-term associative links (see
also Hulme, Stuart, Brown, & Morin, 2003). Items from the
same category tend to co-occur more frequently than items
taken from different categories and this is thought to
strengthen their associative links in memory (Deese, 1960;
Stuart & Hulme, 2000). This is in line with many
conceptualisations of lexical/semantic memory in other
fields, which often depict semantic/lexical memory in terms
of a network of associatively related items; activation in one
part of the network can spread and influence recall of other
items in the network. It seems plausible that activating
multiple items in an associative network might produce high
levels of activation and support recall.
A related idea was put forward by Acheson et al (2011)
although coming from a somewhat different perspective.
Importantly, their particular proposal led us to new, specific
and testable predictions. A quote from their paper makes

1187

their view clearer (emphasis ours): “After initial encoding,
lexical activation is determined by repeated interaction with
semantic and phonological representation. Serial ordering
errors occur when the relative activation levels of the
lexical items change because of this interaction. (…). If
the maintenance of information in verbal WM is achieved
by virtue of activation of language-production architecture,
this leads to the prediction that disrupting semantic
processing should influence the relative activation of
lexical-level representations, thus influencing serial
ordering." (Acheson et al., 2011, p. 46). Acheson et al. used
a dual-task strategy; when the interference task involved
semantic processing, more order errors were produced than
with a spatial task. This effect disappeared with non-words,
i.e. there was no disruption by the semantic dual task.
Another way of “disrupting” semantic processing is by
using associates that are highly related with a target item
within a list. This is the strategy we adopted in the first
experiment reported here. On the face of it, the view above
predicts that semantically related lists should lead to more
order errors than control lists that have reduced levels of
inter-item activation. There are multiple studies that suggest
this is not the case – but there is controversy surrounding
this point (see Saint-Aubin, et al., 2005). As mentioned
earlier, order errors are proportional to item recall and
semantically related lists produce better item recall.
To summarise, according to the hypothesis just reviewed
(hereafter AN for Activated Network view) manipulating
item activation levels within a list should influence serial
ordering - or the information serial ordering is based upon
(Acheson et al., 2011). Exp. 1 manipulated the level of
activation of a target item to test the prediction that this
would increase order errors for that item.
In Exp 1, lists of six visually presented items were used.
Experimental lists contained a target item, presented in
position 5 and the three first items were strong associates of
the target. Control lists contained the same three associates
in positions 1 to 3, but the item in position 5 was unrelated
(see Table 1 for list examples).
Table 1: Sample experimental and control lists
Experimental list examples
officer
band
officer
band

badge
record

siren
concert

fence
yellow

police
music

tractor
tourist

badge
record

Control list examples
siren
music
tourist
concert tractor
fence

yellow
police

For the experimental lists, it is expected that the first
three items will activate the target (5th item) within LTM
networks, making its representation seem more like that of
earlier list items. Based on the AN view, the prediction is
that the target fifth item will migrate more often than a nontarget item in the same position. Although it is difficult to
make specific predictions because of the numerous

constraints on order recall (e.g, there is only one position to
which the 5th item can migrate in one direction and 4 in the
other), one possibility is that the target word moves towards
typically better recalled positions. The latter would provide
stronger evidence in favour of models which include the
prediction of a semantic memory effect on order recall.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants. A total of 40 adults took part (14 men, age
range from 18 to 57, mean 27); they were offered a small
financial incentive (£7) for participating.
Materials. The experiment comprised 32 lists, with 16
experimental and 16 control lists. We first generated a set of
16 lists where the first three items were strong associates of
a target word, based on the University of South Florida
norms (Nelson, McEvoy & Schreiber, 2004). These words,
when used as cue words in a semantic association /
production task, generate the target as a strong (early
produced) associate. The target was placed in the 5th
position of each list, and the remaining positions (4 & 6)
were filled with unrelated words. The same words were
then used again to create a further set of 16 control lists, so
each word was used twice within the experiment. Control
lists had the same three associates in the first positions, in
the same order. The last three words were a random
selection from the filler words and from targets associated
with other lists. The 32 lists thus created were then mixed to
create 4 sets, with a different order of lists. This was done
such that a given trio of related words was presented once in
the first block of 16 lists and once in the second block of 16
lists. Also, each block of 16 lists contained 8 experimental
and 8 control lists. Each participant was only presented with
one set of 32 lists, with sets counterbalanced across
participants. A bespoke computer program controlled
stimulus presentation and response collection.
Procedure. Participants were tested individually, in
sound-proofed cubicles, within a session lasting
approximately 20 minutes. Following instructions they
completed two practice trials. A fixation cross appeared in
the centre of the screen, for two seconds, indicating that the
first word was about to be presented. Words appeared
sequentially on the screen, for one and a half seconds each,
and were separated by a 500 msec blank. After the six
words from a list had been presented, participants were to
type them into response boxes, in the order in which they
had appeared in the list, starting with the word presented
first (the program stopped Ps from typing a response if the
previous one was not entered – except for the first answer).
They were not allowed to backtrack to correct a previous
response. If they did not remember a word, they were asked
to type the letter “b” and proceed to the following position.

Results and Discussion
The hypothesis examined here related to the recall of the
critical word and its control both appearing in the 5th
position of each list. The prediction from the AN view was

1188

that semantic activation plays a role in order encoding and
maintenance. Still another view is that observed effects are
attributable to activation from associative links but the
target item is not recalled very often in position 4 because of
the knowledge of list structure that develops over the
experiment (i.e. Ps notice that item 4 is never related to the
first 3). The next study used lists that eliminate any
advantage that grouping could involve, making the use of
the strategy much less likely.
60
Error Frequency (across Ps)

that there would be more movement of the 5th item in the
condition where the first three items presented were strong
associates of said target. All analyses reported as significant
were related to a p value < 0.05.
Table 2 presents correct-in-position scores (i.e. to be
scored correct, the item must be recalled in its presentation
position) as well as the item recall score (i.e. item scored
correct if it is recalled, irrespective of position). The table
also presents means for the critical 5th item. As perusal of
the table shows, overall performance is similar in both
conditions; it appears item 5 was better recalled in the
experimental condition if one ignores the position of recall.
The latter points towards more migration of that item.
Table 2: Mean recall across positions and for position 5

Control lists
Exp. lists
Control lists
Exp. lists

All positions
Position 5
Correct in position scores
0.71
0.58
0.71
0.58
Item recall scores
0.78
0.68
0.79
0.75

As would be expected, there were no statistically reliable
effect for the correct in position scores. With respect to item
scores, paired sample T-tests showed no reliable difference
for the overall means, but there was a significant difference
for position 5 (t(39)=2.5).
Figures 1 shows the frequency with which the item
studied in position 5 is actually recalled in another position
– essentially error frequency per position, for the 5th item.
As can be seen, the frequency with which the 5th word is
recalled in an incorrect position appears higher for the
Experimental condition than for the Control condition,
particularly for positions 2 and 3. A 2 (condition) x 5 (error
position) repeated measures ANOVA revealed that errors
were significantly less frequent for the Control condition,
F(1, 39) = 12.63, MSe = 0.56. There was also a significant
effect of position, F(4, 156)= 16.76, MSe =0.85 and a
significant interaction, F(4, 156=2.75, MSe= .52. Simple
main effect tests showed that there were more migration
errors in the Experimental condition for positions 2 and 3.
These findings support the prediction of the AN account:
when the first three items in a list are strong associates of
the 5th item, the latter tends to migrate more than a control
item appearing in the same position. What is more, the
target item migrated towards typically better recalled
positions, as expected.
However, there is an alternative interpretation of this
finding. It suggests that the 5th item is simply more
frequently recalled grouped with the related items. Although
the task instructions emphasised ordered recall, participants
might have subjectively grouped the related items and this
could have generated order errors. Essentially, the
alternative hypothesis suggests that the results are an
artefact of a study/recall strategy rather than an indication

Control
Experimental

50
40
30
20
10
0
1

2
3
4
6
Recall position of item 5
Figure 1. Errors for item 5 as a function of position.

Experiment 2
This experiment was based on a re-analysis of the
findings of a previously published study also calling upon
immediate serial recall. The data was from Saint-Aubin et
al. (2005). In their study, the experimental lists contained
items that were all from the same semantic category
(vegetables, sports, clothing, etc). As mentioned earlier,
items from the same category co-occur more frequently in
the language and as a result, have associative links. Based
on the AN view, we would expect heightened co-activation
for these lists, relative to control lists containing unrelated
items. Importantly, one would not expect any special
grouping strategy for the categorised lists as all the items are
from the same category. The control lists were constructed
by re-organising the items from the semantically related
condition so that each word within a list was from a
different semantic category. Each condition involved the
same items overall; however, semantic category was
manipulated between participants, with N=70 in each group.
All lists were seven items long; there were 14 lists presented
in each condition. The details of the methodology are
otherwise similar to the study reported here and can be
found in Saint-Aubin et al. (2005).

Results and Discussion
As the lists used in this experiment were seven items
long, we examined the recall of items 5, and 6. These
seemed like the best candidates for two reasons: a)
activation can be reasonably assumed to grow with the

1189

number of related preceding items, so we would expect it to
be high for these later items and b) there needs to be a
reasonable number of errors made for reliable migration
analyses to be possible. In an immediate serial recall task,
the highest performance is typically observed for the first
few items; the last item (7) is of less interest as it can only
migrate in one direction.
Figures 2a and 2b summarise the main findings. As can
be seen, there were more migrations for the related items
relative to the Control condition. The results for each
position were analysed with two mixed ANOVAs; the
between-subject factor was list type (categorised or not) and
the within-subject factor was error position. For position 5,
there was a main effect of list type, F(1, 138)= 10.05, MSe=

Control

180

200

(A)
Error Frequency (across Ps)

Error Frequency (across Ps)

200

1999b). This increase is accompanied by a proportional
increase in order errors. So, if order error proportions are the
measure called upon, there is typically no effect of category
on order. However, Saint-Aubin et al. (2005) did report a
statistically reliable effect of categorised lists on the
proportion of order errors.
The AN model discussed here offers a straightforward
and parsimonious interpretation of this typical pattern of
findings: the representation of the words in an immediate
serial recall task relies on available language processing
systems, including activation within and between
phonological, sub-lexical, lexical, and semantic networks.
Categorised lists lead to heightened network activation
which produces better item retrieval as well as perturbation

Categorised

160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20

Control

180

(B)

Categorised

160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

0
1

2
3
4
6
Recall position of item 5

1

7

2
3
4
5
Recall position of item 6

7

Figure 2. (A) Error frequency for item 5 and (B) item 6 as a function of recall position.
0.516, of position, F(5, 290)= 82.0, MSe= 0.514, as well as
a significant interaction, F(5, 690)= 4.45, MSe= 2.29. The
same effects were obtained for position 6, with list type F(1,
138)= 24.69, MSe= 0.626, error position F(5, 290)= 86.81,
MSe= 0.718, and the interaction F(5, 690)= 14.10, MSe=
0.718 producing reliable effects. Simple main effect tests
revealed the following: for the words studied in the 5th
position, the difference between conditions was only
significant for recall errors in position 4. For the items
studied in the 6th position, this difference was significant for
the errors observed in positions 4 and 5.
These findings fit nicely with those of Exp. 1; in both
experiments, an increase in order errors / migrations for
semantically related lists was observed, relative to control
list, as predicted by the AN account.

General Discussion
Previous interpretations have insisted that categorised
lists have almost all of their effect by increasing item recall
(irrespective of position; Saint-Aubin & Poirier, 1999a,

of the representation of item order.
Our aim in this paper was to test a specific prediction
derived from the Acheson et al (2011) proposal; the latter
suggests that short-term memory relies on the LTM
networks available for language processing. Our findings
produced a pattern that was very much in line with the
derived predictions. One could possibly interpret these
findings posthoc within the redintegration framework
perhaps by assuming that activation can perturb the order in
which items are rehearsed. We would argue that our results
are best interpreted within a model where STM relies on
LTM representations and available LTM networks.

References
Acheson, D. J., & MacDonald, M. C. (2009). Verbal
working memory and language production: Common
approaches to the serial ordering of verbal information.
Psychological Bulletin, 135(1), 50-68
Acheson, D.J., MacDonald, M.C. & Postle, B.R. (2011). The
effect of concurrent semantic categorization on delayed

1190

serial recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 37, 44-59.
Baddeley, A.D. (1986). Working memory. Oxford: OUP.
Burgess, N. & Hitch, G. J. (2006). A revised model of shortterm memory and long-term learning of verbal sequences.
Journal of Memory and Language, 55, 627-652.
Cowan, N. (1999). An embedded-processes model of
working memory. In A. Miyake & P. Shah (eds.),
Models of Working Memory: Mechanisms of active
maintenance and executive control (pp. 62-101).
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Cowan, N., & Chen, Z. (2009). How chunks form in longterm memory and affect short-term memory limits. In A.
Thorn & M. Page (Eds.), Interactions between shortterm and long-term memory in the verbal domain (pp.
86-101). Hove, East Sussex, UK: Psychology Press.
Deese, J. (1960). Frequency of usage and number of words
in free-recall: The role of association. Psychological
Reports, 7, 337-344.
Hamilton, A. C., Martin, R. C. (2007). Proactive
interference in a semantic short-term memory deficit:
Role of semantic and phonological relatedness. Cortex,
43, 112–123.
Hulme, C., Maughan, S., & Brown, G.D.A. (1991). Memory
for familiar and unfamiliar words: Long-term memory
contribution to short-term memory span. Journal of
Memory and Language, 30, 685-701.
Hulme, C., Stuart, G., Brown, G.D.A., & Morin, C. (2003).
High- and low-frequency words are recalled equally well
in alternating lists: Evidence for associative effects in
serial recall. Journal of Memory and Language, 49, 500518.
Gupta, P. (2003). Examining the relationship between word
learning, nonword repetition, and immediate serial recall
in adults. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
56(7), 1213-1236.
Gupta, P. (2009). A computational model of non word
repetition, immediate serial recall, and non word
learning. In A. Thorn & M. Page (Eds.), Interactions
between short-term and long-term memory in the verbal
domain. Hove: Psychology Press
Martin, N. & Gupta, P. (2004). Exploring the relation-ship
between word processing and verbal STM: Evidence
from associations and dissociations. Cognitive
Neuropsy-chology, 21, 213-228.
Martin R. C. (2006). Semantic short-term memory,
language processing, and inhibition. In Meyer A. S.,
Wheeldon L. R., Krott A. (Eds.), Automaticity and
control in language processing (pp. 162-191). Hoboken,
NJ: Taylor & Francis.
Majerus, S. (2009). Verbal short-term memory and
temporary activation of language representations: the
importance of distinguishing item and order information.
In A. Thorn & M. Page (Eds.), Interactions between
short-term and long-term memory in the verbal domain
(pp 244-276). Hove, UK: Psychology Press.

Nelson, D.L., McEvoy, C.L., and Schreiber, T.A. 2004. The
University of South Florida Word Association, Rhyme
and Word Fragment Norms. Behavior Research
Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 36, 408-420.
Poirier, M., & Saint-Aubin, J. (1995). Memory for related
and unrelated words: Further evidence on the influence
of semantic factors in immediate serial recall. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology A:
Human Experimental Psychology, 48A, 384-404
Roodenrys, S. J. (2009). Explaining phonological
neighbourhood effects in short-term memory. In A.
Thorn & M. Page (Eds.), Interactions between shortterm and long-term memory in the verbal domain (pp.
177-197). Hove: Psychology Press
Roodenrys, S. J. & Miller, L. M. (2008). A constrained
Rasch model of trace redintegration in serial recall.
Memory and Cognition, 36, 578-587.
Saint-Aubin, J. & Poirier, M. (1999a). The influence of
long-term memory factors on immediate serial recall: An
item and order analysis. International Journal of
Psychology, 34, 347-352.
Saint-Aubin, J. & Poirier, M. (1999b). Semantic similarity
and immediate serial recall: Is there a detrimental effect
on order information? The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 52A(2), 367-394
Saint-Aubin, J., Ouellette, D. & Poirier, M. (2005).
Semantic similarity and immediate serial recall: Is there
an effect on all trials? Psychonomic Bulletin and Review,
12, 171-177.
Schweickert, R. (1993). A multinomial processing tree
model for degradation and redintegration in immediate
recall. Memory & Cognition, 21, 168-175.
Stuart, G. & Hulme, C. (2000). The effects of word cooccurrence on short-term memory: Associative links in
long-term memory affect short-term memory
performance, Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory & Cognition, 26, 796-802.
Thorn A. S. C., Frankish C. R. (2005). Long-term
knowledge effects on serial recall of nonwords are not
exclusively
lexical.
Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 31, 729735.
Thorn, A., Frankish, C. R., & Gathercole, S. E. (2009). The
infuence of long-term knowledge on short-term
memory: Evidence for multiple mechanisms. In A.
Thorn & M. Page (Eds.), Interactions between shortterm and long-term memory in the verbal domain (pp.
198-219). Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Thorn, A., & Page, M. (2009). Interactions between shortterm and long-term memory in the verbal domain. Hove,
UK: Psychological Press.
Tse, C.S. (2009). The role of associative strength in the
semantic relatedness effect on immediate serial recall.
Memory, 17, 874-891.

1191

