UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Sequential Sampling Models for Cognitive and Perceptual Decision Making

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4xs7f8fg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Author
Shiffrin, Richard

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Use of Colour in Reference Production: A Comparison between Dutch and
Greek
Mirjana Sekicki (mirjana_sekicki@yahoo.com)
Faculty of Philosophy; University of Novi Sad, Serbia

Jette Viethen (jette.viethen@mq.edu.au)
Centre for Language Technology; Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia

Martijn Goudbeek (m.b.goudbeek@uvt.nl)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC); Tilburg University, The Netherlands

Emiel Krahmer (e.j.krahmer@uvt.nl)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC); Tilburg University, The Netherlands

Abstract
The important role of referring expressions in human
communication has inspired much research in the fields of
computational linguistics and psycholinguistics. Building on
the research done by Viethen, Goudbeek and Krahmer
(CogSci, 2012) the present study takes a cross-linguistic
perspective on examining the use of the colour attribute in
distinguishing a target referent. It aims at answering the
following research question: Does the availability of adequate
basic colour terms in a language affect the use of colour in
reference production? We conducted a language production
experiment with native speakers of Dutch and Greek. Our
results confirm that the use of the colour attribute in reference
production depends on the colour term resources of a
particular language. In addition, we have recorded a large
cross-linguistic difference in the proportion of the colour use,
which we relate to the particular colour nuances used.
Keywords: language production; reference production;
colour; cross-linguistic study.

Introduction
Speakers often need to distinguish one object (the target
referent) from other objects in the same scene that are not
the intended referent (the distractors). Both spoken and
written discourse often include noun phrases of the structure
similar to the followingμ “the tall red bike at the corner”έ
Such verbal descriptions produced in order to point to an
object and put it in focus of the particular discourse are
called referring expressions. When producing referring
expressions a speaker needs to determine which attributes of
a target (such as its colour, type, size or location) to include.
This process, which is known as semantic content selection,
has been a topic of extensive research in cognitive science.
Colour has been found to be readily used and even
favoured in reference production tasks (Pechmann, 1989;
Sedivy, 2003). It is frequently included redundantly in a
target description (Koolen, Goudbeek & Krahmer, 2013;
Viethen & Dale, 2011). This is claimed to be due to the ease
of colour perception, since it is perceived instantly and
independent of context (Pechmann, 1989). In contrast, an

object’s size is a relative attribute and its value can be
determined only in comparison to the objects of the same
type (Brown-Schmidt & Tanenhaus, 2006). Thus, the use of
size in referring expression production has been shown to
depend on how distinguishing size is of the target object
(Sedivy, 2003; Viethen & Dale, 2011). The findings of
Pechmann (1989) show that people tend to start articulating
a referring expression before having thoroughly examined
the whole scene. Hence, the adjectives that denote easily
perceivable features tend to be articulated first. In his study,
Pechmann (1989) found that such a feature was almost
exclusively colour. People often produce overspecified
referring expressions, since they tend to start uttering their
description with the most easily perceivable characteristic
and only later include the most relevant ones. Moreover, the
results of Belke and Meyer (2002) are in agreement with
Pechmann (1989) showing that speakers usually mention the
absolute characteristics first, without reflecting upon how
distinguishing they are of the target.
Viethen, Goudbeek and Krahmer (2012) were the first to
further investigate the mentioned tendency for using colour.
They examined whether the preference for using the colour
attribute is reduced when the colour of the target is
relatively similar to that of the distractors. In addition, they
considered the notion of colour term basicness.
Berlin and Kay (1969) argued for eleven basic perceptual
colour categories universal to human vision that act as
referents for eleven or fewer Basic Colour Terms (BCTs) in
any language. In order to be considered basic a colour term
has to conform to various parameters. 1 The authors found
1
Berlin and Kay (1969) set the following criteria for considering
a colour term basic: (a) the colour term should be monolexemic –
its meaning is not predictable from the meaning of its parts; (b) its
meaning should not be included in the meaning of any other term;
(c) its use should not be restricted to a certain class of objects; (d) it
should be psychologically salient for speakers, which implies the
tendency to occur at the beginning of elicited lists of colour terms,
the stability of reference across informants and occasions of use,
and the occurrence in the idiolects of all informants.

1407

that the number of BCTs can vary greatly among languages,
i.e. a language can have between two and eleven BCTs.
Interestingly, the results of Viethen et al. (2012) show that
colour use does not differ significantly between the
conditions with colours that are perceptually highly different
(e.g., red and blue) and with colours of low perceptual
difference but high codability, i.e., for which BCTs are
available (e.g., red and pink); but they did record a reduction
in colour use for colour pairs of low codability, i.e.,
nameable only with a morphologically complex
modification of a BCT (e.g., light-blue and dark-blue). Thus,
they conclude that the difference in colour use between
conditions is entirely due to the difficulty in naming similar
colour nuances. However, their findings do not clearly point
as to what causes this difference, namely, whether it is the
lack of separate BCTs or morphological complexity. Using
morphologically complex terms potentially asks for higher
cognitive effort. However, in order to require less cognitive
effort a mono-morphemic term should also be salient.
In the present study, we take a cross-linguistic perspective
and examine what influence the colour vocabulary resources
of different languages have on the assumed preference for
using the colour attribute in reference production. We follow
Viethen et al. (2012) but include two languages that differ in
the number of BCTs and thus allow for stronger evidence
for the impact of colour codability on the use of colour. The
language of the experiment conducted by Viethen et al.
(2012) was Dutch. In order to produce comparable results,
the present study employs Dutch, but with the addition of
Greek, a language that according to Androulaki et al. (2006)
includes a 12th BCT, ghalazio (γα ζ ομ light-blue), and
thus has the maximum number of BCTs found in a
language. These two languages enable us to create stimuli
with colour nuances for which separate BCTs are available
in one language but not in the other and thus record if colour
codability yields any differences in colour attribute use both
within a language and cross-linguistically. In addition, we
might be able to shed more light on the apparent
inconsistency of the claim that Greek has 12 BCTs with the
theory of Berlin and Kay (1969).
In sum, we compare the use of the colour attribute in three
different settings: (a) when the colours of the target and the
distractors are very different, (b) when these colours are
similar with available BCTs for naming them, and (c) when
the colours are similar with no available BCTs. In addition
to within-language comparisons, this set-up allows us to
examine the potential cross-linguistic differences.
We aim at answering the following research question:
Does the availability of adequate BCTs in a language affect
the use of colour in reference production? Following
Viethen et al. (2012) we expect no difference in the use of
the colour attribute in conditions where the colours of the
target and of the distractors are very different in comparison
with the conditions where the colours are similar. However,
we expect this to be so only in the conditions where BCTs

exist for both the colour of the target and the distractors.
Thus, we postulate the following hypotheses:
H1: Low perceptual difference between the colours of the
target and those of the distractors alone does not moderate
the proportion of colour use in reference production.
H2: Low codability of the colours required to distinguish
the target from the distractors leads to a reduction in the
proportion of colour use in reference production.
One of the practical implications of the present study is
the further development of Referring Expression Generation
(REG) algorithms. None of the existing algorithms
considers what modifies the human readiness to use colour.
However, aiming at producing human-like output, REG
algorithms should take into account the findings that show
whether the perception of some type or combination of
colour nuances leads to (dis)preferring the use of colour in
reference production and whether these preferences differ
for languages with different BCT inventories.

Experiment
We conducted a language production experiment presenting
the participants with a number of images consisting of three
geometrical objects, displayed on a computer screen. The
participants were instructed to verbally refer to one
particular object in the scene so that an imaginary partner
could successfully distinguish that object. The same
experiment was conducted both with Greek and Dutch
participants, in their respective languages.

Method
Participants 35 native Greek speakers, all but two students
of Tilburg University, participated in the experiment
voluntarily. They had spent a maximum of one year in the
Netherlands and none of them spoke Dutch. There were 19
male and 16 female participants. Their age ranged from 19
to 30 years (M = 24.63). In addition, 30 native Dutch
speakers, students of Tilburg University, participated either
voluntarily or in return for course credit. There were 13
male and 17 female participants. Their age ranged from 18
to 29 years (M = 21.83).
Materials and Design To ensure comparability, the
experimental design and the stimuli employed largely
resemble those of Viethen et al. (2012). Each participant
was presented with 40 critical images and 80 filler items.
The critical trials consisted of three simple two-dimensional
geometrical figures of the same type. The target figure
differed in colour and size from the distractors and the two
distractor figures were identical. Thus, either the use of
colour or size sufficed to fully distinguish the target. The
area of the target figure was always two times bigger (or
smaller) than the area of the distractor figure.
The main experimental manipulation concerned the colour
of the figures. In a pilot study, native speakers of both Greek

1408

(b) hidiff: one small pink and two (c) lodiff-hicode: one small
(d) lodiff-dep_code: one big
big dark-blue circles.
purple and two big pink squares. light-blue and two small darkblue diamonds.

(e) lodiff-locode: one small darkbrown and two big light-brown
diamonds.

Figure 1: Example stimuli from the four experimental conditions
and Dutch participated in a colour naming pre-test which
ensured they named the chosen colours as anticipated.
Four different colour conditions were created and named
in resemblance to the conditions used by Viethen et al.
(2012). The hidiff condition included images with colours
that differed considerably, namely, pink and dark-blue, and
purple and light-blue. Half of the images included objects in
purple and light-blue and another half in pink and dark-blue.
Colours of a pair differ greatly not only in terms of hue and
saturation, but also in terms of their brightness, as pink was
never used in combination with light-blue and purple never
with dark-blue. Figure 1(a) illustrates the hidiff condition.
The lodiff-hicode condition used colours that differ only in
brightness, namely, pink and purple as shown in Figure 1(b).
Thus, this condition used colours of lower difference but
high codability since BCTs exist for them in both languages.
Figure 1(c) illustrates the lodiff-dep_code condition.
Colours differ only in terms of brightness, as in lodiffhicode; however, different coding options are available for
them in the two languages. There are no separate BCTs for
light-blue and dark-blue in Dutch, but the BCT blauw (blue)
has to be modified with licht (light) or donker (dark) in
order for the distinction to be made. Greek, on the other
hand, has two BCTs, ghalazio (γα ζ ο) and ble ( π ε),
respectively.2 For the Greek participants, this condition is
equivalent to lodiff-hicode, for the Dutch, to lodiff-locode.
Finally, Figure 1(d) illustrates the lodiff-locode condition
that included light-brown and dark-brown, colours for which
both languages use the morphologically complex structure,
lichtbruin (light-brown) and donkerbruin (dark- brown) in
Dutchν and anihto kafe (α ο χ
αφ μ light-brown) and
skuro kafe ( ο ρο αφ μ dark-brown) in Greek.
In order to set the colour values, we used the Hue
Saturation Brightness (HSB) colour model. Since there were
three pairs of colours (pink/purple, light-blue/dark-blue,
light-brown/dark-brown), we had to make sure that the
difference between the colours in each pair was identical.
Tightening up the colour choice strategy of Viethen et al.
(2012), we decided that the only difference between the two
2

It should be noted that speakers of Greek have the alternative
of saying anihto ble (α ο χ
π εμ light-blue), instead of ghalazio
(γα ζ ο) for this colour nuance.

colours in a pair was to be a 40% difference in brightness,
keeping the values of hue and saturation constant. Table 1
shows the HSB values for the colour pairs used. Note that
hidiff is the only condition where the colours of the target
and distractor objects differ in all three values, not only
brightness. This ensured a high and more easily perceivable
difference between the colours than in the other conditions.
The filler items were designed to make sure that the
overall number of occurrence of each colour was kept
approximately the same. The number of target objects in
each colour was kept balanced, as well as the position of the
target object in the scene, namely, left, middle or right.
Filler Items Two thirds of the total number of trials were
filler items, half of which were geometrical fillers and the
other half Greeble fillers.
Geometrical fillers were similar to the critical items in that
they used the same types of geometrical figures and the
same colours. However, they differed in various ways in
order not to prime the participants to develop strategies in
creating their descriptions. First, the target object could be
distinguished from the distractors in terms of pattern
(vertical stripes or dots) and/or type. Colour and size were
never fully distinguishing. Second, the distractors were
never identical, but differed in colour, type and/or pattern.
Third, the size of the figures in a scene was the same.
The Greeble items3 consisted of two 3D purple objects
each. These objects are quite complex and difficult to
differentiate and differ greatly from the critical items and
geometrical fillers. As has been the case in previous studies
(e.g., Koolen et al., 2013), they have proved to be an
excellent distractor leading the majority of participants in
our experiment to consider them the objects of our attention.
Procedure The stimuli were shown on a computer screen
in a silent and dimly lit room. Half of the participants were
presented with the randomized order of stimuli and the other
half with the reversed version of this order. In both cases, a
geometrical filler was always followed by a Greeble filler,
which was followed by a critical item.
3

The Greebles are courtesy of Michael J. Tarr, Center for the
Neural Basis of Cognition and Department of Psychology,
Carnegie Mellon University; www.tarrlab.org.

1409

Table 1: The table of the colour values
C
H
S
B

pink
330°
50%
100%

purple
330°
50%
60%

l-blue
210°
40%
90%

d-blue
210°
40%
50%

l-brown
30°
70%
70%

d-brown
30°
70%
30%

The experiment included written instructions that
requested the participants to imagine a situation in which
they were to assist a colleague who was presented with the
same set of images. This imaginary colleague was supposed
to click on the target object in each of the images, but they
did not know which object to click on. An arrow was used to
point out the intended target object to the participants,
whose task it was to verbally distinguish the target from the
distractors. Each image included the beginning of an
appropriate sentence, namely, Click on the… in the
respective language. The sentence was included in order to
remind the participants of their task and to lead them to be
more concrete in their answers, not needing to introduce the
context for each image. The participants were instructed not
to use spatial information of the target object, i.e., not to
characterize it as the left, right or the middle one in the
scene. This restriction assured that the participants would
use only the object characteristics controlled by the
researcher. Moreover, the time for producing the answers
was limited. Each image was displayed for only 4.5 seconds.
After that a fixation cross was displayed for 1.5 seconds.
This was done in order to prevent the participants from
producing extensive descriptions of the scenes, as well as
from meditating upon their answers.
After the experiment a post-test was conducted where the
participants were presented with the colour pairs used in the
experiment, and were requested to name the colours. The
post-test was introduced in order to confirm that the right
nuances of colours were used in order to elicit the expected
colour terms in both languages.
Table 2 gives the proportion of the colour attribute use in
the experimental conditions in the two languages.

Results
Coding of the Independent Variables The main dependent
measure we analysed is the proportion of colour use in the
different conditions. We consider a description to contain
colour if the term used is true of the target object, regardless
of its distinguishing value. Moreover, we analysed the use of
the size attribute.
The recorded responses were first transcribed and then
annotated by a Dutch native-speaker and a near-native
speaker of Greek, for Dutch and Greek data, respectively.

between conditions in the two languages were assessed with
a mixed 2 (languages) x 4 (conditions) ANOVA, again,
followed by pairwise comparisons.
The use of the colour attribute in the Greek sample
showed a significant overall effect [F (3,102) = 4.09, p =
έ00λ]έ After six pairwise comparisons with Bonferonni’s
correction for α-level mistakes (p < .008), the only
significant difference in colour use [t (34) = 3.22, p < .008, r
= .48] was recorded between the hidiff condition (M = .81,
SD = 0.33) and lodiff-dep_code (M = .71, SD = 0.40).
For the use of size in the Greek sample, the withinsubjects ANOVA revealed a significant overall effect [F
(3,102) = 4.84, p < .003]. Pairwise comparisons showed a
significant increase in the use of size [t (34) = -3.17, p <
.008, r = .48] between the hidiff condition (M = .79, SD =
0.25) and lodiff-dep_code (M = .89, SD = 0.18). No
significant difference was found between hidiff (M = .79, SD
= 0.25) and lodiff-hicode (M = .89, SD = 0.18), [p = .012],
however, with the strict α-level correction we employed this
can be seen as a trend towards significance.
The ANOVA revealed a significant difference in colour
use among the conditions in the Dutch sample [F (3,87) =
5.38, p = .002]. Consequently, pairwise comparisons
showed that the difference between hidiff (M = .51, SD =
0.44) and lodiff-locode (M = .40, SD = 0.48), exhibits a
trend towards significance [t (29) = 2.80, p = .009]. Also, a
trend towards significance was found between lodiff-hicode
(M = .45, SD = 0.47) and lodiff-locode (M = .40, SD = 0.48)
[t (29) = 2.80, p = .009], and between lodiff-dep_code (M =
.47, SD = 0.47) and lodiff-locode (M = .40, SD = 0.48) [t
(29) = 2.73, p = .011]. Concerning the use of size in the
Dutch sample, we found a significant overall effect [F (3,87)
= 4.59, p < .005] and a significant increase in the use of this
attribute [t (29) = -3.25, p < .008, r = .52] between hidiff (M
= .85, SD = 0.21) and lodiff-hicode (M = .95, SD = 0.12).
Concerning the comparison between the two languages,
the mixed ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of
colour use among the conditions [F (3,189) = 6.79, p <
.001] and a significantly higher use in the Greek sample [F
(1,63) = 8.87, p= .004, r = .35]. There was no significant
interaction between language and condition [F (3,189) =
2.55, p = .06]. Figure 2 shows the difference in the overall
colour use between the two language samples.
Table 2: The proportion of colour use in the conditions.
The shaded fields present the conditions where no difference
in colour use was expected.

Data Analysis We used a within-subjects ANOVA to
compare the use of attributes in the four experimental
conditions. Subsequently, pairwise comparisons further
investigated the differences. In addition, the differences

1410

Conditions
hidiff
lodiff-hicode
lodiff-dep_code
lodiff-locode

Mean
.81
.76
.71
.75

Greek
SD
0.33
0.36
0.40
0.40

Mean
.51
.45
.47
.40

Dutch
SD
0.44
0.47
0.47
0.48

Figure 2: The use of the colour attribute in the two
language samples, Dutch and Greek
There was a significant effect of size use among the
conditions [F (3,189) = 8.92, p< .001], but no difference
between languages [F (1, 63) = 1.595, p = .21], and no
significant interaction [F (3,189) = 0.34, p = .79].
Finally, we have calculated the proportion of use of the
anticipated colour term, out of the cases in which that term
could have been used and a colour term was used. As shown
in Table 3, the anticipated terms were less readily used in
the experiment than in the colour naming post-test in both
languages, even though participants were in general able to
correctly identify the colours. Interestingly, this reduction in
colour use compared to the colour naming test is lower, or
non-existent for pink and purple.

Discussion
The results support the first hypothesis since there was no
significant difference in colour use between the hidiff and
the lodiff-hicode condition in either of the languages. Even
though the colours used in lodiff-hicode were more similar
than those in hidiff, this did not lead to a significant
difference in colour use between the two conditions, since
the colours in both conditions could be named using BCTs.
This is in agreement with the results of Viethen et al. (2012).
For the Greek speakers, lodiff-dep_code was similar to
lodiff-hicode since the differences between colours in the
pairs were the same and separate BCTs exist to name them.
Consequently, we expected no reduction in colour use
between these conditions in the Greek sample; however, the
results proved the contrary. The colour naming post-test
showed that colours were successfully recognized; but there
was a reduced use of these terms in actual reference
production. This suggests a potential difference between
using an adequate term in a colour naming task and in
reference production. In addition, perhaps ghalazio
(γα ζ ο) is not as established as a BCT as Androulaki et alέ
(2006) suggested.
The second hypothesis expected a reduction in colour use
compared to hidiff in lodiff-dep_code and lodiff-locode in
the Dutch, and in lodiff-locode in the Greek sample. Since
only a tendency towards significance was recorded for

lodiff-locode in the Dutch sample, this hypothesis is not
supported by the present results. For the Greek sample, this
interesting finding may have to do with the availability of
multiple colour terms in this condition since it provides an
option for using a BCT (ghalazio (γα ζ ο)) or a modified
BCT (anihto ble (α ο χ
π ε)έ In addition, the colours
used were not prototypical, but were highly constrained by
the rules set in order to strictly control the stimuli. Thus,
unclear colour nuances paired with multiple naming options
may have led to uncertainty and confusion as to how to
name them and consequently to the reduction in colour use.
Considering the between languages comparison, there was
a large main effect of language on colour use. Greek
participants used colour more readily in all experimental
conditions. However, there was no significant difference in
size use between the languages. Thus, the Greek sample
included more overspecified references. There is a much
greater readiness for using size in the present study than in
Viethen et al. (2012). This may also be due to the fact that
our colour nuances were less prototypical for their expected
terms, which potentially led to reduced colour use in the
Dutch and a high size use in both samples. In addition, one
possible explanation for the higher colour use in Greek is
tuning of the colours to the Greek speakers, i.e., the nuance
for light-blue was designed to elicit the expected Greek
colour term that does not exist in Dutch. Moreover, Greek
speakers make frequent use of morphologically simple, yet
non-basic terms. Thus, an effort was made not to elicit
unwanted terms from the plethora of readily used ones in
Greek, e.g., we had to create a nuance of pink that would not
be called fuchsia. Tuning the colours to one particular
cultural and language group might have led to these colours
being found non-typical and difficult to name to speakers of
the other background, leading to the observed low rate of
colour use in the Dutch sample.
Another possible explanation for the unexpectedly low
colour use in Dutch is that the experimental design ensured
that there were an equal number of occurrences of every
colour. Since most of the colours (four out of six) required a
morphologically complex term in Dutch and were therefore
less easily nameable, this might have led the participants to
abandon colour use altogether.

1411

Table 3: The proportions of use of the anticipated colour
terms: (I) in the experiment, in instances where a colour
term was used, (II) in the colour naming post-test
I
pink
purple
light-blue
dark-blue
light-brown
dark-brown

Dutch
100
97
50
61
71
77

Greek
98
90
66
88
81
73

II Dutch
93
97
97
97
80
97

Greek
100
91
80
97
86
97

Thus, the present study’s use of non-prototypical colour
nuances has potentially led to the scarce colour use by the
Dutch and the extensive size use by the Greek participants.
However, prototypical basic colours are not readily found in
nature. Colour naming options are much wider in reality.
The results of the present study suggest that this fact is not
to be neglected. Consequently, future studies should perhaps
examine to what extent the use of dull colour nuances
moderates the use of the colour attribute.
Finally, the colour nuances used might have led to colour
becoming a less salient attribute. However, since the
experimental setting gave the participants the freedom to
choose any linguistic means to describe the target object,
there is a possibility that colour use was influenced more by
the frequency of colour terms in the respective languages
than by any perceptual effects.

the reduction in colour use with speakers of a language
where those nuances are not linguistically specified.
Future work in the field of colour attribute use should
consider the choice of colour nuances. The improvement of
REG algorithms should include the context and source of
the colour of the target, whether the target is an object found
in nature and to what extent its colour can be regarded as
prototypical of a colour term from a given language.

Consequences for Computational Modelling The
Incremental Algorithm (Dale & Reiter, 1995) is considered
most successful in producing human-like referring
expressions. It is based on a preference list over attributes
where all the values of an attribute are treated the same, e.g.,
all colour nuances are equally likely to be used in a referring
expression. Our results suggest that different preference
ratings should exist for the different colour values. For
instance, colour may be the preferred attribute in the context
of prototypical colours; however, size may become
preferred over colour in the context of non-prototypical
values. In addition, we have shown that tuning colours to
members of one language and cultural group might cause
difficulties in naming colours for members of a different
group. This implies that rankings in the preference list
should be different for different languages.

Androulaki, A., Gômez-Pestaña, N., Mitsakis, Ch., Jover, J.,
Coventry, K. & Davies, I. (2006). Basic Colour Terms in
Modern Greek. Journal of Greek Linguistics, 7, 3-47.
Belke, E., & Meyer, A. S. (2002). Tracking the Time Course
of Multidimensional Stimulus Discrimination: Analyses
of Viewing Patterns and Processing Times During
“Same”–“Different” Decisionsέ European Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 14(2), 237-266.
Berlin, B., & Kay, P. (1969). Basic Colour Terms: Their
Universality and Evolution. Berkeley and Los Angeles,
Calif.: University of California Press.
Brown-Schmidt, S., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2006). Watching
the Eyes When Talking about Size: An Investigation of
Message Formulation and Utterance Planning. Journal of
Memory and Language, 54, 592-609.
Dale, R., & Reiter, E. (1995). Computational Interpretations
of the Gricean Maxims in the Generation of Referring
Expressions. Cognitive Science, 18, 233-263.
Koolen, R., Goudbeek, M. & Krahmer, E. (2013). The
Effect of Scene Variation on the Redundant Use of Colour
in Definite Reference. Cognitive Science, 37(2), 395-411.
Pechmann, T. (1989). Incremental Speech Production and
Referential Overspecification. Linguistics, 27(1), 89–110.
Sedivy, J. C. (2003). Pragmatic versus form-based accounts
of referential contrast: Evidence for effects of
informativity expectations. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 32(1), 3–23.
Viethen, J., & Dale, R. (2011). GRE3D7: A Corpus of
Distinguishing Descriptions for Objects in Visual Scenes.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Using Corpora in
Natural Language Generation (NLG): Language
Generation and Evaluation (UCNLG+Eval), 12-22,
Edinburgh, UK.
Viethen, J., Goudbeek, M. & Krahmer, E. (2012). The
Impact of Colour Difference and Colour Codability on
Reference Production. Proceedings of the 34th annual
meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (CogSci 2012),
1084-1089, Sapporo, Japan.

Conclusions
This study was set to investigate whether it is morphological
complexity or colour term basicness that led to the findings
of Viethen et al. (2012). The present results show, first and
foremost, that there are more factors that influence people’s
tendency to use colour. Assuming that ghalazio is actually
not an established BCT in Greek could account for the
reduction in colour use in the Greek lodiff-dep_code
condition, however, it does not explain the lack of reduction
in lodiff-locode. Since we recorded no significant reduction
in lodiff-locode in either language, morphological
complexity and lack of adequate BCTs alone proved not to
be sufficient to cause the reduction in colour attribute use.
The most important effect we found is the difference in
colour use between the two languages. The colour nuances
used in the experiment were finely tuned to Greek speakers
with special attention to using the right nuances to elicit the
expected colour terms. Subsequently, Greek speakers used
colour extensively. Dutch speakers used colour to a much
lower degree, even less than in Viethen et al. (2012). Hence,
using dull, non-prototypical colour nuances might lead to

Acknowledgments
The reported research forms part of the VICI project “Bridging the
Gap between Psycholinguistics and Computational Linguistics: the
Case of Referring Expressions”, funded by the σetherlands
Organization for Scientific Research (NWO grant 277-70-007). We
thank Kristel Bartels for help with transcribing the Dutch data.

References

1412

