UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Simulating Cognitive Complexity in Work Systems

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3ff272t9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Author
Clancey, William

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Simulating Cognitive Complexity in Work Systems
William J. Clancey (wclancey@IHMC.US)
Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, 40 S. Alcaniz Street
Pensacola, FL 53706 USA
Abstract
The Brahms Generalized Überlingen Model (Brahms-GÜM)
is a cognitive-behavioral simulation of aviation work
practices that reveals how normally complicated situations
become cognitively complex for people in a dynamic
environment of malfunctioning tools and non-routine
workload. Brahms-GÜM was developed by analyzing and
generalizing the roles, systems, and events leading to an
aircraft collision, a scenario that can be simulated as a
particular configuration of the model. Brahms-GÜM
demonstrates the strength of the Brahms framework for
simulating behaviors of asynchronous (or loosely coupled),
distributed processes in which the sequence of spatialtemporal interactions can become mutually constrained and
unpredictable.
Keywords: Work practice; cognitive process model;
behavioral simulation; situated cognition; complex systems.

The Brahms Generalized Überlingen Model (Brahms-GÜM;
Clancey et al. 2013) was developed as part of ongoing
aviation safety research to extend human-system
performance modeling from the individual level (one user,
one task, one display) to the level of multi-agent teams (a
choreography of people and automated systems). In
particular, the research theme of “authority and autonomy”
focuses on how roles and responsibilities are distributed and
reassigned among people and automated systems to handle
routine tasks (e.g., autopilot modes) or resolve dangerous
situations (e.g., collision avoidance alerts).
Brahms is a multi-agent simulation system in which
people, tools, facilities/vehicles, and geography are modeled
explicitly (Clancey et al. 1998; 2005). In Brahms-GÜM the
air transportation system is modeled as a collection of
distributed, interactive subsystems (e.g., airports, air-traffic
control towers and personnel, aircraft, automated flight
systems and air-traffic tools, instruments, crew). Each
subsystem, whether a person, such as an air traffic
controller, or a tool, such as the Air Traffic Control Center
(ATCC) radar, is modeled independently with
properties/states, beliefs/models, and contextual behaviors.
The simulation then plays out the interactions among these
separately existing models of subsystems.
The 2002 Überlingen mid-air collision was chosen for this
experiment using Brahms because systems like the Traffic
Alert and Collision Avoidance System (TCAS) deliberately
shift authority from the air-traffic controller to an automated
system. The Überlingen accident provides a starting point
for exploring authority–autonomy conflict in the larger
system of organization, tools, and habitual behaviors
(practices) that contextually affects attention, deliberation,
and action (Clancey 1997). In particular, a person/system

can have more than one role at a given time, and
responsibilities can be reassigned during operations in a
situation-dependent manner. For example, we can simulate
that when an air traffic controller (ATCO) goes on a break,
as occurred at Überlingen, another ATCO shifts to handling
multiple workstations. Simulated pilots and ATCOs also
have context-dependent behaviors for communicating,
following directions, and interacting with automated
systems.
A work practice simulation represents chronological,
located behaviors of people and automated systems. In
contrast with task models, which represent abstractly what
behaviors accomplish (i.e., functions), a behavioral model
represents what people and systems do, called activities
(Clancey 2002). Activities include monitoring (looking,
attending), moving, communicating, reading and writing, all
of which require time and occur in particular places with
other people, tools, materials, documents, and so on. In
terms of work, a function/task model characterizes what a
person or system does (e.g., “determine the altitude”), and a
cognitive-behavioral model of practice represents how the
work is carried out in the world (e.g., simulate a person
moving, changing the state of a control, perceiving a
display’s representation, and inferring a problem exists).
The simulation is based on a fine-grained analysis of the
published events of the Überlingen collision, relating spatial
and temporal interactions of: 1) information represented on
displays and documents at the air traffic control center and
in the cockpit, 2) what controller(s) and cockpit crew were
individually doing and observing, 3) alerts provided by
automated systems, 4) communications within the cockpit
and with air traffic control, 4) control actions to change
automation and aircraft flight systems, 5) people’s beliefs
and reasoning regarding responsibilities of individuals and
automated systems, progress appraisal of assigned
responsibilities,
and
resolution
of
conflicting
information/directives.
The Überlingen case is of special interest because TCAS
gave advice to one flight crew just seconds after they had
already begun to follow a different directive from the Zurich
air traffic controller. Psychological, social, and physical
coordination issues are potentially involved in disengaging
from an action in process that may make it difficult or
impossible to follow the required protocol of following
TCAS and ignoring the ATCO.
The Brahms simulation model constructed in this research
is not merely a replication of the Überlingen collision, that
is, a hand-crafted, single scenario of events. Rather BrahmsGÜM consists of a generalization of all the subsystems
(e.g., phones, radar, alert systems, aircraft, pilots, air-traffic

1858

controllers, ATCCs) that played a role in the Überlingen
collision. Rather than only representing the states and
behaviors of subsystems at the time of the collision,
Brahms-GÜM represents their normal states and behaviors,
and allows for them to be configured for each simulation
run to characterize alternative behaviors, including absent,
alternative, and dysfunctional or off-nominal forms (e.g., a
pilot can follow TCAS or ignore it; the phones in an ATCC
are not operating; a scheduled flight departs late).
Each of the many possible configurations of BrahmsGÜM parameters defines a scenario. Because of the
variations in initial facts, beliefs, and properties/states and
the probabilistic activity durations, each simulation run
produces time-space-state interactions with potentially
different outcomes. For example, in some configurations of
Brahms-GÜM, the Zurich ATCO notices the imminent
collision and advises pilots before TCAS issues a traffic
advisory. The combinations of all possible parameter
settings define a space of scenarios that Brahms-GÜM
should be able to validly simulate. What occurred at
Überlingen is one scenario in that space.
Experimentation with Brahms-GÜM reveals that timing
of events at the level of a few seconds makes a substantial
difference in the simulated outcomes. In particular, because
TCAS’s advice does not consider what the people are
saying and deciding among themselves, the work system
design is especially vulnerable if ATCO intervenes with
pilots a few seconds before TCAS generates a resolution
advisory, which is what happened at Überlingen.
We had not encountered such sensitivity to timing and
emergent interaction sequences in any of the prior Brahms
models created over two decades. Brahms-GÜM simulates
how subtle issues of timing in human-automation
interactions arise when degraded or missing subsystems
result in lack of information and inability to communicate,
transforming a given configuration of flights that are routine
in a normal work system to a situation too complex for the
overall work system to handle safely.
In particular, the events in the air traffic control center
reveal how after people develop work practices in which
they rely on automation (e.g., a collision warning alert), the
absence of automation may cause the workload to increase
and the evolving situations to become too causally codependent to appropriately prioritize tasks or delegate
responsibility. That is, the workload has become cognitively
complex relative to the person’s knowledge, beliefs, roles,
habitual procedures, and tools. Specifically, ATCO was
required to conceptually coordinate multiple recursively
nested action sequences that were interrupted, analogous to
limitations in natural language comprehension (Clancey
1999; 2005; 2006).
Brahms-GÜM demonstrates the strength of the
framework for simulating behaviors of asynchronous (or
loosely coupled), distributed processes in which the
sequence of interactions can become mutually constrained
and unpredictable. Creating and experimenting with work
practice models reveals interactions that are omitted,

glossed over, or difficult to comprehensively describe in
accident reports. The simulation generates metrics that can
be compared to observational data and/or make predictions
for redesign experiments.

Acknowledgments
This project was supported (October 2011 to June 2013) by
the Authority and Autonomy task within the Aviation Safety
Program of the System-Wide Safety and Assurance
Technologies Project of NASA’s Aeronautics Research
Mission Directorate, when the author was on assignment at
NASA Ames Research Center. Co-developers of BrahmsGÜM included Charlotte Linde, Mike Shafto, and Chin
Seah. Extensive references appear in Clancey et al. (2013).

References
Clancey, W. J. (1997). Situated Cognition: On Human
Knowledge and Computer Representations. NY:
Cambridge University Press.
Clancey, W. J. (1999). Conceptual Coordination: How the
Mind Orders Experience in Time. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Clancey, W. J. (2002). Simulating Activities: Relating
motives, deliberation, and attentive coordination,
Cognitive Systems Research, 3(3), 471-499.
Clancey, W. J. (2004). Roles for agent assistants in field
science: Personal projects and collaboration. IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C:
Applications and Reviews, 34(2), 125-137.
Clancey, W. J. (2005). Modeling the perceptual component
of conceptual learning—a coordination perspective. In P.
Gärdenfors and P. Johansson (Eds.), Cognition, Education
and Communication Technology. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Clancey, W. J. (2006). How anchors allow reusing
categories in neural composition of sentences.
Commentary on F. van der Velde and M. de Kamp:
Neural blackboard architectures of combinatorial
structures in cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
29(1), 73-74.
Clancey, W. J. (2008). Scientific antecedents of situated
cognition. In P. Robbins and M. Aydede (Eds.),
Cambridge Handbook of Situated Cognition. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Clancey, W. J., Linde, C., Seah, C., & Shafto, M. (2013).
Work Practice Simulation of Complex HumanAutomation Systems in Safety Critical Situations: The
Brahms Generalized Überlingen Model (Tech. Publ.
2013-216508). Washington, D. C.: NASA.
Clancey, W. J., Sachs, P., Sierhuis, M., & van Hoof, R.
(1998). Brahms: Simulating practice for work systems
design. Int. J. Human-Computer Studies, 49, 831-865.
Clancey, W. J., Sierhuis, M., Damer, B., & Brodsky, B.
(2005). Cognitive modeling of social behaviors. In R. Sun
(Ed.), Cognition and Multi-Agent Interaction: From
Cognitive Modeling to Social Simulation. New York:
Cambridge University Press.

1859

