UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Social influences on the regularization of unpredictable linguistic variation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8bw2b8pp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Feher, Olga
Kirby, Simon
Smith, Kenny

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Social influences on the regularization of unpredictable linguistic variation
Olga Feher (olga.feher@ed.ac.uk), Simon Kirby & Kenny Smith
Language Evolution and Computation Research Unit, School of Philosophy, Psychology & Language Sciences,
University of Edinburgh, Dugald Stewart Building, 3 Charles Street, Edinburgh, EH8 9AD, UK

Abstract
Languages tend not to exhibit unpredictable variation, and
learners receiving variable linguistic input tend to eliminate it,
making the language more regular. We explore how this
behavior is influenced by social cues, in particular when
variability is distributed within and across teachers. We
trained participants on an artificial language that contained
lexical variability and manipulated how that variability was
distributed across teachers: learners either received input from
one or three variable teachers, or from three teachers who
were individually consistent but exhibited variability
collectively. We found that learners were more likely to
produce variable output when their input came from (one or
multiple) teachers who exhibited variable labeling, and they
regularized more when learning from individually consistent
teachers. This indicates that the propensity of language
learners to eliminate linguistic variation is modulated by
social cues, pointing to potential links with the broader
literature on social learning in other domains.
Keywords: language, unpredictable variation, probability
matching, regularization, conformity.

Introduction
A salient feature of natural languages is that they exhibit
very little free variation: no two linguistic forms will occur
in precisely the same environments and perform precisely
the same functions; rather, usage is conditioned in
accordance with phonological, semantic, pragmatic or
sociolinguistic criteria (Givón, 1985). Where variation does
exist, its use is conditioned on some contextual or
grammatical variable such as the social situation (Labov,
1963). Pidgin languages form an exception, because adult
second language learners tend to be variable (Johnson et al
1996). During creolization (the process where pidgins are
learned by children as a first language), however, young
learners do not reproduce the variable input in their parents’
language, converging instead on more systematic usage
(Sankoff, 1979). The same happens when deaf children
learn sign language from parents who are non-native, and
therefore variable, signers (Singleton & Newport, 2004).
This suggests that child learners are biased against
unpredictable linguistic variation, and that these biases in
child learners reshape languages. Unpredictable variation
therefore provides a useful test case for studying biases in
language learning and how those biases drive language
change, creolization and, ultimately, language design.
Learner responses to unpredictable variation have also
been studied under more controlled circumstances, using
artificial language learning paradigms. Hudson Kam &
Newport (2005) asked adults and children to learn an

artificial language containing inconsistent grammatical
morphemes, and showed that, while adults tend to
probability match the variability present in their input (i.e.
producing a variable particle in the proportion it occurred in
their input data), children regularize, producing only one
(typically the more common) variable. This is consistent
with the idea that young learners drive creolization and
grammaticalization in the formation of languages. However,
other studies have shown that adults will also regularize
inconsistent linguistic input under the right conditions, such
as when presented with a high level of inconsistency and
one determiner that is used much more than the others
(Hudson Kam and Newport, 2009), when tested on novel
words (Wonnacott and Newport, 2005), or when the
language is passed between learners in an iterated learning
paradigm (Reali and Griffiths, 2009; Smith & Wonnacott,
2010).
Existing artificial language learning work in this area
presents learners with linguistic data produced by a single
variable teacher – either the experimenter in face-to-face
teaching, or a single voice in an automated training
procedure. Learning a natural language typically involves
exposure to the linguistic behavior of multiple individuals
(parents, siblings, peers, etc). In this paper we therefore
explore how learners respond to variability distributed
across multiple teachers. When learners are presented with
inconsistent information from different teachers, they could
acquire all the variants and use them probabilistically (i.e.
probability match, as adults tend to in the studies reviewed
above) or preferentially imitate the majority behavior,
known as conformist copying. Conformist copying has been
shown to be an important social learning mechanism in
humans (Morgan et al, 2012) as well as in several animal
species (Van de Waal et al, 2013, Pike & Laland, 2010).
However, whether such social learning strategies play a role
in the learning of variable linguistic input remains an open
question. We used a simple artificial language learning
paradigm (similar to that employed in Reali and Griffiths,
2009, Exp 1, but with participants providing spoken
responses) to investigate learners’ responses when presented
with unpredictable variation of lexical items within and
between teachers. We conducted two experiments that
investigated different aspects of learning from multiple
teachers. Experiment 1 contrasts learning from one variable
teacher to learning from several variable teachers, to test
whether learning from multiple teachers has any impact on
probability matching behavior normally observed in such
paradigms. Experiment 2 contrasts variation distributed
within teachers with variation distributed across teachers.

2187

Methods
The general procedure was identical across experiments.
Participants progressed through a self-paced computer
program individually, in sound-proofed booths. Participants
underwent a two-stage training and testing procedure on a
language which provided 6 artificial words labeling 3
objects, each object with 2 alternative names. We used prerecorded auditory stimuli for training, and participants
provided oral responses during testing.

Participants
Forty-eight native English speakers were recruited through
the Student and Graduate Employment job search web site
at the University of Edinburgh. Participants were randomly
assigned to one of three experimental conditions, with 16
participants per condition, and were paid £8/hour pro rata.

Stimuli
Objects The visual stimuli were colored vintage drawings
of three relatively obscure plants: an agueroot, a bilberry
and a nightshade (Fig.1).

Figure 1: Drawings of the three plants (from left to right:
agueroot, bilberry, nightshade) used as the visual stimuli.
Labels The miniature language consisted of six 3-syllable
artificial object labels: drambowit (dræmboːwɪt), elbanage
(ɛlːbəәnɪdʒ), stanishote (stæːnɪʃot), timplika (tɪmpliːka),
vamola (vəәmoːləә), zellerand (zɛːləәrænd). The words were
constructed using the ARC Nonword database (Rastle et al.
2002) and conformed to English phonology. A full
description consisted of a carrier phrase followed by an
object label. We used two possible carrier phrases: osen pilt
(oːsəәn pɪlt) and sholar zene (ʃoːləәr ziːn) chosen randomly for
each participant but balanced across participants and
conditions.
Speakers We recorded three speakers (A-C) speaking all 12
possible combinations of carrier phrase and object label. All
speakers were female, of English origin, and had easily
distinguishable accents: one had a Received Pronunciation
accent (characteristic of middle class individuals from the
South of England), one had a Geordie accent (originating in
Newcastle-upon-Tyne in Northern England) and one had a
distinctive combination of RP and Standard Scottish
English. We obtained 10 recordings of each description
from each speaker: during training, on each trial one of

these 10 sound files was selected at random, allowing
natural phonetic variation in our participants’ training data.

Procedure
Training The assignment of labels to objects was
independently randomized for every participant, with two
randomly-selected labels being associated with each object.
For each participant, we also selected a single carrier phrase
at random, which was used throughout their training.
There were 9 training blocks, each consisting of 27 trials.
In a block, every object was presented 9 times: 6 times with
one label, 3 times with another. The order of presentation of
the 27 trials was fully randomized within each block. In
each trial, the picture of the object appeared on the screen
for 1s, then a description was played for the participant
through headphones. Participants were then prompted to
repeat the sentence orally, and their responses were recorded
via a microphone situated in the booth. Repetition of the
stimulus sentences was intended to encourage participants to
practice the pronunciation of the unfamiliar vocabulary, as
well as to ensure they were paying attention to the training
input. After repeating the description, participants
progressed to the next trial by pressing the space key, or
after 10s elapsed, whichever came first. There were no
breaks between the training blocks, but after the first four
blocks and again before the testing phase, participants were
given the option to take a break.
Testing There were 36 testing blocks, each consisting of 3
trials, one for each object. During each trial participants
were presented with an image of one of the 3 plants on the
screen and prompted to name plant. Their answers were
recorded via the microphone, as before. Participants
progressed to the next trial by pressing space, or when 9s
had elapsed, whichever came first.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, there were two experimental conditions
(N=16 in each), each providing different social information
to the participants. In the One Speaker condition, for each
participant, one of the three speakers (A, B or C) was
randomly selected, and the participant only heard recordings
from this speaker. In each training block, the speaker named
each object 9 times using one of the labels 6 times (Majority
Label) and the other 3 times (Minority Label). This meant
that there was unpredictable variation in the single teacher’s
lexical input, in the ratio 2:1.
In the Within Speakers condition, participants heard all
three speakers (A, B and C) name objects in the training
phase: each speaker named each object 3 times within a
single block of training, using both the Majority and
Minority Labels in the ratio 2:1. Note that the only
difference between conditions was that the participants
heard 1 or 3 speakers: the total number of trials and the
number and proportion of the Majority and Minority labels
was kept constant across conditions.

2188

Participants’ responses were transcribed by hand and
classified, for each trial, as featuring either the Majority
Label, Minority Label or NA (if participants gave no
response, used an unintelligible label, or used an illegal
label, e.g. a label that in the training phase was used to
describe another object).

Results of Experiment 1

0.3

Participants’ productions during testing in the One Speaker
and Within Speakers conditions were highly similar,
suggesting that the simple contrast between learning from a
single variable speaker and three variable speakers has
relatively little impact on behavior. There were two
dominant strategies apparent in word learning: regularizing
(when participants used one of the labels most of the time)
and probability matching (when participants approximated
the input frequency, 66%). Participants in the One Speaker
condition regularized the Majority Label somewhat more
often than in the Within Speakers condition: 27% of all
labels in the One Speaker condition were regular, meaning
for 27% of the objects, they produced the Majority Label
more than 90% of the time (Fig. 2, blue bars on right) as
opposed to 17% in the Within Speakers condition (Fig. 2,
red bars). These rates of regularization in adult learners are
in line with those observed in other unpredictable variation
learning experiments with adult learners (around 25% of
adults regularize, e.g. in Hudson Kam & Newport, 2005;
Smith & Wonnacott, 2010). In both conditions there was a
peak around 50-60% Majority Label use, which could
reflect slightly inaccurate probability matching behavior or
switching between the two labels randomly.

One Speaker
Within Speaker

conditions. Intervals include lower boundary but not upper
boundary, except for rightmost bin.
For statistical analysis, multilevel models with random
effects were employed: classified responses were fitted to a
binomial distribution, implemented in the R programming
environment version 3.0.1 using the lme4 package (version
0.99999-2) (Bates et al., 2013). Condition (One Speaker vs
Within Speakers) and Testing Block (1-36) were considered
as possible fixed effects, with One Speaker set as the
baseline condition for comparison. We included Participant,
Object, Majority Label and Minority Label as random
effects, with random intercepts for each and a by-Participant
random slope for Testing Block when Testing Block was
included as a fixed effect.
We compared various versions of the model, featuring
fixed effects for Condition, Test Block or both, to the
equivalent null model featuring the intercept and the random
effect structure only (c.f. Mundry, 2011). In no case did the
models with fixed effects significantly improve model fit.
Models featuring either a fixed effect of Condition or fixed
effects of Condition and Test Block were only marginally
better that their null equivalents (Fixed effect for Condition
only: χ2(1)=3.265, p=.071; Fixed effect for Condition and
Trial Number: χ2(3)=6.965, p=.073), suggesting that there
was little reliable difference in propensity to use the
Majority Label between conditions. Furthermore, the
models featuring fixed effects yielded at best marginally
significant differences between the Single and Within
Speakers conditions (Condition-only model: β=-0.747,
SE=0.410, p=.066; Condition plus Training Block model:
β=-0.706, SE=0.362, p=.051). Consequently, we conclude
that there is no reliable difference between conditions,
although there may be a slight tendency for more variable
performance in the Within Speakers condition, a point we
return to in the Discussion.

Experiment 2

0

Proportion of objects
0.1
0.2

In Experiment 2 we ran a further 16 participants through the
experiment in the Between Speakers condition: as in the
Within Speakers condition in Experiment 1, participants
received input from all three speakers; however, rather than
each speaker exhibiting variability, the variability in
labeling was introduced across speakers. Each speaker
labeled each object 3 times during each block of training,
but each speaker used only one label for each object, and
used this label consistently across the entire training set. For
each object, two speakers (e.g. A and B) used the Majority
Label, and the other speaker (eg. C) used the Minority label.
For every object, the identity of the Minority Speaker was
different: i.e. each speaker was in the majority in their
choice of label on two objects and in the minority on one
object.

0−0.1

0.1−0.2 0.2−0.3 0.3−0.4 0.4−0.5 0.5−0.6 0.6−0.7 0.7−0.8 0.8−0.9

0.9−1

Proportion Majority Label

Figure 2: Proportion of objects (y axis) labeled with a given
proportion of the Majority Label (x axis, bins) in the One
Speaker (blue bars) and Within Speakers (red bars)

2189

Results of Experiment 2

0.5

We compared the participants in the Between Speakers
condition to participants from the Within Speakers
condition from Experiment 1. Regularization on the
Majority Label was 42% in the Between Speakers condition
(Fig. 3, green bars), in contrast with 17% in the Within
Speakers condition (Fig 3, red bars). Participants in the
Between Speakers condition were more than 5 times as
likely to use the Majority Label than the Minority Label, but
only twice as likely in the Within Speakers condition. We
observed some probability matching behavior in the
Between Speakers condition, but for less than 15% of the
labels, although matching of the input frequency was more
accurate in the Between Speakers condition – this may be
due to the fact that the ratio of the Majority to Minority
label was tied neatly to the number of speakers in the
Between Speakers condition, which may have facilitated
accurate learning of the statistics of the input data.

0

0.1

Proportion of objects
0.2
0.3

0.4

Within Speaker
Between Speaker

0−0.1

0.1−0.2 0.2−0.3 0.3−0.4 0.4−0.5 0.5−0.6 0.6−0.7 0.7−0.8 0.8−0.9

0.9−1

Proportion Majority Label

Figure 3: Proportion of objects (y axis) labeled with a given
proportion of the Majority Label (x axis, bins) in the Within
Speakers (red bars) and Between Speakers (green bars)
conditions. Intervals include lower boundary but not upper
boundary, except for rightmost bin.
The same statistical techniques were used as in
Experiment 1: logit regression with Condition (Within
Speakers [baseline] vs Between Speakers) as a fixed effect,
with random intercepts for Participant, Object, Majority
Label and Minority Label. The model with a fixed effect of
Condition did significantly better than the equivalent null
model (χ2(1)=4.918, p=.027; we also considered a model
with a fixed effect of Training Block but this did not
improve fit over the simpler model with only a fixed effect
of Condition, nor over the equivalent null model).

The estimated intercept (β=0.106, SE=0.419, p=.8)
suggests that the two labels were used in equal proportions
by participants in the Within Speakers condition (in fact
there was hardly any difference between the proportion of
regularized Majority and Minority Labels), whereas in the
Between Speakers condition the Majority Label was used
overwhelmingly, for nearly 50% of all objects. Our analysis
showed a significant effect of Condition (β=1.011,
SE=0.445, p=.023): participants in the Between Speakers
condition were significantly more likely to produce the
Majority Label than participants in the Within Speakers
condition.

Discussion
Participants’ responses to unpredictable variation are
influenced by how that variation is associated with social
information in their input. We found no significant
difference between learning from one or multiple teachers.
However, Experiment 2 revealed a substantial difference
between the Within Speakers and the Between Speakers
conditions: participants were significantly more likely to use
the Majority Label when variation was distributed across
speakers.
There are at least three non mutually exclusive possible
explanations for this behavior. Firstly, this behavior is
consistent with conformist copying of labels, suggesting that
this domain-general social learning strategy also operates
during word learning, and leads (in the right social scenario)
to the elimination of linguistic variation. However, it is also
possible that learners track the evidence for within-speaker
variability and adjusting their own variability accordingly:
whereas the Within Speakers condition provides good
evidence that speakers are truly variable, the Between
Speakers condition provides evidence that individual
speakers are not variable. Participants in this condition
might therefore be more likely to be consistent and regular,
and might be more likely to choose the Majority Label
simply because of its higher frequency in their input. This
explanation is consistent with accounts that children are
socially sensitive to their interlocutors’ preferences when
learning novel linguistic input (Chang et al., 2009). If this
explanation were correct, however, we might also expect to
see differences between the One and Within Speakers
conditions in Experiment 1: the Within Speakers condition
provides better evidence (across multiple teachers) of
within-speaker variability. If present in Experiment 1, this
effect is, however, extremely weak compared to the effect
observed in Experiment 2.
Finally, there may also be memory-based accounts for the
difference between the Within and Between Speakers
conditions. Hudson Kam and Chang (2009) found that
adults probability matched more when retrieval was
facilitated (e.g. by providing vocabulary on flash cards),
therefore regularization was a result of difficulty recalling
the words rather than encoding them. In contrast, Perfors
(2012) showed that increased memory load does not result
in increased regularization. In the Between Speakers

2190

condition, each Minority label was only produced by a
single speaker, and therefore may have been harder to learn
than the Majority labels which were produced by two
speakers. It has been shown that learning from multiple
speakers aids phonological processing and learning (Rost &
McMurray, 2009). In addition, varying the Minority speaker
for each object also substantially increased the cognitive
demands of the task.
Further experiments are required to tease apart these
various possible explanations: conformist learning, learners
inferring the within-speaker variability of their language,
and lower-level memory demands all might play a role in
our results. It is also possible that paradigms in which
learners receive input from multiple teachers might lead to
rather different regularization dynamics over iterated
learning (Reali & Griffiths, 2009, Smith & Wonnacott,
2010): using a more complex iterated learning paradigm in
which people learn from multiple teachers to study the
process of this would be a useful addition to this literature.

Conclusions
We have shown that social information plays an important
role in how people respond to linguistic variation: in
particular, learners who encounter variation distributed
between, but not within, speakers act in a conformist
manner, preferentially adopting the variant used by the
majority of their teachers. There are several possible
explanations for our results, including social conformity,
which is an important learning mechanism in other socially
acquired behaviors. Alternatively, learners may track the
variability in their teachers’ behavior, or lack thereof, and
adjust their own behavior accordingly. Exploring these
possibilities further will shed light on social learning
mechanisms employed in language learning, and how and
when these biases act to maintain or eliminate linguistic
variation.

References
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2013).
lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using Eigen and S4. R
Package Version, 1(4).
Chang, F., Kobayashi, T., & Amano, S. (2009). Social
factors in the acquisition of a new word order. First
Language, 29, 427-445.
Givón, T. (1985). Function, structure, and language acquisition. In D. Slobin (Ed.), The crosslinguistic study of language acquisition (Vol. 2, pp. 1005–1028). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Hudson Kam, C., & Chang, A. (2009). Investigating the
cause of language regularization in adults: Memory
constraints or learning effects? Journal of Experimental

Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 35, 815–
821.
Hudson Kam, C. L., & Newport, E. L. (2009). Getting it
right by getting it wrong: When learners change
languages. Cognitive Psychology, 59, 30-66.
Hudson Kam, C. L., & Newport, E. L. (2005). Regularizing
unpredictable variation: The roles of adult and child
learners in language formation and change. Language
Learning and Development, 1, 151–195.
Johnson, J., Shenkman, K.,Newport, E. L., & Medin, D.
(1996). Indeterminacy in the grammar of adult language
learners. Journal of Memory and Language, 35, 335–352.
Labov, W. (1963). The social motivation of a sound change.
Word, 19, 273–309.
Morgan, T. J. H., Rendell, L. E., Ehn, M., Hoppitt, W. J. E.
& Laland, K. N. (2012). The evolutionary basis of human
social learning. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 279,
653-662.
Mundry, R. (2011). Issues in information theory-based
statistical inference – a commentary from a frequentist’s
perspective. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 65(1),
57-68.
Pike, T. W. & Laland, K. N. (2010). Conformist learning in
nine-spined sticklebacks’ foraging decisions. Biology
Letters, 6, 466-468.
Reali, F., & Griffiths, T. L. (2009). The evolution of
frequency distributions: Relating regularization to
inductive biases through iterated learning. Cognition, 111,
317–328.
Rastle, K., Harrington, J., & Coltheart, M. (2002). 358,534
nonwords: The ARC Nonword Database. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55A, 1339-1362.
Rost, G. C. & McMurray, B. (2000). Speaker variability
augments phonological processing in early word learning.
Developmental Science, 12, 339-349.
Sankoff, G. (1979). The genesis of a language. In K. C. Hill
(Ed.), The genesis of language, Ann Arbor, MI: Karoma
Publishers.
Singleton, J. L., & Newport, E. L. (2004). When learners
surpass their models: The acquisition of American Sign
Language
from
impoverished
input.
Cognitive
Psychology, 49, 370–407.
Wonnacott, E., & Newport, E. L. (2005). Novelty and
regularization: The effect of novel instances on rule
formation. In A. Brugos, M. R. Clark- Cotton, & S. Ha
(Eds.), BUCLD 29: Proceedings of the 29th annual boston
university conference on language development.
Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Van de Waal, E., Borgeaud, C. & Whiten, A. (2013). Potent
social learning and conformity shape a wild primate’s
foraging decisions. Science, 340, 483-485.

2191

