UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Sound-symbolic correspondences with figures of known entities

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/026415qh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Flumini, Andrea
Ranzini, Mariagrazia
Borghi, Anna Maria

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Sound-symbolic correspondences with figures of known entities
Andrea Flumini (andrea.flumini2@unibo.it)
Department of Psychology, University of Bologna
Viale Berti Pichat 5, 40127 Bologna, Italy
Mariagrazia Ranzini (mari.ranzini@gmail.com)
FNRS, CRCN, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB)
Avenue Franklin Roosevelt 50, 1050 Bruxelles, Belgium
Anna M. Borghi (annamaria.borghi@unibo.it)
Department of Psychology, University of Bologna
Viale Berti Pichat 5, 40127 Bologna, Italy
ISTC-CNR, Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies
National Research Council, Via S. Martino della Battaglia, 44 00185 Roma, Italy

Abstract
The existence of sound-to-shape correspondences has been
demonstrated in the literature on sound-symbolism using
double forced-choice paradigms and ad hoc figures. In two
experiments, we tested if the sound-shape correspondence
effect would be observed when participants were required
to name one by one figures of every-day entities.
Additionally, as stimuli represented known entities, we
hypothesized that the sound-symbolic effect would be
influenced by the entities’ category (i.e., natural, artificial).
Results confirmed the sound-shape correspondence in both
experiments. Furthermore, in Experiment 2 a modulation
due to the category was observed while participants, both
adults and children, named agents (i.e., animals,
anthropomorphous robots). Results are discussed in the
framework of embodied cognition theories.
Keywords: sound-symbolism; embodied cognition; shape;
referent; natural object; artifact; agent.

Introduction
Embodied and grounded cognition theories (reviews in
Barsalou, 2008; Borghi & Pecher, 2011) affirm that
linguistic symbols are grounded in the same systems used
by perception, action and emotion. According to this
perspective, during language processing we would reactivate previous experiences with words referents (e.g.,
Barsalou, 2008). For example, the word “car” would elicit
a simulation of sitting in it, driving it, and so on. In the
present study, we intended to investigate the word-referent
relation by focusing on the direct bindings between the
word sound and certain aspects of the referent appearance
(i.e., shape). By word sound we refer to a multimodal
experience, including both the acoustic experience during
language comprehension and the phono-articulatory
experience of word production, showing that verbal labels
can entertain a non-arbitrary relation with their referents.
This kind of relation has already been identified in speech
and has been called sound-symbolism or phonosemantics
(Hinton et al., 1994), being thought to be the verbal
counterpart of iconicity in sign languages (e.g., Corballis,
2002, 2009; Pietrandrea, 2002; Pizzuto & Volterra, 2000).

The psychological literature on sound-symbolism is
longstanding, dating the first decades of the XX century
(e.g., Sapir, 1929; Köhler, 1929). In the last years, much
research has been conducted on speakers of different
languages, either children and adults. The data collected
support the idea that sound-shape correspondences are at
work in a number of cognitive tasks (e.g., Arata et al.,
2010; Asano et al., 2011; Kovic et al., 2009; Iwasaki et al.,
2007; Nielsen & Rendall, 2011; Nygaard et al., 2009a, b;
Spector & Maurer, 2008; Westbury, 2005). For example,
Maurer et al. (2006) asked 2.5-years-old children and
adults to couple two invented names, one sonorant and
one strident, with two invented figures, one rounded and
one jagged-shaped. Results showed that both groups
assigned sonorant words to rounded shapes and strident
words to jagged ones. These results confirmed the soundshape correspondence effect, suggesting that it plays a role
at the earliest stages of language development.
Despite their interest, a number of studies adopting
labeling tasks with a double forced-choice paradigm has
some methodological limitations. These experiments
typically used forced-choice tasks where two words (one
sonorant and one strident) were simultaneously presented
together with two figures (one rounded and one jaggedshaped). In this way, the subjects’ second-choice was
automatically determined by the first coupling, with no
possibility of disentangling if two matches are effectively
at work, one for strident sounds/jagged shapes and another
for sonorant sounds/rounded shapes, or if there is only a
match in one direction. In addition, the ad hoc figures
typically used magnify the properties that are under
investigation (e.g., roundness, jaggedness). These two
aspects might therefore induce an enhancement of the
results. A further problem that derives from them is the
risk for this design to be too transparent (see Nielsen &
Rendall, 2011, for a similar critique). Finally, this kind of
setting is poorly ecological, and might not reflect what
happens in every-day life.
The methodological flaws of this kind of research,
evidenced by some authors (e.g., Nielsen & Rendall,
2011), has led to the underestimation of the role played by

2210

sound-symbolic correspondences in real languages. A
pervasive skepticism has grown along the years, and
sound-symbolism has often been treated as a peripheral
phenomenon in psycholinguistics (Nielsen & Rendall,
2011). To highlight the role of the sound-shape
correspondence effect, in the present study we decided to
investigate it trying to elude some limitations of the
previous literature. To this aim, we avoided a double
forced-choice design, and used visual stimuli depicting
every-day entities (e.g., animals, tools). The choice of
using every-day stimuli has a further advantage, as it gave
us the possibility of investigating the eventual
modulations on the sound-symbolic effects due to the
category of the stimulus (i.e., artificial, natural). To the
best of our knowledge, no study so far has taken into
account the possible effects of categorical differences on
sound-symbolic correspondences. Instead, the literature
on concepts has provided evidence that artifacts and
natural objects, as well as living and not living entities, are
differently represented. This was observed in studies on
categorization with brain imaging techniques (a review in
Martin, 2007), in neuropsychological studies (e.g.,
Humphreys & Forde, 2001), as well as in behavioral
studies on both children (e.g., Rakison & Oakes, 2003)
and adults (e.g., Borghi et al., 2007). For example, some
research has highlighted that categorization in infants may
be based on perceptual as on motion cues, and that motion
cues differ for animals and artifacts. In fact, animals are
characterized by self-propelled movements and nonlinear,
smooth motion paths, while artifacts are characterized by
induced movements and linear motion paths (e.g.,
Mandler, 1992, 2004). Thus, we reasoned that it would be
possible that natural objects not only have a smoother
motion path, but that their shape might be represented as
smoother in comparison to that of artifacts. In light of
these considerations, we created a design that allowed us
to investigate the development of the symbolic
correspondence between word sounds and properties of
every-day entities belonging to different categories, using
a novel paradigm also in respect to the literature on
categorization.
To summarize, in this study we hypothesized that the
sound-shape correspondence effect would be conserved if
the figures represent every-day entities, and if they were
presented one by one. Furthermore, we hypothesized that
the effect would be modulated by the category of visual
stimuli. To this aim, in Experiment 1 stimuli figures
represented every-day objects which could be natural or
artificial, in order to verify if natural objects are
represented as rounder in shape and associated to
smoother sounds compared to artifacts.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Twenty-four undergraduate students from
the University of Bologna participated in the experiment
for course credits (9 males; mean age = 20.79 (2.23); 2
left-handed by self-report). All participants had normal or

corrected-to-normal vision and were naive as to the
purposes of the experiment.
Materials 24 black-and-white line figures were chosen
from the graphic database by Lotto, Dell’Acqua and Job
(2001), 12 natural objects and 12 artifacts. Each set was
composed by 6 rounded and 6 jagged-shaped figures. The
pictures were rated by each subject after the experimental
session on a 7-point Likert scale for sharpness/roundness
(1: “very sharp” – 7: “very rounded”). A 2 x 2 ANOVA on
ratings with the within factors Figure Type (Artificial vs.
Natural) and Figure Shape (Rounded vs. Jagged) revealed
as significant both the main effects of Figure Type, F(1, 5)
= 24.98, MSe = 0.17, p < .01, ηp2 = .833 (Natural M =
4.21, Artificial M = 3.37), and Figure Shape, F(1, 5) =
134.23, MSe = 0.41, p < .001, ηp2 = .964 (Rounded M =
5.31, Jagged M = 2.26). The interaction was not
significant.
The 8 words, used as names for the 24 pictures, were
taken from the study by Maurer et al. (2006) and
manipulated to obtain in Italian the same sound they have
in English (e.g., the English bouba was changed in the
Italian boba). The 8 words were coupled as in Maurer et
al. (2006), with each pair being composed by a sonorant,
round-sounding name (e.g., maluma) and a strident, sharpsounding name (e.g., takete). Each word pair was
presented visually, right under the picture to name on a
computer screen. Thus, depending on the object
appearance in the figure (Figure Shape: Rounded vs.
Jagged) and on the phonological characteristics of the
name (Response Type: Rounded vs. Jagged), in each trial
it was possible to observe a sound-symbolic response
(e.g., maluma assigned to a round-shaped figure) or not
(e.g., maluma assigned to a jagged-shaped figure). For
sake of simplicity the two levels of both the factors Figure
Shape and Response Type were defined as Rounded vs.
Jagged.
Procedure Participants sat 50 cm from the computer
screen. Each trial began with a fixation point (+) lasting
for 500 ms. Then, the stimulus picture was displayed
centrally and remained on the screen for 5 seconds or until
a response was made. The two names were simultaneously
presented under the picture, one on the left and the other
on the right (the names order was counterbalanced
between subjects). Participants were required to decide
which of the two names was more suitable for the picture
simultaneously displayed by pressing two keys on the
keyboard. The keyboard was positioned just below the
screen, so that each of the two names was located
perfectly above the key to which it corresponded (“5” for
the name on the left, “9” for the one on the right). At the
beginning of the experiment participants were instructed
to decide as quickly as they could, without any feedback
about their responses. As each of the total 24 pictures was
presented once with any of the 4 word pairs, overall the
experiment consisted of 96 experimental trials (plus 8
training trials).

2211

Design and Analysis Missing responses (i.e., responses
that required more than 5 seconds to be given) were
removed. Their very low rate (0.17%) testified that the
task was easy to perform. All the remaining responses
were transformed in percentage of choosing a response
(rounded or jagged) and entered in a 2 x 2 x 2 ANOVA
with the within factors Figure Type (Natural vs.
Artificial), Figure Shape (Rounded vs. Jagged) and
Response Type (Rounded vs. Jagged). Fisher’s LSD post
hoc tests were conducted on significant interactions.

Results
The ANOVA on the percentage of responses did not show
any reliable main effect, but the expected Figure Shape x
Response Type interaction was significant, F(1, 23) =
19.93, MSe = 43.02, p <. 001, ηp2 = .46. In fact, Jagged
shapes were more frequently associated to Jagged
sounding names (M = 13.77%) than to Rounded sounding
ones (M = 11.20%) (LSD p < .05), whereas for Rounded
shapes the opposite was true (Rounded response M =
15.46%, Jagged response M = 9.56%) (LSD p < .01) (see
Figure 1).

Figure 1. Experiment 1 - Interaction between Figure
Shape and Response Type (error bars show S.D.)

Discussion
As predicted, participants more frequently chose rounded
words (e.g., maluma) as names for figures of roundedshaped objects (e.g., compass) and jagged words (e.g.,
takete) as names for figures of jagged-shaped objects
(e.g., pineapple). They revealed a high sensitivity to the
correspondence between words sounds and visual shapes
even if the figures to name represented familiar objects.
This result confirms evidence on the sound-shape
correspondence effect and extends it. First, it suggests that
assigning labels to external entities is not necessarily an
arbitrary activity, also in the case of every-day objects that
are not characterized by ad hoc properties. Second, the
effect was observed while presenting stimuli one by one.
Thus, we were able to avoid the potential limitations of
previous studies. However, despite the fact that results
from participants’ ratings predicted it, the effect of the
object category (artificial vs. natural) was not present.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 1 we asked participants to choose a name
for pictures of already known objects. We found the

predicted sound-symbolic correspondence between names
and shapes, but no effect of the category of visual stimuli
was observed. One possible reason for the absence of a
category effect is that very different items were compared.
Considering this, in Experiment 2 we investigated whether
the effect would be found using more homogeneous
categories of artificial and natural entities, i.e., the
category of agents. We define an agent as an entity
possessing the ability to autonomously act or move, and
endowed with features typically linked to animacy (e.g.,
mouth; see Backscheider et al., 1999). In contemporary
societies, robots have become a quite credible kind of
agent for the role they play in popular culture (e.g.,
science fiction books, comics and movies). In this sense,
we
consider
as
agents
both
animals
and
anthropomorphous robots.
In addition, we decided to test in Experiment 2 a sample
composed by both adults and children, in order to
investigate the sound-symbolic phenomenon related to
every-day categories also in function of age. Indeed, an
ontogenetic continuity of sound-symbolism has already
been shown in the literature, but only with ad hoc stimuli
(e.g., Maurer et al., 2006).
To summarize, we predicted that, using the more
specific and compact subcategory of agents (i.e., animals,
anthropomorphous robots), we would find a modulation of
the sound-symbolic effect in function of both category and
age. In particular, we expected a more marked effect of
category on the label choice for adults, as they may have a
more clear distinction between natural and artificial agents
due to experience, and because the category of animated
entities might be broader in children, including artificial
agents as well.

Method
Participants Twenty-four children (15 males; mean age =
8.79 (1.06); all right-handed) participated to the
experiment as volunteers, and twenty-four students from
the University of Bologna (10 males; mean age = 21.04
(2.91); 3 left-handed by self-report) participated for course
credits. All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal
vision and were naive as to the purposes of the
experiment.
Materials and procedure The materials consisted of 24
black-and-white pictures of manmade drawings, of which
12 represented animals (6 rounded and 6 jagged-shaped)
and 12 robots (6 rounded and 6 jagged-shaped). The same
eight words of Experiment 1 were used. As in Experiment
1, after the experimental session pictures were rated on a
7-point Likert scale for roundness/sharpness by each
subject. A mixed 2 x 2 x 2 ANOVA on ratings with the
between factor Group (Children vs. Adults), and the
within factors Figure Type (Animal vs. Robot) and Figure
Shape (Rounded vs. Jagged), revealed a main effect of
Figure Type, F(1, 10) = 31.14, MSe = 0.40, p < .01, ηp2 =
.757 (Animal M = 4.23, Robot M = 3.21), and of Figure
Shape, F(1, 10) = 331.59, MSe = 0.24, p < .001, ηp2 = .971
(Rounded M = 5.01, Jagged M = 2.42). No other main
effects or interactions reached significance.

2212

Design and Analysis The design and the procedure were
exactly the same of Experiment 1, except for the fact that
the stimuli used, instead of pictures of natural objects and
artifacts, were pictures of animals and robots.

Results
Missing responses were removed (1.28%), and the
remaining responses were entered as percentages in a
mixed 2 x 2 x 2 x 2 ANOVA with the between factor
Group (Children vs. Adults) and the within factors Figure
Type (Animal vs. Robot), Figure Shape (Rounded vs.
Jagged), Response Type (Rounded vs. Jagged). Fisher’s
LSD post hoc tests were conducted on significant
interactions.
The ANOVA showed no reliable main effects, whereas
three interactions were significant. First, similarly to
Experiment 1, the Figure Shape x Response Type
interaction was significant, F(2, 92) = 10.65, MSe = 16.26,
p < .01, ηp2 = .19, indicating that Jagged shapes more
frequently evoked Jagged responses (M = 13.23%) than
Rounded ones (M = 11.70%) (LSD p < .05), while the
opposite was true for Rounded shapes, which elicited less
Jagged (M = 11.85%) than Rounded responses (M =
13.14%) (LSD p < .05) (see Figure 2). This confirmed and
extended the results on the sound-shape correspondence
effect observed in Experiment 1.

Figure 2. Experiment 2 - Interaction between Figure
Shape and Response Type (error bars show S.D.)
The Group x Figure Type x Response Type interaction
was also significant, F(2, 92) = 5.56, MSe = 136.51, p <
.05, ηp2 = .11. While in the children group there was no
difference between Animal (Rounded response M =
11.98%, Jagged response M = 12.93%) and Robot figures
(Rounded response M = 12.56%, Jagged response M =
12.52%), in the Adults group Animal figures were more
frequently associated to Rounded (M = 15.12%) than to
Jagged responses (M = 9.89%) (LSD p < .05 ), with the
opposite being true for Robots figures (Rounded response
M = 9.97%, Jagged response M = 15.01%) (LSD p < .05)
(see Figure 3).

Figure 3. Experiment 2 - Interaction Group x Figure
Type x Response Type (error bars show S.D.)
The last significant interaction, the Figure Type x Figure
Shape x Response Type, F(2, 92) = 23.69, MSe = 11.43, p
< .001, ηp2 = .34, showed that Robot figures were more
frequently assigned with a Jagged sounding name when
the shape of figures was either effectively Jagged
(Rounded response M = 11.39%, Jagged response M =
13.56%) (LSD p < .01) or Rounded (Rounded response M
= 11.13%, Jagged response M = 13.97%) (LSD p < .01).
On the other side, for Animal Jagged shapes no significant
difference was observed between Jagged (M = 12.90%)
and Rounded responses (M = 12.01%) (LSD p = .20),
while for Animal Rounded shape Jagged responses (M =
9.93%) were fewer than Rounded responses (M = 15.09%)
(LSD p < .001) (see Figure 4).

Figure 4. Experiment 2 - Interaction Figure Type x
Figure Shape x Response Type (error bars show S.D.)

Discussion
The results observed in Experiment 1 with natural objects
and artifacts were replicated during the labeling of natural
and artificial agents (i.e., animals, robots). Furthermore, in
Experiment 2 we found also an effect due to the stimulus
category that confirmed our main prediction. As to the
developmental pattern, we found in the adults group a
clear interaction between sound and category that was not
present in children: a sonorant word more frequently
labeled an animal, and a strident word more frequently
labeled a robot. This result shows, with a paradigm never
used in studies on categorization, that natural and artificial
agents may differ also for some general characteristics
related to sounds. If natural entities are characterized by a
smoother motion path compared to artifacts, as already
demonstrated in the literature, they seem to be also
represented as having smoother sounds, at least when
compared with robotic agents.

2213

General Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 revealed that sound-shape
correspondences can be observed also with every-day
objects, but no effect of the category (natural vs. artificial)
was found. In Experiment 2 we rendered the two natural
and artificial categories more comparable using the
subcategory of agents: stimuli were figures of animals and
anthropomorphous robots. The development of the effect
was investigated as well, by testing a sample of
participants composed by both adults and children. The
results of Experiment 2 not only confirmed what observed
in Experiment 1, as an effect of the category (natural vs.
artificial agents) on the labeling emerged as well. In
particular, adults only more frequently assigned rounded
sounding names to animals than to robots, with the
opposite being true for sharp sounding names.
Furthermore, the category also interacted with the taketemaluma effect, as the classic sound-shape correspondence
was observed only with animals, whereas with robots a
jagged response was always preferred independently of
shape. Finally, this interaction was drawn from the overall
data, clearly indicating that the modulation of the category
was present in both adults and children.
Our results allow us to address the predictions made.
First, we were able to demonstrate that the sound-shape
correspondence effect is present with figures of every-day
entities, that is with more ecological stimuli. Second, the
name pairs we used (taken from Maurer et al., 2006)
showed the predicted sound-symbolic effect when the
figures were presented one by one. These two results
strengthen the evidence on sound-shape correspondence
collected by previous studies.
Third, modulations of the stimulus category were found
in Experiment 2, as the sound-shape correspondence was
not observed with robots, that were always associated to
jagged names independently of variations in their shape.
One possible reason why we found the effect in
Experiment 2, with the more compact and apparently less
differentiated category of agents, but not in Experiment 1,
can depend on the special “naming habit” used by
children and adults in their interactions with biological
agents (e.g., animals), as with any entity presenting
animacy cues (e.g., eyes, mouth), hence perceived as able
to autonomously act (e.g., robots). In fact, entities
perceived as agents are usually renamed during the
interactions with them: if adults typically use a special
name for their pets, children do it for teddy-bears and
robot toys as well. In contrast, it is more difficult to
associate proper names to entities endowed only with
generic names, like the objects of Experiment 1. In
support of this explanation, research on the mutual
exclusivity or lexical contrast constraint (Markman, 1989,
1992) has showed that during language acquisition
children experience difficulties in using more names, for
example a basic and a superordinate one (e.g., “apple” and
“fruit”, respectively), to indicate the same referent.
Finally, if the takete-maluma effect and its modulation
due to the category were stable across ages, the interaction
between sound and category changed with development.
In fact, adults only showed the tendency to associate a

jagged name to a robot and a rounded name to an animal
independently of their shape. One could speculate that the
emergence of sound-symbolic correspondences at the
semantic level requires the acquisition of linguistic and
cultural aspects related to categories. We think it is
possible that adults have more experience in listening to
or in actively associating nouns to agents such as pets and
toys. This experience might have created associations
between sounds and categories (i.e., animal more rounded,
robot more jagged) which go beyond the sound-symbolic
correspondence between shapes and names based only on
perceptual aspects of the stimulus. This result also
suggests that children categories are more perceptually
grounded than adults ones. In general, our interpretation
follows the idea that, once the mapping between
perceptual and linguistic aspects is established, subjects
can rely on language as a shortcut (for discussion on this
topic see Barsalou et al., 2008; Borghi et al., 2011).
Taken together, these results strengthen and extend
previous evidence on sound-symbolism, indicating that
correspondences may arise at both perceptual and
semantic levels. On the whole, our results bolster the
hypothesis of a natural relation between the structure of
words and the meanings they convey, extending prior
findings in the literature about sound-symbolism to
entities taken from every-day life. This has interesting
implications for the ongoing debate about the arbitrariness
of verbal language. Furthermore, our evidence provides
some suggestions to speculate about a possible origin of
contemporary lexicons from more iconic ones, in keeping
with those perspectives on cognition which hypothesize a
direct, natural line of evolution from gestures to speech
(e.g., Corballis, 2002, 2009; Flumini, 2014; Gallese, 2008;
Gentilucci & Corballis, 2006; Rizzolatti & Craighero,
2004).

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the EU funded Projects
“ROSSI – Emergence of communication in RObots
through Sensorimotor and Social Interaction”, contract no.
FP7-STREP-216125.

References
Arata, M., Imai, M., Sotaro, K., Guillaume, T., & Okada,
H. (2010). Perception of sound symbolism in 12 monthold infants: An ERP study. Neuroscience Research, 68S,
223-334.
Asano, M., Kitajo, K., Arata, M., Guillaume, T., Sotaro,
K., Okada, H., & Imai, M. (2011). Preverbal infants’
sensitivity to sound symbolism: An EEG study.
Neuroscience Research, 71S, 408-416.
Backscheider, A. G., Gelman, S. A., Martinez, I., &
Kowieski, J. (1999). Children's use of different
information types when learning homophones and
nonce words. Cognitive Development, 14(4), 515-530.
doi:10.1016/S0885-2014(99)00017-9.
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual
Review of Psychology, 59, 617-645.

2214

Barsalou, L. W., Santos, A., Simmons, W. K., & Wilson,
C. D. (2008). Language and simulation in conceptual
processing. In M. De Vega, A. M. Glenberg, & A. C.
Graesser (Eds.). Symbols, embodiment, and meaning
(pp. 245–284). Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
Borghi, A. M., Flumini, A., Cimatti, F., Marocco, D., &
Scorolli, C. (2011). Manipulating objects and telling
words: A study on concrete and abstract words
acquisition. Frontiers in Cognition, 2, 15. doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00015
Borghi, A. M., & Pecher, D. (2011). Introduction to the
special topic Embodied and Grounded Cognition.
Frontiers
in
Psychology,
2,
187.
doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00187.
Borghi, A. M., Bonfiglioli, C., Lugli, L., Ricciardelli, P.,
Rubichi, S., & Nicoletti, R. (2007). Are visual stimuli
sufficient to evoke motor information? Studies with
hand primes. Neuroscience Letters, 411, 17-21.
Corballis, M. C. (2002). From Hand to Mouth: The
Origins of Language. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Corballis, M. C. (2009). The evolution of language.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1156, 19–
43.
Flumini, A. (2014). Cognition in context: Evidence on
affordances and verbal language. Doctoral thesis
retrievable from http://amsdottorato.unibo.it/6449/.
Gallese, V. (2008). Mirror neurons and the social nature of
language: The neural exploitation hypothesis. Social
Neuroscience, 3, 317-333.
Gentilucci, M., & Corballis, M. C. (2006). From manual
gesture to speech: A gradual transition. Neuroscience
Biobehavioural Review, 30, 949-960.
Hinton, L., Nichols, J., & Ohala, J. J. (1994). Sound
symbolism. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Humphreys, G.W., & Forde, E.M. (2001). Hierarchies,
similarity, and interactivity in object recognition:
"category-specific"
neuropsychological
deficits.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24(3), 453-76;
discussion 476-509.
Iwasaki, N., Vinson, D. P., & Vigliocco, G. (2007). What
do English speakers know about gera–gera and yota–
yota? A cross-linguistic investigation of mimetic words
for laughing and walking. Japanese Education in the
World, 17, 53–78.
Köhler, W. (1929). Gestalt psychology. New York:
Liveright.
Kovic, V., Plunkett, K., & Westermann, G. (2009). The
shape of words in the brain. Cognition, 114, 19–28.
Lotto, L., Dell'Acqua, R., & Job, R. (2001). Le figure
PD/DPSS. Norme di accordo sul nome, tipicità,
familiarità, età di acquisizione e tempi di
denominazione per 266 figure. Giornale Italiano di
Psicologia, 28, 193-207.
Mandler, J. M. (1992). How to build a baby: II.
Conceptual primitives. Psychological Review, 99, 587–
604.
Mandler, J. M. (2004). The foundations of mind: The
origins of conceptual thought. New York: Oxford
University Press.

Markman, E. M. (1989). Categorization and Naming in
Children: Problems of Induction. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Markman, E. M. (1992). Constraints on word learning:
speculations about their nature, origins and domain
specificity. In Gunnar, M. R. and Maratsos, M. P. (eds.)
Modularity and Constraints in Language and
Cognition: The Minnesota Symposium on Child
Psychology (pp. 59–101), Erlbaum.
Martin, A. (2007). The representation of object concepts
in the brain. Annu. Rev. Psychol., 58, 25-45.
Maurer, D., Pathman, T., & Mondloch, C. J. (2006). The
shape of boubas: Sound–shape correspondences in
toddlers and adults. Developmental Science, 9(3), 316–
322.
Nielsen, A., & Rendall, D. (2011). The Sound of Round:
Evaluating the Sound-Symbolic Role of Consonants in
the Classic Takete-Maluma Phenomenon. Canadian
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 65(2), 115–124.
Nygaard, L. C., Herold, D. S., & Namy, L. L. (2009a).
The semantics of prosody: Acoustic and perceptual
evidence of prosodic correlates to word meaning.
Cognitive Science, 33, 127–146.
Nygaard, L. C., Herold, D. S., & Namy, L. L. (2009b).
Sound to meaning correspondences facilitate word
learning. Cognition, 112, 181–186.
Pietrandrea, P. (2002). Iconicity and arbitrariness in Italian
Sign Language. Sign Language Studies, 2, 296–321.
Pizutto, E., & Volterra, V. (2000). Iconicity and
transparency in sign languages: A cross-linguistic
crosscultural view. In K. Emmorey & H. Lane (Eds.),
The Signs of Language Revisited: An Anthology to
Honor Ursula Bellugi and Edward Klima (pp. 261–
286), Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Rakison, D. H., & Oakes, L. M. (Eds.) (2003). Early
category and concept development: Making sense of the
blooming, buzzing vonfusion. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Rizzolatti, G., & Craighero, L. (2004). The mirror-neuron
system. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 27, 169–192.
Sapir, E. (1929). A study in phonetic symbolism. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 12, 225–239.
Spector, F., & Maurer, D. (2008). The color of Os:
Naturally biased associations between shape and color.
Perception, 37, 841–847.
Westbury, C. (2005). Implicit sound symbolism in lexical
access: Evidence from an interference task. Brain and
Language, 93, 10–19.

2215

