UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial distance modulates reading times for sentences about social relations: evidence
from eye tracking

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/293438cq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Guerra, Ernesto
Knoeferle, Pia

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial distance modulates reading times for sentences
about social relations: evidence from eye tracking
Ernesto Guerra1,2 (ernesto.guerra@mpi.nl)
Pia Knoeferle1 (knoeferl@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de)
1

Cognitive Interaction Technology Excellence Cluster and Department of Linguistics,
Bielefeld University, Inspiration I, 33615, Bielefeld, Germany
2

Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Wundtlaan 1,
Nijmegen, 6525 XD, The Netherlands

Keywords: spatial distance, social distance, semantic
interpretation, eye tracking.

Guerra and Knoeferle (2012) was motivated by a linking
hypothesis from Conceptual Metaphor Theory (CMT,
Lakoff & Johnson 1999). To accommodate the rapid and
incremental effects of spatial distance on semantic
interpretation, the authors relied on a mechanism that relates
corresponding elements in the sentence and in the visual
context by co-indexing them (see the Coordinated Interplay
Account, CIA, Knoeferle & Crocker, 2006, 2007). Yet, it is
unclear whether spatial distance can rapidly influence
processing of other semantic relations besides similarity (see
Lakoff & Johnson, 1999).
In addition, it remains to be seen how precisely abstract
language is co-indexed with spatial distance depicted in the
visual context during comprehension. The present study
examined spatial distance effects on another abstract domain
(social relations), and additionally, assesses the co-indexing
between visual cues and abstract language comprehension.

Introduction

Spatial distance and social relations

Recent eye-tracking evidence showed that spatial distance
between depicted objects can distinctively modulate reading
times for sentences expressing semantic similarity (Guerra
& Knoeferle, 2012). Participants inspected objects (playing
cards) and then read a sentence about abstract ideas (e.g.,
„Peace and war are certainly different…‟). Reading times
were shorter for sentences expressing similarity between
two abstract „and‟-coordinated nouns when the cards were
presented close together, compared to farther apart. For
sentences expressing dissimilarity the opposite pattern was
observed, namely reading times were shorter when cards
were presented far apart (vs. close together).
These results represent important advances in the
understanding of the relation between visual context effects
and sentence interpretation. For instance, they suggest visual
information can influence abstract-language interpretation –
an effect previously shown for concrete language (see, e.g.,
Tanenhaus et al., 1995). Moreover, they suggest that
linguistic and non-linguistic information can interact in the
absence of an overt referential link, or lexical association
(cf. Altmann & Kamide, 2007; Knoeferle & Crocker, 2007).
However, several open questions remain concerning the
extent to which spatial distance affects abstract language
processing and the mechanisms underlying such effects. The
investigation of non-referential visual context effects in

In everyday language, people commonly use spatial
concepts to communicate aspect of social relations in
expressions such as “he‟s a close friend”. The CMT
suggests that such expressions arise because abstract
representations such as social intimacy are grounded in
physical experience such as spatial distance through
metaphorical mapping (Lakoff & Johnson 1999).
Recent behavioral studies have investigated the link
between social and spatial distance. For instance, in a study,
Williams and Bargh (2008) found that participants reported
weaker bonds to their families and hometowns after they
had been primed with far (vs. close) distance (by marking
off two points on a Cartesian plane, either far apart or close
together). More recently, Matthews and Matlock (2011)
found that in a path-drawing task participants drew paths
closer to figures described to them as friends (vs. strangers).
Another study reported how perceived distance (in a picture
with depth perspective, e.g., scenery of alleys with trees)
interacted with the content of written words (i.e., friend vs.
enemy), modulating response latencies in a distanceestimation and a word-classification task (Bar-Anan et al.,
2007). In both of these tasks longer response times emerged
when the word friend was presented far away in the picture
(compared to close), and the opposite pattern for the word
enemy.

Abstract
Recent evidence from eye tracking during reading showed
that non-referential spatial distance presented in a visual
context can modulate semantic interpretation of similarity
relations rapidly and incrementally. In two eye-tracking
reading experiments we extended these findings in two
important ways; first, we examined whether other semantic
domains (social relations) could also be rapidly influenced by
spatial distance during sentence comprehension. Second, we
aimed to further specify how abstract language is co-indexed
with spatial information by varying the syntactic structure of
sentences between experiments. Spatial distance rapidly
modulated reading times as a function of the social relation
expressed by a sentence. Moreover, our findings suggest that
abstract language can be co-indexed as soon as critical
information becomes available for the reader.

2315

These results showed that spatial information can
modulate participants‟ reports on their social bonds in a way
that is coherent with the conceptual metaphor hypothesis. In
addition, such findings show that a verbal description of
friendliness (vs. unfriendliness) can modulate the way
participants use space in an otherwise unrelated task (path
drawing). Finally, the implicit relation between perceived
distance and different social relations also modulated
response times in a distance-estimation and wordclassification task.
However, these data cannot tell us whether the relation
between spatial and social distance is relevant for the
incremental interpretation of sentences. They also leave
open the question of how precisely spatial distance is related
to words during sentence processing. Re-consider the
above-mentioned paradigm from Guerra and Knoeferle in
which participants inspected two cards moving either farther
apart or closer together. Next they read a sentence. Each
card showed a noun, and these nouns appeared again in the
sentence (e.g., „Peace and war…‟). These two sentenceinitial nouns could be co-indexed with the two playing
cards, which in turn allows participant to integrate spatial
distance with semantic representations. This is particularly
plausible when coordinated objects in the visual context can
be directly related to coordinated nouns in the sentence (see
Guerra & Knoeferle, 2012, Experiment 1). Alternatively,
spatial distance could be directly co-indexed with the
abstract concept of similarity even when there is no one-toone mapping between coordinated objects and coordinated
nouns. The results presented by Guerra and Knoeferle
(2012), could not confirm or rule out this second possibility.
To address these open issues, we aimed to extend findings
of spatial distance effects on abstract sentence interpretation
in two ways: First, we examined a different abstract
semantic domain, namely intimacy in social relations, which
according to the CMT is also associated with spatial
distance. Second, we asked whether spatial distance effects
could be observed in the absence of an „and‟-coordination of
nouns. In Experiment 2, we tested whether the predicted
effects could emerge even before both sentential nouns can
be co-indexed with the objects in the visual context. If so,
then interaction effects should appear as soon as the manner
of the social relation becomes available in the sentence (e.g.,
at the ADV region „cheerfully‟ vs. grumpily‟) even when
only one of the two nouns has been encountered (and could
thus be co-indexed with the cards).

duration). Moreover, these effects should emerge timelocked to the sentence region conveying information about
the social relation, or at the ensuing region (see Guerra &
Knoeferle, 2012, see also Mitchell, 1984).

Method
Participants Thirty-two native speakers of German with
normal or corrected-to-normal vision participated in the
experiment for a compensation of 6 Euro. None of them had
learned a second language before age six, and all gave
informed consent.
Materials and Design A 2x2 within-subject Latin square
design crossed two levels of spatial distance (close vs. far)
and two levels of social relation (friendly vs. unfriendly) as
factors. Distance was depicted using two playing cards
presented in a visual context before each sentence. Social
relations were conveyed through 48 sentences expressing
either a friendly or an unfriendly relation between two
characters (96 further filler sentences were included).
Except for the adverb expressing the manner of the relation,
the sentence materials were identical in all conditions.
Sentences in previous research had included nouns
coordinated by a conjunction („and‟) that could have been
mapped one-to-one onto the two cards in the visual context
(which were coordinated in their motion). In Experiment 1,
sentences did not include an „and‟-coordination of nouns.
Instead, the sentence structure was NP – VP – NP – ADV –
PP – NP. Table 1 presents an example sentence illustrating
the combination of the two manipulated factors.
Table 1: Visual context and sentence examples for one item
(translated from the German originals). Both levels of
spatial distance (close / far) were crossed with both sentence
levels (friendly / unfriendly) yielding 4 conditions.
Visual Context
FAR

FRIENDLY

Sandra

Aunt

CLOSE

Experiment 1

„SandraNP1 metVP
her auntNP2
cheerfullyADV inPP
the elevatorNP3.‟
UNFRIENDLY

Sandra

In an eye-tracking reading experiment we examined whether
spatial distance (close vs. far) depicted in a visual context
could modulate real-time semantic interpretation of German
sentences about social relations (friendly vs. unfriendly
interactions). Based on existing evidence, we predict that if
spatial cues modulate social distance interpretation rapidly
and incrementally, then reliable interactions between spatial
distance and social relations should emerge in relatively
early measures (i.e., first-pass reading times, regression path

Sentence

Aunt

„SandraNP1 metVP
her auntNP2
grumpilyADV inPP
the elevatorNP3.‟

Condition
FarFriendly
CloseFriendly
FarUnfriendly
CloseUnfriendly

Procedure On critical trials, participants inspected a visual
context with two playing cards that moved either apart or
closer together, and then turned around (as indicated by the
arrow in Table 1) showing two nouns. These two nouns
were the first two sentential nouns (e.g., „Sandra‟, „Aunt‟).
Next, participants read a sentence and judged its veracity
contrasted to their world-knowledge. Finally, they saw a
picture of two playing cards and verified whether these

2316

cards were identical to the two playing cards presented
before the sentence. Figure 1 shows the order and the timing
of presentation of the stimuli.

showed this interaction to be only marginally significant
(p=.095). No other significant effects emerged in this
region. At the immediately subsequent region (PP), we
observed marginally significant main effects of distance in
first-pass, and of distance and social relation in regression
path duration (all p-values <.1). More importantly, reading
times at the PP region were faster when a sentence
expressing a friendly interaction was preceded by cards
close together compared to far apart, while reading times for
sentences expressing an unfriendly interaction were faster
when preceding cards moved far apart compared to close
together. This interaction between spatial distance and
social relations was reliable in first-pass (p=.035) and
regression path (p=.009). Figure 2 shows the pattern of
interaction in Experiment 1.

Figure 1: Schematic representation of an experimental trial.
Data Analysis We removed fixations < 80 ms and > 1200
ms before computing reading measures (see, e.g., Sturt,
Keller, & Dubey, 2010). We report three reading measures
for critical sentence regions. First-pass reading times (the
duration of all fixations from first entering an interest area
and prior to moving to another interest area); regression path
duration (the time from first entering a region until moving
past that region to the right, including reading time after
regressions out of the region); and total reading times (the
duration of all fixations in a given region, see, e.g., Rayner,
2009). We report analyses of the data from two critical
regions, namely the ADV region, where the manner of the
social relation is made explicit (friendly vs. unfriendly) and
the immediately ensuing region (i.e., PP, see Table 1).
We analyzed log-transformed reading measures using a
linear mixed effect regression (LMER, lmerTest Package in
R). Our models1 included random intercepts both for
participants and items and fixed effects random slopes for
both random intercepts as well as for their interaction (see
Barr et al., 2013 on the use of full models in LMER).

Results
At the critical ADV region, a main effect of distance in
regression path duration was observed (close: 475 ms, far:
385 ms; p=.007). Moreover, while first-pass times for
sentences expressing similarity were virtually the same
when preceded by cards close together vs. apart (296 ms vs.
298 ms, resp.), for sentences expressing dissimilarity shorter
first-pass times were observed when preceding cards were
close vs. far (278 ms vs. 298 ms, resp.). Data analysis
1

Model example: lmer (first-pass ~ distance * social relation + (1 |
participant) + (1 | item) + (0 + distance | participant) + (0 + social
relation | participant) + (0 + distance : social relation | participant)
+ (0 + distance | item) + (0 + social relation | item) + (0 + distance :
social relation | item), data)

Figure 2: Mean first-pass reading time (on the left) and
regression path duration (on the right) in milliseconds for
the PP region as a function of spatial distance (solid and
dashed lines represent close and far distance, resp.) and
sentence type (friendly vs. unfriendly) in Experiment 1.
Error bars represent standard errors of the mean (SE).

Discussion
In Experiment 1, we asked whether recently reported effects
of spatial distance on incremental interpretation of sentences
about similarity would extend to sentences about social
relations. Furthermore, we examined whether these effect
could emerge in the absence of an „and‟-coordination of
nouns. The results from Experiment 1 showed that spatial
distance distinctively affected reading times (at the PP) as a
function of whether they expressed a friendly or an
unfriendly social relation.
In coherence with previous findings, reliable interaction
effects emerged in first-pass and regression path duration,
immediately after the nature of the social relation was
mentioned in the sentence (see Guerra & Knoeferle, 2012).
This suggests that the effect of spatial information on the
interpretation of social relation occurs rapidly and
incrementally, and it did so in the absence of an „and‟coordination of nouns. Yet, it is unclear whether
comprehenders co-indexed the first two nouns in the
sentence with the two playing cards, or whether spatial
distance was directly co-indexed with the friendliness

2317

expressed by the adverb, since both nouns were processed
before the adverb. Experiment 2 addresses this open issue.

results for the two regions of interest in first-pass reading
times with error bars marking the SEs.

Experiment 2
Our second experiment was identical to Experiment 1 but
we changed the structure of the sentence by moving the
adverb before the second noun phrase (see (1)). With that
sentence structure, the manner of the social relation
(friendly vs. unfriendly) becomes available before the
second noun is processed. If spatial distance effects on
sentence processing require the co-indexing between nouns
and cards (from the visual context), the earliest interaction
effect should appear at the second noun region. However, if
spatial distance can co-index directly with the manner of the
social relation we should observe interaction effects in firstpass reading times (or regression path duration) at the ADV
region. Even late effects (e.g., total reading times) at the
ADV would favor a noun-to-object co-indexing account.

Method
Participants A further group of thirty-two native German
speakers with normal or corrected-to-normal vision received
6 Euro for participating in the study. None of them had
acquired a second language before age six, and all gave
informed consent.
Materials, design, procedure and data analyses In
Experiment 2 we varied the structure of the sentence by
moving the adverb before the second noun as in (1).
Otherwise, the materials were identical to Experiment 1.
(1) SandraNP1 metVP cheerfullyADV herPRON auntNP2
inPP the elevatorNP3.
The design and procedure were identical to Experiment 1.
Data analysis was identical except for the analyzed sentence
regions (the ADV region and the NP2 region were analyzed
to see whether interaction effects emerge only after the
second NP2 has been encountered or earlier, at the ADV).

Results
At the ADV region, first-pass reading times were faster for
sentences that expressed a friendly social relation when
preceded by cards far apart (299 ms) compared to close
together (278 ms). By contrast, reading times for sentences
expressing an unfriendly social interaction were faster when
cards in the visual context moved close together (266 ms)
compared to far apart (289 ms). The LMER analysis
confirmed this interaction as reliable (p=.042). A similar
interaction pattern was marginally significant in total times
(p=.097). No other effects emerged in this region.
At the NP2 the main effect of social relation was marginal
in first-pass (friendly: 227 ms, unfriendly: 243 ms, p=.062)
and statistically significant in total reading times (friendly:
375 ms, unfriendly: 415 ms, p=.035). No other effects
emerged in this region. Figure 3 presents the pattern of

Figure 3: Mean first-pass reading time for the ADV region
(on the left) and the NP2 region (on the right) in
milliseconds as a function of spatial distance (solid and
dashed lines represent close and far distance, resp.) and
sentence type (friendly vs. unfriendly) in Experiment 2.
Error bars represent SE.

Discussion
Experiment 2 examined whether spatial distance effects on
reading times for sentences about social relations could
emerge even before participants encountered the second
noun in the sentence. It‟s possible that co-indexing of the
cards and the nouns is necessary for spatial distance effects
to emerge. Alternatively, co-indexing is not tied to
individual words in the sentence but could be also
“conceptual” (between the concepts of spatial distance and
social relations) Spatial distance between objects in the
previous visual context modulated semantic interpretation
before the second noun had been encountered, as reflected
by the reliable interaction effect in first-pass reading times
at the ADV region (i.e., as soon as the manner of the social
relation became clear).
When comparing Figures 2 and 3, it is noteworthy that the
interaction pattern observed in Experiment 2 is the opposite
of that found in Experiment 1. Such interference patterns
have been previously reported (see Kaschak et al. 2005;
Richardson et al., 2003). Some have argued that differences
in the experimental tasks produce interference (e.g.,
Richardson et al., 2003). Others have argued that
interference effects emerged when related spatial and
semantic information are difficult to integrate (see Kaschak
et al., 2005 for a discussion on the notion of integratibility).
For our experiments, however, the task and materials were
identical, making our results less compatible with taskbased or integratibility-based accounts of interference
effects. More recently, accounts that appealed to the role of
attentional modulation (see Connell & Lynott, 2012) and the
level of activation of semantic and perceptual
representations (Chen & Mirman, 2012) have been proposed
to accommodate interference and facilitation effects.
According to Chen and Mirman (2012), for instance, weakly
active similar representations facilitate semantic processing

2318

while strongly activate similar representations interfere with
it. Such accounts seem to be more compatible with the kind
of interaction effects observed in Experiment 2.

General Discussion
In a recent study (Guerra & Knoeferle, 2012), participants
read sentences that expressed similarity (or dissimilarity)
between two abstract nouns immediately after they had
inspected a visual context with two playing cards that
moved far apart (or close together). Overall, the results from
this study showed that (a) visual context can influence
sentence interpretation in the absence of a referential or a
lexical-semantic link and (b) that abstract language can also
interact with perceptual information derived from the visual
context. However, we do not yet have a good understanding
of the mechanisms behind such effects. In the CIA account
(see Knoeferle & Crocker, 2007), co-indexing is predicted
for nouns and their visual referents and for verbs and
depicted actions. Nevertheless, this account has been
extended to include co-indexing based on subtler
associations, such as spatial information and abstract
adjectives/adverbs (Guerra & Knoeferle, 2012). The authors
argued that the observed rapid and incremental effects can
be accommodated by co-indexing between spatial distance
and abstract semantic information.
Against this background, we tested whether visual
information could modulate real-time interpretation of other
abstract semantic domains, namely social relations. We
examined these effects in real time and asked whether they
occur even in the absence of an „and‟-coordination of nouns
corresponding to cards in motion as in Guerra and Knoeferle
(2012). If the effects of spatial distance on reading times
require the co-indexing between the two objects in the
visual context and the two first sentential nouns, they should
disappear when these two nouns are not coordinated.
Alternatively these effects could emerge independent of
noun coordination, as soon as other relevant semantic
information becomes available in the sentence.
In our first experiment, we replicated and extended
previous findings on the effects of spatial distance during
abstract sentence interpretation (to another semantic domain
and syntactic structure). First-pass times at the PP region for
sentences expressing friendly social relations were faster
when preceding cards were close together (compared to far
apart). In turn, sentences expressing unfriendly social
interactions were read faster when preceded by cards far
apart (vs. close together). The results from our second
experiment further extended and specified the co-indexing
mechanism, showing that rapid and incremental effects of
spatial distance do not depend on relating individual cards to
individual nouns but can appear as soon as the critical
semantic content is accessible otherwise (i.e., when
encountering an adverb expressing social relations).
Therefore the influence of non-referential visual context
does not demand the co-indexing between objects (in the
visual context) and abstract nouns in the sentence.

Undoubtedly, the contrasting patterns of interaction
between Experiments 1 and 2 deserve further discussion. As
mentioned earlier, both facilitation and interference results
have been reported and discussed in the literature (see Chen
& Mirman, 2012; Connell & Lynott, 2012; Kaschak et al.
2005; Richardson et al., 2003). We argue that the present
findings are compatible with an account that considers
activation and attention as moderators in the interaction
between spatial distance and semantic similarity, rather than
with accounts focusing on task or integration (see Kaschak
et al., 2005). This is because the task and materials were the
same in Experiment 1 (facilitation effect) and in Experiment
2 (interference).
Consider the following potential sequence of processes in
Experiment 1: Participants inspected a visual context with
two playing cards. After three seconds, the cards turned
around, revealing two nouns. Participants were instructed to
remember the cards. After six seconds, the visual context
disappeared and a sentence was presented. As participant
begin to read the sentence, their working memory probably
includes an active representation of the location of the cards
in the visual context, the distance between them and the
words on them. Upon encountering the first noun of the
sentence, participants‟ internal attention is directed to the
visual representation of that noun and its card in the
preceding context (see Altmann, 2004; Knoeferle &
Crocker, 2007) possibly boosting its activation level.
Participants continue to read and encounter the second noun
of the sentence previously presented on the other card.
As participants continue reading, they encounter the
critical adverb, which expresses the manner of the social
relation. Arguably at this point, participants‟ internal
attention is focused on the visual context, maintaining its
representation highly active. Accounts that rely on
attentional modulation and level of activation would predict
that since attention is maintained on the perceptual aspect of
the visual context (e.g., card distance), related semantic
representations will be more difficult to process, producing
interference effects. In fact, the trend of interaction in firstpass reading times at the adverb region in Experiment 1,
matches qualitatively an interference effect. Yet, unlike the
nouns, the adverb does not refer to the depicted objects (the
nouns but not the adverbs were printed on the cards).
Moreover, in Experiment 1, the cards could have been coindexed to nouns in the sentence once participants read the
adverb. Thus, the highly active visual context representation
may have decayed as the adverb was processed, producing
the observed facilitation (in first-pass times at the adverb).
For Experiment 2, the processes should be identical up to
the adverb. After the first sentential noun, participants‟
attention is directed to the representation of the visual
context in working memory. Presumably, the card and
distance representations are active as participants encounter
the adverb. In contrast to Experiment 1, however, we moved
the adverb before the second noun, and the latter has thus
not yet been integrated with the other card. Under that
condition, it is possible that the visual context representation

2319

does not decay quickly enough to produce facilitation.
Instead, remains active in working memory, producing
interference on the assumption that highly active distance
representations interfere with processing social relations.
This view of the interaction between perceptual
representation and semantic interpretation can potentially
accommodate both the observed facilitation and interference
effects. However, it is important to be cautious with
conclusions regarding the mechanisms that we attribute to
these facilitation and interference effects. For instance, a
recent study aimed to replicate previous findings on the role
of visual features during sentence comprehension and found
the exact opposite pattern of effects (see Zwaan & Pecher,
2012, Experiment 3a and 3b; cf. Connell, 2007). Thus,
although an attentional account appears compatible with our
results and the co-indexing mechanism, further research
should confirm these initial results.

Conclusion
In two eye-tracking reading studies we examined the effects
of non-referential visual context on real-time interpretation
of social relations. We showed that spatial distance between
objects distinctively modulated reading times for sentences
expressing friendly or unfriendly social interactions. Just as
for semantic similarity, these effects occurred rapidly and
incrementally. Moreover, spatial distance affected semantic
interpretation even when coordinated elements in the visual
context did not directly map onto a coordination of nouns in
the sentence. Instead, spatial distance affected interpretation
of social relations as soon as other critical semantic
information became available. These results appear as
further evidence for effects of non-referential visual
information on abstract semantic interpretation and they also
contribute to the refinement of the co-indexing mechanism.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the Cognitive Interaction
Technology Excellence Cluster, the SFB 673 “Alignment in
Communication” (German Research Foundation, PK), and
by a PhD scholarship awarded to EG by the Ministry of
Education, Government of Chile. We thank Jasmin
Bernotat, Ayten Kilic and Clara Matheus at the Language &
Cognition Lab (Bielefeld University) for their help with
material preparation and data collection.

References
Altmann, G. T. M. (2004). Language-mediated eye
movements in the absence of a visual world: The „blank
screen paradigm‟. Cognition, 93, B79–B87.
Altmann, G. T. M., & Kamide, Y. (2007). The real-time
mediation of visual attention by language and world
knowledge: Linking anticipatory (and other) eye
movements to linguistic processing. JML, 57, 502–518.
Bar-Anan, Y., Liberman, N., Trope, Y., & Algom, D.
(2007). Automatic processing of psychological distance:
evidence from a stroop task. JEP: General, 136, 610–622.

Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013).
Random-effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis
testing: Keep it maximal. JML, 68, 255–278.
Chen, Q., & Mirman, D. (2012). Competition and
cooperation among similar representations: Toward a
unified account of facilitative and inhibitory effects of
lexical neighbors. Psychological Review, 119, 417-430.
Connell, L. (2007) Representing object colour in language
comprehension. Cognition, 102, 476–485.
Connell, L., & Lynott, D. (2012). When does perception
facilitate or interfere with conceptual processing? The
effect of attentional modulation. Frontiers in Psychology,
3, 1-4.
Guerra, E., & Knoeferle, P. (2012). Abstract language
comprehension is incrementally modulated by nonreferential spatial information: evidence from eyetracking. Proceedings of the 34th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1620–1625). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Kaschak, M. P., Madden, C. J., Therriault, D. J., Yaxley, R.
H., Aveyard, M., Blanchard, A. A., & Zwaan, R. A.
(2005). Perception of motion affects language processing.
Cognition, 94, B79-B89.
Knoeferle, P., & Crocker, M. W. (2007). The influence of
recent scene events on spoken comprehension: Evidence
from eye movements. JML, 57, 519–543.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh:
The embodied mind and its challenge to western thought.
New York, NY: Basic Books.
Matthews, J. L., & Matlock, T. (2011). Understanding the
link between spatial distance and social distance. Social
Psychology, 42, 185–192.
Mitchell, D. C. (1984). An evaluation of subject-paced
reading tasks and other methods for investigating
immediate processes in reading. In D. E. Kieras & M. A.
Just (Eds.) New methods in reading comprehension
research (pp. 69–90). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum
Rayner, K. (2009). Eye movements and attention in reading,
scene perception, and visual search. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 62, 1457–1506.
Richardson, D. C., Spivey, M. J., Barsalou, L. W., &
McRae, K. (2003). Spatial representations activated
during real-time comprehension of verbs. Cognitive
Science, 27, 767-780.
Sturt, P., Keller, F., & Dubey, A. (2010). Syntactic priming
in comprehension: Parallelism effects with and without
coordination. JML, 62, 333–351.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M., Eberhard, K., &
Sedivy, J. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic
information during spoken language comprehension.
Science, 268, 1632–1634.
Williams, L. E., & Bargh, J. A. (2008). Keeping one's
distance : The influence of spatial distance cues on affect
and evaluation. Psychological Science, 19, 302–308.
Zwaan, R. A., & Pecher, D. (2012). Revisiting mental
simulation in language comprehension: Six replication
attempts. PloS ONE, 7, 1–10.

2320

