UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial reasoning in bilingual Mexico: Delimiting the influence of language

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0x7187hv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Marghetis, Tyler
McComsey, Melanie
Cooperrider, Kensy

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial reasoning in bilingual Mexico: Delimiting the influence of language
Tyler Marghetis*

Melanie McComsey*

Kensy Cooperrider*

tmarghet@ucsd.edu
Department of Cognitive Science
University of California, San Diego

mmccomsey@ucsd.edu
Department of Anthropology
University of California, San Diego

kensy@uchicago.edu
Department of Psychology
University of Chicago

Abstract

But can such findings be taken as evidence of linguistic
relativity? Critics have suggested they cannot (Li &
Gleitman, 2002). The communities studied have differed in
their linguistic code but also in numerous extra-linguistic
factors, such as their natural setting and built environment
as well as numerous cultural practices. The “language you
speak” is thus only part of a rich web of influences that
might drive a speaker to rely on one spatial FoR over
another. The current project was designed to untangle this
web of influences, to the extent possible in a field situation,
by testing bilingual speakers of languages that differ in how
they encode space. Our data come from an urban, bilingual
community of speakers of Spanish (Indo-European) and
Juchitán Zapotec (Otomanguean), from Juchitán, Oaxaca,
Mexico. Like other Mesoamerican languages, Juchitán
Zapotec has been characterized as “allocentric” (Pérez Báez,
2011), while Spanish is expected to pattern with
“egocentric” European languages. Because individuals
within Juchitán differ in their levels of bilingualism yet
share a common culture and environment, we were able to
probe the relations between spatial language and cognition,
decoupled from other extra-linguistic factors.
We considered several general patterns that might emerge
in this bilingual population. Overall, the community could
exhibit uniform FoR preferences, regardless of language of
instruction, language dominance, or other individual
dispositions. Indeed, previous research has reported
surprisingly uniform preferences within co-located linguistic
communities (Majid et al, 2004). On the other hand, we
could find a more mixed pattern, with individual
participants adopting strategies that differ from each other,
adopting multiple strategies on a particular occasion, or
perhaps changing preferred strategies from one occasion to
the next. Such variability could come from a number of
sources. First, the language being used in a particular setting
could have a temporary effect, with bilinguals flexibly
adopting a corresponding spatial reasoning strategy. This
pattern would be consistent with the idea that speakers infer
appropriate behavior from the language being used (Li et al.,
2011). Second, an individual’s dominant language might
have a stable influence, with bilinguals adopting the spatial
reasoning strategy characteristic of their dominant language
(Majid et al, 2004). Finally, an individual’s linguistic
competence with specific semantic distinctions might have a
targeted influence on tasks involving those distinctions.
Teasing apart the influences of language of instruction,
language dominance, and individual differences in linguistic
competence will help us delimit the possible influences that
language may have on non-linguistic spatial reasoning.

What is the relation been spatial language and cognition?
Across speech communities, linguistic preferences for
particular spatial frames of reference (FoR) predict nonlinguistic spatial reasoning strategies. This has been taken to
imply a powerful influence of language on reasoning, but
extra-linguistic factors may also matter. We present evidence
from a bilingual community in Juchitán, Mexico, where the
two languages contrast in how they encode space. In our
spatial reasoning task, the population overall showed a mixed
profile of FoR use. This naturally occurring variability
provided a laboratory for asking, at a fine-grained level, what
factors predict individuals’ spatial reasoning. Contrary to
suggestions in the literature, we found no effects of language
dominance or of the language used for the task. Instead,
reliance on an egocentric strategy for the non-linguistic task
was predicted by mastery of egocentric spatial vocabulary.
These results delimit the influence of language on spatial
reasoning.
Keywords: linguistic relativity; space;
cognitive diversity; spatial frames of reference

bilingualism;

Introduction*
In recent decades the domain of space has emerged as a
critical proving ground for claims of linguistic relativity, the
idea that an individual’s habitual use of a particular
language has a causal influence on non-linguistic thought
processes. Much of the debate has centered on spatial
frames of reference (FoR) and their use in everyday
language and reasoning. FoRs are coordinate systems for
relating objects separated in space: egocentric FoRs locate
objects with reference to the observer’s bodily coordinates
(e.g., using terms such as “right” or “left”); allocentric FoRs
are not observer based, instead locating objects with
reference to another entity or landmark, or to a salient
asymmetry such as a cardinal direction (e.g. using “north”
or “west”). A surprising finding—and the subject of
ongoing controversy—is (1) that language communities
exhibit preferences for different FoRs, particularly in how
they treat small-scale or “table-top” space and (2) that these
linguistic preferences align with speakers’ performance on
non-linguistic spatial tasks (Majid et al., 2004). For
instance, speakers of Dutch and Japanese—“egocentric”
languages like English—tend to adopt an egocentric strategy
on non-linguistic tasks; speakers of “allocentric” languages
like Tseltal and Longgu tend to adopt an allocentric strategy
(e.g. Levinson & Wilkins, 2006).

*

All three authors contributed equally.

940

Spatial reasoning in bilingual Mexico

2

proficiency in Spanish. Sessions were video- and audiorecorded.
Animals-in-a-Field
Animals-in-a-Field is a variation of the Animals-in-a-Row
task, commonly used as a measure of non-linguistic spatial
reasoning (Pederson et al., 1998). It differs in two respects:
(1) it is incrementally more complex, since complex tasks
may be better than simple tasks at tapping FoR preferences
(Haun et al. 2011); (2) it uses a 90º rather than 180º turn, so
as to distinguish different possible allocentric responses.
Materials consisted of two identical sets of laterally
symmetrical toy animals (chickens, sheep, cows, pigs). Two
identical tables were arranged next to each other in the
patio, parallel to the house, separated visually by a hanging
sheet (Fig. 1). In the presentation phase, the participant was
presented with an array of three animals (two same and one
different) in the form of an equilateral triangle, with the base
of the triangle always parallel to the participant’s own leftright axis and away from the participant. The participant
was instructed in the language of instruction to “remember
how they are.” Then, following an engineered pause of
approximately 30 seconds—attributed to camera set-up—
the participant was asked to move around the sheet to the
recall table, thus rotating 90º. In the recall phase, the
participant was handed a bowl containing all eight animals
and asked to “make it again, the same.” Each participant
completed six trials. There were two lists of stimuli, used in
both a standard and a reversed order. List and list direction
were counterbalanced between subjects. BBs saw a different
list on each session.

Figure 1: Animals-in-a-Field procedure. Egocentric and
allocentric responses are distinguished by orientation.

Methods
Fieldsite and Languages
Juchitán de Zaragoza is a majority-indigenous, urban
municipality located in southern Oaxaca, Mexico. Of its
population of 74,825, a majority (58%) are speakers of
some indigenous language (INEGI, 2010), the most
widespread being Juchitán Zapotec (JCH). Because of
ongoing language shift to Spanish, only 3.6% of indigenous
language speakers are monolingual. JCH is a member of the
Zapotecan branch of the Otomanguean language family.
Juchitán Spanish is a local variety of Mexican Spanish
shaped by several centuries of contact with JCH.

Participants
Potential participants were assessed for bilingual
proficiency by one of the authors (MM), who conducted
ethnographic research in the community for two years, using
a language use interview. The interview was administered in
JCH by a local research assistant. Interviewees were
classified along a continuum of bilingual proficiency on the
basis of self-reports of: language use by setting and
interlocutor; self-assessment of proficiency; and researcher
assessment of elicited Spanish narratives. 16 JCH-Dominant
(JD) and 16 Balanced Bilingual (BB) participants were
selected for participation. All were native speakers of JCH
and natives of Juchitán. The two groups did not differ
significantly in number of women (JD: 14; BB: 10; p = .22,
Fisher’s Exact Test) or age (MJD = 44, MBB = 38, t(30) = 1.22,
p = .23). Participants were compensated with a small gift.

Spatial Vocabulary Comprehension Task
At the end of each session, participants were tested for
comprehension of different uses of two egocentric terms
(‘left,’ ‘right’) and allocentric uses of four cardinal direction
terms (‘north,’ ‘south,’ ‘east,’ ‘west’). They were seated at a
table, facing in a cardinal direction. A bowl was overturned
on the table, surrounded by four wooden blocks at the four
cardinal points (near targets). Another bowl was overturned
on the floor three meters away, surrounded by four toy
animals at the cardinal points (far targets). The interviewer
administered a series of 12 critical questions (plus 5 filler
questions) that required participants to identify a body part,
animal, or block whose location was described with one of
the six spatial terms (e.g. “Show me your left hand” or
“Touch the block that is to the north of the bowl on the
table”). The questions were then repeated after a 180º
rotation. We were careful to distinguish genuinely
projective uses of egocentric terms, which relate distant
objects (e.g. “the pen is left of that paper”), from so-called
“direct” uses that are tied directly to the speaker’s body (e.g.
“the pen is in my left hand”) (e.g. Pérez Báez, 2011).
Therefore, the two egocentric terms were tested both with
body-parts (hands) and in projective uses to identify near
and far objects; two cardinal direction terms were tested
near, and two, far, counterbalanced between rotations.

Procedure
As part of a battery of tasks, participants completed the two
analyzed here: Animals-in-a-Field and Spatial Vocabulary
Comprehension. Sessions were conducted at the homes of
participants or of author MM, in the semi-outdoor, covered
patio that is a feature of almost all houses in Juchitán. JD
participants completed all tasks once in JCH. BB
participants completed all tasks twice—once in Spanish,
once in JCH, in sessions separated by at least 7 weeks, with
order of task language (“language of instruction”)
counterbalanced. JCH sessions were administered in JCH by
a native-speaking assistant; Spanish sessions were
administered in Spanish by author MM, who has native-like

941

Spatial reasoning in bilingual Mexico

Coding

(Fig. 2). Among Balanced Bilinguals, there was no effect of
Language of Instruction: they were no more likely to adopt
an egocentric strategy in Spanish than in JCH (MSPAN = 0.48
vs. MJCH = 0.50; paired t-test: t(15) = 0.12, p = 0.91), nor,
conversely, were they any more likely to adopt an
allocentric strategy in JCH than in Spanish (MJCH = 0.38 vs.
MSPAN = 0.37; paired t-test: t(15) = 0.06, p = 0.95).
Similarly, there was no clear evidence of an effect of
Language Dominance on preferred FoR. Balanced Bilingual
participants were no more likely to adopt an egocentric
strategy than those who were JCH-Dominant (MJD = 0.49
vs. MBB = 0.47; t(30) = 0.22, p = .83). While there was a
numerical trend towards more allocentric responses by
Balanced Bilinguals (MBB = .38) than by JCH-Dominant
participants (MJD = .22), this difference did not reach
significance, t(30) = 1.55, p = .13. Indeed, while there were
numerically fewer allocentric sessions among JCHDominants, the distribution of responses did not differ
between JCH-Dominants, Balanced Bilinguals in Spanish,
or Balanced Bilinguals in JCH (p = .12, Fisher’s Exact).
This pattern of results was confirmed by a mixed-logit
model of FoR. We modeled FoR strategy on those trials for
which participants used either an egocentric or allocentric
strategy, with fixed effects of Language of Instruction
(Spanish, JCH) and Language Dominance (BB, JD), and
random effects of participants and items. Neither Language
Dominance nor Language of Instruction was significantly
predictive of egocentric responses (all zs < .9, ps > .4); the
full model was no better than reduced models without either
of those predictors (all χ2(1) < 0.5, ps > .49). There was no
evidence, therefore, that language of instruction or language
dominance had a systematic influence on spatial reasoning.

Animals-in-a-Field: orientations of the animals were coded
as one of four directions by a naïve research assistant using
overhead images extracted from the video. Comprehension:
response accuracy was determined from video-recordings.

Results
Animals-in-a-Field Task
We performed a variety of analyses of the Animals-in-aField task. To start, for each session, we calculated the
proportion of trials that were egocentric, allocentric, or other
(i.e. neither of the predicted orientations in Fig. 1). We also
identified the dominant FoR for each session, defined as the
modal FoR (egocentric, allocentric, or other) used on 3 or
more trials (following Bohnemeyer, 2011). Four sessions
(out of 48) did not have a dominant strategy according to
this criterion. Overall, participants adopted either an
egocentric- or an allocentric-dominant response in 40 out of
48 sessions, much higher than expected by chance (binomial
test, p < .001, Fig. 2). Participants produced more egocentric
than allocentric responses (Mego = .48 vs. Mallo = .30, paired
t-test: t(31) = 1.83, p = .08†), and there were more egocentricthan allocentric-dominant sessions (26 vs. 14, p = .08,
binomial test), although these differences are only
marginally significant.
More than anything, however, the population was
characterized by its markedly mixed FoR strategy, in
contrast to other populations that have been studied. The
most common strategy—egocentric—was the dominant
response only half the time (26/48). There was also
evidence of individual flexibility, to which we return below.

Flexibility Between Sessions
In addition to looking at the dominant FoR adopted by an
individual within a session, we also looked at flexibility—
that is, the degree to which individuals changed their
dominant response between sessions. This analysis is
necessarily limited to Balanced Bilinguals, who completed
two sessions. Since responses were classified as one of four
possible orientations, we should expect egocentric or
allocentric responses in one out of four sessions by chance
alone‡. Dominant responses were reliably repeated by a
significant number of participants (8/16; binomial test, p =
.037). The flip side, of course, is that the remaining
participants changed their dominant response between
sessions, a significant proportion (8/16; binomial test, p =
.037). Among those who changed their dominant FoR
between sessions, the change was not related to language of
instruction: half adopted an egocentric strategy in JCH, and
the other half, an allocentric strategy. Therefore, while
Balanced Bilinguals as a population exhibited significant
between-session stability, individually they also showed
evidence of between-session flexibility.

Language Dominance and Language of Instruction
We next looked at the combined effect of language of
instruction and language dominance on spatial reasoning

Figure 2: Variability in dominant strategy. Participants
adopted a variety of dominant responses.

†

3

‡

All reported t-tests are two-tailed.

942

This is conservative: sessions might lack a dominant response.

Spatial reasoning in bilingual Mexico

4

< .001; χ2(1) = 11.7, p < .001). Follow-up analyses revealed
that accuracy on allocentric cardinal terms did not differ
between near and far referents (M = .69 vs. .70, t(31) = -0.20,
p = .84), while participants were significantly more accurate
on egocentric items for near than far referents (M = .94 vs.
.79, t(31) = 2.78, p = .009) (Fig. 2). Thus, distance had a
selective influence on participants’ comprehension of
egocentric uses of terms, but did not affect comprehension
of allocentric terms. There was no evidence that either
Language Dominance (MJD = .77, MBB = .79) or Language
of Instruction (MJCH = .79, MSPAN = .76) had any influence
on vocabulary accuracy (all zs < 1.2, all ps > .23).
Relations Between Vocabulary and Animals Tasks
We next investigated the possibility that participants’
performance on the Vocabulary task would predict their
performance on the reasoning task. We used individuals’
performance on the Vocabulary task to classify them as
high- or low-competence, for both projective egocentric and
allocentric uses of terms, using a median split.
We first looked at the relation between vocabulary
competence and the adoption of an egocentric strategy on
the Animals task. We conducted a 2x2x2 analysis of
covariance (ANCOVA) on the proportion of egocentric
responses by each participant, with participants’ Age as a
covariate, and three crossed between-subjects factors:
Language Dominance (Balanced Bilingual vs. JCHDominant), Egocentric Vocabulary Competence (High vs.
Low), and Allocentric Vocabulary Competence (High vs.
Low). The only significant effect was a main effect of
Egocentric Vocabulary Competence. Participants adopted
egocentric strategies significantly more often if they were
highly competent in their use of egocentric vocabulary than
if they were not (M = .59 vs. M = .32, F(1,23) = 4.3, p = .049,
ηp2 = .16; Fig. 4). By contrast, no other effect approached
significance (all Fs > .73, all ps > .4). This effect remained
significant with a nonparametric Wilcoxon test (W = 63.5, p
= .021), and a linear regression confirmed that accuracy for
egocentric vocabulary items predicted egocentric responses
on Animals (β = 0.60, p = .04, r2 = .13, p < .04).
A very different pattern emerged when we looked at the

Figure 3: Vocabulary accuracy with egocentric terms (left,
right) varied by use, while accuracy with the cardinal
direction terms did not differ for near and far targets.

Spatial Vocabulary Comprehension Task
Overall accuracy§ was high (.82) and above chance for all
vocabulary types and distances (all ts > 5, ps < .001). We
first conducted a 3x2 mixed ANOVA, with Vocabulary
Type (body-part egocentric, projective egocentric,
allocentric) as a within-subjects factor and Language
Dominance (JCH-Dominant, Balanced Bilingual) as a
between-subjects factor. There was no effect of Language
Dominance or interaction between Language Dominance
and Vocabulary Type (all Fs < 0.24, ps > .63), but there was
a highly significant effect of Vocabulary Type (F(2,60) =
19.00, p < .001, ηp2 = .39). Indeed, accuracy was nearly at
ceiling for body-part uses of “left” and “right” (M = .98),
and this was significantly better than accuracy for projective
uses of “left” and “right” (M = .87), which in turn was
significantly better than for allocentric uses of cardinal
terms (M = .69) (all ts > 2.8, all ps < .01).
To investigate these differences further, we fitted a
mixed-effects model to participants’ accuracy on trials
involving projective egocentric and allocentric uses of
terms, with fixed effects of Language Dominance, Language
of Instruction, Vocabulary Type (left/right or cardinal
directions), and Distance (near or far), and random effects of
participants and items. Only three factors had a significant
influence on accuracy: Vocabulary Type, Distance, and their
interaction. Accuracy was better for egocentric than for
allocentric items (z = 6.2, p < .001; compared to reduced
model without Vocabulary Type: χ2(1) = 11.8, p < .001), and
better for near than for far items (z = 3.6, p < .001; χ2(1) =
11.7, p < .001). However, these effects were complicated by
a significant interaction between the two factors (z = 3.6, p

Figure 4: Participants with high competence with
egocentric vocabulary produced significantly more
egocentric responses.

§

Data from 16 trials (8 from each Language Dominance group)
was lost due to experimenter error, excess noise, children running
in front of the camera, etc. These were removed before analysis.

943

Spatial reasoning in bilingual Mexico

influence of vocabulary competence on allocentric
responses on the Animals task. The adoption of an
allocentric strategy on the Animals Task was not related to
vocabulary competence, neither for allocentric (F(1,23) =
1.47, p = .24) nor egocentric uses (F(1,23) = 0.14, p = .71).
There was a privileged relation, therefore, between
competence with egocentric uses of vocabulary and the
adoption of an egocentric strategy.

5

classic Animals-in-a-Row task with JCH speakers in the
town of La Ventosa, found that population to be
predominantly allocentric in its spatial reasoning. She
reports that 16 out of 19 participants used an allocentric
strategy on at least 4/6 trials, and 10 of these used an
allocentric strategy on 6/6 trials. Only one person in one
trial used an egocentric strategy—a stark contrast with the
highly variable and predominantly egocentric responses
observed in the current study. But this contrast cannot be
accounted for by differences in bilingualism: Pérez Báez
reports that her participants were all bilingual in JCH and
Spanish; levels of bilingualism are almost identical in the
two places. Inhabitants of La Ventosa should presumably
have access to the same mix of conceptual resources, and
yet they exhibited a completely different pattern. This
comparison across JCH-Spanish bilingual communities
suggests that spatial reasoning is not reliably predicted
solely by a community’s linguistic codes. It further suggests
that the mixed profile we see in Juchitán is either not the
result of merging conceptual tools from different languages,
or, if it is, that such a merged system is not an inevitable
outcome for all communities who speak those languages.
Nor is the difference between communities due to a
simple urban/rural divide, since both places are very similar
on measures used to distinguish rural from urban (INEGI,
2010; c.f. Pederson, 1998). The overall pattern in Juchitán
may instead be driven by extra-linguistic factors such as the
salience of topographical features (Polian & Bohnemeyer,
2011). Residents of La Ventosa often travel to Juchitán and
other nearby towns, while residents of Juchitán do not need
to leave the city often, and when they do travel are likely to
travel further distances to places like Oaxaca City. From La
Ventosa, the horizon is usually visible; but from most
vantage points within Juchitán, the density of the built
environment obstructs such views. We suggest that these
environmental features, and the practices they afford, may
be responsible for the differences in spatial
conceptualization across the two populations.

Discussion
We investigated spatial cognition, spatial language, and the
relationship between the two in a bilingual population of
Juchitán, Mexico. Using a non-linguistic task designed to
assess preferences for spatial frames of reference, we found
evidence for a mixed profile of FoR use. This mixed profile
manifested in two ways. First, it manifested as withinpopulation variability: considering the population as a
whole, there was a preference for egocentric over allocentric
responses, but this preferred strategy still only accounted for
slightly more than half of the sessions. Second, it
manifested as between-session flexibility: even those
Balanced Bilingual participants who did show a strong
preference for one frame of reference in one session did not
necessarily stick to it in the next, with half of participants
switching their dominant response between sessions.
How are we to make sense of the overall pattern we
observed as well as the individual variation within it? Below
we argue against the possibility that bilingualism per se
explains the overall pattern. A comparison with a
neighboring community suggests that extra-linguistic
influences may outweigh linguistic ones at this zoomed-out
level. Next we zoom in on individual-by-individual
variation to consider the finding that spatial reasoning
strategies vary, not randomly, but in a way predicted by
particular linguistic abilities—a targeted influence of an
individual’s linguistic competence. Taken together the
results suggest an important influence of language on spatial
reasoning, but one that may be more specific than
commonly proposed and that co-exists with extra-linguistic
influences.

Explaining Individual Variation in Juchitán: The
Role of Specific Linguistic Abilities

Explaining the Overall Pattern in Juchitán: The
Role of Extra-Linguistic Factors

Language alone may not be able to explain the overall
pattern of spatial reasoning strategies in Juchitán, but can it
help explain the variation we observed from one participant
to the next? Yes and no. Of the three possible sources of
variability we considered at the outset, only one proved
predictive. Language dominance and language of task did
not predict spatial reasoning, a finding that is surprising in
light of accounts of linguistic relativity that appeal to the
temporary or stable effects of the “language you speak” on
non-linguistic reasoning. What did predict spatial reasoning
was competency with specific spatial language. This finding
is consistent with recent developmental findings that
suggest that the acquisition of specific spatial terms is
correlated with improved non-linguistic spatial abilities that
require the newly acquired concepts (e.g. Gentner et al.,
2013). Indeed, if a word encodes a novel semantic

A pattern like the patchwork one that we observed, with
participants exhibiting a mix of strategies apparently drawn
from both linguistic systems, has only rarely been reported
in the spatial FoR literature. What drives it? At first blush, it
mirrors patterns reported for some bilingual populations in
other semantic domains (e.g. Pavlenko, 2002), suggesting
that bilingualism per se may be a key factor. However,
much of the previous research on spatial language and
cognition has also been conducted with bilinguals, though
this bilingualism was not systematically taken into account.
Indeed, comparison with speakers of the same languages
from a town just 15 km away undercuts the idea that
bilingualism per se accounts for the patchwork pattern we
observed. Pérez Báez (2011), who ran a variant of the

944

Spatial reasoning in bilingual Mexico

6

Acknowledgments

distinction, acquiring it may highlight the distinction. Once
acquired, its habitual use may entrench the distinction. And
once mastered, the word itself may become a ready-to-hand
conceptual tool, even when a task is not explicitly linguistic.
Mastering projective uses of “left” and “right,” therefore,
might highlight, entrench, and routinize the use of
egocentric spatial relations.
While previous research has found that knowledge of
spatial language may scaffold spatial cognition, the pattern
we observed was specific to egocentric spatial language and
cognition: knowledge of projective uses of egocentric terms
predicted egocentric responses in a non-linguistic task, but
knowledge of allocentric terms did not predict allocentric
responses. What could explain this curious contrast? One
possibility is that, in humans, egocentric and allocentric
reasoning simply do not require the same degree of
scaffolding. It may be that, consistent with findings on the
preference for allocentric encoding in non-human primates
(Haun et al., 2006), allocentric spatial reasoning emerges
spontaneously while egocentric spatial strategies must be
scaffolded by various cultural practices. However, such an
account fails to explain why speakers of predominantly
egocentric-encoding languages show diminished ability to
use an allocentric FoR when explicitly required to do so
(Haun et al., 2011). Even if allocentric reasoning is in some
way basic, it appears to benefit from habitual use.
Another possibility is that both egocentric and allocentric
spatial reasoning depend on various forms of scaffolding,
but that this scaffolding need not be strictly linguistic.
Indeed, previous work has shown that allocentric responses
on tasks similar to the one used here do not require mastery
of allocentric vocabulary (Le Guen, 2011). In the case of
Juchitán, it could be that allocentric reasoning is supported
by non-linguistic cultural practices, such as gestural
conventions, while egocentric reasoning is largely—or even
uniquely—supported by linguistic practices. This possibility
raises the interesting question of what kinds of nonlinguistic practices, both in Juchitán and beyond, might
support allocentric encoding.

Thanks to the residents of Juchitán, and for support from:
NSF #1061053, The Wenner-Gren Foundation, The Jacobs
Research Funds Kinkade Grant (to MM), and a Franklin
Grant from the American Philosophical Society (to KC).

References
Bohnemeyer, J. (2011). Spatial frames of reference in
Yucatec: Referential promiscuity and task-specificity.
Language Sciences, 33, 892-914.
Gentner, D., Ozyürek, A., Gürcanli, O., & Goldin-Meadow,
S. (2013). Spatial language facilitates spatial cognition:
evidence from children who lack language input.
Cognition, 127, 318–30.
Haun, D., Rapold, C. J., Call, J., Janzen, G., & Levinson, S.
C. (2006). Cognitive cladistics and cultural override in
Hominid spatial cognition. PNAS, 103, 17568–17573.
Haun, D., Rapold, C., Janzen, G., & Levinson, S. (2011).
Plasticity of human spatial cognition: Spatial language
and cognition covary across cultures. Cognition, 119, 7080.
INEGI (2010). Instituto Nacional de Estadística y
Geografía. Conteo de Población y Vivienda. Online.
http://www.inegi.org.mx/sistemas/consulta_resultados/iter
2010.aspx?c=27329&s=est
Le Guen, O. (2011). Speech and Gesture in Spatial
Language and Cognition Among the Yucatec Mayas.
Cognitive Science, 35, 905–938.
Levinson, S. C., & Wilkins, D. P. (Eds.). (2006). Grammars
of space: Explorations in cognitive diversity. CUP.
Li, P., Abarbanell, L., Gleitman, L., & Papafragou, A.
(2011). Spatial reasoning in Tenejapan Mayans.
Cognition, 120, 33–55.
Li, P., & Gleitman, L. (2002). Turning the tables: language
and spatial reasoning. Cognition, 83, 265-294.
Majid, A., Bowerman, M., Kita, S., Haun, D., & Levinson,
S. C. (2004). Can language restructure cognition? The
case for space. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 108-114.
Pavlenko, A. (2002). Bilingualism and Emotions.
Multilingua, 21, 45-78.
Pederson, E. (1998). Spatial language, reasoning, and
variation across Tamil communities. In P. V. Zima & V.
Tax (Eds.), Language and Location in Space and Time
(pp. 111–119). Munich & Newcastle: Lincom Europa.
Pederson, E., Danziger, E., Wilkins, D., Levinson, S. C.,
Kita, S., & Senft, G. (1998). Semantic Typology and
Spatial Conceptualization. Language, 74, 557–589.
Pérez Báez, G. (2011). Spatial frames of reference
preferences in Juchitán Zapotec. Language Sciences, 33,
943–960.
Polian, G., & Bohnemeyer, J. (2011). Uniformity and
variation in Tseltal reference frame use. Language
Sciences, 33, 868–891.

Conclusion
Where does this leave the relation between language and
cognition? Our results help delimit the relation. At the
population level, environment and sociocultural factors, not
language, seemed to explain differences between the
inhabitants of Juchitán and those of nearby La Ventosa. At
the individual level, non-linguistic reasoning was flexible
and seemingly unaffected by language dominance or
language of instruction. It was, however, predicted by
competence with specific lexical items, as if acquiring and
mastering the associated semantic distinctions shaped nonlinguistic reasoning. In the web of influences that shapes
spatial reasoning, language may play a powerful but also
more selective role than is commonly claimed.

945

