UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Structural Differences in the Semantic Networks of Simulated Word Learners

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/28q915dx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Nematzadeh, Aida
Fazly, Afsaneh
Stevenson, Suzanne

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Structural Differences in the Semantic Networks of Simulated Word Learners
Aida Nematzadeh, Afsaneh Fazly, and Suzanne Stevenson
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
{aida,afsaneh,suzanne}@cs.toronto.edu
Abstract
A learner’s semantic network represents the learner’s knowledge of words/concepts and the relations among them. The
structure of this network is significant as it might reveal aspects
of the developmental process that leads to the network. In this
work, we use computational modeling to examine the structure of semantic networks of different simulated word learners. We find that the learned semantic knowledge of a learner
that simulates a normally-developing child reflects the structural properties found in adult semantic networks of words. In
contrast, the network of a late-talking learner — one that simulates a child with a marked delay in vocabulary acquisition
— does not exhibit these properties. We discuss the implications of this result for understanding the process of vocabulary
acquisition and delay.

Introduction
Semantic knowledge includes the knowledge of word-toconcept mappings, as well as relations among the words
and/or concepts. Much research shows the importance of different aspects of semantic knowledge in vocabulary acquisition (e.g., Jones, Smith, & Landau, 1991; Colunga & Smith,
2005; Sheng & McGregor, 2010; Colunga & Sims, 2011). A
long-standing question is how the overall structural properties
of semantic knowledge impact how words are learned and
processed in semantic memory (Collins & Quillian, 1969;
Collins & Loftus, 1975; Steyvers & Tenenbaum, 2005).
Semantic knowledge is often represented as a semantic
network in which the nodes correspond to words or concepts, and the edges specify semantic relationships among
them (e.g., Collins & Loftus, 1975; Steyvers & Tenenbaum,
2005). Steyvers and Tenenbaum (2005) argue that semantic
networks created from adult-level knowledge of words exhibit a small-world and scale-free structure: an overall sparse
network with highly-connected local sub-networks, where
these sub-networks are connected through high-degree hubs
(nodes with many neighbours). Through mathematical modeling, they argue that these properties arise from the developmental process of semantic network creation, in which word
meanings are differentiated over time.
The work of Steyvers and Tenenbaum (2005) raises very
interesting follow-on questions: To what degree does children’s developing semantic knowledge of words exhibit a
small-world and scale-free structure? How do these properties arise from the process of vocabulary acquisition in children? The work of Beckage, Smith, and Hills (2011) is suggestive regarding these issues. They compare semantic networks formed from the productive vocabulary of normallydeveloping children and from that of late talkers — children who show a marked delay in their vocabulary acquisition (Ellis-Weismer & Evans, 2002). Beckage et al. (2011)

show that the network of vocabulary of late talkers exhibited a small-world structure to a lesser degree than that
of the normally-developing children. However, while this
work suggests some preliminary answers to the first question above, it cannot shed light on the relation between the
process of word learning and the small-world and scale-free
properties. Specifically, the networks considered by Beckage
et al. (2011) only include productive vocabulary, not the
many words a child will have partial knowledge of, and the
connections among the words are determined by using cooccurrence statistics from a corpus, not the children’s own
knowledge or use of the words. In order to shed light on
how the small-world and scale-free properties arise from the
developmental process of word learning, we need to consider
the structure of semantic networks formed from the (partially)
learned meanings of the words in the child’s environment.
In this work, we take advantage of a computational model
to simulate normally-developing (ND) and late-talking (LT)
learners, enabling us to examine the properties of semantic networks that include all the vocabulary a learner has
been exposed to (i.e., even those partially learned), and that
has connections based on the actual learned knowledge of
those words. The model is a probabilistic cross-situational
learner which incrementally acquires word-to-meaning mappings through exposure to naturalistic input. When parameterized to reflect normal and deficit scenarios, this computational model has been shown to replicate several patterns of
results observed in normally-developing and late-talking children (Nematzadeh, Fazly, & Stevenson, 2011, 2012), making
its learned knowledge suitable as a simulation of the knowledge of such children. We create semantic networks based on
the learned knowledge of this model in the ND and LT modeling scenarios, and investigate their structural differences with
respect to having a small-world and scale-free structure.
We find that the semantic network of the ND learner – created from all the words in the input to the model, and the
learned meanings of those words – exhibits a small-world
and to some extent a scale-free structure, whereas the corresponding LT network does not. Moreover, we find that a
“gold-standard” network – which uses ground-truth meanings rather than the learned meanings from the model – less
clearly exhibits these two important properties. This suggests
that properties of the learned knowledge may actually aid the
learner in making appropriate connections among words. We
conclude that considering the learned knowledge of vocabulary is important in understanding how the structure of children’s semantic networks is related to, and might arise from,
word learning processes.

1072

apple: { FOOD:1, SOLID:.72, · · · , PLANT- PART:.22,
PHYSICAL - ENTITY :.17, WHOLE :.06, · · · }

all possible meaning features, but gradually the features that
consistently occur in the presence of w in the input will rise
in probability, while less relevant features will decline. Note
that one consequence of the cross-situational approach is that
features of other words that frequently occur in the context of
w may also have some non-negligible probability mass in the
meaning representation of w.
The model incorporates an attentional mechanism that
gradually improves over time, enabling it to focus (more
or less) on the relevant features to a word. We simulate
normally-developing (ND) and late-talking (LT) learners by
parameterizing the rate of development of this mechanism,
such that ND has a faster rate. Because the attentional mechanism impacts the learning algorithm of the model, the ND
and LT learners differ in the quality of their learned meanings; specifically, the LT meanings tend to have a more uniform distribution over semantic features at a given point in
development.

Figure 1: true meaning of the word apple.

The Simulated Semantic Networks
In this section, we first explain how our computational model
learns and represents word meanings, and how our normallydeveloping (ND) and late-talking (LT) learners differ in their
word learning mechanism. Next, we describe our approach
to the construction of the semantic networks from the learned
knowledge of the model in these two scenarios.

Simulating Different Learners
The model of Nematzadeh et al. (2011, 2012) learns from
a sequence of input utterance–scene pairs, corresponding to
what a child is exposed to in her natural learning environment. Each input pair consists of an utterance (what a child
hears), represented as a set of words, and its corresponding
scene (what a child perceives upon hearing that utterance),
represented as a set of semantic features; e.g.:

Constructing a Learner’s Semantic Network

Utterance: {she, drinks, milk }
Scene: {ANIMATE, PERSON, FEMALE, CONSUME, DRINK,
SUBSTANCE, FOOD , DAIRY- PRODUCT , . . . }

The utterances are taken from the child-directed speech portion of the Manchester corpus (Theakston et al., 2001, from
CHILDES MacWhinney, 2000). The corresponding scene
representation for each utterance is generated using a goldstandard lexicon. In this lexicon the gold-standard meaning
(true meaning) of each word is represented as a set of features, taken from a pool of F semantic “primitives” that comprise the F-dimensional space of semantic meanings. Each
feature for a word is associated with a score that reflects the
strength of association of the word and feature, and the specificity of each feature to that word (see Figure 1 for an example).1 Given this gold-standard lexicon, a scene is probabilistically generated by sampling from the full set of features in
the true meanings of the words in the utterance, according to
the score of each feature.2
As a probabilistic cross-situational learner, the model uses
observations of co-occurrences of words and features in the
utterance and scene inputs to update its hypotheses of the
meaning of each word over time. Specifically, for each word
w in the input, the model maintains a probability distribution over all F possible semantic features; this probability
distribution represents the model’s learned meaning of w at
any given point in the input sequence. Initially, the probability distribution for w will start out uniformly distributed over
1 For details on the semantic features and data generation see
Nematzadeh et al. (2012). We also note that a naturalistic word
learning scene contains rich information beyond word meanings
such as social cues and context. We cannot represent this information automatically, and given the scale of our data, it is not feasible
to manually annotate such information. Our scene representation is
thus limited in that it only includes the semantics of words in each
utterance.
2 Note that the gold-standard lexicon is only used for generating
the input data, and is not used in the learning algorithm of the model.

We train each learner (ND and LT) on an identical sequence
of utterance–scene pairs, and then use their learned lexicons
to build a semantic network for each. Unlike Beckage et al.
(2011), we do not want to restrict the network to productive
vocabulary, which eliminates much semantic knowledge of
the learner (e.g., Benedict, 1979; Woodward & Markman,
1998). We thus assume all the words that the model has been
exposed to during training are part of the learner’s semantic
network. This reflects our assumption that an important aspect of a learner’s semantic knowledge is that it (perhaps imperfectly) captures connections among even words that cannot yet be fully comprehended or produced.
To establish the connections among nodes in the network,
we examine the semantic similarity of the meanings of the
corresponding words. Specifically, we measure semantic
similarity of two words by turning their meanings into vectors, and calculating the cosine of the angle between the two
vectors. We connect two nodes if the similarity of their corresponding words is higher than a pre-defined threshold.
This process yields two networks, Net-ND and Net-LT,
each of which contains nodes for all the words in the input,
with the edges determined by the semantic similarity of the
word meanings represented within the ND and LT learners,
respectively.
For comparison, we also build a gold-standard semantic
network, Net-GS, that contains the same words as Net-ND
and Net-LT (i.e., all the words in the input), but relies on the
true meanings of words (from the gold-standard lexicon) to
establish the connections. Note that the structure of this network does not depend on the learners’ knowledge of word
meanings, but only on the similarity of the true meanings.
In order to further explore the importance of the knowledge
of (partially) learned meanings to the structure of the resulting
networks, we also consider a variation on Net-ND and NetLT. Like Beckage et al. (2011), we can consider only a subset
of the best-learned words of the learners, and see whether the

1073

vocabulary itself – as opposed to what the learner has learned
about that vocabulary – exhibits the small-world and scalefree properties. Recall that Beckage et al. (2011) create semantic networks connected on the basis of corpus-based cooccurrence statistics that are the same for both groups of children – i.e., it is the make-up of the vocabulary, rather than
the learner’s knowledge of that vocabulary, that differs across
the two types of networks. In our approach, this corresponds
to using the true meanings from the gold-standard lexicon to
connect the words in the network.
Hence, we form additional networks, Net-NDacq and NetLTacq as follows. We take “productive” vocabulary in our
model to be a subset of words which are learned better than
a predefined threshold (by comparing the learned meaning to
the true meaning in the gold-standard lexicon). We then build
semantic networks that contain these acquired words of our
ND and LT learners, connected by drawing on the similarity
of the true meanings (that are the same for both learners). We
can then use these networks to further explore the importance
of the partially learned knowledge of words in our original
networks in contributing to small-world and scale-free networks.
To summarize, we consider the following networks:
1. Net-GS: The nodes of the network are all the words in the
input, and the edges are based on the similarity of the true
meanings of the words.
2. Net-ND and Net-LT: The nodes are all the words in the input, and the edges are based on the similarity of the learned
meanings of the words in each of the modeling scenarios.
3. Net-NDacq and Net-LTacq : The nodes are the acquired
words (those best learned) in each scenario, and the edges
are based on the similarity of the true meanings of those
words.

Evaluating the Networks’ Structural Properties
A network that exhibits a small-world structure has certain
connectivity properties – short paths and highly-connected
neighborhoods – that are captured by various graph metrics
(Watts & Strogatz, 1998). Below we explain these properties, and how they are measured for a graph with N nodes and
E edges. Then we explain the requirement for a network to
yield a scale-free structure.
Short paths between nodes. Most of the nodes of a
small-world network are reachable from other nodes via relatively short paths. For a connected network (i.e., all the node
pairs are reachable from each other), this can be measured as
the average distance between all node pairs (Watts & Strogatz, 1998). Since our networks are not connected, we instead measure this property using the median of the distances
(dmedian ) between all node pairs (e.g., Robins et al., 2005),
which is well-defined even when some node pairs have a distance of ∞.
Highly-connected neighborhoods. The neighborhood of
a node n in a graph consists of n and all of the nodes that
are connected to it. A neighborhood is maximally connected

if it forms a complete graph —i.e., there is an edge between
all node pairs. Thus, the maximum number of edges in the
neighborhood of n is kn (kn − 1)/2, where kn is the number
of neighbors. A standard metric for measuring the connectedness of neighbors of a node n is called the local clustering
coefficient (C) (Watts & Strogatz, 1998), which calculates the
ratio of edges in the neighborhood of n (En ) to the maximum
number of edges possible for that neighborhood:
C=

En
kn (kn − 1)/2

(1)

The local clustering coefficient C ranges between 0 and 1. To
estimate the connectedness of all neighborhoods in a network,
we take the average of C over all nodes, i.e., Cavg .
Small-world structure. A graph exhibits a small-world
structure if dmedian is relatively small and Cavg is relatively
high. To assess this for a graph g, these values are typically
compared to those of a random graph with the same number
of nodes and edges as g (Watts & Strogatz, 1998; Humphries
& Gurney, 2008). The random graph is generated by randomly rearranging the edges of the network under consideration (Erdos & Rényi, 1960). Because any pair of nodes is
equally likely to be connected as any other, the median of
distances between nodes is expected to be low for a random
graph. In a small-world network, this value dmedian is expected to be as small as that of a random graph: even though
the random graph has edges more uniformly distributed, the
small-world network has many locally-connected components which are connected via hubs. On the other hand, Cavg
is expected to be much higher in a small-world network compared to its corresponding random graph, because the edges
of a random graph typically do not fall into clusters forming
highly connected neighborhoods.
Given these two properties, the “small-worldness” of a
graph g is measured as follows (Humphries & Gurney, 2008):
Cavg (g)
Cavg (random)
σg =
dmedian (g)
dmedian (random)

(2)

where random is the random graph corresponding to g.
In a small-world network, it is expected that Cavg (g) 
Cavg (random) and dmedian (g) ≥ dmedian (random), and thus
σg > 1.
Note that Steyvers and Tenenbaum (2005) made the empirical observation that small-world networks of semantic
knowledge had a single connected component that contained
the majority of nodes in the network. Thus, in addition to
σg , we also measure the relative size of a network’s largest
connected component having size Nlcc :
sizelcc =

Nlcc
N

(3)

Scale-free structure. A scale-free network has a relatively
small number of high-degree nodes that have a large number

1074

of connections to other nodes, while most of its nodes have a
small degree, as they are only connected to a few nodes. Thus,
if a network has a scale-free structure, its degree distribution
(i.e., the probability distribution of degrees over the whole
network) will follow a power-law distribution (which is said
to be “scale-free”). We evaluate this property of a network by
plotting its degree distribution in the logarithmic scale, which
(if a power-law distribution) should appear as a straight line.

Evaluation
Set-up
We train our learners on 10, 000 utterance–scene pairs taken
from the input data of Nematzadeh et al. (2012). Recall that
our ND and LT learners differ in the rate of attentional development that is a parameter of the model (c). Following
Nematzadeh et al. (2011), we use c = 1 for ND and c = 0.5
for LT. We use only nouns in our semantic networks: since
we draw on different sources for the semantic features of different parts of speech (POS), we cannot reliably measure the
similarity of two words from different POS’s. To determine
the subset of “acquired words” for Net-NDacq and Net-LTacq ,
we follow Fazly et al. (2010) and use a threshold of 0.7 for
similarity between the learned and true meaning of a word.
Finally, when building a network, we connect two word nodes
with an edge if the similarity of their corresponding meanings
is higher than 0.6.

(a) Net-GS

(b) Net-ND

Figure 2: (a) The gold-standard network, and (b) the network
of ND with all words connected by learned meanings.

Results and Discussion
Table 1 contains the graph measures for all the semantic networks we consider here. The table displays the number of
nodes (N) and edges (E) in each network, as well as the measures that capture characteristics of a small-world structure.
We first discuss these measures, and the indicator of scalefree structure, for our primary networks, Net-GS, Net-ND,
and Net-LT, and then consider the networks formed without
using the learned knowledge of the words, Net-NDacq and
Net-LTacq .
Small-world and scale-free structure in the learners’ networks. We first compare the structure of Net-GS and NetND (rows 1 and 2 in the table), and then turn to Net-LT (row
3).
According to the values of σg , we can see that both NetGS and Net-ND yield a small-world structure, although the
structure is more clearly observed in Net-ND: σg (ND) = 5.5
versus σg (GS) = 3.1. This is especially interesting since both
networks have the same nodes (all the words), but Net-ND
uses learned meanings to connect the nodes, whereas Net-GS
uses the true meanings (from the gold-standard lexicon).
A closer look reveals that Net-ND has a structure in which
many more nodes are connected to each other (sizelcc (ND) =
.90 vs. sizelcc (GS) = .72) by using substantially fewer edges
(E(ND) = 12, 704 vs. E(GS) = 26, 663). Net-ND achieves
this by a better utilization of hubs: each hub node connects to
many nodes, and in turn to other hubs, ensuring a high-degree
of connectivity with a relatively small number of edges. Note

that these hubs are one of the main characteristics of a smallworld structure. The different structures of Net-GS and NetND are evident from their visualizations in Figure 2. We can
see that in Net-GS there are a number of isolated components
that are not connected to the rest of the network.
We also examine Net-GS and Net-ND for having a scalefree structure by looking at their degree distributions in the
logarithmic scale (see Figure 3). According to these plots,
Net-ND to some degree exhibits a scale-free structure (with
the plot roughly following a straight line), but Net-GS does
not.

(a) Net-GS

(b) Net-ND

Figure 3: The degree distributions of Net-GS and Net-ND in
the logarithmic scale.
Now, looking at the characteristics of Net-LT (row 3 of the
table), we can see that it does not clearly show a small-world

1075

1
2
3

Networks
Net-GS (gold-standard)
Net-ND
Net-LT

N
776
776
776

E
26, 633
12, 704
239, 736

sizelcc
0.72 (1)
0.90 (1)
1.00 (1)

Cavg
0.95 (0.09)
0.70 (0.04)
0.97 (0.81)

dmedian
7 (2)
6 (2)
1 (1)

σg
3.1
5.5
1.2

4
5

Net-NDacq
Net-LTacq

512
84

12, 470
423

0.67 (1)
0.23 (1)

0.96 (0.10)
0.81 (0.11)

∞ (2)
∞ (2)

0
0

Table 1: The calculated graph metrics on each of the semantic networks. The number in the brackets is the measure for the
corresponding random network. The value of N and E are the same for each network and its random graph.
structure. The value of σg (LT) is very close to 1 because the
value of Cavg for Net-LT is very similar to its corresponding
random graph (cf. Eqn. 2). This is mostly due to the existence of a very large number edges in this network, which
reflects the uninformativeness of the learned meanings of LT
for identifying meaningful similarities among words. Specifically, the meanings that the LT learns for semantically unrelated words are not sufficiently distinct, and hence almost
all words are taken to be similar to one another. Net-LT consequently also does not show a scale-free structure, since the
nodes across the network all have a similar number of connections (resulting in a bell-shaped rather than a power-law
degree distribution).
What underlies the small-world and scale-free findings?
To summarize, we find that Net-ND shows a small-world
and (to some degree) a scale-free structure, while Net-LT
does not. This is consistent with the findings of Beckage
et al. (2011) who observed that a network of vocabulary
of normally-developing children had more of a small-world
structure than a network of late-talkers’ vocabulary. However,
by using the simulated knowledge of ND and LT learners, and
comparing it to a representation of the “true meanings” in
Net-GS, we can go beyond their work and address the question we raised in the introduction: How do these properties
arise from the process of vocabulary acquisition in children?
The fact that Net-ND exhibits a small-world and scalefree structure more clearly than Net-GS suggests that the
probabilistically-learned meanings of our model capture important information beyond the true meanings. Recall that our
model learns the meaning of each word w by gradually associating w with semantic features that consistently co-occur with
it across its usages. We noted above that this probabilistic
cross-situational approach can lead to a “contextualization”
of meaning representation for w: i.e., if another word w0 consistently co-occurs with w (e.g., due to semantic relatedness),
then the learned meaning of w can include semantic features
of w0 . This contextualized meaning representation essentially
makes the learned meanings of the two co-occurring words
more similar than their true meanings. This “blurring” of
meanings entails that, even though Net-ND has fewer edges
than Net-GS, those edges form connections across hubs that
achieve a greater small-world structure.
On the other hand, the lack of a small-world structure in
Net-LT clearly arises from the lack of differentiation of mean-

ings achieved by that learner. The relative deficit in attention
in our LT learner entails that the learner cannot focus on the
most relevant meaning features, yielding a network that fails
to distinguish relevant clusters of meaning around “hubs”.
Clearly, this is data from a computational model, and not
the actual semantic memory representation of children. However, it does lead to interesting predictions about the relationship between the small-world and scale-free properties and
the process of vocabulary acquisition: specifically, that the
contextualization of otherwise (at least moderately) distinguishable meanings is a crucial outcome of successful vocabulary acquisition, and one that leads to the formation of semantic networks with the overall structural properties found
in representations of adult semantic knowledge.
A further look at the role of learned meanings. We suggest above that the small-world and scale-free properties of
Net-ND arise due to qualitative differences in its learned
knowledge of words, compared to both Net-LT or Net-GS.
However, Beckage et al. (2011) found differences in the degree of small-world structure in their ND and LT networks
that differed only in the vocabulary used as nodes in the network – that is, even though both networks used the same external knowledge to create edges among those nodes. Hence
we also examine two additional networks, Net-NDacq and
Net-LTacq , formed from the best-acquired words of the learners and the similarity of the true meanings of those words.
This can help reveal whether it is the make-up of the vocabulary or the specific learned knowledge of words that plays a
role in our results.
The graph measures for Net-NDacq and Net-LTacq are
shown in rows 4 and 5 of Table 1. We see that neither of these
networks exhibits a small-world structure (σg = 0), mainly
because they have many isolated sub-networks, resulting in
dmedian having a value of ∞ (i.e., most node pairs are not connected to each other).
We conclude that in our simulations of child knowledge, it
is the actual meaning representation that is important to yielding a small-world and scale-free structure, not simply the particular words that are learned. Our finding differs from that of
Beckage et al. (2011), who found small-world structure even
when using simple corpus statistics to similarly connect the
vocabulary of each type of learner. It could be that our “bestlearned” words do not correspond to the productive vocabulary of children; we also note that forming network connec-

1076

tions based on similarity of our true meanings is much stricter
than compared to the simple co-occurrence statistics used by
Beckage et al. (2011).
More importantly, we think our simulated networks can
turn attention around these issues to the actual (developing)
knowledge that different learners are bringing to the task of
word learning and semantic network creation. Specifically,
Beckage et al. (2011) conclude that the semantic networks of
late talkers might be less connected because they use a wordlearning strategy that favors semantically-dissimilar words. It
is not clear, however, how such children could follow a strategy of semantic dissimilarity when they do not have an adequate representation of semantic similarity. To the extent that
the semantic knowledge of children is similar to the simulated
knowledge in our model – in being partial, probabilistic, and
contextualized – our experiments point to a different explanation of late talkers’ disconnected vocabulary: Not that it is
purposefully disconnected, but that due to the lack of meaningful semantic differentiation, it is accidentally so – i.e., late
talkers have simply failed to exploit the contextualized meanings that help normally-developing children formulate helpful
connections among words.

Summary and Future Direction
We use a computational model to simulate normallydeveloping (ND) and late-talking (LT) learners, and examine the structure of semantic networks of these learners. We
compare the networks of ND and LT learners with that of a
gold-standard (GS) network that has access to ground-truth
meanings. Our goal is to investigate whether the simulated
learned meanings of words reflected in ND and LT networks
yield a small-world and scale-free structure, as observed in
adult semantic networks (Steyvers & Tenenbaum, 2005).
Our results show that while Net-GS and Net-ND exhibit a
small-world and (to some extent) a scale-free structure, the
less differentiated meanings of Net-LT does not. We also observe that Net-ND shows a stronger small-world and scalefree structure compared to Net-GS. We attribute this interesting observation to the way our model learns word meanings: Unlike the true meanings, the learned meanings capture
contextual semantic knowledge, which brings in an additional
and helpful source of information for identifying semantic relatedness among words.
An interesting future direction is to model the actual development of a semantic network over the course of word learning. This would allow us to examine the underlying mechanisms that might be involved in the growth of a semantic network, and how the developing knowledge of word meanings
interacts with the formation of network connections.

References
Beckage, N., Smith, L., & Hills, T. (2011). Small worlds and
semantic network growth in typical and late talkers. PloS
one, 6(5), e19348.
Benedict, H. (1979). Early lexical development: Compre-

hension and production. Journal of child language, 6(2),
183–200.
Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreadingactivation theory of semantic processing. Psychological
review, 82(6), 407.
Collins, A. M., & Quillian, M. R. (1969). Retrieval time from
semantic memory. Journal of verbal learning and verbal
behavior, 8(2), 240–247.
Colunga, E., & Sims, C. (2011). Early talkers and late talkers
know nouns that license different word learning biases. In
Proc. of CogSci’11.
Colunga, E., & Smith, L. B. (2005). From the lexicon to
expectations about kinds: A role for associative learning.
Psychological Review, 112(2), 347–382.
Ellis-Weismer, S., & Evans, J. L. (2002). The role of processing limitations in early identification of specific language
impairment. Topics in Language Disorders, 22(3), 15–29.
Erdos, P., & Rényi, A. (1960). On the evolution of random
graphs. Publ. Math. Inst. Hungar. Acad. Sci, 5, 17–61.
Fazly, A., Alishahi, A., & Stevenson, S. (2010). A probabilistic computational model of cross-situational word learning.
Cognitive Science, 34(6), 1017–1063.
Humphries, M. D., & Gurney, K. (2008). Network smallworld-ness: a quantitative method for determining canonical network equivalence. PLoS One, 3(4), e0002051.
Jones, S., Smith, L. B., & Landau, B. (1991). Object properties and knowledge in early lexical learning. Child Development, 62(3), 499–516.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: Tools for
analyzing talk (3rd ed., Vol. 2: The Database). Erlbaum.
Nematzadeh, A., Fazly, A., & Stevenson, S. (2011). A computational study of late talknig in word-meaning acquisition. In Proc. of CogSci’11.
Nematzadeh, A., Fazly, A., & Stevenson, S. (2012). Interaction of word learning and semantic category formation in
late talking. In Proc. of CogSci’12.
Robins, G., Pattison, P., & Woolcock, J. (2005). Small and
other worlds: Global network structures from local processes1. American Journal of Sociology, 110(4), 894–936.
Sheng, L., & McGregor, K. K. (2010). Lexical–semantic
organization in children with specific language impairment.
J. of Speech, Lang., & Hearing Research, 53, 146–159.
Steyvers, M., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). The large-scale
structure of semantic networks: Statistical analyses and a
model of semantic growth. Cognitive science, 29(1), 41–
78.
Theakston, A. L., Lieven, E. V., Pine, J. M., & Rowland, C. F.
(2001). The role of performance limitations in the acquisition of verb–argument structure: An alternative account. J.
of Child Language, 28, 127–152.
Watts, D. J., & Strogatz, S. H. (1998). Collective dynamics
of small-worldnetworks. nature, 393(6684), 440–442.
Woodward, A. L., & Markman, E. M. (1998). Early word
learning.

1077

