UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Studying Frequency Effects in Learning Center-embedded Recursion

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3zt2g6g8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Lai, Jun
Krahmer, Emiel
Sprenger, Jan

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Studying Frequency Effects in Learning Center-embedded Recursion
Jun Lai (J.Lai@ tilburguniversity.edu)
Tilburg Center for Logic and Philosophy of Science; Tilburg Center for Cognition and Communication,
Tilburg University, the Netherlands

Emiel Krahmer (E.J.Krahmer@ tilburguniversity.edu)
Tilburg Center for Cognition and Communication, Tilburg University, the Netherlands

Jan Sprenger (j.sprenger@tilburguniversity.edu)
Tilburg Center for Logic and Philosophy of Science, Tilburg University, the Netherlands

Abstract
Long-distance dependencies in center-embedded recursion are
among the most typical but also most difficult structures in
human language (Corballis, 2007; Hauser, Chomsky, & Fitch,
2002). Concerning the impact of the learning sample on
grasping object-action relations, there are two opposing
arguments: more is better vs. fewer is better (Maguire,
Hirsh-Pasek, Golinkoff, & Brandone, 2008). The former theory
assumes that a large number of different exemplars facilitates
learning (Gentner, 2003), while the latter theory suggests that a
more restricted set of unique exemplars with repetitions
advances the learning of these patterns (Casasola, 2005; Kersten
& Smith, 2002). In the current study, we designed a
grammaticality-judgment task and test both theories using an
artificial grammar learning paradigm. We found that when
participants were trained on fewer unique exemplars, but with
repetitions, they could still perform significantly better than at
chance level. Moreover, when the few unique exemplars were
repeated for an unequal number of times, their performance was
boosted to a higher level. In line with the fewer is better theory,
our findings point to a repetition effect and frequency
distribution effect in processing hierarchical center-embedded
recursion.
Keywords: center-embedded recursion; statistical learning;
starting small; repetition; frequency distribution

Introduction
In early language acquisition, children display remarkable
capabilities in learning and producing new sentences. One
of the most discouraging obstacles in language learning
lies in making associations between objects and actions
(Kersten & Smith, 2002). Children tend to initially
concentrate on objects and agents, rather than on the
relations between them (Behrend, 1990). One of the most
difficult sentential relations to learn is center-embedded
(CE) recursion, which is proposed to be a crucial factor
distinguishing humans and nonhumans (Corballis, 2007;
Hauser, Chomsky, & Fitch, 2002). For instance, “The
rabbit that the fox chased ran away.” is a typical CE
recursive sentence, with one object-action pair
(fox-chased), inserted as a relative clause in the middle of

another pair (the rabbit-ran away) that forms the main
sentence. The complexity of the sentence poses great
challenges for sentence processing and understanding, since
human parsers not only need to store all the relevant
information in memory, but also need to integrate the
associated elements, in order to detect who did what to whom.
There is a large amount of research attempting to explain
why the relations in CE recursion are so notoriously difficult to
comprehend (Christiansen & MacDonald, 2009). For instance,
Chomsky (1965) argued that the way that CE recursion is
constructed requires human parsers to associate related
elements, which is complicated for remote dependencies.
Moreover, Johnson (1998) and Morrill (2000) indicated that
the comprehension collapses at the moment when too many
dependencies are waiting to be paired in memory.
Though processing CE recursion seems extraordinarily
challenging, it has been shown that acquisition of such
complicated structures could be enhanced to a certain extent by
varying the learning sample, for instance, when the complexity
of the learning material is arranged incrementally (Conway,
Ellefson, & Christiansen, 2003; Elman, 1993; Lai & Poletiek,
2011). It has also been shown that the high variability of the
intervening middle element in a non-adjacent structure could
result in better understanding and discrimination of the remote
dependencies (Gomez, 2002). Furthermore, the frequency
distribution of the co-occurrence of related dependencies has
been observed to affect the categorization of the intervening
elements (Mintz, 2003). In addition, it has been shown that
people could master the sentential structures easier when
verbs were in high frequencies (Kidd, Lieven, & Tomasello,
2010). Thus, a skewed frequency distribution, which could
result in different constructions of the sample, e.g. size and
probability, is also an aid in learning complex structures.
With regard to the effects on sample diversity on facilitating
learning, there are primarily two opposite points of view: more
is better vs. fewer is better (see Maguire, Hirsh-Pasek,
Golinkoff, & Brandone, 2008, for a review). The first
perspective assumes that the variety of learning samples helps

797

children in unpacking the sentential structures. Therefore,
exposure to a larger amount of different exemplars
advances children’s development in extracting relations
(Gentner, 2003). Evidence for this position comes from
studies on natural language production (Gallivan, 1987;
Rinaldi, Barca, & Burani, 2004), but also experiments
with nonlinguistic materials (Gomez, 2002). In a statistical
learning task, Gomez (2002) trained both adults and
children to learn the a-b relation in the aXb pattern, with
sample size ranging from 2, 6, 12, to 24 items. The highest
learning scores were observed with the largest sample size,
of 24 items. Similarly, in a series of artificial grammar
learning (AGL) studies, participants who were presented
with diverse training exemplars showed increasing
sensitivity towards the sequential structure, while those
who were trained with a few exemplars were only able to
memorize certain individual fragments (McAndrews &
Moscovitch, 1985; Meulemans & VanderLinden, 1997).
Furthermore, with computational simulations, Harris
(1991) found that a network succeeded in learning and
making generalizations when it was exposed to a complete
“big” set of data, instead of a “small” subset of data.
Arguably, the larger sample variety might provide a better
estimate of the general population.
By contrast, the alternative perspective regards the
repetition of a limited set of exemplars as an accelerator of
abstracting relational information (Kersten & Smith,
2002). Experiments with 14-month-olds showed a
learning effect in a spatial categorization task only when
the infants were exposed to two-pair-relations, instead of
six-pair-relations (Casasola, 2005). In addition, Elman
(1993) found a “starting small” (SS) effect in simulations
with neural networks. His Simple Recurrent Networks
could not learn the new language when they were given
the entire training input at once, whereas the network
showed learning when given restricted data initially,
namely staged-input increasing gradually. Hence, the
debate remains inconclusive as to whether the exposure to
a large or a small amount of various exemplars helps
learners to acquire associations between object and actions
in CE recursion and to form the correct relational
categories.
In the current study, we address this issue by
investigating the influence of sample properties on
comprehending CE recursion with the AGL paradigm.
AGL is a well-known and often used paradigm to study
natural language learning. Recent research (Pelucchi, Hay,
& Saffran, 2009) found that in a task of learning novel
words, 8-month-olds showed a highly consistent pattern
with that from statistical learning using an artificial
language. Nevertheless, natural language is an extremely
complex system, integrating information from many
different sources, such as lexicon, semantics, syntax, etc.,
whereas our artificial language is quite straightforward.
However, it is precisely this difference between artificial

and natural languages that allows us to manipulate various
aspects of the learning conditions. In this manner, we were able
to analyze the specific influence of linguistic variables on
language learning, and avoid being confounded by the
co-occurrence of multiple linguistic components.
In the grammar-learning experiment of the current study, we
manipulated two aspects of the sample set, i.e. the diversity of
unique learning exemplars, and the occurrence of the learning
exemplars according to their frequencies. In a previous study
with CE recursion (Lai & Poletiek, 2013), we observed a
skewed frequency distribution effect, i.e. participants showed
better performance when exemplars with different levels of
embedding (LoE) were presented unequally than equally. In
that study, with sufficient exposure to the basic associations,
participants were still able to learn the structure when given
fewer items of higher complexity. Accordingly, on the one
hand, we are interested in whether we could maintain the
effect of “fewer exemplar”, when decreasing the number of
learning items for all levels of complexity. On the other hand,
we are curious about the interaction between the decreased
sample variety and the skewed frequency distribution.
Therefore, in the present study, we hypothesize that: 1)
People might not necessarily need a large number of different
exemplars when learning a new complex structure. Instead,
fewer unique exemplars, which are repeated, could facilitate
the processing of CE recursion and detection of the inherent
relations. 2) The occurrence of exemplars with different
frequencies might affect the learning performance: the more
high-frequency exemplars occur, the better participants
perform.
Our current study is a crucial complement to the previous
research on statistical learning and language development in a
number of aspects. Firstly, referring to sample size, previous
studies have focused mainly on the absolute number of sample
items in total (Gomez, 2002;McAndrews & Moscovitch,
1985;Poletiek & van Schijndel, 2009), but not on the diversity
and the relative frequency of the exemplars in the sample.
Although a few experiments addressed this issue in verb
learning (Maguire et al., 2008), in spatial categorization
(Casasola, 2005), or in objects relations (Kersten & Smith,
2002; Quinn, Polly, Furer, Dobson, & Narter, 2002), no
research has pinpointed the exemplars’ uniqueness in
processing the non-adjacent relations of hierarchical CE
structures.
Secondly, previous research mostly focused on human
parsers’ cognitive limitation and the facilitative effect that it
might bring about. For example, it has been shown that
children’s limited working memory and processing abilities
only direct them to individual linguistic segments. As their
cognitive abilities develop, they become able to analyze and
produce more complex structure of a language (Newport,
1990). Similarly, Goldowsky and Newport (1993) presented a
statistical model and demonstrated the advantage of memory
limitations in learning a morphological system; Kareev,
Lieberman, and Lev (1997) found that participants with lower

798

memory span provided larger response correlations and
higher accuracies. Moreover, in a study of American Sign
Language, Cochran, McDonald, and Parault (1999) found
that participants could show better learning of novel
verbs with the aid of cognitive limitations.
Nevertheless, instead of focusing on the internal
limited cognitive resources, only a few studies
investigated the properties of the actual external input per
se. For instance, Elman (1993) stressed the importance of
starting with a small subset at an initial stage of learning,
instead of the entire set as a whole. Lai and Poletiek (2011)
replicated this SS effect for learning CE recursion by
showing that the gradual increasing ordering of input
complexity assisted participants in learning this
construction. Lai and Poletiek also showed that the
sufficient exposure to the basic adjacent-dependencies, i.e.
0-LoE (for instance, sentences like “The dog runs.”) was
another necessity for successful learning. Furthermore,
Lai & Poletiek (2013) verified the SS effect again with a
skewed frequency distribution. The frequencies of
different LoE items were inversely related to their
complexity (i.e. 50% 0-LoE items, 33% 1-LoE and 17%
2-LoE items). Nevertheless, as far as we know, no
previous studies have explored the sufficient proportion of
unique exemplars within each LoE. For instance, in order
to learn the CE recursive sentences with one embedding,
we do not know yet whether we need to see as many
different unique combinations as possible, or merely a
certain limited combination, but with a lot of repetition.
Thirdly, with regard to frequency distribution, a number
of highly frequent subject-verb relations appear much
more often than the others. For example, in a sentence like
“The horse that the astronaut that the veterinarian
chiseled possessed ran,” three subject-verb pairs represent
three different levels of relative frequencies: high, medium
and low, respectively. Previous studies using the AGL
paradigm attempted to simulate the skewed distribution of
natural language input, merely by presenting the simple
and short sentences more frequently than the long and
complex ones, either with a phrase structure grammar (Lai
& Poletiek, 2013), or with a finite grammar (Poletiek &
Chater, 2006). However, previous studies have not
specified the skewed frequency distribution for certain
level of complexity, e.g. more A1B1 than A2B2, or more
A1A2B2B1 than A2A3B3B2, etc. Studying this influence is a
major novel aspect of our research.
In response to the issues discussed above, in the current
experiment, we compared the performance of learning an
artificial CE recursion under three learning conditions,
with exactly the same amount of learning input but
different content. The first condition is an incrementally
staged input with multiple various exemplars
(Starting-Small), for which we replicated the learning
material used by Lai and Poletiek (2011); the second is a
smaller set of fewer unique exemplars, which are repeated

for an equal number of times (Starting-Less); and the third
contains the same unique exemplars as the second condition,
but the exemplars were repeated for an unequal number of
times, according to their frequency distribution (Starting-High).
Since previous research has shown the advantage of
staged-input ordering (Lai & Poletiek, 2011; Lai & Poletiek,
2013), we also presented our learning material incrementally in
complexity in all conditions.

Experiment
Method
Participants. Sixty-nine students (33 female, mean age 24
year, SD 6.4) 1 from Tilburg University participated for course
credit or payment. All were native Dutch speakers. All had
normal or corrected to normal vision.
Materials and design. For ease of comparison, we applied the
artificial CE Grammar G with the type of AnBn in Lai and
Poletiek (2011), but generated three novel sets of artificial
sequences, which were composed of non-sense syllables.
Syllables from Category A [be, bi, de, di, ge, gi] were paired
with specific syllables from Category B [po, pu, to, tu, ko, ku]
according to their consonants. The pairs were [be/bi-po/pu];
[de/di-to/tu]; [ge/gi-ko/ku]. The complexity differs from 0-, 1-,
to 2-LoE. Accordingly, the length of sequences ranged from
two-, four-, to six-syllable (e.g. bipo, bebepopo, gebiditopoku).
The occurrence number of all possible syllables was balanced
in all conditions.
All groups were exposed to a learning set with the same
sample size, but crucially, each set contains different items.
The original “Starting-Small” (SS) group was trained with 144
items 2 as in Lai and Poletiek (2011). The “Starting-Less” (SL)
group was trained with 36 unique items, each presented
equally four times. Among these 36 items, there are 12 unique
0-LoE items, 12 1-LoE items and 12 2-LoE items. The
“Starting-High” (SH) group also received the same 36 unique
items as the SL group, each presented for an unequal number
of times, which was determined by their relative frequencies of
occurrence. In order to create various relative frequencies, only
for the SH condition, we defined three categories of frequency
for the basic 0-LoE relations in the grammar: the pairs
[be/bi-po/pu] as high frequency; [de/di-to/tu] as medium
frequency; [ge/gi-ko/ku] as low frequency. The number of
occurrences of an item depended on its defined frequency. For
1

The data from 7 additional participants could not be included in
the analysis, due to computer failure (2), external disturbance (2),
and experimental pilots (3).
2
In Lai and Poletiek (2011), there were 144 items in total, but
actually only 108 unique items, since the grammar decided that there
were only 12 unique 0-LoE items. Those 108 items consisted of 12
unique 0-LoE, 48 unique 1-LoE and 48 unique 2-LoE. The
remaining 36 items were the repetition of 0-LoE. For ease of
comparison, we used the same combination.

799

example, the unequal frequency would result in more
occurrences of bepo than geku, and in turn more bebipopu
than gegikoku, more bebebipopupu than gegegikokuku
etc.
All groups received the same set of 72 test items, half
grammatical and half ungrammatical. There were an equal
number of test items for each level of complexity (i.e. 0-,
1-, and 2-LoE). The violations were implemented by
mismatching an A-syllable with another B-syllable. The
numbers of A- and B-syllables were the same for the test
sequence in order to avoid salient cues for detecting errors
merely by simple strategies, such as counting.
Procedure. Participants were randomly assigned to one of
the three groups (23 each). In the training phase,
participants were presented with the visual sequences
randomly and were informed that there was an underlying
rule. Each trial started with a fixation cross (500 ms) and
presented the learning sequence syllable-by-syllable (each
syllable 800 ms, no in-between interval). In the test phase,
participants received a set of new sequences. Participants
were instructed to respond whether the test sequences
obeyed the same rule as the one in the training phase or not.
No feedback on answers was given during the test.
The whole experiment took approximately 35 minutes.

Results
All three groups performed significantly above chance
level: MSS= .60, SESS=.02, t (20) = 5.92, p < .001, r2 = .64;
MSL= .61, SESL= .02, t (22) = 5.20, p < .001, r2 = .55;
MSH= .67, SESH=.03, t (21) = 6.82, p < .001, r2 = .69,
respectively, (Figure 1). This shows that in all conditions
participants were able to learn processing CE recursion to
some extent.

represents chance level (M= .50). Error bars indicate standard
error of the mean.
The current results showed a main effect of condition on
accuracy, F (2, 63) = 3.44, p < .05, ƞp2 = .10. A post hoc Tukey
test showed that the SH group outperformed the SS group
significantly (p =.048), while no significant difference
between the SH and the SL group (p = .102), nor the SL and
the SS group (p = .920).
Next we performed separate analyses for the grammatical
and ungrammatical items in the test. When only looking at the
grammatical items, there was no main effect of condition on
accuracy, F (2, 63) = .21, n.s., (MSS= .66, SESS= .03; MSL= .67,
SESL= .03; MSH= .69, SESH= .03). However, regarding the
performance on ungrammatical items, there appeared a
significant effect of condition on accuracy, F (2, 63) = 5.61, p
< .01, ƞp2 = .15. It indicates that these three conditions scored
differently when judging ungrammatical items. About the
performance on ungrammatical items, a post hoc Tukey test
revealed that the SH group (MSH= .66, SESH= .04) was
significantly better than the SS group (MSS= .53, SESS= .04), p
= .009, and also better than the SL group (MSL= .55, SESL= .03),
p = .025. There was no significant difference between the SS
and SL group, p = .891.
For the high accuracy of the SH group, we probed into
different LoE test items to see whether the effect was due to
certain simple and highly frequent ones. An ANOVA indeed
showed a main effect of LoE on accuracy, t (63) = 9.22. A
post hoc Tukey test indicated that performance on 0-LoE
(M= .78, SE= .03) was significantly better than that on 1-LoE
(M= .65, SE= .03), p = .010, and also 2-LoE (M= .59,
SE= .03), p = .001, though no significant difference between
1- & 2-LoE, p = .498. However, performance on 0-, 1-, and
2-LoE test items were all significantly above chance,
respectively t (21) = 8.11, p = .001, t (21) = 4.71, p = .001,
and t (21) = 3.18, p = .005. Briefly, participants scored better
on simple and more frequent items, but they also showed
learning on the more complex and less frequent items.

General Conclusion and Discussion

Figure 1. Mean accuracy of all conditions. The dotted line

The current study highlights the influence of sample properties
in detecting relational structures of CE recursion. In our study,
we first observed that staged-input facilitated learning CE
recursion in all three conditions. When participants were
exposed to the training input, which was arranged in an
increasingly complex manner, they were able to learn
hierarchically recursive structures. Moreover, when
participants in the SL group received a sample set which
contains fewer unique exemplars compared to the original SS
group, they were still able to show above-chance performance
in the grammaticality-judgment task. This suggests that fewer
unique learning exemplars, but with repetition, are at the very
least not detrimental to learning center-embedded recursion.

800

Interestingly, for the SH group, which was provided with a
sample set of fewer unique exemplars, which were
repeated for an unequal number of times, the performance
was significantly boosted.
Our results suggest that we might actually not need a
large number of unique learning exemplars when being
exposed to a new language construction. Our observations
provide empirical supports for the “fewer is better” side of
the debate (Casasola, 2005; Kersten & Smith, 2002). Our
prominent finding is that the diversity of exemplars turned
out not to be the most important factor, but the repetition
of a smaller set of unique exemplars with differential
frequencies stands out as a crucial element. The advantage
appears to be twofold: on the one hand, the restricted
number of unique exemplars seems more natural in
accordance with the cognitive processing window of a
human parser. Due to the intrinsic constraints of memory
(Christiansen & MacDonald, 2009), people are directed to
smaller segments of information more efficiently. On the
other hand, the repetition might help to consolidate
memory traces. The recurrent exemplars seem to help
participants to focus on the pattern and to detect the
underlying rule. In this way, the repetition assists people to
store and recognize their acquired knowledge.
The distribution of linguistic levels of complexity in
natural language is not uniform, but fairly skewed. For
instance, child-directed speech contains a large amount of
simple and short utterances, but fewer complex or long
sentences (Snow, 1972). Also concerning CE recursive
sentences, it has been shown that in oral language, people
tend to use simpler structures, and that they seldom
produce sentences with two or more embeddings
(Karlsson, 2010), although proficient language users are
able to understand sentences with more embeddings.
Compared to other studies, our design is more realistic in
the sense that our SH condition simulated these properties
of natural language, as discussed above. The SH group
was confronted with more basic 0-LoE exemplars (84
items), fewer 1-LoE (45 items) and even fewer 2-LoE (15
items); while the SS and the SL group respectively
received 48 0-LoE, 48 1-LoE and 48 2-LoE items. Here,
once again we replicated the skewed frequency
distribution effect as also observed in Lai and Poletiek
(2013).

References
Behrend, D. A. (1990). The Development of Verb
Concepts - Childrens Use of Verbs to Label Familiar
and Novel Events. Child Development, 61(3),
681-696.
Casasola, M. (2005). When less is more: How infants
learn to form an abstract categorical representation of
support. Child Development, 76(1), 279-290.

Note that our results also showed that the SH group
primarily benefited for ungrammatical items. To correctly
judge on ungrammatical items, participants need to know
about the underlying rule that they might form in the learning
phase. The SH group might have acquired more confidence in
detecting the inherent rule from their set of learning material.
However, while our artificial simulation is ideal in the lab
setting, natural language is much more chaotic. Firstly, we
created an error-free environment and our training exemplars
were all grammatical items. In reality, however, children are
exposed to a noisy linguistic environment, full of correct and
incorrect examples. When they make grammar mistakes, they
might be corrected and given the grammatical examples by
parents. Previous studies suggested that this type of negative
evidence was a useful part to correct errors in language
learning (Schachter, 1991). We would like to further test the
influence of (negative) feedback in forthcoming studies.
Secondly, our staged-input in all conditions followed a strictly
incremental ordering, while in natural language there are more
mixtures of different complexities. In future studies, it might
be worthwhile testing whether the effect could be replicated
without stage-input. In that manner, we would be able to
disentangle the influence of incremental ordering from that of
the learning sample with fewer exemplars. Thirdly, though we
endeavored to mimic the statistical environment at the
beginning of language learning, we tested adults with a
simplified artificial language. Yet, the ecological validity still
needs to be testified. Also, natural language is a sophisticated
system, which contains enormous information from a large
vocabulary, phonology, syntax, and semantic, etc. Given the
complexity of the linguistic properties, it seems extremely
difficult for children to discover and extract the underlying
grammatical rules precisely. Further testing is needed to verify
how well the model could depict children’s natural language
learning.
Moreover, it would be worthwhile to further test the effect
across modalities to see whether the results under various
modalities are comparable.
In sum, we found that a limited set of exemplars but with
repetition could largely boost the learning of complex
structures. Our results shed light on how language learners
utilize the statistical properties of the sample set to detect the
associated relations of complex hierarchical recursion and the
underlying rules in a cognitively efficient and economical way.

Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the Theory of Syntax.
Cambridge, Massachusetts : The MIT Press.
Christiansen, M. H., & MacDonald, M. C. (2009). A
Usage-Based Approach to Recursion in Sentence
Processing. Language Learning, 59, 126-161.
Cochran, B.P., McDonald, J.L., & Parault, S.J. (1999). Too
smart for their own good: The disadvantage of a superior
processing capacity for adult language learners. Journal
of Memory and Language, 41, 30-58.

801

Conway, C. M., Ellefson, M. R., & Christiansen, M. H.
(2003). When Less is Less and When Less is More:
Starting Small with Staged Input. Proceedings of the
25th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, 270-275, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Corballis, M. C. (2007). Recursion, language, and
starlings. Cognitive Science, 31(4), 697-704.
Elman, J. L. (1993). Learning and Development in Neural
Networks - the Importance of Starting Small.
Cognition, 48(1), 71-99.
Gallivan, J. (1987). Correlates of order of acquisition of
motion verbs. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 64,
311-318.
Gentner, D. (2003). Why we're so smart. In D. Gentner &
S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in mind:
Advances in the study of language and thought (pp.
195-236). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Goldowsky, B.N., & Newport, E.L. (1993). Modeling the
effects of processing limitations on the acquisition of
morphology: the less is more hypothesis. In E. Clark
(Ed.), The proceedings of the 24th annual Child
Language Research Forum (pp. 124-138). Stanford,
CA: Center for the Study of Language and
Information.
Gomez, R. L. (2002). Variability and detection of
invariant structure. Psychological Science, 13(5),
431-436.
Harris, C. (1991). Parallel distributed processing models
and metaphors for language and development. Ph.D.
dissertation, University of California, San Diego.
Hauser, M. D., Chomsky, N., & Fitch, W. T. (2002). The
faculty of language: What is it, who has it, and how did
it evolve? Science, 298(5598), 1569-1579.
Johnson, M. (1998). Proof Nets and the Complexity of
ProcessingCenter-Embedded Constructions. Journal
of Logic, Language and Information, 7(4), 433-447.
Kareev, Y., Lieberman, L., & Lev, M. (1997). Through a
narrow window: Sample size and the perception of
correlation. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
126(3), 278-287.
Karlsson, F. (2010). Syntactic recursion and iteration. In
H. v. d. Hulst (Ed.), Recursion and Human Language
(pp. 43–68). Berlin/New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Kersten, A. W., & Smith, L. B. (2002). Attention to novel
objects during verb learning. Child Development,
73(1), 93-109.
Kidd, E., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M. (2010). Lexical
frequency and exemplar-based learning effects in
language acquisition: Evidence from sentential
complements. Language Sciences, 32, 132-142.
Lai, J., & Poletiek, F. (2011). The impact of
adjacent-dependencies and staged-input on the
learnability
of
center-embedded
hierarchical
structures. Cognition, 118(2), 265-273.
Lai, J., & Poletiek, F. H. (2013). How "small" is "starting
small" for learning hierarchical centre-embedded

structures? Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 25(4),
423-435.
Maguire, M. J., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R. M., &
Brandone, A. C. (2008). Focusing on the relation: fewer
exemplars facilitate children's initial verb learning and
extension. Developmental Science, 11(4), 628-634.
McAndrews, M. P., & Moscovitch, M. (1985). Rule-based and
exemplar-based classification in artificial grammar
learning. Memory & Cognition, 13(5), 469-475.
Meulemans, T., & VanderLinden, M. (1997). Associative
chunk strength in artificial grammar learning. Journal of
Experimental
Psychology-Learning
Memory
and
Cognition, 23(4), 1007-1028.
Mintz, T. H. (2003). Frequent frames as a cue for grammatical
categories in child directed speech. Cognition, 90(1),
91-117.
Morrill, G. (2000). Incremental processing and acceptability.
Computational Linguistics, 26(3), 319-338.
Newport, E. L. (1990). Maturational Constraints on
Language-Learning. Cognitive Science, 14(1), 11-28.
Pelucchi, B., Hay, J. F., & Saffran, J. R. (2009). Statistical
Learning in a Natural Language by 8-Month-Old Infants.
Child Development, 80(3), 674-685.
Poletiek, F., & Chater, N. (2006). Grammar induction proWts
from representative stimulus sampling Proceedings of the
28th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 1968–1973). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Poletiek, F., & van Schijndel, T. J. (2009). Stimulus set size
and statistical coverage of the grammar in artificial
grammar learning. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16(6),
1058-1064.
Quinn, P. C., Polly, J. L., Furer, M. J., Dobson, V., & Narter, D.
B. (2002). Young Infants' Performance in the
Object-Variation Version of the Above-Below
Categorization Task: A Result of Perceptual Distraction or
Conceptual Limitation? Infancy, 3(3), 323-347.
Rinaldi, P., Barca, L., & Burani, C. (2004). A database for
semantic, grammatical, and frequency properties of the
first words acquired by Italian children. Behavior Research
Methods Instruments & Computers, 36(3), 525-530.
Schachter, J. (1991). Corrective feedback in historical
perspective. Second Language Research, 7, 89-102.
Snow, C. E. (1972). Mothers Speech to Children Learning
Language. Child Development, 43(2), 549-565.

802

