UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Subitizing and Finger Gnosis Predict Calculation Fluency in Adults

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4vv725r4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Penner-Wilger, Marcie
Waring, Rylan J.
Newton, Adam T.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Subitizing and Finger Gnosis Predict Calculation Fluency in Adults
Marcie Penner-Wilger (mpennerw@uwo.ca)
Department of Psychology, King’s University College at Western University
266 Epworth Avenue, London, ON, Canada N6A 2M3

Rylan J. Waring (rwaring2@uwo.ca)
Department of Psychology, King’s University College at Western University
266 Epworth Avenue, London, ON, Canada N6A 2M3

Adam T. Newton (anewton9@uwo.ca)
Department of Psychology, King’s University College at Western University
266 Epworth Avenue, London, ON, Canada N6A 2M3

Abstract
Both subitizing, the ability to enumerate small sets without
counting, and finger gnosis, the ability to mentally represent
one’s fingers, have been found to predict calculation skill in
children (Penner-Wilger et al., 2007, 2009). In the current
paper, we examined whether these same relations hold for
young adults. Consistent with the developmental data, both
subitizing and finger gnosis were significantly related to
university students’ (N = 51) calculation fluency, jointly
accounting for 33% of variability in fluency. The findings
demonstrate that early precursor skills to mathematics remain
similarly related into adulthood.

Introduction
The calculation skills of young adults are falling (LeFevre et
al., 2014; Mulhern & Wylie, 2004). LeFevre et al. (2014)
report data showing that the arithmetic fluency of university
students has declined by 24% across a 12-year span. This
decline is problematic, because without basic calculation
skills students have insufficient resources to grasp more
advanced material (Walcyzk & Griffith-Ross, 2006). Also,
strong calculation skills are related to positive employment
outcomes including obtaining and retaining a job, higher
employment income, and home ownership (Bynner &
Parsons, 1997; Parsons & Bynner, 1997; Ritchie & Bates,
2013). Indeed, the links are stronger for numeracy than for
literacy skills. Recent research has identified foundational
capacities that underlie the development of calculation skills
in children (Butterworth, 2010; Penner-Wilger et al. 2007).
In the current paper, we examine whether these childhood
precursors to calculation skill, subitizing and finger gnosis,
remain related to calculation skill into young adulthood. The
answer to this research question will address whether the
relation in childhood simply reflects the cognitive strategies
employed by children while learning arithmetic or a more
fundamental and enduring relation.
Subitizing, the ability to enumerate small sets without
counting, predicts calculation skill in children (PennerWilger et al., 2007; Reeve, Reynolds, Humberstone, &
Butterworth, 2012). Children can typically subitize to three

items, whereas adults can typically subitize to four items
(Svenson & Sjoberg, 1983). Penner-Wilger et al. (2007)
examined the relation between subitizing and calculation
skill in Grade 1 children. Children completed an
enumeration task, where they were shown a set of dots and
asked to verbally report how many dots were shown. The
response time (RT) slope as a function of set size across 1-3
items was used as the subitizing measure. A slope close to
zero indicates subitizing (items enumerated in parallel) and
a positive slope indicates counting. Calculation skill was
measured using the calculation subtest from the WoodcockJohnson Psycho-Educational Battery-Revised (Woodcock &
Johnson, 1989). Penner-Wilger et al. found that subitizing
was significantly related to calculation skill [r(145) = -.31]
concurrently in Grade 1. Children with better subitizing
ability, indicated by flatter slopes, displayed better
calculation skills. These findings were extended by Reeve et
al. (2012) who found that subitizing ability at six years of
age was related to calculation skill both concurrently and
also longitudinally at nine and eleven years of age.
Children with developmental dyscalculia, a deficit in
numeracy and/or arithmetic, have poorer subitizing abilities
than typically developing children (Andersson & Ostergren,
2012; Landerl, 2013; Schleifer & Landerl, 2011). Schleifer
and Landerl (2011) found that dyscalculic children in
Grades 2, 3 and 4 had response time slopes across 1-3 items
that were twice as steep as the slopes of their typically
developing peers. Landerl (2013) replicated the finding that
dyscalculic children in Grades 2-4 have steeper RT slopes
than typically developing children for dot enumeration
across 1-3 items. Thus, there is evidence for a relation
between subitizing ability and calculation skill both within
typically developing samples and when comparing between
typically developing and dyscalculic samples.
Why does subitizing predict calculation skill? Butterworth
(1999; 2010) proposed that the capacity to abstractly
represent numerosity, the number of items in a set, is a
foundational ability for building calculation skill. The dot
enumeration task indexes this capacity to abstractly
represent numerosities by requiring the mapping of an
abstract symbol (e.g., 3 or “three”) onto a set. In a test of

1150

Butterworth’s proposed mechanism, Reeve et al. (2012)
found that group differences in dot enumeration were found
in the subitizing range, but not in the counting range. As
such, subitizing may predict calculation skill because it
indexes this foundational capacity to abstractly represent
numerosities, and it is precisely these abstract
representations of number that we use to perform arithmetic
calculations. If Butterworth is correct, subitizing should
predict not only calculation skill but other numeracy
measures as well. Consistent with this view, Penner-Wilger
et al. (2007) found that subitizing slope also predicts Grade
1 children’s number system knowledge, including
recognizing digits, identifying which number comes next,
ordering and understanding of place value, [r(145) = -.30].
Finger gnosis, the ability to mentally represent one’s
fingers, also predicts calculation skill in children (Fayol,
Barrouillet & Marinthe, 1998; Noël, 2005; Penner-Wilger et
al., 2007, 2009). Finger gnosis is commonly measured using
variants of a finger localization task (Baron, 2004), where
the participant’s hand is occluded from view, the researcher
touches one or two fingers, and the participant is asked to
report the touched finger(s). The number of correct
identifications is used as the finger gnosis measure. Fayol,
Barrouillet and Marinthe (1998) found that a set of
neuropsychological tests, including tests of finger gnosis,
predicted Grade 1 children’s math scores. Noël (2005)
found that children’s finger gnosis scores predicted accuracy
and fluency on a variety of mathematical tests, both
concurrently in Grade 1 and longitudinally one year later.
Penner-Wilger et al. (2007) replicated the relation between
finger gnosis and calculation skill in Grade 1 children,
finding that finger gnosis was significantly related to
calculation skill [r(145) = .19] concurrently in Grade 1. In
sum, there is robust evidence of a relation between finger
gnosis and calculation skill in unselected populations across
different countries and educational systems including
France and Canada.
To pinpoint the relation between finger gnosis and
calculation skill, Penner-Wilger et al. (2009) examined
finger gnosis and two tests that index the strength of number
representations – magnitude comparison and number line
estimation. Finger gnosis was measured using the finger
localization task. The child’s hand was occluded and two
fingers on the same hand were touched simultaneously;
children were asked to point to the touched fingers. Children
with better finger gnosis scores in Grade 1 had smaller
distance effects on the magnitude comparison task [r(99) = .35] and more linear estimates on the number line
comparison task [r(99) = .27] in Grade 2, reflecting a more
precise mapping between numerals and their associated
magnitude (Dehaene et al., 1998; Siegler & Booth, 2004).
Why does finger gnosis predict calculation skill? Using
cross-domain modeling, Penner-Wilger and Anderson
(2011) showed that finger and number representations use
overlapping neural substrates. They argue that this overlap
is the result of neural reuse (Anderson, 2010), wherein a
neural circuit originally evolved for one use, such as finger

representation, has be redeployed for a later developing use,
number representation. This overlapping neural circuit
forms part of the functional complex supporting each use –
finger and number representation – and, importantly,
performs the same low-level working in both uses (PennerWilger & Anderson, 2013). Thus, children with more
distinct mental representations of their fingers also have
more distinct mental representations of number because
both representations are supported by the same neural
substrate. Alternatively, Butterworth (2010) argues that poor
numerosity representations could impair the use of fingers
in children’s arithmetic development, leading to poor
calculation skill. If this were the mechanism linking finger
gnosis and calculation skill, however, we would expect
subitizing and finger gnosis to be related.
Subitizing and finger gnosis are independent predictors of
calculation skill. No significant relation exists between
children’s subitizing and finger gnosis scores (PennerWilger et al., 2007; 2009), contrary to Butterworth’s
hypothesis. Penner-Wilger et al. (2007) found that each
precursor predicted significant unique variance in
calculation skill, [r(99) = -.19 and r(99) = .28 for subitizing
and finger gnosis, respectively, controlling for receptive
vocabulary and processing speed]. Children with flatter
subitizing slopes and more distinct representations of their
fingers had stronger calculation skills. Jointly, subitizing
and finger gnosis accounted for 28% of variability in
calculation skill. Moreover, children’s patterns of
performance on subitizing and finger gnosis tasks in Grade
1 can be used to identify and differentiate children with
math-specific difficulties and children with more general
non-verbal learning difficulties longitudinally (PennerWilger et al., 2009).
Subitizing and finger gnosis jointly and independently
predict calculation skill in children. It remains an open
question, however, as to whether the same relations hold in
adults. The observed relations may reflect the solution
strategies young children use to perform arithmetic
calculations,
strategies
that
undergo
significant
developmental changes (Siegler & Shrager, 1984). As a
result, the relations may hold only for children. In support of
this hypothesis, the relation is currently reported for
kindergarten and early elementary school children, when
arithmetic calculation skills are being taught.
Alternatively, given that subitizing and finger gnosis are
posited to relate specifically and fundamentally to the
representation of number, we might predict that the relations
between subitizing, finger gnosis and calculation skill hold
for young adults. For example, phonological awareness is a
foundational capacity for the development of reading skill
(Goswami & Bryant, 1990). Consistent with the
foundational nature of this relation, phonological awareness
continues to relate to reading ability beyond childhood
(Durgunoğlu & Öney, 2002; Wilson & Lesaux, 2001).
In the current paper, the relations among subitizing, finger
gnosis and calculation skill in university students were
tested. Given that both subitizing and finger gnosis are

1151

posited to play a foundational role in the development of
number representations, it was hypothesized that the
relations previously seen for children between subitizing
and calculation skill and finger gnosis and calculation skill
would hold for young adults – at level similar to that shown
previously in children.

addition problems, and two pages containing both two-digit
subtraction problems and two-digit multiplication
problems). Participants were instructed to solve the
problems as quickly and accurately as possible and were
given two minutes per page. Calculation fluency was
measured as the total number of correct solutions on both
tests, and reflects an individual’s ability to quickly and
accurately execute simple arithmetic procedures on multidigit problems.

Method
Participants
The participants for the study consisted of 51 students (M =
19.8 years ± 1.0 years, Range = 18-23 years), from King’s
University College and Western University (27 male, 24
female). All participants completed their elementary and
secondary education in Canada. Participation for this study
was on a voluntary basis.

Materials
Subitizing The subitizing task is based on the number
discrimination task from Trick et al. (1996). In this task,
participants were presented with a set of dots (ranging from
1 to 9), and were asked to identify the number of dots as fast
as they could without making any errors. Participants
selected their response by touching one of two alternatives.
The following eight discriminations were made twice (once
with the smaller number of dots displayed and once with the
larger number of dots displayed) in each of five blocks: 1
vs. 2; 2 vs. 3; 3 vs. 4; 4 vs. 5; 5 vs. 6; 6 vs. 7; 7 vs. 8; 8 vs.
9. Stimuli remained on the screen for 7800ms or until the
participant made a choice, and the time between trials was
1000ms. Participants performed a total of 80 trials and the
order of the problems was randomized. The dependent
variable was response time slope as a function of set size
across 1 – 4 items. This subitizing range was selected based
on previous research showing that adults generally subitize
to four items (Svenson & Sjoberg, 1983).
Finger Gnosis The finger gnosis task is based on Noël
(2005). During this task, participants were first asked to
place either their dominant or non-dominant hand palm
down on a desk (starting hand was counterbalanced). The
participant’s view of their hand was subsequently occluded
by a box placed over their hand. For each trial, the
experimenter lightly touched the top of two fingers
(simultaneously) on the participant’s hand (right below the
fingernail). The experimenter then removed the box and
asked the participant to point to the two fingers that were
touched. Participants performed a total of 10 trials on each
hand for a total of 20. The dependent variable was number
of fingers correctly identified (out of 40).
Calculation Fluency As a measure of calculation fluency,
participants completed the addition and subtractionmultiplication subtests of the Kit of Factor-Referenced
Cognitive Tests (French, Ekstrom, & Price, 1963). Each
subtest of this paper-and-pencil task consisted of two-pages
of multi-digit arithmetic problems (two pages of three-digit

Procedure
Participants were seated in a quiet room in front of an iPad.
Once comfortable, participants completed the subitizing
task on the iPad. Following the subitizing task, participants
completed the finger gnosis task and the addition and
subtraction-multiplication subtests from the Kit of FactorReferenced Cognitive Tests. These tasks were completed in
one session lasting approximately one hour.

Results
Descriptive statistics for calculation fluency, subitizing
slope, and finger gnosis can be found in Table 1.
Table 1: Descriptive statistics for all measures
Measure

M (SD)
53.7 (20.0)
143.0 (54.6)
38.2 (1.9)

Calculation fluency (# correct)
Subitizing slope (ms)
Finger gnosis (# correct)

Correlations
A Pearson’s bivariate correlation was used to determine the
associations among subitizing slope, finger gnosis, and
calculation fluency. Correlations are summarized in Table 1.
There was a significant correlation between subitizing slope
and calculation fluency, r = -.52, p < .001, indicating that
flatter subitizing slopes were associated with greater
calculation fluency. There was also a significant correlation
between calculation fluency and finger gnosis, r = .29, p =
.04, indicating that higher scores on the finger gnosis
measure were associated with greater calculation fluency.
The correlation between subitizing slope and finger gnosis
was not statistically significant, r = -.08, ns. To determine
whether the relation was specific to subitizing, and not
enumeration ability more generally, we included the
enumeration slope for the entire range and the counting
range (5+), but neither was significantly related to
calculation fluency and are not discussed further.
Table 2: Correlations among student measures (N = 51)

1. Calculation Fluency
2. Subitizing Slope (RT)
3. Finger Gnosis
*p < .05, **p < .01.

1152

1

2

-.52**
.29*

-.08

3

Multiple Regression
A multiple regression analysis was used to determine if
subitizing slope and finger gnosis significantly predicted
participants' calculation fluency. Predictors were entered in
a single step. As shown in Figure 1, the two predictors
jointly explained 33% of the variability in calculation
fluency, R2 = .33, F(2,48) = 11.58, p < .001. Finger gnosis
significantly predicted calculation fluency, β = .25, t(48) =
2.07, p = .04, as did subitizing slope, β = -.50, t(48) = -4.17,
p < .001.

Figure 1: Multiple regression model predicting calculation
skill from subitizing slope and finger gnosis.
**p<.001 *p<.05

Conclusion
We found that subitizing and finger gnosis predicted
significant unique variance in young adults’ calculation
fluency, jointly accounting for 33% of the variability. Our
findings demonstrate that the relation between the precursor
skills (subitizing and finger gnosis) and calculation does not
just reflect the early solution strategies used while
developing calculation skills, but instead is an enduring
relation. Moreover, the strength of the relation was not
reduced in young adults. Thus, the findings support the view
that subitizing and finger gnosis are foundational capacities
for arithmetic calculation.
The finding that subitizing ability is related to adult
calculation skill is consistent with the position that the
ability to abstractly represent numerosities is foundational
for building calculation skills. Contrary to Butterworth’s
numerosity coding hypothesis (2010), however, this relation
is specific to the small numerosity, or subitizing, system.
Our findings are consistent with developmental data
showing that the relation between enumeration and
calculation ability is specific to the subitizing range
(Penner-Wilger et al., in prep; Reeve et al., 2012).
The finding that finger gnosis is related to adult
calculation skill is consistent with Penner-Wilger and
Anderson’s (2013) redeployment view. On the
redeployment view, finger gnosis and calculation skill are
related because finger and number representations share an
overlapping neural substrate. Given that the proposed nature
of this relation is one of partial identity, it follows that the

relation would be observed in both children and adults.
Butterworth’s (2010) proposed mechanism for the relation
between finger gnosis and calculation skill was not
supported. Finger gnosis and calculation skill were related
in adults but, as in the developmental data, subitizing and
finger gnosis were not correlated.
The relations between the precursors and calculation skill
may be mediated by the strength of number representations.
Both subitizing and finger gnosis contribute unique
capacities to the representation of number, as supported by
developmental data (Penner-Wilger et al., 2007; 2009). It
follows that the relations in adults may also be mediated by
the strength of number representations. We are currently
addressing this research question by gathering data for two
tasks that index the strength of symbolic and non-symbolic
number representations: Magnitude comparison and
ordinality (Butterworth & Reigosa, 2008; Lyons & Beilock,
2009).
Given the evidence supporting subitizing and finger
gnosis as foundational capacities for arithmetic calculation,
an obvious next step is to design training studies to see if (1)
subitizing and finger gnosis can be improved by training
and (2) if this training improves calculation skills. Some
preliminary research on these important questions has
begun. Gracia-Bafalluy and Noël (2008) report that finger
gnosis training improves children’s numeracy skills (cf.
Fischer, 2010). Further training studies are needed to
evaluate the suitability of subitizing and finger gnosis
training, both individually and jointly, as effective
interventions. Improving these foundational capacities may
lead to an increase in numeracy skills in the same way that
improving phonological awareness leads to an increase in
literacy skills (Goswami & Bryant, 1990).

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from King’s
University College at Western University. The authors
thank Josh Hanna and Katie Hart for assistance with data
collection and data entry.

References
Anderson, M.L. (2010). Neural reuse: A fundamental
organizational principle of the brain. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 33(4): 245-66.
Andersson, U., & Ostergren, R. (2012). Number magnitude
processing and basic cognitive functions in
children with mathematical learning disabilities.
Learning & Individual Differences, 22, 701-714.
Butterworth, B. (1999). What counts - how every brain
is hardwired for math. New York, NY: The Free
Press.
Butterworth, B. (2010). Foundational numerical capacities
and the origins of dyscalculia. Trends in Cognitive
Science, 14, 534–541.

1153

Butterworth, B. & Reigosa, V. (2007). Information
processing deficits in dyscalculia. In D. B. Berch &
M. M. M. Mazzocco (Eds.), Why is math so hard
for some children? (pp. 65 - 81). Baltimore, MD:
Brookes.
Bynner, J., & Parsons, S. (1997). Does numeracy matter?.
London: The Basic Skills Agency.
Dehaene, S., Dehaene-Lambertz, G., & Cohen, L. (1998).
Abstract representations of numbers in the animal
and human brain. Trends in Neuroscience, 21, 355
- 361.
Durgunoğlu, A. Y., & Öney, B. (2002). Phonological
awareness in literacy acquisition: It’s not only for
children. Scientific Studies of Reading, 6 (3), 254266.
Fayol, M., Barrouillet, P., & Marinthe, C. (1998). Predicting
arithmetical achievement from neuropsychological
performance: A longitudinal study. Cognition, 68,
B63–B70.
Fischer, J. P. (2010). Numerical performance increased by
finger training: A fallacy due to regression toward
the mean? Cortex, 46 (2), 272-273.
French, J. W., Ekstrom, R. B., & Price, L. A. (1963). Kit of
factor reference tests for cognitive factors.
Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service.
Goswami, U., & Bryant, P. (1990). Phonological skills and
learning to read. East Sussex, UK: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Gracia-Bafalluy, M. & Noël, M.-P. (2008). Does finger
training increase young children's numerical
performance? Cortex, 44, 368-375.
Landerl, K. (2013). Development of numerical processing in
children with typical and dyscalculic arithmetic
skills – a longitudinal study. Frontiers in
Psychology, 459, 1 -14.
LeFevre, J., Penner-Wilger, M., Pyke, A., Shanahan, T.,
Deslauriers, W. A., Trbovich, P., & Roberts, M. A.
(2014). Putting two and two together: Declining
arithmetic fluency among young adults. Manuscript
submitted for publication.
Lyons, I. M., & Beilock, S. L. (2009). Beyond quantity:
Individual differences in working memory and the
ordinal understanding of numerical symbols.
Cognition, 113, 18-204.
Mulhern, G., & Wylie, J. (2004). Changing levels of
numeracy and other core mathematical skills
among psychology undergraduates between 1992
and 2002. British Journal of Psychology, 95, 355370.
Noël, M. E. (2005). Finger gnosia: A predictor of numerical
abilities in children? Child Neuropsychology, 11,
413-430.
Parsons, S., & Bynner, J. (1997). Numeracy and
employment. Education and Training, 39(2), 4351.

Penner-Wilger, M., & Anderson, M.L. (2013). The relation
between finger gnosis and mathematical ability:
why redeployment of neural circuits best explains
the finding. Frontiers in Psychology, 4:877. doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00877
Penner-Wilger, M., & Anderson, M. L. (2011). The relation
between finger gnosis and mathematical ability:
Can we attribute function to cortical structure with
cross-domain modeling? Proceedings of the 33rd
Annual Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2445-2450).
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Penner-Wilger, M., Fast, L., LeFevre, J., Smith-Chant, B.
L., Skwarchuk, S., Kamawar, D., & Bisanz, J.
(2007). The foundations of numeracy: Subitizing,
finger gnosia, and fine-motor ability. In D. S.
McNamara & J. G. Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 29th Annual Cognitive Science Society (pp.
1385-1390). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Penner-Wilger, M., Fast, L., LeFevre, J., Smith-Chant, B.
L., Skwarchuk, S., Kamawar, D., & Bisanz, J.,
(2009). Subitizing, finger gnosis, and the
representation of number. Proceedings of the 31st
Annual Cognitive Science Society (pp. 520–525).
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Penner-Wilger, M., Waring, R. J., Newton, A. T., Bigras, L.
& White, C. (in preparation). Evidence against the
numerosity coding hypothesis: Subitizing, rather
than enumeration, is related to arithmetic
performance.
Reeve, R., Reynolds, F., Humberstone, J., & Butterworth,
B. (2012). Stability and change in markers of core
numerical competencies. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 141, 649–666.
Ritchie, S. J. & Bates, T. C. (2013). Enduring links from
childhood mathematics and reading achievement to
adult socioeconomic status. Psychological Science,
24 (7), 1301-1308.
Schleifer, P., and Landerl, K. (2011). Subitizing and
counting in typical and atypical development.
Developmental Science, 14, 280–291.
Siegler, R.S. & Shrager, J. (1984). Strategy choices in
addition and subtraction: How do children know
what to do? In C. Sophian (Ed.), The origins of
cognitive skills (pp. 229-293). Hillsdale,
NJ:Erlbaum.
Siegler, R. S. & Booth, J. L. (2004). Development of
numerical estimation in young children. Child
Development, 75, 428-444.
Svenson, O., & Sjoberg, K. (1983). Speeds of subitizing and
counting processes in different age groups. Journal
of Genetic Psychology, 142, 203–211.
Trick, L.M., Enns, J.T., & Brodeur, D.A. (1996). Life-span
changes in visual enumeration: The number
discrimination task. Developmental Psychology,
32(5), 925-932.

1154

Walczyk, J. J., & Griffith-Ross, D. A. (2006). Time
restriction and the linkage between subcomponent
efficiency and algebraic inequality success.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 98(3), 617627.
Wilson, A. M., & Lesaux, N. K. (2001). Persistence of
phonological processing deficits in college students
with dyslexia who have age-appropriate reading
skills. Journal of Reading Disabilities, 34 (5), 394400.
Woodcock, R. W., & Johnson, M. B. (1989). WJ-R Tests of
Cognitive Ability. Itasca, IL: Riverside Publishing.

1155

