UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Task relevance moderates saccade velocities to spatially separated cues

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0wj5z3sq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
McColeman, Caitlyn
Blair, Mark

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Task relevance moderates saccade velocities to spatially separated cues

!

Caitlyn M. McColeman (caitlyn_mccoleman@sfu.ca)
Department of Psychology, Simon Fraser University
8888 University Drive, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6

!

Mark R. Blair (mark_blair@sfu.ca)

Cognitive Science Program & Department of Psychology, Simon Fraser University
8888 University Drive, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6

!

!

Abstract
The study of eye movements has enjoyed a history of
supporting theories of attention in different task settings by
expanding our understanding of how people navigate tasks
such as natural scene perception, reading and categorization.
The theories and models that these data inform, however, are
largely based on fixation patterns. Presently lacking is an
understanding of how the eye movements preceding these
fixations are affected by the task environment and if they
change as a function of a shift in the state of knowledge. In an
effort to close this gap, we report changing saccade velocities
in two category learning experiments, evidencing the
importance of understanding saccades in developing a
stronger theory of the deployment of visual attention as it is
influenced by higher level cognitive changes.
Keywords: Saccades; eye movements; category learning;
visual attention; learning

!

The visual world contains an enormous amount of
information. From when we wake up to check the time, to
the familiar walk to the car, we make a remarkable number
of eye movements to different elements of the environment
in order to extract the information that is relevant to our
goals at the time. However, we also make a large number of
eye movements to elements of the environment that are
irrelevant to our goals. For instance, the tree rustling outside
the kitchen window is unrelated preparing a coffee, but we
still opt to look there from time-to-time during the morning
ritual. These eye movements, saccades, are punctuated by
fixations. During fixations, the eyes pause while extracting
information from the environment for further processing.
The saccade itself is not an effective source of
information gathering, since visual perception is suppressed
while the eye is in motion (Matin, 1974). However, the
fixation is unable to gather information from another part of
the environment without the preceding saccade to bring the
eye to the target location. Since so many saccades are made
each minute, small differences in the speed or accuracy of
the movement can add up to important cumulative
differences in completing a task or perceiving various parts
of the visual environment. It is both the journey and the
destination of the eye, on the scale of milliseconds, that
indicate the processing underlying the deployment of visual
attention.
The subtle properties of saccades have been explored in
oculomotor learning tasks, wherein participants are trained

to saccade toward a target. Work in non-human primates has
shown that saccades quicken when they are deployed to a
rewarded target location relative to alternative unrewarded
locations (Takikawa, Kawagoe, Itoh, Nakahara & Hikosaka,
2002), implicating an important role of learning and
reinforcement in programming and executing saccades.
In an anti-saccade task, when the participants’ goal is to
make a saccade to the mirror location of an onscreen cue,
saccades tend to be longer and are more likely to miss the
target location than when the task is simply to make a
saccade to a cue (Hallett, 1977; Walker, Walker, Husain &
Kennard, 2002). Recent work shows eye movements in the
anti-saccade task can be further affected by factors such as
drowsiness (Ahlstrom, Nyström et al. 2013), age and
executive function (Mirsky, Heuer, Jafari, Kramer, Schenk,
Viskontas, Miller, & Boxer, 2011), alcohol impairment
(Roche & King, 2010) and anxiety (Cornwell, Mueller,
Kaplan, Grillon, & Ernst, 2012). Through the variety of
sampled participants, it is consistently found that executing
a purely goal-driven saccade in the absence of a clear visual
cue is more demanding, as is exhibited through slower eye
movements. This finding also invites the possibility that the
existence of a larger cognitive load - having to identify a cue
and calculate a mirror target location to send the eyes to enacts costs to the oculomotor system that is observed in
sacrifices of saccade speed and accuracy relative to simply
moving the eyes to an onscreen target. If a cognitively
demanding decision does influence saccade velocities in a
simple task, a natural next step is to explore how cognitive
load may be reflected in saccadic properties in more
challenging tasks.
Fixations have been explored more often than saccades in
complicated task settings and are known to vary both as a
function of the task environment and of participants’
knowledge. Category learning tasks provide insight into the
interplay between developing expertise in making category
judgements and the corresponding trial-to-trial oculomotor
activity. For instance, as knowledge of a category structure
develops, participants’ fixations to task relevant cues are
longer than fixations to irrelevant cues (Blair, Watson,
Walshe & Maj, 2009; Chen, Meier, Blair, Watson & Wood,
2013), and there are more fixations to relevant than
irrelevant cues (McColeman, Barnes, Chen, Meier, Walshe
& Blair, 2014; Rehder & Hoffman, 2005), demonstrating

2627

features to make a decision between four possible categories
(Table 1). One additional (irrelevant) feature is presented as
a distractor. The goal of this analysis is to examine the
difference in saccade speeds between those directed to two
relevant items and those targeting a single relevant
distractor1.

Methods

Figure 1. The stimuli used in the experiments. The features
(right) could take on two possible values. They were pasted
on the stimulus background (left).
flexibility in the mechanisms underlying fixations and
responsiveness to higher level cognitive changes.
Understanding the influence of learning on fixations is
important in understanding the allocation of attention in the
context of problem solving, but there remains a question of
what comes before those fixations. Saccades are an integral
part of visual attention, and so in the following study, we
explore two category learning tasks of varying complexity
to uncover the influence of learning on saccade velocity.
Over the course of these category learning experiments,
participants must learn the abstract properties of feature
values, and combine these to learn a category response rule.
Category learning tasks have been a significant part of
cognitive psychology for decades, and various influences on
high-level performance during categorization are well
documented. For instance, single dimensional rules like the
one used in Experiment 2 are typically much easier than two
dimensional rules (Experiment 1) and yield higher accuracy
scores (Maddox, Filoteo, Hejl & Ing, 2004). Since the high
level performance differences between single- and twodimensional rule tasks are well understood, the
interpretation of new lower-level measures is not muddied
by questions of higher-level phenomena in the same way
that it would be in a novel learning paradigm.
Understanding how saccades change over the course of
learning is invaluable in the pursuit of developing a full
model of visual attention - be it in the context of
categorization or with respect to learned visual tasks in
general.

Stimuli were presented to the participants as a series of alien
animal cells. The task was to sort them into different groups
using the information conveyed by three features. There
were 69 undergraduate students from Simon Fraser
University’s Research Participation Pool who received
partial course credit for their participation. Participants were
assigned to either a speed (n = 25) or an accuracy (n = 25)
instruction condition prior to exclusion, where the speed or
the accuracy of their responses was emphasized prior to the
start of the experiment, respectively. Gaze quality criteria
(>70% of trials with >75% of gaze points collected)
identified 4 participants for exclusion, and an additional 15
participants were excluded for failing to reach a learning
criterion of 12 consecutive correct responses.
The speed/accuracy manipulation was originally
implemented to encourage a Speed/Accuracy Tradeoff and
explore how eye movements may differ when speed (or
accuracy) was prioritized. The experiment failed to elicit an
effect of either reaction time or accuracy. Failure to find an
effect of condition may have been a function of the weak
instantiation of the manipulation, in that the condition was
communicated only in the instructions and block breaks.
Another possibility is that the participants intrinsically
prioritized accuracy in order learn the categories regardless
of their condition.
Stimuli and Category Structure Features on the alien cell
were separated in space by 10.6° and each spanned 1.3°.
Each could take on two possible values (Figure 1). The
combination of two features was diagnostic of the category,
while the third was irrelevant (Table 1).
Table 1: Experiment 1 Category Structure
Category

Feature 1

Feature 2

Feature 3

A

1

1

0 or 1

B

1

0

1 or 0

Experiment 1: Two Dimensional Categories

C

0

1

0 or 1

This experiment is a rule-based category learning task,
wherein the participants learn to determine the value of two

D

0

0

1 or 0

!

1 The data from these experiments have been analyzed for other measures, and are reported in McColeman et al. (2014). Data are
publicly available through Summit, Simon Fraser University’s open access data repository (http://summit.sfu.ca/collection/94 under
“Speed-Accuracy Trade-Offs in Category Learning”).

2628

Figure 2. Saccade velocities for the Accuracy (solid line)
and Speed (dashed line) conditions in Experiment 1. The
velocity of saccades to relevant features is shown in blue,
while the saccades the irrelevant features is plotted in red.
Procedure Participants are presented with 300 trials, shown
in Figures 2 and 3 as twelve blocks of 25. During these
trials, a Tobii X120 eye tracker recorded participants’ eye
movements, sampling at 120Hz with a spatial resolution of
0.5°. Fixations were defined using a modified dispersion
algorithm (Salvucci & Goldberg, 2000), with a spatial
threshold of 1.1° and a temporal threshold of 75ms. Saccade
latency was defined as the difference in time between the
end of one fixation and the beginning of the second; saccade
amplitude is the angular distance between the spatial
centroids of the gaze points that make up the first and
second fixations. Saccade velocity is then calculated as
amplitude divided by latency.
Each of the 300 trials began with a fixation cross,
followed by the presentation of the stimulus upon which
participants made a self-timed response. Feedback was
provided with the the same stimulus, by showing the
category label (A-D) in green font. If the participants’
response was incorrect, then the label corresponding to their
category choice was displayed in red. Participants were
provided with breaks at the end of a block of trials.

!

Results
Because the primary interest of this study is the
deployment of saccades in the context of categorization,
those included in this analysis are only saccades that were
made to one of the three possible features. Any saccade that
ended with a fixation further than 150 pixels from the centre
of a feature (8%) was dropped from the analyses
independently from those reported here.
Saccade velocities (Figure 2) were predicted using a
linear mixed effects regression model (LMER) including
five predictors. The first was Condition (C), a between

subjects predictor to identify the contribution of the speed/
accuracy manipulation on the variance of saccade speeds.
The first within subjects predictor was Block (B), where one
block was 25 trials in the experiment. Estimates for the
contribution of Block indicate how saccade speeds changed
over the course of the experiment. Feature Relevance (R)
was coded such that saccades ending on Feature 1 and 2
were assigned a value of 1 and saccades Feature 3 were
assigned a value of 0. The Relevance predictor was meant to
explore how the value of a fixated feature corresponds to the
speed of the preceding saccade. An interaction between
Block and Relevance (BxR) was included to investigate
divergence in saccade velocities to relevant versus irrelevant
features as the experiment unfolded. Fixation Order (FO) is
a predictor meant to explore the influence of when a fixation
occurs in the context of a trial on the speed of the saccade.
The FO predictor can help in understanding how initial
saccades may differ from later saccades. The Number of
Fixations (NF) are included in the model to track repeated
attempts to gather information from the stimulus in a trial
(NF). For instance, there is a decrease in the number of
fixations in each trial as the experiment runs its course: does
this change the speed of the saccades that precede those few
fixations? These predictors then form a model of predicting
saccade velocity,

!
!

saccade velocity ~ β0
error

+

βB + βC + βR + βBxR + βFO + βNF +

where β0 is the intercept, and the remaining β values are
coefficients for their respective predictors. Using the R
Package “lme4” (Bates & Sarkar, 2007) to estimate the
values of the coefficients, β0=19.57 (t=31.57, SE=0.62), and
the best predictors for saccade velocity are Block (βB=-.96
t=-16.92, SE=0.06) suggesting a decrease in saccade
velocity over blocks, and Relevance (βR=1.24, t=5.31,
SE=0.24) suggesting that saccades to irrelevant features are
faster than saccades to relevant features. The remaining
predictors, including the interaction between Block and
Relevance (β BxR =0.03, t=0.61, SE=0.05), Condition
(βC=0.17, t=0.22, SE=0.76), Fixation Order (βFO=0.01,
t=0.46, SE=0.01) and the Number of Fixations (βNF=-0.01,
t=1.19, SE=0.01) were poor predictors of saccade velocity.
Understanding how saccades relate to the fixations they
precede is an important part of moving toward a richer
account of visual attention in the context of learning.
Fixation durations are known to be longer when the
participant is fixating a relevant feature than an irrelevant
feature (Chen, Meier et al., 2013; Rehder & Hoffman,
2005), while we just showed that saccades are slower when
they’re directed to relevant features. It may be the case that
there is a fixation duration/saccade speed trade-off, in that
slower saccades use some of the resources that would be
dedicated to processing during the fixation, but that seems
unlikely given the findings just presented, and earlier work

2629

following tasks that are more commonly employed in
investigating saccades. The task still requires a decision,
which in itself is more demanding than common cuefollowing saccade testing paradigms.

Methods
Unless otherwise noted, the stimuli (Figure 1), procedure
and equipment are the same as Experiment 1. There were 67
participants, again were drawn from the Research
Participation Pool. Three participants were excluded for
failure to meet gaze quality criteria, and 7 failed to meet the
learning criterion, leaving 28 participants in the accuracy
condition, and 29 in the speed condition.

Results
Figure 3. Saccade velocities for Experiment 2. The velocity
of saccades to the relevant features is shown in blue, while
the saccades to irrelevant features is plotted in red.
showing longer fixations to relevant features. Alternatively,
slow saccades may precede longer fixations, in that
additional cognitive processing occurs during the eyes’
movements and the pause as information is gathered from
the stimulus. Beyond that, it is possible that saccade
velocities and fixation durations are informed by separable
systems, and they display some independence.
To test these possibilities, a Spearman ranked correlation
was conducted to investigate the relationship between
saccade velocities and fixation durations. A negative
correlation would indicate a trade-off between slow
saccades and longer fixations, a positive correlation would
suggest a common generator or a common motivator for
slow saccades and long fixations while the absence of a
correlation would suggest that both measures offer insight
into separate processes. The test reveals a weak, but
significant correlation between the two measures,
ρ(74178)=-0.01, p=0.004 although the very small ρ with the
large sample size suggests little practical significance.
Although the test indicates a relationship between the
measures, it’s clear that there is still a great deal of variance
to account for, and that it is possible that the measures are
reflecting different processes. It appears that both fixations
and saccades are important to explore in developing a robust
understanding of visual attention, at least in the context of a
learning task.

Of the recorded saccades, 12% were not directed toward
any of the three features and were excluded from analysis. A
linear mixed effect regression model was built to explore the
same variables as in Experiment 1 for their role in affecting
saccade velocity: Condition (C), Block (B), Relevance (R),
Block x Relevance (BxR), Fixation Order (FO) and Number
of Fixations (NF). The only difference between the structure
of this model and the one in Experiment 1 is the coding of
Relevance (R). Since, in Experiment 2, Feature 1 is the only
relevant feature, it alone is assigned an R value of 1.
Features 2 and 3 are assigned an R value of 0.
The resulting model suggests that saccade velocities are
influenced largely by Relevance (βR=0.88, t=29.13,
SE=0.03), Number of Fixations (β NF =.01, t=11.62,
SE=0.00), Block (βB=-0.09, t=-11.01, SE=0.01), and the
interaction between Block and Relevance (βBxR=-0.04,
t=5.85, SE=0.01), but negligibly by Condition (βC=0.04,
t=0.48, SE=0.09) and Order (βFO=0.00, t=0.08, SE=0.00).
The relatively strong influence of Relevance in predicting
saccade velocity suggests that the task relevance of a
saccade’s target is affecting how quickly the it is executed.
A Spearman Rank correlation was conducted between
saccade velocity and fixation duration to see if the two share
a similar relationship to the underlying variables identified
in the model above. The test failed to detect a relationship
between the two measures, ρ(37060)=-0.00, p=0.57. That is,
changes in saccade velocities are either unrelated to changes
in fixation durations, or there are underlying variables
linking the two that have yet to be explored.

Experiment 2: One Dimensional Categories
This is a simplified version of the category learning task,
wherein only two categories are determined by a single
feature. There are still three features on the stimulus, but
two of them serve only as distractors (Table 2). In having a
single feature, this experiment bridges more complicated
learning tasks (like Experiment 1) with simpler target-

2630

!

Table 2: Experiment 2 Category Structure
Category

Feature 1

Feature 2

Feature 3

A

1

1 or 0

0 or 1

B

0

0 or 1

1 or 0

Discussion
Through two experiments of varying complexity, we find
that that saccades to irrelevant items are faster than saccades
to goal-relevant targets. To complete the task in Experiment
1, participants had to use the information conveyed by two
equally important stimulus features. Saccades to these
features were slower than saccades directed to the irrelevant
distractor. In Experiment 2, only a single feature was
relevant for making a category decision, while there were
two irrelevant distractors. In both experiments, saccades
slow down over the course of learning, which may indicate
a decrease in the proportion of quick, reflexive saccades
relative to more purposeful eye movements.
These data begin to shed light on a more dynamic
relationship between participants’ developing understanding
of task relevance and the rapidity of saccades. Critically,
relevant items are learned over time, and as they are learned,
saccades directed their way travel more slowly to their
target. Also of note is that the saccades do slow over the
course of learning. This is especially evident in Experiment
2, where the model identifies an important interaction
between Feature Relevance and Block. The presence of this
interaction provides statistical support for the divergence of
saccade velocities based on the relevance of a feature.
Through inspection of Figure 3, it is apparent that the
saccades to irrelevant features remain rather consistent over
the course of learning, while saccades to the single relevant
feature drastically slow down as the experiment progresses.
The importance of this divergence is twofold: for one, it
provides evidence that the decrease in saccade velocity for
the relevant items is not simply a function of fatigue. If that
were the case, it would be expected that saccades to the
irrelevant items would become slower too. Additionally, it
suggests that increased knowledge of the category structure
yields slower saccades to relevant features overall, but also
incrementally as knowledge of the task increases (see
McColeman et al. 2014 for higher level measures such as
accuracy).
Experiment 1 paints a more complicated picture at first
glance. Again, saccades do slow down over the course of
learning, but saccades to both relevant and irrelevant items
appear to decrease in velocity. Even so, the findings support
an important influence of task relevance on saccade speed.
The failure to elicit a strong divergence is likely due to the
increased task complexity.
In Experiment 2, the participant simply has to execute a
saccade to a pre-determined location. It is possible that the
simplicity of this task evokes volitional saccades almost
exclusively to feature 1, since few saccades will be directed
to the known target after the rapid learning of the task
structure. In Experiment 1, however, there is an extra step in
that participants have to choose which of the two relevant
features are their initial target.
As has been reported previously (Chen, Meier et al.,
2013) participants typically select a pattern of eye

movements to deploy in the presence of multiple relevant
features, and carry this pattern over a number of trials.
Considering the feature relevance shown in Table 1, one
participant may opt to employ a Feature 2-Feature 1-Feature
3 pattern of eye movements to extract information; another
may gather information in a slightly different order: Feature
1-Feature 2-Feature 3. Both are equally good strategies,
since Feature 1 and Feature 2 are of equal relevance and
there is no reason to prefer one feature over the other.
However, having to make this choice about the initial
fixation may introduce some volatility into attentional
processing, and invite a few more reflexive (fast) saccades
than in the simpler Experiment 2. This study is an initial
examination of the influence of task complexity, and further
work will be necessary to flesh out the role of ordered
fixations and choosing between multiple, equally good
items to understand each factor’s influence on saccade
velocity.
It is important to note that these data differ somewhat
from other work investigating saccade velocities. For
instance, non-human primates saccade more quickly toward
rewarded locations (Takikawa et al., 2002; Chen, Hung,
Quinet & Kosek, 2013); however, the findings shown here
align with the previous contrast between volitional and
reflexive eye movements, wherein consciously controlled
saccades are understood to be slower than reflexive
saccades (Godijn & Theeuwes, 2002; van Zoest, Donk &
Theeuwes, 2004; Walker et al., 2000). There are a number
of differences in how tasks can be constructed to further
investigate saccades and how they change over learning. It
is possible that the primal reinforcement type of reward used
more commonly in non-human primate saccade tasks differs
from the more abstract reward that humans gather by
learning new information or achieving task goals.
These early data investigating the change in saccade
speed over learning provide motivation for further exploring
the properties of saccades to elucidate complexities in the
cognitive system. The evident dynamic interplay between
high level learning and saccade velocity shown here offers a
wide array of future research questions and possible
practical applications. The increasing prevalence of gazebased human computer interfacing in itself is an incentive to
maximize the utility of gaze data, and to do so,
understanding the relationship between the intention of an
observer and recorded saccade speed is of critical import.

Acknowledgements
Thank you to the members of the Cognitive Science
Laboratory for their ideas and contributions. Thank you
especially to Joe Thompson and Jordan Barnes for their
comments and Kim Meier for designing the stimuli used in
the studies in addition to providing feedback on an early
draft of this manuscript.

2631

References
Ahlstrom, C., Nystrom, M., Holmqvist, K., Fors, C.,
Sandberg, D., Anund, A., Kecklund, G., & Akerstedt, T.
(2013). Fit-for-duty test for estimation of drivers’
sleepiness level: Eye movements improve the sleep/wake
predictor. Transportation Research Part C(26), 20-32.
Bates, D., Sarkar, D. (2007). lme4: Linear mixed-effects
models using S4 classes. R package version 0.9975-12.
Blair, M. R., Watson, M. R., Walshe, R.C., & Maj, F. (2009).
Extremely selective attention: Eye-tracking studies on
dynamic attentional allocation to stimulus features.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 35(5), 1196-1206.
Chen, L. L., Hung, L. Y., Quinet, J., & Kosek, K. (2013).
Cognitive regulation of saccadic velocity by reward
prospect. The European Journal of Neuroscience, 38(3),
2434–44.
Chen, L., Meier K.M., Blair, M.R., Watson, M.R., Wood,
M.J.(2013). Temporal characteristics of overt attentional
behaviour during category learning. Attention Perception
& Psychophysics, 75(2), 244-256.
Cornwell, B., Mueller, S., Kaplan, R., Grillon, C. & Ernst,
M. (2012). Anxiety, a benefit and detriment to cognition:
Behavioral and magnetoencephalographic evidence from
a mixed-saccade task. Brain and Cognition, 78(3),
257-67.
Godijn, R., & Theeuwes, J. (2002). Programming of
endogenous and exogenous saccades: Evidence for a
competitive integration model. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 28(5),
1039–1054.
Hallett, P. E. (1978). Primary and secondary saccades to
goals defined by instructions. Vision Research, 18(10),
1279-96.
Matin, E. (1974). Saccadic suppression: A review and an
analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 81(12), 899-917.
Maddox, W., Filoteo, J., Hejl, K., & Ing, D. (2004).
Category number impacts rule-based but not informationintegration category learning: Further evidence for
dissociable category learning systems. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 30(1), 227-245.
McColeman, C., Barnes, J., Chen, L., Meier, K., Walshe, R.
& Blair, M. (2014). Learning induced changes in
attentional allocation during categorization: A sizable
catalog of attention change as measured by eye
movements. PLoS One, 9. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0083302Mirsky, J. B., Heuer, H. W., Jafari, A., Kramer, J.,
Schenk, A., Viskontas, I., Miller, B., & Boxer, A. (2011).
Anti-saccade performance predicts executive function and
brain structure in normal elders. Cognitive and Behavioral
Neurology, 24(2), 50-58.
Rehder, B., & Hoffman, A. B. (2005). Eyetracking and
selective attention in category learning. Cognitive
Psychology, 51(1), 1–41.

Roche, D. J. & King, A. C. (2010). Alcohol impairment of
saccadic and smooth pursuit eye movements: impact of
risk factors for alcohol dependence.Psychopharmacology,
212, 33-44.
Salvucci, D., Goldberg, J. (2000). Identifying fixations and
saccades in eye-tracking protocols. Proceedings of the
Symposium on Eye Tracking Research and Applications,
71-78.
Takikawa, Y., Kawagoe, R., Itoh, H., Nakahara, H. &
Hikosaka, O. (2002). Modulation of saccadic eye
movement by predicted reward outcome. Experimental
Brain Research, 142, 284-91.
van Zoest, W., Donk, M., & Theeuwes, J. (2004). The Role
of Stimulus-Driven and Goal-Driven Control in Saccadic
Visual Selection, 30(4), 746–759.
Walker, R., Walker, D. G., Husain, M., & Kennard, C.
(2000). Control of voluntary and reflexive saccades.
Experimental Brain Research, 130(4), 540–4.

2632

