UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Nativist Input Problem: Why Evolutionary Psychology Still Can’t Explain Human
Intelligence

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2785c3q1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Author
Huang, Linus Ta-Lun

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Nativist Input Problem:
Why Evolutionary Psychology Still Can’t Explain Human Intelligence

Linus Ta-Lun Huang (linusthuang@gmail.com)
Unit for the History and Philosophy of Science
University of Sydney, Australia

The nativist input problem is, briefly, a crippling limitation
to the range of contexts in which evolutionary psychology
can handle information routing reliably. I argue that it
undermines successful self-assembly required for these
models to explain human flexibility, highlighting nativism
as one (perhaps, the most) problematic commitment of
evolutionary psychology.
I begin (section 2) by introducing Evolutionary
Psychology, focusing on the often-ignored epistemic
commitments. Section 3 briefly explicates the capacity of
human flexibility and points out a substantial explanatory
gap in some recent models– there is no demonstration that
interaction of modules solves novel problems. On the
contrary, section 4 argues that while coordinating modules
to solve novel problems requires reliable information
routing in novel contexts, Evolutionary Psychological
models that commit to the strongest version of nativism lack
such capacity. Section 5 expands the argument against
Evolutionary Psychological models that commit to a weaker
version of nativism.
It shows that learning, while
compatible with a weaker version of nativism, will not help
with the nativist input problem. One caveat: the strategy of
this paper is to prove evolutionary psychology wrong on its
own ground. So, I accept several of its potentially
problematic assumptions for the sake of argument.

Abstract
One distinctive feature of human intelligence is a high level
of flexibility for problem-solving. Human thought is flexible
roughly in the sense that , "there is no end to the kinds of
problems human reason can deal with" (Horgan & Tienson,
1996). However, no theory to date has adequately explained
such unique capacity. Recently, evolutionary psychologists
have confronted this challenge by building models that have
the potential to generate human flexibility via interaction of
modules and learning (Barrett, 2005; Carruthers, 2006b;
Sperber & Hirschfeld, 2006; Sperber, 1994). The key idea is
that our cognitive system can learn to self-assemble, out of
our sophisticated adaptive toolbox, new mechanisms that
solve significantly novel problems. In this paper, I identify a
serious information routing problem, “the nativist input
problem”, distinct from the a priori and really real input
problems previously launched against evolutionary
psychology by Fodor (2000) and subsequently solved
(Barrett, 2005; Pinker, 2005). The nativist input problem is,
briefly, a crippling limitation to the range of contexts in
which evolutionary psychology can handle information
routing reliably. I argue that it undermines successful selfassembly required for these models to explain human
flexibility, highlighting nativism as one of the most
problematic commitments of evolutionary psychology.
Keywords: Evolutionary Psychology; Nativism; Carruthers;
Human Intelligence; Flexibility; Input Problem; Information
Routing

2. Evolutionary Psychology

1. Introduction
One distinctive feature of human intelligence is a high level
of flexibility at the types of problems it is capable of
solving. Human thought is flexible roughly in the sense that
, "there is no end to the kinds of problems human reason can
deal with" (Horgan & Tienson, 1996). However, no theory to
date has adequately explained such unique capacity.
Recently, evolutionary psychologists have confronted this
challenge by building models that has the potential to
generate human flexibility via interaction of modules and
learning (Barrett, 2005; Carruthers, 2006b; Sperber &
Hirschfeld, 2006; Sperber, 1994). The key idea is our
cognitive system can learn to self-assemble, out of our
sophisticated adaptive toolkit, new mechanisms that solve
particular novel problems. In this paper, I argue that these
models fail because, per their nativist commitments, there is
no resource for overcoming an important type of
information routing problem—the “nativist input problem”. 1

Evolutionary psychology can be understood in the narrow
and wide senses. In the wide sense, it amounts to a branch
of cognitive science that takes understanding the etiology of
mind to be an integral part of a complete psychology and
employs an evolutionary approach in its investigation of
cognitive processes (Jeffares & Sterelny, 2012). The target
of this paper however is evolutionary psychology in the
narrow sense. Evolutionary psychology in the narrow sense
(aka, Evolutionary Psychology) has nativism as one of its
additional commitments (Barkow, Cosmides, & Tooby,
1995; Pinker, 1997)
The central thesis of Evolutionary Psychology is the
massive modularity hypothesis, according to which the
human cognitive system is composed of a large number of
Darwinian modules exclusively. Understood architecturally,
Darwinian modules are innate, domain-specific, and
informationally encapsulated computational mechanisms.
More importantly, a Darwinian module, characterized in

1
The nativist input problem is distinct from the a priori and
really real input problems (Fodor, 2000), both of which, I think,

have been solved (Barrett, 2005; Pinker, 2005). I’ll discuss them
briefly in section 4.

631

epistemic terms, implements exclusively innate, domainspecific, heuristics (aka, Darwinian heuristics) (Carruthers,
2006a). I will use Darwinian modules and Darwinian
heuristics interchangeably in the rest of the paper.
Heuristics are principles or algorithms for information
processing that, if applied correctly without performance
errors, will provide (1) satisficing solutions, (2) in selective
contexts, (3) within the constraint of tractable computation.
Consider the “Do-what-the-majority-do heuristic”: If you
see the majority of your peers display a behavior, engage in
the same behavior (Gigerenzer, 2006). Studies have reported
such imitation behaviors in animals and humans. For
instance, female guppies base their mate choice on the
preferences of other female guppies (Dugatkin, 1992). This
heuristic provides satisficing solution as it produces
“decision” good enough, often enough, but not necessarily
optimal or best. Also, it works reliably (in a satisficing
sense) only in some contexts and becomes unreliable in
other contexts. “…a heuristic is not good or bad, rational or
irrational per se, but only relative to an environment”
(Gigerenzer, 2006).
Some qualifications are necessary here. In the following,
when I describe a heuristic being reliable without further
qualification, I mean “reliable in a satisficing sense, that is,
good enough, often enough according to some particular
standard”. Also, I use the term ‘context’ technically to refer
to the information structure of some particular combination
of a cognitive task and its embedding environment. For
example, the mate selection task in a guppie’s natural
environment has a distinctive information structure and
counts as one distinctive context. Note that it is a delicate
issue concerning the individuation of context types. In order
to capture the unique feature of human flexibility to solve
problems in a wide range of novel contexts, we need to
adopt a coarse-grained approach to individuation—that is,
only contexts that differ significantly in terms of their
information structures would count as different types of
contexts. This is to avoid trivializing the unique capacity of
human flexibility when one adopt a fine-grained approach
and count a context that only bears a minor difference as
novel.
Finally, in a human cognitive system, assessing all
relevant information to solve a typical nondemonstrative
reasoning task, i.e., abductive reasoning, requires intractable
computation (Fodor, 2000). A computational process is
tractable, roughly, if it does not require more time and
resources than what a normal human being can be expected
to possess for completing a task. Heuristics are
computationally tractable as they do not assess all taskrelevant information. Importantly, the tractability of
heuristic is connected to its context-dependent, satisficing
performance. Because a heuristic has built-in “knowledge”
about some contexts, it “knows” certain relevant
information can be approximated or ignored without
significant loss in performance in those contexts. The
female guppie’s “decision” is adaptive, but far from optimal
in the sense of allowing it to find the best mate. In addition,

this fast and frugal heuristic only works in an environment
that is relatively stable for reliable social information to
emerge (Boyd & Richerson, 1988).
Information encapsulation, at its core, is a restriction on
the range of information a mechanism can use as resource
when performing tasks. A mechanism is encapsulated if it
cannot be influenced by most of the relevant information
held in the mind during the process of a task (Carruthers,
2006b). 2 In fact, information encapsulation is one way of
implementing heuristics in a computational mechanism.
Domain-specificity is a proper-function concept in
evolutionary psychology (Tooby & Cosmides, 1995). A
mechanism/heuristic is domain-specific if it is designed
(e.g., by evolution) to solve problems in a limited range of
contexts. Note that this definition is distinct from Fodor’s
original conception of domain-specificity, which refers to a
limitation on the types of representations acceptable as
inputs (Fodor, 1983).
The heuristic employed by female guppies is domainspecific if it is designed by evolution to solve mate selection
problem in their natural environment. Relatedly,
evolutionary psychologists believe Darwinian modules are
adaptions produced by natural selection to solve adaptive
problems (Tooby & Cosmides, 1995). Adaptive problems
are recurrent problems whose solution promotes fitness
directly or indirectly in the environment of evolutionary
adaption (EEA) in pre-human and early human history, such
as Pleistocene.
Note that there are two distinct types of contextspecificity discussed so far. A Darwinian heuristic has
reliable performance only in some particular types of
contexts, and it has a proper function (i.e., it is designed by
evolution) to solve some small range of particular adaptive
problems. While both proper function and adaptive problem
are causal-historical concepts (i.e., roughly, whether a
particular problem is an adaptive problem depends on its
causal-historical
property),
the
context-dependent
performance is not (i.e., the individuation of contexts, when
evaluating a heuristic’s context-dependent performance,
does not rely on causal-historical property). This has an
important complication: a context that has the same
information structure as an adaptive problem may not be
that adaptive problem because it does not have the same
causal-historical property, i.e., being a particular type of
significant problem that drives human evolution in
Pleistocene. In the following, I shall call all contexts that
have the same information structures as some adaptive
problems “adaptive contexts”.
Finally, Darwinian modules are innate in the sense that,
roughly, they are not the result of learning (Samuels, 2002,
2009). We should note that the concept of Darwinian
module defined so far is one that accords with the strongest
2
It remains debatable how the restriction on information has to
be implemented for a mechanism to qualify as encapsulated
(Samuels, 2006). Here, I assume a liberal notion most charitable to
evolutionary psychology.

632

version of nativism. It is fair to say that few Evolutionary
Psychologists adhere to such an unreasonable view of
nativism now. However, I find it instructional to start with
the argument against the strongest version of Evolutionary
Psychology (Section 4) and modify the argument to address
the more moderate and reasonable ones (Section 5), and it is
the strategy this paper will follow.
In sum, evolutionary psychologists conceive of human
mind as composed exclusively of Darwinian modules, that
is, innate and informationally encapsulated computational
mechanisms that are designed to solve some limited range
of adaptive problems.

Figure 1 A simplified representation of the massive modular
architecture of human mind. (Carruthers, 2006b)

3. The Puzzle, Solution, and Explanatory Gap
The puzzle of human flexibility, simply put, is the question
of how a non-magical, purely mechanistic system, i.e., our
cognitive system, can produce satisficing solutions in a wide
range of adaptive and novel (i.e., non-adaptive) contexts.
Here, I take it as a prima facie fact that we can solve
problems in a wide range of novel contexts. 3 For example,
Antarctica excursion is possible because we are capable of
devising satisficing solutions in an environment so different
from the environment we evolved that evolution cannot
prepare our Pleistocene ancestors for. Some evolutionary
psychologists falsely believe the puzzle is solved simply
through massive modularity hypothesis, that human beings
are "flexible ........ because their minds contain so many
different modules" (Pinker, 1995, p. 410). Obviously, the
puzzle remain unanswered because the fact that our mind‘s
capacity of problem-solving in a massive numbers of
adaptive contexts does not explain problem-solving in novel
contexts. Additional explanatory steps need to be taken.
Here is where some recent models of evolutionary
psychology come in (Barrett, 2005; Carruthers, 2006b;
Sperber & Hirschfeld, 2006; Sperber, 1994). They aim to
show that interactions of Darwinian modules can generate
human flexibility. Without doing full justice to Carruther’s
original and complex account, I will summarize its key
features and point out incorporated contributions from other
authors:
1. Human mind is constituted by a massive numbers of
perceptual, motor, and central (i.e., belief-generating,
desire-generating, and practical reasoning) modules (Figure
1).
2. Each module has a recognition front-end, a mechanism
that identifies representations that fit its triggering
conditions. Although each module is designed to process
certain types of representations (its proper input domain), it
will process any representations that fit its triggering
conditions (its actual input domain) (Sperber & Hirschfeld,
2006; Sperber, 1994).

3. There is a common blackboard structure through which
perceptual information is broadcast to belief-generating and
desire-generating modules. If a representation satisfies the
triggering conditions of a module, the module will be
activated to process it. If there are multiple representations
meeting the condition of a particular module, they compete
to become inputs to the module. Other representations may
also modulate the module’s activities at the same time, like
enzymes interacting and influencing the production of
proteins in the cells (Barrett, 2005). Similarly, beliefgenerating and desire-generating modules compete to send
information to practical reasoning modules, which in turn
compete for control of motor modules (Figure 2). In fact,
the blackboard structure, the recognition front-ends, and the
competition/cooperation of modules work together as a softassembled information routing module (Clark, 1998, p. 42).

Figure 2 A possible implementation of the blackboard
structure (Barrett, 2005).
4. When human beings engage in problem-solving, some
relevant motor plan is activated in response to demand of
the problem. This results in the broadcasting of it efferent
copy, that is, representations of what would be perceived as
a result of the relevant actions. The efferent copy is
processed by belief- and desire-generating modules to
determine whether the problem can be solved through
performing the action.
5. If the problem can be solved through performing the
action, the motor plan will be executed.

See (Potts, 1996; Richerson & Boyd, 2012; Sterelny, 2006,
2012) for discussion on how contemporary problems differ
substantially in terms of information structure from adaptive
problems.
3

633

6. If otherwise, some variation may be generated,
randomly or through some heuristic processes, in various
modules to produce a different motor plan— a type of trialand-error reinforcement learning. (I will put this point and
the relevant learning issue aside until section 5.)
7. The step 4-6 can be repeated until a satisfying solution
emerges or until the agent gives up (Figure 1).

(2) Such series of information processing is constituted
by information passing through the right (serial, parallel, or
cyclical) sequences of modules.
(3) Hence, it is important that routing modules involved
in the series ensure that information is routed to the right
downstream modules at each step. 5
(4) However, evolutionary psychology cannot handle
information routing in a wide range of novel contexts—i.e.,
the nativist input problem.
(C) As a result, it cannot reliably provide solution in a
wide range of novel contexts.

This account indeed looks plausible. The recognition
front-end explains how human mind can process novel
representations. The soft-assembled routing module allows
wider information accessibility and potentially more flexible
information routing. The cycles of mental operation with
learning capacity promises to produce novel solutions.
However, the account remains incomplete because (1) the
ability to process novel representations does not entail the
ability to process them successfully; (2) the soft-assembled
routing modules are adaptations and implements rather
inflexible Darwinian heuristics 4; most importantly, there is a
significant explanatory gap: (3) while cycles of interactions
among Darwinian modules can no doubt produce some
solutions, we have no reason to believe that the interaction
is capable of producing satisficing solutions in novel
contexts—let me call this explanatory gap the
“novel/adaptive gap”. Without a detailed story linking this
gap, the claim that interactions produce flexibility is not so
much an explanation as a statement of the problem given the
commitments of evolutionary psychology. I suspect
Carruthers is aware of it himself:

Of course, the nativist input problem (premise 4) is the
controversial one here. Various input problems have been
raised (Fodor, 1983, 2000, 2008) and solved (Barrett, 2005;
Pinker, 2005). What makes the nativist input problem
different? Here, I demonstrate that the nativist input
problem is a distinctive and substantial problem, and unlike
previous versions of input problems, one that evolutionary
psychology has no resource to overcome:
Because heuristics are not universal machines but have
context-dependent performance,
(1) To solve nondemonstrative reasoning tasks reliably
with heuristics, an additional “routing” decision is required
to figure out the identity of the present context so that the
appropriate heuristic can be selected to perform the task
(Fodor, 2000, p. 44).
The significance of premise (1) is often missed because
evolutionary psychologists often take for granted that
individuating contexts is rather unproblematic. For example,
Carruthers suggests “heuristics ‘[could] be cued
automatically by particular subject matters’; but he says
nothing about how ‘subject matters’ might be
individuated…” (Fodor, 2008, p. 118). In fact,
(2) The routing decision is usually also a species of
nondemonstrative reasoning (Fodor, 2000, p. 43).
Ignoring the premise (2) has dire consequence because,
(3) For evolutionary psychologists, all nondemonstrative
reasoning, including the routing decision, is approximated
by Darwinian heuristic, but
(4) Darwinian heuristics cannot reliably perform
nondemonstrative reasoning in a wide range of novel
contexts.
As we discussed earlier, Darwinian heuristics are innate
domain-specific heuristics that are designed to solve
particular adaptive problems. Proper function does not entail
actual performance: That a Darwinian heuristic has the
proper function for solving a particular adaptive problem
does not imply or guarantee that its actual performance is
reliable in the corresponding adaptive context and unreliable
otherwise. Yet, given a strong and consistent evolutionary
force (i.e., natural selection), its actual performance should

…my claim isn’t really that [the puzzle of flexibility]
has now been solved. It is rather that there is
some reason to hope that it can be solved, and
that we can at least begin to understand human
cognitive processes in massively modular terms.
(Carruthers, 2003, p. 520)

4. The Nativist Input Problem
In this section, I argue that evolutionary psychology, due to
the nativist input problem, has no theoretical resource to
bridge the novel/adaptive gap. I first lay out the main
argument, and then provide additional support for its most
crucial premise:
(1) For a set of Darwinian modules to provide a
satisficing solution in a novel context, their interactions
must amount to a series of information processing that result
in a satisficing solution.
4

The fact that enzyme model is a heuristic solution is not made
clear in Barrett’s original paper, especially the important feature of
context-dependent performance. As Barrett puts it, “One can have
an enzymatic system…in which only the ‘correct’ reactions are
catalyzed” (Barrett, 2005, p. 270), implying enzymatic system is
reliable across all contexts. However, cellular enzymes are only
reliable in the cellular environment it is designed for and similarly
for enzymatic routing mechanisms.

5

I will, for the sake of argument, assume that humans have all
the necessary building blocks (Darwinian non-routing modules) to
assemble mechanisms for novel problems we can solve.

634

track its proper function. That is, Darwinian modules have
competence for reliable performance in their specialized
adaptive contexts. However, natural selection is not a
reliable force in producing competence for reliable
performance outside of adaptive contexts; as a result, we
cannot expect Darwinian modules to possess competence
for reliable performance in a wide range of novel contexts.
As a result,
(C) Evolutionary psychology cannot handle information
routing in a wide range of novel contexts.

by establishing the following features in the learning
mechanism responsible for its acquisition:
(a) The learning mechanism contains substantial innate
domain-specific information.
The PoSA usually establishes this by showing that: based
on the observation, information in a learner’s environment is
inadequate to account for the acquired trait, or even if
adequate, the subject has insufficient time to acquire
necessary information to develop the trait (Margolis &
Laurence, 2012, p. 6). Because the input is inadequate, what
is missing has to be made up somewhere—potentially by
innate information in the learning mechanism. But PoSA
does not merely establish what is learned goes beyond what
is experienced. It also shows that,
(b) Some of the innate domain-specific information acts
as strong bias or constraint in the learning process (e.g., in
hypothesis generation).
This feature is established by showing what is learned
surpasses what is experienced in a way that cannot be
accounted for without these innate bias and constraint,
because “… the correct hypotheses are not at all the most
natural ones for an unbiased learner…. Indeed, there are
numerous alternatives that would be more natural to such a
learner but that would lead the learner astray” (Margolis &
Laurence, 2012, p. 8). Finally, because of the abundant
domain-specific innate information, it suggests that:
(c) This mechanism has a fairly limited and constrained
learning capacity.
Now, it is clear why PoSA supports nativism—it gives
innate information and constraint a much more substantial
role over learning in the acquisition of the particular trait.
So, while both nativists and anti-nativists take innate
constraints and experiences as determinants of the learning
outcome, i.e., the acquired trait, only nativists believe that
innate constraints, rather than experiences, are the more
powerful determinants of the learning outcome. Intuitively,
we can think of all possible learning outcomes in a domain
as organized in a multi-dimensional traits space.
Experiences direct the learning trajectory, while innate
constraints constitute sloped boundaries surrounding areas
in the space, facilitating the trajectory into areas within the
boundary while impeding it from going beyond.
Importantly, nativism requires the innate constraints to form
a strong boundary, surrounding a relatively small area and
impeding learning trajectory from going beyond. Take one
influential nativist theory in linguistics as an example:
Chomsky (1975) argues that principles of Universal
Grammar (UG) are innately represented in the human
language faculty and interact with each children’s linguistic
experiences to determine the specific language the child will
acquire. Significantly, UG restricts the range of possible
languages the child can acquire by constraining the range of
linguistic hypotheses available for confirmation by
experiences. So, only linguistic hypotheses that lied within
the boundary of UG could ever be confirmed and acquired,
even if the child were exposed to some hypothetic language

The nativist input problem is distinct from the a priori
input problem because it is not concerned about the limiting
architectural features of modules, i.e., informational
encapsulation and limited input domain (Fodor, 2000, p.
72). 6 It is also distinct from the really real input problem,
which criticizes the epistemic property of heuristics in
general—that they do not have reliable performance in all
contexts (Fodor, 2000, p. 77). 7 Instead, the nativist input
problem criticizes the epistemic property of Darwinian
heuristics in particular—they cannot have reliable
performance in a wide range of novel contexts.

5. How About Learning?
So far, I’ve ignored the learning issue for the sake of
simpler argument presentation. Naturally, it invites a
powerful and legitimate objection: The nativist input
problem attacks a straw man. Evolutionary psychology,
though a nativist program, is compatible with learning. In
fact, many evolutionary psychologists would happily
acknowledge that, “most innate cognitive modules are
domain-specific learning mechanisms that generate the
working modules of acquired cognitive competence”
(Sperber, 2005, p. 57). So, a Darwinian learning module can
acquire the necessary competence for routing information in
a wide range of novel contexts. In this section, I show that
the kind of learning evolutionary psychologists need is not
the kind of learning they can have. The nativist input
problem remains.
Both nativists and empiricists agree that through a
lifetime of development, we come to acquire a large
numbers of psychological traits. What they disagree about is
“the character of the psychological systems that underlie the
acquisition of psychological traits” (Margolis & Laurence,
2012, p. 3). So, what kind of learning mechanism are
nativists committed to? We can answer this question by
looking into the central argument for nativism, the poverty
of stimulus argument (PoSA) (Samuels, 2002, p. 237).
PoSA supports nativism for a particular psychological trait
6

I deliberately define informational encapsulation liberally to be
compatible with the solution to the a priori input problem—an
access-general, process-specific routing mechanism (Barrett,
2005).
7
As Pinker (2005) points out, this criticism does not really
undermine evolutionary psychology because actual human
performance is in fact not reliable in all context.

635

the structure of which differed significantly from all
possible human languages.
This is bad news for Evolutionary Psychologists.
Although they can incorporate learning into their models
(e.g., step 6 in Carruthers’ account), it has to be highly
constrained by innate domain-specific information, in our
case, built in by evolution because it facilitates acquiring
“knowledge” for reliable information routing in the EEA.
As a result, the innate constraints should form a strong
boundary in the trait space, surrounding a small area
containing the knowledge for reliable information routing in
adaptive contexts. As adaptive and novel contexts have very
different information structures, knowledge required for one
is very different from that for the other. That is, they should
locate relatively far away from each other in the traits space,
and strong innate constraints that facilitate the acquisition of
one are likely to prevent the acquisition of the other. In fact,
claiming that a learning mechanism can acquire the
knowledge necessary for a wide range of novel contexts is
equivalent to denying the existence of strong innate
constraints
and
therefore,
nativism—something
Evolutionary Psychologists cannot afford to do.
Perhaps, they can bite the bullet and claim that all
contemporary contexts are really the same as, or very
similar to, some adaptive contexts. So, the routing
knowledge to be acquired falls within the boundary of the
strong innate constraints. However, such move remains
post-hoc until independent empirical supports for the
similarity of the information structures of adaptive and
contemporary contexts are provided. Give an example of
what this would look like to make the point sink—how
unlikely it is. In short, resorting to learning will not solve
the nativist input problem because nativist learning cannot
help Darwinian modules acquire competence for
information routing in a wide range of novel contexts.

Carruthers, P. (2006a). The Architecture of the Mind.
Oxford University Press, USA.
Carruthers, P. (2006b). Simple heuristics meet massive
modularity. The innate mind. Culture and cognition, 2,
181–198.
Clark, A. (1998). Being there: Putting brain, body, and
world together again. The MIT Press.
Dugatkin, L. A. (1992). Sexual Selection and Imitation:
Females Copy the Mate Choice of Others. The American
Naturalist, 139(6), 1384–1389. doi:10.2307/2462347
Fodor, J. A. (1983). The Modularity of Mind (Vol. 341).
MIT press Cambridge, MA.
Fodor, J. A. (2000). The mind doesn’t work that way: The
scope and limits of computational psychology. The MIT
Press.
Fodor, J. A. (2008). LOT 2: The language of thought
revisited. Oxford University Press, USA.
Gigerenzer, G. (2006). Bounded and rational. Contemporary
debates in cognitive science, 7, 115–133.
Horgan, T. E., & Tienson, J. (1996). Connectionism and the
Philosophy of Psychology. The MIT Press.
Margolis, E., & Laurence, S. (2012). In defense of nativism.
Philosophical Studies. doi:10.1007/s11098-012-9972-x
Pinker, S. (1995). The language instinct: The new science of
language and mind (Vol. 7529). ePenguin.
Pinker, S. (2005). So how does the mind work? Mind &
Language, 20(1), 1–24.
Potts, R. (1996). Humanity’s descent: the consequences of
ecological instability. Morrow.
Richerson, P. J., & Boyd, R. (2012). Rethinking
Paleoanthropology: A World Queerer Than We
Supposed. In G. Hatfield & H. Pittman (Eds.), Evolution
of Mind, Brain, and Culture. University of Pennsylvania
Press.
Samuels, R. (2002). Nativism in cognitive science. Mind &
Language, 17(3), 233–265.
Samuels, R. (2006). Is the human mind massively modular.
Contemporary debates in cognitive science, ed. RJ
Stainton, 37–56.
Samuels, R. (2009). Nativism. In P. Calvo & J. Symons
(Eds.), The Routledge Companion to Philosophy of
Psychology. Taylor & Francis.
Sperber, D. (1994). The modularity of thought and the
epidemiology of representations.
Sperber, D. (2005). Modularity and Relevance. The innate
mind: Structure and contents, 1, 53.
Sperber, D., & Hirschfeld, L. (2006). Culture and
modularity. The innate mind: Culture and cognition, 2,
149–164.
Sterelny, K. (2006). Cognitive load and human decision, or,
three ways of rolling the rock up hill. The innate mind, 2,
218–233.
Sterelny, K. (2012). The Evolved Apprentice: How
Evolution Made Humans Unique. A Bradford Book.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1995). Foreword. In
Mindblindness: As Essay on Autism and Theory of Mind
(pp. xi–xviii). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Conclusion
Evolutionary psychologists seek to explain human
flexibility with models that allow interaction of modules to
self-assemble new mechanisms that can solve a wide range
of novel problems. However, even a sophisticated adaptive
toolkit needs to be cleverly assembled to be of any use.
These models, due to their nativist commitments, cannot
acquire the necessary competence for intelligent selfassembly in order to bridge the novel/adaptive gap. The
nativist input problem is why evolutionary psychology still
cannot explain human intelligence.

References
Barrett, H. C. (2005). Enzymatic computation and cognitive
modularity. Mind & language, 20(3), 259–287.
Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. J. (1988). Culture and the
evolutionary process. University of Chicago Press.
Carruthers, P. (2003). On Fodor’s Problem. Mind &
Language, 18(5), 502–523. doi:10.1111/1468-0017.00240

636

