UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Difference-Detection in Learning Contrastive Categories

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7105k5q0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Smith, Linsey
Gentner, Dedre

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Difference-Detection in Learning Contrastive Categories
Linsey A. Smith (linsey@u.northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208 USA
Abstract
Prior research has found that comparison fosters abstraction
and transfer of concepts (e.g., categories, solution methods).
These learning benefits are often explained by virtue of
comparison’s ability to highlight common relational structure
between cases. Here we explore the role of comparison in
identifying critical differences. Participants compared
contrastive cases, listed differences between them, and
completed a classification task. We found that carrying out a
structural alignment prior to listing differences influenced the
kinds of differences people noticed. Further, the kinds of
differences people noticed predicted their subsequent
classification performance.
Keywords: Analogy; structural alignment; comparison;
contrast; learning

Introduction
Comparison has been shown to lead to learning in a
number of different realms for both children and adults.
Comparing cases facilitates transfer and problem-solving in
adults (e.g., Catrambone & Holyoak, 1989; Gentner,
Loewenstein, Thompson, & Forbus, 2009; Gick & Holyoak,
1983). Comparison also fosters children’s learning of
relational categories (Gentner, Anggoro & Klibanoff, 2011)
and relational language (Childers, 2011; Gentner & Namy,
2006; Haryu, Imai & Uchida, 2011). A recent meta-analysis
by Alfieri et al., (2013) found that the use of comparison in
classrooms is a strong predictor of learning gains.
How do these benefits come about? According to
structure-mapping theory (Gentner, 1983), when learners
compare two cases, they generate a structural alignment
between the two representations. This fosters learning in at
least three ways (Gentner, 2010; Gentner & Markman,
1997). First, it increases the salience of their common
structure; second, it invites inferences from one case to the
other; and, third, it highlights alignable differences—
differences connected to the common structure.
Much of the research showing positive effects of
comparison on learning has focused on its effects in
abstracting commonalities and inviting inferences (e.g.,
Catrambone & Holyoak, 1989; Gentner et al, 2009).
However, there is mounting evidence that comparison can
aid in differentiation as well as in abstraction. For example,
comparing two “near-miss” cases (McClure, Friedman, &
Forbus, 2010), which are identical except for a crucial
structural difference, improves learning (e.g., Gick &

1473

Paterson, 1992). Comparison also fosters discrimination
between more complex cases, such as alternative solution
methods (Rittle-Johnson & Star, 2009), easily confusable
concepts (e.g., Day, Goldstone & Hills, 2010; VanderStoep
& Seifert, 1993), and category exemplars vs. non-exemplars
(Gick & Paterson, 1992; Kok, de Bruin, Robben, & van
Merriënboer, 2012; Kurtz & Gentner, 2013). For example,
Day et al. (2010) found that having middle-school students
contrast positive and negative feedback systems could
improve classification of new examples. An open question is
how exactly the observed learning effects come about in
contrastive case comparisons. These findings underscore the
benefit of contrastive cases in learning. Many of these
studies utilize pairs that are highly similar except for the
crucial difference. Such pairs have two advantages. First,
they are ‘self-aligning”—that is, they are extremely easy to
align, even for children and novices. Second, once aligned,
they have few or no competing alignable differences besides
the key intended difference. For example, Kurtz and Gentner
(2013) found that people could identify an error in a skeleton
faster if they compared it with a highly alignable correct
example than if they compared it with the same correct
example mirror-reversed (and thus less perceptually
alignable).
But not all important distinctions can be illustrated with
very close ‘near-miss’ pairs. Many important category
distinctions involve moderate similarity, with some overlap
and many differences. Here we ask what kinds of learning
processes best facilitate learning in these more complex
cases, in which pairs from different categories are only
moderately similar—not so close as to be “self-aligning.”
Because structural alignment highlights not only
commonalities but also alignable differences, we propose
that explicitly encouraging comparison between members of
the two categories will facilitate noticing differences and
thereby facilitate learning the category distinction.
Prior work has shown a relationship between structural
alignment and difference-detection (e.g., Gentner & Gunn,
2001; Sagi et al., 2012) and between comparing contrastive
cases and transfer (e.g., Day, Goldstone, & Hills, 2010;
Rittle-Johnson & Star, 2009); our goal is to clarify the
relationships between these phenomena. Thus, the current
study examines the connections between structural
alignment, difference-detection, and subsequent ability to
classify new examples of the two categories.
We chose positive and negative feedback systems as our

domain of inquiry. These two kinds of systems are of wide
importance across both physical and social domains, yet
prior work suggests that these causal structures are not
salient, even to college students (Rottmann, Gentner, &
Goldwater, 2012; see also Day et al., 2010). These categories
make an ideal testing ground because they share significant
common structure as well as significant differences. As
feedback systems, they are both causal systems that share the
commonality that both are causal systems in which part of
the output is returned to serve as input to the same system.
Thus in both cases the output ultimately re-affects itself.
These two kinds of systems also differ in a fundamental
way: In positive feedback the output increases the input; this
in turn produces a greater output. This results in a cycle of
increasing magnitude of effect. In negative feedback, the
output reduces the input. Thus if the input is increased, this
will increase the output, which will decrease the subsequent
input. This results in a cycle that stabilizes the system.
In our study, participants were given two contrastive
cases—a positive feedback case and a negative feedback
case, exemplified in Table 1. Although the two cases were
always from the same domain, they differed in many ways
beyond the positive-vs.-negative feedback distinction. For
example, the two cases in Table 1 involve different
hormones, and they differ in that one concerns healthy cells
and the other, cancer cells. Participants were told that one of
the cases was an example of “System A” and the other, of
“System B.” Participants listed differences between them
and went on to complete a transfer task in which they had to
classify examples into these two systems. The key
manipulation was that half the participants were asked to list
commonalities before listing differences. Then participants
went on to carry out a classification task in which they had
to decide whether new phenomena were exemplars of
System A or System B—that is, of positive vs. negative
feedback.
We assume, based on prior research, that listing
commonalities will induce people to carry out a structural
alignment between the two cases, and that this will lead them
to focus on the maximal common relational structure—
namely, that both are causal systems and that in both of
them, the output is ‘fed back’ into the system. We
hypothesize that structurally aligning the two cases will lead
people to notice alignable differences connected to this
causal structure—leading to greater likelihood of noticing
the key difference between positive and negative feedback.
We further predict that people who have noticed a key
difference will be better able to classify further phenomena
as positive versus negative feedback systems than those who
have not.
Thus, our hypotheses are (1) that people who list
commonalities before they list differences will be more
likely to produce key differences than those who simply list
differences; and (2) that listing key differences between the
study pair of exemplars will be causally related to better
performance on the classification task.
The first hypothesis—that people who list commonalities

1474

and who therefore carry out a structural alignment between
the cases) will be more likely to notice the key alignable
difference than those who do not—has some support from
prior findings. Gentner and Gunn (2001) found that people
were more likely to list a difference (typically, an alignable
difference) between a pair of concepts if they had previously
listed commonalities for that pair. More to the point, Kurtz,
Miao, & Gentner (2001) gave people two physics scenarios
and varied the level of comparison intensity that participants
were asked to engage in—from separate descriptions (no
comparison) to similarity ratings (shallow comparison) to
writing out commonalities and stating correspondences
(intensive comparison), Then participants were given both
scenarios and asked to state a difference between them.
People were more likely to list an important alignable
difference—that is, one that was related to the key causal
commonality (heat flow)—if they had engaged in more
intensive comparison. These results lend support for the
prediction that inducing participants to list commonalities
will foster noticing key alignable differences.
However our second hypothesis—that participants who
list key differences will perform better on the classification
task—needs some unpacking. A link between difference
detection and later classification performance could come
about in at least two ways. One possibility—the one we
favor—is that detecting a key difference is causally related
to learning and transfer to the classification task. But an
alternate possibility is that identifying a key difference is
simply diagnostic of having achieved a structural
alignment—better alignment (as prompted by a commonality
task) leads both to better difference-detection and to better
transfer. To this end, we test whether difference-detection
mediates the link between structural alignment
(commonality listing) and classification task performance.
Finding this mediation effect will provide strong support for
a causal link between difference-detection and
discrimination learning.

Experiment
Participants were presented with two contrastive cases, listed
any differences they noticed between them, then completed a
classification task where they had to identify new cases as
either examples of positive or negative feedback.

Participants
152 participants were recruited through Amazon Mechanical
Turk. Participants were all located in the United States and
appeared to be fluent English speakers. The task required 1520 minutes.

Materials and Design
Difference Listing Task Each participant was randomly
assigned to one of two conditions: Explicit Comparison or
Control. In the Control condition, participants were asked to
“Write a difference between System A and System B (feel
free to list more than one if you choose).” In the Explicit
Comparison condition, participants were invited to compare

the cases (“Write out any important similarities between
System A and System B”) before they listed differences. The
experiment was presented within the Qualtrics interface.
Contrastive Cases Examples of positive and negative
feedback were drawn from four domains: ecology,
economics, engineering, and physiology. The two feedback
cases from physiology are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Sample positive (System A) and negative (System
B) feedback passages, from the physiology domain
System A
When a tumor grows, cancerous cells manufacture excess
growth hormones. These hormones send a signal that
causes the body to increase production of cancer cells. This
increase in cancer cells leads to a further increase in
growth hormones. This in turn leads the body to produce
even more cancer cells, which leads to an even higher
concentration of growth hormones. The further increase in
growth hormones encourages additional proliferation of
cancer cells.
System B
In normal cell proliferation, healthy cells release growth
inhibitory factors—chemicals that tell the body to reduce
the rate of cell growth. As the body produces more cells, the
concentration of growth inhibitory chemicals in the body
increases. Consequently, the body begins to produce fewer
new cells. With fewer new cells being produced, there is a
reduction in the amount of inhibitory chemicals produced.
Once again, cell production begins to increase.
Participants received two examples from a single domain.
To ensure that any effects we observed were tied to the
actual case comparisons rather than to knowledge of the
terms positive and negative feedback, we introduced each
case using the generic labels System A and System B. The
selection of cases was randomized and their position on the
screen was counterbalanced.
Classification Task The classification task was designed to
assess learners’ ability to discriminate between positive and
negative feedback systems. These materials included 16
brief scenarios, each describing a real-world phenomenon
(some scenarios were adapted from Rottmann et al., 2012).
Eight of these scenarios described positive feedback
systems, and eight described negative feedback systems.
Furthermore, the 16 scenarios were drawn from the same
four domains that were used in the contrastive cases—this
allowed us to assess how narrow or broad peoples’ category
generalizations were. Feedback type and Domain varied
orthogonally—there were two examples of positive feedback
and two examples of negative feedback for each of the four
domains. Participants classified each scenario as an example
of either a positive or negative feedback system by selecting
one of four multiple choice options: System A, System B,
neither, or I don’t know. The scenarios were presented in

1475

random order. Because the 16 scenarios were drawn from
the same four domains that had been used in the study cases,
each participant saw four examples from the studied domain
and twelve from non-studied domains. This allowed us to
assess how narrow or broad peoples’ category
generalizations were.

Measures
Difference Ratings We coded several aspects of
participants’ difference listings. First, we coded whether or
not the participant provided a key difference—the crucial
alignable difference that captures the distinction between
positive and negative feedbacks. For key differences, we
further coded them as being: (1) a global or process-level
description, and (2) an abstract or concrete description. A
global key difference captures the higher-order difference
between positive and negative feedbacks. A process-level
key difference invokes a distinction in the specific causal
structures of the cases. Participants who gave process-level
descriptions typically used language expressing qualitative
relations such as “X increased [decreased] Y.” A concrete
key difference describes the difference by referring to
particular elements in the passages (e.g., cells), whereas an
abstract key difference does not. The first two examples
below exemplify global descriptions at the concrete and
abstract levels.
System B controls the rate at which cells grow. In System
A, the cancerous cells have the ability to grow with no
inhibition, unlike System B which keeps itself balanced
out. (Global, Concrete)
The difference between System A and B is that in System
A, one action causes a reaction that eventually leads to a
balance. In System B, the reaction continues to increase
in intensity until it is out of control. (Global, Abstract)
The next two examples illustrate process-level descriptions
at the concrete and abstract levels.
System A just produces more cancer cells as growth
hormones increase. System B regulates the production of
cells producing less with the increase in inhibitory
chemicals and more when there is a reduction of
inhibitory chemicals. (Process, Concrete)
System B describes a system that increases, then
decreases, then increases as production increases and
decreases, whereas System A describes a system that only
increases no matter the production. (Process, Abstract)
Two raters, blind to instructional condition, coded the
differences. Inter-rater Reliability was high for all measures
(Key Difference: κ=.87, p<.001; Global/Process: κ=.88,
p<.001; Abstract/Concrete: κ=.90, p<.001). Disagreements
were resolved through discussion.

Predictions There are two variables of interest here: key
difference detection and classification task performance.
Compressing our hypotheses into the key predictions, we
predict, first, that listing similarities will induce a structural
alignment; thus people who explicitly list similarities before
differences will more often produce the key alignable
difference than people who only list differences; and,
second, that key difference detection will lead to better
understanding of the distinction between positive and
negative feedback, and therefore to better performance on
the classification task. A strong version of this second
prediction—that difference detection is causally related to
discrimination learning—further predicts that key differencedetection should mediate the relationship between Explicit
Comparison and Classification Score.

Results
To test our first prediction—that similarity-listing will
induce a structural alignment and that this will foster key
difference-detection—we
examined
how
Explicit
Comparison influenced key difference identification (Figure
1). Overall, people who listed similarities produced the key
difference 57% of the time versus 28% of the time for people
who only listed differences. A binary logistic regression
revealed that Task (Explicit Comparison vs. Control) was a
significant predictor of whether people produced the key
difference. People who listed similarities were more likely to
generate the key difference than people who did not list
similarities (Wald χ2 = 12.73, df=1, p<.001, Odds
Ratio=3.42).

Proportion of
Participants	


1	


the relationship between key difference detection and later
classification. Figure 2 shows the dispersion of scores for
individuals who produced the key difference and those who
did not. Participants who detected the key difference had
higher scores on the classification test (m=0.79, SD=0.16)
than participants who did not identify the key difference
(m=0.52, SD=0.23), t(149.89)=8.61, p<.001, d=1.37.
Exploratory analyses revealed that that the effect size was
much larger for Far Transfer (d=1.50) than for Near Transfer
problems (d=0.88), suggesting a particularly strong
relationship between difference-detection and far transfer.

Classification Task Score	


Classification Score Each participant received a score based
on total correct answers (max=16). To assess the broadness
of transfer, we calculated separate scores for scenarios drawn
from the training domain (Close Transfer Score) and
domains that the participant was not trained on (Far Transfer
Score). For example, if an individual compared cases from
Engineering, their Close Transfer Score consisted of their
total score on the four scenarios from Engineering (max=4),
whereas their Far Transfer Score would consist of their score
on the scenarios from Economics, Ecology, and Physiology
(max=12). All scores were converted to percent correct.

1	

0.8	

0.6	

0.4	

0.2	

0	

No Key Difference	


Key Difference	


Figure 2: Dispersion of classification task scores, by key
difference production
To test the plausibility of a causal link between differencedetection and discrimination—a strong interpretation of our
second hypothesis—we conducted a simple mediation
analysis (Hayes, 2013). This analysis involved a standard
three-variable path model (Figure 3; Baron & Kenny, 1986).
Three tests must reach statistical significance to conclude
mediation: (1) the initial variable (Task) must be related to
the mediating variable (Difference-Detection; Figure 3, Path
a); (2) the mediating variable must be related to the outcome
variable (Classification Score) after controlling for the initial
variable (Figure 3, Path b); and (3) the mediation effect
(a*b) must be significant (Hayes, 2013).

Key Differences Produced 	


0.75	

0.5	

0.25	

0	

Control	


Explicit Comparison	


Figure 3: Mediation analysis. Unstandardized coefficients
are shown, significant at ***p < 0.001.

Figure 1: Key differences produced, by Task
To test our second hypothesis—that difference-detection
predicts performance on the classification task—we assessed

1476

The mediation analysis indicates that explicit comparison
indirectly influenced classification performance through its

effect on key difference detection. As can be seen in Figure
3, participants who listed similarities were more likely to
notice the key difference (a=.29, p<.001), and participants
who noticed the key difference did better on the
classification task (b=.286, p<.001). To put this another way,
participants who listed a key difference scored on average
28.6% above participants who did not list the key difference.
The indirect effect was significant1 (p<.001). The direct
effect was non-significant, indicating that explicit
comparison did not influence classification task performance
independent of is effect on key difference detection (direct
=-.052, p >.05).
Types of Key Differences and Later Transfer An
examination of the kinds of key differences produced
revealed that, overall, 54% of key differences were processlevel descriptions and 46% were global descriptions, a nonsignificant difference, z=0.5, p=0.61. People also produced
many more Concrete differences (83%) than Abstract
differences (17%), z=5.04, p<.001. We explored two aspects
of the data concerning the kinds of key differences produced.
First, we asked whether there was a connection between
explicit comparison and the types of key differences
generated. For instance, listing similarities between cases
may have lead to the production of more process-level
differences since people explicitly specified the common
relational structure. However, the distribution of difference
types did not vary by task, χ2 (3)=.63, p=0.89. There was no
evidence that explicit comparison influenced the kinds of
differences people generated here.
Second, we asked whether the type of key difference was
related to breadth of transfer. For example, if a person
generated an abstract difference they may hold a more
general representation of the key category distinction;
therefore they may do better on Far Transfer than a person
who produced a concrete difference. To identify connections
between the types of key differences produced and transfer,
we ran three separate regression models for the dependent
measures of Overall Transfer, Close Transfer, and Far
Transfer. Explanation Type (Process/Global) and
Abstractness (Abstract/Concrete) were entered as predictors.
Explanation Type was a significant predictor of far transfer
(β=0.32, p<.05)—people who produced global differences
scored higher on far transfer than people who produced
process-level differences. No other significant relationships
between key difference type and transfer were found.

Discussion
There are two main findings. First, we found evidence for
our first hypothesis—that structural alignment would
facilitate key difference-detection. People who explicitly
compared cases and stated commonalities were more likely
to go on to generate a key alignable difference between the
1

A bias-corrected bootstrap confidence interval for the indirect
effect (a*b=.083) based on 5,000 bootstrap samples was entirely
above zero (.039 to 0.137, p=.001).

1477

positive and negative feedback cases than were those who
simply listed differences. This result is consistent with prior
work that demonstrates (a) that structural alignment favors
discovering the maximal common relational structure
(Clement & Gentner, 1991)—in this case the causal structure
of feedback systems—and (b) that structural alignment
facilitates detection of alignable differences connected to the
common structure (Markman & Gentner, 1993a; 1994;
Gentner & Gunn, 2001).
In line with our second hypothesis—that difference
detection predicts discrimination learning—we found that
people who generated a key difference did better on the
subsequent classification task than people who did not
generate the key difference, suggesting that differencedetection plays a critical role in learning. Indeed, the data
support a particularly strong version of the second
hypothesis. We found that difference-detection mediated the
link between structural alignment (or more precisely,
between whether people received explicit comparison
instructions) and classification performance. There was no
direct effect of explicit comparison on later classification –
that is, the effect of explicit comparison on contrastive case
learning was only observed through its effect on key
difference detection. This suggests that the effect of
structural alignment here was to promote key differencedetection, which in turn led to higher performance on the
classification task.
Prior research has found that comparison fosters
abstraction and transfer of concepts (e.g., categories, solution
methods). These learning benefits are often explained by
virtue of comparison’s ability to highlight common relational
structure between cases. There has been far less attention to
the role of structural alignment in identifying critical
differences. (but see Hammer, Diesendruck, Weinshall, &
Hochstein, 2009; Higgins & Ross, 2011; Rittle-Johnson &
Star, 2009). Our finding that focusing on commonalties prior
to listing differences led people to notice more critical
differences—and
that
this
improved
subsequent
classification performance—suggests ways of better using
comparison processes to foster discrimination learning.
Of course, we would not want to claim that comparing two
cases from different categories will necessarily lead to
deeper understanding of the key category differences. We
suspect that this effect depends on there being significant
structural overlap between the categories, as is the case for
positive and negative feedback. But because overlapping
category descriptions are likely to be difficult to
discriminate, the methods described here may have an
important role to play in complex learning, including
learning in mathematics and science. Future work should
explore to what degree the patterns found here extend to
other categorical contrasts.
There are specific limitations in the current study that our
ongoing work aims to address. First, we are verifying that
key-difference facilitation is due to structural alignment in
particular rather than simply a consequence of spending
more time processing the cases (since the Control group

didn’t engage in an alternative task while the Explicit
Comparison group listed commonalities). Second, while the
mediation analysis provides strong support for a causal link
between difference-detection and discrimination learning,
convergent evidence is required to substantiate this claim. In
current studies we are directly manipulating differencedetection to determine its effects on classification task
performance.
There remain many open questions regarding the links
between comparison, difference-detection, and learning. For
example, how might other factors of the comparison task,
such as surface similarity between the cases, influence
difference-detection and learning? Perhaps key difference
detection is best when the features of the compared cases are
relatively similar to one another, versus when their content is
more dissimilar. However, comparison of dissimilar cases
may lead to key difference representations with broader
generalizability, whereas comparison of highly similar
contrastive cases may lead to relatively specific common
representations, which could limit transfer (Goldstone &
Sakamoto, 2003).

Conclusions
We find that the simple act of comparing two contrastive
cases is helpful in learning to distinguish between two
complex interrelated relational concepts. These findings
offer insight the role of comparison in learning from
contrastive cases.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Office of Naval Research grant
N00014-13-1-0470. We would like to thank Christian Dayal
for his help with coding.

References
Alfieri, L., Nokes-Malach, T. J., & Schunn, C. D. (2013).
Learning through case comparisons: A meta-analytic
review. Educational Psychologist, 48(2), 87-113
Catrambone, R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1989). Overcoming
contextual limitations on problem-solving transfer. JEP:
LMC, 15(6), 1147-1156.
Day, S., Goldstone, R. L., & Hills, T. (2010). The effects of
similarity and individual differences on comparison and
transfer. In S. Ohlsson, and R. Catrambone, (Eds.),
Cognition in Flux: Proc. of the 32nd annual meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 465–470)..
Forbus, K. (1984). Qualitative process theory. Artificial
Intelligence, 24, 85-168.
Forbus, K. D. (2003). Qualitative Reasoning. In CRC
Handbook of Computer Science and Engineering, 2nd
Edition. CRC Press.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155–170.
Gentner, D., & Gunn, V. (2001). Structural alignment
facilitates the noticing of differences. Memory and
Cognition, 29(4), 565-577.

1478

Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L., & Forbus, K.
(2009) Reviving inert knowledge: Analogical abstraction
supports relational retrieval of past events. Cognitive
Science, 3, 1343-1382.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1994). Structural alignment
in comparison: No difference without similarity.
Psychological Science, 5(3), 152–158.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A.B. (1997). Structure mapping in
analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52, 45–56.
Gentner, D. & Namy, L. L. (2006). Analogical processes in
language learning. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 15, 297-301.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction and
analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1–38.
Gick, M. L., & Paterson, K. J. (1992). Do contrasting
examples facilitate schema acquisition and analogical
transfer? Canadian Journal of Psychology, 46, 539–550.
Hammer, R., Diesendruck, G., Weinshall, D., & Hochstein,
S. (2009). The development of category learning
strategies: What makes the difference? Cognition, 112(1),
105–119.
Haryu, E., Imai, M., & Okada, H. (2011) Object similarity
bootstraps young children to action-based verb extensions.
Child Development, 82(2). 674–686.
Higgins, E. J., & Ross, B. H. (2011). Comparisons in
category learning: How best to compare for what. In L.
Carlson, C. Holscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Kok, E. M., de Bruin, A. B. H., Robben, S. G. F., & van
Merriënboer, J. J. G. (2013). Learning radiological
appearances of diseases: Does comparison help? Learning
and Instruction, 23, 90 –97.
Kurtz, K. J., Boukrina, O., & Gentner, D. (2013).
Comparison promotes learning and transfer of relational
categories. JEP: LMC, 39(4), 1303-1310.
Kurtz, K. J., & Gentner, D. (2013). Detecting anomalous
features in complex stimuli: The role of structured
comparison. JEP: Applied, 19(3), 219-232.
Kurtz, K., Miao, C. H., & Gentner, D. (2001). Learning by
analogical bootstrapping. J. Learning Sci., 10, 417–446.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993a). Splitting the
differences: A structural alignment view of similarity. J.
Memory and Language, 32, 517–535.
McLure, M. D., Friedman, S. E., & Forbus, K. D. (2010).
Learning concepts from sketches via analogical
generalization and near-misses. Proceedings of the 32nd
annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 465–
470).
Rittle-Johnson, B., & Star, J. R. (2009). Compared with
what? The effects of different comparisons on conceptual
knowledge and procedural flexibility for equation solving.
J. Educational Psychology, 101(3), 529–544.
Sagi, E., Gentner, D. & Lovett, A. (2012). What difference
reveals about similarity. Cognitive Science, 36(6), 10191050.

