UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Procedural Memory in Adult Second Language Acquisition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0dc7958r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Brill-Schuetz, Katherine
Morgan-Short, Kara

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Procedural Memory in Adult Second Language Acquisition
Katherine A. Brill-Schuetz (kbrill@uic.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1007 W. Harrison St.
Chicago, IL 60607 USA

Kara Morgan-Short (karams@uic.edu)
Department of Psychology & Department of Hispanic and Italian Studies, 601 S. Morgan St.
Chicago, IL 60607 USA
Abstract

al. (2014) examined whether individual differences in
procedural memory predicted performance on an assessment
of L2 syntax (word order) at the end stages of learning an
artificial language. Procedural memory was assessed using a
composite score across two computerized measures of
procedural memory: the Tower of London (TOL;
Unterrainer et al., 2004) and the dual-task version of the
Weather Prediction Task (WPT; Knowlton, Squire, &
Gluck, 1994). Results confirmed that higher procedural
memory scores were associated with better performance on
an L2 judgment task assessing knowledge of word order.
Similarly, Ettlinger et al. (2012) examined the role of
procedural memory in the learning of simple and complex,
artificial L2 morphophonological rules. Procedural memory
was assessed using the TOL task, and results showed that
participants who performed better on the TOL also
evidenced a mastery of the simple rules at final test.
Although these studies lend initial support to the idea of
procedural memory being involved in L2 acquisition at later
stages, it should be noted that for both of the studies
mentioned above, learners were exposed to the L2s under
implicit training conditions, which were designed to reflect
immersion-like contexts, where explicit rule explanation
may not be available. However, not all adult L2 learners are
exposed to an L2 under such contexts. Many learners
acquire their L2 in classroom contexts where there is
frequent, explicit instruction of grammatical rules. Evidence
suggests that different learning contexts may have an effect
on both L2 learning outcomes (Norris & Ortega, 2000) and
on the neurocognitive bases for such outcomes (MorganShort, Finger, Grey, & Ullman, 2012; Morgan-Short, Sanz,
Steinhauer, & Ullman, 2010; Morgan-Short, Steinhauer,
Sanz, & Ullman, 2012). Thus it is important to consider, the
role that procedural memory may play in different types of
L2 contexts or training conditions. Indeed, one may expect
an aptitude-treatment interaction	   (e.g., Robinson, 2001;
Snow, 1991), where procedural memory ability (aptitude)
may play a larger role under implicit training conditions as
compared to explicit training conditions (treatment).
One previous study has provided some preliminary
evidence regarding the role of procedural memory in adult
L2 development across different learning contexts.
Carpenter (2008) examined the role of procedural memory
in the development of word order proficiency at the end
stages of learning an artificial L2 under either an explicit
training condition, where learners were exposed to L2 forms

This study examined the role of procedural memory in adult
second language (L2) development. Participants were trained
on an artificial language under either explicit or implicit
conditions. Development in the L2 was assessed by grammar
tests at two time points. Measures of procedural memory were
administered and were used to create high and low procedural
groups. Results revealed an advantage in L2 development for
learners with high procedural memory when trained in the
implicit condition. Overall, this study suggests that procedural
memory may be an important factor in adult L2 development
but its role may differ under different learning contexts.
Keywords: Adult second language acquisition; Procedural
memory; Syntax

Introduction
A relatively recent line of investigation in second language
(L2) research has focused on the role of different types of
domain general memory systems in adult L2 acquisition of
grammar. Initially research focused on the role of working
memory (e.g., Robinson, 2003; Williams, 2012) and now
has also begun to examine the role of declarative and
procedural memory (Carpenter, 2008; Morgan-Short,
Faretta-Stutenberg, Brill-Schuetz, Carpenter, & Wong,
2014). Theories put forth by Ullman (2001, 2004, 2005),
Paradis (1994, 2004, 2013), and DeKeyser (2007) have
posited that these two types of long-term memory have an
important role in language learning and claim that success at
advanced stages of L2 development may depend on
procedural memory in particular. This claim has received
some initial empirical support (Carpenter, 2008; Ettlinger,
Bradlow, & Wong, 2012; Morgan-Short, FarettaStutenberg, et al., 2014), but the nature of the relationship
between procedural memory and L2 development is not
entirely clear and is further examined in the present study.
Although
there
are
differences
among
the
declarative/procedural-based theories of L2 acquisition
(DeKeyser, 2007; Paradis, 1994, 2004, 2009, 2013; Ullman,
2001, 2004, 2005), each theory independently posits that as
L2 learners gain exposure, experience, and proficiency with
the L2, they come to rely on procedural memory or
knowledge, which is generally understood to reflect
memory for skills and habits and is a specific subtype of
nondeclarative, implicit memory (Squire & Zola, 1996).
This idea has already received some support in behavioral
studies. For example, Morgan-Short, Faretta-Stutenberg, et

260

along with grammatical rules and explanations, or an
implicit training condition, where learners were exposed to
the L2 but were not provided with any grammatical rules or
explanations. Procedural memory was assessed with the
dual-task WPT (Knowlton et al., 1994). Results showed that
procedural memory did not play a role for explicitly trained
learners but accounted for higher levels of development for
a subset of implicitly trained learners on end-of-training
grammar assessments.
In sum, emerging evidence lends support to the
theoretical claim that procedural memory plays a role at
advanced stages of L2 acquisition. However, such results
merit replication and extension and, in general, would be
more robust and informative if research took the following
approach: First, studies should use more than one measure
of procedural memory in order to more adequately capture
this construct (Cronbach & Meehl, 1955; Messick, 1975).
Second, comparisons of the role of procedural memory
across explicit and implicit training conditions would
inform theoretical perspectives in regard to whether
procedural memory plays a role only under certain
conditions or whether its role is more universal. The current
study takes such an approach.

allows for control over confounding variables as compared
to natural languages.
Brocanto2 consists of 14 words: four nouns (pleck, neep,
blom, vode), two adjectives (troise/o, neime/o), two articles
(li/u), four verbs (klin, nim, yab, praz) and two adverbs
(noyka, zayma) (see Table 1 for full sentence). The
grammatical structure of this language follows a similar
pattern to that of Romance languages and not to English.
Whereas English follows a subject-verb-object order,
Brocanto2 follows a subject-object-verb order. Each noun
(e.g., blom) is either masculine or feminine and can be
followed by a gender-specific adjective describing the shape
of the game piece (e.g., neimo). The noun or adjective is
then followed by a gender-agreeing article (i.e., lu). The
initial, subject noun phrase can be followed either by an
intransitive verb (e.g., klin) or by a direct object noun phrase
(e.g., neep neime li) and a transitive verb (e.g., praz). Verbs
can be followed by an adverb indicating what direction the
pieces should move. Participants learned this artificial
language in order to play a computer-based game in which
the movement of tokens is described by the language (see
Figure 1).
Table 1: Sample Brocanto2 sentences.

Methods

Grammatical:
Blom
neimo lu neep
neime li
praz.
Blom-piece square the neep-piece square the switch.
“The square blom-piece switches with the square neep-piece.”

Participants
Twenty-six students (18–24 years old; 16 female) from a
large midwestern university were recruited either through a
psychology course subject pool or through flyers, and
received class credit or monetary compensation,
respectively, for participation. Selection requirements
limited participants to those who had no hearing, learning,
or speaking impairments, and to those who were native
speakers of English. Participants were pseudo-randomly
assigned to either the explicit or the implicit training
condition (see below). Previous experience with L2 was
equally matched between the two groups.

Violation:
Blom
*nim
lu neep
neime li
praz.
Blom-piece capture the neep-piece square the switch.
“The capture blom-piece switches with the square neep-piece.”

Artificial Language
The artificial language learned by participants was
Brocanto2 (Morgan-Short, Faretta-Stutenberg, et al., 2014;
Morgan-Short, Finger, et al., 2012; Morgan-Short et al.,
2010). In contrast to many artificial grammar learning
paradigms, the artificial language Brocanto2, modeled after
the artificial language Brocanto (Friederici, Steinhauer, &
Pfeifer, 2002), is based on universal requirements of a
natural language and is fully productive and meaningful.
Previous research with these artificial languages has shown
that learners evidence processing patterns that are similar to
those found in natural language processing (Friederici et al.,
2002; Morgan-Short, Finger, et al., 2012; Morgan-Short et
al., 2010; Morgan-Short, Steinhauer, et al., 2012),
suggesting the use of Brocanto2 in the current study has
ecological validity in regard to L2 acquisition. At the same
time, the use of the artificial language allows learners to
reach high proficiency in a shortened amount of time and

Figure 1: Screen shot of Brocanto2 computerized board
game.
Language training and practice. On the first and third day
of the study, participants were engaged in either an explicit
or implicit language training condition followed by
practice. 1 The artificial language training phase lasted
approximately 13 minutes regardless of the condition. In the
explicit training condition, participants were auditorily
1

Note that we do not assume that explicit and implicit training
leads exclusively to explicit and implicit learning, respectively.

261

presented with the specific rules and examples of phrases
and sentences in Brocanto2. In the implicit training
condition, no rules or explanations were given and instead
participants received repeated, aural examples of the
language that ranged from simple noun phrases to complete
sentences. At no point in the training did any participant see
written examples of the language.
After completing the training portion of the language,
participants continued on to the practice modules. Practice
consisted of using Brocanto2 to play a computer-based
board game (see Figure 1). Participants either heard
sentences and made the corresponding move on the game
board (comprehension) or saw a move and orally described
it (production). A total of 20 practice modules were
presented over the course of the study (10 production and 10
comprehension), with 20 novel sentences presented in each
module for a total of 400 practice items.
Assessment. On the second and final day of the study,
assessments were administered. Participants were given a
grammaticality judgment task (GJT) to measure their
knowledge of the language. The GJT consisted of 120 novel
sentences that were presented auditorily. Participants were
asked to judge whether each sentence was correct or
incorrect and responded by pressing either the right or left
mouse button. In this task, participants heard 60
grammatical and 60 ungrammatical sentences that contained
word order violations.2 Violations were created by replacing
one word from each of the 60 correct sentences with another
word from one of the five word categories (see Table 1) so
that the new sentence violated the word-order rules of
Brocanto2 (Morgan-Short et al., 2012). The distribution of
the violations was as even as possible across all word types
(nouns, verbs, etc.) and one verb was omitted to control for
sentence length (between 5 and 8 words). Violations never
occurred on the first or final word and violation position
among words was as evenly distributed as possible. The 120
sentences were broken down into two blocks of 60 (half
ungrammatical) sentences, which were administered in a
counterbalanced order so that participants received different
versions on the two assessment days.

regarded as implicit or procedural in nature (Deroost &
Soetens, 2006). In this computerized version of the task,
participants watched circles on the screen fill in with black
dots. Participants responded to these targets by pressing the
corresponding key on the keyboard: They were instructed to
press the key as soon as the circle was filled in and to
respond as quickly and accurately as possible using their
right and left middle and index fingers (each finger was
assigned to a particular key on the keyboard). There was an
embedded pattern that was presented in trials that alternated
with random trials. For example, if the pattern was 1234, the
circle farthest to the left would fill in, followed by a random
circle, followed by the second circle from the left, etc.
Therefore, the sequence of targets would be 1r2r3r4r.
Reaction times were measured and accuracy rates were
recorded; improvement in reaction time for patterned trials
versus random trials was the measure of procedural memory
used in analyses.
The second measure of procedural memory was the dualtask version of the WPT (Knowlton et al., 1994; Poldrack &
Packard, 2003). The WPT is a probability-based learning
task where participants are presented with various
geometrical patterns on cards to determine the weather
forecast (sunshine or rain). The particular arrangement of
patterns on each card was associated with a particular
probability of rain. These cards were presented using EPrime v2.0 and there were a total of 320 trials divided into
eight blocks. Neither a sunshine nor a rain stimulus occurred
more than four times in a row. After a response was given,
the correct response was shown. The secondary task in the
WPT involved the counting of high tones during a trial.
Therefore, every trial consisted of participants making a
sun/rain judgment and keeping a running total number of
high tones, which were interspersed with low tones. This
was a distracter task designed to increase the reliance on
procedural memory and reduce the development of explicit
information. Accuracy and reaction time for the primary
task (predicting weather) were the measures that were
examined as markers for successful procedural learning.
However, weather prediction accuracy on the final block
(block 8) of the dual-task condition was used for analyses.

Procedural Memory Measures

Procedure

Two measures of procedural memory were administered
over the course of the study: the Alternating Serial Reaction
Task (ASRT; Howard & Howard, 1997) and the WPT
(Knowlton et al., 1994).
The first measure of procedural memory was the ASRT
(Howard & Howard, 1997). The ASRT, like the original
SRT, uses sequence learning that has previously been

This was a six-hour study that took place over four days
with a maximum of three days in between sessions. On day
one, participants completed a language background
questionnaire followed by either explicit or implicit artificial
language training and practice modules 1–10. Day two
consisted of either the ASRT or other cognitive measures,
and the first administration of the GJT (GJT1). Day three
consisted of the second training session, practice modules
11–20, and the WPT. On the final day participants
completed a second administration of the GJT (GJT2) and
either the ASRT or other cognitive measures. Except for the
WPT, the cognitive tasks and the GJT version order were
counterbalanced across participants (see Figure 2).

2

Word order violations as opposed to other possible types of
violations, e.g., gender agreement, were examined in the current
study because word order seems to be learned more successfully
and more quickly than other structures (Morgan-Short, 2007).
Given that the current study does not provide extended training and
practice as in previous Brocanto2 studies, learning effects are more
likely to be evidenced with this structure than with other structures.

262

this question, a 2 (Group: implicit vs. explicit) × 2
(Procedural Memory: high vs. low) × 2 (Time: GJT1 vs.
GJT2) repeated measures ANOVA was conducted. The
results showed a significant main effect for Time, F(1, 22) =
35.80, p < .001, ηp2 = .62, reflecting higher performance at
GJT2 when compared to GJT1 (GJT1, M = .78, SD = .87;
GJT2, M = 1.74, SD = 1.27). Results showed a trending
effect for Procedural Memory Ability, F(1, 22) = 3.87, p =
.06, ηp2 = .15, reflecting better performance for the high
group compared to the low group (GJT1: high, M = 1.08,
SD = 1.02; low, M = .47, SD = .57; GJT2: high, M = 2.19,
SD = 1.20; low, M = 1.29, SD = 1.21). There was no effect
of training group, F < 1.0, ns. Each of these effects was
qualified by a Group × Procedural Memory Ability × Time
interaction, F(1, 22) = 5.90, p < .05, ηp2 = .21.
Subsequent analyses were conducted in order to reveal the
source of the interaction. These analyses revealed a Time ×
Procedural Memory Ability interaction in the implicit
training group, F(1, 11) = 15.59, p < .01, ηp2 = .59, but no
significant interaction for the explicit training group. The
interaction in the implicit training condition was driven by
an effect for Procedural Memory Ability, F(1, 11) = 11.42,
p < .01, at GJT2 but not at GJT1 (see Figures 3 and 4). The
effect was such that participants with high procedural
memory ability performed better than participants with low
procedural memory ability in the implicit training condition.
All other follow-up comparisons did not yield significant
results.

Figure 2: Overview of study design.3

Results
First, performance on the GJT1 and GJT2 was compared to
establish whether there was significant language
development from the first grammar assessment to the
second grammar assessment and that this was the pattern for
participants in both training conditions. To assess this, a 2
(Training Condition: implicit vs. explicit) × 2 (Time: GJT1
vs. GJT2) repeated measures ANOVA was conducted. The
results showed that there was a significant difference
between GJT assessments, with participants scoring higher
on the GJT2, F(1, 24) = 28.24, p < .001, (GJT1: M = .78,
SD = .87, GJT2: M = 1.74, SD = 1.27). Alternately, there
were no differences based on Training Condition, F < 1, ns,
and no interaction between Time and Training Condition.
Evidence for learning in each of the assessments of
procedural memory was also verified through statistical
analysis (ANOVAs). For the ASRT, participants performed
better on Block 10 vs. Block 1, F(1, 25) = 8.05, p < .01;
they also performed better on pattern vs. random trials, F(1,
25) = 4.58, p < .05. For the WPT, a paired-samples t-test
showed that participants performed better on the final block
of the dual-task WPT compared to the first block, t(25) = 2.21, p < .05.
Next, the measures of procedural memory were used to
create a composite score using the z-scores of the ASRT and
WPT. The procedural composite score was used in the
subsequent analyses. A median split based on this score
divided learners into high and low procedural memory
ability groups and served as the bases for subsequent
analyses.
The primary research question explored the role of
procedural memory in L2 development across differing
training conditions. More specifically, we examined how
procedural memory ability influenced performance on the
grammar assessment, and if variable patterns of
performance under different training emerge. To address

Performance (d')

2.5	  
2	  
1.5	  

Low

1	  

High

0.5	  
0	  
GJT1	  

GJT2	  

Grammar Assessment

Figure 3: Language performance in explicit training
condition for low vs. high procedural memory ability.

3

The other cognitive measures used in this study were the TOL
(Unterrainer et al., 2004) and part V of the Modern Language
Aptitude Test (MLAT; Carroll & Sapon, 1959). The computerized
TOL was included based on previous studies (Ettlinger et al., 2012;
Morgan-Short, Faretta-Stutenberg et al., 2012) and was used in
order to more fully capture the underlying construct of procedural
memory. However, upon analysis, the TOL did not demonstrate a
stable relationship to other measures of procedural memory and
was not included in the analyses reported below. The MLAT V
was used as a measure of declarative memory but is not included in
the analyses below because it is not related to the current research
questions.

263

Performance (d')

2.5	  
2	  
1.5	  
1	  
0.5	  
0	  

The results of this study more generally support the idea
of aptitude-treatment interactions in L2 learning contexts
(Robinson, 2001) in that procedural memory may be an
important contributor to language learning specifically
within implicit training conditions. Implicit training
conditions are most similar to language immersion settings
where learners are exposed to the language without rules or
explanations. Therefore, it might be beneficial for late L2
learners with strong procedural memory to elect to study
under immersion-based contexts either in the classroom or
study abroad settings in order to maximize their L2
development potential.
While this study provides valuable new information about
the role of procedural memory in adult L2 learning, the
length of this learning study is one limitation that may affect
the relationships found in the data. Ideally, participants
would have been able to complete a greater number of
practice modules to ensure that each participant reached a
high level of proficiency (i.e., achieving 95% in consecutive
modules). Adding a separate session of cognitive testing
before participants begin any language training, rather than
having cognitive testing intertwined with language training
and assessment, would rule out any confounding influence
that the artificial language training conditions may have had
on cognitive test performance.
In future research, a replication of this study using
multiple measures of both declarative and procedural
memory would be informative in regard to the full set of
predictions made by declarative/procedural theories of L2,
i.e., that declarative memory plays a larger role at early
stages of L2 development whereas procedural memory plays
a larger role at later stages. Only the latter was tested here.
In addition, it would be interesting to also examine whether
similar relationships are evidenced for more complex
linguistic systems as well as for first language acquisition.
In conclusion, this study showed that procedural memory
may be an important factor in adult L2 development,
consistent with predictions made by declarative/procedural
theories of L2. Importantly, though, the findings suggest
that the role of procedural memory may differ under
different learning contexts. This may be considered
evidence for exploring procedural memory as another
individual difference in language acquisition for late (adult)
learners. This study suggests that we may be able to better
guide language development by assessing specific cognitive
skills of the learner before assigning them to a particular
mode of training. More generally, the results warrant further
examination of the role of procedural memory as well as
other domain-general memory systems in L2 acquisition.

Low
High

GJT1	  

GJT2	  

Grammar Assessment

Figure 4: Language performance in implicit training
conditions for low vs. high procedural memory ability.

Discussion
Overall, the results of this study are consistent with a
general role for procedural memory in adult L2
development, as suggested by the trending main effect for
procedural memory ability. Furthermore, the results
revealed an interaction with procedural memory ability,
training condition, and stage of development, suggesting
that the role of procedural memory may differ for different
L2 training conditions and may change over time or with
increasing proficiency. More specifically, participants with
high procedural memory ability performed better than
participants with low procedural memory ability on final
grammar assessments when they had been trained under
implicit conditions. Thus higher procedural memory ability
led to higher levels of L2 development, particularly under
implicit conditions. Indeed, it appears that high procedural
memory ability paired with implicit training conditions
produced an optimal learning context.
These findings are consistent with the results from the
previous studies conducted by Carpenter (2008), Ettlinger et
al. (2010), and Morgan-Short, Faretta-Stutenberg, et al.
(2014), which showed that procedural memory ability
predicted success in implicit language training conditions at
later stages of L2 development. This study adds to the
previous studies by expanding the measures of procedural
memory and examining its influence across both explicit
and implicit training conditions.
More broadly, the findings from this study also are
consistent with the ideas posited by DeKeyser’s Skill
Acquisition Theory (2007), Paradis (1994, 2004, 2009,
2013), and Ullman’s Declarative/Procedural (DP) Model
(2001, 2004, 2005), all of which predict involvement of
procedural memory at later, more proficient stages of
language development. Specifically, the finding that
performance on procedural memory tasks played a role in
L2 development at later stages of learning but not at early
stages, at least for implicitly trained learners, seems
consistent with these predictions. However, the results also
suggest that the theories must also account for why
procedural memory appears to play a more significant role
under implicit training conditions.

References
Carpenter,
H.
S.
(2008).
A behavioral and
electrophysiological investigation of different aptitudes
for L2 grammar in learners equated for proficiency
level. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Georgetown
University, Washington, DC.

264

Carroll, J. B., & Sapon, S. M. (1959). Modern language
aptitude test. San Antonio, TX: Psychological
Corporation, San Antonio, TX.
Cronbach, L. J., & Meehl, P. E. (1955). Construct validity in
psychological tests. Psychological Bulletin, 52(4), 281.
DeKeyser, R. (2007). Skill acquisition theory. In B.
VanPatten & J. Williams (Eds.), Theories in Second
Language Acquisition: An Introduction (pp. 97–114).
Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Deroost, N., & Soetens, E. (2006). Spatial processing and
perceptual sequence learning in SRT tasks. Experimental
Psychology, 53(1), 16–30.
Ettlinger, M., Bradlow, A. R., & Wong, P. C. M. (2012).
Variability
in
the
learning
of
complex
morphophonology. Applied Psycholinguistics, 1–25.
Friederici, A. D., Steinhauer, K., & Pfeifer, E. (2002). Brain
signatures of artificial language processing: Evidence
challenging the critical period hypothesis. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 99(1), 529–534.
Howard, J. H., & Howard, D. V. (1997). Age differences in
implicit learning of higher order dependencies in serial
patterns. Psychology and Aging, 12(4), 634.
Knowlton, B. J., Squire, L. R., & Gluck, M. A. (1994).
Probabilistic classification learning in amnesia. Learning
& Memory, 1(2), 106–120.
Messick, S. (1975). The standard problem: Meaning and
values in measurement and evaluation. American
Psychologist, 30(10), 955.
Morgan-Short, K. (2007). A neurolinguistic investigation of
late-learned second language: Effects of explicit and
implicit conditions. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation).
Georgetown University, Washington, DC.
Morgan-Short, K., Faretta-Stutenberg, M., Brill-Schuetz, K.
A., Carpenter, H., & Wong, P. (2014). Declarative and
procedural memory as individual differences in second
language acquisition. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition, 17(1), 1–17.
Morgan-Short, K., Finger, I., Grey, S., & Ullman, M. T.
(2012). Second language processing shows increased
native-like neural responses after months of no exposure.
PLoS ONE, 7(3), e32974.
Morgan-Short, K., Sanz, C., Steinhauer, K., & Ullman, M.
T. (2010). Second language acquisition of gender
agreement in explicit and implicit training conditions:
An event-related potential study. Language learning,
60(1), 154–193.
Morgan-Short, K., Steinhauer, K., Sanz, C., & Ullman, M.
T. (2012). Explicit and implicit second language training
differentially affect the achievement of native-like brain
activation patterns. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
24(4), 933–947.
Norris, J. M., & Ortega, L. (2000). Effectiveness of L2
instruction: A research synthesis and quantitative metaanalysis. Language Learning, 50(3), 417–528.
Paradis, M. (1994). Neurolinguistic aspects of implicit and
explicit memory: Implications for bilingualism and SLA.
Implicit and explicit learning of languages, 393, 419.

Paradis, M. (2004). A neurolinguistic theory of bilingualism
(Vol. 18). Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing
Company.
Paradis, M. (2009). Declarative and procedural
determinants of second languages. Philadelphia, PA:
John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Paradis, M. (2013). Late-L2 increased reliance on L1
neurocognitive substrates: A comment on Babcock,
Stowe, Maloof, Brovetto & Ullman (2012).
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 1–4.
Poldrack, R. A., & Packard, M. G. (2003). Competition
among multiple memory systems: Converging evidence
from
animal
and
human
brain
studies.
Neuropsychologia, 41(3), 245–251.
Robinson, P. (2001). Individual differences, cognitive
abilities, aptitude complexes and learning conditions in
second language acquisition. Second Language
Research, 17(4), 368–392.
Robinson, P. (2003). Attention and memory during SLA. In
C. Doughty & M. Long, The handbook of second
language acquisition, (pp. 631–678). Blackwell
Publishing.
Snow, R. E. (1991). Aptitude-treatment interaction as a
framework for research on individual differences in
psychotherapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 59(2), 205.
Squire, L. R., & Zola, S. M. (1996). Structure and function
of declarative and nondeclarative memory systems.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 93(24), 13515–13522.
Ullman, M. T. (2001). A neurocognitive perspective on
language: The declarative/procedural model. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 2(10).
Ullman, M. T. (2004). Contributions of memory circuits to
language: The declarative/procedural model. Cognition,
92(1–2).
Ullman, M. T. (2005). A cognitive neuroscience perspective
on
second
language
acquisition:
The
declarative/procedural model. In C. Sanz (Ed.), Mind
and Context in Adult Second Language Acquisition, (pp.
141–178). Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University
Press.
Unterrainer, J. M., Rahm, B., Kaller, C. P., Leonhart, R.,
Quiske, K., Hoppe-Seyler, K., Halsband, U. (2004).
Planning abilities and the Tower of London: Is this task
measuring a discrete cognitive function? Journal of
Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 26(6),
846–856.
Williams, J. N. (2012). Working memory and SLA. In S. M.
Gass & A. Mackey (Eds.), The handbook of second
language acquisition, (pp. 427–441). New York:
Routledge.

265

