UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Implications of Embodiment for Mathematics and Computing Education

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5hs6g3rz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Landy, David
Trninic, Dragan
Soylu, Firat
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Implications of Embodiment for Mathematics and Computing Education
David Landy (dlandy@indiana.edu), Indiana University - Bloomington
Dragan Trninic (trninic@berkeley.edu), University of California - Berkeley
Firat Soylu (firat@northwestern.edu), Northwestern University
Joselle Kehoe (joselle.kehoe@utdallas.edu), University of Texas at Dallas
Paul Fishwick (paul.fishwick@utdallas.edu), University of Texas at Dallas
Keywords: Embodied cognition; mathematics; computing;
education; learning design

disciplines, which tend toward increased levels and densities
of human-information interaction, such as art and design.
This approach could provide a more holistic view of
aesthetics, which merges the apparently disembodied
definition of aesthetic in mathematics (e.g. beautiful proof)
with the broader definitions within the arts and humanities
(e.g., sensory-based beauty).

Goal and Scope
This symposium is a venue for discussing the implications
of embodied cognition research for mathematics and
computing education. Our goal is to bring five themes
together that we think are complementary in understanding
what embodiment holds for math and computing education:
(1) Empirical studies: Behavioral, neuroscience, and
neuropsychological work on sensorimotor groundings of
higher-cognition, (2) The impact of perspectives in
embodied cognition on a philosophy of mathematics, (3)
Embodied interaction & ubiquitous computing: Recent
trends in human-computer interaction that propose physical
and social embedding in the world as basis for interaction,
(4) Embodied interaction and the arts: Trends in aesthetic
computing that result in crafting artistically-derived
notations and representations of mathematics and
computing, and (5) Embodied learning: Wide range of
approaches in education that view bodily involvement as a
crucial aspect of the learning process. By accounting for
work in these five areas we will bridge empirical and
philosophical studies on embodiment with learning and
communication design work. Our goal is to present a
comprehensive story of embodiment of mathematical
cognition by covering and relating multiple levels, from
sensorimotor neural circuits that support mathematical
cognition to technological external representations that
facilitate learning of mathematical concepts and ideas.

Rationale
The meaning of embodiment for education, and the
implications of embodied cognition for learning design,
have become key issues in recent educational discourse.
Among these discussions mathematics learning constitutes a
special place since mathematics is often perceived as the
most abstract and “disembodied” domain of human thought.
Considerable research has been done on bodily groundings
of mathematical cognition. However, the implications of
these studies for mathematics, computing education, and
learning design have not been widely discussed.
In parallel to the work on the bodily groundings of
cognition, theoretical and technological innovations in
human-computer interaction allow the development of
learning technologies that provide learners with dynamic,
interactive, and embodied experiences. Recent advances in a
wide range of computational platforms afford the
development of embodied and ubiquitous gaming, mobile,
and sensing technologies that can better take advantage of
natural human abilities and tendencies for interaction.
Design aesthetics dominate the human-information
interfaces in these technologies.
There is both the need for theoretical discussions on what
embodiment means for mathematics learning and
assessment, as well as how embodied technologies and
computational environments can help us realize an
embodied learning design vision.

Theoretical Framework
Embodied cognition is a theoretical view of cognitive
processes, arguing that these processes are best understood
when they are seen as grounded in the body’s interaction
with the world. It represents a loosely connected set of
theories grounded in multiple disciplines with the common
notion of a bodily grounding for cognition. Kiverstein and
Clark’s (2009) classification of embodied approaches
distinguishes those that regard embodiment as a component
of cognition (extended functionalism) from those for which
it is a central tenet (enactivism). We present a perspective
that falls into the latter category. Our approach is also
informed by Barsalou’s (2008) grounded cognition theory
that characterizes cognition as a simulation of perceptual,
motor and introspective states. Central to our thinking is that
if cognition is embodied then 1) we should explore ways of
creating human-information interfaces that exemplify high
degrees of embodied cognition, and 2) we should leverage

Embodied Languages and Notations
Paul Fishwick
As evidence for embodied cognition grows, we ask what
effects this growth will have on the understanding of the
foundations of computer and information science? We argue
that embodied cognition as both a subject of empirical study
and philosophy will fundamentally alter our way of thinking
about computer science. For example, an embodied
perspective on the computing concepts of sequence and
iteration is explained through the use of the body,
mechanically. The mechanical approach takes us back into
the ancient history of computing when information was

86

encoded, decoded, and processed through analog means.
The methods of analog computing, however, are largely
missing from computing education. This situation leads to
reintroducing analog machines, often using new
technologies such as 3D fabrication and augmented or
virtual reality. We will present a history of analog
computing within the context of embodied cognition and its
future implications for improving computing education.

complex integrated neural activity, like Giulio Tononi’s
qualia space. Visual processes, like stereopsis, may be said
to be mathematical in character, and the brain is often
described as performing computations on sensory data as it
constructs the elements of our experience. Mathematician
Yehuda Rav has argued that mathematics grows on the
scaffolding of cognitive mechanisms that have become
genetically fixed with human adaptation. Joselle Kehoe will
present a philosophy of mathematics informed by the
significance of selected studies in cognitive science and
selected moments in the history of mathematics. It will be
considered in the light of structural coupling – the
embodiment concept of enaction introduced by Varela,
Thompson and Rosch.

Embodied Learning and Design
Dragan Trninic
How does embodied activity become symbolically
articulated? How, if at all, should instructors foster the
embodiment of new notions, and how should they guide
students to articulate these notions in standard forms? To
approach these questions, Dragan Trninic has been involved
in pedagogical design for the content of proportional
reasoning. Within novel learning environments, students
first embody the target concept of proportion as a
coordinated bi-manual performance and only later, under
tutorial guidance, signify this performance in the
mathematical semiotic system using a set of instruments
interpolated into the problem space. Findings suggest that in
the realm of elementary mathematics, conceptual
development is much closer to motor skill development than
previously supposed. This holds direct implications for
reform math education movement, where conceptual
understanding is emphasized often at the expense of
procedural fluency.

Educational Neuroscience of Mathematical
Cognition
Firat Soylu
One of the main claims of the embodiment thesis is that
cognitive processes are grounded in the sensorimotor
system. From an evolutionary perspective, new cognitive
skills are acquired by redeployment of existing neural
regions that originally participate in sensorimotor tasks.
Understanding neural correlates of mathematical cognition
requires the study of bodily processes and the sensorimotor
circuitry that underlie number processing. In this talk Firat
Soylu will review research on the neural correlates of
number processing, how sensorimotor neural resources
selectively participate in various number processing tasks
and discuss implications of neuroscience findings for
learning design and educational practice.
To exemplify the body and mathematical cognition
relation Firat will focus on how finger related sensorimotor
circuitry participate in mathematical cognition, review what
we know on the neuropsychological, cultural and
developmental aspects of the finger & number relation, and
present findings from behavioral and fMRI dual-task
experiments testing hypotheses on how the finger
sensorimotor circuitry participate in number processing with
adult participants. Firat will also discuss the educational
implications of findings on the finger & number relation,
and how new technologies can be used to consolidate
finger-based, symbolic, phonetic, and perceptual
representations of numbers during early development.

Mathematical Cognition and Perception
David Landy
Mathematical tools and formalisms encapsulate
experience in the physical world, and allow for conceptual
abstractions. At the same time, formalisms are themselves
physical systems, which are engaged via perceptual and
motor processes. As computational devices become more
ubiquitous, symbol systems are more and more dynamic and
interactive. How can our understanding of embodied
approaches to mathematical formalisms and diagrams
inform the development of these systems? David Landy will
trace a project starting from basic cognitive research
through the construction of a pedagogical design project
applying an embodied perspective to the design of an
interface for symbolic manipulation. David will present the
results of two experiments demonstrating that the use of
such a system in typical classrooms leads to more flexible
and more accurate symbol use.

References
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded Cognition. Annu. Rev.
Psychol, 59, 617–645.

Embodied Mathematics & Philosophy
Joselle Kehoe

Kiverstein, J., & Clark, A. (2009). Introduction: Mind
Embodied, Embedded, Enacted: One Church or Many?
Topoi, 28(1), 1–7. doi:10.1007/s11245-008-9041-4

Mathematics has been the subject of experimental studies
in cognitive science that explore the sensory grounding of
number and magnitude. But mathematics also provides
conceptual schemes that can manage our comprehension of

87

