UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Metaphors We Speak with Affect How We Think about Time and Space

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2d87h8jq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Lleras, Martin
Reali, Florencia
Alviar, Camila
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Metaphors We Speak with Affect How We Think about Time and Space
Martín Lleras (m.lleras70@uniandes.edu.co)
Departamento de Psicología, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, 111711, Colombia.

Florencia Reali (f.reali96@uniandes.edu.co)
Departamento de Psicología, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, 111711, Colombia.

Camila Alviar (mcalviarg@unal.edu.co)
Departamento de Psicología Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Bogotá, 111711, Colombia
María Paula Bermúdez (mp.bermudez620@uniandes.edu.co)
Departamento de Psicología, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, 111711. Colombia
Abstract
A growing bulk of work indicates that we think about time in
terms of space. Solving temporal ambiguities may involve
adopting alternative spatial frames – namely time-moving vs.
ego-moving perspectives. Previous work showed that people
draw on either spatial perspective to disambiguate statements
such as Next Wednesday´s meeting has been moved forward 2
days (Boroditsky, 2000). The ambiguity lies in the expression
move forward, which can be translated into Spanish either as
adelantar or as mover hacia adelante. A Spanish corpus
analysis shows that, when these expressions are used to talk
about time, the former is more frequently used to describe
events moving towards the ego (time-moving perspective).
We studied whether the use of these expressions influences
the interpretation of ambiguous temporal statements in
Spanish. Results from three experiments show that: 1.Both
spatial schema primes and the choice of “move forward”
translation constrain people´s interpretations of ambiguous
temporal statements (Experiment 1); 2.The use of different
metaphors to talk about time influences the solving of spatial
ambiguities (Experiment 2); 3.Temporal primes containing no
metaphorical forms fail to do so (Experiment 3). We conclude
that the conventionalized use of expressions affects how
people draw on spatial schemas when thinking about time and
space.
Keywords: conceptual metaphor; ambiguous temporal
statements; ego-moving/time-moving schemas; language use.

Introduction
The question of how people mentally represent time and
space has been a recurring theme to which cognitive
scientists have devoted much recent work. Conceptual
Metaphor Theory suggests that abstract thought depends
largely on metaphorical mappings from more concrete
conceptual domains that emerge directly from perceptual
representations such as spatial orientation or physical
containment (Casasanto, 2010; Kövecses, 2010; Lakoff &
Johnson, 1980, 1999). Time is an abstract concept that is not
directly grounded on our physical experience, thus we may
borrow spatial schemas to think about it.
Time and space representations seem to be
asymmetrically dependent (Boroditsky, 2000; Lakoff &
Johnson, 1980, 1999). Some evidence of the directionality
of the space-time mapping comes from language use: we
talk about time in terms of space as in periods of time being
long or events being ahead of us. Linguistic forms used to
describe spatial motion are also imported into time, as when

we say that a certain date is approaching or a meeting has
been moved forward.
Cross-linguistic studies show that linguistic expressions
of the TIME IS SPACE conceptual metaphor can be found
in languages as diverse as English, Mandarin Chinese,
Hindi, and Sesotho among others (Altverson, 1994). Across
cultures people use spatial metaphors to describe time more
frequently than time metaphors to describe space (see
Kövecses, 2010, for a review).
There are two distinct space-time metaphoric systems in
English and other languages: the ego-moving and the timemoving schemas (Clark, 1973; Boroditsky, 2000). In the
ego-moving perspective we represent the individual moving
across the time line walking into the future (e.g., we are
approaching the weekend). In the time-moving schema, we
think about a static individual who is being “hit” by the time
line – that is, events are represented as approaching the ego
(e.g., the weekend is approaching). Boroditsky (2000)
showed that ego-moving and time-moving scenarios used as
spatial primes affected the way people thought about time.
By contrast, temporal primes had no influence over spatial
thinking. In a different study, Boroditsky and Ramscar
(2002) showed how our experience of spatial situations
(e.g., mentally simulating spatial movement or moving
along a cafeteria line) had an effect on the type of
spatiotemporal metaphors that are activated. People
experiencing motion compatible with the ego-moving
schema were more likely to use an ego-moving
representation of time, while those that underwent the
experience of an object moving towards them were more
likely to activate time-moving schemas.
The importance of distinguishing between mental
metaphors and linguistic metaphors has been pointed out
(e.g., Casasanto, 2010). Casasanto and Boroditsky (2008)
performed a series of psychophysical tasks, which did not
require the use of language, showing that spatial stimuli
interfered significantly with temporal judgments, while
temporal stimuli had no effect on spatial judgments. These
findings showed that spatial and temporal mental
representations are asymmetrically dependent, as predicted
by the directionality of space-time linguistic metaphors,
even when tasks contained no linguistic materials.
Casasanto, Fotakoupoulou and Boroditsky (2010) studied
the question of whether space-time representations are
symmetrical in the first stages of development. They studied
space-time mapping behavior in kindergartners and

1258

schoolchildren. Their results were consistent with former
experiments performed with adults: kids are able to ignore
irrelevant temporal information when they make spatial
judgments, but they can´t ignore irrelevant spatial
information when they make temporal judgments. This
suggests that the origin of the asymmetric condition of
metaphorical mapping might not be due (at least not
exclusively) to language experience. One plausible
explanation for the directionality observed in the space-time
mapping is that mental metaphors are grounded in our
interactions with the physical world. Because space is easier
to perceive and reconstruct from our perceptual experiences,
time representations might be parasitic on it (Casasanto,
2010; Casasanto, Fotakopoulou & Boroditsky, 2010).
Does language play any role in the directionality of the
space-time mapping? Most authors agree that language
might have a modulating role on the inferential structure
derived from primary metaphors. Initially we may all
develop similar mental metaphors, but as we gain linguistic
experience, mental mappings could be adjusted according to
patterns of language use. For example, in a comparative
study between Greek and English speakers, Casasanto
(2010) showed that, although the asymmetric relationship
showed up in both cases, the type of spatial stimuli that
caused the most interference on temporal judgments was
congruent with the linguistic metaphors most commonly
used in participants´ native language. More recently, Duffy
and Feist (2013) showed that the kind of verb used in
ambiguous statements about time influenced the type of
spatial schema (ego-moving or time-moving) that people
chose during interpretation.
Along these lines, this work is intended to investigate
whether the use of different metaphorical expressions in
Spanish constrains the type of spatial schemas elicited
during space-time mapping. Beyond aiming to provide
evidence of metaphorical transfer effects, our primary goal
is to show that the conventionalized use of certain
expressions affects the ways in which people draw on
competing spatial perspectives when thinking about time
(and space). Consistent with the frequency patterns revealed
by a corpus analysis of Colombian Spanish, the results from
our three experiments suggest that the specific linguistic
metaphors that we use to talk about time constrain the
interpretation of temporal and spatial ambiguities. More
generally, the results align with usage-based approaches
(e.g., Langacker, 2000) according to which the patterns of
language use and repetition shape our cognitive
representations.

Interpreting Ambiguous Statements about Time
Solving temporal ambiguities may involve adopting
different spatial representations – namely time-moving vs.
ego-moving schemas (Boroditsky, 2000; Clark, 1973;
Lakoff & Johnson, 1980). Boroditsky and Ramscar (2002)
used ambiguous temporal questions to demonstrate that
people use spatial information when disambiguating
statements about time. In the first study of their paper, they

used spatial primes to get participants to think about
themselves moving through space (ego-moving perspective)
or making an office chair come towards them through space
(object-moving perspective). Afterwards, participants were
asked to solve an ambiguous temporal statement—namely
Next Wednesday’s meeting has been moved forward 2 days.
What day is the meeting now that it has been rescheduled?
People primed to think about space adopted an ego-moving
schema and answered Friday more often, while those
primed to think in terms of an object moving towards them
answered Monday more often.
It has been argued that the locus of the ambiguity might
be the adverb forward, which can be interpreted either as
indicating the direction of motion of the ego through time or
as indicating the direction of motion of time towards the ego
(Boroditsky 2000; Kranjec & McDonough, 2011). Recently,
Duffy and Feist (2013) looked at responses to the
ambiguous Next Wednesday’s meeting question using
different verbs (such as pull or bring) finding that both the
verb and adverb constrain the interpretation.
Along these lines, Spanish provides an interesting case
study to further explore this issue. The expression move
forward can be translated into Spanish in two ways: (a)
mover hacia adelante, and (b) adelantar – that is, the
verbalization of the adverb adelante (ahead). Both
expressions are synonymous in Spanish. Actually, according
to the dictionary Real Academia Española, the first entrance
for the definition of adelantar is “mover o llevar hacia
adelante” (tr. to move or bring forward) (RAE, 2014).
Does the choice between adelantar and mover hacia
adelante affect how people solve ambiguous statements
about time in Spanish? Before dealing with this question,
we conducted a corpus analysis to explore the patterns of
usage of these two expressions. We used the CREA corpus
of Spanish (Banco de datos CREA online, 2012), which
contains over 160 million words of written texts (90%) and
oral transcriptions (10%) from Spain and Latin American
countries. Since our experiments were conducted in
Colombia, we restricted our search to data from Colombian
sources. We retrieved all sentences containing the
expressions adelantar or the formula “VERB (V) + hacia
adelante”. Phrases were then classified according to
whether the target items were used in reference to space,
time or had any other metaphorical meaning. Expressions
used in reference to time or space, were classified into three
categories: 1.ego-moving-perspective, 2. time/objectmoving-perspective and 3.ambiguous (if the contextual
information was not sufficient to decide between an egomoving and a time-moving interpretation). For example, the
sentence “the event on Wednesday has been moved forward
to the Friday on the same week” would be classified as
temporal/ego-moving-perspective. Decisions about sentence
coding were reached by consensus of all four authors of this
work.
The results were the following: from a total of 118
sentences containing the form adelantar, 62 (52.5%)
described time, 5 (4.2%) space, and 52 (43.3%) had a

1259

different (metaphorical) meaning; from a total of 32
sentences containing the form V+hacia-adelante, 14
(43.8%) described time and 18 (56.2%) space. Among
expressions where adelantar was used in reference to time,
52 of them were tagged as time-moving-perspective and 10
as ambiguous (χ2 (1,N= 62); p<.0001), and among those
used in reference to space, 2 were tagged as ego-movingperspective and 3 as ambiguous (ns.). Among the 14
sentences where V+hacia adelante was used in reference to
time, 12 of them were tagged as ego-moving perspective, 1
was tagged as time-moving-perspective and 1 as ambiguous
(χ2(2, N=14); p<.001), and among spatial sentences, 8 were
tagged as ego-moving-perspective, 10 as ambiguous (ns.).
The data suggest a difference between the
conventionalized use of the target expressions in reference
to spatial and temporal contexts. Specifically, in temporal
contexts, adelantar seems to be used more often to refer to
events moving in time towards people, while V+hacia
adelante seems to be used more often to refer to people
moving through the time line. However, that appears not to
be the case when these expressions are used in reference to
space.
Now we turn to the question of whether the use of
adelantar/mover hacia adelante in ambiguous statements
about time influences the way people solve them.
Additionally, we are interested in exploring whether spatial
schema primes affect disambiguation of temporal statements
when different translations of “move forward” are used to
construct temporal targets. Experiment 1 was designed to
address these questions. Moreover, we ask whether thinking
about time exerts any measurable priming effect on the
solving of spatial ambiguities. Previous work suggests that
is not the case (Boroditsky, 2000). In Spanish, however, the
expression adelantar is used more frequently to describe
time-moving temporal scenarios while mover hacia
adelante is typically used to describe ego-moving temporal
scenarios. Thus, the use of these forms when talking about
time might contribute to the activation of different spatial
perspectives influencing the transfer from temporal primes
to spatial targets. Experiments 2 and 3 were designed to
address this issue.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 was intended as a replica of Study 1 in
Boroditsky and Ramscar (2002). We aimed to investigate
whether spatial primes affect the interpretations of
ambiguous temporal statements in Spanish. To do so, we
used similar spatial primes as those used in Boroditsky and
Ramscar (2002) followed by the translation to Spanish of
the ambiguous temporal question used in the original study:
Next Wednesday’s meeting has been moved forward two
days. What day is the meeting now that it has been
rescheduled? The expression move forward was translated
either as adelantar or as mover hacia adelante.
The experiment was a two-factorial (“move forward”
wording type and spatial prime schema type) fully crossed
between participants design. The first factor was the “move

forward” translation used in the probe question (adelantar
vs mover hacia adelante). The ambiguous temporal
statement used in our study was the following: La reunión
del próximo miércoles ha sido [adelantada/movida hacia
adelante] dos días. ¿Qué día será la reunión ahora que ha
sido reprogramada?
The two levels of the second factor – spatial prime
schema type – were ego-moving and object-moving schema
primes. Similar to Boroditsky and Ramscar (2002), spatial
primes were designed to get people to think about
themselves moving through space in an office chair (egomoving prime) or making an office chair come towards
them though space (object-moving prime).

Method
Participants One hundred and eight undergraduate students
from the Universidad de Los Andes and Universidad
Nacional de Colombia, all native Spanish speakers,
completed voluntarily a two-page questionnaire.
Materials and Procedure Four types of questionnaires
were
created
(adelantar/ego-moving
prime;
adelantar/object-moving prime; mover-hacia-adelante/egomoving prime; mover-hacia-adelante/object-moving prime).
Conditions were counterbalanced across subjects. The first
page of the questionnaire depicted the spatial prime, which
was similar to the one used in Boroditsky and Ramscar
(2002). In the ego-moving prime condition, participants
were exposed to a drawing of a man sitting on a chair on
one end of a track. An X was drawn on the opposite end of
the track. Participants were instructed to imagine they were
the man on the picture maneuvering the chair towards the X.
They were instructed to draw an arrow indicating the path of
motion. In the object-moving prime condition, participants
were exposed to a drawing of a man next to an X, on one
end of a track. The man holds a rope attached to a chair on
the opposite end of the track. Participants were instructed to
imagine that, with the rope, they had to maneuver the chair
towards the X (that is, towards them). They were also
instructed to draw an arrow indicating the path of the
motion. The left-right orientation of the spatial primes was
counterbalanced. In the second page of the questionnaire
they were asked the ambiguous question in one of the two
wording conditions (“move forward” translated either as
adelantar or as mover hacia adelante).

Results and Discussion
Eight questionnaires were excluded from the analysis either
because participants failed to complete the first page or
provided nonsensical responses to the probe question (e.g.,
“Wednesday”), leaving a final sample of 100 participants:
48 in the adelantar condition (24 exposed to the egomoving spatial prime and 24 to the object-moving spatial
prime) and 52 in the mover-hacia-adelante condition (27
exposed to the ego-moving spatial prime and 25 to the timemoving spatial prime).

1260

Number of Responses

Results are summarized in Figure 1. Of the 24 participants
in the adelantar/ego-moving prime condition, 10 (42%)
responded viernes (Friday) and 14 (58%) responded lunes
(Monday). From the 24 participants in the adelantar/objectmoving prime condition, 2 of them (8%) responded Friday
and 22 (92%) responded Monday. All participants in the
mover-hacia-adelante/ego-moving
prime
condition
responded Friday, and in the mover-hacia-adelante/objectmoving prime condition, 19 (76%) responded Friday and 6
(24%) responded Monday.
As illustrated in Figure 1, participants showed a tendency
toward responding Monday in the adelantar wording
condition (75%), while in the mover-hacia-adelante
wording condition most people responded Friday (88.5%).
(χ² (1, N=100); p<.0001). A three-way contingency table
analysis showed that there was also a significant effect of
spatial schema primes on responses when controlling for the
wording of the ambiguous statement. The effect of spatial
primes was significant among the pool of participants filling
the adelantar condition questionnaires (χ² (1, N=48) = 5.1;
p=.017), as well as among participants filling questionnaires
in the mover-hacia-adelante condition (χ² (1, N=52) = 5.44;
p=.009). Similarly, a significant effect of wording type was
found when controlling for spatial schema prime type, both
among participants grouped by ego-moving prime
questionnaires (χ² (1, N=51) = 18.9; p<.0001) and objectmoving prime questionnaires (χ² (1, N=49)=20.2; p< .0001).
30

Viernes (Friday)

Lunes (Monday)

20
10
0

EM SP

OM SP

MOVER HACIA ADELANTE

EM SP

(Boroditsky, 2000). However, we hypothesize that Spanish
expressions with conventionalized use might potentiate the
activation of temporal schemas that may in turn contribute
to constrain the interpretation of spatial ambiguities.
Experiment 2 was designed to explore this hypothesis.

Experiment 2
In this second experiment we were concerned with whether
temporal primes transfer to spatial targets. The prime stimuli
were statements about time that were congruent with either
an ego-moving or a time-moving scenario. Crucially, egomoving temporal scenarios were described using the
expression mover hacia adelante to convey “move forward
in time”, while time-moving temporal scenarios were
described using the expression adelantar to also mean
“move forward in time”. Participants were primed with a
series of sentences describing temporal scenarios and
afterwards they were asked to solve a task that involved a
spatial ambiguity.

Method
Participants One hundred and twenty undergraduate
students from Universidad de Los Andes and Universidad
Nacional de Colombia, all native Spanish speakers,
completed voluntarily a two-page questionnaire.
Materials and Procedure Two types of questionnaires
were created corresponding to ego-moving and time-moving
schema primes. Conditions were counterbalanced across
subjects. The first page of the survey included temporal
primes consisting of a set of four statements describing
temporal scenarios, each followed by a comprehension
question. The following are examples of the stimuli used:

a. Ego-moving temporal schema prime condition:

OM SP

La reunión del próximo miércoles ha sido movida
hacia adelante de modo que será el viernes de la
misma semana.[tr. Next Wednesday´s meeting has
been moved forward so it will take place on Friday of
the same week.]
b. Time-moving temporal schema prime condition:
La reunión del próximo miércoles ha sido adelantada
de modo que será el lunes de la misma semana.[Tr.
Next Wednesday´s meeting has been moved forward
so it will take place on Monday of the same week.]

ADELANTAR

Figure 1: Number of Monday and Friday responses shown
as a function of the experimental condition. EM=Ego
Moving; OM=Object Moving; SP= Spatial Prime.
Taken together, the results are twofold: Consistently with
the patterns of use revealed by the corpus analysis, using
adelantar in the probe question biases participants toward
responding lunes (Monday) while using mover hacia
adelante biases responses toward viernes (Friday). Second,
the finding in Boroditsky and Ramscar (2002) was
replicated: the spatial schema prime type influences the way
people solve ambiguous temporal questions in Spanish
regardless of the “move forward” translation used in the
probe question. The results then contribute to the crosslinguistic accumulating evidence that spatial information
interferes with the temporal judgments.
We now turn to a different question: Does the type of
expression used to talk about time affect the way people
think about space? Previous work showed that thinking
about time does not affect the solution of spatial ambiguities

Statements in both conditions were followed by the same
comprehension question: How many days are there between
the initial and final schedules? The purpose of this question
was to ensure the participants read the statement carefully
and engaged in thinking about the different temporal
scenarios. The other three additional prime statements were
similar to the examples above but differed in that months,
years and hours were used as time units (instead of days),
and a contest, a talk and a conference were used as events
(instead of a meeting). Temporal statements depicting egomoving scenarios consistently contained the expression

1261

Results and Discussion
Ten questionnaires were removed from the sample either
because participants failed to complete the first page or
because they provided atypical responses (e.g., circling the
middle widget) leaving a final sample of 110 responses.
From these, 54 corresponded to the time-moving prime
condition and 56 to the ego-moving prime condition.
Results are summarized in Figure 2 (right panel). Of the 54
participants who were exposed to the time-moving prime
condition, 38 (70%) said that the bottom widget was ahead
and 16 (30%) chose the one on top. On the other hand, of
the 56 participants in the ego-moving prime condition, 26
(47%) said the bottom widget was ahead and 30 (53%) said
the top widget was ahead. The difference across conditions
was significant (χ²(2,N=110)=5.5; p=.018), suggesting that
people´s responses were constrained by their thinking about
the temporal scenarios. This appears to be at odds with
previous work showing the absence of transfer effects from
temporal primes to spatial targets (Boroditsky, 2000). In
Spanish, however, patterns of language use are such that the
metaphorical expression adelantar is more often used to
describe events moving across the timeline towards the ego,
while mover hacia adelante is more frequently used to
describe the ego moving along the timeline. Thus, the use of
these linguistic forms might contribute significantly to the
activation of temporal ego-moving and time-moving
schemas when participants are prompt to think about time.
But, what exactly is causing the effect? One possibility is
that temporal representations per se activate schemas strong
enough to constrain spatial interpretations. Another
possibility is that the salience of the linguistic metaphor in
the temporal primes contributes significantly to the effect.
To shed light on this matter, we asked whether the results of
Experiment 2 would replicate if temporal primes contained

no metaphorical expressions as part of their wording.
Experiment 3 was designed to address this question.
Number of responses

mover hacia adelante and those depicting time-moving
scenarios consistently included the expression adelantar to
convey “move forward in time”.
Participants were instructed to turn the page after reading
the four temporal statements and answering the
comprehension questions. In the second page of the
questionnaire they were asked to solve an ambiguous spatial
task. Similar to Boroditsky (2000), participants were
exposed to a hand-made drawing of three equal widgets that
were arranged from closest to farthest. The widget on top of
the drawing was significantly smaller than the widget at the
bottom, while the middle widget was intermediate in size
(see Figure 2, left panel). Participants answered the
following ambiguous question written below the figure:
¿Cuál de los artefactos está adelante?(Márquelo con un
círculo) – that is, a translation from the probe question used
in Study 2 in Boroditsky (2000): “Which one of the widgets
is ahead?(Please circle one)”. The intrinsic properties of the
widgets impeded participants to infer the “aheadness” of the
widgets, forcing them to adopt either an ego-moving
perspective or object-moving perspective to solve the task.

Top Widget
Bottom Widget

40
30
20
10
0
TimeMoving
Prime

EgoMoving
Prime

Figure 2: Ambiguous spatial target (left panel) and results
from Experiment 2 (right panel).

Experiment 3
Experiment 3 was identical to Experiment 2 except for the
wording of the temporal statements used as primes. The aim
of this study was to explore whether the results of
Experiment 2 do replicate when priming materials contain
no conventionalized metaphorical expressions.

Method
Participants A hundred and seventy six undergraduate
students from the Universidad de Los Andes and
Universidad Nacional de Colombia, all native Spanish
speakers, completed voluntarily a two-page questionnaire.
Materials and Procedure Two types of questionnaires
were created and counterbalanced across subjects. Similar to
Experiment 2, questionnaires corresponded either to the
ego-moving prime condition or the time-moving prime
condition. The first page of the questionnaire included the
temporal prime consisting of a set of four temporal
statements describing temporal scenarios, each followed by
a comprehension question. Unlike Experiment 2, the
temporal statements included no conventionalized
metaphorical expressions. The following is an example:
Ego-moving/time-moving schema prime conditions:
La reunión del próximo miércoles ha sido
reprogramada de modo que será el [viernes/lunes]
de la misma semana. [Tr. Next Wednesday´s meeting
has been rescheduled so it will take place on
Friday/Monday on the same week.]
The additional three statements were the same as in
Experiment 2, but differed in that the expressions adelantar
and mover hacia adelante were replaced by the verb
reprogramar (reschedule) in both the ego-moving and timemoving prime conditions, as in the example above. All
statements were followed by the same comprehension
questions as in Experiment 2. The procedure as well as the
spatial target shown in the second page of the survey was
the same as in Experiment 2.

1262

Results and Discussion
Five atypical responses were excluded from the analysis,
leaving a final sample of 171 responses, 85 in the timemoving prime condition and 86 in the ego-moving prime
condition. Among participants exposed to the time-moving
prime condition, 46 (54%) said that the bottom widget was
ahead, while 39 (46%) chose the one on top. Similarly,
among participants in the ego-moving prime condition, 44
(51%) said the bottom widget was ahead and 42 (49%) said
the top widget was ahead. A chi-square analysis showed no
significant difference across conditions (χ² (2, N=171); p
>.8; ns.), suggesting that, thinking about temporal schemas
alone might not be enough to constrain the interpretation of
spatial ambiguities.
These findings suggest that transfer from temporal primes
– containing no metaphorical expressions – to spatial targets
fails to occur. This is consistent with previous work
showing similar priming asymmetries (Boroditsky, 2000)
and supports the notion that the concept of time might be
parasitic on spatial representations (e.g., Casasanto, 2010).
Rather, the results of Experiment 3 suggest that the timeto-space transfer effect observed in Experiment 2 depends,
at least in part, on the salience of the metaphorical
expressions included in the temporal primes. In other words,
specific linguistic instantiations of the TIME IS SPACE
conceptual metaphor may constrain the interpretation of the
spatial ambiguities. Is this just a red herring? A closer look
to Experiment 2 suggests that there is more to it. Granted,
the salience of the expressions adelantar and mover hacia
adelante in temporal primes may be a key constraint to how
people solve the spatial task. However, notice that these
expressions provide no explicit linguistic information about
the competing spatial perspectives (ego-moving vs. timemoving schemas). In fact, these two expressions are
synonymous according to standard dictionaries. What seems
to be occurring is that alternative spatial motion schemas
become differentially activated as a consequence of the
conventionalized use of the surface constituents of the
linguistic metaphor.
Along these lines, beyond providing additional evidence
of the psychological reality of conceptual metaphorical
transfer effects, the main contribution of this work is to
show that the patterns of use of linguistic expressions
constrain the ways in which we draw on competing spatial
perspectives when thinking about time and space. More
generally, the results align with usage-based approaches
(e.g., Langacker, 2000) according to which the patterns of
language use and repetition shape the way we construct and
represent our cognitive representations.

Conclusion
Although the same metaphor –the same mapping between
source (space) and target (time) domains– may exist in
many languages, the corresponding linguistic expressions of
the metaphor may not be identical. The mental
(nonlinguistic) metaphors underlying the space-time
mapping is asymmetrically construed: representation of time

might be parasitic on spatial schemas grounded on
perceptual experience. However, the conventionalized use
of linguistic forms constrains the kind of schemas that we
naturally draw upon when thinking about time and space,
suggesting that language use plays a key role on shaping the
ways in which our conceptual metaphors operate. Finally,
the results discussed in this paper shed light into the
Whorfian question, expanding our understanding of how
language is related to thought.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by Vicedecanatura de
Investigaciones, Univ. de Los Andes, Bogotá, Colombia.

References
Altverson, H. (1994). Semantics and experience: Universal
metaphors of time in English, Mandarin, Hindi, and
Sesotho. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Banco de datos CREA [online]. (2012). Corpus de
referencia del español actual. http://www.rae.es.
Boroditsky (2000). Metaphoric structuring: understanding
time through spatial metaphors. Cognition, 75, 1-25.
Boroditsky, L. & Ramscar, M. (2002). The roles of body
and mind in abstract thought. Psychological Science, 13,
185–188.
Casasanto, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2008). Time in the mind:
Using space to think about time. Cognition, 106, 579–
593.
Casasanto, D. (2010). Space for thinking. In V. Evans and
P. Chilton (Eds.), Language, cognition and space: State
of the art and new directions (pp. 453-478). London:
Equinox Publishing.
Casasanto, D., Fotakopoulou, O., Boroditsky, L. (2010).
Space and Time in the Child’s Mind: Evidence for a
Cross-Dimensional Asymmetry. Cognitive Science, 34,
387–405.
Clark, H. (1973). Space, time, semantics and the child. In T.
Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and the acquisition
of language (pp. 27-63). New York: Academic Press.
Duffy, S. & Feist, M. (2013). Moving beyond Next
Wednesday: Interpreting ambiguous statements about
time. Paper presented at ICLC-12. Edmonton, Canada.
Kövecses, Z. (2010). Metaphor and culture. Acta
Univesitatis Sapientiae Philologica, 2, 197-220
Kranjec, A. & McDonough, L.(2011). The implicit and
explicit embodiment of time. Journal of Pragmatics, 43:
735-748.
Langacker, R. (2000). A dynamic usage-based model. In
Barlow M. and Suzanne K. (Eds.), Usage-based models of
language (pp-1-63). Stanford: CSLI.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh.
New York: Basic Books.
Matlock, T., Ramscar, M., & Boroditsky, L. (2005). On the
experiential link between spatial and temporal language.
Cognitive Science, 29, 655–664.

1263

