UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Protean Pointing Gesture: Variation in a Building Block of Human Communication

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6sd477h8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Cooperrider, Kensy
Nunez, Rafael
Slotta, James

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Protean Pointing Gesture:
Variation in a Building Block of Human Communication
Kensy Cooperrider (kensy@uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Chicago
5848 S. University Ave., Chicago, IL 60637

Rafael Núñez (nunez@cogsci.ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, University of California – San Diego
9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, CA 92093

James Slotta (slottaj@gmail.com)
Department of Anthropology, University of California – San Diego
9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, CA 92093
Abstract

on these questions. In the folk theories of the Englishspeaking world and other so-called WEIRD (Western
Educated Industrialized Rich Democratic) societies, there is
a strong association between pointing and extension of the
forefinger, an association enshrined in the English
colloquial terms “index” or “pointer” finger. This
forefinger-pointing association is not just a matter of
terminology. A recent study of infant gestures in seven farflung speech communities found in each one a preference
for index finger pointing over other kinds of manual or nonmanual pointing (Liszkowski et al., 2012). Use of the index
finger as a kind of developmental pointing default may in
fact have its roots in the anatomy of the human hand. When
the hand is at rest, the index finger protrudes relative to the
other fingers in human children and adults but not in
chimpanzees (Povinelli et al., 1994). And, indeed,
notwithstanding impressionistic claims made about remote
cultures, use of the index finger for pointing has been found
in every community in which it has been sought. These facts
taken together suggest that index finger pointing may be a
strong candidate for a human universal.
Countering this swelling tide of evidence for the extended
index finger as a species-wide privileged form of the
gesture, however, are a handful of reports of substantive
cultural differences in how humans point. In several groups,
variations in pointing handshape, such as the flat or horned
hand, carry conventional meanings (Wilkins, 2003; Kendon
& Versante, 2003). Other studies have described
conventionalized ways of pointing non-manually, such as by
protruding the lips (Sherzer, 1972; Enfield, 2001) or by
scrunching the nose (Cooperrider & Nunez, 2012) while
directing one’s gaze to a region of space. Though largely
absent from WEIRD communities, such non-manual
pointing practices may not be so rare. Lip-pointing in one
variant or another appears to be widely distributed, with
reports of its use in Southeast Asia, Australia, the
Caribbean, Africa, and South America.
Should such differences of form be considered surfacelevel cultural quirks, or do they imply that this foundational
building block is more protean than often assumed? Existing

Pointing is a foundational building block of human
communication, but does it take the same form from one
culture to the next? Index finger pointing is often assumed to
be universally privileged. Use of non-manual pointing
morphologies has been attested around the world but it has
never been clear how central these variants are in the
communities in which they occur. Using a novel referential
communication task, we investigated pointing preferences in
two cultures: in the Yupno of Papua New Guinea and in the
US. Our task prompted similar rates of pointing in both
groups, but the Yupno participants produced more nonmanual pointing (nose- and head-pointing) than manual
pointing, while the US participants stuck unwaveringly to
index finger pointing. The motivation for these starkly
contrasting patterns requires further investigation, but it is
clear they constitute fundamentally different ways of carrying
out one of our most distinctively human communicative acts.
Keywords: pointing; reference; communicative universals;
human diversity; embodiment; Papua New Guinea

Introduction
Humans have been influentially described as the “symbolic
species” but might just as well be described as the “deictic
species.” Evidence of animal pointing in the wild is scarce
and contested, but human infants everywhere, sometime
before they can speak, start to point for their caretakers.
This prelinguistic gesture, an early bodily expression of the
drive to orient and share the attention of others, remains a
basic communicative tool throughout the lifespan and is
deployed in all kinds of everyday activities (Clark, 1996).
Such observations have led some researchers to posit a
special role for pointing at the dawn of human language
(e.g. Tomasello, 2008). Primordial or not, there is little
question that pointing constitutes, in the words of one
researcher, a “foundational building block of human
communication” (Kita, 2003).
What form does this building block take and is it the same
form from one culture to the next? Despite decades of
philosophical and cognitive scientific interest in pointing,
there has been surprisingly little systematic empirical work

355

evidence leaves this question largely open. Previous studies
have provided existence proofs of alternatives to index
finger pointing but have not demonstrated a central role for
them. Provocative claims about the primacy of non-manual
pointing in some groups have occasionally been put
forward. About the Cuna of Panama, for example, Sherzer
(1983) observes that lip-pointing, relative to manual
pointing, is “more common by far” (pg. 169, quoted in
Enfield, 2001). But the reliance on lip-pointing or other
non-manual forms relative to manual forms has never to our
knowledge been quantified. Moreoever, even in WEIRD
groups, the extent of the preference for index finger pointing
relative to other types of pointing, either manual or nonmanual, has been taken for granted and never studied
systematically. Head-pointing has also been attested in a
number of such groups (McClave et al., 2007), leaving open
the possibility that it plays a larger role than casual
impressions might suggest. Given the current body of
evidence, a skeptical observer might understandably
presume patterns in pointing gestures across cultures to be
universal until proven otherwise.
In the present study we used a novel referential
communication task to investigate preferences for different
forms of pointing in two cultural groups: a first group
consisting of adult members of the Yupno community of
Papua New Guinea and a second group consisting of adult
speakers of English in the United States. In addition to
index finger pointing, the Yupno make use of both headpointing and nose-pointing, a conventional form of nonmanual pointing that consists of ‘S-action’ — that is,
contractions of the muscles surrounding the nose along with
muscles of the brow — while re-orienting the head toward a
region of space (Cooperrider & Núñez, 2012). Our own
previous impressions were that non-manual pointing, and in
particular nose-pointing, played a central role in Yupno
communication. The US population has previously been
shown to use both index finger pointing and head-pointing
but not any conventional facial gesture such as lip- or nosepointing. Our referential communication task was designed
to elicit pointing gestures and demonstratives (not analyzed
further here), and to be appropriate for use across cultures
and age groups. The task affords an important opportunity
to make, for the first time, a systematic comparison across
groups in what bodily resources are used to accomplish one
of our most basic and distinctively human communicative
tasks.

sessions were conducted within the main settlement area of
Gua village, half in an enclosed garden area and the other
half in a single-room schoolhouse.
The US portion of the study was conducted at the
University of California, San Diego. 18 adults participated
in exchange for course credit. All were undergraduate
students and fluent speakers of English. One pair was
eliminated because of excessive leaning on or sitting on the
hands, as well as a comment implying that pointing was not
allowed during the task. 16 participants (12 men, 4 women)
were included in the final analysis. All sessions with US
participants were conducted indoors.

The ‘Stacks and Squares’ task
‘Stacks and Squares’ is a novel referential communication
task in which a director tells a matcher how to arrange
objects (‘stacks’) on a fixed array of locations (‘squares’).
Unlike many classic referential communication games, the
participants work in full view of each other, inviting gesture
as a useful strategy. The director is seated before an array of
five square cloths laid out on the ground, with a stack of
objects off to one side of the array. The director is shown a
photo of the objects arranged in a particular way on the
cloth squares, and is told that the goal is to get the matcher,
who cannot see the photo, to arrange the objects just like
they are in the photo. Each photo depicts eight of the eleven
total objects arranged on the cloths, with every square
occupied and sometimes with more than one object per
square.
The five cloth squares (one 16 by 16 in. red square, two 8
by 8 in. red squares, and two 8 by 8 in. blue squares,) are
arranged on the ground in a symmetrical array (see Figure 1
for a schematic depiction). To one side of the array is a
small rectangular platform on the ground that serves as a
“staging area” for the objects. Eleven objects are stacked on
the staging area: a small white cylindrical top, a large white
cylindrical top, a small cardboard cylinder, a large
cardboard cylinder, three colored beanbags (red, green,
blue), and four yellow foam cubes. All objects start on the
staging area at the beginning of a trial and return to it after
the trial is over.
After consenting to participate, one member of the pair
was seated on one side of the array in cross-legged fashion
with the arms in front of the body and thus available for
gesture. Other sitting positions, such as leaning back on the
hands, were corrected by the experimenter. The participant
seated first served as the first director. He or she first
completed one practice trial involving only 5 objects and
then two additional trials involving full 8-object arrays. The
director and matcher then switched roles and the nowdirector completed two trials. After four total trials, the roles
were switched again and the director’s seating position was
moved to the opposite side of the array. All other aspects of
the array remained fixed. There were then two more trials,
another role switch, and two final trials. In all, each

Methods
Participants
The Yupno portion of the study was conducted in the upper
Yupno valley of Papua New Guinea’s Finisterre Range, in
the village of Gua. 16 Yupno adults (8 men, 8 women)
participated in pairs in exchange for a small gift. All
participants were local residents and native speakers of
Yupno, most with limited experience in urban areas. All

356

Figure 1: The layout of the ‘Stacks and Squares’ task. The colored squares represent square cloths laid out on the ground in
front of the director. The director’s task is to tell the matcher how to arrange objects (retrieved from the staging area) on the
squares (D= director, M= matcher, and E= experimenter).
participant served as director for four trials, two from each
side of the array. Throughout the study the experimenter sat
to one side of the participant, holding a laptop with a fullscreen photograph of each target array. The director was
video-recorded from a single camera, filming the participant
from roughly a 45 degree angle off to one side. The same
order of trials was used for all participants, and which side
of the array the participants started on was counterbalanced
across pairs.

thrusting of the head, or in rarer cases an accelerated full
torso movement with the head and neck fixed. In nosepointing, one of the above types of head movement is also
co-produced with the distinctive S-action. For each pointing
gesture, the form of the gesture was classified into one of
the following mutually exclusive categories: (a) index finger
extended handshape, (b) other handshape, (c) a headpointing movement without S-action, (d) a head-pointing
movement with S-action, (e) S-action without a headpointing movement, (f) other combination of these forms.
Because S-action has conventional uses in Yupno that do
not involve pointing (see Cooperrider & Núñez, 2012 for
discussion), cases of S-action without head-pointing were
not considered pointing gestures. Finally, Yupno
participants occasionally produced a manual pointing
gesture and a nose-pointing gesture simultaneously. Such
cases were counted as separate manual and non-manual
pointing gestures.

Analysis
All videos were analyzed using ELAN annotation software
for the presence of pointing and iconic gestures (not
discussed in the present report) produced by the director.
Note that while it was not mandated that matchers remain
silent, they spoke much less than directors and their verbal
and gestural productions were not analyzed. Pointing
gestures were defined as effortful movements toward a
region of the task area (e.g. the staging area) produced with
the intention of directing attention toward that region, and
exhibiting an effort peak— or “stroke” (Kendon, 2004). In
the case of manual pointing, the finger or arm serves to
define a vector in space projecting from the speaker toward
the target region. In the case of non-manual pointing, the
eyes primarily serve to define the vector and other head and
face movements, by virtue of their marked nature, serve to
call attention to the speaker’s gaze (Enfield, 2001). These
movements may include lifting, lowering, tossing, tilting, or

Results
The task successfully elicited high rates of pointing in both
groups: 496 were produced by the US participants
(mean=31, median= 33.5); 598 were produced by the Yupno
participants (mean= 37.4, median= 31.5). The mean number
of pointing gestures— collapsing across articulators— did
not differ between the two groups (t= .92, 30 df, two-tailed
p= .36).

357

Figure 2: Examples of pointing gestures produced in the
‘Stacks and Squares’ task. US participants produced almost
exclusively index finger pointing gestures (panel A, B, C),
while Yupno participants produced a balance of non-manual
(D, E) and manual (F) pointing gestures.

Figure 3: Mean proportions of manual pointing forms in
Yupno and US participants. Standard deviations are given in
parentheses.

Discussion
The present study used a novel referential communication
task to compare the use of different pointing forms in two
cultural communities. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the US
speakers in our sample showed a strong preference for index
finger pointing over other kinds of manual pointing and
only trace amounts of non-manual pointing. In this pattern
of articulator preferences they differed dramatically from
the Yupno speakers in our sample, who commanded a much
more balanced repertoire of pointing forms. Most strikingly,
the Yupno speakers produced more non-manual pointing
gestures than manual ones. The groups did not differ overall
in the rate at which they produced pointing gestures in the
task, and when pointing manually both strongly preferred
the extended index finger over other handshapes. Our results
thus lend support to the primacy of the pointing gesture as a
basic building block of human communication, while at the
same time suggesting that this building block may be more
protean than previously appreciated.
Our results lead naturally to the question of why the
Yupno point non-manually at much higher rates than do US
speakers. A straightforward, if somewhat unsatisfying,
explanation is that non-manual pointing is a “technique of
the body” (Mauss, 1934)— that is, a form of unreflective
bodily practice that differs from one group to the next.
There may be nothing incorrect about this answer as far as it
goes, but it only pushes back the question of why the Yupno
have developed this particular technique of the body while
other cultures have developed other techniques. Deeper
answers may perhaps be found in how the Yupno pointing
system is interwoven with other features of the cultural
context, such as communicative sensibilities prevailing in
Papua New Guinea, Yupno understandings of proper
comportment, and the Yupno language itself.
Throughout New Guinea there is an emphasis on
controlling the broadcasting of communications. Secrecy is
a religious and political imperative that makes controlling
the "cast" of communication a matter of serious

We next examined the pattern of articulator use in each of
the groups (see Figure 2 for examples). Of the 496 pointing
gestures produced by the US participants, 450 [.91] were
produced with the index finger extended, 35 [.07] were
produced with some other handshape, and 11 [.02] were
produced with the head. 16/16 of the US participants
produced manual pointing gestures, but only 2/16 produced
non-manual pointing gestures. The mean proportion of
hand-pointing morphologies for the US participants was .95
(median= 1.00, SD= .19). Overall, 15 of 16 US participants
showed a preference for manual pointing.
Of the 598 pointing gestures produced by the Yupno
participants, 234 [.39] were produced with the index finger
extended, 8 [.01] were produced with some other
handshape, 252 [.42] were cases of nose-pointing, and 104
[.17] were produced with the head only. 14/16 of the Yupno
participants produced manual pointing gestures, and 16/16
produced non-manual pointing gestures. The mean
proportion of hand-pointing morphologies for the Yupno
participants was .34 (median= .32, SD= .24) (see Figure 3).
Overall, 11 of 16 Yupno participants showed a preference
for non-manual pointing.
We next tested for the significance of these observed
patterns. First, we tested whether the presence or absence of
manual or non-manual pointing differed across the groups.
Overall, the proportions of participants using manual
pointing did not differ by group (two-tailed Fisher’s exact
test p= .48), but the proportions of participants using nonmanual pointing did (two-tailed Fisher’s exact test p<
.0001). Second, we tested whether the proportions of
pointing gestures that were produced manually differed
between the groups. A Mann-Whitney U-test confirmed that
the proportions in the groups did indeed differ (U= 10,
n1=n2= 16, p<.0001).

358

concern. The stakes of controlling who hears what are high:
in one popular Yupno story all but one of the men in a
village are ritually killed after a young boy inadvertently
reveals a secret of the men's house to his mother. From
institutionalized practices of revelation and concealment in
men's cults (e.g., Barth, 1975; Herdt, 2003) to "secret
languages" used to disguise the true meaning of speech from
outsiders (Schieffelin, 2008), communicative practices
reflect this concern to direct communications to some while
masking them from others. Among the Yupno, extensive
whispering and ingressive speech are used, apparently to
limit the prospect that people will overhear one's speech and
to narrow the cast of communication to those being
addressed. In much the same vein, after the completing the
task reported in this paper, a few participants commented
that nose- and head-pointing were ways of masking what
one is talking about from potential over-hearers. Nonmanual gesture may thus be part of a repertoire of
techniques that reduce the broadcasting of communicative
signals. If this account is correct, high rates of non-manual
pointing may be found throughout Papua New Guinea or at
least in those regions where this communicative sensibility
prevails.
Another possibility is that the less “active” bodily
demeanor involved in non-manual gesture may accord with
a Yupno ideal of the "easy-going" person (yaworɨ)— one
who is not overactive and aggressive, but calm and
contained (Wassmann, 1994; Wassmann & Dasen, 1994). If
this account is correct, the high rates of non-manual
pointing we observed may not be observed in other
communities in the same region that differ in their models
of proper comportment. Importantly, note that, whatever the
possible roles of such communicative sensibilities or
cultural models, they do not constitute rigid taboos against
manual pointing, a fact that is clear in our data: manual
pointing still made up 40% of all Yupno pointing gestures
produced, was used by 14/16 Yupno participants, and was
preferred over non-manual pointing by five Yupno
participants.
Structural features of the Yupno language might also have
implications for the group’s pointing practices. The
possibility of a connection between gestural practices and
linguistic features was once suggested in passing by Charles
S. Peirce. Peirce (1998) comments that many languages
supply spatial information in gesture and that “[o]nly the
Eskimo are so wrapped up in their bearskins that they have
demonstratives distinguishing landward, seaward, north,
south, east, and west" (pg.16, fn). Peirce’s fanciful idea that
limitations on gesture production prompted linguistic
changes could just as well be turned on its head: speakers of
languages that habitually provide increased spatial precision
in their core grammar might have less of a need for precise
gestures. The Yupno language boasts a highly elaborated
demonstrative system, with entity-referring demonstratives
(like “this” and “that” in English) and place-referring
demonstratives (like “here” and “there” in English) that are
enriched with uphill-downhill marking (Wassmann, 1994).

These enriched demonstratives were used pervasively by
Yupno speakers in our task, while US speakers only had the
comparatively impoverished English demonstratives to
work with. The possibility that language structure might
covary with pointing practices could go some way in
explaining the puzzling fact that non-manual pointing
conventions and elaborated demonstratives systems are
apparently not uncommon in small-scale linguistic
communities but are both entirely absent from WEIRD
communities.
Our study also invites the more fine-grained question of
what determines, from one moment to the next, what
articulator a speaker will use for pointing. One clear factor
is which articulators are currently available. If the hands are,
for whatever reason, not available for gesture, the head may
prove a useful substitute, a phenomenon that has been
observed in English speakers. We controlled for this factor
in the present study by having participants adopt a common
sitting position with the hands available. Note, though, that
the availability issue may have implications for variation in
pointing practices over longer time scales. In cultures or
subcultures where the hands may be regularly occupied
during communication, non-manual gesture may flourish
and over time become established as a viable pointing
alternative even when the hands are free.
Another likely factor in selecting one pointing form over
another in the moment is its affordances. A common and
probably not unwarranted assumption is that manual
pointing is more spatially precise than non-manual pointing,
and, indeed, some have mentioned this “diminished
precision” of non-manual pointing as its raison d’etre (e.g.
Hewes, 1981, pg. 265). Importantly, along with exhibiting
diminished precision, non-manual pointing forms may
require less effort to produce than manual pointing. If
required precision and required effort go hand in hand in
pointing, it could be that Yupno speakers tailor their
pointing form according to the “principle of least effort”
(Zipf, 1949; Clark, 1996), in general using a non-manual
morphology unless the increased precision of a manual
morphology is required. Further analysis of the moment-bymoment structure of Yupno pointing will be required to
address this issue. Additionally, future studies using the
Stacks and Squares task might manipulate the degree of
precision required, for instance by creating more complex
arrays of “squares” that consist of both high- and lowprecision targets. If, indeed, Yupno speakers observe a
principle of least effort when pointing, then the question
becomes— not why do Yupno speakers “suppress” manual
pointing (c.f. Hewes, 1981)— but why do English speakers
over-extend themselves.
Pointing is a behavior that humans everywhere, across the
world’s cultures and starting from a young age, produce
routinely and unreflectively throughout their everyday
social interactions. Various strands of evidence have
previously supported the possibility that there is a specieswide privileged form that the human pointing gesture takes.
Our data challenge this universality and open up new

359

questions for further investigation. Do the Yupno show a
preference for non-manual pointing already in infancy? Do
other cultures with conventions for non-manual pointing,
such as lip-pointing, exhibit a similar pattern of articulator
preferences? Why, given the alternatives that the human
bauplan makes available, do US speakers stick
unwaveringly to the index finger? Most generally but also
most importantly of all: if this foundational building block
of human communication is not rigid but malleable, what
forces determine its shape?

Philosophical
Writings
Volume
2
(18931913). Bloomington: Indian University Press.
Povinelli, D. J., & Davis, D. R. (1994). Differences between
chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and humans (Homo
sapiens) in the resting state of the index finger:
implications for pointing. Journal of Comparative
Psychology, 108(2), 134–9.
Schieffelin, B. (2008). Tok Bokis, Tok Piksa: Translating
Parables in Papua New Guinea. In M. Meyerhoff & N.
Nagy (Eds.), Social Lives in Language: Sociolinguistics
and Multilingual Speech Communities. Philadelphia:
John Benjamins.
Sherzer, J. (1972). Verbal and nonverbal deixis: The pointed
lip gesture among the San Blas Cuna. Language in
Society, 2, 117–131.
Tomasello,
M.
(2008).
Origins
of
human
communication.Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wassmann, J. (1994). The Yupno as Post-Newtonian
Scientists: The Question of What is “Natural” in Spatial
Description. Man, 29(3), 645–666.
Wassmann, J., & Dasen, P.R. (1994). “Hot” and “Cold”:
Classification and Sorting Among the Yupno of Papua New
Guinea. International Journal of Psychology, 29, 19-38.
Wilkins, D. (2003). Why pointing with the index finger is
not a universal (in
sociocultural
and
semiotic
terms). In S. Kita (Ed.), Pointing: Where language,
culture, and cognition meet. Mahwah, NJ: Laurence
Erlbaum.
Zipf, G.K. (1949). Human Behavior and the Principle of
Least Effort. Menlo Park, CA: Addison-Wesley.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant (#9131-12) from the
National Geographic Society, Committee for Research and
Exploration (R. Núñez is Principal Investigator; K.
Cooperrider and J. Slotta are co-investigators).

References
Barth, F. (1975). Ritual and Knowledge among
the Baktamin of New Guinea. New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Cooperrider, K, & Núñez, R. (2012). Nose-pointing: Notes
on a facial gesture of Papua New Guinea. Gesture, 12 (2),
103-129.
Enfield, N. J. (2001). ‘Lip-pointing’: A discussion of form
and function with reference to data from Laos. Gesture, 1
(2), 185–211.
Herdt, G. (2003). Secrecy and Cultural Reality:Utopian
Ideologies of the New Guinea Men's House. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.
Hewes, G. W. (1981). Pointing and language. In T. Myers,
J. Laver, & J. Anderson (Eds.), The cognitive
representation of speech. New York: North-Holland.
Kendon, A. (2004). Gesture: Visible action as utterance.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kendon, A. & Versante, L. (2003). Pointing by hand in
Neapolitan. In S. Kita (Ed.),
Pointing:
Where
language, culture, and cognition meet. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kita, S. (2003). Pointing: A foundational building block of
human communication. In S. Kita (Ed.), Pointing: Where
language, culture, and cognition meet. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Liszkowski, U., Brown, P., Callaghan, T., Takada, A., & de
Vos, C. (2012). A prelinguistic gestural universal of
human communication. Cognitive Science, 36, 698-713.
Mauss, M. (1973). Techniques of the body. Economy and
Society, 2(1), 70–88.
McClave, E., Kim, H., Tamer, R., & Mileff, M. (2007).
Head movements in the context of speech in Arabic,
Bulgarian, Korean, and African-American Vernacular
English. Gesture, 7 (3), 343–390.
Peirce, C.S. (1998). Of Reasoning in General. In the Peirce
Edition Project (Ed.), The Essential Peirce: Selected

360

