UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Systematicity of the Sign: Modeling Activation of Semantic Attributes from Nonwords

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3n65w62f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Monaghan, Padraic
Lupyan, Gary
Christiansen, Morten

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Systematicity of the Sign:
Modeling Activation of Semantic Attributes from Nonwords
Padraic Monaghan
Centre for Research in Human Development and Learning, Department of Psychology, Lancaster University, UK

Gary Lupyan
Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA

Morten H. Christiansen
Department of Psychology, Cornell University, USA
Abstract

between words constitute meaning, independent of those
phonemes – is sustained.
Yet, there are very many apparent exceptions to the rule
of arbitrariness observed in spoken language. Morphology
carries information about form-meaning mappings at a
grammatical category level – even in languages with such
impoverished systems of morphology as English, there
are indicators in the spoken word about the general
syntactic role of a word, in turn supporting inferences
about semantic properties (Seidenberg & Gonnerman,
2000: Monaghan, Chater & Christiansen, 2005).
Furthermore, there are many instances of sound-meaning
relationships (Hinton, Nichols, & Ohala, 1994), such as
phonoaesthemes (certain phonological clusters relating to
meaning, e.g., for English, spr- relates to fast movement,
or –ump relates to roundedness). Such phonoaesthemes
have been shown to be significantly expressed in corpora
of English (Otis & Sagi, 2008), and have processing
consequences in word reading (Bergen, 2004). Given
these mixed messages available from the literature, it is
unclear precisely how arbitrary language is.
In a recent corpus analysis, Monaghan Shillcock,
Christiansen & Kirby (2014) provided a first
comprehensive assessment of the extent to which form
and meaning is systematic or arbitrary in the vocabulary
of English. They correlated the similarities between words
in terms of their phonological form and determined the
extent to which those phonological distances could
predict distances in meaning space, where meaning was
derived from two alternative representations. The first
semantic representation was constructed on the basis of
contextual co-occurrence vectors, similar to Latent
Semantic Analysis (Landauer, Foltz, & Laham, 1998).
The second was based on semantic features derived from
WordNet (Miller, 1990). Both types of semantic
representation resulted in significant but very small
amounts of systematicity between form and meaning,
even when morphology and etymology was controlled.
The actual systematicity between form and meaning is
very small indeed, and, though intellectually intriguing,
the small amounts of variance accounted for in the
semantics by the phonology may be practically
unimportant. However, studies of semantic attributes

There are numerous studies demonstrating that people’s
judgments about meanings of words can sometimes derive
from their sound – a phenomenon often referred to as
sound symbolism. A recent comprehensive assessment of
English demonstrates that some small amount of
systematicity exists between form and meaning. Is this
small level of systematicity in language sufficient to drive
the observed behavioral effects of sound symbolism? In
this study we first tested the extent to which similarities
amongst the sounds of words was sufficient to drive sound
symbolic effects. We then tested whether a computational
model that learned to map between form and meaning of
English words better accounted for the observed behavior.
We found that phonological similarity alone was sufficient
to account for several effects of sound symbolism (without
reference to meaning at all), but that the form-meaning
mapping model was able to reproduce additional key
behavioral effects of sound symbolism.
Keywords: form-meaning mappings, arbitrariness of the
sign, brand names, word learning.

Introduction
The sound of a word bears an arbitrary relationship to its
meaning, such that the phonological properties of the
word generally carry no information about its intended
meaning (de Saussure, 1916; Hockett, 1960).
Arbitrariness in language provides a host of potential
advantages for communication: It permits the speaker and
listener to extract themselves from the immediate
situation, allowing language to express concepts distant in
space and time, as well as hierarchical, abstract
relationships (Clark, 1998); arbitrariness promotes
learnability, in that acquisition of a new form-meaning
relationship is not constrained by previous learning
(Gasser, Sethuraman, & Hockema, 2010) and also ensures
that the amount of information present in the environment
for learning, and communicating the mapping is
maximized (Monaghan, Christiansen, & Fitneva, 2011);
arbitrariness enables direct mapping from word to
concept, which iconic symbols do not (Lupyan &
Thompson-Schill, 2012); finally, arbitrariness ensures that
duality of patterning – where the relationships between
phonemes constitute a word, and then the relationships

1024

related to nonwords have typically adopted a forcedchoice design, and this forced-choice may be sufficient to
pick up on very subtle distinctions in semantic priming
from sound.
One of the most famous examples of sound symbolism
is the relationship between speech sounds and shape.
Köhler (1929) showed participants two shapes – a
rounded and a spikey object, and asked them which of the
two nonwords kiki and bouba related to which object. In
this frequently replicated study (see, e.g., Ramachandran
& Hubbard, 2001; Maurer, Pathman, & Mondloch, 2006),
participants typically map kiki to the angular object and
bouba to the rounded object. In terms of the phonological
properties of the nonwords, studies have demonstrated
that both the phonological features of the vowel as well as
of the consonants contribute to the effect (Monaghan,
Mattock, & Walker, 2012; Nielsen & Rendall, 2013).
Such sound influences on meaning appear to generalize
to numerous semantic attributes. In a series of studies on
brand name choices, Klink has shown that nonwords
varying in consonant and vowel properties relate to a
whole range of brand decisions (Klink, 2000, 2003; Klink
& Wu, 2013). In his most comprehensive study, Klink
(2000) tested a small set of nonwords that varied in terms
of whether they contained fricative or stop consonants,
voiced or unvoiced consonants, or front or back vowels.
A small set of nonwords that manipulated each of these
phonological features was tested for the extent to which
participants judged the nonword to be an appropriate
brand name for promoting a variety of semantic attributes
in a questionnaire study.
Klink (2000) found that nonwords containing front
vowels were judged to be smaller, lighter, milder, thinner,
softer, faster, colder, more bitter, more feminine,
friendlier, weaker, and prettier than nonwords containing
back vowels (e.g., detal versus dutal). He also found that
fricatives were smaller, faster, more feminine and lighter
than plosives (e.g., fazz versus kazz), and that unvoiced
consonants were smaller, softer, faster, more feminine,
lighter, and sharper than voiced consonants (e.g., faruck
versus varuck).
Insofar as there exists some systematicity between
certain sounds and certain semantic dimensions in
English, a model that is trained to map between
phonological and semantic representations of English
vocabulary should be able to account for the meanings
people attribute to various nonwords.
A further advantage of the computational model is that
it permits testing of various phonological properties of
words simultaneously, rather than measuring vowels or
consonants features separately. In Klink’s (2000) studies,
he tested vowel position by contrasting nonwords
containing the letters i and e (front) from those containing
o and u (back). However, these vowels differ not only in
position but also in height (high and low, respectively).
Furthermore, Klink tested fricatives versus plosives by a
comparison conflating unvoiced fricatives and voiced

plosives, so several the stimuli differed on two
dimensions. In addition, the combinations of certain
consonants and vowels may drive participants’ judgments
rather than the individual properties of vowels or
consonants. There are practical constraints in testing a
large set of nonwords in behavioral studies, but ensuring
that effects are generalizable is possible in a
computational model tested on a large set of stimuli,
which is not possible with behavioral studies. Thus, we
investigated the simultaneous contribution of consonant
manner and voicing and vowel position and height for
their relationship to different semantic attributes.
However, the model results have to be considered in
terms of whether observed behavioral effects are due to
regularities in the form-meaning mappings, or whether
they are due to other uncontrolled contributions to
decisions about meaning of nonwords. One possibility is
that the effects may just be due to phonological similarity
between nonwords and the meaning of known words. If
this is so, then behavioral effects could be captured by
assessing the similarity between the phonology of
nonwords and the phonology of semantic attributes
directly, without any role of semantics in participants’
decisions. We first describe how we assessed
phonological similarity effects before presenting the
model of form-meaning mappings.

Determining phonological similarity effects
Some observed effects of sound symbolism, in behavioral
as well as computational studies, may be due, not to the
systematicity that exists between form and meaning, but
rather to analogies between the sound of the attribute
word and the nonword being assessed. In experimental
studies of the effect of sound symbolism nonword stimuli
are sometimes, but by no means always, controlled for the
extent to which they remind participants of existing
words. In Klink’s (2000) studies, for instance, stimuli that
reminded participants of words were not used in the main
study. However, the extent to which implicit associations
between sounds of nonwords and sounds of attribute
words may still be affecting performance. For example,
asking participants about the extent to which a nonword
elicits the attribute cold may be influenced by whether or
not the nonword contains a plosive. If it does then it may
resonate with the /k/ in the onset of cold, whereas if the
nonword does not contain a plosive then it may be judged
to be distinct, again solely based on comparisons in sound
similarity.

Materials
In order to investigate the effects of phonological
similarity on judgments about meaning, a corpus of
nonwords was generated. We would have liked to have
employed the precise materials from previous
experimental studies of attribute selection from nonwords.
However, these were unsuitable for our analyses,
primarily because they tended to use polysyllabic words

1025

which are not available in the training set for the
phonology to semantics model reported below, but also
because the word sets were small – the power from these
previous studies derives from the large number of
participants used in the studies. Thus, we required a large
set of nonwords to be tested, which would be impractical
in a behavioral study but possible in a modeling context.
To create a large set of nonwords, all the single
fricative/plosive onsets, vowels, and single phoneme
codas from the set of 6229 words used to train the formmeaning model (see below) were selected. Then, these
were joined together to form a candidate set of nonwords.
These were then pruned by detecting any of the CVC
sequences that were actual words, which were then
omitted. This resulted in 2142 nonwords.
Each nonword was encoded for analysis in terms of its
phonological properties. The manner of articulation
(plosive or fricative) of the onset consonant, and whether
the onset consonant was voiced or unvoiced were
recorded. For the vowel, the position (front/back) and
height (close/open) were recorded. Nonwords with closemid, or open-mid vowels were classified as close and
open, respectively. The characteristics of the nonwords
are shown in Table 1.

next constructed a model that learned to map between
phonology and semantics for a large set of English words.

Modeling form-meaning mappings
Architecture
The model was an extract of the connectionist triangle
model developed by Harm and Seidenberg (2004). We
implemented only one pathway from their model: the
mapping from phonological input to semantic output. The
model is shown in Figure 1. At input the model had 8
slots, and each slot contained 25 units to represent each
phoneme. The input phonology layer was fully connected
to a set of 1000 hidden units, which were in turn fully
connected to an output semantic layer comprising 2446
units. The output semantic layer was connected to and
from a set of 50 “cleanup” units which assisted in
increasing the fidelity of the output semantic
representation. The model differed from that of Harm and
Seidenberg’s (2004) model only in terms of the number of
hidden units – the original model contained 500 hidden
units, but we found in pilot simulations that this was
inadequate for accurate learning.

Table 1: Number of nonwords with each phonological
property.
Manner
Consonants

Plosive
682

Vowels
Front
1473

Fricative
1460
Position
Back
669

Voicing
Voiced Unvoiced
1061
1081
Height
Close
Open
1541
601

Attributes were taken from the set used by Klink (2000,
2003), with antonym pairs derived for each attribute. Only
antonym pairs that were both monosyllabic were included
in the analysis. The derived pairs, corresponding to the
original attributes used by Klink (2000) were: small-large,
light-dark, mild-harsh, thin-thick, soft-hard, fast-slow,
cold-warm, weak-strong, and sharp-blunt.

Figure 1: Model of form-meaning mappings.

Training

Testing

The model was trained on 6229 monosyllabic words.
Phonology for each word was represented by 25 binary
phonological features for each phoneme. There were 3
slots for the onset consonants, one slot for the vowel
(diphthongs were represented in terms of a single vowel),
and 4 slots for the coda consonants. Phonemes were
always adjacent to the vowel, so that, if the word
contained one onset consonant, that consonant occurred in
the third slot for the word, and if the word contained two
onset consonants, then those occupied the second and
third slot.
For the semantic representations, words were encoded
in terms of semantic features, derived from WordNet
(Miller, 1990). Each word activated a subset of the 2446
features, and the target representation for each word in
terms of semantic features was binary. Use of this

In order to determine the effect of phonological similarity,
we measured the edit distance between the phonology of
each nonword and each pair of attribute words, such that
small values indicate the nonword was similar to the
attribute word’s phonology, and larger values indicate
greater distinctiveness in the sound (see Monaghan,
Christiansen, Farmer, & Fitneva, 2010, for discussion of
this and similar measures of phonological similarity).
Differences between the phonological similarity for each
nonword and each antonym pair of attributes were entered
as the dependent variable into the analysis.
To determine the effect of form-meaning mappings on
judgments about semantic properties of nonwords, we

1026

semantic representation was appropriate in order to test
the extent to which small amounts of systematicity in
form-meaning mappings may drive behavioral judgments
about semantic attributes of nonwords, because
Monaghan et al. (submitted) tested exactly these semantic
features in their corpus analysis.
The model was trained by randomly sampling words
according to square root compression of frequency taken
from the Wall Street Journal corpus (Marcus, Santorini, &
Marcinkiewicz, 1993), presenting the phonological
representation for the word at input, and requiring the
model to learn to produce the semantic representation at
the
output,
using
the
continuous
recurrent
backpropagation learning rule (Harm & Seidenberg,
2004). The model had 12 time steps in order to generate
the semantics, at which point error was propagated
through the network according to the cross-entropy of the
difference between the target and actual semantic layer
activations for that word. The learning rate was 0.2.
After 5M patterns, the model had reached asymptote in
learning to produce the correct semantic output for 94.3%
of the words, and we proceeded to test the model. Of the
errors made by the model, they were generally low
frequency words that were not effectively learned where
no relationship between phonological or semantic form
could be discerned, together with a small number of
phonological errors (e.g., deigned → deign, seize → sea)
and a small number of semantic errors (e.g., beers → ales,
dross → waste).

the nonwords predicting preferences for semantic
attributes when the phonological similarity effects are
partialled out.

Phonological similarity effects
We ran linear mixed effects models using restricted
maximum likelihood for difference scores for each
attribute, with nonword as random factor, and vowel
position, manner of the onset (fricative/plosive), and
voicing of the onset as fixed factors. The dependent
variable was the difference between the phonological
similarity between each nonword and each semantic
attribute antonym pair.
The results are shown in Table 2, which shows all the
significant effects (p < .05) for each of the semantic
attributes. In the results tables, bold indicates that the
effect is significant and consistent with Klink (2000), gray
indicates a significant effect in Klink (2000) and
consistent but not significant effect in the model. *
indicates an effect in Klink (2000) contradicted by the
model, and normal font indicates a comparison not tested
directly in the behavioral study, but significant in the
model.
Table 2: Summary of the effects of phonological
analogical similarity for comparisons of antonym pairs.
Vowel
Manner
Voicing
Vowel
Attribute position
height
Smaller
front
fricative unvoiced
Lighter
front
fricative unvoiced
Milder
front
Thinner
front
Softer
front
unvoiced
Faster
front
fricative
unvoiced
open
Colder
front
Weaker
front
close
Sharper
unvoiced

Testing
In order to determine that the model was able to learn to
map between phonology and semantics for the words in
the training set, we determined for each word whether the
output semantic representation was closer to the target
semantic representation than to the semantics of any other
word. Several words in the dataset were homophones
(e.g., beet, beat), and if the word activated a semantic
representation that was consistent with the phonology
then this was also accepted as accurate.
The same set of nonwords, as described in Table 1,
were presented to the model, and the output activations
across the semantic layer were recorded. The semantic
output for the nonword was compared against the target
vector for the same set of semantic attributes as were
tested in the phonological similarity analyses, using
cosine distance. Differences between the cosine distance
for the nonword and each word in the semantic attribute
antonym pair was taken, and the difference scores were
entered as the dependent variable into the analysis.

The results demonstrate that several of the sound
symbolic semantic attributes reported in the behavioral
literature may be due to similarity in terms of just the
sound of nonwords and the attributes being assessed. This
was particularly true of the properties of the consonants,
where two of the three attributes associated with manner
of articulation, and three of the five voicing effects, were
replicated in the phonological similarity results. Only one
of the eight vowel position effects was found to be
significant in the phonological similarity results.
However, vowel height was also found to be differently
distributed in terms of phonological similarity for several
of the semantic attribute antonym pairs.

Results

Phonology to semantics effects in the model

We first report the results of the phonological analogical
similarity for the extent to which they can account for the
behavioral effects, before testing the form-meaning
mapping model against the behavioral results. Finally, we
report the effects of the form-meaning mapping model on

The same linear mixed effects analyses as were applied to
the phonological analogical results were tested on the
output of the form-meaning mapping model. Table 3
reports all the significant effects (p < .05) resulting from

1027

the mixed models analyses, with the direction of the effect
illustrated. For example, from the first row of the Table,
for manner of the consonant onset, fricatives related more
closely to the attribute small than to the attribute large, in
comparison with plosives. Similarly unvoiced onset
consonants related more closely to small than large, in
comparison with voiced onset consonants. In addition,
closed vowels related more closely to small than large,
compared to open vowels.
As with the phonological similarity effects, several of
the behavioral effects from Klink (2000) were replicated
in the form-meaning mapping model, with particularly
strong effects of vowel position, as well as vowel height,
though not all effects were in the same direction as the
behavioral observations.

difference between the form-meaning mapping semantic
activation related to each semantic antonym pair as the
dependent variable, except with the addition of the
difference in the phonological analogical similarity
between the nonword and each pair of semantic antonyms
as a covariate. The results are shown in Table 4.
Removing the effect of phonological similarity from the
analyses enhanced the match between the computational
model’s results and the behavioral studies for the vowels
– 5 of the 8 attributes were now aligned with the
behavioral studies. However, the effects for consonants
were weaker.

Discussion
There is a modicum of systematicity between form and
meaning in the vocabulary of English. This paper aimed
to determine whether capturing this systematicity in a
model trained to map between form and meaning for a
large set of English words was able to reproduce
behavioral studies of apparent sound symbolic effects,
where certain phonological features of nonwords affected
judgments about a range of semantic attributes.
We first tested the extent to which similarities within
the phonological forms of words alone could explain the
behavioral effects. These analyses demonstrated that this
was the case for many of the relationships between
properties of consonants and semantic attributes.
However, effects associated with the phonological
features of vowels were not effectively simulated just by
computing phonological similarity. Hence, sound
symbolic effects are not due only to phonology.
Rather, several of the behavioral effects of the
properties of vowels were reproduced only when the
form-meaning regularities were taken into account in the
simulations. Furthermore, determining the pure effect of
the sound-meaning mappings, when the phonological
similarity was partialled out of the analyses, resulted in
the best fit between the behavioral and the modeling
effects.
However, not all of the sound symbolic effects were
predictable from our analyses. This could be either
because the modeling did not accurately represent the
psycholinguistic properties of the phonological or
semantic similarity, or because these effects are due to
sound symbolic decisions that are not encapsulated within
the structure of the language. Using WordNet semantic
features to represent semantic similarity is certainly
imprecise, but this is more likely to result in an absence of
effect, whereas some of the observed effects are reverse to
the behavioral studies. Intriguingly, participants have to
suppress the regularities within the language (as exhibited
by the model) in order to make their decisions.
A further alternative, highlighted by the computational
modeling presented here, is that combinations of
phonological properties of nonwords may be driving
decisions in sound symbolism studies. The modeling
results show that there are many regularities in vowel

Table 3: Summary of the effects of the phonology to
semantics computational model for comparisons of
antonym pairs.
Vowel
Manner
Voicing
Vowel
Attribute position
height
Smaller
front
fricative unvoiced
closed
Lighter
front*
fricative
unvoiced
open
Milder
front
closed
Thinner
front
open
Softer
front*
unvoiced
Faster
front*
fricative
unvoiced
open
Colder
front
Weaker
front*
open
Sharper
unvoiced
Table 4: Effects of the phonology to semantics
computational model with phonological similarity as a
covariate.
Vowel
Manner
Voicing
Vowel
Attribute position
height
Smaller
front
fricative
unvoiced
Lighter
front*
fricative
unvoiced
open
Milder
front
close
Thinner
front
Softer
front*
unvoiced
Faster
front
fricative
unvoiced
close
Colder
front
Weaker
front*
open
Sharper
unvoiced

Phonology to semantics without phonological
similarity effects
The final analyses tested the effects of the form-meaning
mappings when the phonological similarity between
nonwords and attributes was accounted for. This
simulates the assumption in the study that participants are
not influenced by the particular phonological similarity
between a nonword and the given semantic attribute.
The same linear mixed effects models were run as
before with vowel position, vowel height, consonant
manner and consonant voicing as factors and the

1028

height, as well as vowel position, that correspond to
semantic distinctions, which have not yet been appraised
in behavioral studies, and yet are conflated in the design
of these studies. Furthermore, the properties of the
nonwords’ codas have not yet been systematically
assessed, either in behavioral or our computational
studies. This is a further likely source of influence on
semantic judgments which merits further investigation.
We do know, for instance, that vowels in first versus
second syllables of a nonword affect performance
differently (Klink & Wu, 2013). Thus, it is likely that
further subtle patterns of interactions between
phonological properties are the likely drivers of effects.
Our computational framework presented here provides
a starting point for generating predictions about complex
interactions between phonological properties resulting in
sound symbolism decisions. We have shown that
consideration of phonological similarity alone, as well as
pure measures of form-meaning systematicity, are able to
predict a range of behavioral studies of sound symbolic
judgments. Testing the interactions in the computational
model, rather than only, as we have so far done, testing
main effects of individual phonological properties, will
enable us to uncover the potent complexity of the
systematicity of the sign.

Klink, R. R. (2003). Creating meaningful brands: The
relationship between brand name and brand mark.
Marketing Letters, 14, 143–157.
Klink, R.R. & Wu, L. (2013). The role of position, type,
and combination of sound symbolism imbeds in brand
names. Marketing Letters, 1-12.
Köhler, W. (1929). Gestalt psychology. New York, USA:
Liveright.
Landauer, T., Foltz, P., & Laham, D. (1998). An
introduction to latent semantic analysis. Discourse
Processes, 25, 259– 284.
Lupyan, G. & Thompson-Schill, S.L. (2012). The
evocative power of words: Activation of concepts by
verbal and nonverbal means. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General. 141, 170-186.
Maurer, D., Pathman, T., & Mondloch, C. J. (2006). The
shape of boubas: Sound–shape correspondences in
toddlers and adults. Developmental Science, 9, 316-322.
Miller, G.A. (1990). WordNet: An on-line lexical
database. International Journal of Lexicography, 3,
235-312.
Marcus, M., Santorini, B., & Marcinkiewicz, M.A.
(1993). Building a large annotated corpus of English:
The Penn Treebank. Computational Linguistics, 19,
313-330.
Monaghan, P., Chater, N., & Christiansen, M. H. (2005).
The differential role of phonological and distributional
cues in grammatical categorization. Cognition, 96, 143–
182.
Monaghan, P., Christiansen, M.H., Farmer, T.A. &
Fitneva, S.A. (2010). Measures of phonological
typicality: Robust coherence and psychological validity.
The Mental Lexicon, 5, 281-299.
Monaghan, P., Christiansen, M.H. & Fitneva, S.A.
(2011). The arbitrariness of the sign: Learning
advantages from the structure of the vocabulary.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 140,
325–347.
Monaghan, P., Shillcock, R.C., Christiansen, M.H. &
Kirby, S. (2014). How arbitrary is language?
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, in
press.
Nielsen, A.K. & Rendall, D. (2013). Parsing the role of
consonants versus vowels in the classic Takete-Maluma
phenomenon. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 67, 153-163.
Otis, K. & Sagi, E. (2008). Phonoaesthemes: A corporabased analysis. In Love, B.C., McRae, K., & Sloutsky,
V.M. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th Annual Meeting
of the Cognitive Science Society. Boston, MA.
Ramachandran, V. S., & Hubbard, E. M. (2001).
Synaesthesia: A window into perception, thought and
language. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 8, 3–34.
Seidenberg M.S. & Gonnerman, L.M. (2000). Explaining
derivational morphology as the convergence of codes.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4, 353-361.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Mike Harm and Mark Seidenberg for
making the code for their 2004 model available online.

References
Bergen, B. (2004). The psychological reality of
phonaesthemes. Language, 80, 291-311.
Clark, A. (1998). Magic words: How language augments
human computation. In P. Carruthers & J. Boucher
(Eds), Language and thought: Interdisciplinary themes,
162-183. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
de Saussure, F. (1916). Course in general linguistics.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Gasser, M., Sethuraman, N., & Hockema. S. (2010).
Iconicity in expressives: an empirical investigation. In
J. Newman & S. Rice (Eds.), Empirical and
experimental methods in cognitive/functional research,
pp.163-180. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Harm, M.W. & Seidenberg, M.S. (2004). Computing the
meaning of words in reading: Cooperative division of
labor between visual and phonological processes.
Psychological Review, 111, 662–720.
Hinton, L., Nichols, J., & Ohala, J. (Eds.). (1994). Sound
symbolism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hockett, C. F. (1960). The origin of speech. Scientific
American, 203, 89-96.
Klink, R. R. (2000). Creating brand names with meaning:
The use of sound symbolism. Marketing Letters, 11, 5–
20.

1029

