UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The influence of feedback on the flexibility of strategy choices in algebraic problem solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/037964tj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Nussbaumer, Daniela
Schneider, Michael
Stern, Elsbeth

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

0FThe influence of feedback on the flexibility of strategy choices in algebraic
problem solving
Daniela Nussbaumer (nussbaumer@ifv.gess.ethz.ch)
Institute for Behavioral Sciences, ETH Zurich, Universitätsstrasse 41
8092 Zurich, Switzerland

Michael Schneider (m.schneider@uni-trier.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Trier, Universitätsring 15
54296 Trier, Germany

Elsbeth Stern (stern@ifv.gess.ethz.ch)
Institute for Behavioral Sciences, ETH Zurich, Universitätsstrasse 41
8092 Zurich, Switzerland
Abstract
The ability to choose problem solving strategies flexibly and
adaptively is an important part of proficiency. However, it is
unclear how simple forms of problem solving practice as well
as feedback affect this ability. On the one hand, as
demonstrated by the Einstellung and Stroop effect, practice
can decrease adaptivity. On the other hand, practice helps to
associate problem types with effective solution strategies
what can increase adaptivity.
In a microgenetic design with 48 trials of a mathematical
problem solving task, we found that the adaptivity of strategy
choices increased linearly during practice without feedback in
a group of ninth-graders. Instructional support to stimulate
insight sped up this process in a second experimental group.
The results are interpreted in terms of cognitive models of
strategy choices. They demonstrate the adaptive nature of
human problem solving with minimal informational
input.Keywords: mathematical problem solving, flexibility

Theoretical Background
Strategies are step-by-step procedures for solving a
problem. From among available strategies adaptive problem
solvers choose the strategy which allows them to solve the
problem most efficiently, particularly in terms of accuracy
and speed. Adaptive strategy choices are relevant in many
everyday situations, for example, when we go to office by
car or by bike depending on the weather or when we choose
the type of knife we use based on what we want to cut. The
adaptivity of strategy choices has been recognized as an
important outcome of competence development (Siegler,
2007; Siegler & Lemaire, 1997), as a central component of
being proficient (Hatano & Inagaki, 1986; Star & Newton,
2009), and as a favorable educational outcome (Baroody &
Dowker, 2003; Star & Rittle-Johnson, 2008).
A person chooses a strategy adaptively when he or she
chooses the most efficient strategy given the specific
problem, the problem solver, and the socio-cultural context
(Verschaffel, Luwel, Torbeyns, & Van Dooren, 2007). In
the current study, we focus on strategy adaption to task
characteristics. In line with many studies (e.g., Lemaire &
Siegler, 1995; Torbeyns, Ghesquiére, & Verschaffel, 2009),
we see a strategy as more efficient than another one when it

leads to higher accuracy and to a shorter solution time than
the alternative strategy. Adaptivity is closely related to, but
should not be confused with, accuracy and speed of the
problem solutions, how many strategies a problem solver
knows, and how efficiently he switches between strategies
(Star & Newton, 2009). For instance, a person can know
many strategies, flexibly switch between them, carry them
out quickly and accurately and still not adapt the strategy
choices to task characteristics. This could happen, for
example, if the problem solver did not know the relative
efficiency of a strategy for solving a task with particular
characteristics and therefore selected a less efficient strategy
(Lemaire & Siegler, 1995; Selter, 2009; Shrager & Siegler,
1998; Torbeyns, De Smedt, Ghesquière, & Verschaffel,
2009).
Possible Negative Effects of Practice on Adaptivity
A high degree of practice in a domain can make problem
solvers more accurate but less flexible. This has been
suggested in educational studies on mathematical problem
solving strategies (De Smedt, Torbeyns, Strassens,
Ghesquière, & Verschaffel, 2010; Selter, 2009; Star &
Newton, 2009; Torbeyns, Ghesquiére et al., 2009;
Verschaffel, Luwel, Torbeyns, & Van Dooren, 2009) and in
in studies about costs of expertise (Baroody, 2003; Bilalić,
McLeod, & Gobet, 2008, 2010; Frensch & Sternberg, 1989;
Hesketh, 1997; Sternberg & Frensch, 1992; Zeitz, 1997).
For example, Sternberg (1996, p. 347) writes “There are
costs as well as benefits to expertise. One such cost is
increased rigidity: The expert can become so entrenched in a
point of view or a way of doing things that it becomes hard
to see things differently.” A similar idea is demonstrated by
research on the Einstellung effect, that is, participants’
preference for familiar strategies instead of more effective
but less familiar strategies (Luchins & Luchins, 1959, 1987;
McKelvie, 1990).
A negative effect of practice on adaptive, flexible
problem solving is usually explained in terms of problem
solving routines (Bilalić et al., 2008; Johnson, 2003).
Practice leads to increasingly automated problem solving
routines. These routines are quick, require minimal
cognitive resources, and appear to be beyond conscious

1102

control (Anderson, 1982; Johnson, 2003; Logan, 1988).
This is an advantage when solving routine problems, but it
can work against the problem solver who is faced with new
or changing problem types that require flexible behavior
(Hesketh, 1997).
Possible Positive Effects of Practice on Adaptivity
Several other authors suggested a positive influence of
practice on the development of adaptive strategy choices.
Experts have more perceptual chunks, more ways of
representing a problem, and more solution approaches
available than novices. In theory this allows to better adapt
behavior to situational constraints (De Groot, 1978;
Ericsson, Krampe, & Tesch-Römer, 1993; Gobet & Waters,
2003; Star & Newton, 2009).
In the literature on strategy change, Robert S. Siegler’s
cognitive models (Shrager & Siegler, 1998; Siegler &
Araya, 2005; Siegler & Shipley, 1995) suggest a positive
impact of problem solving practice alone on the
development of adaptive strategy choices. While Siegler’s
original model has been extended several times, one of the
remaining basic assumptions is that individuals acquire
information about each strategy’s effectiveness, in terms of
accuracy and speed, for solving the encountered problem
types. This information subsequently helps learners to
choose the strategies that maximize the efficiency of the
problem solution.
However, learners do not know the actual efficiency of
the strategies; instead, they must infer this from their
experiences. This is a gradual and probabilistic process as
accurate and efficient strategies can sometimes lead to low
solution times and solution rates if a superficial error is
made in how the strategy is executed. The more often a
learner uses a set of strategies on a set of problems, the more
accurate the learner’s implicit knowledge about each
strategy’s efficiency on different problem types becomes.
As a result, the more practice a learner has with a given set
of problems, the better the learner knows the relative
efficiency of each strategy for each problem type, which
leads to more adaptive strategy choices.
Shrager and Siegler (e.g., 1998, p. 407) label this process
as “associative learning” and explicitly distinguish it from
meta-cognitive learning; that is, they see the acquisition of
strategy adaptivity as a low-level cognitive process. Simple
problem solving practice should suffice to acquire strategy
adaptivity -- at least to the extent to which the learners are
able to judge the accuracy and speed of their own problem
solutions.
Possible Effects of Feedback
Feedback is widely seen as an important facilitator in
learning and performance (for reviews see Kluger & DeNisi,
1996; Kulhavy & Stock, 1989; Mory, 2004) however most
conclusions drawn from empirical studies on feedback are
general with the specific mechanisms how to relate
feedback to learning unknown (Shute, 2008). Shute (2008)
defines formative feedback as information intended to
modify a learners thinking/ behavior to improve learning.
She sees different cognitive mechanisms through which

feedback can take a facilitative effect on learning: Feedback
can reveal a gap between the current level of performance
and the aspired level of performance what can on its part
lead to a higher level of motivation and effort as a learner
naturally tries to resolve this gap, feedback can reduce
cognitive load (e.g., Paas, Renkl, & Sweller, 2003) or
feedback can facilitate the correction of inappropriate task
strategies or procedural errors (e.g. Mory, 2004; Narciss &
Huth, 2004).
According to a meta-analysis by Hattie (1999) feedback is
among the top of the highest influences on achievement
along with direct instruction, reciprocal teaching and
students’ prior cognitive ability, but effect sizes for
feedback show considerable variability, indicating that some
types of feedback are more powerful and – maybe
surprisingly – quite a few studies have reported either no
effect or negative effects of feedback on learning (see
Kluger & DeNisi, 1996; Mory, 2004). According to a metaanalysis by Bangert-Drowns et al. (1991) negative effects of
feedback on learning is found in about one third of studies
included in their analyses. There are many explanations why
feedback is not necessarily facilitative1. One aim of
intervention studies therefore is to investigate how to
maximize the positive effect of feedback on learning as
feedback does not necessarily have a positive influence on
learning.
The Current Study
Hence, prior research has firmly established that practice
influences the adaptivity of strategy choices in at least two
ways: a) Practice leads to problem solving routines, which
can decrease adaptivity, and b) at the same time, practice
also leads to more information about how effectively
alternative strategies solve a given type of problem, which
increases adaptivity. The relative strength of the two
opposing mechanisms is unclear. In their literature review,
Bilalić and colleagues (2008, p.77) conclude: “…
(in)flexibility has frequently been discussed in the scientific
literature (e.g., Ericsson, 1998, 2003; Feltovich, Spiro, &
Coulson, 1997; Hesketh, 1997; Krems, 1995; Sternberg,
1996; Zeitz, 1997), the empirical evidence for either
possibility is sparse and unconvincing.” This presents an
open empirical question: does practice without feedback
ultimately a) increase the adaptivity of strategy choices, b)
decrease it, or c) do the two opposing influences cancel each
other out and leave adaptivity unchanged?
In the present study the formative feedback aims to
influence strategy use, specifically adaptivity. We therefore
conceptualize feedback as information provided by an agent
1
It can be accepted or rejected, be perceived differently than
intended (Kulhavy, 1977) or interrupting the cognitive processes
(Baron, 1993. Kulhavy, White, Topp, Chan, and Adams (1985)
found negative effects of feedback complexity, that is, the more
complex the feedback the least positive outcome effect whereas
Bangert-Drowns et al. (1991) found that the more information
feedback provides the more effective it is (e.g. correct–incorrectfeedback being less efficient than if feedback provides the correct
answer).

1103

(here computer program) regarding aspects of one’s
understanding (here strategy choice) or performance (Hattie
et al., 2007) with which a learner can confirm or restructure
preexisting knowledge, e.g. domain knowledge or cognitive
tactics (Butler & Winne, 1995).
The current study uses a microgenetic design, that is, a
trial-by-trial assessment of strategy choices on 48 trials of a
mathematical problem solving task. One experimental group
practiced problem solving without feedback. A second
experimental group received feedback designed to stimulate
high-level cognition and insight into the advantages of
adaptive problem solving. This design helped to investigate
the following three questions. First, does practice without
feedback increase or decrease the adaptivity of strategy
choices over the course of unsupervised practice? Second,
how is this developmental pattern affected by instructional
support designed to stimulate high-level cognition about
adaptivity? Third, do increases in adaptivity in the two
groups tend to be abrupt (pointing to insightful learning;
Davidson, 1995) or gradual (pointing to associative
learning; Gluck & Thompson, 1987)?

Method
Participants
The sample consisted of 77 Swiss ninth-graders (age: M =
14.9 years, SD = 0.8; 71% girls) who participated
voluntarily during their free time for a small monetary
compensation. They were recruited from, the highest track
of the Swiss educational system, the ‘Gymnasium’ –
attended by approximately 20% of students. Our sample
therefore consists of high performing students.
Procedure
Each student took part in a three-hour-session comprising
an instructional phase and a microgenetic session.
During instructional phase, each student was shown ten
slides on a computer explaining three different strategies for
solving the task – an equation system with two equations
and two unknowns. Most students stated they knew these
strategies from school, which was in line with the formal
curricula of their schools. At the end of the instructional
phase students had to demonstrate their ability to correctly
name and use all three strategies before they could proceed
to the microgenetic session and otherwise they received
additional explanations. Students were neither instructed on
when to use which strategy nor was the concept of adaptive
strategy choice introduced.
In the microgenetic session, students were presented with
16 blocks of 3 trials. Each block comprised one of each
problem typ. For each student problems had been
individually and randomly selected from a pool of tasks.
Problems of the same type varied in surface structure (i.e.
the order of the two equations, the order of the terms of an
equation, etc.).
For each trial the equation system was presented on the
computer, students were instructed to copy it into a booklet,
solve the problem in a written form, and finally, enter the
solutions on the computer, in order to recorded solution

accuracy and speed. A trained rater coded strategy use
according to participants’ solution steps in the booklet. A
second trained rater coded 100 randomly selected trials and
agreed with the first rater in 99 of the 100 trials.
Students were randomly assigned to one of two groups: A
no-feedback group (n = 39) practicing problem solving
without any instructional support and a feedback group (n =
38). Students of the feedback group had to indicate which of
the alternative strategies they had used after each trial by
checking one of three buttons. They then got feedback about
the adaptivity and effectiveness of their strategy with either
wording: “You have chosen the most efficient strategy,
which saved you from unnecessary work” or “You have
chosen a less efficient strategy, which created unnecessary
work”. This feedback condition was designed to stimulate
high-level cognition. Naming and checking the strategy
chosen could have fostered greater awareness of strategy
use, independent from the feedback and in addition the
feedback reminded them of what they were expected to do
(i.e. choose a strategy adaptively) and why (i.e. to save
unnecessary work).
Material
Participants had to solve systems of two algebraic
equations with two unknowns, that is, to derive the
numerical values of the unknowns. There were three
problem types: Addition problems, equating problems, and
substitution problems (see Table 1) and there were the three
problem solving strategies they could choose from: the
addition strategy, the equating strategy, and the substitution
strategy (see Table 2). Each problem could be solved by all
three strategies. However, without prior transformations of
the presented equations, addition problems could only be
solved by the addition strategy. Therefore we hypothesize
that the addition strategy is the most efficient strategy to
solve the addition problems. The same applies to equation
problems and the equation strategy and to substitution
problems and the substitution strategy. In the following, we
label strategy use in line with this pattern as adaptive.
Table 1
Six of the forty-eight problems used in the study.

.Results
As expected, compared to other trials, trials with adaptive
strategy choices showed higher solution rates (M = 68 %,
SD = 47, vs. M = 53 %, SD = 50, Mann-Whitney U =
558692, p < .001), lower solution times (M = 126 sec, SD =
61, vs. M = 171 sec, SD = 75, Mann-Whitney U = 133239, p

1104

< .001), and less solution steps according to the written
solution path in the booklet (M = 4.4 lines, SD = 1.6, vs. M
= 6.0 lines, SD = 2.0, Mann-Whitney U = 756456, p < .001).
This justifies our assumption that matching strategies to
problem types is adaptive behavior. In the feedback group,
the student-reported strategies and the rater-coded strategies
matched in 92% of all trials. Table 3 displays mean solution
rates, mean solution times, and mean adaptivity rates for the
two experimental groups together with error probabilities p
and Cohen’s d from t-tests for repeated measures. In both
experimental groups, solution rates do not significantly
increase over time; solution times decrease strongly; and
adaptivity increases.

show that the positive effects of practice without feedback
on adaptivity far outweigh the negative effects, that is,
participants get more adaptive. Adaptivity increased
significantly from 78% to 90% over 48 trials of practice in
the no-feedback group. In the feedback group – receiving
feedback designed to foster insightful learning –, less
surprisingly, and in accordance with the literature on
strategy learning, adaptivity also increased.

Table 2
The three strategies investigated in the study applied to the
same problem (not used in the study).

Figure 1
Microgenetic development of the relative frequency of
adaptive strategy choices over the 16 blocks of tasks
averaged over all participants in a group.

The increase in adaptivity is roughly linear and fit well by a
linear regression function in the no-feedback group. In the
feedback group, the fit of the linear function is less good
and adaptivity increases strongly during the first four trials
and subsequently stays at a high level. Figure 1 displays
changes in adaptivity over time.

Discussion
The literature suggests positive as well as negative effects
of practice without feedback on the adaptivity of strategy
choices. This raises the question whether adaptivity
ultimately increases or decreases with practice. Our results

The strong positive net effect of practice without feedback
on the adaptivity of strategy choices is remarkable because
students were in a complex learning situation and received
minimal information. They had to solve equation problems
while simultaneously learning how to increase adaptivity, a
combination placing high demands on working memory
(Mayer & Moreno, 2003; Renkl, 2005). The students were
neither instructed to focus on strategy use nor to increase the
adaptivity of their solution approaches. They also did not
know beforehand that there would be three different
problem types, each corresponding to one strategy. Further,
each of the three problem types was presented with four
different surface structures to prevent superficial learning.
The students received neither feedback on the correctness of
their answers nor on the efficiency of the strategies chosen.
Reaching higher adaptivity therefore included the following
steps: a) identifying the three problem types, (2) evaluating
the relative efficiencies of the nine combinations of
strategies and problem types, and (3) choosing the adaptive
strategy.
Two empirical findings point to cognitive mechanisms for
increasing adaptivity of strategy choices. First, in the
feedback group adaptivity increased quickly and stayed
high. In contrast, in the no-feedback group adaptivity
increased linearly throughout the course of practice. The
more abrupt learning curve in the feedback condition points
to insightful learning (Blöte, van der Burg, & Klein, 2001;
Rittle-Johnson & Star, 2009),and, the more gradual learning
curve in the no-feedback condition to associative learning
(cf. Davidson, 1995). As proposed by Siegler’s models of

1105

strategy changes (Shrager & Siegler, 1998; Siegler & Araya,
2005; Siegler & Shipley, 1995), over the course of
unsupervised practice, the participants learned to associate
each combination of problem type and strategy with its
respective efficiency and then based their strategy choices
on this information. Second, adaptive strategy choice (i.e.
matching strategy choice to problem type e.g., the use of the
addition strategy for an addition problem) led to a) shorter
written solution paths, b) higher solution rates c) lower
solution times. Thus, matching strategy choices to problem
characteristics was clearly adaptive because it saved time
and mental effort during problem solving. Since the students
received no external rewards for choosing their strategies
adaptively, they must have perceived the reduced time and
mental effort required to derive a solution as inherently
rewarding.
Compared to other studies (cf. Torbeyns, De Smedt et al.,
2009), the relative frequency of adaptive strategy choices
was already high (> 75%) at the beginning of our study and
increased further during learning. This demonstrates the
relatively high prior knowledge of our participants: They
knew all three strategies prior to the microgenetic session–
from school instruction and through a brush up instructional
phase prior to assessment – and came from the highest track
of the Swiss educational system. Future studies will have to
test whether less knowledgeable students are able to use the
learning mechanisms for adaptivity in a similar way as the
high performing students in our sample. Still, the present
results provide a strong case for the inherently adaptive
nature of human problem solving (Anderson, 1990; Siegler,
1996) which shapes behavior even in complex learning
situations with minimal information input.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1982). Acquisition of cognitive skill.
Psychological Review, 89, 369-406. Anderson, J. R. (1990).
The adaptive character of thought. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Baroody, A. J. (2003). The development of adaptive
expertise and flexibility: The integration of conceptual and
procedural knowledge. In A. J. Baroody & A. Dowker
(Eds.), The development of arithmetic concepts and skills:
Constructing adaptive expertise (pp. 1-33). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Baroody, A. J., & Dowker, A. (Eds.). (2003). The
development of arithmetic concepts and skills: Constructing
adaptive expertise. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bilalić, M., McLeod, P., & Gobet, F. (2008). Inflexibility
of experts - reality or myth? Quantifying the Einstellung
effect in chess masters. Cognitive Psychology, 56, 73-102.
Bilalić, M., McLeod, P., & Gobet, F. (2010). The
mechanism of the Einstellung (set) effect: A pervasive
source of cognitive bias. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 19, 111-115.
Blöte, A. W., van der Burg, E., & Klein, A. S. (2001).
Students' flexibility in solving two- digit addition and
subtraction problems: Instruction effects. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 93(3), 627-638.

Davidson, J. E. (1995). The suddenness of insight. In R. J.
Sternberg & J. E. Davidson (Eds.), The nature of insight
(pp. 125-155). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
De Groot, A. D. (1978). Thought and choice in chess (2nd
ed.). Oxford, UK: Mounton. De Smedt, B., Torbeyns, J.,
Strassens, N., Ghesquière, P., & Verschaffel, L. (2010).
Frequency, efficiency and flexibility of indirect addition in
two learning environments. Learning and Instruction, 20,
205-215.
Ericsson, K. A., Krampe, R. T., & Tesch-Römer, C.
(1993). The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of
expert performance. Psychological Review, 100(3), 363406.
Frensch, P. A., & Sternberg, R. J. (1989). Expertise and
intelligent thinking: When is it worse to know better? In R.
J. Sternberg (Ed.), Advances in the psychology of human
intelligence (Vol. 5, pp. 157-188). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gluck, M. A., & Thompson, R. F. (1987). Modeling the
neural substrates of associative learning and memory: A
computational approach. Psychological Review, 94(2), 176191.
Gobet, F., & Waters, A. J. (2003). The role of constraints
in expert memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29, 1082-1094.
Hatano, G., & Inagaki, K. (1986). Two courses of
expertise. In H. A. H. Stevenson & K. Hakuta (Eds.), Child
development and education in Japan (pp. 262-272). New
York: Freeman.
Hesketh, B. (1997). Dilemmas in training for transfer and
retention. Applied Psychology: An International Review,
46(4), 317-339.
Johnson, A. (2003). Procedural memory and skill
acquisition. In I. B. Weiner (Ed.), Handbook of Psychology
(pp. 499-523). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Lemaire, P., & Siegler, R. S. (1995). Four aspects of
strategic change: Contributions to children's learning of
multiplication. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 124(1), 83-97.
Logan, G. D. (1988). Toward an instance theory of
automatization. Psychological Review, 95(4), 492-527.
Luchins, A. S., & Luchins, E. H. (1959). Rigidity of
behavior: A variational approach to the effect of
Einstellung. Eugene, OR: University of Oregon Press.
Luchins, A. S., & Luchins, E. H. (1987). Einstellung
effects. Science, 238(4827), 598. Mayer, R. E., & Moreno,
R. (2003). Nine ways to reduce cognitive load in
multimedia learning. Educational Psychologist, 38(1), 4352.
McKelvie, S. J. (1990). Einstellung: Luchins' effect lives
on. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 5, 105-121.
Renkl, A. (2005). The worked-out examples principle in
multimedia. In R. E. Mayer (Ed.), The Cambridge
Handbook of multimedia learning (pp. 229–246). New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Rittle-Johnson, B., & Star, J. R. (2009). Compared with
what? The effects of different comparisons on conceptual

1106

knowledge and procedural flexibility for equation solving.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 101(3), 529-544.
Selter, C. (2009). Creatvity, flexibility, adaptivity and
strategy use in mathematics. ZDM Mathematics Education,
41, 619-625.
Shrager, J., & Siegler, R. S. (1998). SCADS: A model of
children's strategy choices and strategy discoveries.
Psychological Science, 9(5), 405-410.
Siegler, R. S. (1996). Emerging minds: The process of
change in children's thinking. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Siegler, R. S. (2007). Cognitive variability.
Developmental Science, 10, 104-109.
Siegler, R. S., & Araya, R. (2005). A computational
model of conscious and unconscious strategy discovery. In
R. V. Kail (Ed.), Advances in child development and
behavior (pp. 1-42). Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
Siegler, R. S., & Lemaire, P. (1997). Older and younger
adults' strategy choices in multiplication: Testing
predictions of ASCM via the choice/no choice method.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 126, 71-92.
Siegler, R. S., & Shipley, C. (1995). Variation, selection,
and cognitive change. In T. Simon & G. Halford (Eds.),
Developing cognitive competence: New approaches to
process modeling (pp. 31-76). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Star, J. R., & Newton, K. J. (2009). The nature and
development of experts' strategy flexibility for solving
equations. ZDM Mathematics Education, 41, 557-567.
Star, J. R., & Rittle-Johnson, B. (2008). Flexibility in
problem solving: The case of equation solving. Learning
and Instruction, 18(6), 565-579.
Sternberg, R. J. (1996). Costs of expertise. In K. A.
Ericsson (Ed.), The road to excellence: The acquisition of
expert performance in the arts and sciences, sports, and
games (pp. 347-354). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Sternberg, R. J., & Frensch, P. A. (1992). On being an
expert: A cost-benefit analysis. In R.
R. Hoffman (Ed.), The psychology of expertise: Cognitive
research and empirical AI (pp. 191-204). New York:
Springer.
Torbeyns, J., De Smedt, B., Ghesquière, P., &
Verschaffel, L. (2009). Jump or compensate: Strategy
flexibility in the number domain up to 100. ZDM
Mathematics Education, 41, 581-590.
Torbeyns, J., Ghesquiére, P., & Verschaffel, L. (2009).
Efficiency and flexibility of indirect addition in the domain
of multi-digit subtraction. Learning and Instruction, 19, 112.
Verschaffel, L., Luwel, K., Torbeyns, J., & Van Dooren,
W. (2007). Developing adaptive expertise: A feasible and
valuable goal for (elementary) mathematics education?
Ciencias Psicolóicas, 1(1), 27-35.
Verschaffel, L., Luwel, K., Torbeyns, J., & Van Dooren,
W. (2009). Conceptualizing, investigating, and enhancing
adaptive expertise in elementary mathematics education.
European Journal of Psychology of Education, 24(3), 18785174.

Zeitz, C. M. (1997). Some concrete advantages of
abstraction: How experts' representations facilitate
reasoning. In P. J. Feltovich, M. K. Ford & R. R. Hoffman
(Eds.), Expertise in context: Human and machine (pp. 4365). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kluger, A. N., & DeNisi, A. (1996). The effects of
feedback interventions on performance: a historical review,
a meta-analysis, and a preliminary feedback intervention
theory. Psychological bulletin, 119(2), 254.
Kulhavy, R. W., & Stock, W. A. (1989). Feedback in
written instruction: The place of response certitude.
Educational Psychology Review, 1(4), 279-308.
Mory, E. H. (2004). Feedback research revisited.
Handbook of research on educational communications and
technology, 45(1), 745-784.
Shute, V. J. (2008). Focus on formative feedback. Review
of educational research, 78(1), 153-189.
Bangert-Drowns, R. L., Kulik, C. L. C., Kulik, J. A., &
Morgan, M. (1991). The instructional effect of feedback in
test-like events. Review of educational research, 61(2), 213238.
Paas, F., Renkl, A., & Sweller, J. (2003). Cognitive load
theory and instructional design: Recent developments.
Educational psychologist, 38(1), 1-4.
Narciss, S., & Huth, K. (2004). How to design
informative tutoring feedback for multimedia learning.
Instructional design for multimedia learning, 181-195.
Butler, D. L., & Winne, P. H. (1995). Feedback and selfregulated learning: A theoretical synthesis. Review of
educational research, 65(3), 245-281.

Appendix
Table 3
Differences between the two experimental groups.

1107

