UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The QWERTY Effect: How typing shapes word meanings and baby names

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2573p1tf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Casasanto, Daniel
Jasmin, Kyle
Brookshire, Geoffrey
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The QWERTY Effect:
How typing shapes word meanings and baby names
Daniel Casasanto1

Kyle Jasmin2,3

Geoffrey Brookshire1

Tom Gijssels1,4

(casasanto@uchicago.edu) (kyle.jasmin.11@ucl.ac.uk) (brookshire@uchicago.edu) (tomgijssels@uchicago.edu)
1

Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, IL
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, London, UK
3
Laboratory of Brain and Cognition, National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, MD
4
Free University of Brussels, Belgium
2

Abstract

from the right side of the QWERTY keyboard are more
positive in meaning than words typed with more letters from
the left: This is the QWERTY effect, which has been shown
in three languages (English, Spanish, and Dutch), in a large
corpus of phonotactically legal English pseudowords, and in
a collection of keyboard-based neologisms (e.g., LOL;
Jasmin & Casasanto, 2012; hence J&C).
This effect was predicted on the basis of a more general
relationship between left-right space and emotional valence.
Implicitly, people tend to associate “positive” with their
dominant side of space, and “negative” with their nondominant side (Casasanto, 2009; 2011). This means that for
right-handers, “right” is “good” and “left” is “bad.” This
implicit association is enshrined in idioms like “my right
hand man” and “two left feet,” found across many
languages, presumably because the overwhelming majority
of language users are right-handers. For this same reason
J&C predicted that, overall, the lexicons of QWERTY-using
language communities should show a “right-side
advantage”: a tendency for words typed with more rightside letters to be more positive in meaning, both because
QWERTY use should influence the meanings of existing
words, and because it should serve as a filter for the creation
or adoption of new words.
Although these predictions were supported by a series of
experiments (Jasmin & Casasanto, 2012), many questions
remained regarding the generality of the QWERTY effect
and the mechanisms by which interacting with the
QWERTY keyboard shapes people’s lexicons. Here in
Experiments 1-2 we replicated the QWERTY effect in a
large English corpus, and extended it to a fourth language
(Portuguese). In Experiment 3 we extended the effect to a
fifth language (German), and ruled out one of the possible
origins of the QWERTY effect J&C had proposed. In
Experiment 4 we showed that the relationship between
keyboard position and valence extends to individual letters.
Furthermore, we confirmed that left-handers show a similar
QWERTY effect to right-handers, further constraining
theorizing about the origins of the QWERTY effect. Finally,
in Experiment 5 we showed a strong relationship between
QWERTY key position and the names that American
parents choose for their babies, providing one demonstration
of the QWERTY effect’s real-world impact.

Filtering words through our fingers as we type appears to be
changing their meanings. On average, words typed with more
letters from the right side of the QWERTY keyboard are more
positive in meaning than words typed with more letters from
the left: This is the QWERTY effect (Jasmin & Casasanto,
2012), which was shown previously across three languages.
In five experiments, here we replicate the QWERTY effect in
a large corpus of English words, extend it to two new
languages (Portuguese and German), and show that the effect
is mediated by space-valence associations encoded at the
level of individual letters. Finally, we show that QWERTY
appears to be influencing the names American parents give
their children. Together, these experiments demonstrate the
generality of the QWERTY effect, and inform our theories of
how people’s bodily interactions with a cultural artifact can
change the way they use language.
Keywords: QWERTY effect; Space; Typing; Valence

Introduction
Although some form-meaning relationships in language
may be arbitrary (de Saussure, 1966), words’ meanings are
constrained by the way they are produced. For example,
across languages there appears to be a systematic
relationship between the forms and meanings of words
denoting “small” vs. “large”: chico vs. gordo (Spanish);
petit vs. grand (French); /mikros/ vs. /makros/ (Greek);
teeny vs. humongous (English), etc. (Ohala, 1984). In each
case, a vowel in the “small” word requires the speaker to
shorten the vocal tract, and a vowel in the “large” word
requires the speaker to lengthen it, by comparison (see also
Jakobson & Waugh, 1979; Sapir, 1929).
Until recent years, words in spoken languages were
produced mainly with the mouth, so form-meaning
relationships like the one described above were mediated by
the way speakers articulate words with the vocal tract.
Increasingly, however, “spoken” words are produced with
the hands as we type, and for millions of language users
word production is mediated by the QWERTY keyboard.
Widespread typing creates an opportunity for new kinds of
form-meaning relationships in language to arise. In addition
to being shaped by the vocal tract articulators, words’
meanings can potentially be shaped by the way we articulate
their orthographic forms with our fingers.
One such form-meaning relationship has been
documented. On average, words typed with more letters

296

Experiment 1: QWERTY in a larger corpus

predicted, but the relationship was not significant (b=.003,
Wald χ2=.67, df=1, p=.41). When we controlled for Word
Length, mean Letter Frequency, and their interaction,
however, RSA was a significant predictor of Valence
(b=.013, Wald χ2=7.06, df=1, p=.008; fig. 1a). We
confirmed this result with a 20,000-iteration permutation
test (p = .0095, one-tailed; fig 1b). This p-value indicates
that there was less than a 1-in-100 chance of obtaining a
relationship between RSA and Valence that was greater than
the observed relationship by chance.
In summary, when irrelevant factors known to influence
processing fluency were controlled, parametric and
nonparametric tests showed a significant QWERTY effect
in NewANEW: English words with more right-side letters
were, on average, more positive in valence than words with
more left-side letters. This analysis extends the original
English QWERTY effect to a corpus containing an order of
magnitude more words. The majority of the words in
NewANEW were distinct from those in original ANEW, but
even for the minority of overlapping words, the authors of
NewANEW obtained new ratings; thus, these data represent
a fully independent replication of the QWERTY effect, in a
sixth corpus.

The goal of Experiment 1 was to replicate J&C’s main
result in a larger corpus of English words. We predicted that
words with more right-side letters would be, on average,
more positive in valence than words with more left-side
letters.

Method and Results
We analyzed words from the NewANEW corpus (Warriner,
et al. 2013), which consists of 13,915 words normed for
Valence, Arousal, and Dominance, with Amazon
Mechanical Turk. Subjects rated words on these dimensions
using a 9-point scale.
Following J&C, we calculated the Right Side Advantage
for each word by taking the difference of the number of
letters on the right side of the keyboard (y, u, i, o, p, h, j, k,
l, m n) and subtracting the number from the left side (q, w,
e, r, t, a, s, d, f, g, z, x, c, v, b; [RSA=(# right-side letters) (# left-side letters)]). Only the Valence scores were of
interest, so Arousal and Dominance scores were not
analyzed.
For each of the corpora analyzed in Experiments 1-3 here,
we report three analyses. For the sake of completeness, we
first report the relationship between Valence and RSA in a
simple linear regression model including random intercepts
for items (i.e., words), as in J&C. This model does not
control for word length and letter frequency. Length and
(word) frequency are controlled in the majority of
psycholinguistic studies, and are known to influence
numerous dependent variables. Since longer words with
lower frequency letters may be read less fluently than
shorter words with higher frequency letters, controlling for
these factors was particularly well motivated in the present
study. Therefore, we conducted a second analysis,
regressing Valence on RSA, controlling for Word Length,
Letter Frequency, and their interaction, as in J&C.1 Finally,
we added a third analysis to confirm the relationship
between Valence and RSA using a nonparametric
randomization test, which makes no assumptions about the
distribution of the data (e.g., that the distribution is normal),
and provides an intuitive way to assess whether the
observed relationship is likely to have occurred by chance.
Valence ratings were residualized in a linear regression with
word length, mean letter frequency, and their interaction.
These valence residuals were then correlated with 20,000
random permutations of the observed RSA values. The pvalue (one tailed) represents the proportion of random
permutations with a higher correlation coefficient than the
actual observed value.
In our first simple regression analysis, Valence was
positively related to RSA in the NewANEW words, as

Figure 1. Results of Experiment 1. Relationship between Valence
and RSA (controlling for word length, letter frequency, and their
interactions) in NewANEW, analyzed parametically (1a, left) and
nonparametrically (1b, right). The histogram in 1b shows the
frequency with which each r-value was obtained in the permutation
test.

Experiment 2: QWERTY Effect in Portuguese
Experiment 2 tested for the QWERTY effect in Portuguese
version of the original ANEW corpus.

Method and Results
We analyzed valence-normed words from the European
Portuguese adaptation of the Affective Norms for English
Words corpus (EP-ANEW; Soares, et al. 2011). EP-ANEW
consists of 1034 words, which were rated by 958 native
Portuguese speakers for Valence, Arousal and Dominance,
using 9-point scales and Self-Assessment Manikins (SAM)
scale (see Soares, et al. for detailed methods and Bradley &
Lang, 1999 for details on SAMs).
As in Experiment 1, we computed the RSA for each word
in the corpus: [Left-hand letters: (q, w, e, r, t, a, s, d, f, g, z,
x, c, v, b); Right-hand letters: (y, u, i, o, p, h, j, k, l, ç, n, m, )]. Diacritics were stripped from the letters because, on the

1

It was not possible to control for word frequency because
frequency counts were not available for all words. We note,
however, that the QWERTY effect has been shown in a large
pseudoword corpus, for which all “words” had a frequency of zero
(Jasmin & Casasanto, 2012, Experiment 3).

297

Portuguese keyboard, accented letters do not have their own
keys. Nineteen of the words had hyphens, which were
treated as right-side letters due to the hyphen’s placement on
the Portuguese keyboard.
In a simple regression, RSA was a highly significant
predictor of Valence (b=.06, Wald χ2=7.06, df=1, p=.008).
A second analysis controlling for Word Length, mean Letter
Frequency, and their interaction showed the predicted
positive relationship between Valence and RSA, though the
effect in the controlled analysis was marginally significant
(b=.038, Wald χ2=2.80, df=1, p=.09; fig 2a). We confirmed
this result with a 20,000-iteration permutation test (p =
.0714; fig 2b).
In summary, Experiment 2 extends the QWERTY effect
to a seventh corpus and a fourth language: European
Portuguese. In the controlled analyses, the relationship
between Valence and RSA was of marginal statistical
significance, likely due to the relatively small number of
words in the original ANEW corpus. To determine whether
the Portuguese QWERTY effect differed in magnitude from
the effects found in English, Spanish, and Dutch versions of
ANEW (see J&C), we conducted a regression analysis
combining the data from all four languages, with words
(i.e., translation equivalents) as a repeated random factor.
The magnitude of the QWERTY effect did not differ
between languages, as indicated by the absence of any RSA
by Language interaction (Wald χ2=1.26, df=1, p=.73), and
the relationship between RSA and Valence remained highly
significant when the effect of Language was controlled
(Wald χ2=7.34, df=1, p=.007).

are more left-hand letters than right-hand letter, creating
more response competition for letters typed with the left
hand than the right. The QWERTZ keyboard, however, has
an equal number of right- and left-hand letters. Therefore,
testing for a QWERTZ effect allowed us to determine
whether the left-right asymmetry that gives rise to the
QWERTY effect is located in the keyboard, per se, or in the
bodies of its right-handed users.

Method and Results
We analyzed valence-normed words from the BAWL-R
corpus (Võ, et al., 2009). BAWL-R consists of 2902 words
rated for valence, arousal and imageability. Valence ratings
were made on a 7-point scale from -3 (very negative)
through 0 to +3 (very positive; see Vo, et al. 2006 and Vo,
et al. 2009) for detailed methods). Only valence ratings were
analyzed in this experiment.
We calculated the RSA for each German word, using
QWERTZ key position: [Left-hand letters: (ß, z, u, i, o, p, ü,
h, j, k, l, ö, ä, n, m); Right-hand letters: (q, w, e, r, t, a, s, d,
f, g, y, x, c, v, b)]. In a simple linear regression, RSA was a
significant predictor of Valence (b=.023, Wald χ2=5.37,
df=1, p=.02). In a second analysis controlling for Word
Length, mean Letter Frequency, and their interaction, the
effect of RSA on Valence was highly significant (b=.029,
Wald χ2=7.54, df=1, p=.006; fig 3a). We confirmed this
result with a 20,000-iteration permutation test (p = .0062;
fig. 3b).

Figure 3. Results of Experiment 3. Relationship between Valence
and RSA (controlling for word length, letter frequency, and their
interactions) in BAWL-R, analyzed parametically (3a, left) and
nonparametrically (3b, right). The histogram in 3b shows the
number of times each r-value was obtained in the permutation test.

Figure 2. Results of Experiment 2. Relationship between Valence
and RSA (controlling for word length, letter frequency, and their
interactions) in EP-ANEW, analyzed parametically (2a, left) and
nonparametrically (2b, right). The histogram in 2b shows the
number of times each r-value was obtained in the permutation test.

In summary, the QWERTZ effect was highly significant,
in both the “raw” and controlled analyses, extending the
effect of RSA on word meaning to an eighth corpus and a
fifth language: German. Moreover, this finding argues
strongly against one of the two possible explanations for the
QWERTY effect proposed by J&C, locating the origin of
the effect in the bodies of typers, not in the keyboard, per se.

Experiment 3: QWERTZ Effect in German
Experiment 3 tested whether key position predicted valence
for German words, in order to extend the QWERTY (or
QWERTY-like) effect to another language, and to test one
of the possible origins of the QWERTY effect proposed by
J&C. J&C initially predicted the QWERTY effect on the
basis of manual motor asymmetries in right-handers:
righties should prefer right-hand letters because they are
easier to type with their dominant hand. However, there is
an asymmetry built into QWERTY keyboards, per se: There

Experiment 4: QWERTY Effect in Letters
In Experiment 4, we tested for an effect of QWERTY key
position on English speakers’ valence ratings for individual
letters, and compared this effect between right- and lefthanders.

298

Method and Results

the interaction of Ordinal Position and Frequency were all
controlled (b=.024, Wald χ2=3.86, df=1, p=.05).

Native English speakers were recruited via Amazon
Mechanical Turk and participated for online payment (N =
209). Of these participants, 7 were excluded for not
following instructions and 4 were excluded for having a
non-Qwerty keyboard.
Data from the remaining 198
participants were analyzed.
Each letter from the alphabet was presented in lower case
on an individual page, with the order of presentation
randomized. Participants indicated how positive the letter
seemed on a vertical 9-point SAM scale (5 manikins were
used as well as two labels: 'Very Positive' at the top; 'Very
Negative’ at the bottom). For the analysis, each letter was
assigned a value corresponding to its left-to-right column
position on the keyboard (Column 1 = [q, a, z]; Column 2 =
[w, s, x], etc.)
In a simple regression including random intercepts for
subjects, Keyboard Column was a significant predictor of
Valence (b=.029, Wald χ2=7.37, df=1, p=.007). We found
the same positive relationship when controlling for a letter’s
frequency, its ordinal position in the alphabet, and their
interaction (b=.026, Wald χ2=5.80, df=1, p=.016; fig. 4a),
and confirmed this relationship in a 20,000-iteration
permutation test (p = .01135; fig 4b).
In a further analysis, we tested whether the relationship
between Keyboard Column and Valence was categorical or
continuous. On one possibility, this relationship could be
categorical: letters typed with the left hand could be treated
as more negative and those typed with the right hand as
more positive. Alternatively, this relationship could be
continuous: On average, the valence of letters could increase
gradually, column-by-column, from left to right. According
to a non-parametric rank-order test of the relationship
between keyboard position and valence the relation appears
to be continuous (Kendall Tau = .02, p = .056).
Finally, to test whether the effect of Keyboard Column
varied with handedness, we added Handedness and its
interaction with Keyboard Column to the model.
Handedness was measured using the Edinburgh Handedness
Inventory (EHI; Oldfield, 1971). Consistent with common
practice, right-handedness was operationalized as having an
EHI greater than 40 (n = 168 right-handers) and lefthandedness as having an EHI less than -40 (n = 10 lefthanders; 20 ambidextrous participants were excluded from
this analysis). Importantly, the effect of horizontal position
did not differ between right- and left-handers (Wald
χ2=.843, df=1, p=.36). Right- and left-handers showed
similar QWERTY effects in tests of the effect of Keyboard
Column on Valence, controlling for the letters’ Ordinal
Position in the alphabet, their Frequency, and the interaction
of Ordinal Position and Frequency (Left-handers: b=.097,
Wald χ2=4.11, df=1, p=.04; Right-handers: b=.022, Wald
χ2=3.53, df=1, p=.06). Overall, the effect of Keyboard
Column on Valence remained significant when Handedness,
the interaction of Handedness with Keyboard Column, the
letters’ Ordinal Position in the alphabet, their Frequency and

1.5

a.

0.5

s

0.0

z
q

w

y

g
b

v

−0.5

Valence (residualized)

1.0

a

j
m
u

c

k
i

t

r
e
d

o
l

p

h
n

−1.0

x

−1.5

f

1

2

Left

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Keyboard column

10
Right

1000

1200

b.

600
0

200

400

Frequency

800

Obs. r = 0.032
p = 0.01135

−0.06

−0.04

−0.02

0.00

0.02

0.04

0.06

Permuted r−scores

Figure 4. Results of Experiment 4. Relationship between Valence
and Keyboard Column for individual letters (controlling for letters’
frequency, ordinal positions in the alphabet, and their interactions),
analyzed parametrically (4a, top) and nonparametrically (4b,
bottom). The histogram in 4b shows the number of times each rvalue was obtained in the permutation test.

In summary, the relationship between keyboard position
and valence shown previously at the level of words was
found here in individual letters: on average, letters farther to
the right were rated as more positive in valence than letters
on the left. This pattern was found in spite of the fact that
letter “a,” located in the left-most column, was the most
positively rated letter by far (controlling for its frequency
and ordinal position), presumably because “a” signifies the

299

top rating in American school grades and other evaluation
schemes. The meaningfulness of this letter, and its status as
an outlier in our data, both work against the “right-is-good”
relationship that we hypothesized, which we found in both
right- and left-handers.

landmarks like those listed above, and on the inflection
point observed in figure 5a, rounded to the nearest decade.
Names invented after 1990 (n = 38,746) use more letters
from the right side of the keyboard than names in use before
1990 (n = 43,429; 1960–1990 mean RSA = -0.79; 1991–
2012 mean RSA = -0.27, t(81277.66) = 33.3, p < 2.2 × 10-16;
fig. 5b). This difference remained significant when length
was controlled by dividing each name’s RSA by the number
of letters in the name (t(81648.1) = 32.0, p < 2.2 × 10-16).
We note that the second result, reported in figure 5b, is
statistically independent from the result reported in figure
5a. The longitudinal analysis (see fig. 5a) only included
names that were given to at least 100 children for every year
from 1960–2012; none of the names invented after 1990
(see fig. 5b) were included in that analysis.

Experiment 5: QWERTY and Baby Names
Does the QWERY effect influence people’s behavior
beyond the laboratory? Although the effect is subtle, it is
pervasive: It may be shading the meanings of words,
according to Experiment 4, with every letter we type, read,
and perhaps imagine. One domain of language use in which
people have a great degree of autonomous choice, and
therefore where a QWERTY effect is likely to be found, is
in naming new places, products, or people. In Experiment
5, we tested whether the first names that Americans give
their children have changed over time, as QWERTY has
become ubiquitous in people’s homes, and whether new
names coined after the popularization of QWERTY are
spelled using more right-side letters (i.e., have a greater
RSA) than names coined earlier.

Method and Results

−0.50

We obtained naming statistics from the US Social Security
Administration
website
(http://www.ssa.gov/oact/
babynames/limits.html). This database reports the frequency
of each name that was given to 5 or more children in the
United States that year. RSA was computed as in
Experiment 1.

−0.40

Mean RSA

−0.30

−0.20

a

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year

Longitudinal analysis of names’ popularity. We first
analyzed the mean RSA of all names from 1960–2012 that
had been given to at least 100 children every year (n = 788
distinct names). Results showed that the mean RSA has
increased since the popularization of the QWERTY
keyboard, as indicated by a correlation between the year and
average RSA in that year (1960–2012, r = .78, df = 51, p =
8.6 × 10-12; fig. 5a). This correlation remained highly
significant when word length was controlled by dividing
RSA by the number of letters in a name (r = .77, df = 51, p
= 1.7 × 10-11).

0.05

0.10

Pre−QWERTY
Post−QWERTY

0.00

Probability mass

0.15

b

Comparison of pre- versus post-QWERTY era names.
QWERTY may also influence how new names are coined.
We compared the RSA of names coined before and after the
massive popularization of QWERTY. It is difficult to
pinpoint the moment in history at which QWERTY became
ubiquitous in Americans’ homes, and a part of people’s
daily lives across a wide variety of demographics. Apple
Macintosh and Windows home computers became available,
though not yet widely used, in 1984 and 1985, respectively
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_operating_system
s; accessed February 8, 2013). America Online made the
Internet widely available in people’s homes starting in 1991
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AOL; accessed February 8,
2013). We chose the year 1990 as the beginning of the
“QWERTY era” based on a survey of technological

−5

0

5

RSA

Figure 5. Results of Experiment 5. 5a (top): Mean RSA of names
given to at least 100 children per year from 1960–2012. 5b
(bottom): Overlaid histograms of the RSAs for all names in use
before the mass popularization of QWERTY (1960–1990) and
after its popularization (1991–2012).

In summary, we find very strong relationships between
the names Americans have decided to give their children
and the QWERTY key positions of the letters in those
names. In a longitudinal analysis, we found that the mean
RSA of names that were already in use as of 1960 increased

300

dramatically starting at the dawn of the “QWERTY era,”
indicating that higher-RSA names were increasing in
popularity and lower-RSA names declining in popularity. In
a second analysis, we found that names coined after 1990
have significantly higher RSAs than names used during the
previous three decades.

numerous ways, which is rooted in their greater left-hand
motor fluency (Casasanto, 2009; 2011).
The finding that both left- and right-handers prefer words
with more right-side letters suggests that the QWERTY
effect arises both from typing experience and from the
experience of using typed words in speech. Variation in the
way words are used is constrained by communities of
language users, which are composed mostly of righthanders. English speakers, for example, must all agree that
the “correct answer” is the “right answer,” even if they are
lefties. Perhaps “good” is associated with “right” on the
keyboard because “good” is associated with “right,” more
generally, in a social world dominated by right-handers.

General Discussion
In five experiments, we replicate and extend the QWERTY
effect, showing the predicted relationship between keyboard
position and valence in two new languages, single letters,
and in the names US parents choose for their babies. These
data underscore the robustness and generality of this effect,
and also constrain theorizing about its origins.
J&C proposed that the left-right asymmetry that gives rise
to the QWERTY effect could either be inherent in the
bodies of the keyboard’s right-handed users or in the
keyboard, per se. Finding a QWERTY-like effect in
German argues strongly against the second possibility.
Whereas the QWERTY keyboard has more left-hand letters
than right-hand letters, the German QWERTZ keyboard
does not. Since the QWERTZ effect cannot be explained by
asymmetries built into the keyboard, it would be
unparsimonious to invoke this explanation for the
QWERTY effect found in other languages. The relationship
between keyboard position and word meanings in all of the
languages tested, therefore, is best explained in terms of
manual motor asymmetries inherent in the keyboards’ users,
the great majority of whom are right-handers (Casasanto,
2009; 2011; Logan, 2003).
The QWERTY effect in single letters rules out two other
possible explanations for the effect. Typing letter
combinations that use (i.) distinct fingers or (ii.) alternating
hands is easier than typing combinations that reuse the same
fingers or the same hand (Beilock & Holt, 2007). Could the
QWERTY effect be driven by some unexpected relationship
between the right-left position of keys and finger repetitions
(FRs) or hand alternations (HAs)? Previously, J&C ruled
out effects of FRs and HAs statistically, showing that the
effect of RSA on valence remained significant when these
variables were controlled. Here we rule out the effects of
FRs and HAs definitively: The relationship between valence
the left-right positions of single letters cannot be explained
in terms of typing easy vs. hard key combinations.
Finally, theorizing about the QWERTY effect’s origins is
strongly constrained by the finding of a significant
QWERTY effect in left-handers, which did not differ
quantitatively or qualitatively from the effect found in righthanders. This replicates previous findings by J&C, who
showed a trend toward the standard right-biased QWERTY
effect in left-handers. On the simplest prediction about the
effects of typing on word meanings, right-handers should
show a right-side advantage (preferring words with more
right-hand letters), but left-handers should show a left-side
advantage, giving higher valence ratings to words with
more left-side letters. This prediction follows from studies
showing that lefties manifest a “good-is-left” bias in

References
Beilock, S. L. & Holt, L. E. (2007). Embodied preference
judgments: Can likeability be driven by the motor system?
Psychological Science, 18, 51-57.
Bradley, M. M., & Lang, P. J. (1999). Affective norms for English
words (ANEW): Instruction manual and affective ratings (pp. 145). Technical Report C-1, The Center for Research in
Psychophysiology, University of Florida.
Casasanto, D. (2009). Embodiment of abstract concepts: good and
bad in right- and left-handers. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 138(3), 351-367.
Casasanto, D. (2011). Different Bodies, Different Minds: The
body-specificity of language and thought. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 20(6), 378–383.
de Saussure, F. (1966). Course in General Linguistics. Charles
Bally and Albert Sechehaye (Eds.), Translated by Wade Baskin.
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Jakobson, R. & Waugh, L. R. (1979). The sound shape of
language. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Jasmin, K. & Casasanto, D. (2012). The QWERTY Effect: How
typing shapes the meanings of words. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review, 19(3), 499-504.
Logan, G. D. (2003). Simon-type effects: Chronometric evidence
for keypress schemata in typewriting. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 29, 741-757.
Logan, G. D., & Crump, M. J. C. (2011). Hierarchical control of
cognition and action: The case for skilled typewriting. In Brian
Ross (ed.). Psychology of Learning and Motivation, Vol. 54,
Burlington: Academic Press, 1-27.
Ohala, J. J. (1984). An ethological perspective on common crosslanguage utilization of F0 of voice. Phonetica, 41(1), 1-16.
Oldfield, R.C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of handedness:
The Edinburgh inventory. Neuropsychologia, 9, 97–113.
Sapir, E. (1929). The status of linguistics as a science. Language,
207-214.
Soares, A. P., Comesaña, M., Pinheiro, A. P., Simões, A., & Frade,
C. S. (2012). The adaptation of the Affective Norms for English
Words (ANEW) for European Portuguese. Behavior research
methods, 44(1), 256-269.
Võ, M. L., Conrad, M., Kuchinke, L., Urton, K., Hofmann, M. J.,
& Jacobs, A. M. (2009). The Berlin affective word list reloaded
(BAWL-R). Behavior research methods, 41(2), 534-538.
Warriner, A. B., Kuperman, V., & Brysbaert, M. (2013). Norms of
valence, arousal, and dominance for 13,915 English
lemmas. Behavior Research Methods, 45, 1191-1207.

301

