UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The good ship Theseus: The effect of valence on object identity judgments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/41b9k7cq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
De Freitas, Julian
Tobia, Kevin
Newman, George E.
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The good ship Theseus: The effect of valence on object identity judgments
Julian De Freitas (julian.defreitas@psy.ox.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Oxford. 9 South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3UD, United Kingdom

Kevin Tobia (kevin.tobia@philosophy.ox.ac.uk)
Department of Philosophy, University of Oxford. Radcliffe Humanities, Woodstock Road, Oxford OX2 6GG, United
Kingdom

George E. Newman (george.newman@yale.edu)
School of Management, Yale University. New Haven, CT, 06511, USA

Joshua Knobe (joshua.knobe@yale.edu)
Program in Cognitive Science, Yale University. New Haven, CT, 06511, USA
Abstract

same individual. Yet a recent wave of research has
suggested that valence—at least, in the form of moral
valence—influences people’s judgments about all sorts of
matters which initially seem to have nothing to do with
value judgments (see Knobe 2010), including freedom
(Phillips & Knobe, 2009), weakness of will (May & Holton,
2012), intentional action (Knobe, 2003), and happiness
(Phillips, Misenheimer, & Knobe, 2011). We predict that
valence has a similar effect on people’s identity judgments.

How do ordinary people decide whether an individual object
at t1 is the same individual at t2? We show that valence—
people’s value judgments about whether a given trait is good
or bad—can influence this decision. This effect is explained
by people’s tendency to believe that the underlying essence of
an entity is good, and may be part of a far wider phenomenon
of how people understand essences in general—be they of
humans, categories, or even non-human objects.
Keywords: Concepts; moral reasoning; identity; persistence;
essentialism; true self

Valence and Essence Ascriptions

Would the USA still be the USA without freedom of
expression? What about without social discrimination?
Would the Beatles still be the Beatles without John Lennon?
What about without Pete Best?
How do people decide that an individual object at t1 is the
same individual at t2? While there have been several
theories proposed in metaphysics about what should
constitute identity (in a normative sense), here our focus is
descriptive—in other words, what are the ways in which
everyday people tend to make judgments of identity
continuity? A good deal of philosophical and empirical
work has investigated the lay theories people use when
judging whether an individual object continues to be the
same individual (see Rips, Blok, & Newman, 2006). Much
of this work has converged on four factors: phenomenalism
(whether the object maintains the same appearance across
time or transformation), sortalism (whether the object
maintains the same basic-level category membership, e.g.
‘dog’), physicalism (whether the object continues to be
composed of the same physical ‘stuff’; e.g. the ‘ship of
Theseus’ is a thought experiment that questions whether an
object that has all its parts replaced remains the same
object), and the causal continuer view (whether the object
has the same underlying cause).
However, to date research on identity judgment has not
explored the role of valence, i.e. of people’s value
judgments about whether certain traits are good or bad. At
first, it might seem strange to even ask whether valence can
influence something as concrete as whether an object is the

More specifically, we propose that the impact of valence
on identity judgments is explained by people’s
psychological essentialism (Gelman & Hirschfeld, 1999;
Keil, 1989; Medin & Ortony, 1989). In its everyday sense,
an essence is often referred to as something intrinsic to an
entity that makes it the kind of thing that it is (Newman &
Keil, 2008). Much of the existing work on essentialism has
been concerned with category essences (e.g. Gelman, 2003;
Keil, 1989), but people also ascribe essences to individual
entities (e.g. Gupta, 1980; Gutheil & Rosengren, 1996). As
an example, the essence of the present paper is constituted
in part by its engagement with questions about identity, and
if we eliminated all discussion of these questions from the
paper, its very essence would have been removed. By
contrast, this paper happens to start with the letter ‘W’, but
that is not the essence of the paper, and if we changed that
one letter, the essence of the paper could still remain.
Recent research suggests that valence may have an impact
on intuitions about individual essence. In particular, studies
of the way people understand human beings indicate that
people are more inclined to say that the good qualities of a
human being constitute that human being’s essence
(Newman, Bloom, & Knobe, 2014; Newman, De Freitas, &
Knobe, in press). In fact, even if a human being behaves
immorally, people will still be inclined to say that the
human being is good ‘deep down’ (Newman et al., 2014;
Newman et al., in press).
Our hypothesis is that this very same effect arises when
people think about things other than human beings. That is,
1

2103

if you are thinking about entities such as a band, or a nation,
or even inanimate objects such as a science paper, you will
also be inclined to see the good aspects of it more as being
its essence. Since people should be more inclined to see an
entity as losing its essence when it loses good traits than
when it loses bad traits, they should be more inclined to say
that the entity itself no longer even exists when its good
traits disappear than when its bad traits disappear. In short,
we predict that the impact of valence on essence judgments
leads to an impact on intuitions about object identity.

The Present Studies
To test this hypothesis, we chose five different non-human
entities and described them as either improving or
deteriorating along a relevant dimension. Studies 1 and 2
tested whether there would be an asymmetry in people’s
judgments about whether the object before and after the
changes was the same individual. Studies 3 and 4 tested
whether these results could be explained in terms of
people’s psychological essentialism.

Results and Discussion

Study 1
Study 1 investigated whether people show an asymmetry in
persistence judgments depending on whether an entity
undergoes a valence change to become more positive
(Improvement), or negative (Deterioration). We predicted
that if an entity improves, people will believe that the entity
after the changes is still the same entity as the entity before
the changes, whereas if the entity deteriorates, people will
believe that the entity after the changes is no longer the
same entity as the entity before the changes.

Methods
320 participants (Mage = 30, 104 female) were recruited
using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. Participants were
assigned to one of ten conditions in a 2 (valence:
improvement vs. deterioration) X 5 (vignette) design. The
different vignettes served merely as a robustness check, and
included a band, science paper, nation, university, and
conference. For example:
Eastford is a large university. When the university first
opened, some of its departments used diverse teaching
styles and also challenged students to think for themselves,
while others taught by reading straight out of a textbook
and did not allow any student participation. Over the
years, some of the original departments were removed,
and some new departments created.
Now after these changes, the majority of departments
teach by using diverse teaching styles and also
challenging students to think for themselves.
OR:
Now after these changes, the majority of departments
teach by reading straight out of a textbook and do not
allow any student participation.

agreed with the statement (1 = ‘completely disagree’, 7 =
‘completely agree’): The new [Eastford] is not really the
same [university] as the [Eastford] before the changes.
Finally, they answered two multiple choice comprehension
questions about the vignette: Before the changes, how would
you describe [Eastford]? and After the changes, how would
you describe [Eastford]? Participants chose an answer from
the same three options for both questions, for example: a)
Used diverse teaching styles and also challenged students to
think for themselves, b) Taught by reading straight out of a
textbook and did not allow any student participation, and c)
Some departments used diverse teaching styles and also
challenged students to think for themselves, while others
taught by reading straight out of a textbook and did not
allow any student participation

83 participants were excluded for not answering all
comprehension questions correctly. A 2 (valence:
improvement vs. deterioration) X 5 (vignette) ANOVA
indicated a significant main effect of valence on persistence
judgments, F(1,227) = 30.24, p < .001, ηp2 = .118. As
predicted, participants were significantly more likely to
agree that the entity after the changes was no longer the
same as the entity before the changes when it deteriorated
(M= 5.33, SD= 1.39) than when it improved (M= 4.35, SD=
1.43). There was also a main effect of vignette, in which
participants gave higher persistence ratings to some
vignettes, F(4,227) = 5.24, p < .001, ηp2 = .085, though
critically this factor did not interact with the primary
variable of valence, p = .982, and all vignettes were
directionally consistent with our hypothesis (i.e. a higher
likelihood of reporting identity disruption when the entity
deteriorated than when it improved). In short, participants
were significantly more inclined to say that the entity’s
identity was preserved when it improved than when it
deteriorated.

Study 2
Results from Study 1 provided initial support for
asymmetric identity judgments of non-human entities based
on valence, but another possible explanation of these results
is that they were driven by judged asymmetries in
intentionality and/or the quantity of good and bad traits of
the entity. For instance, perhaps participants were more
inclined to think that the good traits of the entity were
intended by its creator than to think that the bad traits were
intended in this way. Then it might have been this inference
about the creator’s intentions, rather than anything about
valence directly, that was driving the effect. Along similar
lines, participants may have judged an entity to have more
good than bad traits before it changed. Then, perhaps they
judged the good traits to be more essential to the entity
simply because good traits happened to be more prevalent in
this specific entity.

Participants were then asked to rate the extent to which they
2

2104

To address these alternative explanations, Study 2
included explicit information about intentionality (we also
tweaked the original vignettes wherever we thought
intentionality was potentially ambiguous), and described the
conditional change as going from a majority good (bad) to a
majority bad (good). Doing so ensured that there would be
no ambiguity in participants’ minds that a full valence
change had taken place in each of the conditions, since now
it would be very clear what the initial and final valences
were. Finally, in order to strengthen our confidence that the
previous effect observed in Study 1 was truly one on
identity judgments per se (and not some related, but vaguer
notion), we also added a second, more direct measure of
persistence.

Person A thinks that Bellshore after the changes is still the
same country as Bellshore before the changes.
Person B thinks that it makes more sense to say that
Bellshore is no longer the same country it used to be. The
way he sees it, the original Bellshore no longer exists.
Who do you agree with more, Person A or Person B?
Participants answered this question on a 7-point Likert Scale
(1 = ‘person A’, 4 = ‘equally agree with both persons’, 7 =
‘person B’). Finally they also answered two comprehension
questions about the vignette.

Results and Discussion

Methods
320 participants (Mage = 30, 96 female) were recruited using
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. The experimental design was
largely consistent with Study 1, except this time information
about intentionality was explicitly added, and entities were
described as changing from a majority good (bad) to a
majority bad (good). For example:
Bellshore is a small country. In the majority of its regions
the local government intentionally teaches people to
express their opinions freely in public, while in some other
regions the local government intentionally teaches people
to discriminate against one another for being different.
Over the years, some regions of Bellshore change their
policies. Now, after these changes, in the majority of
regions the local government intentionally teaches people
to discriminate against one another for being different.
OR:
Bellshore is a small country. In the majority of its regions
the local government intentionally teaches people to
discriminate against one another for being different, while
in some other regions the local government intentionally
teaches people to express their opinions freely in public.
Over the years, some regions of Bellshore change their
policies. Now, after these changes, in the majority of
regions the local government intentionally teaches people
to express their opinions freely in public.
Participants were then asked to rate the extent to which they
agreed with the statement (1 = ‘completely disagree’, 7 =
‘completely agree’): [Bellshore] after the changes is not
really the same [country] as [Bellshore] before the changes.
The order of this question was counterbalanced with a
second question about persistence:
Person A and Person B agree that at a superficial level
(e.g. the number of regions, or the number of people)
Bellshore before the changes shares a lot in common with
Bellshore after the changes. However, when they consider
what it really means to be Bellshore, the country, they run
into a disagreement about what has happened to the
identity of Bellshore after the changes:

86 participants were excluded for not answering all
comprehension questions correctly. The two items
measuring persistence intuitions showed high internal
consistency (α = 0.85), and thus were averaged to produce a
single measure of identity judgment. A 2 (valence:
improvement vs. deterioration) X 5 (vignette) ANOVA
indicated a significant main effect of valence on identity
judgments, F(1,224) = 19.24, p < .001, ηp2 = .079.
Participants were significantly more likely to agree that the
entity after the changes was no longer the same as the entity
before the changes when it deteriorated (M=5.67,
SD=1.18), than when it improved (M=4.99, SD=1.38).
There was also a main effect of vignette, in which
participants gave higher identity ratings to some vignettes,
F(4,224) = 4.86, p < .01, ηp2 = .080, though critically this
factor did not interact with the primary variable of valence,
p = .301, and all vignettes were directionally consistent with
our hypothesis (i.e. a higher likelihood of reporting identity
disruption when the entity deteriorated than when it
improved). Thus, these results replicate the original effect
via two different measures of identity, while simultaneously
ruling out alternative explanations based on potential,
intuited differences in intentionality or the initial quantity of
a valenced trait.

Study 3
Study 3 tested whether this asymmetric effect of valence on
identity judgments can be explained by participants’
intuitions about the individual essences of these entities.

Methods
320 participants (Mage = 28, 91 female) were recruited using
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. The experimental design was
almost identical to that of Study 2, though this time we used
only the second identity measure from Study 2. Following
this measure, participants rated their agreement with the
statement, [Entity] after the changes no longer reflects the
true essence of the original [Entity] (1 = ‘completely
disagree’, 7 = ‘completely agree’). Previous studies have
successfully employed this kind of wording to probe
intuitions about essentialism (e.g. Newman et al., 2014;
Newman et al., in press). Finally, participants answered two
3

2105

comprehension questions about the vignette.

Results and Discussion
89 participants were excluded for not answering all
comprehension questions correctly. A 2 (valence:
improvement vs. deterioration) X 5 (vignette) ANOVA
indicated a significant main effect of valence on identity
judgments, F(1,221) = 19.67, p < .001, ηp2 = .082.
Participants were significantly more likely to agree that the
entity after the changes was no longer the same as the entity
before the changes when it deteriorated (M=5.53, SD=1.43)
than when it improved (M=4.57, SD=1.70). There was no
main effect of vignette, p = .085, and this factor did not
interact with the primary variable of valence, p = .430.
To determine whether beliefs about essence explain the
effect of valence on identity ratings, we then conducted a
bootstrap mediation analysis (Preacher & Hayes, 2008;
Hayes, 2012), with condition as the independent variable,
ratings of identity persistence as the dependent variable, and
measures of essence as a potential mediator. The analysis
indicated that essence did indeed significantly mediate the
effect of valence on identity judgments (95% CI = -1.19 to .56; see Figure 1).

Figure 1: Mediation results from Study 3.

leads to a corresponding influence on people’s intuitions
about identity persistence. But in order to really demonstrate
that essence is causally responsible for the current effects,
one would need to directly manipulate the essence of an
entity and show that this leads to a corresponding change in
people’s intuitions about whether the identity of the entity
still exists.
Study 4 took exactly this approach. We reasoned that even
though people assume by default that the essence of an
entity is good, if they are directly told that the essence of an
entity is bad then this should lead to a corresponding ‘flip’
in their intuitions about whether the identity of the entity is
still the same after the changes. In particular, a bad-essenced
entity that deteriorates should now be seen as staying in line
with its true bad essence, and so people should be more
inclined to say its identity is the same after the changes; by
contrast, a bad-essenced entity that improves should now be
seen as deviating from its true bad essence, and so people
should be more inclined to say its identity is not the same
after the changes.
Note that such a study is an extremely direct test of our
hypothesis that intuitions about essence explain the present
asymmetries. We are predicting that, even if one only
manipulates whether the entity’s essence is initially
described as good or bad (i.e. while keeping all other details
of the vignette identical for all participants), this information
about the essence will causally determine whether people
think its identity survives the changes.
Study 4 would also rule out another possible explanation
of our results, which argues that the only reason people are
more inclined to say an entity’s identity no longer exists
after it deteriorates, is to communicate their disapproval of
the negative resulting characteristics. Note that our
prediction for the current study is that if an entity is
described as having a bad essence, then people should be
more inclined to say exactly the opposite: that its identity no
longer exists after it improves.

Methods

Study 4

640 participants (Mage = 31, 210 female) were recruited
using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, and assigned to one of
four conditions in a 2 (essence: good vs. bad) X 2 (valence:
improvement vs. deterioration) design. Participants initially
read one of two essence stems about a band:

Study 3 provided evidence that the asymmetric effect of
valence on identity judgments can be explained by people’s
intuitions about the essence of these entities: since
positively valued traits are seen as part of the very essence
an entity1, manipulating whether these traits are present

Ever since the band Breath String was formed, it was
clear that there was something distinctive about its music.
It sometimes played bad [good] songs, but deep at its
essence it was a fundamentally authentic [superficial]
band. At the very core of its existence, the band was never
only [only ever] interested in playing songs if it thought
that doing so would make it famous and rich, and it had

1

Of course people do not always value the same things, and can
sometimes even have very different values about the same thing.
This observation naturally opens us to another prediction: when
people value opposing characteristics in the same entity, they
should exhibit correspondingly different views about whether a
valenced change to that characteristic constitutes an improvement
or deterioration, which should in turn influence their intuitions
about its identity. In a separate study we showed exactly this
effect, by comparing liberals vs. conservatives’ intuitions about
entities that changed toward having either more characteristics
valued by liberals or more characteristics valued by conservatives,
e.g. a conference whose presentations now almost only dealt with

climate change vs. military defense technology. As predicted,
liberals were more likely to say that the entity’s identity was lost
when it changed toward conservativism, while conservatives were
more likely to say that the entity’s identity was lost when it
changed toward liberalism.

4

2106

great interest [no interest at all] in making good quality
music.

(M=5.32, SD=1.66), although this difference did not reach
statistical significance, t(217)= -1.47, p = .143.
This last result identifies a boundary condition for the
present effects that is in agreement with Studies 1-3,
suggesting that people find it most natural to assume the
essence of entities is good. In other words, even when
people were explicitly told that the essence of the entity is
bad, the identity effects were attenuated compared to the
effects for the good essence stem (although the effects for
both stems were still in the predicted directions). This
suggests that, unless people are given explicit information to
believe otherwise, they by default assume that the essence
of an entity is good. One notable exception to this trend may
be rare cases of extremely harmful entities, such as
concentration camps, or terrorist groups, to which people
might naturally posit a bad essence. Exploring people’s
intuitions about such entities remains an intriguing avenue
for future research, and may be informed by the current
studies.

In the early 2000s, the band then went through a
transitional phase. It was very confused about many things
in its repertoire and the members regularly abused drugs
and alcohol. Most of the bands that Breath String would
perform alongside were basically playing low [high]
quality and unoriginal [original] music, but at its essence
there was something that made Breath String
fundamentally different from all of them.
On the next page, you will read about that period in
Breath String’s history, and then how things turned out in
the very end.
As a manipulation check, participants then used a 7-point
Likert Scale (1 = fundamentally bad, 7 = fundamentally
good) to answer the following question: Based on this
information, how would you characterize Breath String’s
“true essence”?
On a separate page, participants were then shown a similar
vignette as used in Study 2, in which the band was described
as changing either toward playing only superficial and
commercial songs (deterioration), or only moving and
meaningful songs (improvement). Then all participants read
the description of two people disagreeing about whether
Breathstring was still the same band after the changes (see
Study 2 for exact wording), and indicated which of the two
people they agreed with more by using a 7-point Likert
Scale (1 = ‘person A’, 4 = ‘equally agree with both
persons’, 7 = ‘person B’). Lastly, they answered two
comprehension questions about the vignette.

General Discussion

Results and Discussion
197 participants were excluded for not answering all
comprehension questions correctly. Results from the
manipulation check question indicated that we successfully
manipulated essence judgments: participants were
significantly more likely to rate the band as good when they
read the ‘good’ stem (M=4.84, SD=1.39) than when they
read the ‘bad’ stem (M=2.57, SD=1.30), t(441)=17.72, p <
.001.
Turning to the main dependent variable, a 2 (essence:
good vs. bad) X 2 (valence: improvement vs. deterioration)
ANOVA indicated a significant interaction between essence
and valence, F(1,439) = 9.08, p < .01, ηp2 = .02. Consistent
with our hypothesis, when the entity was described as
having a good essence participants were significantly more
likely to agree that the entity after the changes was no
longer the same after it deteriorated (M=5.65, SD=1.41)
than after it improved (M=5.12, SD=1.46), t(222)= 2.80, p <
.01. Conversely, when the entity was described as having a
bad essence participants were more likely to agree that the
entity after the changes was no longer the same after it
improved (M=5.61, SD=1.14) than after it deteriorated

Across four studies, we found that people are more
inclined to say that a non-human entity no longer exists
when its good traits disappear than when its bad traits
disappear. Study 1 demonstrated this basic influence of
valence on intuitions about object identity, Study 2
replicated the effect while controlling for potential
confounds, and Studies 3 and 4 showed that this
phenomenon can be explained in terms of people’s beliefs
about the essence of an entity. The studies also cumulatively
suggest that people by default assume that the essence of an
entity is good.
Although the present studies were limited to five entities,
we see no reason to believe that these intuitions would not
extend to numerous others. Indeed, the fact that we find this
intuition for such a diverse group of entities suggests that
there are likely all sorts of other entities that frequently give
rise to this same intuition. An interesting question for future
work will be to explore the precise characteristics of entities
that allow them to be ‘essentialized’ in this way and whether
there are entities for which the current intuitions would not
hold.
One central question that has arisen from work on the
essence of humans is why it is that people see this essence
as being good in the first place (Newman et al., 2014;
Newman et al., in press). One possibility is that this effect
arises from a tendency to think of humans, per se, in
positive terms (Sears, 1983). After all, moral traits are a
useful predictor of how people will fare as cooperative
partners in all sorts of social interactions (e.g. Nowak, Page,
& Sigmund, 2000), and so (the theory goes) it would make
sense for these traits to have a substantial influence on
identity judgments. Indeed, as some have pointed out,
morality may even be the one capacity that is uniquely
human— “even C. elegans has memory” (Strohminger &
Nichols, 2014). But what all of these theories have in
common is that they assume the explanation lies with
5

2107

humans. That is, they assume that we already know what the
boundaries of the problem are, and all we need to do now is
continue researching humans and eventually we will
discover the correct explanation.
The present results suggest that this assumption is
mistaken. Instead, people’s default tendency to see the
essence of humans as good actually appears to be part of a
far wider phenomenon that can be found in people’s way of
understanding essences in general—be they of humans,
categories, or even non-human objects.

Phillips, J., & Knobe, J. (2009). Moral judgments and
intuitions about freedom. Psychological Inquiry, 20, 30–
36.
Phillips, J., Misenheimer, L., & Knobe, J. (2011). The
ordinary concept of happiness (and others like it). Emotion
Review, 71, 929–937.
Preacher, K. J., & Hayes, A. F. (2008). Asymptotic and
resampling strategies for assessing and comparing indirect
effects in multiple mediator models. Behavior Research
Methods, 40, 879–891.
Rips, L. J., Blok, S., & Newman, G. (2006). Tracking the
identity of objects. Psychological Review, 113, 1–30.
Sears, D. O. (1983). The person positivity bias. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 44, 233–250.
Strohminger, N. and Nichols, S. (2014). The essential moral
self. Cognition.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Christina Starmans and Jillian
Jordan for useful suggestions.

References
Gelman, S. (2003). The essential child: Origins of
essentialism in everyday thought. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Gelman, S. A., & Hirschfeld, L. A. (1999). How biological
is essentialism? In D. L. Medin & S. Atran (Eds.),
Folkbiology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gupta, A. (1980). The logic of common nouns: An
investigation in quantified modal logic. New Haven:
Yale University Press.
Gutheil, G., & Rosengren, K. S. (1996). A rose by any
other name: Preschoolers understanding of individual
identity across name and appearance changes. British
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 14, 477–498.
Hayes, A. F. (2012) PROCESS: A versatile computational
tool for observed variable mediation, moderation, and
conditional process modeling [white paper].
Keil, F. C. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and cognitive
development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Knobe, J. (2003). Intentional action and side effects in
ordinary language. Analysis, 63, 190–193.
Knobe, J. (2010). Person as scientist, person as moralist.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33, 315–329.
May, J. & Holton, R. (2012). What in the world is weakness
of will? Philosophical Studies, 157, 341–360.
Medin, D. L., & Ortony, A. (1989). Psychological
essentialism. In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.),
Similarity and analogical reasoning. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Newman, G. E., Bloom, P., & Knobe, J. (2014). Value
judgments and the true self. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin.
Newman, G. E., De Freitas, J., & Knobe, J. (in press).
Beliefs about the true self explain asymmetries based on
moral judgment. Cognitive Science.
Newman, G. E., & Keil, F. C. (2008). Where is the essence?
Developmental shifts in children’s beliefs about internal
features. Child Development, 79, 1344–1356.
Nowak, M., Page, K., & Sigmund, K. (2000). Fairness
versus reason in the ultimatum game. Science, 289, 1773–
1775.

6

2108

