UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Interplay between Joint Attention, Physical Proximity, and Pointing Gesture in
Demonstrative Choice

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0fg8q1sq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Peeters, David
Azar, Zeynep
Ozyurek, Asli

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Interplay between Joint Attention, Physical Proximity, and Pointing Gesture
in Demonstrative Choice
David Peeters (david.peeters@mpi.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
International Max Planck Research School for Language Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Radboud University, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Zeynep Azar (zeynep.azar@mpi.nl)
Radboud University, Center for Language Studies, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Aslı Özyürek (asli.ozyurek@mpi.nl)
Radboud University, Center for Language Studies, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Abstract
A fundamental property of language is that it allows us to
establish triadic joint attention to a referent, for instance by
the use of spatial demonstratives. Traditional accounts of
demonstrative choice focused on the physical proximity of
the referent to the interlocutors. However, recent work taking
into account the multimodal context in which spatial
demonstrative use is generally embedded shows that such
accounts are too simplistic. Using a controlled elicitation task,
we here tested the differential roles of visual joint attention,
physical proximity of a referent, and use of a pointing gesture
in demonstrative choice in Dutch. It was found that
‘proximal’ demonstratives were used in a speaker-anchored
way to refer to objects nearby the speaker. ‘Distal’
demonstratives were used for referents not nearby the
speaker, but also in an addressee-anchored way, i.e. when the
referent was in the addressee’s focus of visual attention.
Pointing gestures were closely tied to demonstratives but not
to the use of (in)definite articles. These findings show that
demonstrative choice is dependent on a subtle interplay
between different context-dependent factors as a function of
both speaker- and addressee-anchored perspectives. Findings
are discussed in terms of demonstrative systems and
multimodal reference production in general.
Keywords: Spatial Demonstratives; Deixis; Joint Attention;
Reference; Pointing Gesture

Introduction
Establishing triadic joint attention to a referent is a very
basic human communicative ability (Carpenter, Nagell, &
Tomasello, 1998) and a common way to do so is by using a
linguistic referring expression, often combined with a
manual pointing gesture and a shift of gaze (Bakeman &
Adamson, 1984; Clark & Bangerter, 2004; Diessel, 1999).
In everyday spoken interaction, people often refer to objects
in the extra-linguistic physical surroundings of a
conversation (i.e. exophorically) by using demonstrative
pronouns and determiners (henceforth: demonstratives) such
as this and that (in English) in their speech. Most languages
contain more than one demonstrative type (Diessel, 2005),
which implies that people have to choose among different

options when using a demonstrative. Traditional accounts of
demonstrative reference are spatialist in nature. Generally
they take the relative proximity of a referent to the speaker
as a fundamental criterion in demonstrative choice (e.g.,
Anderson & Keenan, 1985; Halliday & Hasan, 1977; Lyons,
1977, inter alia). Such proximity-based accounts argue that
one would select a proximal demonstrative to refer to an
object that is physically relatively nearby, and a distal
demonstrative to refer to an object that is relatively far
away. This speaker-anchored proximity-based view is
omnipresent in reference grammars (Diessel, 2005) and
recent experimental studies provide partial support (e.g.,
Coventry et al., 2008; Stevens & Zhang, 2013).
However, more and more evidence accumulates showing
that such traditional accounts are too simplistic (e.g.,
Enfield, 2003; Hanks, 1990; Strauss, 2002). Descriptions of
demonstrative systems in different languages from different
language families (e.g., Dutch, English, Jahai, Jordanian
Arabic, Turkish) suggest that factors related to the locus of
visual attention of the addressee and/or the cognitive (rather
than physical) accessibility of a referent may play an
important role in which demonstrative a speaker chooses
(Burenhult, 2003; Jarbou, 2010; Küntay & Özyürek, 2006;
Piwek et al., 2008; Stevens & Zhang, 2013). Küntay and
Özyürek (2006), for instance, show that the Turkish
demonstrative şu is primarily used to shift the visual
attention of the addressee when she does not (yet) visually
attend to the referent, independent of the relative physical
distance of that referent. As such, joint attention between
speaker and addressee focused on a referent is not only
often the desired outcome of exophoric demonstrative use
(Diessel, 1999), but the presence or absence of joint
attention to a referent at the moment a referring expression
is instantiated may also drive the choice for a particular
demonstrative over another. In general, being able to
monitor and follow the gaze of an interlocutor is indeed a
pivotal communicative skill and often a prerequisite for
successful communication (e.g., Bakeman & Adamson,
1984).

1144

There are some preliminary indications that joint attention
may also play a role in demonstrative choice in Dutch, a
language with a two-term demonstrative system. Piwek,
Beun, and Cremers (2008) investigated demonstrative
choice in Dutch in cases of exophoric reference in a
building task. Pairs of participants, consisting of an
instructor and a builder, constructed a small building using
Lego blocks. Participants’ speech recorded during the task
was analyzed off-line in terms of their focus of attention on
a referent. A referent was coded as in the focus of attention,
i.e. cognitively relatively accessible, when it was mentioned
in the preceding utterance and/or when it was in an area
toward which the speaker had explicitly directed the
attention of the addressee already. It was found that
participants used proximal demonstratives (dit, deze in
Dutch) to refer to objects that were not in the focus of
attention (low cognitive accessibility) and distal
demonstratives (dat, die) to objects that were in the focus of
attention (high cognitive accessibility). On the basis of their
results, Piwek et al. (2008) argue against proximity-based
views of demonstrative choice.
The operationalization of focus of attention by Piwek et
al. (2008), however, does not differentiate between
cognitive and visual foci of attention. In the current study
we zoom in on the visual focus of attention of the addressee
only. Research in different languages has shown that the
visual attention of the addressee may have an effect on
demonstrative choice (Küntay & Özyürek, 2006; Stevens &
Zhang, 2013). In addition, although Piwek et al. (2008)
argue against proximity-based views of demonstrative
choice, they did not quantify the physical proximity of the
referents in their study. It is therefore unclear whether the
physical proximity of referents (to speaker and/or addressee)
also influenced demonstrative choice and whether this
interacted with the addressee’s visual focus of attention. In
general, previous observational work has often not enabled
investigation of interactions between different variables that
influence demonstrative choice in a controlled way.
The current study therefore experimentally contrasted
three variables that may influence demonstrative choice. In
a controlled elicitation task, participants were presented
with different visual scenes that induced the production of
referring expressions. First, the influence of the visual focus
of attention of the addressee (and as such the joint attention
between speaker and addressee to a referent) in the visual
scenes was varied. Proximity-based theories do not predict a
difference in demonstrative choice based on the attentional
focus of the addressee. In contrast, if the findings by Piwek
et al. (2008) generalize to situations where the visual focus
of attention of the addressee is manipulated, this would
predict the use of proximal demonstratives for referents that
are not in the addressee’s visual focus of attention. In such a
situation, a proximal demonstrative in Dutch would indeed
allow strong indicating to shift the addressee’s attention
towards the referent (Piwek et al., 2008). Under such an
account, Dutch speakers would use distal demonstratives for

referents that are already in the focus of visual attention of
the addressee.
Secondly, in orthogonal contrast to the addressee’s focus
of attention we varied the location of the referent, and as
such its physical distance from the speaker and addressee.
Proximity-based
accounts
predict
that
proximal
demonstratives are used for referents close to the speaker
and that the use of distal demonstratives increases with an
increase in the relative physical distance of the referent from
the speaker (e.g., Anderson & Keenan, 1985; Halliday &
Hasan, 1977; Lyons, 1977). In contrast, Piwek et al. (2008)
argue that the relative physical distance of a referent does
not primarily drive demonstrative choice.
A third and novel factor manipulated here is the presence
or absence of a pointing gesture. Proximity-based accounts
do not predict an influence of this variable. However,
observational research suggests that within a language
pointing gestures may be more closely tied to some
demonstratives than to others (Küntay & Özyürek, 2006;
Senft, 2004). The participants in the study by Piwek et al.
(2008) always produced a manual pointing gesture when
uttering a proximal demonstrative, but not always when
using a distal demonstrative. However, it is unclear whether
this finding interacts with or is driven by the relative
distance of the referents from the speaker.
Finally, the current study not only focuses on the choice
of demonstratives but also looks at noun phrases containing
(in)definite articles. Demonstratives can be placed within a
wider class of referring expressions (e.g., Ariel, 1988) and it
is an open question whether similar factors influence the
choice of demonstratives and the choice of a particular
article in exophoric reference. It is not unlikely that speakers
would use more definite than indefinite articles when
objects are nearby and/or when their addressee is already
visually attending to a referent. Furthermore, pointing
gestures may be paired with demonstratives more than with
articles, because one function of demonstratives may be to
direct the addressee’s gaze to the gesture (Bangerter, 2004).
Identification of the factors influencing the choice of
referring expression is not only theoretically interesting, but
may also inform computational models of reference
production (see Van Deemter, Gatt, Van Gompel, &
Krahmer, 2012).

Method
Participants
Twenty native speakers of Dutch studying in Nijmegen (13
female; mean age 22.2) participated in return for payment.
They had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and no
history of language impairment.

Materials
The materials consisted of 64 triplets of still images that
contained a speaker, an addressee, and an object. Each
triplet consisted of an introductory picture, a target picture,

1145

Figure 1: Subset of target pictures used in the elicitation task (converted to grayscale). Below the pictures it is indicated to
which condition the picture belonged. The object could be in four different locations. There could be joint attention (JA) or
no joint attention (no JA) between speaker and addressee to the object, and the speaker could either make a pointing gesture
towards the object or not.
and a concluding picture. Figure 1 shows a subset of the
picture materials.
Three independent variables were orthogonally
manipulated in the target pictures. First, the location of the
object could be close to the speaker, close to the addressee,
at middle distance from both speaker and addressee, or
relatively far away from speaker and addressee. Second,
there could be either visual joint attention or no visual joint
attention between speaker and addressee to the object. In the
case of no visual joint attention, the speaker looked at the
referent object while the addressee looked at another part of
the visual scene (e.g., a painting, see Fig.1). Third, the
speaker could either produce a pointing gesture towards the
object or not. It is not uncommon in natural interactions for
speakers to refer to an object using speech and gesture while
their addressee is not yet looking at them or their referent
(e.g., Küntay & Özyürek, 2006). The three manipulated
factors are henceforth called Location, Joint Attention, and
Pointing Gesture respectively.
In all target pictures the speaker and addressee were
either sitting (n=32) or standing (n=32) opposite each other.
The referent object was a ball, a bowl, a bucket, or a cup
(n=16 each). Whether the person on the left or the right in
the picture was the speaker was counterbalanced and
indicated by a text balloon close to the mouth of the
speaker. Every target picture contained a text balloon
presenting a declarative sentence that was missing a
referring expression and could be completed using a
demonstrative or an article and a noun. All sentences were
of the form ‘Ik heb [
] + verb’ (‘I have [
] + verb),
which elicited sentences such as ‘Ik heb dit kopje
schoongemaakt’ (I have cleaned this cup) or ‘Ik heb die bal
meegebracht’ (I have brought that ball). The verb form was
specified in the sentences; only the referring expression was
left out.
The introductory picture was always the same as the
target picture except for the presence of the text balloon, and
served to introduce the visual context of each trial. In the

concluding picture there was always joint attention between
speaker and addressee to the referent object. As such every
referential act successfully resulted in joint attention to the
referent.
In addition to the 64 experimental trials, 64 triplets were
created that were used as fillers in the task. These images
depicted a single speaker and one object. A large number of
different objects were used. In these filler trials, the text
balloons contained a sentence that would not elicit a
demonstrative or article (e.g., ‘What a nice [
]’).

Procedure
Participants were tested individually in a sound-proof booth.
The experiment was presented on a computer screen using
Presentation
software
(Neurobehavioral
Systems).
Participants were instructed to carefully look at the pictures,
and read aloud and complete the sentence shown in the
picture that was presented in the center of the screen. Trials
were presented one by one. Each trial started with an
introductory picture at the left part of the screen. After 1500
ms, the target picture appeared in the centre of the screen,
while the introductory picture remained visible. After
having read aloud and completed the written sentence in the
target picture, participants pressed the spacebar on a
keyboard, which resulted in presentation of the concluding
picture. Together with the other two pictures, this picture
remained visible on the screen for another 1500 ms, after
which the next trial started. The 128 trials were presented in
a unique randomized order for each participant.

Data Coding
Throughout the task, participants’ speech was continuously
recorded by a voice recorder (Olympus Imaging Corp.)
linked to an external microphone. The elicitation task
yielded 128 uttered sentences per participant. Speech was
transcribed off-line and each referring expression was coded
for the presence of a demonstrative (proximal or distal) or
an article (definite or indefinite) preceding the noun. In line

1146

with previous studies (e.g. Piwek et al., 2008),
demonstratives were collapsed across grammatical gender in
the analysis.

Results
Participants produced a demonstrative or article on 95.3% of
all trials. In this dataset, 32.4% of trials contained a
demonstrative (9.0% proximal + 23.4% distal) and 67.6% of
trials contained an article (20.2% definite + 47.4%
indefinite).
Separate repeated measures analyses of variance were
carried out on the proportion of use of the proximal and
distal demonstrative, and the definite and indefinite article,
with the three independent variables (Location, Joint
Attention, and Pointing Gesture) as factors (cf. Küntay &
Özyürek, 2006). The Greenhouse-Geisser correction was
applied in all analyses. Corrected degrees of freedom are
reported.
The analysis on the use of proximal demonstratives
showed no effect of Joint Attention (F < 1). A significant
main effect of Location was found, F (1,22) = 14.62, p =
.001, ηp2 = .435. Significantly more proximal
demonstratives were used when the referent object was
close to the speaker compared to the three other referent
locations (all p-values <.01). In addition, a significant main
effect of Pointing was found F (1,19) = 6.77, p = .017, ηp2 =
.263. Proximal demonstratives were used significantly more
often when the speaker pointed compared to when she did
not point.
The analysis on the use of distal demonstratives showed a
significant main effect of Joint Attention, F (1,19) = 5.32, p
= .033, ηp2 = .219. The proportion of distal demonstratives
used was significantly higher in the case of joint attention
compared to no joint attention. In addition, a significant
main effect of Location was found, F (2,36) = 12.25, p =
.001, ηp2 = .392. Participants used significantly fewer
demonstratives when the object was close to the speaker
compared to the other three locations (all p-values <.01). A
significant main effect of Pointing, F (1,19) = 15.05, p =
.001, ηp2 = .442, reflected that distal demonstratives were
used significantly more often when the speaker pointed
compared to when she did not point. Finally, a significant
Location x Pointing interaction effect was found, F (2,42) =
3.18, p = .047, ηp2 = .143. This interaction effect reflected
that the main effect of Pointing only held when the object
was close to the addressee (p = .008), at middle distance (p
= .013), or far away (p = .015). No main effect of Pointing
was found for the object close to the speaker (p = .716)
when the distal demonstrative was used.
No significant effects were found for the use of definite
articles. The analysis of the use of indefinite articles,
however, yielded a significant main effect of Pointing, F
(1,19) = 13.84, p = .001, ηp2 = .421. Indefinite articles were
used significantly more when the speaker did not point
compared to when she did point. Figure 2 depicts all results.

Conclusion and Discussion
A fundamental property of language is that it allows us to
refer to entities in the world around us (e.g., Clark, 1996;
Tomasello, 2008). The current study investigated three
factors that might influence how we do this by zooming in
on the choice of demonstratives in Dutch. First, we found
that distal demonstratives were used more often when there
was visual joint attention between speaker and addressee to
the referent compared to when there was no joint attention.
This finding is in line with the suggestion by Piwek et al.
(2008) that the Dutch distal demonstrative is used when no
strong indicating is necessary because the referent is already
in the focus of attention. Research on other languages has
also found an influence of the addressee’s attention on
demonstrative choice (e.g., Burenhult, 2003; Küntay &
Özyürek, 2006). Together, these findings confirm that joint
attention may not only be the aim and result of using a
referring expression (Diessel, 1999), but also a driving force
in demonstrative choice. Interestingly, Dutch differs here
from other two-term demonstrative systems (see also
Kirsner & Van Heuven, 1988). For instance, in Jordanian
Arabic it is the proximal demonstrative that is used for
entities with high perceptibility to the addressee (Jarbou,
2010). In contrast, we did not find an influence of the focus
of attention of the addressee on the use of the proximal
demonstrative in Dutch. Indeed, factors influencing
demonstrative choice do not need to be symmetrically
expressed in different demonstrative terms within a
language (Enfield, 2003).
Second, we found that Dutch speakers also took into
account the relative proximity of the referent to the speaker
in their demonstrative choice. Referents nearby the speaker
elicited proximal demonstratives whereas referents in three
physically more distant regions
elicited distal
demonstratives. No linear increase of distal demonstrative
use was found as a function of an increase in relative
physical distance from the speaker to the referent. Rather,
speakers differentiated between a zone close to the speaker
and the rest of the extra-linguistic space. This also explains
why the presence of a pointing gesture only influenced the
use of a distal demonstrative when the referent was not near
the speaker. Arguably, because the distal demonstrative
would be used for a less strict demarcated part of space than
the proximal demonstrative, a pointing gesture could narrow
down the addressee’s search space in looking for the
intended referent.
In sum, in our study the Dutch proximal demonstrative
was used in a speaker-anchored way. Referents nearby the
speaker elicited proximal demonstratives and the visual
attention of the addressee did not influence the use of this
demonstrative. However, Dutch speakers did take into
account their addressee in demonstrative choice and the
current results suggest that this is marked on the distal
demonstrative. Arguably the distal demonstrative may be
used both in a speaker-anchored way (for objects not near
the speaker) and in an addressee-anchored way, as its use
may acknowledge that the referent is already in the

1147

addressee’s focus of visual attention. Thus, the attentional
state of the addressee and the use of pointing are
differentially exploited in the use of different
demonstratives. Earlier accounts of demonstrative reference

have sometimes explained demonstrative choice by focusing
on a single factor such as proximity (e.g., Anderson &
Keenan, 1985; Halliday & Hasan, 1977; Lyons, 1977) or
accessibility (e.g., Jarbou, 2010; Piwek et al., 2008). Here

Figure 2: Separate panels for the mean proportion of use of proximal demonstratives, distal demonstratives, definite articles,
and indefinite articles as a function of the three factors manipulated in the target pictures (Joint Attention, Location, and
Pointing Gesture). Error bars represent standard errors of the mean.

1148

we show that different factors may play a role and that
speakers have different strategies at their disposal.
Moreover, this finding underlines the importance of
contrasting different factors in the same study (cf. Coventry
et al., 2008; Stevens & Zhang, 2013). The current study
further specifies that the influence of these factors may play
a significant role in demonstrative choice, but not in the
choice of (in)definite articles.
Finally, we found that both proximal and distal
demonstratives were used more often with than without a
pointing gesture. In contrast, indefinite articles were used
more in the absence of a gesture. Bangerter (2004, p. 418)
suggested that demonstratives may direct gaze to a
concurrently used pointing gesture when the gesture carries
the main informational burden. Our results are in line with
this suggestion and underline that a pointing gesture may
demarcate the addressee’s search space, in our case when a
distal demonstrative was used in reference to an object not
near the speaker. Previous research has shown that speakers
design the exact kinematic properties of their index-finger
pointing gesture, such as its velocity and the duration of its
post-stroke hold-phase, by taking into account the mental
state of their addressee (Peeters et al., 2013). A
demonstrative could then indeed be used to make the
addressee pay attention to such an effort.
To conclude, the current study showed differential roles
of visual joint attention, physical proximity, and the
presence of pointing gestures in demonstrative choice. Our
findings underline that the very basic human communicative
ability of establishing triadic joint attention to a referent
turns out to be dependent on a subtle interplay between
different context-dependent factors, as reflected in one’s
choice of demonstrative.

References
Anderson, S. R., & Keenan, E. L., (1985). Deixis. In T.
Shopen (Ed.), Language typology and syntactic
description. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ariel, M. (1988). Referring and accessibility. Journal of
Linguistics, 24, 65-87.
Bakeman, R., & Adamson, L. B. (1984). Coordinating
attention to people and objects in mother-infant and peerinfant interaction. Child Development, 55, 1278-1289.
Bangerter, A. (2004). Using pointing and describing to
achieve joint focus of attention in dialogue. Psychological
Science, 15(6), 415-419.
Burenhult, N. (2003). Attention, accessibility, and the
addressee: The case of the Jahai demonstrative ton.
Pragmatics, 13, 363-379.
Carpenter, M., Nagell, K., & Tomasello, M. (1998). Social
cognition, joint attention, and communicative competence
from 9 to 15 months of age. Monographs of the Society
for Research in Child Development, 255, Vol. 63, 1-174.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H., & Bangerter, A. (2004). Changing ideas about
reference. In I. A. Noveck & D. Sperber (Eds.),
Experimental Pragmatics. Basingstoke: P. Macmillan.

Coventry, K. R., Valdés, B., Castillo, A., & GuijarroFuentes, P. (2008). Language within your reach: Near–far
perceptual space and spatial demonstratives. Cognition,
108, 889-895.
Diessel, H. (1999). Demonstratives. Form, Function, and
Grammaticalization. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Diessel, H. (2005). Distance contrasts in demonstratives. In
M. Haspelmat, M. S. Dryer, D. Gil, & B. Comrie (Eds.),
The World Atlas of Language Structures. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Enfield, N. J. (2003). Demonstratives in space and
interaction: Data from Lao speakers and implications for
semantic analysis. Language, 82-117.
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1977). Cohesion in
English. London: Longman Group Ltd.
Hanks, W. F. (1990). Referential practice: Language and
lived space among the Maya. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Jarbou, S. O. (2010). Accessibility vs. physical proximity:
An analysis of exophoric demonstrative practice in
Spoken Jordanian Arabic. Journal of Pragmatics, 42(11),
3078-3097.
Kirsner, R. S., & Van Heuven, V. J. (1988). The
significance of demonstrative position in modern Dutch.
Lingua, 76(2), 209-248.
Küntay, A., & Özyürek, A. (2006). Learning to use
demonstratives in conversation: what do language
specific strategies in Turkish reveal? Journal of Child
Language, 33, 303-320.
Lyons, J. (1977). Semantics. Volume 2. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Peeters, D., Chu, M., Holler, J., Özyürek, A., & Hagoort, P.
(2013). Getting to the point: The influence of
communicative intent on the kinematics of pointing
gestures. Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1127-1132). Austin, TX :
Cognitive Science Society.
Piwek, P., Beun, R. J., & Cremers, A. (2008). ‘Proximal’
and ‘distal’ in language and cognition: Evidence from
deictic demonstratives in Dutch. Journal of Pragmatics,
40, 694-718.
Senft, G. (2004). Deixis and Demonstratives in Oceanic
Languages. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics.
Stevens, J., & Zhang, Y. (2013). Relative distance and gaze
in the use of entity-referring spatial demonstratives: An
event-related potential study. Journal of Neurolinguistics,
26, 31-45.
Strauss, S. (2002). This, that, and it in spoken American
English: a demonstrative system of gradient focus.
Language Sciences, 24(2), 131-152.
Tomasello, M. (2008). Origins of human communication.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Van Deemter, K., Gatt, A., van Gompel, R. P. G., &
Krahmer, E. (2012). Toward a computational
psycholinguistics of reference production. Topics in
cognitive science, 4(2), 166-183.

1149

