UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The effect of convergent interaction using subjective opinions in the decision-making
process

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/83n763wx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Ohmoto, Yoshimasa
Kataoka, Misao
Nishida, Toyoaki

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The effect of convergent interaction using subjective opinions in the
decision-making process
Yoshimasa Ohmoto(ohmoto@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp)
Department of Intelligence Science and Technology
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University
Yoshida-Honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501 Japan

Misao Kataoka (kataoka@ii.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp)
Department of Intelligence Science and Technology
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University
Yoshida-Honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501 Japan

Toyoaki Nishida (nishida@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp)
Department of Intelligence Science and Technology
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University
Yoshida-Honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501 Japan
Abstract

can be obtained), we dynamically change the emphasizing
points during the interaction as a consequence of facing new
information and subjective interpretation. We also change our
interpretations of these points and the relationships between
them. For example, in travel planning, we have to consider
factors such as place, a hotel, budgets, members, schedule
and what to do in the travel. We often make such plans interactively with friends and travel agency staff. In this case,
the subjective information given by these parties includes a
reasonable emphasizing points from a different perspective.

In an interactive decision-making process like a face-to-face
consultation (a situation in which subjective information can
be obtained), we dynamically change the emphasizing points
during the interaction in which an adviser provided new information and subjective interpretations. In previous work, we
proposed and evaluated a method to dynamically estimate emphasizing points (DEEP) but the method only included the intrinsic emphasizing points of each person. In this study, we
investigated the effect of extrinsic subjective interpretations of
the adviser in interactive decision-making. We used tightly
controlled Embodied Conversational Agents (ECAs) as the
adviser to evaluate the effect. We conducted an experiment
that compared the results of interactive decision-making with
two types of ECAs: a facilitative agent who provided subjective opinions to realize divergent and convergent processes in
decision-making and an estimation agent who only provided
proposals that reflected the emphasizing points of each participant. As a result, we can confirm that the facilitative agent
increased the participant’s satisfaction of interaction with the
ECA, the naturalness of ECA’s interaction, and the impression
of decision-making process. In addition, we developed a concept called the “Bubbling intention.” We think the concept is
useful to design human-agent interaction.
Keywords: verbal and nonverbal behavior; human-agent interaction; decision-making support.

Introduction
We seldom make important decisions without information
from outside sources. Nowadays we can readily obtain information from the internet and various publications. On the
other hand, subjectively interpreted information is still important in decision-making. In this case, the information is obtained from friends, experts, and other trusted sources. One
of the reasons why we place significance on it is that it helps
us to interpret those factors that we consider and emphasize to
reach an appropriate decision. There are many factors which
influence decision-making. We implicitly focus on some of
the factors and make a decision based on the focused factors.
We call these factors “emphasizing points.”
In an interactive decision-making process like a face-toface consultation (a situation in which subjective information

In previous studies (Ohmoto, Kataoka, Miyake, & Nishida,
2011; Ohmoto, Miyake, & Nishida, 2012; Ohmoto, Kataoka,
& Nishida, 2013), to support interactive decision-making,
we proposed a method to dynamically estimate emphasizing points (DEEP) based on verbal reactions, body movements, and physiological indices. To evaluate the method,
participants interacted with Embodied Conversational Agents
(ECAs), which implemented DEEP and a comparative
method. Using ECAs, we could strictly control the verbal
and nonverbal expressions of the agent, which could affect the
participants’ decision-making. In those studies, we found that
the dynamic estimation of emphasizing points was helpful for
the participants in the decision-making process. The estimated emphasizing points reflected in the proposals helped
to the decision-making in the given task because the emphasizing points were important intrinsic factors for their appropriate decision-making. In other words, the DEEP supported
their decision-making by being aware of the intrinsic emphasizing points. On the other hand, subjective information is
also helpful when people must considered many factors for
the decision-making. The subjective interpretations of the
emphasizing points are extrinsic and they provide different
perspectives to interpret the factors we have to consider and
emphasize to reach an appropriate decision. The extrinsic
subjective interpretations can support decision-making.

2711

One of the methods to conduct smooth and effective

decision-making using subjective opinions is “facilitation.”
The facilitator mediates between participants during the communication process (Reagan-Cirincione, 1994). The facilitator can support the social and cognitive processes, allowing participants to focus their attention on the more substantive issues in the decision-making process (Schuman, 1996)
and ultimately reach the most appropriate solution (Khalifa,
Kwok, & Davison, 2002). For the facilitation, the facilitator
subjectively interprets participants’ emphasizing points based
on the most important arguments of each participant and then
controls the communication process.
A conversation is divided into some “zones” depending on
the contents. The facilitation process includes a divergent
zone, convergent zone and others (Kaner, 2007). We have
previously analyzed facilitation processes and facilitating behavior, and have identified that the process changes from divergent discussion to convergent discussion (Ohmoto, Toda,
Ueda, & Nishida, 2010). Especially in the convergent zone,
the facilitator subjectively summarizes the discussers’ opinions and limits the direction of the discussion. We assume that
we can effectively support interactive decision-making based
on extrinsic subjective information by applying the facilitation process to interactive decision-making. For example, a
counselor in interactive decision-making provides subjective
opinions, such as “I think that’s good,” to move into the convergent zone of the decision-making interaction.
The purpose of this study is to investigate how the interaction process during the transition from divergent to convergent discussion, which includes providing extrinsic subjective
information, affects the decision-making process and the impression of the process. To test this, we used ECAs because it
is difficult for human agents to achieve rigorously controlled
interactions with participants. Specifically, we conducted an
experiment that compares the results of interactive decisionmaking with two types of ECAs: a facilitative agent that
provided subjective opinions to implicitly reduce divergent
opinions from different perspectives and to encourage convergent process in decision-making, and an estimation agent
that only provided proposals that reflected the emphasizing
points of each participant. Both of the ECAs implemented
DEEP. This means that the facilitative agent supported the
decision-making using intrinsic and extrinsic factors.

– The participant provides backchanneling phrases, which
express acknowledgement, surprise, or understanding,
such as “ah,” “oh,” “aha,” “I see,” and “I understand.”
• Body movements
The participant repeatedly nods three times or more.
• Physiological indices
Either of the following two responses occurs. (refer to (Lin,
Omata, Hu, & Imamiya, 2005; Nakazono, Hada, Ataka,
Tanaka, & Nagashima, 2008)).
– Skin conductance response (SCR) increases more than
10% compared with resting levels.
– Low-frequency/high-frequency (LF/HF) value (electrocardiograph measurement) is more than 6.0.
Verbal reactions, body movements, and physiological indices, are used as criteria for determining when a new factor
is discovered and should be emphasized, and for determining when a user’s degree of emphasis of a particular factor
increases or decreases.
Rules for changing estimated emphasizing points during
interaction A DEEP system explains the proposals and the
estimated emphasizing points change depending on the participant’s responses.
• Discovery of a new factor to be emphasized
Verbal reactions, body movements, and physiological indices are the criteria for determining when a new factor is
discovered and should be emphasized. When any one of
the three criteria appears during interaction, the system decides that the factor should be slightly emphasized, and increases the degree of emphasis from zero to two. When any
two or all three criteria are present, the system increases the
emphasis from zero to three.
• Increasing or decreasing degree of emphasis
Verbal reactions, body movements, and physiological indices are used as criteria for determining when a user’s
degree of emphasis of a particular factor increases or decreases. When any one of the three criteria appears, the
system decides that the factor should be emphasized, and
increases the emphasis of the factor by one.
When there are physiological reactions, but no verbal reactions and body movements, the system decides that the
factor should be emphasized less, and decreases the emphasis of the factor by one.

Overview of DEEP
In an earlier study (Ohmoto et al., 2011), we introduced the
DEEP method, based on verbal reactions, body movements,
and physiological indices from an interaction.

Estimation of Emphasizing Points
The degree of emphasis is rated on a scale from zero to five.
The rating is changed based on the following three factors in
interaction between human and a system with DEEP.
• Verbal reactions
Either of the following two reactions occurs.
– Listed words appear in answers or demands.

Rules for changing estimated emphasizing points from active demands The system asks whether or not a user has
any demands. From the user’s response, the system determines what the user’s demands are and what changes there
are to the emphasizing points. The system accepts keywords
which are expected words in advance to express emphasizing
points, demands, and basic words necessary to capture demands in the user’s responses. Words that are not expected to
be included in answers are ignored.

2712

• Discovery of new factors to be emphasized
When the emphasis degree of the discovered factor is zero,
the system increases the degree of emphasis from zero to
three.
• Increasing or decreasing degree of emphasis
When the emphasis of the discovered factor is greater than
zero and the system decides that the factor should be increased, the system increases the degree by one. When the
system decides that the emphasis of the factor should be
decreased and the degree is greater than zero, the system
decreases the degree by one.

Selecting the next step based on DEEP results
According to the criteria mentioned above, changes to a user’s
emphasizing points are estimated after the proposals are given
and data are collected from the user’s reactions and responses.
After the estimation, the next two proposals are selected
based on the estimation results.
The next proposals are selected using a table of orthogonal
arrays prepared in advance. Orthogonal arrays are a special
set of Latin squares, which can be used to estimate main effects using only a few experimental runs. From the table,
the proposal that most satisfies the user’s emphasizing points
is selected. When many proposals in the table can satisfy a
user’s emphasizing points, a proposal is selected according
to predefined rules. For example, the system selects a nearest proposal in convergent process bacause the system knows
which factor is important. The distances of the proposals are
calculated by cosine similarity.

processes in the interaction. The used signals are the frequency of providing a new proposal, recommendation from
the agent, mimicry of nodding motions, and utterances.
• The agent’s behavior in the divergent process
The agent provides a small nod once in reaction to the
user’s utterance. The frequency of providing a new proposal is low. The agent provides a new proposal after she
explains three emphasizing points. The furthest proposal
from the previous one is selected as a new proposal. The
degree of emphasis decreases if the emphasizing point is
not explained in the previous proposal.
• The agent’s behavior in the convergent process
The agent provides two nods in reaction to the user’s utterance. The frequency of providing a new proposal is high.
The agent provides a new proposal after she explains one
emphasizing point, which is a recommendation. The nearest proposal to the previous one is selected as a new proposal. The degree of emphasis decreases only when the
emphasizing point is refused in the previous proposal.
• The rules to switch between the divergent process and
convergent process
The agent starts the interaction with a divergent process.
The agent switches from the divergent process to a convergent process when she detects the following situations:
– There are more than three emphasizing points, with a
degree of emphasis of more than one, and the degree of
emphasis does not change during the interaction.
– The user offers a convergent opinion such as “I want to
see like this one” and “I want to determine.”

A Facilitative Decision-making Support Agent
We used MMDAgent (MMD Agent, n.d.) as the interface for
a facilitative decision-making support agent. MMDAgent is
a toolkit for building voice interaction systems, and includes
Julius, Open J Talk, and a number of other systems. We developed a control system that received inputs from MMDAgent (recognized voice data) and Polimate (LF/HF data and
SCR data) and sent outputs of motion and speech commands
to MMDAgent. The inputs for the facilitative agent were automatically captured, with the exception of the data related
to verbal meanings, such as whether a user’s utterance was
positive or negative and whether the user’s utterance was a
question, because we could not robustly determine them automatically in real-time. We call the agent control method
using manual inputs as a WOZ (Wizard of Oz) method. The
agent automatically generates verbal and nonverbal behavior
that had been previously designed, with the exception of the
answers to the questions.

Method to control divergent and convergent
processes in an interaction
The facilitative agent supports the user’s decision-making
during the interaction. The agent uses social signals for active listening and teaming to control divergent and convergent

• The emphasizing points of the agent
The agent has the same set of emphasizing points for the
decision-making. The emphasizing points and the degree
of emphasis are the subjective opinions of the agent. The
emphasizing points are set to the values of the recent proposal at the time when the agent switches from the divergent process to the convergent process. This means that
the agent searches the neighbor of the last proposal of the
divergent process during the convergent process. The degree of emphasis decreases when the emphasizing point is
clearly refused by the user.

Experiment
The purpose of this experiment was to investigate how the interaction process during the transition from divergent to convergent, which includes providing extrinsic subjective information, affects the final goal of the decision-making and impressions of the process. In the experiment, to strictly control
the verbal and nonverbal expressions, we used two types of
agents: a facilitative agent who provided subjective opinions
to realize divergent and convergent processes in decisionmaking and an estimation agent who only provided proposals
that reflected the emphasizing points of each participant. We

2713

Figure 2: Means and the results of the t-test for reaction latency.

Figure 1: The experimental settings.
explained the facilitative agent in the previous section. The
estimation agent is similar to the agent used in previous studies. The estimation agent is implemented DEEP method. The
agent can dynamically estimate emphasizing points of a participant but it cannot control divergent and convergent process. Here, we analyze the reaction behavior of participants
and questionnaire responses.

Task
Participants were asked to design gift-wrapping for a valentine present. The participants did not know what was appropriate gift-wrapping. The participants interacted with the
agent to design the gift-wrapping. We identified 30 factors
that the participants considered when they designed the wrapping. We expected that the emphasizing points would change
during the interactions and the participants would take advice
from the agent because they tried to predict what the receiver
of the gift would like.

Experimental settings
The experimental setting is shown in Figure 1. The participant sat in front of a monitor displaying the ECA. The experimenter sat out of view of the participant and entered the
stimuli via a WOZ interface. The kinect captured the nodding
motion of the participant. Polymate was used to measure SCR
and the electrocardiogram.

Participants
The participants in this experiment were 20 Japanese college
students (all female). They did not know about gift-wrapping.
The participants were divided into two groups: one interacted
with the facilitative agent and the other with the estimation
agent. The reason why the participants were females was that
there was motivation gap for the gift-wrapping task between
males and females.

Procedure
After a brief explanation of the experiment, the experimenter
began the experiment, and the recording of the video and
physiological indices. The participant repeatedly asked questions about the proposal and considered the proposals provided by the ECA until one of the proposals satisfied the par-

ticipant. At the conclusion of the experiment, the participant
completed a questionnaire regarding evaluations of the interaction process.

Results of participants’ reaction analyses
Reaction latency To investigate whether participants attentively listening proposals by the ECA, we extracted a reaction
latency for each participant. The reaction latency was defined as the time from the end of the utterance of the agent to
the start of the participant’s reaction. We expected that most
of participants listened the proposals in the early part of the
interaction but they became gradually less responsive to the
ECA as they understood the task and proposals. Reaction latency data thus were divided into first half and second half
in the middle of each experiment. We conducted a t-test to
compare the data from the facilitative agent group with the
data from the estimation agent group. The results are shown
in Figure 2.
In the first half of the interaction, there is no significant difference between the reaction latency in both group. In contrast, there is a significant difference in the second half. In
addition, there is a significant difference between the reaction
latency in the estimation agent group in the first half and that
in the second half.
We interpreted these results as follows. When the participant interacted with the estimation agent, she carefully
thought about the proposal in the second half of the interaction. As the participant had already obtained a lot of information from the agent in the first half, she did not pay
any further attention to the interaction with the agent. In
contrast, when the participant interacted with the facilitative
agent, she actively interacted with the agent in the second
half. As the participant regarded the subjective opinions of
the facilitative agent as helpful information, she continuously
interacted throughout the whole interaction. Therefore, we
can confirm that subjective information was helpful in interactive decision-making.
Changing emphasizing points To investigate whether the
control of divergent and convergent processes influences participants’ emphasizing points, the participants chose emphasizing points that they changed during the interaction at the

2714

Figure 3: Means and the result of t-test of the number of the
changed emphasizing points.
Figure 4: Means and the result of Wilcoxon signed-rank tests
on the questionnaires.
end of the experiment. We then calculated the number of
changed emphasizing points for each participant. We conducted a t-test to compare the number in the facilitative agent
group with that in the estimation agent group. The results are
shown in Figure 3.
The number in the facilitative agent group was significantly higher than that in the estimation agent group (t=-2.63,
p<0.05). It seems that there were fewer changes in the facilitative agent group because the facilitative agent provided
similar proposals in the second half of the interaction. We
discuss this further below.
As the results of the reaction latency analysis have shown,
the participants in the estimation agent group carefully considered the proposal in the second half of the interaction. It
would seem that as they made their decision only based on intrinsic emphasizing points, they could not recognize changes
to the emphasizing points. Similarly, the participants in the
facilitative agent group did not recognize some changes because the total number of the changes reported by them was
small. However, in the facilitative agent group, the agent provided extrinsic subjective opinions. Therefore, they could explicitly recognize some of the changes.

Questionnaire results
To investigate the impression of the decision-making process
with ECAs, the participants answered three rating questions
on the ECA’s behavior using a seven-point scale. The scale
was presented as seven ticks on a black line without numbers,
which we scored from 1 to 7. And we conducted Wilcoxon
signed-rank tests on each questionnaire result. The results are
shown in Figure 4. We performed a Wilcoxon signed-rank
test to each data of the questionnaire.
• Participant’s satisfaction of interaction with the ECA
Participants answered how satisfied they were with the interaction with the ECA. In this experiment, the “satisfaction” means that the participant felt pleasure in the intaraction with the ECA. As a result, the facilitative agent provided significantly more satisfactory interactions than the
estimation agent (z = 3.5, p < 0.001).
• Naturalness of ECA’s interaction
Participants answered how natural the sequence of proposals was. As a result, the facilitative agent provided signif-

icantly more natural interactions than the estimation agent
(z = 2.3, p < 0.05).
• Appropriateness as a decision-making adviser
Participants answered how appropriate the ECA was as a
decision-making adviser. As a result, the facilitative agent
provided significantly more appropriate than the estimation
agent (z = 2.0, p < 0.05).
• Realizing divergent thinking and convergent thinking
Participants answered how useful the proposals by the
agent were for divergent thinking and convergent thinking. Wilcoxon signed-rank tests shows that the facilitative
agent was significantly more useful for divergent interactions and convergent interactions than the estimation agent
(divergent: z = 2.5, p < 0.05; convergent: z = 2.0, p <
0.05).
The results show that the interaction process with the facilitative agent was better than that with the estimation agent.
This suggests that the convergent interaction process, where
subjective opinions are expressed, produces a better impression of the interaction process. Of particular interest is the
result stating how useful the agent’s proposals were for divergent thinking. This means that the convergent process contributed to divergent thinking. We consider that one of the
reasons for this result is that the participants felt they finished
searching the whole of the problem space by switching from
the divergent process to the convergent process.

Discussion
In this study, we evaluated a facilitative agent who provided
subjective opinions to realize divergent and convergent processes in decision-making, and found that this led to higher
scores for participant satisfaction regarding ECA interactions,
the naturalness of ECA’s interaction, and impressions of the
decision-making process. From the results of the reaction
analyses and questionnaires, we confirmed that the participants who interacted with the facilitative agent recognized the
divergent thinking process more explicitly than those who interacted with the estimation agent. From these results and
those of our previous studies, we have developed the following concept on decision-making and intention. The decision

2715

itative agent who provided subjective opinions to realize divergent and convergent processes in decision-making and an
estimation agent who only provided proposals that reflected
the emphasizing points of each participant. The facilitative
agent supported decision-making by intrinsic and extrinsic
factors. As a result, we can confirm that the facilitative agent
increased the participant’s satisfaction with the ECA interaction, the naturalness of ECA’s interaction, and the impression
of decision-making process. In addition, we developed a concept called the “Bubbling intention.” We think the concept is
useful to design human-agent interaction so we will develop
an ECA with the concept.

References
Figure 5: Bubbling intention.

or intention is extemporarily shaped, based on the underlying
and ambiguous wish (which is one of the sources of the decision and intention) through the interaction. Figure 5 shows
the concept. There are wishes, wills, and desires at the bottom of the human mind. When a stimulus is applied, then
the decision or intention is produced as an ambiguous bubble. After the bubbling intention is produced, the bubble explodes as an activity because of an extrinsic stimulus (e.g., a
partner’s behavior or new information) and intrinsic pressure
(e.g., reflection of one’s own activity).
We can explain the results of this study from the perspective that the decision is extemporarily shaped by extrinsic
stimulus and intrinsic pressure. For example, in the case of
the results of the reaction analyses, the participants did not
receive extrinsic stimulus, especially in the second half of the
interaction when they interacted with the estimation agent. It
took a long time to recognize their own emphasizing points
and shape their decision; therefore, the reaction latency grew
longer and they could not recognize the changes in the emphasizing points. Regarding the results of the questionnaires,
the participants could clearly recognize the divergent thinking, which was intrinsic pressure, because switching from the
divergent process to the convergent process was triggered by
extrinsic stimuli provided by the facilitative agent.
From a different perspective, the concept means that we do
not need to precisely estimate the inner states (e.g., emphasizing points, emotions, and intentions) of communication partners during natural communication. This can be used for the
design of interaction artifacts like the facilitative agent.

Conclusion
In this study, we investigated the effect of the divergent
and convergent interaction process in interactive decisionmaking. We used Embodied Conversational Agents (ECAs)
to evaluate the effect because it is difficult for human agents
to achieve tightly controlled interactions with participants.
We conducted an experiment that compared the results of interactive decision-making with two types of ECAs: a facil-

Kaner, S. (2007). Facilitator’s guide to participatory
decision-making. Wiley. com.
Khalifa, M., Kwok, R.-W., & Davison, R. (2002). The effects of process and content facilitation restrictiveness on
gss-mediated collaborative learning. Group Decision and
Negotiation, 11(5), 345–361.
Lin, T., Omata, M., Hu, W., & Imamiya, A. (2005). Do
physiological data relate to traditional usability indexes? In
Proceedings of the 17th australia conference on computerhuman interaction (pp. 1–10).
MMD Agent. (n.d.). http://www.mmdagent.jp/.
Nakazono, K., Hada, T., Ataka, E., Tanaka, H., & Nagashima,
Y. (2008). Workload evaluation of gaming task by physiological indices and psychological indices (Vol. 107 - 553;
Tech. Rep.). Technical report of IEICE. HIP.
Ohmoto, Y., Kataoka, M., Miyake, T., & Nishida, T. (2011).
A method to dynamically estimate emphasizing points and
degree by using verbal and nonverbal information and
physiological indices. In The 2011 ieee international conference on granular computing 2011 (pp. 508–514).
Ohmoto, Y., Kataoka, M., & Nishida, T. (2013). Extended
methods to dynamically estimate emphasizing points for
group decision-making and their evaluation. ProcediaSocial and Behavioral Sciences, 97, 147–155.
Ohmoto, Y., Miyake, T., & Nishida, T. (2012). Dynamic estimation of emphasizing points for user satisfaction evaluations. In Proc. the 34th annual conference of the cognitive
science society (pp. 2115–2120).
Ohmoto, Y., Toda, Y., Ueda, K., & Nishida, T. (2010). Analyses of the facilitating behavior by using discussion conditions, participant stances and nonverbal behavior. In Proceedings of social intelligence design 2010 (p. CD-ROM).
Reagan-Cirincione, P. (1994). Improving the accuracy of
group judgment: a process intervention combining group
facilitation, social judgment analysis, and information technology. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 58(2), 246–270.
Schuman, S. P. (1996). What to look for in a group facilitator.
Quality Progress, 29(6), 69–76.

2716

