UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The effect of pre-exposure on family resemblance categorization for stimuli of varying levels
of perceptual difficulty.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3mp0f92p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Milton, Fraser
Copestake, Edward
Satherley, David
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The effect of pre-exposure on family resemblance categorization for stimuli of
varying levels of perceptual difficulty.
Fraser Milton (f.n.milton@exeter.ac.uk) 1, Edward Copestake1, David Satherley1, Tobias Stevens1, &
Andy J. Wills2
1

School of Psychology, College of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter, United Kingdom
2
School of Psychology, University of Plymouth, United Kingdom
Abstract

This study investigated the effect that pre-exposure to a set of
stimuli has on the prevalence of family resemblance
categorization. 64 participants were tested to examine the effect
that pre-exposure type (same-stimuli vs unrelated-stimuli) and
the perceptual difficulty of the stimuli (perceptually similar vs
perceptually different) has on categorization strategy. There
was a significant effect of perceptual difficulty, indicating that
perceptually different stimuli evoked a higher level of family
resemblance sorting than perceptually similar stimuli. There was
no significant main effect of pre-exposure type; however, there
was a significant interaction between pre-exposure type and
level of perceptual difficulty. Post-hoc tests revealed that this
interaction was the result of an increase in family resemblance
sorting for the perceptually different stimuli under relevant preexposure but no such effect for perceptually similar stimuli. The
theoretical implications of these findings are discussed.
Keywords:
free
classification;
family
resemblance;
unidimensional; perceptual learning, match-to-standards.

Introduction
Categorization is a fundamental cognitive mechanism that
enables us to function effectively in our everyday
environment. In particular, it allows us to make inferences
about objects that we have never seen before and to treat
different objects in the same way, greatly simplifying the
environment that we live in. However, in view of the
immense number of objects we encounter, this process must
necessarily be highly constrained. This is illustrated by the
fact that just ten items can be partitioned in more than
100,000 different ways. Thus, a greater knowledge of how
we acquire the categories we have is an important prerequisite for our understanding of human cognition.
One reasonable assumption is that the categories we prefer
to create would reflect the underlying structure of objects
we encounter outside the laboratory. One early prominent
theory - the “classical” view - posited that categories are
organised around necessary and jointly sufficient features.
According to this theory, if an item has the necessary feature
(or features) it can be considered a member of that category
regardless of the characteristics of its other features.
However, many natural categories do not appear to have
such a structure and the seminal work of Rosch and
colleagues highlighted the idea that instead they are often
organized around “family resemblance” relations (e.g.,
Rosch & Mervis, 1975), in which categories possess a
number of characteristic but not defining features. Under a
family resemblance structure, an object does not have to

possess any particular feature (or features) but can be
considered a member of that category if it possesses enough
characteristic features. In other words, a family resemblance
structure is organized around overall similarity relations.
It is therefore surprising that despite the plausibility of a
family resemblance theory of natural categories, previous
work has shown that when people are asked to free classify
stimuli (i.e., are given no feedback on their responses) they
find it far from natural to sort by family resemblance. In
fact, people have a strong preference to free classify
unidimensionally (i.e., on the basis of a single feature, e.g.
Ahn & Medin, 1992; Ashby, Queller, & Berretty, 1999;
Medin, Wattenmaker, & Hampson, 1987) – an approach that
seems more consistent with the classical view. Whilst
manipulations of the method of stimulus presentation
(Regehr & Brooks, 1995), the level of spatial separability of
the stimulus dimensions (Milton & Wills, 2004; Milton,
Viika, Henderson, & Wills, 2011), the perceptual difficulty
of the stimuli (Milton & Wills, 2008), the structure of the
categories (Pothos & Close, 2008), time pressure (Milton,
Longmore, & Wills, 2008), instructions (Wills, Milton, &
Longmore, 2013), and background knowledge (Spalding &
Murphy, 1996) have all been shown to influence the extent
of family resemblance categorization, such sorting is still far
from common. One important question, therefore, is to
understand why the categories we prefer to create do not
reflect the commonly assumed underlying structure of
natural world categories.
One explanation for this anomaly is that participants
generally have not seen any of the stimuli prior to
classification. This appears atypical of categorization
outside the lab where we usually have had a great deal of
exposure to the objects we categorize. One consequence of
asking participants to sort a set of stimuli they have never
seen before may be to encourage them to fall back on a
simplistic, unidimensional, strategy as they have had little
experience of the stimuli. One possibility, then, is that if
participants receive substantial pre-exposure to the stimuli
prior to classification they may find a family resemblance
response a more intuitive and easier strategy to perform.
Previous work has, in general, used response accuracy to
measure the effects of pre-exposure on behavior (e.g.,
McLaren, 1997). Typically such studies have shown that
pre-exposure has a beneficial effect on response accuracy
(e.g., McLaren, Leevers, & Mackintosh, 1994). Whilst such
work is undoubtedly important, a related question that is
arguably just as interesting is the extent to which pre-

1018

exposure can actually change the nature of the categories
that we create. It is, therefore, surprising that there is
currently a paucity of research that has addressed this issue.
One exception to this is the work of Wills and McLaren
(1998) which used a free classification procedure to show
that pre-exposure can influence the number of categories
people use. The current work extends this finding by
investigating the hypothesis that pre-exposure may facilitate
family resemblance sorting.
A large body of work has shown that pre-exposure
improves stimulus differentiation (e.g., McLaren et al.,
1994) and this may be one mechanism by which preexposure could facilitate family resemblance sorting. This
increased
differentiation
(which
may
facilitate
discrimination of the values of a particular dimension and
also allow easier extraction of the relevant dimensions
themselves) should make family resemblance sorting an
easier and more viable option as the differences between the
various items will be more apparent as, perhaps, will be the
dimensional inter-correlation. This may, for example,
facilitate the use of a multi-dimensional rule (c.f., Wills et
al., 2013). This assumption receives support from recent
work which indicates that perceptually different stimuli lead
to greater levels of family resemblance sorting than more
perceptually similar stimuli (Milton & Wills, 2008).
Previous work indicates that perceptual learning is most
pronounced for perceptually similar stimuli (e.g., Oswalt,
1972) and that pre-exposure can even inhibit learning if the
stimuli are sufficiently different (e.g., Chamizo &
Mackintosh, 1989). One model that can explain this pattern
of findings is the MKM model (McLaren, Kaye, &
Mackintosh, 1989). The MKM account assumes that stimuli
are represented by a number of elements. Items that share
many common elements will be more difficult to
discriminate than items that share few elements. One of the
key assumptions of this model is that when elements cooccur, there will be a reduction in the salience of these
elements (due to what is known as latent inhibition). As a
consequence, one of the principal effects of pre-exposure is
that elements which frequently co-occur reduce in salience
more quickly than elements that rarely co-occur. This means
that the unique elements that discriminate one stimulus from
another will tend to be higher in salience than the common
elements that both stimuli share (because the common
elements will have been presented more often). This effect
is likely to be greater for items that are perceptually similar
because they share many common elements and hence latent
inhibition will be more pronounced than for items that are
very different (i.e., that have few common elements).
According to this line of reasoning, if perceptual learning
is more marked for perceptually similar items than
perceptually different items as the MKM (McLaren et al.,
1989) model predicts and as previous work indicates
(Oswalt, 1972), then one prediction that follows on from our
account is that pre-exposure would lead to a greater
elevation of family resemblance sorting for perceptually
similar stimuli compared to perceptually different stimuli.

Correspondingly, if our account is correct and increased
differentiation helps encourage family resemblance
categorization then perceptually different stimuli should,
more generally, result in greater levels of family
resemblance sorting than perceptually similar stimuli, as
found by Milton and Wills (2008). These predictions are the
focus of the current study.

Method
Participants and apparatus
Students from the University of Exeter participated either
for course credits or for a payment of £5. There were sixtyfour participants (16 in each of the four between-subject
conditions) who were tested individually in a quiet testing
cubicle. We tested participants using E-prime, on a Dell PC
with a 17-in. monitor and a standard computer keyboard.

Stimuli
The four stimulus sets employed in this study had the
same abstract structure as previously used by Medin et al.
(1987). This structure is shown in Table 1. The structure
consisted of five binary-valued dimensions (D1-D5) and the
stimuli were organized around two prototypes, each
representative of one of the categories. These prototypes
were constructed by taking all the positive values on the
dimensions for one of the stimuli (1, 1, 1, 1, 1) and all of
the zero values on the dimensions (0, 0, 0, 0, 0) for the
other category. The rest of the stimuli were mild distortions
of the two prototypes in that they had four features
characteristic of their category and one atypical feature
more characteristic of the other category. In total, there
were 12 stimuli in each set. Sorting the stimuli by family
resemblance, as shown in Table 1, maximizes within-group
similarities and minimizes between-group similarities.
Table 1: The abstract stimulus structure

Note. Each row (within each category) describes a different
stimulus. D = dimension: 1 and 0 represent the values of each
dimension.

Two of the stimulus sets were based on ladybirds and the
other two stimulus sets were based on houses (see Figure
1). The two pairs of stimulus sets were identical except that
for one of the sets the binary values for each dimension
were relatively easy to distinguish (e.g., for the “ladybird”
stimuli the difference in the length of the antennae were
relatively large) and for the other set the differences were
relatively hard to distinguish (e.g., the difference in the
length of the antennae was relatively small). We term these
sets the “perceptually different” and the “perceptually
similar” stimuli respectively. The five dimensions for the

1019

ladybird stimuli were: the length of the antennae, the size of
the head, the number of dots, the length of the green ovals
on the body, and the size of the legs. The five dimensions
for the house stimuli were the height of the aerial, the
length of the chimney, the number of lines on the roof, the
size of the windows, and the height of the door.

the next trial immediately began. At the end of each block,
participants were informed of their accuracy in that block.
In total, participants completed sixteen blocks of 24 trials.

Figure 1. The category prototypes of the four stimulus
sets used in this experiment.

Design
The experiment had a 2 x 2 between-subjects factorial
design. The first factor was the perceptual difficulty of the
stimuli (two levels: perceptually different/perceptually
similar). The second factor was the type of pre-exposure,
which also had two levels. In the same-stimuli exposure
condition, participants were pre-exposed to the same stimuli
that they were subsequently asked to free classify (e.g., they
were pre-exposed to and then free classified the ‘ladybird’
stimuli). In the unrelated-stimuli exposure conditions,
participants were pre-exposed to stimuli different to those
that they later free classified (e.g., they were exposed to the
‘house’ stimuli and then free classified the ‘ladybird’
stimuli). This led to four conditions: perceptually
different/same-stimuli exposure; perceptually similar/samestimuli exposure; perceptually different/unrelated-stimuli
exposure and perceptually similar/unrelated-stimuli
exposure. In all conditions, the stimulus set (either ladybirds
or houses) that participants classified was counterbalanced.

Procedure
The running-recognition phase.
In both the same-stimuli and unrelated-stimuli conditions,
participants were pre-exposed to the appropriate set of
stimuli via a running-recognition task (e.g., Wills &
McLaren, 1998). Each of the twelve stimuli in the set was
presented twice in each block in a random order. Each trial
began with a black fixation cross presented in the middle of
the screen lasting 500ms. This was immediately followed
by one of the stimuli from the set appearing in the middle
of the screen for 3000ms. Participants were not allowed to
respond during this time. Once this time had elapsed
participants were asked to say whether they had seen that
stimulus before in that particular block (by pressing x) or
whether they had not seen it before in that block (by
pressing m). This response was self-paced. Following this,

The free classification phase.
The basic categorization procedure was the same for all
four conditions. We used a computer-based variation of
Regehr and Brooks’s (1995) match-to-standards procedure
that was the same as that adopted in Milton, Wills, and
Hodgson (2009). Participants were asked to classify a
number of stimuli into two categories (they were not told
this during the running-recognition task to avoid them
categorizing the stimuli during that phase). They were
informed that there were many ways in which the stimuli
could be split and that there was no one correct answer.
Participants were also told that the two groups did not have
to be of equal sizes and that they should classify the stimuli
in the way that seemed most sensible or natural.
At the beginning of each trial, a black fixation cross was
presented for 500ms in the centre of the screen. The two
category prototypes were then presented at the top of the
screen and below these prototypes one of the twelve stimuli
in the set (E1-E12) was displayed. Participants categorized
the stimulus into category A by pressing “x” and into
category B by pressing “m”. This decision was self-paced
and no feedback was given on their response. A blank
screen was then presented for 1000ms before the next trial
began. Each of the stimuli in the set appeared once in each
block in a random order. At the end of each block,
participants were asked to describe as precisely as possible
how they categorized the stimuli in the previous block. In
total, there were six blocks of twelve stimuli. The inclusion
of multiple blocks provided the opportunity to build up a
reliable index of an individual’s sorting behaviour rather
than relying on a limited number of responses from just one
block. Previous work indicates a close correspondence
between multiple block procedures and single block
procedures (Wills et al., 2013).

Analysis of results
Each participant was classified as having produced one of
the sort types described below. These sort types are similar
to those employed by Regehr and Brooks (1995) and are
identical to those used by Milton and Wills (2004). To be
classified as sorting by either family resemblance or
unidimensionally, the participant’s description of their
strategy had to match their behavioural response. As in
previous work (e.g., Wills et al., 2013) each block was
categorized independently.
A family resemblance sort, also commonly known as an
“overall similarity” sort, has the same structure as shown in
Table 1. In this type of strategy, the participant has to place
each of the prototypes, along with their derived one-aways,
into separate categories without error. Additionally, they
have to describe their strategy as being based either on
general similarity or on placing each item into the category
with which it had more features in common. A one-away

1020

family resemblance sort is similar to the one-away
unidimensional sort with the exception that the error
occurred in a sort that was otherwise family resemblance.
A unidimensional sort is based on a single dimension of
the stimulus. It does not matter which of the dimensions is
used as the basis of sorting, so long as all of the positive
values for the chosen dimension are placed in one category
and all of the zero values for that dimension are in the other
category. Additionally, to be classified as a unidimensional
sort, the participant has to describe their sort as being based
on a single dimension. Participants were classified as
producing a one-away unidimensional sort if they described
their sorting as being driven by a single dimension but there
was a solitary error in their classification.
Any classifications other than those described above were
classified as other sorts, even if the description given by the
participant fitted one of the sorts described above. The
verbal descriptions were clear and easy to categorize into
the appropriate group and as in previous work (e.g., Milton
& Wills, 2009) there was a very high correspondence
between verbal report and behavioral strategy.

using a 2 x 2 between-subjects ANOVA with the two
factors being the level of perceptual difficulty (similar vs
different) and pre-exposure type (same-stimuli vs unrelatedstimuli). There was a significant effect of perceptual
difficulty, F(1,60) = 30.601, p <.001, η2p= .338, which
indicated that family resemblance categorization was higher
for the perceptually different stimuli than the perceptually
similar stimuli. There was no significant effect of preexposure type, (F1,60) = 3.211, p = .078, η 2p= .051,
although there was a trend for the proportion of family
resemblance categorization to be greater in the same-stimuli
condition than the unrelated-stimuli condition. Finally, there
was a significant interaction between level of perceptual
difficulty and pre-exposure type, F (1, 60) = 9.233, p = .004,
η2p= .133. Pairwise comparisons revealed that same-stimuli
exposure resulted in greater levels of family resemblance
categorization than unrelated-stimuli exposure for the
perceptually different stimulus set, t(30) = 2.570, p = .015,
but not for the perceptually similar stimulus set, t(30) =
1.826, p = .078. Indeed, there was a numerical trend for
family resemblance sorting to be lower in the same-stimuli
condition than in the unrelated-stimuli condition.

Results
Running-recognition phase
The mean accuracy levels for all the conditions across the
16 blocks are displayed in Figure 2. We conducted a mixeddesign ANOVA with one within-subjects factor (block, 16
levels) and two between-subjects factors: pre-exposure type
(same-stimuli vs unrelated-stimuli) and level of perceptual
difficulty (similar vs different).1 There was a significant
effect of perceptual difficulty, F(1,60) = 6.422, p =.014,
η2p= .097, indicating that stimuli in the perceptually
different condition were better recognized than those in the
perceptually similar condition. There was also a significant
effect of block, F(15,900) = 4.956, p <.001, η2p= .076,
indicating that performance on the task improved across the
blocks. Unsurprisingly, given that there was no difference
between the same-stimuli and unrelated-stimuli exposure
conditions in this phase, there was a non-significant effect
for this factor, F(1, 60) = 1.342, p = .251, η2p= .022. None of
the interactions approached significance (all Ps>.2).
Free classification phase
For every block, each participant’s sorting strategy was
classified according to the sort types described above. Oneaway unidimensional and one-away family resemblance
sorts were classified as unidimensional and family
resemblance sorts respectively (cf. Milton & Wills, 2004).
The mean proportions of family resemblance and
unidimensional categorizations produced in the four
conditions are shown in Figure 3. The difference in family
resemblance sorting between our conditions was assessed
1

We ran additional ANOVAs that assessed whether there were
any differences in the pattern of results between the two types of
stimuli (ladybirds/ houses). None of these analyses approach
significance and for conciseness we have, therefore, not included
this factor in the reported analyses.

Figure 2. The mean accuracy for the four conditions in the
running-recognition pre-exposure task.
For the mean proportion of unidimensional sorts, a similar
2 x 2 between-subjects ANOVA was conducted. There was
again a significant effect of perceptual difficulty, F(1,60) =
6.910, p = .011, η2p= .103, indicating that unidimensional
sorting was greater for the perceptually similar stimuli than
for the perceptually different stimuli. There was, however,
no significant effect of exposure type, F(1,60), = .925, p =
.340, η2p= .015, but there was again a significant interaction
between stimulus type and exposure type, F(1,60) = 6.252, p
= .015, η2p= .094. Pairwise comparisons, assessing this
interaction, revealed that for the perceptually different
stimuli, unidimensional sorting was lower in the samestimuli exposure condition than in the unrelated-stimuli
exposure condition, t(30) = 2.220, p = .034. In contrast,
there was no significant effect of exposure type for the
perceptually similar stimuli, t(30) = 1.229, p = .229.
For “other” classifications, a 2 x 2 between-subjects
ANOVA yielded a significant main effect of perceptual

1021

difficulty, F(1,60) = 6.959, p = .011, η2p= .104, with the
perceptually similar stimuli resulting in a greater level of
“other” sorting. There was, however, no significant main
effect of exposure type, F(1,60) = .278, p = .600, η2p= =
.005, and no interaction between exposure type and
perceptual difficulty, F(1,60) = .031, p = .861, η2p= .001.
0.9

Proportion of sorts

0.8
0.7

0.6
0.5

FR

0.4

0.3

UD

0.2

Other

0.1
0
Perceptually Perceptually Perceptually Perceptually
Similar
Different
Similar
Different
Same Exposure

Different Exposure

Figure 3. The mean proportion of family resemblance,
unidimensional, and other sorts for each condition. FR =
family resemblance, UD = unidimensional.

General Discussion
The results of our experiment provide, to our knowledge,
the first demonstration that prior exposure to a set of stimuli
can elevate the subsequent level of family resemblance
categorization. However, the precise pattern of this effect
was somewhat different to what we predicted. Specifically,
we found that same-stimuli pre-exposure increased family
resemblance sorting (and reduced unidimensional sorting)
for the perceptually different stimuli but not for the
perceptually similar stimuli. Indeed, for the perceptually
similar stimuli we found a non-significant trend for an
effect in the opposite direction.
The finding that pre-exposure led to a significant increase
in family resemblance categorization for the perceptually
different stimuli but not for the perceptually similar stimuli
is surprising according to the latent inhibition mechanism
of the MKM model (McLaren et al., 1989) outlined in the
introduction. However, the effect we observed could,
potentially, be driven by another mechanism that is a
fundamental property of the MKM model – unitization.
Unitization is the process by which individual dimensions
or units can be bound into a single perceptual configuration
(e.g., Schyns, Goldstone, & Thibaut, 1998). If unitization
were to occur, then this would be likely to encourage a
family resemblance strategy as the dimensions would be
bound into a holistic item and it would require effort to
analyse the constituent parts separately as would be
required by a unidimensional strategy. It could be that the
unitization process occurs more rapidly for items that are
perceptually more discriminable than those which are more
similar and this would explain our pattern of results. This
hypothesis would be consistent with the traditional view
that family resemblance sorting is the result of a quick,

holistic, non-deliberative, process (e.g., Kemler Nelson,
1984). If unitization is driving this effect, then one
prediction is that the imposition of a time constraint (or a
concurrent load) should lead to increased levels of family
resemblance sorting compared to no time constraints (or no
concurrent load) for same-stimuli pre-exposure but not for
unrelated-stimuli pre-exposure. This latter prediction is
based on previous work which indicates that, for novel
stimuli, family resemblance sorting is the result of a
deliberative, analytic, strategy under the conditions we have
used here (cf., Milton et al., 2008; Wills et al., 2013). If this
is correct, then it would provide insight into why we appear
to apply an effortful and time-consuming family
resemblance strategy in the lab whilst in the real world,
where one often has substantial prior exposure to the items,
family resemblance sorting appears to be relatively
automatic. More generally, this issue would be of relevance
to the question of whether there are competing implicit and
explicit categorization systems as proposed by the
COmpetiton between Verbal and Implicit Systems
(COVIS) model (Ashby et al., 1998) which has been
subject to intense debate in recent years (e.g., Ashby et al.,
1998, 1999; Newell et al., 2013).
Contrary to our predictions, same-stimuli pre-exposure
did not enhance family resemblance categorization for the
perceptually similar stimuli. Our a priori hypothesis was
that the pre-exposure would increase the discriminability of
the dimension which should, on the basis of previous work
(Milton & Wills, 2008), lead to an elevation of family
resemblance categorization. One potential explanation for
this failure to find the predicted pattern is that pre-exposure
may have increased the differentiation of the stimuli as in
previous work (e.g., Oswalt, 1972) but not to the extent
necessary to encourage family resemblance sorting. Indeed,
family resemblance categorization was very low for the
perceptually difficult stimuli in both the same-stimuli and
unrelated-stimuli pre-exposure conditions (for a related
effect, see Milton & Wills, 2004). If this is correct, then a
greater level of pre-exposure (perhaps over multiple
sessions) should increase family resemblance sorting for the
perceptually similar stimuli.
A number of issues are worthy of future research. First,
whilst the match-to-standards procedure is often
characterized as a form of free classification, it is more
restricted than other procedures which do not present the
prototypes on each trial and do not specify the number of
categories that can be created (e.g., Pothos & Close, 2008).
It would be interesting to see the extent to which our
findings generalise to other procedures. Second, there were
only 12 unique stimuli in the set - it would be useful to
examine whether having a greater number of unique stimuli
influences the results. Third, whilst we used unrelated
stimuli as our baseline exposure condition these stimuli
shared the same category structure as the stimuli they later
classified. It is, therefore, possible that both groups
benefited from pre-exposure to some extent. Future work
could use a completely unrelated task as a baseline to assess

1022

this possibility. Relatedly, it would be worth examining
whether our results generalise to different types of preexposure tasks such as, for example, pleasantness ratings.
Nevertheless, whilst the experiment produced a
somewhat different pattern of results than was anticipated,
we found clear evidence that pre-exposure can elevate
family resemblance categorization at least for stimuli that
are of relatively low perceptual difficulty. This result
appears important as in previous free classification studies
participants typically have had little or no pre-exposure to
the stimuli before being asked to sort them, an approach
that seems atypical of the items that we encounter in the
real world. The present study, therefore, provides some
explanation for why the prevalence of family resemblance
categorization is low in previous free classification
experiments. Clearly, much research needs to be conducted
to understand the conditions under which this effect will
occur and the mechanisms by which it operates. In this
regard, the present study should be seen as an important
first step that we hope will help motivate future research.

Acknowledgments
We thank Ian McLaren and the anonymous reviewers for
their helpful thoughts and suggestions on this work.

References
Ahn, W.-K., & Medin, D. L. (1992). A two-stage model
of category construction. Cogn Sci, 16, 81-121.
Ashby, F. G., Alfonso-Reese, L. A., Turken, A. U., &
Waldron, E. M. (1998). A neuropsychological theory of
multiple systems in category learning. Psychol Rev, 105,
442-481.
Ashby, F.G., Queller, S., & Berretty, P.M. (1999) On the
dominance of unidimensional rules in unsupervised
categorization. Percept Psychophys, 61, 1178–1199.
Bruner, J.S., Goodnow, J.J., Austin, G.A., 1956. A Study of
Thinking. Wiley, New York.
Chamizo, V. D., & Mackintosh, N. J. (1989). Latent
learning and latent inhibition in maze discriminations. Q J
Exp Psychol B, 41, 21–31.
Kemler Nelson, D. G. (1984). The effect of intention on
what concepts are acquired. J Verb Learn Verb Behav, 23,
734 – 759.
McLaren, I.P.L. (1997). Categorization and perceptual
learning: an analogue of the face inversion effect. Q J Exp
Psychol B, 50, 257-273.
McLaren, I.P.L., Kaye, H., & Mackintosh, N.J. (1989). An
associative theory of the representation of stimuli:
applications to perceptual learning and latent inhibition. In
Morris R.G.M. (ed) Parallel Distributed Processing Implications for Psychology and Neurobiology, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
McLaren, I., Leevers, H., & Mackintosh, N. (1994).
Recognition, categorization, and perceptual-learning (or,
how learning to classify things together helps one to tell
them apart). Attention and Performance XV, 15, 889-909.

Medin, D.L., Wattenmaker, W.D. & Hampson, S.E.
(1987). Family resemblance, conceptual cohesiveness,
and category construction. Cognit Psychol, 19, 242279.
Milton, F. N., Longmore, C. A., & Wills, A. J. (2008).
Processes of overall similarity sorting in free
classification. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform, 34,
676 – 692.
Milton, F.N., Viika, L., Henderson, H., Wills, A.J.
(2011). The effect of time pressure and the spatial
integration of the stimulus dimensions on overall
similarity categorization. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 795-800.
Milton, F.N., & Wills, A.J. (2004). The influence of
stimulus properties on category construction. J Exp
Psychol Learn Mem Cogn, 30, 407-415.
Milton, F., & Wills, A.J. (2008). The influence of
perceptual difficulty on family resemblance sorting.
Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, 2273-2278.
Milton, F., & Wills, A. J. (2009). Long-term persistence of
sort strategy in free classification. Acta Psychol, 130, 161167.
Milton, F., Wills, A. J., & Hodgson, T. L. (2009). The
neural basis of overall similarity and single-dimension
sorting. NeuroImage, 46, 319-26.
Newell, B.R., Moore, C.P., Wills, A.J., & Milton, F. (2013).
Reinstating the frontal lobes? Having more time to think
improves “implicit” perceptual category learning. A
comment on Filoteo, Lauritzen & Maddox (2010). Psych
Sci, 24, 386-389.
Oswalt, R. M. (1972). Relationship between level of visual
pattern difficulty during rearing and subsequent
discrimination in rats. J Comp Physiol Psychol, 81, 122–
125.
Pothos, E.M., Close, J., (2008). One or two dimensions in
spontaneous classification: a simplicity approach.
Cognition 107, 581–602.
Regehr, G. & Brooks, L.R. (1995). Category organization
in free classification: The organizing effect of an array
of stimuli. J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn, 21, 347363.
Rosch, E. & Mervis, C.B. (1975). Family resemblances:
Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognit
Psychol, 7, 573-605.
Schyns, P.G., Goldstone, R.L., & Thibaut, J-P. (1998).
The development of features in object concepts. Behav
Brain Sci, 21, 1-54.
Spalding, T. L., & Murphy, G. L. (1996). Effect of
background knowledge on category construction. J Exp
Psychol Learn Mem Cogn, 22, 525–538.
Wills, A.J., & McLaren, I.P.L. (1998). Perceptual learning
and free classification. Q J Exp Psychol B, 51, 235-270.
Wills, A.J., Milton, F., Longmore, C.A., Hester, S.,
Robinson, J. (2013). Is overall similarity classification less
effortful than single-dimension classification? Q J Exp
Psychol, 66, 299-318.

1023

