UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Bouba Effect: Sound-Shape Iconicity in Iterated and Implicit Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5bv3p6fd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Jones, John Matthew
Vinson, David
Clostre, Nourane
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Bouba Effect: Sound-Shape Iconicity in Iterated and Implicit Learning
Matthew Jonesa (john.jones.09@ucl.ac.uk), David Vinsona (d.vinson@ucl.ac.uk) , Nourane Clostrea
(n.clostre@ucl.ac.uk), Alex Lau Zhua (a.zhu@ucl.ac.uk), Julio Santiagob (santiago@ugr.es), Gabriella
Viglioccoa (g.vigliocco@ucl.ac.uk)
a
Division of Psychology and Language Sciences, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK
b
Dept. de Psicología Experimental y Fisiología del Comportamiento, Facultad de Psicología, Universidad de
Granada, Campus de Cartuja s/n 180179-Granada, SPAIN
labels in adults (Perniss et al, 2010). In spoken languages:
iconicity facilitates word processing in adults (Westbury,
2005); 3- to 4-month-old infants are sensitive to iconic
mappings (Walker et al., 2010); and iconic words are easier
for 3-year-olds to learn than non-iconic words (Imai et al.,
2008). This is unsurprising given an embodied perspective:
if the semantics of words depend on sensorimotor
activation, then words with forms that generate appropriate
activation will automatically be more learnable than
arbitrary words, and will enjoy easier encoding, storage, and
retrieval (Perniss and Vigliocco, in press).

Abstract
Although wordforms are often arbitrarily linked to their
meaning, many exhibit iconicity (resemblance between form
and meaning). This is especially visible in the lexica of nonIndo-European languages and signed languages. Iconicity has
been argued to play a role in grounding linguistic form to
real-world experience, rendering language more learnable
(Perniss & Vigliocco, in press). Here we examine soundshape iconicity, the ‘kiki-bouba’ effect, i.e. the tendency to
associate bouba-type labels with round shapes, and kiki-type
labels with spiky shapes. In a first experiment we show that
this iconicity emerges in the course of iterated learning
(presumably because it renders labels more learnable).
However, it only emerges for the mapping between round
shapes and bouba-type labels. In a second experiment (using
cross-situational learning, see Monaghan et al., 2012) greater
learnability is observed for mappings of the bouba-to-round
type but not of the kiki-to-spiky type. We discuss possible
mechanisms underlying this difference.

Sound-Shape Iconicity

Keywords: cross-modal; cultural evolution; iconicity;
iterated learning; language evolution; sound symbolism.

Introduction
Iconicity as a Widespread Feature of Language
The arbitrariness of wordform has often had the status of a
truism (de Saussure, 1983). However, wordforms are often
motivated by iconic relationships with meaning. In English,
iconicity can be found in onomatopoeia, (e.g. bang, miaow).
However, in languages outside the Indo-European family,
iconicity is more pervasive. Large iconic or sound-symbolic
lexica are reported for many unrelated languages (including
sub-Saharan African languages, Australian Aboriginal
languages, and Japanese and Korean; see Perniss
Thompson, & Vigliocco, 2010).
Iconicity is not limited to resemblance between sounds. In
Japanese, reduplication of syllables often indicates
repetition of an event, and voicing of an initial consonant
can indicate object size (e.g. gorogoro – a heavy object
rolling repeatedly; korokoro – a light object rolling
repeatedly; Perniss et al., 2010).
Given the hands’ potential for mimesis, it is unsurprising
that signed languages are rich in iconicity (see Perniss et al.,
2010 for a review). E.g. in British Sign Language, the sign
for hammer is a hammering gesture, and the sign for lion
uses the hands to mimic the pouncing cat’s paws.
There is evidence, especially in sign languages, that
iconic mappings facilitate learning and processing of novel

A seemingly universal form of iconicity is the association
between certain sounds (e.g. back vowels and voiced
consonants) with heavy, slow, rounded objects; and others
(e.g. front vowels and voiceless consonants) with small,
quick, jagged objects (Ramachandran & Hubbard, 2001). In
standard demonstrations, participants (being adult speakers
of English, 4 month old infants, or people in non-literate,
non-industrial societies) are given images of two 2dimensional shapes, one round, the other spiky. The
majority prefers to associate ‘kiki’ with a spiky shape, and
‘bouba’ with a round shape. (Maurer, Pathman, &
Mondloch, 2006; Ozturk, Krehm, & Vouloumanos, 2013;
Bremner et al., 2012). Similar shape-sound associations
obtain when the methodology used is implicit learning
(Monaghan, Mattock, & Walker, 2012).
The origin of this sound-shape iconicity is, however,
uncertain. It could be argued that the effect arises from
multisensory statistics, with certain shapes co-occuring with
certain sounds in the environment, but that such correlations
exist is far from clear (see Spence & Deroy, 2012, for
discussion). Ramachandran and Hubbard (2001) suggest
that the effect is a reflection of cross-modal analogy
between the articulatory gestures required to produce the
labels and the visual properties of the shapes, implying that
non-visual representation of articulation mediates between
sound and shape (p. 19). Alternatively, they also suggest
that ‘cross-wiring’ (p. 21) of auditory and visual brain maps
may create an unmediated link (with associations depending
on features of brain architecture). Both of these accounts
predict that the effect is present for both ‘kiki’-spiky and
‘bouba’-round.
There is, however, yet another possible explanation:
associations between speech sounds and lip shape. Words

2459

like ‘bouba’ involve literal rounding of the lips through
bilabial plosives and rounded vowels - representations of
such lip rounding would on this account mediate between
‘round’ sounds and round objects. Other articulatory
features might be involved in other forms of iconicity, but
sound-shape iconicity would be based on the lips. The lip
representations could be primarily visual, or primarily
motoric, but would – crucially – represent actual roundness,
rather than representing roundness through metaphorical
associations of the sort that Ramachandran and Hubbard
posit for spikiness. Unlike the first two accounts, which can
at best accommodate an asymmetry, this latter predicts one:
round sound-shape associations should be stronger than
spiky ones, because round sounds involve literal rounding
of an articulator, whereas spiky sounds do not involve any
comparable spikiness. Importantly, what evidence there is
(in the form of ERP data) suggests that the round
association may be privileged over the spiky one in
processing (Kovic, Plunkett, & Westermann, 2010 – though
note that their paradigm was not capable of separating the
associations behaviourally). This dissociation is not
something that the classic kiki-bouba experiment is able to
test: because there are only two words and two shapes, the
determination of one (hypothetically stronger) sound-shape
pairing would automatically determine the other (weaker or
absent) pairing.
In this study we independently assess the two types of
associations by asking whether both will emerge in the
course of cultural evolution (iterated learning), suggesting
that they render a ‘language’ more learnable, and - in a
second experiment - whether they both provide a learning
advantage, relative to neutral labels, in probabilistic learning
across situations (Monaghan et al., 2012). The question of
which (if either) of the labels is more important will bear
crucially on our understanding of the mechanism of the
effect.

vocabulary more learnable, we would expect the process to
favour iconic mappings. Experiment 1 tests this. Crucially,
by using an initial language that is neutral with respect to
iconicity and seeing whether kiki-bouba like labels emerge
we can assess each mapping (spiky-to-kiki-like vs. roundto-bouba-like) separately. Moreover, to determine whether
the paradigm is suitable to elicit iconicity effects in general,
we introduced a further manipulation of our visual stimuli
(length of motion) which could be realised in the labels in
terms of length of word.

Methods
Participants were sixty native speakers of English (32
females, M = 26.3 ± 4.4 years old).
Materials
Visual Stimuli Eighteen video stimuli were used for the
study, varying on the dimensions of shape (round vs. spiky),
colour (red, green, and blue), and motion (still, upwards,
bouncing up and down – see Figure 1 below). Colour was
not of direct interest, but served to provide enough stimuli.
Shapes maximized the kind of contrast sound-shape
iconicity is known to capture. In Figure 1 arrows represent
motion (no arrow: still, duration = 0s; single arrow: single
upwards motion, average duration = 0.5s; dual up-down
arrows: repeated bouncing motion, average duration = 5s).

Experiment 1: Iterated Learning
The iterated learning model (Scott-Phillips & Kirby, 2010)
approximates cultural evolution using diffusion chains, in
which a succession of separate participants (or generations)
each learn from the previous participant (rather like the
children’s game called ‘broken telephone’ or ‘Chinese
whispers’). An initial participant is taught a ‘language’ of
mappings between novel words and visual stimuli, and then
tested on names for stimuli they have seen and
(unbeknownst to them) similar stimuli they haven’t.
Crucially, this compels the participant to innovate. Hence
when the responses of the first generation are taught to the
second generation (participants are unaware of being part of
a chain), evolution of the set of names takes place. This
process is repeated between the second and third generation,
the third and the fourth, and so on.
When participants change the labels, these changes are
passed on to the next generation. If these changes make the
language more learnable they should be retained
(Christiansen & Chater, 2008). Therefore, if iconicity makes

Figure 1: Stills from the stimuli for Experiment 1. Arrows
denote motion. Stimuli in the original teaching set appear
above their names.
Labels For the initial language, iconically neutral names
(letter strings) were constructed from normative data
obtained in the following manner. All consonant-vowel
pairings possible in English orthography were rated by
monolingual English speakers who did not participate in the
other studies (N = 28, 16 males, 28.46 ± 12.03 years old) on
a ten-point scale anchored by a circle (1) and a star (10). A
centered scale was created by redefining the mean rating

2460

(5.04) as zero. Neutral names were generated by taking
syllables whose score did not significantly differ from zero
on the normalized scale and concatenating them. Figure 1
shows each of these names below the shape it was initially
paired with. Stimuli without names were unseen by first
generation participants in the training phase (see below).
Apparatus and Procedure The study was run on E-Prime
2.0 on an IBM compatible PC equipped with a 15” monitor
(resolution: 1024×768). The procedure closely followed
Kirby, Cornish, and Smith (2008). Participants were told
that their task was to learn an ‘alien language’, which paired
certain words with certain pictures. Each language consisted
of 18 pairings, which were randomly divided into a SEEN
set (12 items) and an UNSEEN set (six items). Participants
were trained only on the SEEN set but (unbeknownst to
them) tested on both sets to force innovation. A postexperiment questionnaire confirmed that participants
typically did not notice the new items.
Participants learned the languages in three rounds of
training, with breaks between rounds. Each round was
followed by a testing phase. In each training round
participants were exposed to the SEEN set in two
randomized orders. The first frame of each video was
displayed centrally for 1 second before the letter string was
displayed below the video. The video + label were visible
together for 5 seconds.
In each testing phase, participants were presented with
videos and asked to produce the corresponding letter strings
by using a standard keyboard. There was no time limit for
answering. The first round’s test phase contained only half
the SEEN set and half the UNSEEN set, with the second
round’s testing phase containing the other half of each set.
The final test phase contained all items. The responses in the
final test phase were the only source for the next
generation’s language. Participants were assigned a position
in one of 6 diffusion chains of 10 generations each. The first
participant in each chain was trained on the named stimuli
depicted in Figure 1. Subsequent generations were trained
on a SEEN set randomly drawn from the output of the
previous participant with the following constraint: where the
previous participant assigned the same name to multiple
stimuli, the SEEN set was chosen such as to minimize the
number of uses of a name (see Kirby et al., 2008).

Results and Discussion
Analyses were conducted using repeated-measures
ANOVAs with: 10/11 (generations) × 2 (shapes) × 3
(colours) × 3 (motion types). Generation was a withinsubjects variable (1 to 10 for error, 0 to 10 for sound-shape
iconicity and length), as were shape, colour, and motion
type. As there is continuity of names across the generations
of a particular chain, generations cannot be regarded as
independent. Therefore, chain was treated as a random
effect.
First, following Kirby et al. (2008) we measured
transmission error between generations, an index of

learnability useful as a manipulation check. Transmission
error was operationalized as Levenshtein edit distance. We
found a significant effect of generation on transmission
error (F(9,45) = 5.410, p < .001), i.e. error declined over the
generations - the languages became more learnable.
Sound-Shape Iconicity was assessed using a metric called
LetterScore, obtained through the norming studies that
produced the syllables for the initial language. Each letter’s
LetterScore was the mean of the ratings of the syllables it
appeared in. A letter that tended to appear in spiky-sounding
syllables would receive a spiky score, a letter that appeared
in round-sounding syllables would receive a round score. A
word’s LetterScore is the mean of its letters’ LetterScores.
Scores were centered on a neutral zero, with positive scores
representing spikiness, negative scores roundness. As the
initial experimenter-generated language at generation 0 has
scores of approximately zero, unnamed stimuli were also
deemed to have LetterScores of zero in the initial language
for the purposes of this analysis.

Figure 2 – LetterScore in Experiment 1, averaged across
chains. A LetterScore of zero implies neutrality. Positive
scores are spiky, negative scores round.
The only significant effect is an interaction between
generation and shape (F(10,50) = 3.486, p = .002). The
LetterScores for round and spiky shapes diverged in the
expected direction over the course of the experiment (see
Figure 2). Figure 2 suggests however that the emergence of
iconicity was expressed among round but not spiky stimuli.
This is confirmed when separate ANOVAs are run for round
and spiky stimuli – for round stimuli there is a significant
main effect of generation (F(10,50) = 3.146, p = .003), i.e.
LetterScores changed systematically over time, but there is
no significant effect for spiky stimuli (F < 1).
Length Iconicity The metric for length was number of
letters per name. The videos that were not named in
generation 0 were deemed to have names six letters long
(the mean for generation 0) for the purposes of this analysis.

2461

this experiment assesses each association separately,
without creating a strong expectation of a round-sound vs.
spiky-sound dichotomy (even implicitly). In addition,
Experiment 2 complements Experiment 1 by assessing these
effects using spoken, rather than written, labels.

Methods
Participants were thirty two adult native English speakers
(17 females, M = 23.3 ± 4.4), not including six participants
who failed to learn and were excluded and replaced.
Materials
Visual Stimuli (Shapes) Sixteen rounded and sixteen spiky
shapes were created and matched for size (see Figure 4 for
examples).

Figure 3 – Word Length in Experiment 1, averaged across
chains.
There was a significant interaction between generation and
motion (F(20,100) = 4.647, p < .001), indicating that word
length did not change in the same way for all types of
motion. By the end of the diffusion chains the length of
videos’ names positively correlated with the duration of
their phases of motion (see Figure 3). An ANOVA
conducted on the last five generations by way of
confirmation revealed a significant main effect of motion
(F(2,10) = 4.310, p = .045).
Thus in Experiment 1, iconicity emerged for shape and
for duration of motion. These changes were accompanied by
an increase in learnability. For shape, we found that
iconicity emerged for round but, crucially, not spiky shapes.
In addition we found that iconicity emerged for motion
duration: longer-moving videos had longer names. In
Experiment 2 we test the role of shape iconicity in the
learning of new words for shapes, again assessing the
contribution of round and spiky sounds to sound-shape
iconicity separately.

Auditory stimuli (names) Thirty two names were generated
using previously normed syllables (see Experiment 1) eight composed of syllables normed as round, eight of
syllables normed as spiky, and sixteen of syllables normed
as neutral. Names were recorded by a female native speaker
of North American English.
Apparatus and Procedure The study was run using Matlab
7.4.0 on an IBM compatible PC equipped with a 15”
monitor (resolution: 1024×768). Each participant took part
in two conditions, each being a separate task in the crosssituational learning paradigm (Yu & Smith, 2007).
Trials featured two shapes on screen (one to the left and
one to the right – see Figure 4) and one name (played
through headphones). The name belonged to one of the two
shapes, and the participant’s task was simply to say which
shape the name belonged to by pressing the left or right
arrow. Participants did not receive feedback and had to
guess at first. However, over time it was possible to infer
which shape each name referred to.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 suggests that the mapping between boubatype labels and round shapes may be more iconic than the
mapping between kiki-type labels and spiky shapes.
Experiment 2 aims to further test any difference between the
two mappings, focusing on learning labels for visual stimuli
in a cross-situational learning paradigm (Yu & Smith,
2007), a methodology in which learning is implicit rather
than explicit, enhancing ecological validity as a model of
vocabulary acquisition. Previous work by Monaghan et al.
(2012) has used the methodology to demonstrate the
existence of an advantage for learning names showing kikibouba iconicity (i.e. iconic congruence). However it did not
assess the independent contributions of spiky sound-shape
associations and round sound-shape associations. By
including neutral labels, hence having either ‘round’ and
‘neutral’, or ‘spiky’ and ‘neutral’ names in each condition,

Figure 4 – A cross-situational learning trial (note that
names are presented aurally).
Trials were grouped into four blocks per condition, each of
64 trials. Within each block each name appeared four times,
and concomitantly each shape appeared four times as a

2462

target and four times as a foil. The number of times each
shape appeared on each side of the screen in each role was
counterbalanced, as was the number of appearances by each
shape as a foil for a target from its own category vs. the
opposite category. The same name was not permitted to
appear for two trials in a row. Within these constraints, trials
and trial order were randomised.
One of the two conditions was the ‘round’ condition. In
this condition half of the shapes were round and half spiky
(eight of each), and, crucially, half of the names were round
and half neutral. The other condition was the ‘spiky’
condition – which again had eight round and eight spiky
shapes (different to the ones used in the round condition),
but by contrast had eight neutral names and eight spiky
names (again, neutral names were new). Shapes and neutral
names were counterbalanced across conditions between
participants. Condition order was also counterbalanced
between participants.
At the outset of each participant’s experiment, each shape
was assigned a name from its condition (specific assignment
was counterbalanced between participants). Half of the
shapes in each category in each condition were assigned
iconically congruent names. The other half of each category
were assigned iconically incongruent names.
Here congruence is defined within whichever half of the
putative round-spiky spectrum of sounds the condition in
question covers. In the round condition, round name-round
shape pairings were considered congruent and round namespiky shape pairings were considered incongruent.
However, neutral name-spiky shape pairings were
considered congruent for the purposes of the following
analysis (as there are no spiky names in this condition, and
also in contrast to the incongruent round-name-spiky shape
pairings) and neutral name-round shape pairings were
considered incongruent (as they are less congruent than
round-round pairings). The converse applied for the spiky
condition (see figure 5)

Round
Shape
Spiky
Shape

Round Condition
Round
Neutral
Name
Name
Congruent
Incongruent

Spiky Condition
Neutral
Spiky
Name
Name
Congruent
Incongruent

Incongruent

Incongruent

Congruent

category as target, and category of target. Participant was
treated as a random effect. There was an additional nuisance
between-subjects variable of condition order (round first vs.
spiky first).

Figure 6 – Results for the round condition in Experiment 2.

Figure 7 – Results for the spiky condition in Experiment 2.

Congruent

Figure 5 – Relative Congruence
If only round sound-shape associations matter, then iconic
congruence will only be an advantage in the round condition

Results
Repeated-measures ANOVAs were conducted with: 2
(conditions) × 4 (blocks) × 2 (congruent/incongruent
pairing) × 2 (foil from same or different category) × 2
(target rounded or spiky); and with a dependent variable of
log-transform of accuracy across the eight-trial cells defined
by the above structure. Within-subjects variables were
condition, block, congruence, foil from same vs. different

As expected there was a main effect of block
(F(1.921,57.643) = 232.449, p < .001; Greenhouse-Geisser
corrected) indicating that participants learned over the
course of the experiment. Furthermore, although there was
no significant main effect of congruence, there was an
interaction between condition and congruence (F(1,30) =
4.893, p = .035), indicating that congruence was an
advantage for the round but not the spiky condition (see
Figures 6 and 7).

Discussion
These experiments explored the role lexical iconicity might
play in diachronic language change, and the origins of a
particular kind of iconicity, namely the so called ‘kikibouba’ effect.

2463

In Experiment 1, an initially arbitrary ‘language’
developed iconicity for shape and duration of motion over
the course of multiple generations. This is in line with the
theory that because iconicity makes words easier to learn,
remember, and process, iconicity is one pressure shaping
long-term language change (among a number of others
which include arbitrariness, see Perniss et al., 2010).
Intriguingly, in both Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 we
found that sound-shape iconicity emerged for round but not
spiky objects. This fact has not been widely reported before,
possibly because the previous literature on the kiki-bouba
effect has always relied on mutually-determining binary
comparisons between pairs of words and shapes. Our
experiments allowed us to independently assess iconic
mappings to both round and spiky shapes. We found that
iconic effects emerged in Experiment 1 only for boubaround type mappings and that in Experiment 2 bouba-round
associations show an iconic learning advantage in the
absence of kiki-spiky pairings, but not vice versa.
This asymmetry is important with regards to the potential
mechanisms
underscoring
these
iconic
effects.
Ramachandran and Hubbard (2001) suggest that the kikibouba effect comes about either as cross-modal mappings
that respect (non-visible) similarity between articulatory
gestures and visual shapes, or that the effect may arise
through cross-wiring between neural maps involved in
audition and vision. Either way, however, an asymmetry is
not predicted. Our speculative explanation for the effect is
that it is driven by lip shape, perhaps implying a mechanism
that maps similarity in shape between the lips of a speaker
producing a bouba label and the corresponding shape. If this
is the case, then the phenomenon does not require crossmodal analogies. Future research will address the extent to
which this effect is mediated by visual or motoric
representations of lip roundness, test its robustness among
non-Anglophones, and, taking cues from Spence & Deroy
(2012), explore the significance that it may have for our
understanding of how embodied associations could support
understanding of speech.

Acknowledgments
Supported by UK ESRC grants RES-062-23-2012 to
Vigliocco & RES-620-28-6002 to the Deafness, Cognition
and Language Research Centre (DCAL); UCL Impact; and
the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitivity grant
PSI2012-32464, to Santiago and Vigliocco. Paper written
while Santiago was Leverhulme Visiting Professor (VP-12012-032) at UCL, hosted by Vigliocco.

References
Bremner, A. J., Caparos, S., Davidoff, J., de Fockert, J.,
Linell, K. J., & Spence, C. (2012). “Bouba” and “Kiki” in
Namibia? A remote culture make similar shape-sound
matches, but different shape-taste matches to Westerners.
Cognition, 126(2), 165-172.

Christiansen, M. H., & Chater, N. (2008). Language as
shaped by the brain. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
31(5), 489–558.
de Saussure, F. (1983). Course in general linguistics. La
Salle, IL: Open Court.
Imai, M., Kita, S., Nagumo, M., & Okada, H. (2008). Sound
symbolism facilitates early verb learning. Cognition,
109(1), 54-65.
Kirby, S., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2008). Cumulative
cultural evolution in the laboratory: An experimental
approach to the origins of structure in human language.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 104(12), 5241-5245.
Köhler, W. (1929). Gestalt Psychology. New York:
Liveright.
Kovic, V., Plunkett, K., & Westermann, G. (2010). The
shape of words in the brain. Cognition, 114(1), 19-28.
Maurer, D., Pathman, T., & Mondloch, C. J. (2006). The
shape of boubas: sound-shape correspondences in toddlers
and adults. Developmental Science, 9(3), 316-322.
Monaghan, P., Mattock, K., & Walker, P. (2012). The role
of sound symbolism in word learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 38(5), 1152-1164.
Ozturk, O., Krehm, Madelaine, & Vouloumanos, A. (2013).
Sound symbolism in infancy: Evidence for sound-shape
cross-modal correspondences in 4-month-olds. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 114(2), 173-186.
Perniss, P., Thompson, R. L., & Vigliocco, G. (2010).
Iconicity as a general property of language: evidence from
spoken and signed languages. Frontiers in Psychology
1(227). doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2010.00227
Perniss, P., & Vigliocco, G. (in press). The bridge of
iconicity: From a world of experience to the experience of
language. Proceedings of the Royal Society B.
Ramachandran, V. S. & Hubbard E. M. (2001). Synesthesia:
a window into perception, thought and language. Journal
of Consciousness Studies, 8(12), 3-34.
Scott-Phillips, T., & Kirby, S. (2010). Language evolution
in the laboratory. Trends in Cognitive Science, 14(9), 411417.
Spence, C., & Deroy, O. (2012). Hearing mouth shapes:
Sound symbolism and the reverse McGurk effect. IPerception, 3, 550-552.
Walker, P., Bremner, J. G., Mason, U., Spring, J., Mattock,
K., Slater, A., & Johnson, S. P. (2010). Preverbal infants’
sensitivity
to
synaesthetic
cross-modality
correspondences. Psychological Science, 21(1), 21-25.
Westbury, C. (2005). Implicit sound symbolism in lexical
access: evidence from an interference task. Brain and
Language, 93(1), 10-19.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. (2007). Rapid word learning under
uncertainty via cross-situational statistics. Psychological
Science, 18(15), 414–420.

2464

