UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Neurocognitive Roots of Fraction Knowledge

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9m72z62p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Lewis, Mark
Matthews, Percival
Hubbard, Edward

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The (Neuro)cognitive Roots of Fraction Knowledge
Mark Rose Lewis (mrlewis5@wisc.edu)
Department of Educational Psychology, 1025 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA

Percival G. Matthews (pmatthews@wisc.edu)
Department of Educational Psychology, 1025 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA

Edward M. Hubbard (emhubbard@wisc.edu)
Department of Educational Psychology, 1025 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA
Abstract

Ratio Type [Study]

The current study investigated whether cognitive architectures
tuned to the magnitudes of nonsymbolic ratios support the
acquisition of symbolic fraction concepts and subsequent
achievement in algebra. Participants’ performance on a novel
battery of nonsymbolic ratio comparison tasks predicted their
symbolic fraction knowledge and algebra achievement even
after controlling for performance on control tasks. These
results provide initial behavioral evidence that recently
discovered brain systems which represent nonsymbolic
rational magnitude may be important for math learning,
especially for developing a strong understanding of fraction
concepts.
Keywords: Mathematical Cognition, Approximate Number
System, Fractions, Math Achievement.

Introduction
Recent research has highlighted the critical importance of
fraction concepts for promoting math achievement (Siegler
et al., 2012). Fraction knowledge serves as a “gateway” to
algebra and higher mathematics (Booth & Newton, 2012),
and cultivating this knowledge has rightfully become a
major focus of math education reform initiatives (National
Mathematics Advisory Panel, 2008). However, cultivating
fraction knowledge is far from easy; students often struggle
to understand fractions, and several theorists have even
proposed that fraction concepts are fundamentally
incompatible with the core neurocognitive architectures that
support mathematical cognition (Dehaene, 1997; Feigenson,
Dehaene, & Spelke, 2004; Geary, 2007). In this paper, we
investigate a competing hypothesis that may help to
illuminate how individual differences in ratio-specific
neurocognitive architectures influence fraction learning and
eventual achievement in higher mathematics.
According to this hypothesis, successful fraction learning
builds upon a set of potentially primitive neurocognitive
architectures – the Rational Brain System (RBS) – which
are tuned to the magnitudes of nonsymbolic ratios (e.g. the
relative length of two lines or the relative numerosities of
two dot arrays) (See Figure 1). In the current study, we
investigate a critical behavioral implication of this proposal
– that individual differences in RBS acuity, as measured by

Example

Dot ratios
[Jacob & Nieder, 2009b]
Line Ratios
[Jacob & Nieder, 2009b]
Symbolic Fractions
Fraction Words
[Jacob & Nieder, 2009a]
Symbolic Fractions
[Ischebeck et al., 2009]

1/6
“One-fourth”

2/5

Figure 1: Approximate locations of brain regions showing
distance-dependent activation to the holistic magnitudes of
nonsymbolic ratios and symbolic fractions.
the ability to compare nonsymbolic ratios, predict individual
differences in the learning of fraction concepts and
subsequent algebra achievement.

Core Architectures for Math Cognition
In recent decades, advances in the cognitive and neural
sciences have helped researchers to chart the neurocognitive
foundations of mathematical cognition. This research has
begun to identify candidate “neurocognitive startup tools”
upon which number knowledge is founded. These startup
tools include the exact small number system that enables
subitizing (the Object Tacking System, or OTS) and the
Approximate Number System (ANS) that enables humans
and many nonhuman animals to represent the approximate
number of items in a set (Piazza, 2010).
These
evolutionarily primitive architectures are recycled by formal
learning and promote the acquisition of key early math
concepts that parallel their nonsymbolic representational
affordances (Dehaene & Cohen, 2007). For example, the
OTS-based ability to represent exact small numerosities and
the ANS-based ability to represent approximate numerosity
may promote the learning of whole number concepts and
whole number symbols.
The role of the ANS in supporting early math learning has
been implicated by positive correlations between individual
differences in ANS acuity, measured by the ability to
compare the numerosities of two sets, and individual
differences in measures of symbolic whole number

2549

knowledge and arithmetic achievement (Halberda,
Mazzocco, & Feigenson, 2008). However, these
architectures become less useful in promoting math learning
as the structure of mathematical constructs diverges from
their representational affordances.
A major divergence from the affordances of these core
architectures comes relatively early with the introduction of
fraction concepts in grades 3 and 4. For the first time, the
magnitude of the symbols students must learn no longer
maps easily onto their intuitive OTS or ANS
representations. Whereas the magnitude of the symbol “7”
may have mapped onto an ANS representation built by
evolution and/or experience to represent approximately
seven discrete items, the magnitude of the symbol “1/2”
emerges from the relative magnitude of the two symbolic
components and can in fact refer to an infinite number of
magnitude pairs (1/2,2/4,4/8…).
Students struggle mightily to understand the holistic
magnitudes of fractions. For example, when a nationally
representative sample of 17 year olds was asked whether
12/13 + 7/8 was closest to 1, 2, 19, or 21, more chose either
19 or 21 than 2 (Carpenter, Corbitt, Kepner, Lindquist, &
Reys, 1980). Misconceptions like these illustrate a clear
failure to recognize that the magnitude of a fraction emerges
from the relation between its two components rather than
from the magnitudes of the individual components
themselves.
The pervasive problems that students experience have led
some to claim that fractions are fundamentally incompatible
with human cognitive architecture (Dehaene, 1997;
Feigenson et al., 2004; Geary, 2007). However, a growing
body of evidence suggests that humans may actually possess
neural circuitry, the Rational Brain System (RBS) which is
ideally suited to representing fraction concepts.

The Rational Brain System
Although fractions are not usually formally introduced until
grades 3 and 4, children far younger than this demonstrate
some understanding of nonsymbolic ratios. For example,
McCrink & Wynn (McCrink & Wynn, 2007) demonstrated
that 6-month old infants habituated to specific nonsymbolic
ratios (e.g., a 2:1 ratio composed of yellow Pacmen
intermixed with blue pellets) and subsequently looked
longer at novel ratio stimuli that differed by a factor of two
(e.g., a 4:1 ratio). By 4 years of age, children can order
pictures of part-whole ratios based on holistic magnitude
(Goswami, 1995) and perform above chance on tasks that
require the addition and subtraction of nonsymbolic partwhole fractions (Mix, Levine, & Huttenlocher, 1999) even
though much older children struggle to perform analogous
tasks with symbolic fractions. This competence with
nonsymbolic ratios seems to be flexible and abstract,
allowing children to draw proportional analogies even when
materials are visually dissimilar (e.g., drawing analogies
between pizzas and chocolates and glasses of lemonade).
Even monkeys can be trained to identify matching

nonsymbolic ratios in delayed match–to-sample tasks, and
this training transfers to novel untrained ratios.
Functional imaging with humans (Jacob & Nieder, 2009b)
and single-cell recordings from monkeys (Vallentin &
Nieder, 2008) have begun to reveal that key components of
the RBS span a fronto-parietal network (see Figure
1). Within this network, subpopulations of neurons show
classical tuning curves to specific ratios. For example, some
populations of neurons respond most strongly to all pairs of
lines in which one of the lines is ¼ as long as the other, but
respond more weakly to other relative lengths. Importantly,
RBS tuning is not sensitive to the absolute sizes of
components used to instantiate a ratio but tracks the holistic
magnitude corresponding to the relationship between two
given components.

The Rational Brain and Fraction Learning
Lewis, Matthews, & Hubbard (under review) have recently
articulated a theory explicating how these “rational brain”
networks influence fraction learning and, in turn, subsequent
algebra achievement. This model suggests that both formal
and informal learning experiences help to generate links
between perceptually based representations of nonsymbolic
ratio magnitudes and fraction symbols – both verbal fraction
labels like “one half” and “one third” and orthographic
symbols like “2/3” and “3/4”. Notably, these links are
formed regardless of whether instruction explicitly
leverages perceptual sensitivity to nonsymbolic ratios.
Visuospatial representations (e.g. pies, numberlines, and
counters) are used extensively to support learners’
acquisition of fraction knowledge. Even when these
representations are used to complement instruction that
emphasizes counting and the application of whole number
schemas, RBS networks – which antedate formal
educational experiences – respond to the nonsymbolic
rational magnitudes encoded by these representations. Thus,
there is at least a modicum of percept-to-symbol linking that
occurs even when instruction does not explicitly encourage
it. These links become stronger with more years of
experience using graphical representations of fractions.
A key prediction of the RBS argument is that these
symbolic-to-nonsymbolic links serve as an important basis
for learners’ understanding of the holistic magnitude of
fractions, a key understanding that promotes the acquisition
of procedural and conceptual fraction knowledge. In turn,
improved understanding of fractions supports subsequent
algebra achievement. Because the precision of these
symbolic-to-nonsymbolic links is dependent on the acuity of
a learner’s RBS, Lewis et al. predicted that individual
differences in RBS acuity would predict individual
differences in fraction understanding and algebra
achievement.

The Current Study
Although there is compelling evidence demonstrating
human sensitivity to nonsymbolic rational magnitudes, the
hypothesized connections between RBS acuity, fraction

2550

learning, and algebra achievement have yet to be
investigated. The current study was designed to do just that.
Specifically, we tested whether individual differences in
nonsymbolic rational acuity would predict individual
differences in symbolic fraction knowledge and algebra
achievement.
Therefore, we constructed a battery of nonsymbolic
comparison tasks that included a standard measure of ANS
acuity, a measure of acuity for line length, and four novel
measures of RBS acuity (see Figure 2). In addition to the
battery of comparison tasks, participants completed three
measures of symbolic fraction knowledge (symbolic
fraction comparison, fraction number line estimation, and a
paper and pencil fraction knowledge assessment), and an
additional task to control for differences in cognitive
control/conflict resolution (flanker task).
The key research question was whether RBS acuity would
predict fraction knowledge and algebra achievement above
and beyond ANS acuity and other control measures. If so,
these results would be the first to demonstrate the
importance of the RBS to math learning.

pencil assessment to assess their fraction knowledge and
granted us access to their university algebra entrance exam
scores.

Nonsymbolic Comparison Tasks
Nonsymbolic comparison tasks assessed acuity for
discriminating numerosity, line length, and nonsymbolic
rational magnitude. Each trial began with a fixation cross
for 1000 ms. This was followed by the presentation of two
stimuli. Stimulus pairs were visible for 750 ms for the dot
and line comparison tasks and 1500 ms for the nonsymbolic
ratio comparison tasks. Participants were instructed to
select the more numerous dot array, the longer line, or the
larger nonsymbolic ratio by pressing the “j” key on a
computer keyboard for the right stimulus and the “f” key for
the left stimulus. There was no time limit imposed on trials,
but responses were fast (e.g., an average reaction time of
approximately 1200 ms for the separate line ratio task).
Each comparison task began with 10 practice trials and
contained 45 experimental trials (40 for the dot and line
comparison tasks) of varying difficulty determined by the
ratio of stimuli magnitudes in a trial. For example, a ratio of
2:1 might be realized by the comparison of 100 dots to 50
dots in the ANS task or by the comparison of a line ratio of
½ to a line ratio of ¼ in the integrated line ratio comparison
task. Ratios for each task were chosen based on pilot
experiments and were intended to span from a ratio easy
enough to elicit near perfect performance to a ratio difficult
enough to elicit chance performance at the group level. All
participants judged the same stimuli, but the order of these
stimuli was randomized for each participant. In each task,
the correct selection was presented approximately half of
the time on the right. Performance was defined as the
proportion correct on the experimental trials.
To reduce reliance on the lengths/numerosities of
individual components in the ratio comparison tasks, in
approximately half of the trials the components of the larger
ratio were shorter/less numerous than the corresponding
components of the smaller ratio, and in the remaining trials
the components of the smaller ratio were shorter/less
numerous than the corresponding components of the larger
ratio.
To reduce reliance on cumulative area or dot size in the
three tasks that employed dot stimuli, in approximately half
of the trials, sets had the same cumulative area, but variable
dot sizes, and in the other half, dot size was constant, but
cumulative area differed.

Figure 2: Sample stimuli from the nonsymbolic comparison
battery. Top row from left to right: dot numerosities,
separate dot ratios, and integrated dot ratios. Bottom row
from left to right: line lengths, separate line ratios, and
integrated line ratios.

Methods
Participants
101 undergraduate students at a large American university
participated for partial course credit. Two participants did
not understand the computerized tasks and were excused
from that portion of the experiment.

Procedure
Participants first completed the computerized nonsymbolic
comparison tasks. Next, they completed two computerized
measures of symbolic fraction knowledge (fraction
comparison and numberline estimation) followed by the
flanker task. Finally, participants completed a paper-and-

Dot Numerosity (ANS Acuity) Participants were asked to
“determine whether there are more dots on the left or right
hand side of the screen” and were explicitly instructed to
“base your decisions on the number of dots, not the sizes of
the dots”. The range of item difficulties were chosen based
on Halberda et al. (2008). The number of dots in each set
ranged from 50 to 175.

2551

Flanker Task

Line Length Participants were asked to “decide which line
is longer”. Lines were randomly offset from the midline by
up to half of the line length.
Separate Line Ratios Participants were asked to
“determine which set of lines has the higher ratio of white to
black line lengths”.
Integrated Line Ratios Participants were asked to “decide
which line has a higher proportion of white relative to total
line length”.
Separate Dot Ratios Participants were asked to “determine
which set of dots has a higher ratio of white to black dots”
and were instructed to “choose the higher ratio based on the
number of white to black dots, not size”. Component dot
numerosities ranged from 11 to 119.
Integrated Dot Ratios Participants were asked to
“determine which set of dots has a higher proportion of
white dots relative to the total number of dots in that set”
and were instructed to make their decisions “based on the
number of white dots relative to the total number of dots,
not the sizes of the dots”. Component dot numerosities
ranged from 10 to 143.

Symbolic Fraction Comparison
Participants selected the larger of two symbolic fractions in
each of 30 single digit fraction pairs. To reduce reliance on
componential strategies, fraction pairs shared no common
components (all numerators and denominators in a pair were
unique). Pairs were sampled at random from all possible
combinations of single digit irreducible fractions except ½
and presentation side with the restriction that in half of the
trials, the larger fraction was presented on the left. Each
trial began with a fixation cross for 750 ms and then the
fraction pair until the participant responded or 5000 ms had
elapsed at which point the trial timed out and participants
had to press the space bar to continue. Participants pressed
the “f” key to indicate that the fraction on the left was larger
and the “j” key to indicate that the fraction on the right was
larger. Prior to the start of the experiment, participants
made 5 practice judgments. All participants judged the same
fraction pairs, but the order of the fraction pairs was
randomized for each participant. Performance was defined
as proportion correct on the experimental trials.

Numberline Estimation
The numberline estimation task was patterned after Siegler,
Thompson and Schneider (2011). Participants used a
computer mouse to indicate the position of the fractions
(1/19, 1/7, 1/4, 3/8, 1/2, 4/7, 2/3, 7/9, 5/6, or 12/13) on a
numberline with end points 0 and 1. Performance was
defined as each participants’ mean percentage absolute error
(PAE),
where
PAE
=
(|Answer
–
Correct
Answer|/Numerical Range). A smaller PAE indicates a
more accurate response.

Each trial began with the presentation of a fixation cross for
500ms. This was followed by an array of five equally-sized
and equally-spaced white arrows on a black background.
This array remained on the screen for 800ms or until
participants made a response. Participants were instructed
to “choose which direction the center arrow is pointing” by
pressing “f” for left and “j” for right. Participants first
completed 12 practice trials and then 80 experimental trials.
Forty of these trials were “congruent”; the four flanking
arrows pointed in the same direction as the center arrow
(e.g., “> > > > >”). The other 40 trials were “incongruent”;
the four flanking arrows pointed in the opposite direction
(e.g. “< < > < <”). In half of the trials, the center arrow
pointed left; and in the other half, it pointed right. The
order of trials was randomized for each participant.
Performance was determined by the proportion of correct
choices, and trials in which no response was provided in the
allotted 800ms were scored as incorrect.

Fraction Knowledge Assessment (FKA)
The FKA is a 38-item test of procedural and conceptual
fraction knowledge. We constructed this assessment using
items from key national and international assessments
including the NAEP and TIMMS and from instruments
developed by psychology and math education researchers
(e.g., Hallet et al., 2012). The FKA had strong reliability as
measured by classical test theory (Cronbach’s alpha = .88)

Algebra Entrance Exam
The algebra entrance exam is a 35 item subtest of the
University of Wisconsin System Mathematics Placement
Test taken by all freshmen in the University of Wisconsin
system. The algebra subtest has strong reliability as
measured by classical test theory (Cronbach’s alpha = .90).
Exam scores were not available for all participants.

Outlier Removal and Recoded Cases
For the nonsymbolic comparison tasks and the fraction
comparison task, we removed data from trials that were
more than 3 standard deviations faster or slower than a
participant’s mean response time for that task. At the task
level, we removed data from any participants who scored
more than 3 standard deviation above or below the group
mean for a given task. This resulted in the removal of data
from 5 participants.
In a few cases, participants appeared to give reversed
responses. For example, two participants in the flanker task
had performance of less than 20 percent correct. These
participants’ responses were recoded. All reported tests for
nonrational acuity remain statistically significant if these
cases are not recoded.

2552

Table 1: Hierarchical Regression Analyses

Base + Ratio

Base Model

Fraction Comparison
Slope

SE

p

Line Length

0.02

0.18

0.92

ANS Acuity

0.52

0.21

0.02

Numberline Estimation - Log(PAE)
Base R2
0.08

*

ΔR

Base Model

SE

-0.80

0.28

0.28

-0.58

0.52

0.52

-1.65

0.25

0.25

Flanker

0.35

0.34

0.31

Separate line ratios

0.37

0.15

0.01

*

0.06

-1.69

0.01

0.01

Integrated line ratios

0.28

0.12

0.03

*

0.05

-0.40

0.44

0.44

Separate dot ratios

0.33

0.10

0.00

***

0.10

-1.03

0.02

0.02

Integrated dot ratios

0.06

0.14

0.67

0.00

-0.43

0.46

0.46

Slope

SE

p

Line Length

10.47

7.79

0.18

ANS Acuity

19.05

9.36

0.05

Base R

0.04

Δ R2
*

0.08
0.01

*

0.06
0.01

Algebra Entrance Exam
2

0.08

ΔR

Base R2

p

2

Fraction Knowledge Assessment

Base + Ratio

Slope

2

Slope

SE

p

-1.938

169.564

0.991

366.12

211.46

0.087

26.791

321.942

0.934

Base R2
0.04

Δ R2

Flanker

13.75

15.06

0.36

Separate line ratios

18.57

6.36

0.00

***

0.08

384.277

148.357

0.011

*

0.08

Integrated line ratios

12.59

5.38

0.02

*

0.05

280.526

118.157

0.02

*

0.06

Separate dot ratios

14.43

4.51

0.00

***

0.09

193.6

105.825

0.071

0.04

8.81

6.16

0.16

0.02

143.573

133.155

0.284

0.01

Integrated dot ratios

Results
To test whether individual differences in RBS acuity predict
fraction knowledge and algebra achievement above-andbeyond individual differences in ANS acuity, line length
acuity, and flanker performance, we conducted a series of
hierarchical regression analyses (see Table 1). In the first
stage of each analysis, we entered the control variables. In
the second stage, we added the RBS variables (using a
separate model for each comparison task) to test whether
individual differences in RBS acuity would uniquely predict
performance on the fraction knowledge and algebra
measures.
Even after controlling for ANS acuity, line length acuity,
and flanker performance, acuity for separate line ratios
significantly predicted performance on all three fraction
knowledge measures and the algebra entrance exam; acuity
for integrated line ratios predicted performance on all of
these measures except the numberline task; and acuity for
separate dot ratios significantly predicted performance on all
outcomes except algebra performance. Acuity for integrated
dot ratios did not significantly predict any of the outcomes.

Discussion
These results represent the first evidence that individual
differences in acuity for nonsymbolic rational magnitudes
correlate with fraction knowledge and algebra achievement.
Although this evidence is behavioral, it supports hypotheses

derived from emerging neuroscientific evidence for a
Rational Brain System. In the long run, understanding how
to exploit the RBS may help educators to design more
effective fraction instruction. In the short run, however, a
number of open questions remain.

Open Questions & Educational Implications
Perhaps the most pressing question is to determine whether
learners’ representations of symbolic fractions do indeed
build upon the neural circuits of the RBS. We are currently
conducting an fMRI experiment to investigate this question.
Another open question is to determine how the RBS relates
to systems like the ANS that are tuned to the magnitudes of
the components that make up a nonsymbolic ratio. This
question is particularly interesting given that key
components of both the RBS and ANS appear to be located
near the intraparietal sulcus.
A broader set of questions concerns how the RBS
supports fraction learning, and whether fraction learning can
be improved by more directly leveraging this system.
Figure 3 presents a conceptual model of how the RBS may
influence students’ understanding of fractions. According
to this model, instruction on fractions generates links
between symbols and RBS representations of rational
magnitude. These links form an important basis of a
learners’ understanding of the holistic magnitude of
fractions, a key understanding that promotes the acquisition

2553

Figure 3: A conceptual model of how RBS acuity supports fraction learning and Algebra achievement.
of procedural and conceptual fraction knowledge. In turn,
general fraction knowledge supports algebra learning.
This model suggests that students with higher RBS acuity
will be more successful in fraction and algebra learning – a
prediction that is supported by the current research. It also
suggests that fraction instruction can be improved by
generating stronger links between fraction symbols and
RBS representations. One way to do this may be to reduce
the classroom emphasis on activities like partitioning that
may activate incompatible ANS representations and wholenumber schemas. However, more targeted research with
school-aged children will be necessary to evaluate this
model and its educational implications.

References
Booth, J. L., & Newton, K. J. (2012). Fractions: Could they
really be the gatekeeper’s doorman? Contemporary
Educational Psychology, 37(4), 247–253.
Carpenter, T. P., Corbitt, M. K., Kepner, H. S., Lindquist,
M. M., & Reys, R. (1980). Results of the second NAEP
mathematics assessment: Secondary school. The
Mathematics Teacher, 73(5), 329–338.
Dehaene, S. (1997). The number sense: How the mind
creates mathematics. New York: Oxford University Press.
Dehaene, S., & Cohen, L. (2007). Cultural recycling of
cortical maps. Neuron, 56(2), 384–398.
Feigenson, L., Dehaene, S., & Spelke, E. (2004). Core
systems of number. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8(7),
307–314.
Geary, D. C. (2007). Development of mathematical
understanding. In D. Kuhn, R. S. Siegler, W. Damon, &
R. M. Lerner (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology (6th
ed., Vol. 2, pp. 777–810). Hoboken, NJ, US: John Wiley
& Sons, Inc.
Goswami, U. (1995). Transitive relational mappings in
three- and four-year-olds: The analogy of Goldilocks and
the three bears. Child Development, 66(3), 877–892.

Halberda, J., Mazzocco, M. M. M., & Feigenson, L. (2008).
Individual differences in non-verbal number acuity
correlate with maths achievement. Nature, 455(7213),
665–668.
Ischebeck, A., Schocke, M., & Delazer, M. (2009). The
processing and representation of fractions within the
brain: An fMRI investigation. NeuroImage, 47(1), 403–
413.
Jacob, S. N., & Nieder, A. (2009a). Notation-independent
representation of fractions in the human parietal cortex.
The Journal of Neuroscience, 29(14), 4652–4657.
Jacob, S. N., & Nieder, A. (2009b). Tuning to non-symbolic
proportions in the human frontoparietal cortex. European
Journal
of
Neuroscience,
30(7),
1432–1442.
doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2009.06932.x
McCrink, K., & Wynn, K. (2007). Ratio abstraction by 6month-old infants. Psychological Science, 18(8), 740–
745.
Mix, K. S., Levine, S. C., & Huttenlocher, J. (1999). Early
fraction calculation ability. Developmental Psychology,
35(1), 164–174.
National Mathematics Advisory Panel. (2008). Foundations
for success: The final report of the National Mathematics
Advisory Panel. Washington, DC: US Department of
Education.
Piazza, M. (2010). Neurocognitive start-up tools for
symbolic number representations. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 14(12), 542–551.
Siegler, R. S., Duncan, G. J., Davis-Kean, P. E., Duckworth,
K., Claessens, A., Engel, M., … Chen, M. (2012). Early
predictors of high school mathematics achievement.
Psychological Science, 23(7), 691–697.
Siegler, R. S., Thompson, C. A., & Schneider, M. (2011).
An integrated theory of whole number and fractions
development. Cognitive Psychology, 62(4), 273–296.
Vallentin, D., & Nieder, A. (2008). Behavioral and
prefrontal representation of spatial proportions in the
monkey. Current Biology, 18(18), 1420–1425.

2554

