UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Neural Basis of Argument Structure Composition through Eye-Tracking, Focal BrainLesion and fMRI

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2z71v5g9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Sancehz-Alonso, Sara
Ly, Amy
Braze, David
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Neural Basis of Argument Structure Composition through Eye-Tracking,
Focal Brain-Lesion and fMRI
Sara Sánchez-Alonso(sara.sanchez.alonso@yale.edu)
Linguistics Department, 370 Temple Street
New Haven, CT 06520 USA

Amy Ly (amy.ly@gmail.com)
Yale College, New Haven, CT 06520 USA

David Braze (dave.braze@haskinslabs.org )
Haskins Laboratories , 300 George Street
New Haven, CT 06511 USA

Cheryl M. Lacadie (cheryl.lacadie@yale.edu)
Magnetic Resonance Research Center, 300 Cedar Street
New Haven, CT 06520 USA

Todd Constable (todd.constable@yale.edu)
Magnetic Resonance Research Center, 300 Cedar Street
New Haven, CT 06520 USA

Maria Mercedes Piñango (maria.pinango@yale.edu)
Linguistics Department, 370 Temple Street
New Haven, CT 06520 USA
Abstract

Background

We investigate the processing and neurological basis of Light
Verb Constructions (LVCs) such as The girl gives a kiss (to
the boy) where the thrust of the event argument structure is
provided not by the verb give but by the NP a kiss. LVCs contrasts with ”heavy” counterparts (HVC) as in photograph in
The girl photographs a kiss (between her friends). We examine two questions: 1) whether the heavy reading ([CAUSE <
thing, [event < GO,thing, PAT H]]) is derived from the light
reading ([CAUSE < thing, event >]), or instead the heavy reading is lexically stored alongside the light counterpart, and
2) whether LVCs are lexically stored as idioms or instead,
they are built compositionally during real-time comprehension. Study 1 addresses the first question by showing via
eye-tracking an increased reading time for the heavy (over
the light) condition at the point of the verb, thus supporting
the view that LVs are not stored with both readings, but are
stored instead with an underspecified/empty semantics. Studies 2 and 3 address the second question. Study 2 does so via
aphasic comprehension (Broca’s vs. Wernicke’s vs. intactbrain matching controls) using a sentence-to-picture matching
task and study 3 via event-related fMRI. Results from Study
2 show a contrast in comprehension whereby, unlike Wernicke’s or matching controls, Broca’s patients reveal chancelevel comprehension for LVCs over HVCs, thus indicating a
preferential recruitment of left inferior frontal cortex (LIF cortex) in the comprehension of LVCs. Results from Study 3 further support the validity of these findings by showing preferential activation for LVCs over HVCs in the LIF cortex and crucially not in the left posterior superior temporal cortex (LPST
cortex) associated with Wernicke’s area. Altogether, these results support a view of LVCs that is compositional (in real-time
terms), semantic in nature, and supported by the workings of
the LIF cortex, an area previously robustly associated with argument structure composition.
Keywords: Language comprehension; inferior frontal gyrus;
Broca; light verbs; argument structure composition

LVCs (light verb constructions) such as The girl gives a kiss
(to the boy)1 , contrast with semantically heavier counterparts
like The girl photographs a kiss (between her friends). Both
sentences exhibit the same surface syntax: [NP [V NP]], but
only in the LVC the argument structure (AS) of the sentence emerges from the object’s meaning kiss. Whereas
all analyses agree that LVCs result from the integration of
the AS of the object into the event argument structure of
the sentence [kiss< kisser, kissee >], they differ in the extent to which they allow the argument structure of the verb
[givex , y, z] to participate in that event representation (and if
so, how). Such differences carry in turn distinct processing
and cortical implications. We consider three possible analyses: 1) Ambiguous-Semantics, 2) Empty-Semantics, and 3)
Underspecified-Semantics. We discuss each in turn alongside
its respective processing implication.
The Ambiguous-Semantics analysis represents the default
analysis according to which LVs2 are stored with both their
light and heavy readings. Accordingly, verbs are retrieved
with both meanings and the object plays a crucial role disambiguating between the two senses. The processing implication of this analysis is that retrieval of an ambiguous LV
1 Sometimes, other LVCs such as ”the woman gives an order to
the man” are in fact ambiguous between a light (i.e., the woman
orders the man to do something) and heavy (i.e., the woman hands
the man a piece of paper containing instructions) reading. Here, the
label LVC refers to the light reading of those sentences.
2 LV refers to a light use of a verb inside a LVC.

2877

will engender a higher cost than retrieval of a non-ambiguous
HV because such a process demands 1) retrieval of a verb
with two readings and 2) pruning, as it were, the unnecessary meaning from the sentence representation. The LexicoConceptual Structure (LCS) of the two readings for give is
illustrated as follows:

the crucial role of left inferior frontal areas during argument
structure composition.

Study 1: Empty/Underspecifed Semantics
Analyses vs Ambiguous Analysis

Under the Empty-Semantics analysis, LVs are placeholders with no semantic content (Goldberg,2003, Hale and
Keyser, 1993). Their lack of semantic content allows their
object to supply the necessary argument structure to the constructions event representation. Accordingly, LVs are lexically stored with their objects in the lexicon as constructions,
similar to idiomatic expressions. Since they are stored as individual constructions, they are highly sensitive to frequency
factors. Consequently, the main processing implication of
this analysis is that LVCs should be retrieved faster than their
heavy verb (HV) counterparts because they are more frequent
(Piñango et al., 2006). An example of a lexico-conceptual
representation of the LVC give a kiss under this analysis is
given below:

Study 1 addresses the question of whether the heavy reading
is derived from the light reading, or instead the light reading is lexically stored alongside its heavy counterpart. Previous research on meaning composition has already shown that
at least certain kinds of meaning composition translate into
more computational work reflected in turn in higher reading times (e.g., Frazier and Rayner (1990), Piñango et al.,
1999; Katsika et al., 2012). More to the point, Briem et
al, 2009 have already shown results for German consistent
with the underspecified-semantics view. That study was done
via MEG, with short sentences (with context), and the measure of underspecification was level of brain activation. In
the present study we address this question using eye-tracking
in English. We measure the unfolding of comprehension in
longer multi-phrasal sentences. If it is indeed the case that
potential light verbs are stored with underspecified semantics, the underspecified-semantics analysis predicts that, in an
LVC, the LV meaning will be activated first, and consequently
that the comparatively more costly processing of HVs will
lead to longer reading times before the object is fully processed.

Participants
Thirty-six native speakers of English, students at Yale University and all between 18-27 years of age participated in the
study.
Finally, the Underspecified-Semantics analysis, proposes that LVCs are formed in real-time by composition
of the semantically underspecified verb and the object’s AS
(Butt,2003, Culicover and Jackendoff,2005). When frequency differences are minimized (although they are never
eliminated since LVs are by and large high in frequency)
LVC composition may be observed as higher cost during online comprehension in comparison to heavy verbconstruction (HVC) counterparts. An example of the two
lexico-conceptual representations involved in the LVC give
a kiss under this analysis is given below:
Here, we present three studies that evaluate the behavioral and neural correlates of real-time processing of LVCs,
and shed light on their compositionality. To forecast, the results support the empty/underspecified semantics of LVs and

Materials
The study was embedded in a larger study of multiple conditions that served as fillers to the LVC and HVC conditions.
The LVC study consisted of two conditions (LVC and HVC)
and 20 sentences per condition. Each sentence was preceded
by a context (On the main deck of the boat,) and followed
by either a LVC (David gave a shout to Captain McDonald)
or a HVC (David heard a shout from Captain McDonald).
Verbs and objects were selected based on a corpus analysis
of light senses using the Brown Corpus of Written American
English (Francis and Kucera, 1964; Hofland et al., 1999) (see
Piñango et al., 2006, for details). Thus, for each pair of sentences, verbs and objects were matched in raw frequency and
length and sense co-occurrence.

2878

Procedure

has been claimed to target one key language area: the left
inferior frontal cortex (LIF cortex) associated with Brocas
aphasia and not the left posterior temporal cortex associated
with Wernickes aphasia. (Piñago et al.,1999, Burkhardt et
al. 2003, Bornkessel et al.,2005, Grewe et al.,2005, Grewe et
al.,2006, Raettig et al.,2010).
Accordingly, the underspecified semantics analysis, but not
the empty semantics analysis, predicts that only patients with
Broca’s aphasia (in contrast to patients with Wernickes aphasia and matching controls) will show impaired performance
for LVCs (and not for HVCs).

The eye-tracker was calibrated using a series of nine fixed
targets across the display. Trials consisted of several events.
First, a fixation target appeared at the screen position to be occupied by the sentence-initial letter. The context sentence disappeared and the sentence initial fixation target re-appeared.
Participants re-fixed their gaze and pressed a button to bring
up the critical sentence. They read this sentence and clicked
a button when finished.

Results
We observed greater times for first-pass regression (i.e., a final first-pass fixation that ends in a backward glance to an
earlier part of the sentence) and regression-path fixation (i.e.,
all fixations from the first fixation in a region until the reader
fixates to the right of the region) for HVCs at the object (1).
This leftward regression back to the verb resulted in greater
second-pass fixation times (i.e., sum of all fixation durations
in a region that are not first-pass fixations) at the verb. The
percentage of correct responses for the comprehension questions was 94%.
Table 1: Results of Study 1

Variable
First-pass regression (ms)
Heavy
Light
Regression-path
fixation
(ms)
Heavy
Light
Second-pass fixation (ms)
Heavy
Light

Verb
heard/read

Object
shout

278.6 (155.5)
273.2 (138.6)

356.1 (196.0)
340.7 (204.6)

358.2 (279.8)
304.1 (182.9)

432.5 (302.3)
429.9 (333.6)

120.9 (201.2)
85.9 (171.7)

164.6 (260.6)
140.7 (301.2)

Participants
Twelve participants diagnosed with chronic aphasia (8 females and 4 males, mean age: 55 years old) participated in
the study. Seven patients were diagnosed with Broca’s aphasia and four with Wernicke’s aphasia. A control group of
eight education and age-matched controls (six females and
two males, mean age: 51 years old) was included for comparison.

Materials
Seventy experimental sentences were constructed. They were
distributed along the following conditions: 1) 20 LVCs, a
combination of a light verb and a noun phrase (e.g., La mujer
hace una llamada ”The woman makes a call”), 2) 10 HVCs
with a heavy verb and a noun phrase (e.g., La mujer responde
una llamada ”The woman answers a call”), 3) 10 DVCs with
a dark verb3 and a noun phrase (e.g., La mujer hace un dibujo
”The woman makes a drawing”), 4) 20 fillers Type 1,which
consisted of a non-light verb and a noun phrase (e.g., La mujer lee un libro ”The woman reads a book”, and 5) 10 fillers
Type 2, which were identical in structure to fillers of Type 1,
with the exception that they included a relative clause (e.g.,
La mujer que lee un libro esta sentada ”The woman that reads
a book is seating”) in order to ensure that participants did not
suffer from an auditory memory deficit.

Procedure
Discussion
As verb-frequency was controlled, the lower reading times for
LVs over HVs support both the Empty/Underspecified characterization of LVCs. These results thus replicate those of
Briem et al, 2009. Having addressed this preliminary question we proceed to the question of compositionality of LVCs,
the central point of the paper.

Study 2: Compositional vs Non-compositional.
Focal Lesion Study
Study 2 addresses the second question: whether LVCs are
lexically stored as idioms or instead they are built compositionally during real-time comprehension. This question
can be studied from a neurological perspective because, as
it turns out, argument structure (AS) composition, the umbrella process that presumably underpins LVC composition,

The experimental sentences were randomized and recorded
by two native speakers of Spanish. Simultaneously with the
presentation of each sentence, a set of two pictures was presented (Figs.: 1, 2, 3) Each set consisted of a correct and a
foil picture. Patients were instructed to choose the picture
that represented the best match for the sentence that they had
just heard.

Results
In the LV condition, controls and Wernicke’s performed significantly better than patients with Broca’s aphasia. In contrast, performance between the control group and Wernicke’s
was not significantly different. The analysis reported an accuracy score of 89% for controls, 92% for Wernicke’s patients,
and 68% for Broca’s. No differences in the number of correct responses were found across groups in the HV condition.
3A

2879

dark verb (DV) is defined as the heavy counterpart of a LV.

Figure 1: Example of correct and foil pictures for the sentence: La
mujer hace una llamada, lit. ”The woman makes a call”.
(top: correct picture, bottom: foil picture).

Figure 2: Example of correct and foil pictures for the sentence: La
mujer responde una llamada, lit. ”The woman answers a
call”. (top: foil picture, bottom: correct picture).

Figure 3: Example of correct and foil pictures for the sentence: La
mujer hace una circulo, lit. ”The woman makes a circle”.
(top: correct picture, bottom: foil picture).

As for the DV condition, control participants achieved significantly higher scores than Wernicke’s.

Discussion
The results are consistent with the prediction of compositionality associated with the underspecified semantics analysis,
and not with the empty-semantics analysis. According to this
prediction, LVCs demand that the underspecified argument
structure (AS) associated with the verb and the AS associated
with the object be composed into a larger event representation
as comprehension unfolds. Argument structure composition
is independently associated with the workings of the LIF cortex, Brocas patients exhibit focal lesions in that cortical region exclusively. Consequently Brocas patients should show
impaired performance in the interpretation of LVCs. This
was indeed the case. Patients with Broca’s aphasia performed
worse in comprehension of LVCs than Wenickes. Moreover,
performance seems to improve as severity of the deficit is reduced (mild Brocas > moderate Brocas). This same cortical

2880

correct responses in the behavioral task.

Materials
The four critical sentence conditions for the study are shown
in Table 2. Each participant read a total of 100 light verb
sentences, 50 heavy verb sentences and 50 dark verb sentences, randomly assigned to 10 fMRI runs. Sentences were
presented word-by-word with an ISI of 500 milliseconds.
Table 2: Experimental Sentences in Study 3.

region does not seem to play a crucial role in the processing of
HVCs/DVCs, as seems clear by the unimpaired performance
of Broca’s aphasics in these conditions.

Condition

Example

Light Verb (LV1)

Mr. Olson gave an order to the produce
guy at the market.

Heavy Verb (HV)

Mr. Olson typed an order to the produce
guy at the market.

Light Verb (LV2)

The order that the English department
chair gave to the postdoc was completely
ignored.

Dark Verb (DV)

The letter that the English department
chair gave to the postdoc was completely
ignored.

Figure 4: Percentage of correct responses by verb type and experimental group. Error bars indicate the standard error of
the mean.
100

Correct Responses

90

Group
Control
80

Broca
Wernicke

70

As can be seen in Table 2, the contrast LV1 and HV presented the verb before the object, whereas the contrast LV2
and DV presented the object first, then the verb. This was
done in order to study whether the order of processing influences compositionality. Wittenberg and Piãngo (2012) had already shown that in German, a language with SOV order (e.g.
eine Referat hielt, lit.:”a speech gave”), it is the choice of the
verb that determines whether the argument structures associated with the NP complement and the verb respectively need
to be integrated. This experimental design examines whether
in English the verbs AS may play a similar crucial role.

Procedure
60
LV

HV

DV

Construction type

Study 3: Compositional vs Non-Compositional:
fMRI
Study 3 pursues the compositionality question also from a
neurological perspective but through the intact brain. Accordingly, it sought to test the prediction that the argument
structure composition involved in the creation of LVC’s will
engender preferential activation in left inferior frontal areas
and crucially not the left-posterior temporal cortex (associated with Wernickes area).

Participants
25 participants (11 females and 14 males, mean age: 20; age
range: 18-27) entered the final analysis. All were monolingual, native speakers of English and achieved over 85% of

fMRI study in which participants viewed sentences in a segmented manner, word by word, at the center of the screen.
During comprehension task trials, participants had to answer
a question by making a button press (right index finger for
yes, right thumb finger for no).

Results
Results show that LVC composition preferentially recruits the
left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG). Figure 5 illustrates the results for the contrast LV1-HV and Table 3 below shows the
corresponding Talairach coordinates. Major activations in response to this interaction were observed in the LIFG, which
includes Broadmann areas BA47, BA45, BA44 and BA46,
extending up into area BA10; and in the anterior cingulate
cortex (ACC) extending up into BA8 and BA6. These activations were recorded from the start of the sentence up to the

2881

offset of the object. After the object, no differences in activation were observed between the LV1 and HV conditions. As
for the LV2-DV contrast, there were no significant differences
in activation.
Figure 5: Averaged activation for the interaction between LV1 and
HV.

the kissee arguments have been processed). This means that
when the finally verb is encountered supplying its underspecified argument structure, the compositional process for the
event representation of the clause have already been sketched
out, thus attenuating the differences between the two sentences and presumably making less visible any differences
in hemodynamic response between the two conditions. This
contrast aside, the LV-HV results are consistent with those
found in Study 2 and with previous studies which find further
support in previous evidence associating argument structure
composition with left inferior frontal cortex. (?, ?, ?, ?, ?)

Conclusion

Table 3: Talairach coordinates, maximal values and volumes of the
activated regions for the local maxima in the interaction
contrast LV x HV.

Region
Cerebellum
Visual cortex
LIFG: BA47,
BA45, BA44,
BA6, BA8-10

Talairach coordinates
16, -80, -29
-8, -72, 9
5, 20, 23

Max.value
7854
7358
14405

Volume
(mm3 )
29873
10726
21190

Discussion
The results provide further evidence for the compositionality of LVCs because LIF cortex have been associated with
processing of argument structure composition. Interestingly
we also observed enhanced activation in the cerebellum. Previous evidence indicates that this region supports language
processing indirectly through its connections with frontal areas (Booth et al.,2007; Alexander et al., 1986; Clower et al.,
2005; Dum and Strick, 2005; Middletong and Strick, 1994,
1996). Our findings provide evidence for this role of the cerebellum.
We did not find significant activations in the contrast LV2
vs DV. In this condition, the object was presented much earlier than the verb (The letter that the English department chair
gave... vs. The order that the English department chair
gave...). We argue that the lack of differences in activation
is due to the fact that, when the verb is encountered, the event
representation is already partially constructed as most of the
event’s arguments have been provided (i.e., the kisser and

The results from Study 1 support the claim that LVs, such as
give, take,get, are empty/underspecified in meaning in comparison to HVs, such as type, shred, write, send. Studies 2 and
3 provide evidence in favor of the compositional analysis of
LVCs. A focal-lesion study showed that a damage to Broca’s
area, which has been associated with argument structure composition, causes difficulties in comprehension of LVCs. By
contrast, comprehension of non-light counterparts is unimpaired in these patients. In addition, an fMRI study provided
finer-grained details of the areas involved in real-time comprehension of LVCs. We found that comprehension of LVCs
relies mainly on left BA 44, 45 and 47. These findings support the compositional process of LVCs because these areas
have been traditionally associated with composition of argument structure. The processing and neurological behavior of
LVCs speak to an architecture of language whereby semantic
composition is taking place partially independently and parallel to syntactic composition.

Acknowledgments
Studies and 2 were funded by NSF-BCS grant 0643266 to
Maria M. Pinango. Study 3 was funded by a John F. Enders Fellowship and a MacMillan Pre-Dissertation fellowship
from Yale University to Sara Sánchez-Alonso.

Selected References
Bornkessel I. et al. (2005). Whod did what to whom? Neuroimage
(26).
Briem D.et al. (2009). Distinct processing of function verb categories. Brain Research (1249).
Butt, M. (2003). The Light Verb jungle. Harvard Working Papers
in Linguistics (9).
Culicover, R. and Jackendoff R. (2005). Simpler syntax. Oxford
University Press.
Goldberg, A. (2003). Words by default. In Mismatch. E. Francis
and L. Michaelis (eds.). CSLI Publications.
Grewe T. et al. (2006). Linguistic prominence and Broca’s area.
NeuroImage (32).
Hale K. and Keyser J. (1993). On argument structure [...]. The
View from Building 20 (20).
Katsika et al. (2012). Complement coercion[...]. The Mental
Lexicon (7).
Piñango et al. (1999). Real-time processing implications of aspectual coercion[...]. J. Psych. Res. (4).
Piñango et al. (2006). Semantic combinatorial processes in AS.
Proceedings of Berkeley Ling. Soc.
Raettig T. et al. (2010). Neural correlates of morphosyntactic and
verb AS[...]. The Mental Lexicon (3).

2882

