UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The structure of the lexicon reflects principles of communication

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7pw472zx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Lewis, Molly
Sugarman, Elise
Frank, Mike

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The structure of the lexicon reflects principles of communication
Molly Lewis

Elise Sugarman

Michael C. Frank

mll@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

elisesug@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

mcfrank@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Abstract

that a longer utterance should have a less predictable meaning. Consistent with this prediction, speakers tend to increase
the duration of a word prosodically in cases where the word
is unpredictable (highly informative) given the linguistic context (Aylett & Turk, 2004).
Recent experimental data provide additional evidence for
a complexity bias operating at the moment of language interpretation. For example, in an artificial language learning task,
Fedzechkina, Jaeger, and Newport (2012) found that learners
tended to use case marking (i.e. longer referential forms) in
cases where the sentence meaning was less predictable in the
experimental context. Bergen, Goodman, and Levy (2012)
provide a more direct test of a complexity bias. In their task,
partners were told that they were in an alien world with three
objects of different base rate frequencies and three possible
utterances of different monetary costs. Their task was to
communicate about one of the objects using one of the available utterances. The results suggest that both the speaker and
hearer expected costlier forms to refer to less frequent meanings, consistent with Horn’s principle.
A number of pieces of evidence thus corroborate proposals that communicative pressures lead to a complexity bias
at the moment of language interpretation. In our work here,
we asked: Do these communicative pressures have consequences beyond in-the-moment language choices? That is,
do these communicative pressures lead to the instantiation of
a complexity bias in the lexicon? While this question has not
been previously investigated, there is some evidence to suggest that they might: words that are more predictable in their
linguistic context are found to be shorter than words that are
less predictable in their linguistic context (Piantadosi, Tily, &
Gibson, 2011b).
A substantial challenge in studying a complexity bias is the
difficulty of defining complexity. We give an intuitive definition guiding our investigation, but we note that our operationalization below is also consistent with other definitions.
Imagine a space of possible meanings as compositional semantic primitives. In this space, a more complex meaning
would be one with more primitives in it. (In a probabilistic
framework, having more units would also be correlated with
having a lower overall probability).
We explore a complexity bias through norming and experimental studies. Analyses of norming data suggest that longer
English words tend to have more complex meanings. Evidence from three experiments also suggests that a complexity
bias guides inference in a novel word learning task, in both
adults (Exp. 1 and 2) and preschoolers (Exp. 3). We conclude
by discussing hypotheses about the source of these results and

We explore a previously undescribed regularity in language:
a bias for longer words to map to relatively more complex
meanings. While theories of communication make the more
general prediction that longer utterances should be associated
with more complex meanings, this prediction has not yet
been explored at the level of words. Through norming
and experimental studies, we find evidence in support of a
complexity bias in word meanings. We conclude by discussing
hypotheses about the nature of this bias.
Keywords: communication; pragmatics

Introduction
Is the structure of language shaped by its use in communication? Hockett (1960) argued that several major features of language—from its productivity to its arbitrary mappings from signifier to signified—emerge from communicative pressures. This kind of functional explanation has since
been proposed for a wide range of phenomena, from the presence of ambiguity in language (Piantadosi, Tily, & Gibson,
2011a) to the way languages organize the semantic space
of kinship meaning (Kemp & Regier, 2012). In our current
study, we identify a regularity in the lexicon—that more complex ideas tend to be named by longer words—and investigate
a potential communicative explanation.
Several theories of communication predict that longer utterances should be associated with more complex meanings
(a complexity bias). More specifically, they predict that communicative pressures should lead to a complexity bias that operates at the moment of language interpretation. Horn (1984)
proposed one such theory. He argued for a relationship between the cost of an utterance and the probability of meaning. He suggested that costlier phrases are associated with
less probable meanings. For example, the phrases “I started
the car” and “I got the car to start” are denotationally equivalent (they both denote the successful starting of a car), but
they differ in cost in terms of their utterance length. Horn’s
principle accounts for this difference as an asymmetry in the
probabilities of meanings: The shorter form refers to the typical (more frequent) starting of a car, and thus the longer form
refers to an atypical case, perhaps where the driver encountered difficulty.
Information theory also predicts a complexity bias that operates during online language interpretation. Under this theory, speakers optimize information transfer (in terms of bits)
by keeping the amount of information conveyed in a unit of
language constant across the speech stream (Aylett & Turk,
2004; Frank & Jaeger, 2008). This “uniform information density” hypothesis predicts as a straightforward consequence

845

the relationship between them.
(Intercept)
Complexity
Log Frequency
Concreteness
Imageability

Complexity bias in the lexicon
To explore whether there is a complexity bias in the lexicon,
we asked adults to rate the meanings of English words for
their complexity. If there is a complexity bias in the lexicon,
we predicted that the meanings of longer words should be
rated as more complex, relative to shorter words.

Std. Error
0.0707
0.0878
0.0893
0.1683
0.1611

t value
79.87
13.16
-7.68
-1.28
1.37

Pr(>|t|)
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.203
0.172

Table 1: Model parameters for linear regression predicting
word length in terms of number of characters. Coefficient estimates are standardized, so they can be interpreted as number
of characters per standard deviation.

Method
Participants
We recruited 250 participants from Amazon Mechanical
Turk, but excluded 10 for earlier participation in related experiments or failure to correctly answer a control question
(answering a simple math problem). In this and the subsequent experiments, all reported results remain statistically
significant when including these participants.

length with complexity, controlling for concreteness, imageability and familiarity. We also controlled for the log spoken
frequency of each word. Frequency was estimated from a corpus of transcripts from American English movies (Subtlex-us
database; Brysbaert & New, 2009).
Familiarity and log frequency were highly colinear (r =
.77, p < .01), and so our final model included only complexity, concreteness, imageability, and frequency as predictors.
Complexity and frequency reliably predicted word length in
terms of number of characters. Concreteness and imageability were not reliable predictors. The estimates for this model
are presented in Table 1. The same pattern held for the other
two length metrics (phonemes and syllables).
This analysis suggests there is a complexity bias in the lexicon: more complex meanings tend to be encoded in language
with longer forms.

Stimuli
We selected 500 English words that were broadly distributed
in their length. All of these words were also included in
the MRC Psycholinguistic Database (Wilson, 1988). This
database includes norms for three other psycholinguistic variables: concreteness, familiarity, and imageability. This allowed us to compare our complexity norms to previously
measured psycholinguistic variables.
Procedure
Participants first viewed a webpage that described the norming task. The instructions read:

Complexity bias at the moment of language
interpretation

In this experiment, you will be asked to decide how complex the meaning of a word is. A word’s meaning is simple if it is easy to understand and has few parts. An example of a simple meaning is “brick.” A word’s meaning
is complex if it is difficult to understand and has many
parts. An example of a more complex meaning is “engine.”

In addition to a complexity bias in the lexicon, we also predicted that speakers might be able to make use of this regularity to guide reference selection in a novel word learning
task. We tested this prediction experimentally in three experiments with adults and children. In each experiment, we
presented participants with two objects and a novel word, and
asked participants to identify the referent. One of the objects
was visually simple and the other visually complex. Across
trials, we manipulated the length of the word. If a complexity
bias guides reference selection, participants should be more
likely to map a long word to a complex object, relative to a
simple object. The data support this hypothesis, suggesting
that this bias is present in adults (Exp. 1 and 2) and develops
in preschoolers (Exp. 3).

They then rated 32 words for their complexity on a 5-point
Likert scale. For all participants, the first two items were
“ball” and “motherboard” in order to anchor participants on
the complexity scale. After the 17th word, participants were
asked to complete a simple math problem to ensure they were
engaged in the task.

Results
Word length in terms of number of characters was highly correlated with complexity ratings (r = .66, p < .01).1 This relationship held for other metrics of length for words where
this information was available (phonemes: r = .69, p < .01;
syllables: r = .63, p < .01).
Next we examined whether there was a systematic relationship between word length and complexity, controlling for
other variables. We created a linear model predicting word
1 All
code
and
data
available
http://github.com/mllewis/refComplex-cogsci

Estimate
5.6484
1.1550
-0.6861
-0.2148
0.2204

Experiment 1a
In Experiment 1, we probed the complexity bias in adults with
a forced choice (Exp. 1a) and betting measure (Exp. 1b).
Methods
Participants. We recruited 60 participants from Amazon
Mechanical Turk, but excluded 11 for earlier participation in
related experiments or failure to correctly answer a control
question (identifying a familiar object).

at

846

indicating their judgement, with a constraint that the bets
on the two objects summed to 100. In this experiment, we
also introduced baseline trials by manipulating the referential alternatives available across participants. Participants
viewed either two simple objects (baseline), two complex
objects (baseline), or a simple and a complex object (critical).
Results In the critical alternatives condition, participants
selected the complex referent significantly more often when
they saw a long word compared to short word (t(134) =
2.44, p < .05, d = .42; Fig. 2). There was no linguistic difference in the baseline conditions (complex-complex: t(106) =
−1.07, p = .29; simple-simple: t(94) = 0.88, p = .38).

Figure 1: Example trial from Experiment 1a.

Experiment 2
The results from Experiment 1 suggest that adults have a
complexity bias when interpreting the meaning of a novel
word. In Experiment 2, we further explored this bias using
more naturalistic stimuli for the objects. Instead of geons, we
presented participants with pictures of real objects that had
been normed for visual complexity.

Stimuli. The referents were objects composed of a varying
number of geometrical shapes. Each geometric shape was
a geon — a representation that has been argued to be the
primitive unit in the visual system for object recognition
(Biederman, 1987). The simple objects were composed of a
single geon and the complex objects were composed of five
geons. There were eight simple items and eight complex
items. The actual stimuli were adopted from Hayward and
Tarr (1997). The linguistic stimuli were novel words. There
were seven short words composed of two syllables (e.g.,
“tupa,” “gabu,” “fepo”) and seven long words composed of
four syllables (e.g., “tupabugorn,” “gaburatum,” “fepolopus”).

Methods
Participants. Ninety-two adults were recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk. Thirty-three participants were excluded for participating in related experiments.
Stimuli. The object stimuli were taken from a set of images
normed for complexity. In the norming task, we presented
participants with 10 randomly selected novel objects from the
full set of 60. For each object, participants were asked, “How
complicated is this object?,” and then indicated their response
using a slider scale. Ratings were collected from 60 participants. A second sample of 60 participants gave ratings that
were highly correlated with those of the first sample, r = .94.
Figure 3 shows all images sorted by complexity.
In the present experiment, 11 images from the bottom quartile of the normed objects and 15 from the top quartile were
selected as the simple and complex objects (Fig. 3). The linguistic stimuli were the same as in Exp. 1.
Procedure. The procedure was identical to the betting
procedure used in Exp. 1b, with the exceptions that each
participant completed only a single critical trial and there
were no baseline conditions.

Procedure. Participants viewed a webpage that showed
two objects and a word, and were asked to select the referent
(see Fig. 1). Each participant completed four critical trials
followed by a control trial. In the control trial, participants
were asked to identify the referent among two known objects
(e.g. cactus and sandwich).
We manipulated two factors: word length and object complexity. On each trial, a simple and a complex object were
presented. Word length was manipulated between participants, such that each participant saw only one word length
across all four trials.
Results Participants selected the complex referent significantly more often in the long word condition, relative to the
short word condition (χ2 (1) = 6.71, p < .01, d = .46; Fig. 2).

Results As in Experiment 1, participants selected the complex referent significantly more often in the long word condition compared to the short word condition (t(57) = 3.54, p <
.001, d = .92; Fig. 2).

Experiment 1b
Methods
Participants. We recruited 90 participants from Amazon
Mechanical Turk. Five were excluded for earlier participation in related experiments or failure to correctly answer the
control question.
Stimuli.
The stimuli were identical to Experiment 1a.
Design.
The procedure was identical to Experiment
1a except for the new measure. In this version of the
experiment, participants were asked to provide bets 0-100

Experiment 3
Experiments 1 and 2 suggest that adults have a complexity
bias when inferring the meaning of a novel word. Given
evidence that a complexity bias is present in the lexicon, the
ability to adopt a complexity bias in the moment of reference
could potentially help constrain referential uncertainty for

847

comp./simp.

simp./simp.

1.0
0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

short
long

3

4

5

Age (years)

Objects

Exp. 1a

0.0

comp./comp.

Proportion generalizations to complex object

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Proportion generalizations to complex object

short
long

Exp. 1b

Exp. 2

Exp. 3

Figure 2: Mean proportion selections (Exp. 1a and 3) or mean bets (Exp. 1b and 2) to complex object for adults (left) and
children (right). Error bars represent 95% CIs as computed via non-parametric bootstrap (Exp. 1a) and parametric 95% CIs
(Exp. 1b, 2, 3). In Experiment 1b, transparent bars represent the two baseline conditions (two complex object alternatives and
two simple object alternatives).
young language learners. In Experiment 3, we explored
whether preschool age children adopt a complexity bias in an
iPad adaptation of Experiment 2.

first.
Results Figure 2 (right) illustrates the proportion of children selecting the complex referent in the short and long word
conditions. Five percent of trials were excluded in cases
where the child had difficulty operating the iPad, or where
there were technical difficulties. Across the three age groups,
a complexity bias emerged only in 5-year-olds.
To test the reliability of this difference, we ran a generalized linear mixed model predicting object selection as an interaction between condition (long or short word) and age with
random effects of participant and trial number. There was a
main effect of age (β = −0.40, p < .01), indicating that children were overall more likely to select the complex referent
with increasing age. There was also a reliable interaction between age and condition (β = 0.38, p < .05). The effect of
condition was not significant.
We ran a series of paired t-tests to examine response differences between conditions for each age group (3s, 4s, and 5s).
There was a reliable difference between conditions for the 5year-old age group (t(35) = 2.35, p < .05, d = .48), but not
the younger groups. These results suggest that older, but not
younger, preschoolers have an adult-like bias to map longer
words onto more complex referents.

Methods
Participants. We recruited 108 children (60 girls) from a
nursery school at Stanford University and the San Jose Children’s Discovery Museum (36 3-year-olds, M= 3;8; 36 4year-olds, M= 4;5; 36 5-year-olds, M= 5;5).
Stimuli. The object and linguistic stimuli were identical to
those used in Experiment 2.
Procedure. The procedure was identical to Experiment 2
with a few changes necessary to adapt the experiment for
children. Children first completed a training phase to gain
familiarity with the iPad’s touchscreen. They were then introduced to a puppet named Furble and told that “he speaks a
different language from us. He has some toys that will look
familiar, but he has lots of funny-looking toys, too. I need you
to help me pick Furble’s toys. Furble’s going to say a word,
and you’re going to pick which toy you think the word is for.”
Children were then shown a display with two images, and the
experimenter asked the child in child-directed prosody to select a referent using one of three naming frames (“Can you
find the [label]?,” “Where’s the [label]?,” or “Can you pick
the [label]?”).
We manipulated word length within subject. Children
completed 12 trials: four trials with long words, four trials
with short words, and four trials with familiar words. Familiar word trials involved a familiar word and two familiar
objects. These were included to familiarize children with the
task of reference selection. Order of trials was randomized
with the constraint that two familiar trials always appeared

General Discussion
A number of theories of communication predict that longer
utterances should be associated with more complex meanings
in the moment of language interpretation. We explored this
prediction at the level of words. Using two sources of data —
correlational evidence within actual spoken language and experimental evidence with novel words — we found evidence
that longer words tend to be associated with more complex

848

jects were named in the order that they were observed. Since
more frequent (i.e. higher probability and hence likely less
complex, see Introduction) objects tended to be observed earlier, these objects received shorter names, relative to the less
frequent objects that were encountered later. This story provides one possible account of the emergence of a complexity
bias over the language change timescale.
Under this hypothesis, there are several ways to account
for a pragmatic in-the-moment complexity bias. One possibility is that the lexical bias and the in-the-moment bias are
the result of independent causal processes: the lexical bias
may be the result of an efficient naming strategy, while the
in-the-moment complexity bias may be the product of general pragmatic reasoning.
An alternative possibility is that the in-the-moment bias
emerged from a generalization, or overhypothesis (Kemp,
Perfors, & Tenenbaum, 2007), based on observations about
the lexicon. That is, given experience with a lexicon that
contains a regularity to map longer words to more complex
meanings, learners might have induced a complexity regularity about the lexicon. Thus, when faced with a novel word,
speakers might apply this bias as a probabilistic heuristic
about the meaning of the word. An overhypothesis account
of the behavioral data has the advantage that it is able to account for the development in an in-the-moment complexity
bias in preschoolers. Under this account, preschoolers might
not show this behavioral bias because they have not yet observed enough data to induce a complexity overhypothesis.
3. The Communicative Pressure Hypothesis. A final
possibility is that humans are predisposed to consider the intentions of others (Tomasello et al., 2005). This predisposition leads to pragmatic reasoning in the moment of language
use. As argued by Horn (1984), one type of inference that
might be guided by pragmatic reasoning is that a costlier (i.e.
longer) utterance is more likely to refer to a more complex
meaning. Thus, under this hypothesis, domain-general pragmatic reasoning may underly an in-the-moment complexity
bias. Over time, this in-the-moment bias may become grammaticalized, leading to a complexity bias in the lexicon.
A variant of this hypothesis is that an in-the-moment behavioral bias might be the product of both an underlying pragmatic inference and an overhypothesis about a complexity
regularity in the lexicon. This possibility is similar to one account of a different, well-studied bias in word learning (Lewis
& Frank, 2013): the mutual exclusivity bias. The mutual
exclusivity bias is the tendency for children to map a novel
word onto a novel object. In this work, we suggest that the
mutual exclusivity behavior may emerge from both an in-themoment pragmatic inference (the speaker would have used
the known word to refer to a known object if that was the
intended referent, and so the novel word must refer to the
novel object) and an overhypothesis about the structure of the
lexicon (a 1-1 mapping between words and concepts). We argued that processes at both timescales may jointly contribute
to mutual exclusivity behavior.

Figure 3: Novel objects sorted by mean complexity rating.
Top left object corresponds to the lowest-rated object, and the
bottom right object corresponds to the highest-rated object.
Objects from the bottom (red) and top (blue) quartile were
used as stimuli in Exp. 2 and 3.

referents.
While both sources of evidence reveal a complexity bias
in the pattern of observable data, each has different implications for the origins of the bias. In particular, each piece of
evidence points to the emergence of a complexity bias at a
different timescale (McMurray, Horst, & Samuelson, 2012).
The norming study suggests that the bias may be grammaticalized in the lexicon (language change timescale). The experimental work with children suggests that a complexity bias
could shape children’s learning through the process of word
learning (language acquisition timescale). And, the experimental work with adults suggests that a complexity bias operates during individual episodes of language use (pragmatic
timescale).
How, if at all, are complexity biases at these three
timescales related? Three broad hypotheses are consistent
with our findings: A complexity bias (1) is innately given,
(2) emerges as an artifact of the emergence of language, or
(3) emerges from communicative pressures. Below we outline these alternatives in more detail.
1. The Innate Bias Hypothesis. One explanation of our
data is that humans have an innate bias to map long words
to complex referents. Under this hypothesis, a cognitive bias
would lead to a complexity bias in the moment of language
use. Over time, this behavioral regularity might become a
probabilistic rule, becoming “grammaticalized” into the language. A challenge for this hypothesis is accounting for why
a behavioral bias was not observed in young preschoolers in
Experiment 3. Nonetheless, it has been argued in the case of
other innate constraints that early age of onset is not a necessary condition for innateness (e.g., Markman, 1992).
2. The Efficient Naming Hypothesis. A second class
of hypotheses posits that the complexity bias in the lexicon
emerged independently of communicative pressures. To understand one variant of this hypothesis, consider the following fable: At the beginning of linguistic time, names were
assigned to objects by length, starting with the shortest. Ob-

849

In conclusion, our work provides the first analysis of the relationship between utterance length and referent complexity
at the level of words. We find evidence suggesting that a complexity bias is present in the lexicon and that speakers make
use of this regularity in a word learning task. On grounds of
parsimony, we favor the Communicative Pressure Hypothesis
as an account of these data. However, future work is needed
to more fully understand the relationship between complexity
biases at different timescales.

Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society.
Markman, E. M. (1992). Constraints on word learning: Speculations about their nature, origins, and domain specificity.
McMurray, B., Horst, J., & Samuelson, L. (2012). Word
learning emerges from the interaction of online referent selection and slow associative learning. Psychological Review, 119, 831.
Piantadosi, S., Tily, H., & Gibson, E. (2011a). The communicative function of ambiguity in language. Cognition, 122,
280–291.
Piantadosi, S., Tily, H., & Gibson, E. (2011b). Word lengths
are optimized for efficient communication. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 108, 3526–3529.
Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., Moll, H., et
al. (2005). Understanding and sharing intentions: The origins of cultural cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
28, 675–690.
Wilson, M. (1988). MRC psycholinguistic database:
Machine-usable dictionary, version 2.00. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 20, 6–10.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the staff and families at the Bing Nursery School and San Jose Children’s Discovery Museum.

References
Aylett, M., & Turk, A. (2004). The smooth signal redundancy
hypothesis: A functional explanation for relationships between redundancy, prosodic prominence, and duration in
spontaneous speech. Language and Speech, 47, 31–56.
Bergen, L., Goodman, N. D., & Levy, R. (2012). That’s
what she (could have) said: How alternative utterances affect language use. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Biederman, I. (1987). Recognition-by-components: a theory
of human image understanding. Psychological Review, 94,
115.
Brysbaert, M., & New, B. (2009). Moving beyond Kučera
and Francis: A critical evaluation of current word frequency norms and the introduction of a new and improved
word frequency measure for American English. Behavior
Research Methods, 41, 977–990.
Fedzechkina, M., Jaeger, T. F., & Newport, E. L. (2012). Language learners restructure their input to facilitate efficient
communication. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 109, 17897–17902.
Frank, A., & Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Speaking rationally: Uniform information density as an optimal strategy for language production. In Proceedings of the 30th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Hayward, W. G., & Tarr, M. J. (1997). Testing conditions
for viewpoint invariance in object recognition. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 23, 1511.
Hockett, C. (1960). The origin of speech. Scientific American, 203, 88-96.
Horn, L. (1984). Toward a new taxonomy for pragmatic inference: Q-based and R-based implicature. Meaning, Form,
and Use in Context, 42.
Kemp, C., Perfors, A., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). Learning
overhypotheses with hierarchical Bayesian models. Developmental Science, 10, 307-321.
Kemp, C., & Regier, T. (2012). Kinship categories across languages reflect general communicative principles. Science,
336, 1049–1054.
Lewis, M., & Frank, M. C. (2013). Modeling disambiguation
in word learning via multiple probabilistic constraints. In

850

