UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The task-oriented approach in psychology: a solution to Fodor's problem

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7ps1h2fk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Author
Baggs, Ed

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The task-oriented approach in psychology: a solution to Fodor’s problem
Ed Baggs (e.baggs@ed.ac.uk)
University of Edinburgh, School of Informatics,
10 Crichton Street, Edinburgh, EH8 9AB UK
Abstract

logical realist framework (Gibson, 1979; Michaels & Carello,
1981) does not subscribe to the idea that the job description
of the brain is to maintain an internal record of the world. Instead, perception is held to be direct (that is, not mediated by
mental symbols) and inextricably bound up with behaviour.
Perceiving and acting are held to be a single phenomenon:
perception-action. This perception-action process can be conceived as a relation that links an actively exploring animal to
its environment—an environment which is itself richly structured and inherently meaningful to the animal by virtue of the
things it affords to that animal. The ecological realist is thus
not in the business of attempting to give an account of how
the brain works. The brain is not the object of inquiry. Rather
the ecological project aims to give an account of an animalenvironment system: the whole system comprising the animal
in its environment.
But a similar problem arises: where to begin? Again what’s
needed is a way of breaking down the broader project into
tractable research problems. The solution that ecological psychologists have settled upon is not to break down the system
into component pieces, but to break down the things the system does into individual units. The solution is to study individual tasks.
This raises the question: what is a task? It will be argued
that there are two quite different ways of answering this question, which correspond to the two types of psychology just
identified. The cognitivist, or brain-oriented psychologist is
quite familiar with the task as a research device. These tasks
are usually carefully constructed laboratory-based activities
which seek to measure some behavioural response to a set of
stimulus materials. The task is devised as a means of indirectly measuring some aspect of the brain.
The ecological or task-oriented psychologist, by contrast,
aims to study real phenomena: activities that people actually
engage in outside the laboratory. A prerequisite for being able
to study a task in this way is that the task itself can be defined
in a precise manner. The phenomena that have been studied most extensively by ecologically-inclined psychologists
are simple action-control phenomena; for example: how does
a driver control steering, how do infants learn to walk, how
does a baseball fielder run to the correct position to intercept
a ball in flight? All of these might be considered as tasks in
some sense, although it is not equally clear in each case where
we should place the boundaries separating the task from other
background activity. The baseball outfielder problem is neat
in that it has clear start and end points, and a clear criterion
for successful performance: the catcher consistently ends up
in the right place to intercept the ball. But where does an individual steering task end? And when is the task of learning

It is proposed that studying individual tasks in isolation is a
solution to Fodor’s problem: how can we break down the empirical project in psychology into tractable units? The taskoriented approach is in this sense an alternative to the modular view of the mind. I propose a definition of a task as a
researcher-defined unit of study that corresponds to a reconfiguration of resources in an animal-enviroment system; this reconfiguration: is meaningful to a perceiver-actor; is amenable
to precise characterization; specifies criteria for succesful completion of the task; and provides a guide to researchers on how
to generalize empirical conclusions drawn from the study of a
given phenomenon. The task-oriented approach is well-suited
to the study of certain phenomena that the standard brainoriented approach struggles to characterize, such as collaborative activity. Framing the dichotomy between the approaches
in terms of methodology allows us to avoid fruitless ontological discussions about external content.
Keywords: Tasks; modularity; ecological psychology.

Introduction
Jerry Fodor’s essay The Modularity of Mind (1983) was an
attempt to address a major problem in cognitive psychology:
if the aim of the research programme is to come up with an
account of how the brain works, then the problem space is
impossibly large: where does one start? What’s needed is
some means of breaking down the overall problem into manageable pieces. Fodor believed that the only plausible means
we had of dividing the problem space in a useful way was
to endorse some version of faculty psychology: the old idea
that the brain is by nature divided into special-purpose units,
which on Fodor’s account are ‘modules’—encapsulated computational devices that interact with one another but otherwise
behave autonomously. If the brain is organized into modules
this is good news because it means we don’t have to study
the entire brain, we can start by studying individual modules
in isolation: ‘The condition for successful science... is that
nature should have joints to carve it at: relatively simple subsystems which can be artificially isolated and which behave,
in isolation, in something like the way that they behave in situ.
Modules satisfy this condition...’ Fodor argued that the best
candidates for modular processes are input-analysing systems
such as vision and language, which were held to function inferentially, turning noisy and impoverished sense data into
symbols which can be computed over, and which can be fed
into central cognitive processes such as thought and memory
(which are not themselves modular in nature).
An alternative approach in psychology rejects the rationalist assumptions of Fodor’s brand of cognitivism.1 The eco1 Note:

this paper will not argue that the concept of modularity
lacks merit; rather, the aim here is to establish that there is an alternative approach, and that this alternative is genuinely different and
not merely a rediscription of modularity.

128

to walk complete, if ever?
The present paper has two aims: 1) to achieve precision
about the concept of a task, around which some ambiguity
exists; in particular I will pursue a definition of the concept
that will allow us to expand the scope of the ecological research programme beyond simple visually-guided phenomena like the outfielder problem, but without losing the rigour
and precision that such activities impose; and 2) to argue that
the task, when defined in an appropriately precise way, is a
unit that satisfies the criteria for a solution to Fodor’s problem: how can the overall research project be broken down
into manageable pieces?

Within the ecological framework, by contrast, there can
be no recourse to positing internal entities. The system is
the animal in its environment. In the ball-kicking example,
the system consists minimally of an actor and a ball and a
perception-action relation linking the two. There is nothing
in this system that we can label as the task. Perhaps the relation itself is the task? This might work for a system with
only two entities and one relation, but now suppose the actor
is kicking the ball at a tree. There are now at least three relations in the system (linking actor and ball, actor and tree, and
ball and tree), none of which we could point to individually
and label as the task.2
We are left with the conclusion that the task does not name
some component of the system but rather identifies a particular way of looking at the system from the outside. The task is
an epistemological device. Some happy consequences follow
from adopting this position. It means that we do not have to
worry about how to correctly individuate particular instances
of tasks: there is no correct way because there isn’t anything
out there to individuate to begin with. Instead, we can define
a task in whatever way is convenient for some purpose.
But as we saw above with the examples of catching a ball
and learning to walk, there is much diversity in the things
that can potentially be labelled as tasks. The problem is how
to define the concept of a task in a useful way, in a way that
can be applied quite generally, and in a way which allows us
to draw useful conclusions from the particular phenomenon
under investigation.

The task as an epistemological device
The first question we must address concerns what nature of
thing a task is: which category should we place it in? Should
the task be considered a part of reality, or a part of our description of reality? Is the task a thing that resides somewhere in
the system, or is it a tool for describing that system in some
way?
Within the rationalist framework, a case could be made for
either response. Within the ecological framework however,
only the latter response makes sense. This can be seen if we
try to apply the concept of a task to a specific activity; say,
kicking a ball. On the traditional, internalist view, one might
be tempted to say that the task is something that resides inside
the actor. In order to be able to engage in the activity of kicking a ball, the actor must on some level be able to categorize
what they are doing as an act of kicking a ball. And further, in
order for a particular action to count as an act of kicking, the
actor must initially intend to carry out that particular action.
On this view, the task is perhaps construed as an internal plan
or recipe which exists in the actor’s head prior to the carrying out of the action: it is a part of reality, and not just of the
description.
This rationalist manner of construing the concept of a task
is subject to the same criticism as was made by Gilbert Ryle
(1949) in relation to the concept of ‘volitions’. If a task is an
internal entity, how might one go about individuating separate instances? If tasks are real, discoverable things, then it
should be possible to answer such questions as the following:
‘What was the last task you completed?’ ‘Of the tasks you
have fulfilled today, which took the longest?’ ‘How many
tasks must be performed in preparing a French onion soup?’
And then there is the problem of how a particular task or plan
is selected. If the actor, in performing some task, must first
select a particular method for performing it, this is an internal
act of choosing which appears to constitute a task in itself:
the task of selecting the next task. But then this selecting task
must itself have been selected somehow. The whole thing is
thus threatened by an infinite regress. A possible escape, for
the internalist, is to say that the actor does not choose the task,
but merely acts out whatever script is currently presenting itself. But this implies that the actor must be an automaton—a
perennially unpopular proposition.

The acting animal and the task-seeking
psychologist
First, though, it is necessary to add a qualification to the assertion just made. If the task is defined as an epistemological
construct, then it is a thing that is strictly artificial, invented
for the benefit of the researcher. However, it is not the case
that a researcher is justified in labelling just anything as a task.
Nature must still possess joints to carve it at. In order for the
analysis to be valid, the researcher’s description of the task
must correspond to what the actor is in fact doing. The task
is a third-person device, but it must recognize that the actor
occupies a particular first-person perspective.
Failing to take into account the first-person perspective of
an actor is an old problem; it is a version of what William
James named the psychologist’s fallacy. The fallacy is committed when a researcher assumes the validity of a particular description of what the subject is doing which may correspond poorly to the actual mechanisms involved. In particular, the subject may have a very different view of things from
the researcher.
2 I here assume that three-way relations are not possible, or else
must be reducible to a set of binary relations. I take it that if we allow
for the existence of higher-order relations then it becomes possible to
define a task at an arbitrary level of complexity (to describe the same
activity in an arbitrarily large numer of ways), and it again becomes
impossible to identify a single thing that constitutes the task.

129

This is illustrated by Martin Orne’s (1962) work on research subjects’ behaviour in hypnosis sessions. A question
that arises for hypnotists is: when patients behave as if they
are hypnotized, how does one know if they are really hypnotized? Might they not be perfectly aware but only simulating
hypnosis for some reason (to avoid embarrassment, for example)? To investigate this, Orne tried to trick his subjects:
he attempted to create the impression that the hypnotist had
left the room during the session and that the subject was no
longer being observed. A number of the subjects were convinced by this act and gave up the pretense that they had ever
been hypnotized: they began moving about or even got up
and wandered around the room. By doing so, they demonstrated clearly to an outside observer that they had in fact
been simulating all along. What this demonstrates is that it
is not sufficient for a psychologist to merely describe a situation as it appears from the outside: a third party observer may
be inclined to take at face value any behaviour that looks like
behaviour under hypnosis. Only by considering what the situation looks like from the point of view of the research subject
is it possible to assess whether the third-party description is a
valid one.
In what follows I have attempted to reserve the term task
for referring to the researcher-defined unit of study, and to
talk of the actor as acting or carrying out actions.

defined a task. Subsequently, whenever the relevant conditions obtain, we are justified in characterizing what is happening as an instance of that task.
Notice that these task descriptions also specify criteria for
successful completion of the task. The task is completed successfully if the ball is caught, if the car negotiates the bend
without disaster, and if the infant eventually learns to walk.
Furthermore, the fact that the task is defined as a precise reconfiguration of resources means that we also have a way of
assessing whether we can further apply the analysis of the
phenomenon under investigation to some novel phenomenon
that has not itself been studied. Thus, the analysis of ballcatching should apply for catching any projectile that follows
a parabolic trajectory through the air, but will not necessarily
extend to explain how frisbees are caught or how goalkeepers
in soccer move to stop bending free kicks.
It might be unclear whether learning can really be characterized as a task in the same way as the other activities. In
the case of learning to walk, it looks like what is happening is a local change within the infant. One may be tempted
to suggest that there is no reconfiguration of physical resources here—that the infant already has all of the necessary
resources to be able to walk, and that what is needed is really
a change in mental structure, which cannot be characterized
from the outside. This would be quite wrong, however. It
would be wrong partly for the obvious reason that any change
in mental structure must also be a change in physical structure somewhere. But more importantly, learning to walk is
not a process that occurs only inside the infant, but is one that
involves the entire animal-environment system. The infant
never exits the environment to practice in private. The way
infants learn to walk is by exhaustive trial and error: repeatedly trying a few steps before falling down and trying again
(Adolph et al., 2012). The falling down is part of the learning process, and the only way to tell whether one has fallen
down is by attending to information from the environment. If
what’s being reconfigured is the animal-environment system
and not just the animal, then the task of learning can in this
instance be characterized from the outside after all.

The task as a reconfiguration of resources
The discussion so far has attempted to identify what a task is
not: it is not an entity in an actor’s head, nor is it an arbitrary
description drawn directly from a psychologist’s intuitions.
We must now attempt a definition of what a task is.
The solution that ecological psychologists arrive at is to
define a task as a particular, characteristic reconfiguration of
resources. That is, the task should have a precisely defined
start and end point, and a recognizable mode of transition between the two. This is important because it provides a means
to unite different instances of a single phenomenon as being instances of the same task, and not just a disparate set
of individual things that happened. The word resources here
can be defined quite broadly; the purpose is to pick out any
component of the animal-environment system that is used as
an instrument in completing the task, or that changes in a
characteristic way over the course of the activity. This might
be a change in some object or other structure in the environment, or might be a change in the animal itself. Thus,
a ball-catching task is any instance of a catcher attempting
to locomote from some initial position to a position where
they can catch a ball which is following a parabolic trajectory
through the air. A steering task is any instance in which a
driver must control the motion of a car around a bend. And
the task of learning to walk is characterized by a change in
the infant, from being incapable of ambulating between one
standing position and another to being capable of doing so.
The claim is that if we can characterize a specific reconfiguration that happens somewhere in the system, then we have

Perhaps there are some activities that people engage in that
cannot be characterized from the outside, and thus must remain out of reach for a psychology committed to empirical
investigation based on the present definition of the task. An
operation carried out entirely ‘in the head’ may be one such
case. An example would be someone working through some
particular sum without then making the solution ‘external’ in
any way. Here the initial sum is being reconfigured into a
solution, but there appears to be no means by which a psychologist could measure the outcome, and thus no way of
charcterizing this from the outside as a task . This is certainly
a limitation, but then again it’s not clear why a psychologist
would want to study this kind of thing: why bother asking
people to work on sums if you are not going to check the answer in some way? Such operations carried out ‘in the head’
must remain elusive for empirical purposes, but this need not

130

necessarily be a source of great concern.
More likely is that we can identify some phenomenon informally that we’d like to define as a task, but which turns
out to be of such complexity that it’s unclear where to posit
a start and end point, or how to characterize what goes on in
between. This presents an important practical limit on current
empirical study, but also motivates the project of developing
better tools for characterizing a broader range of tasks.
A. D. Wilson and Golonka (2013) outline a four-point procedure for applying the task-oriented approach to the general
case: 1) identify the task: conduct a task analysis ‘which characterizes from a first person perspective the specific task that
a perceiving-acting cognitive agent is faced with’; 2) identify task-relevant resources available to the agent which can
potentially be assembled in the carrying out of the task; 3)
‘identify how the agent can assemble these resources into a
system capable of solving the problem at hand’; and 4) recruit research subjects and have them perform the activity in
order to test whether they do in fact carry it out in the fashion
identified in (3). Clearly step (1) is crucial: it is necessary to
define the task in a precise way at the outset if steps (2)-(4) are
to be possible. We are presently concerned with what is presupposed by the first step: what does it take for something to
count as a task? The suggestion is that the things we can characterize as tasks, and therefore the things we can study, are the
things where we can identify a characteristic reconfiguration
of resources with a clearly identifiable start and end point.
If this formulation of the task is a good one, we can hope
to be able to use it to extend the scope of the task-oriented
approach beyond phenomena of the ball-catching type to encompass more complex activities.

Might it be useful to define a task as a thing carried out by
the pair: the pair is the actor, and the task is what this pair
does? This does not seem plausible. An individual is an experiencing perceiver-actor—an organism that goes about perceiving invariant structure in order to control action. A group
of people is not an experiencing unit, and does not appear
to possess any means of controlling its own actions, except
through the actions of the individuals that make up the group.
In the rowing example, then, there must be two tasks. That
is, we can define what is going on as two individuals each carrying out their own task. For one rower the task might be to
set the pace and to carry out equally-spaced strokes with their
oar, while for the other rower the task may be to match the
first stroke-for-stroke, applying equal force on the opposite
side of the boat. In this example, the pair will either succeed
or not depending on whether or not the two rowers are able
to coordinate their respective activities. But the apparent success of the pair is really a consequence of individual success
on the part of the second rower. Of course, in reality things
may not be so simple: the first rower may actively coordinate
with the second, instead of merely setting the pace and letting the second do all the work of maintaining coordination.
But the point is that as long as the individual tasks are defined
in an appropriate way, there is no need to appeal to any additional process at the group level. The group level activity
should already be defined in the individual tasks.
And to reiterate, the individual tasks are not private processes going on in the heads of the actors, but processes that
span the animal-environment system. The distinguishing feature of a task that’s carried out with others is that the environment happens to contain other animals who are also producing structure that is relevant to the task at hand.

Acting with other actors
Rationale for the task-oriented approach

A particularly acute test of the methodology will be how well
it can be applied to activities involving more than one actor.
This presents a notorious set of difficulties for psychologists
working in the brain-oriented tradition: if action is the output of mental process, how can it be that some actions appear
to be carried out by multiple actors? Cognitivists have attempted to resolve this by appealing to various mechanisms,
including internal prediction processes, mirror mechanisms
that are held to transmit mental content by contagion, and
group minds (Sebanz, Bekkering, & Knoblich, 2006).
The task-oriented approach does not encounter this difficulty, because it does not posit that behaviour is the result of
operations in a distinct mental realm. But there remains some
ambiguity to be resolved. If a task is a third-person device for
describing a first-person activity, what then are we to make
of actions that are carried out by multiple individuals? If two
people are rowing a boat together, how many tasks are there?
Well, since the task on the present definition is a descriptive
device rather than an aspect of reality to be discovered, the
question is ill-formed: there isn’t any pre-existing number of
tasks to be untangled. The number of tasks there are depends
on how we choose to define what constitutes a task.

Psychology has in recent history been defined as the science
of mind, brain, and behaviour, or some combination of those
three things. In any case, the unit of analysis is always taken
to be the individual organism. Tasks have thus been understood as things that psychologists get subjects to do merely
as a proximate source of data about the real phenomena hidden in the head. What reason could there be to give up on this
formulation and to instead carve up the problem space into
individual tasks, making the task the main unit of analysis?
An important rationale for the task-oriented approach
comes from work on learning. Learning in infancy is shown
to be thoroughly context-dependent, the child’s general abilities arising out of immediate experience with local problems
(Thelen & Smith, 1994). This context-dependency applies
across a wide array of different activities, and at different
points of development. One example comes from how infants
learn to negotiate slopes when they are crawling versus when
they have begun to walk. Crawling infants initially attempt
to descend a slope head-first, even if the slope is too steep to
negotiate. Through further exploration these children gradually learn to adapt their approach to slopes and will become

131

increasingly cautious when faced with a steep descent. This
cautiousness does not, however, transfer straightaway to the
new task of walking: infants who have newly begun to walk
are once again unable to perceive that a slope does not afford
walking down and will attempt to descend when encouraged
by an experimenter. This happens even though the same infants are perfectly capable of perceiving that the slope does
not afford descent if they are placed in a crawling position at
the top of the same slope (Adolph, Eppler, & Gibson, 1993).
In a sense, the transition from crawling to walking means that
the infant has to learn what its environment means all over
again.
Thelen and Smith (1994) cite further examples of contextspecific learning, including work on the ‘shape bias’ in children’s object-naming, which is a phenomenon that emerges
when children are specifically asked to name objects but not
when they are merely asked to match objects with ‘similar’ targets; that is, the shape bias is dependent on the context of the experimenter’s demands (Smith, Jones, & Landau,
1996). A similar context-dependent process is observed in
normal language learning, in which children appear to initially use any given verb in only a handful of specific syntactic structures—the so-called ‘verb island’. Only later do they
begin to generalize, using novel verbs in syntactic structures
where they have not previously been used (Tomasello, 2000).
And this task-specificity in learning does not appear be
unique to young children. Evidence for similar contextspecificity in later life learning comes from studies of brain
training products which claim to promote improvement in
general cognitive abilities. These studies have shown that although users of these products improve at the specific activities that are performed as part of the ‘training’ regime, there
is no evidence that this learning transfers to novel activities
(Owen et al., 2010).
So learning is context-specific, and thus one rationale for
doing psychology one task at a time is that this does in fact
appear to correspond to how we learn things. But doesn’t this
suggest that tasks are, after all, genuine components of the
system, and not merely analyst-defined units? Tasks are the
things we learn to do? No. This is just another confusion of
description and reality. Contexts, like tasks, are not naturally
distinct from one another. It’s only when we look in from the
outside that we can divide things up in this way. From the
perspective of the learner, there is no thing which constitutes
the context of the present, there is only the present, which is
continuous with everything else the learner does. The point
is only that the task-oriented description scheme may better
correspond to reality than the brain-oriented scheme.
A further rationale comes from empirical success. The
task-oriented approach has in fact been shown to produce hypotheses that better correspond to reality than those generated
by the alternative general problem-solving approach. To return to the ball-catching example, the task-oriented approach
here treats this as a problem to be solved by the catcher in a
simple way: the catcher maintains visual attention upon the

ball in flight in such a way that the ball appears to follow a
linear path up and down (McBeath, Shaffer, & Kaiser, 1995).
This predicts that the catcher will run in a curved line to intercept the ball, in contrast to the general problem solving
approach which predicts that the catcher will perform an internal calculation in order to work out the optimal place to run
to and will run to that spot in a straight line. In fact, catchers
do follow a curved path before catching the ball, lending empirical support to the task-oriented hypothesis and suggesting
that the internal-calculation hypothesis is false (A. D. Wilson
& Golonka, 2013).
A final rationale here is a rationale from usefulness. Applied fields exist to solve practical problems. We’ll take
speech language therapy as an example. This field is not
organized around the question of how speech is organized
in the brain but around what can be done in practice to improve patients’ speech in a measurable way. Treating children with articulation disorders is, for the speech therapist, a
two-part task consisting of firstly improving the child’s articulation of specific sounds, and secondly improving the child’s
systematic use of those sounds so that the child’s improved
pronunciation can be generalized to novel words and not just
to the words they have already practiced (Gierut, 1998). This
particular treatment technique uses precisely a task-oriented
approach, on the present definition. Treating an articulation
problem as a task to be solved is useful, and even a necessary
pre-requisite for devising an effective treatment methodology.

Final definition: what is a task?
The discussion in the preceding sections allows us to state the
following as a definition of a task.
A task is an analyst-defined unit that corresponds to a
recognizable reconfiguration of resources in an animalenvironment system, which:
1. is meaningful from a first person perspective; it
presents opportunities to act and constrains possible
solutions,
2. can be defined precisely, has a start and end point,
and a transition between them, that can all be directly
observed,
3. specifies criteria for successful completion,
4. specifies conditions under which conclusions can be
generalized to similar tasks.
I’ll here address a couple of possible objections to the taskoriented approach. Firstly, if the objective is to study individual tasks one at a time, isn’t this just massive modularity by
another name? No. Massive modularity, like Fodor’s nonmassive version, still appeals to modules in the brain that are
not directly observable. The task-oriented approach by contrast, is concerned with disruptions of physical resources that
can in principle be measured directly: the physical resources
are the task; they are not measured as a proxy for investigating a hypothetical construct in the brain.

132

Acknowledgements

Secondly, if the task-oriented approach is all about coming
up with useful characterizations of specific, circumscribed
phenomena, that’s all well and good, but it can never lead
to a complete picture, either of how the brain works or of
how the animal-environment system works. I think this objection is perfectly valid, except that it characterizes as a limitation what could equally be seen as a strength. The strength
is that the task-oriented approach leads to immediately useful
conclusions. By contrast, suppose we had a perfect model
of the brain, assuming such a thing to be possible. That
model would be a monumental scientific achievement, but it
would still only be useful for solving particular questions we
might ask it—that is, for addressing specific tasks. The taskoriented approach is a means of not having to wait for that
model to be finished, it is a tool for solving practical problems in the present. In fact, this is a similar conclusion to
the one Fodor (1983) arrived at. Modularity, it was hoped,
might work as a methodological tool for studying peripheral
input systems such as language and vision, but it cannot give
an account of central cognition or thinking: ‘The ghost has
been chased further back into the machine, but it has not been
exorcised’.

I thank Holly Branigan and Jon Oberlander for their comments.

References
Adolph, K. E., Cole, W. G., Komati, M., Garciaguirre, J. S.,
Badaly, D., Lingeman, J. M., et al. (2012). How do you
learn to walk? Thousands of steps and dozens of falls per
day. Psychological Science, 23(11), 1387–1394.
Adolph, K. E., Eppler, M. A., & Gibson, E. J. (1993).
Crawling versus walking infants’ perception of affordances
for locomotion over sloping surfaces. Child Development,
64(4), 1158–1174.
Fodor, J. A. (1983). The modularity of mind. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.
Gierut, J. A. (1998). Treatment efficacy: Functional phonological disorders in children. Journal of Speech, Language
and Hearing Research, 41(1), S85.
McBeath, M., Shaffer, D., & Kaiser, M. (1995). How baseball outfielders determine where to run to catch fly balls.
Science, 268(5210), 569-573.
Menary, R. (Ed.). (2010). The extended mind. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: The MIT Press.
Michaels, C. F., & Carello, C. (1981). Direct perception.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Orne, M. (1962). On the social psychology of the psychological experiment: With particular reference to demand characteristics and their implications. American Psychologist,
17(11), 776–783.
Owen, A. M., Hampshire, A., Grahn, J. A., Stenton, R., Dajani, S., Burns, A. S., et al. (2010). Putting brain training
to the test. Nature, 465(7299), 775–778.
Ryle, G. (1949). The concept of mind. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Sebanz, N., Bekkering, H., & Knoblich, G. (2006). Joint
action: bodies and minds moving together. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10(2), 70–76.
Shapiro, L. (2011). Embodied cognition. London: Routledge.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., & Landau, B. (1996). Naming in
young children: a dumb attentional mechanism? Cognition, 60(2), 143–171.
Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1994). A dynamic systems approach to the development of cognition and action. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Tomasello, M. (2000). The item-based nature of children’s
early syntactic development. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
4(4), 156–163.
Wilson, A. D., & Golonka, S. (2013). Embodied cognition is
not what you think it is. Frontiers in Psychology, 4(58).
Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(4), 625–636.

I’ll make one final point. A current debate in cognitive science opposes a traditional symbol-manipulating disembodied
view of cognition with various purportedly embodied alternatives (M. Wilson, 2002; Shapiro, 2011). Or more exotically, the view of the mind as an internal property of an organism is opposed to the ‘extended mind’ which is said to
span brain, body, and environment (Menary, 2010). These
debates make a dichotomy in the ontological claims supposedly made by two incompatible camps. This frequently leads
to fruitless discussions on the question of what we should
call ‘cognitive’: can external symbols constitute mental content or must mental content be confined to the head? In
the present paper I have emphasized a different kind of dichotomy, on methodological rather than ontological lines,
between a brain-oriented and a task-oriented approach to
doing empirical psychology. I suggest that this difference
in methodology is real and unambiguous, and that the dichotomy is a useful one. Making the dichotomy on methodological lines allows us to concentrate not on what our ultimate model should look like, but on how to make empirical
progress towards it by investigating real phenomena that we
are interested in.
The case in favour of the task-oriented approach ultimately
rests on its usefulness. The approach may serve as a useful
general framework for psychological study, if the concept of
a task can be defined in a precise way. The present discussion
suggests that it can be, and further proposes that the task is
a viable solution to Fodor’s problem of how psychological
research can be organized. The challenge that arises is the
following. If we want to study psychology in a tractable way,
we have a choice between two options: there are modules,
and there are tasks.

133

