UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Psychophysics of Algebra Expertise: Mathematics Perceptual Learning Interventions
Produce Durable Encoding Changes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/99s2g1p3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Bufford, Carolyn
Mettler, Everett
Geller, Emma
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Psychophysics of Algebra Expertise: Mathematics Perceptual Learning
Interventions Produce Durable Encoding Changes
Carolyn A. Bufford (cabufford@g.ucla.edu)
Everett Mettler (mettler@ucla.edu)
Emma H. Geller (ehgeller@ucla.edu)
Philip J. Kellman (kellman@psych.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, 405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA

Goldstone, 2007). PL is not addressed systematically by
conventional instructional methods. In mathematics, PL
may develop over time and experience with the materials
(rather than through direct instruction); however, students
encounter many obstacles to effective PL due to infrequent
opportunities to explicitly focus on the structural patterns
that signal which concepts and procedures can be applied.

Abstract
Mathematics requires thinking but also pattern recognition.
Recent research indicates that perceptual learning (PL)
interventions facilitate discovery of structure and recognition
of patterns in mathematical domains, as assessed by tests
of mathematical competence. Here we sought direct evidence
that a brief perceptual learning module (PLM) produces
changes in basic information extraction. Accuracy and speed
of undergraduate participants’ encoding of equations was
assessed in a psychophysical task at pretest and delayed
posttest. In between, the experimental group completed
an Algebraic Transformations PLM, which involved
identifying valid transformations of equations. Relative to
controls, PLM participants showed reliable changes in
encoding equations, detectable psychophysically 24 hours
later. Encoding improvements were shown robustly by
participants who were initially less proficient at algebra and
were negligible for participants who were initially proficient.
These results provide direct evidence for durable changes in
information encoding produced by a PL intervention targeting
a complex mathematical skill.

Previous Research
Recent PL research has revealed a great deal about the
conditions under which such learning occurs (for a review,
see Kellman & Garrigan, 2009). Kellman & colleagues have
incorporated principles of PL into learning interventions
aimed at accelerating PL in complex cognitive domains
(Kellman, 2013; Kellman & Kaiser, 1994; Kellman et al.,
2010). Perceptual learning modules (PLMs) involve short
and varied classification trials with feedback; they can be
enhanced by using adaptive learning techniques that arrange
spacing and mastery criteria in learning based on both
accuracy and reaction times (Mettler & Kellman, 2013;
Mettler, Massey, & Kellman, 2011). In an Algebraic
Transformations PLM (Kellman et al., 2010), eighth and
ninth graders in Algebra I classes at mid-year mapped target
equations to legal transformations among distractor illegal
transformations but did not practice solving equations.
Pretest and posttests tested both the mathematical
transformation task used in the PLM and transfer to algebra
equation solving. These students had acquired a good basic
grasp of algebra concepts and procedures before the PLM,
as evidenced by 80% average accuracy in solving simple
equations such as X + 8 = 12 on the pretest, but they were
poor at seeing structure and potential transformations of
equations, taking around 28 seconds per problem. After two
35-40 minute sessions with the PLM, students solved
equations markedly faster, reducing their solving time by
more than 55% to about 12 s, a gain that was fully
maintained at a two-week delay. Characteristics of both the
intervention and the results implicated perceptual learning
as the cause of the improvement in students’ performance
(Kellman et al., 2010). Students were not explicitly taught
any new rules or principles of algebra in the PLM, nor did
they practice solving problems, yet practice at seeing
transformations increased their problem-solving efficiency.

Keywords: Perceptual learning; mathematics learning;
perception and education; psychophysics

Introduction
How do students in an algebra class differ from their teacher
in solving problems? What cognitive changes must occur
for students to become proficient? Typical answers would
be that the teacher knows and imparts to students facts,
concepts and procedures. But the teacher also sees algebraic
structures and representations differently. A primary driver
of expertise in mathematics and many domains is perceptual
learning (PL) – domain specific changes in the extraction of
information (Gibson, 1969; Kellman & Massey, 2013). A
well-known example is that chess masters more effectively
encode structure in board positions than do novices (Chase
& Simon, 1973). More generally, it has been argued
(Kellman, 2002) that PL produces a variety of effects that
fall into two categories: 1) discovery effects, such that
information pickup becomes more selective, and perceivers
discover new relationships, and 2) fluency effects, including
faster encoding and reduced cognitive load (Kellman, 2002;
Kellman & Garrigan, 2009). Recent work suggests that PL
plays an important role in high-level cognitive domains,
even symbolic ones such as mathematics (e.g., Kellman &
Massey, 2013; Kellman, Massey, & Son, 2010; Landy &

272

These results complement others showing the importance
of seeing in mathematics learning (Kulp et al., 2004; Landy
& Goldstone, 2007; Ottmar, Landy, & Goldstone, 2012).
That the relevant encoding and pattern extraction skills can
be accelerated by PLMs appears to be true across many
learning domains (Kellman & Kaiser, 1994; Kellman et al.,
2008; Krasne, Hillman, Kellman, & Drake, in press). These
results have shown large effect sizes and gains that persist
over substantial delays (Drake et al., in press; Kellman et
al., 2010; Massey et al., 2010; Mettler & Kellman, 2013).
Assessments of PLMs’ efficacy have typically focused on
domain-relevant tasks, such as math problem solving.
Because PLMs aim at improving information extraction,
it is interesting to ask whether learners who have used
PLMs in complex tasks show measurable, lasting changes in
basic encoding of information, as measured using
psychophysical methods. After a PLM focusing on seeing
transformations in algebra, for example, one might observe
not only improved mathematics performance, but also
improved speed or accuracy of encoding, comparison, or
discrimination of mathematical objects.
One study (Thai, Mettler, & Kellman, 2011) examined
basic information extraction consequences of a PL
intervention on an immediate posttest. The authors trained
Chinese-illiterate participants on two PLMs involving
Chinese characters. On each trial, learners selected which of
two characters shared either a feature (radical) or the overall
structure (configuration) of a target character. Completing a
PLM produced significant improvement in visual search
relative to controls, and the particular kinds of improvement
observed depended on which PLM (feature or structure)
each learner had completed.

improved abilities to rapidly compare equations when tested
24 hours later. For this study, we used an undergraduate
population, all of whom had previous classroom experience
with and have demonstrated competence in algebra (“Profile
of Admitted Freshmen” – UCLA, 2013). It was possible that
encoding abilities relevant to algebraic transformations
would be quite advanced in this subject group, such that a
brief PLM intervention might not produce any further
improvements. Thus we hypothesized that students who
demonstrated less initial algebra mastery would have had
more room for improvement in their algebra skills and
therefore were predicted to have been more likely to show
effects of perceptual learning.

Methods
Participants
Students (n = 51, 9 males) in undergraduate psychology
courses at the University of California, Los Angeles
participated for course credit. Eleven additional participants
were excluded because of i) experimenter procedural errors
(6), ii) failure to take posttest (1), and iii) various forms of
noncompliance (4), such as rapid, random responding
during the psychophysical task or PLM or failure to wear
needed corrective lenses.

Design
We used a pretest-posttest design. Participants in both
Learning and Control conditions completed an equationsolving assessment and the psychophysical task at pretest
and completed the psychophysical task in a posttest given
24 hours later. The Learning Group participated in an
Algebraic Transformations PLM immediately following the
pretest. The Control Group checked for test/retest effects in
the psychophysical task. The experiment was web-delivered
on computer workstations using a standard browser.

Current Study
Here we sought to find evidence for durable changes in
information encoding and sensitivity to structure in a
mathematical domain. We used the Algebraic
Transformations PLM previously employed by Kellman et
al. (2010), because it showed strong mathematics PL effects
in classroom settings.
A difficulty in looking for basic encoding changes after
use of a high-level, domain-specific PLM is that we do not
initially know what kinds of changes to look for. The visual
search task used by Thai et al. (2011) would be impractical
for algebra. We do know that the Algebraic Transformations
PLM (Kellman et al., 2010) focuses on students’ processing
of relations and transformations. It could lead to more rapid
or accurate encoding of equations or their parts, chunking,
and/or improved comparison abilities. One could instead
look for improved discrimination of numerals or characters
such as x or y, but this seems less intuitively connected to
equation structure or transformation. We note that the
choice of a task to detect particular encoding changes was
made intuitively from a large set of possibilities.
We developed a psychophysical task involving speeded
judgment of two simultaneously presented equations as
same or different. We predicted that participants who
completed the PLM would show some evidence of

Algebra Equation-Solving Assessment The point of the
algebra equation-solving assessment was to evaluate
students’ initial algebra ability. Participants solved for the
variable in ten simple one-variable equations. One of the
most complex equations was (5w)/3 = 8+2. Instructions
specified that participants use decimal form and that they
could use a pen and scratch paper, but no calculators.
Psychophysical Task On each trial, participants viewed a
briefly presented pair of equations and made a forced choice
of whether they were physically identical (“match”) or
whether they differed in any way (“mismatch”). We used
the method of constant stimuli, testing 24 trials at each of 5
presentation durations that were spaced according to a
geometric series (200, 336, 564, 948 and 1593 ms). The
lowest and highest values were aimed to capture
presentation times at which performance was expected to be
at or near chance, and at or near ceiling, respectively.
Equation pairs were presented in a single line of text with
blank space between them. The equations were presented in
black text on a white rectangle. Viewed from 3 feet away,
equations had visual angles of 4.1 deg in width and 36 min
in height, with a space between equations of 1.6 deg. At the

273

onset of each trial, participants viewed a white fixation cross
(1.5 deg) centered on a black background in the center of
the screen for one second. Participants were shown labeled
response keys for match (‘z’) and mismatch (‘>’). Equations
appeared where the fixation cross had been. Participants
could respond as soon as they felt ready. At the end of the
presentation duration, equations were replaced by a randomdot mask sized to just cover the equation rectangle. Once
participants responded, the next trial began immediately or
the participant was shown an end-of-block screen.
To create equation pairs, we generated three-term linear
equations involving addition or subtraction, e.g. 13+27=5m.
From each of these, we created systematic variations (not
mathematical transformations) that were visually similar,
e.g. 13=27+5m. From each original equation and its
variations, we created four match and four mismatch pairs.
Pairs were randomly assigned to blocks of eight, such that
blocks had four match (and four mismatch) pairs with only
one pair from an original equation.
For each participant at each test time, fifteen of the 32
blocks were randomly selected, ordered, and assigned
presentation durations. Order of pairs (trials) within each
block was also randomized. Trials in a block had the same
duration, and three blocks were assigned to each duration,
producing 24 trials per presentation duration. On rare
occasions, a program error caused a trial to be repeated
within a testing session; these repeated trials were removed
from the data set (approximately 0.2% of trials).

both groups were given the same pretest: the equationsolving assessment followed by the psychophysical equation
match-mismatch task. Control Group participants were
released. Immediately after the pretest, the Learning Group
worked on the PLM until reaching termination criteria,
before being released. All participants returned the next day
for the posttest.
Psychophysical Task Participants read instructions and
continued through the five practice trials and all fifteen
blocks of the match-mismatch task. On any trial, if the
participant did not respond within 2 seconds of the mask
onset, then text appeared prompting participants to respond.
PLM Intervention Learning Group participants remained
after the pretests for the PLM intervention. They were given
a brief introduction to the PLM. Participants were informed
that their accuracy and reaction time would be tracked, so
random guessing would not help them complete the PLM.
Once participants achieved mastery criteria, they saw a
congratulatory screen and were released. Participants who
did not reach mastery were released at the end of a total of
two hours of pretesting and PLM participation. All but 3
participants completed the module to mastery.
Posttest The psychophysical (match mismatch) task was
administered again, one day later.

PLM Intervention Learning Group participants used a
current version of the Algebraic Transformations PLM
previously studied by Kellman et al. (2010). Most trials
consisted of equation-mapping trials, in which a target
equation was shown at the top of the screen and participants
were asked to select the legal algebraic transformation of
that target from four options: three distracters and one legal
transformation, as in Figure 1. There were eight subtypes
within equation-mapping trials, including easy and hard
questions involving each of the arithmetic transformations:
addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. Equation
mapping trials were always followed by simple feedback,
indicating whether the participant’s answer was correct or
incorrect, and highlighting the correct answer as needed.
It is important to note that no trials in the PLM resembled
the trials in the psychophysical task trials; in other words,
the PLM provided no practice in deciding on a physical
match of two equations under conditions of restricted
presentation time; thus, effects of PLM use on the
psychophysical task would be transfer effects, providing
insight into deeper encoding changes produced by the PLM.
PLM use continued for each participant until he or she
achieved objective mastery criteria; these combined
accuracy across successive trials, under a criterion response
time for each type of transformation.

Figure 1: Screen shot of an equation-mapping trial in the
Algebraic Transformations PLM, showing feedback.

Dependent Measures and Analyses
Equation-Solving Assessment We measured accuracy in
terms of score (number correct trials out of 10), and
response time on correct trials for the equation-solving
assessment. Performance on this assessment was used to
split participants into High- and Low-Ability groups for
ability-based analyses on the psychophysical task.
Psychophysical Task We analyzed proportion correct at
each presentation duration for the psychophysical task at
pretest and posttest in each group. (We also fit psychometric
functions to these data using logistic functions with
maximum likelihood fitting, but those analyses, while
consistent with the data reported here, provided little
additional information and are omitted here.)
We also conducted analyses for each ability group, to test
our hypothesis about how students with lower initial algebra
ability would show stronger PL effects.

Procedures
Participants were randomly assigned to either the Learning
Group or the Control Group. On the first day of the study,

274

We planned comparisons of i) Learning Group pretest and
posttest accuracy at each duration and ii) change in accuracy
across conditions (Learning versus Control) using difference
scores (accuracy change = posttest accuracy – pretest
accuracy). T-tests were all two-tailed.
PLM Intervention The PLM program recorded accuracies
and reaction times for each trial, total time and total number
of trials.

Further analyses focused on the middle three presentation
times. Figure 2 illustrates the full results. The Learning
Group improved more on the match-mismatch task from
pretest to posttest than the Control Group at longer
presentation durations. A condition (Control, Learning) x
test time (pretest, posttest) x presentation duration (336 ms,
564 ms, 948 ms) repeated-measures ANOVA on raw
accuracy confirmed a trending 3-way interaction, Pillai’s
trace1 F(2,48)=3.149, p=.052. There were also main effects
of test time, F(1,49)= 14.091, p<.001, ηp2=.223, and
presentation duration F(1,49)=94.021, p<.001, ηp2=.797.
There were no other reliable main effects or interactions.
Planned comparisons at each presentation duration
showed that the Learning Group was more accurate at
posttest than pretest, and this difference was reliable at the
948 ms duration, t(25)=-4.122, p<.001. At 948 ms, the
Learning Group had a significantly greater increase in
accuracy than the Control Group, p=.046. No other planned
comparisons had reliable results.

Results
Equation-Solving Assessment
We gave the equation-solving assessment to identify
participants more likely to show learning effects.
Participants were split into High- and Low-Ability Groups
based on a median split regardless of condition assignment.
This procedure yielded a Low-Ability Group of 26
participants (nLearning=11, nControl=15) and a High-Ability
Group of 25 participants (nLearning=14, nControl=11).

PLM Intervention
Overall, the Learning Group spent an average of 30.2
minutes (median = 21.4 minutes) on an average of 141.9
trials (median = 110 trials) in the PLM. As predicted, ability
groups differed on both time and number of trials in the
PLM, such that the Low-Ability Group required more
practice on the PLM to reach mastery than the High-Ability
Group: the Low-Ability Group (̅=46.0 minutes) spent a
significantly longer time training on the PLM than the HighAbility Group (̅=17.8 minutes), F(1,23)=11.04, p=.003,
ηp2=.324. The Low-Ability Group (̅=180.9) also required
significantly more trials than the High-Ability Group
(̅=105.8), F(1,23)=9.88, p=.005, ηp2=.300. Three students
did not reach mastery; on average they retired about half of
the categories, spending an average of 87.5 minutes 325.7
trials. All three were in the Low-Ability Group. Comparing
ability groups on the PLM without these three reduces the
time and trial differences between groups, but the
differences and are still reliable. These participants were
included in further analyses.

Figure 2: Average accuracy as a function of presentation
duration (x-axis), test time (bars), and condion (panels).
Error bars indicate standard errors of the mean.

Psychophysical Task

Low-Ability Group Splitting students into Low-Ability and
High-Ability Groups based on their equation-solving
assessment revealed that almost all the improvements in
encoding occurred in the Low-Ability Group, as shown in
Figure 3. The Low-Ability participants in the Learning
Group showed reliably greater increases in accuracy than
Low-Ability participants in the Control Group, especially
for longer presentation durations. This pattern of results was
confirmed by a two-way repeated-measures ANOVA of
condition and presentation duration on accuracy change
(difference scores). There was a significant two-way
interaction, F(2,23)=5.29, p=.013, ηp2=.315, such that at
948ms the Learning Group increased their accuracy while

We tested durations aimed at capturing a full range of
accuracies from floor to ceiling because we did not know a
priori in what part of the range we might find PL effects.
Results showed that the shortest (200 ms) and longest (1593
ms) presentation durations were effective at capturing the
low and high ends of the range, such that they showed clear
floor and ceiling effects. The shortest presentation duration
of 200 ms showed a floor effect or chance accuracy (pretest
proportion correct = .51, posttest = .54). The longest
presentation duration, 1593 ms, produced pretest accuracy
of .87 and posttest accuracy of .88. Consistent with
occasional accidental key presses and lapses in attention,
these values were considered to be at or near a theoretical
ceiling of about .90 accuracy.

1
All match-mismatch analyses report Pillai’s trace, which is
robust to assumption violations.

275

the Control Group did not, and performance was not
different across groups at the other durations. There were no
reliable main effects.
Planned comparisons of Learning Group accuracy at
pretest and posttest revealed a significant increase in
accuracy at 948 ms, t(10)=-3.06, p=.012. Comparisons of
accuracy change confirmed that at 948 ms the Learning
Group increased their accuracy significantly more than the
Control Group, t(24)=2.70, p=.011. Other planned
comparisons were not reliable.
High-Ability Group High-Ability participants in the
Learning Group showed no benefit of the PLM intervention
relative to the Control Group. This was confirmed by a twoway repeated-measures ANOVA of condition and
presentation duration on accuracy change. There were no
reliable main effects or interactions.
Planned comparisons of Learning Group pretest and
posttest accuracy revealed a significant gain in accuracy at
948 ms (̅pre=.76, SEpre=.03; ̅post=.83, SEpost=.02), t(13)=2.709, p=.018, but there were no reliable differences in
accuracy change across conditions (Learning, Control).
The different pattern of results for each ability group
cannot be explained by preexisting differences on the
psychophysical task: a three-way ANOVA of ability group
and condition and presentation duration on pretest accuracy
revealed no reliable main effects or interactions involving
ability group or condition.

current results, however, show that PLM interventions in
math induce at least some basic, durable encoding changes.
These initial findings are also striking in that undergraduate
participants all had extensive previous algebra exposure and
competence. All took college entrance examinations and
were admitted in a highly competitive admissions process.
On the SAT Reasoning Test, freshmen who enrolled at
UCLA in the fall of 2013 had an average Math Section
score of 654 out of 800 (“Profile of Admitted Freshmen” –
UCLA, 2013). 74% of freshmen scored at least 600 – at or
above the 74th percentile of test takers (The College Board,
2014). Despite substantial experience with algebra and
higher mathematics, a mere 30 minutes on the PLM
significantly increased their accuracy in extracting equation
structure in a relatively enduring way.

Discussion
College students demonstrated significantly improved
encoding of mathematical objects at a 24-hour delay after a
brief perceptual learning intervention. The same level of
improvement was not shown by a Control Group. These
results indicate that even a relatively brief PL intervention
can lead to durable changes in basic information extraction,
detectable using psychophysical methods.
These results are remarkable, in several ways. One is that
these results appear to be the first evidence of specific
encoding changes produced by the use of a high-level
mathematics learning intervention. After use of the PLM,
learners showed encoding improvements that were manifest
in the initial second of contact with new mathematical
expressions. We found these effects using a psychophysical
task in which participants simply judged whether or not two
briefly presented equations were physically identical. This
task was quite different from mapping transformations, over
much longer time periods, that participants performed in the
PLM. Second, we detected these changes after a 24-hour
delay, indicating that these are not transient effects.
Conceivably, resulting changes in information encoding
could have been at other levels, such as in discrimination of
elementary symbols or characters, or in more complex
perceptual recognition of shifting or alteration of specific
terms in algebraic transformations. Indeed, there may also
be encoding improvements on tasks such as these. The

Figure 3: Average accuracy change as a function of
presentation duration (x-axis), condition (bars), and ability
group (panels) using difference scores. Error bars indicate ±
one standard error of the mean.
The results in this study were modest for the Learning
Group as a whole but robust for students who showed lower
algebra proficiency at pretest. This pattern suggests that
students with high initial algebra performance were already
at or near mastery, at least as defined by the learning criteria
in the Algebraic Transformations PLM (Kellman et al.,
2010); they required little learning or practice to complete
the PLM and thus did not show the learning effect. The
results for the lower proficiency participants, however,
indicates that a PLM intervention designed for middle or
early high school students may improve basic encoding
even among university students. It is likely that even greater
PL-induced changes in basic information extraction may be
detectable in younger or less proficient students. This is an
important topic for future research.
The application of psychophysical methods to complex
cognitive domains, such as mathematics, seems unusual,

276

even anomalous. Searching for, and finding, changes in
information encoding in mathematics learning, for example,
may be understood in terms of important connections
among perception, PL, cognition, and learning (Kellman &
Massey, 2013), but more typically perception and complex
cognitive tasks have often been considered to have little
relation. As a variety of recent work suggests, perception of
relational structure, and its improvement through PL, is a
primary component of learning and expertise in high-level
domains, moreso than has been generally recognized in
research or implemented in instruction (Kellman & Massey,
2013). In future work, combining psychophysical and new
instructional methods may lead to revealing synergies in
understanding and optimizing mechanisms of learning.
In sum, we found direct evidence of durable encoding
changes due to PL in mathematics: perceptual learning
increases the accuracy of speeded equation comparisons. PL
interventions have already shown strong benefits in
notoriously hard parts of mathematics learning (Kellman et
al., 2010; Massey, Kellman, Roth, & Burke, 2011), as well
as in other domains (Kellman, 2013; Krasne et al., in press).
The present results open a door to a more detailed
understanding of the aspects of learning, even in complex,
symbolic tasks, that advance via attunements and
improvements in the pickup of information. Progress in
exploring these components of learning, and their relations
to equally important declarative and procedural aspects of
learning, may offer great potential for addressing chronic
problems in STEM learning and revealing missing links in
theory and instruction.

Kellman, P.J. & Kaiser, M.K. (1994). Perceptual learning
modules in flight training. Proceedings of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society, 38(18), 1183-1187.
Kellman, P.J., Massey, C., Roth, Z., Burke, T., Zucker, J.,
Saw, A., Aguero, K.E., & Wise, J. A. (2008). Perceptual
learning and the technology of expertise: Studies in
fraction learning and algebra. Pragmatics & Cognition,
16(2), 356-405.
Kellman, P.J., Massey, C.M., & Son, J. (2010). Perceptual
learning modules in mathematics: Enhancing students'
pattern recognition, structure extraction, and fluency.
Topics in Cognitive Science, 2(2), 285-305.
Krasne, S., Hillman, J.D., Kellman, P.J., & Drake, T.A. (in
press). Applying perceptual and adaptive learning
techniques to introductory histopathology for medical
students. Journal of Pathology Informatics.
Kulp, M.T., Earley, M.J., Mitchell, G.L., Timmerman,
L.M., Frasco, C.S., & Geiger, M.E. (2004). Are visual
perceptual skills related to mathematics ability in second
through sixth grade children?. Focus on Learning
Problems in Mathematics 26(4).
Landy, D., & Goldstone, R.L. (2007). How abstract is
symbolic thought? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33(4), 720-733.
Massey, C.M., Kellman, P.J., Roth, Z, & Burke T. (2011).
Perceptual learning and adaptive learning technology:
Developing new approaches to mathematics learning in
the classroom. In Stein, N.L. (Ed.), Developmental and
learning sciences go to school. NY: Taylor & Francis.
Mettler, E.M. & Kellman, P.J. (2013). Adaptive responsetime based category sequencing in perceptual learning.
Vision Research, [epub ahead of print].
Mettler, E.M., Massey, C.M. & Kellman, P.J. (2011).
Improving adaptive learning technology through the use
of response times. In L. Carlson, C. Holscher, & T.
Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, (pp. 25322537). Boston, MA: Cognitive Science Society.
Ottmar, E., Landy, D., & Goldstone, R.L. (2012). Teaching
the perceptual structure of algebraic expressions:
Preliminary findings from the Pushing Symbols
intervention. In N. Miyake, D. Peebles, & R.P. Cooper
(Eds.) Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2156-2161). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Profile of admitted freshmen fall 2013. (2013). (UCLA)
(http://www.admissions.ucla.edu/Prospect/Adm_fr/Frosh
_Prof13.htm)
Thai, KP, Mettler, E, & Kellman, PJ (2011). Basic
information processing effects from perceptual learning in
complex, real-world domains. In L. Carlson, C. Holscher,
& T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 555560). Boston, MA: Cognitive Science Society.
The
College
Board.
(2014).
Retrieved
from
http://www.collegeboard.org

Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge support from NSF
REESE award #110922 and the US Department of
Education, Institute of Education Sciences (IES), Cognition
and Student Learning (CASL) Program awards
R305A120288 and R305H060070. We thank Hongjing Lu
and Christine Massey for helpful discussions, and Timothy
Burke, Joel Zucker, Rachel Older for expert assistance.

References
Chase, W., & Simon, H. (1973). Perception in
chess. Cognitive Psychology, 4, 55-81.
Drake, T., Krasne, S., Hillman, J., & Kellman P. (2013).
Applying perceptual and adaptive learning technique for
teaching introductory histopathology. Journal of
Pathology Informatics, 4(1), 34.
Gibson, E. (1969). Principles of perceptual learning and
development. NY: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Kellman, P.J. (2002). Perceptual learning. In R Gallistel
(Ed.), Stevens’ Hdbk. of Exp. Psych., 3rd edition, Vol. 3
(Learning, motivation and emotion), John Wiley & Sons.
Kellman, P.J. (2013). Adaptive and perceptual learning
technologies in medical education and training. Military
Medicine, 178(1), 98-106.
Kellman, P.J. & Garrigan, P.B. (2009). Perceptual learning
and human expertise. Physics of Life Review, 6(2), 53-84.

277

