UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Equiprobability Bias in the Monty Hall Dilemma: A Comparison of Primary School,
Secondary School, and University Students

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1m13f1pf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Saenen, Lore
Heyvaert, Mieke
Grosemans, Ilke
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Equiprobability Bias in the Monty Hall Dilemma:
A Comparison of Primary School, Secondary School, and University Students
Lore Saenen (Lore.Saenen@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Methodology of Educational Sciences, KU Leuven, Andreas Vesaliusstraat 2
3000 Leuven, Belgium

Mieke Heyvaert (Mieke.Heyvaert@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Methodology of Educational Sciences, KU Leuven, Andreas Vesaliusstraat 2
3000 Leuven, Belgium

Ilke Grosemans (Ilke.Grosemans@student.kuleuven.be)
Methodology of Educational Sciences, KU Leuven, Andreas Vesaliusstraat 2
3000 Leuven, Belgium

Wim Van Dooren (Wim.VanDooren@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Instructional Psychology and Technology, KU Leuven, Dekenstraat 2
3000 Leuven, Belgium

Patrick Onghena (Patrick.Onghena@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Methodology of Educational Sciences, KU Leuven, Andreas Vesaliusstraat 2
3000 Leuven, Belgium

Abstract
The Monty Hall dilemma (MHD) is a notorious brain teaser
that received a lot of attention because both novices and
statistical experts fail to reason correctly when solving this
problem. In the current paper, we try to shed more light on the
previous MHD research findings by discussing them in
relationship to the equiprobability bias, which is known to
develop with age and statistical education. Besides
investigating behavioral performances on the MHD, the
experiment described in this paper focuses on the level of
understanding of the problem and how the latter can be
improved. The results show that by increasing the number of
alternatives in the MHD, both behavioral performance and
understanding of the problem improved. However, full
understanding of the MHD was only reached by some
participants, and depended on participants’ age and the
number of choice alternatives in the MHD.
Keywords: Monty Hall dilemma; equiprobability bias;
probability; heuristic reasoning; age differences.

Introduction
The Monty Hall dilemma (MHD) is known as one of the
most counterintuitive conditional probability problems. The
problem is useful for research in the domain of cognitive
psychology because both novices and experts massively
solve this problem incorrectly and fail to understand why
their reasoning is wrong.
The problem is adapted from an American television
show called ‘Let’s make a deal’ (Friedman, 1998) and is
named after the host of the program. The classic version of
the MHD goes as follows: The host, Monty Hall, gives his
contestant the option to choose between three identical

doors. A prize is randomly placed behind one of the doors.
The other two doors conceal mock prizes, for example
goats. After the contestant picks an initial door, the host,
being aware of the location of the prize, will not yet open
this door to reveal what is behind it. Instead, he will first
open another door than the door initially chosen by the
contestant to show that it contains a mock prize. At this
point, when two doors are left unopened, the host asks the
contestant to make a final decision. Thus, the dilemma for
the contestant is whether to stay with his initial choice for a
door, or to swap to the other remaining unopened door.
Previous research on the MHD has demonstrated that
most people have the idea that winning chances are equal
for staying and switching (e.g., Franco-Watkins, Derks, &
Dougherty, 2003; Granberg & Brown, 1995). Next, there
exists a very strong (cross-cultural) tendency to stay with
the initial choice (e.g., Friedman, 1998; Granberg, 1999;
Granberg & Brown, 1995). When people solve the MHD for
the first time, switching rates vary from 4.5% to 21% (e.g.,
Bown, Read, & Summers, 2003; Friedman, 1998; Page,
1998). Although the majority of the participants believes
that switching and staying hold equal winning chances, they
feel more inclined to stay with the initial choice because of
the larger amount of regret participants anticipate to
experience after a loss due to switching compared to a loss
due to staying (Stibel, Dror, & Ben-Zeev, 2009).
When applying Bayes’ theorem, however, it becomes
clear that the theoretical posterior winning probabilities for
staying and switching are unequal. In order to maximize
winning chances in the MHD, the best way to proceed is to
switch doors because switching yields a 2/3 probability to

2859

win the prize, whereas staying only yields a 1/3 winning
probability. Given the strong tendency to stay (cf. supra),
this optimal solution is highly counterintuitive.
So far, research has shown that the strong tendency to
stay with the initial choice is malleable. For example, when
the number of choice alternatives was increased in the
MHD, participants showed higher switching rates (e.g.,
Franco-Watkins et al., 2003; Stibel et al., 2009). Next, when
participants completed successive trials of the MHD,
switching rates increased substantially across trials (e.g.,
Franco-Watkins et al., 2003; Slembeck & Tyran, 2004).
Despite this improved behavioral performance, however,
participants never arrived at optimal behavior, which is to
switch on all trials. Furthermore, repeated experience with
the problem and the results of the decisions taken improve
behavioral performance but do not seem to enhance insight
into the underlying probabilities of the MHD; which is
referred to as the dissociation between behavioral
performance on the MHD and a full understanding of the
problem (Franco-Watkins et al., 2003; Stibel et al., 2009;
Tubau & Alonso, 2003).
One explanation for the lack of understanding of the
MHD lies in the equiprobability bias (Lecoutre, 1992),
which describes people’s tendency to judge the probability
of random events as being equal because “it reflects a
process by chance”. In the MHD, this means that the
probability of winning is determined by dividing the number
of prizes (i.e., one) by the number of remaining alternatives
(i.e., two), which leads to the erroneous judgment that
staying and switching have posterior winning probabilities
that are equally large (e.g., Franco-Watkins et al., 2003;
Granberg & Brown, 1995). The equiprobability bias then is
due to the fact that people heuristically determine the chance
of an event by merely considering the number of possible
cases (Falk, 1992; Shimojo & Ichikawa, 1989).
Previous research showed that the equiprobability bias
increases with age (De Neys, 2007) and formal statistical
education (Morsanyi, Primi, Chiesi, & Handley, 2009).
What would these findings mean for the identified
dissociation between behavioral performance on the MHD
and the level of understanding of the problem, knowing that
the majority of MHD research has been conducted with
adult participants? So far, only one study compared MHD
performance between participants of different age groups
(De Neys, 2007). In his research, De Neys (2007)
confronted 13- till 18-years old participants with the MHD
and questioned which behavior (i.e., staying, switching, or
chances are equal) would maximize winning chances. First,
the results showed that the oldest participants most often
chose the ‘chances are equal’ answer, which indicates that
they were most influenced by the equiprobability bias.
Second, the youngest participants more often gave the
‘switching’ response compared to older participants, and
when they not switched, they chose the ‘staying’ response
more often than the ‘chances are equal’ answer. The
‘staying’ response is not based on a consideration of the
number of possibilities, but has an affective basis: Staying

with the initial choice is an anticipation of regret (Gilovich,
Medvec, & Chen, 1995; Stibel et al., 2009). The problem
with the study of De Neys (2007), however, is that he only
included behavior as dependent variable. Consequently, it
does not reveal whether the relation between behavioral
performance and the level of MHD understanding is the
same for younger participants as for adult participants. The
present study tries to shed a first light on this research gap.
In the current experiment, participants completed ten
trials of an MHD variant. We minimized the influence of
regret (cf. infra), because of our primary interest in people’s
cognitive reasoning processes on the MHD. First, we
investigated whether the MHD was solved differently by
participants of different age groups. Second, we
manipulated the number of alternatives in the MHD. In the
classic version of the MHD, only three alternatives are
included. With an increasing number of alternatives, the
intuition that the initial choice is likely to be the correct one
will be less available, because the difference between the
prior probabilities to initially pick the correct versus wrong
door becomes more salient (i.e., 1/10 vs. 9/10 in a 10-door
MHD variant, compared to 1/3 vs. 2/3 in the classic 3-door
MHD). Thereby, one would be less stimulated to stay with
the initial choice, and the equiprobability bias would no
longer be influential. Next, previous research has shown that
in the classic MHD situation, the difference in the posterior
winning probabilities when staying or switching (i.e., 1/3 vs.
2/3) is not sufficiently salient for participants (e.g., FrancoWatkins et al., 2003; Stibel et al., 2009). With an increasing
number of alternatives, this difference will become more
salient (i.e., 1/10 vs. 9/10 in a 10-door MHD variant).
Furthermore, repeated experience with the MHD will reveal
(an approximation of) the underlying switching
reinforcement rate, which of course is higher with an
increased number of alternatives. As a consequence,
participants assigned to a condition with an MHD variant
with a higher number of alternatives will experience more
‘winning when switching’ trials and may therefore more
easily pick up the advantage of switching.
For the behavioral MHD performances, our predictions
were the following: (1) For each age group, increased
number of alternatives would result in increased switching
rates; (2) For the classic MHD, younger participants would
show higher switching rates compared to older participants
because the equiprobability bias is less developed.
For MHD understanding, we predicted the following: (1)
Participants of the youngest age group would show least
understanding of the problem, because understanding the
MHD requires some minimal understanding of probabilistic
situations (Fischbein & Schnarch, 1997); (2) For older
participants, whose understanding of probabilistic situations
is at least minimally developed, the highest level of MHD
understanding will be observed in the MHD variant with the
highest number of alternatives.

2860

Methods
Participants and Design
Three-hundred eighty-five students from three different age
groups (primary school, secondary school, and university)
participated in the experiment. Ninety-six of them were
familiar with the MHD and were excluded from the
analyses. Descriptive statistics of the 289 included
participants in the three age groups can be found in Table 1.
Participants of each age group were assigned to one of
three treatment conditions: An MHD variant with 3 vs. 10
vs. 50 alternatives. As a consequence, this study involves a
3 (age group) x 3 (number of alternatives) between subjects
design.
The study protocol was approved by the Ethical
Committee of KU Leuven.
Table 1: Descriptive statistics of participants in
the three age groups

n
Mage
SDage

Primary
school
100
10.27
0.81

Age group
Secondary University
school
98
91
14.71
18.85
0.70
3.94

Materials and Procedure
Five participants of the same age group came to the
laboratory simultaneously. One reason to conduct the
experiment in groups of five participants was efficiency.
Another reason was the diminished influence of regret,
because participants would be responsible for the initial
choice in only 20% of the MHD trials (cf. infra).
Upon arriving, each participant completed some
demographical
questions.
Next,
each
participant
individually received a sheet of paper to complete during
the experimental MHD trials.
The MHD was operationalized by 3, 10, or 50 numbered
cups (cf. doors) and one jolly toy (cf. prize) randomly
placed beneath one of the cups. Each group of five students
was confronted with 11 trials of the MHD, containing one
practice trial and ten experimental trials. Before the start of
the experiment, the experimenter placed the material for
each trial (cups with one jolly toy randomly placed beneath
one of the cups) on a separate table (i.e., 11 tables in total).
At the start of the experiment, the experimenter asked the
five students to stand in a fixed row, leaving enough space
between each other in order to avoid interaction and
collaboration between the participants. For the practice trial,
the student standing first in the row (i.e., participant 1) was
asked to say aloud the number of the cup of which (s)he
thought it would contain the jolly toy. All participants were
asked to write down this number in the first column of their
sheet of paper. Next, the experimenter took away 1, 8, or 48

other cups that did not contain the prize (depending on the
treatment condition). Next, the experimenter asked each
participant to decide individually whether to stay with the
initial choice (made by participant 1), or to switch to the
other remaining cup. Each participant was asked to write
down his/her choice in the second column by encircling
either the word ‘staying’ or ‘switching’. Note that
participant 1, who made and communicated aloud his/her
initial choice for a cup, was not allowed to say aloud
whether (s)he stayed with the initial choice or switched. The
experimenter then removed the two remaining cups and
communicated the outcome of the trial (e.g., “In this trial,
staying with the initial choice for cup number 3 resulted in
winning, whereas switching to cup number 1 resulted in
losing”). Finally, each participant was asked to write down
the outcome of the current trial depending on the choice
(s)he made individually to either stay or switch, by
encircling either the word ‘winning’ or ‘losing’ in the third
column. For the first experimental trial, the same participant
as for the practice trial was asked to make the initial choice
for a cup. For the subsequent experimental trials, the
participant next in the row got to make the initial choice.
Thus, each participant was responsible for the initial choice
of a cup twice across ten experimental trials. Hereby, the
overall influence of regret, which is known to prohibit
participants from making switch choices (Stibel et al.,
2009), was kept relatively small.
After the MHD trials were completed, each participant
was asked to individually complete a three-item
questionnaire. First, the participant was asked which
strategy (s)he believed was optimal in order to maximize
winning chances (i.e., the chance of correctly locating the
jolly toy beneath a cup): ‘switching’, ‘staying’, or ‘it does
not matter’. Second, the participant was asked to make a
posterior probability judgment of winning the prize when
staying with the initial cup. Third, the participant was asked
to make a posterior probability judgment of winning the
prize when switching to the other remaining alternative.

Results
Behavioral Performance on MHD Trials
For each participant, frequencies of switching were counted
for the ten experimental trials. Mean frequencies of
switching are displayed in Table 2 for each of the nine
conditions separately. In line with our hypotheses, switching
rates increased when an MHD variant contained a higher
number of alternatives. Support for this hypothesis is found
for each age group. Next, in the classic version of the MHD
with three alternatives, the youngest age group showed a
higher switching rate compared to the two oldest age
groups. This result is also consistent with our expectations.
For the MHD variants with 10 and 50 alternatives, however,
the youngest age group showed the lowest switching rate in
comparison with the two older age groups.

2861

Table 2: Mean frequencies of switching across 10 MHD
trials (standard errors in parentheses)

Number of
alternatives
3
10
50

Primary
school
4.52
(0.29)
5.82
(0.28)
8.79
(0.29)

Table 3: Percentages of correct answers on the three items
of the questionnaire

Age group
Secondary University
school
4.06
3.48
(0.29)
(0.29)
6.55
7.71
(0.30)
(0.29)
9.05
9.10
(0.27)
(0.30)

Number of
alternatives
3

10

50
A two-way analysis of variance was performed with ‘age
group’ and ‘number of alternatives’ as independent
variables and with switching frequencies as the dependent
variable. In line with our hypothesis, results show a
statistically significant main effect of ‘number of
alternatives’, F(2, 280) = 222.37, p < .001, η²partial = .61. No
statistically significant main effect of ‘age group’ was
found, F(2, 280) = 1.35, p = .26, η²partial = .01. Next, there is
a statistically significant interaction effect between ‘age
group’ and ‘number of alternatives’, F(4, 280) = 6.48, p <
.001, η²partial = .09. As shown in Table 2, behavioral
performance on the MHD improved with increased number
of alternatives, but this improvement varied between the age
groups. The effect of the number of alternatives is largest in
the oldest age group and smallest in the youngest age group:
F(2, 97) = 51.76, p < .001, η² = .52 for the primary school
participants group, F(2,95) = 79.79, p < .001, η² = .63 for
the secondary school participants group, and F(2, 88) =
113.88, p < .001, η² = .72 for the university participants
group (all three p-values were statistically significant after
Bonferroni-Holm correction for multiple testing).

Understanding of the MHD
After the 10 experimental MHD trials, each participant
individually completed a three-item questionnaire in order
to assess his/her level of understanding of the problem. In
item 1, each participant was asked to indicate which strategy
one could best use to maximize winning chances in the
MHD (i.e., strategy statement). Switching responses were
coded as correct responses, whereas the responses ‘staying’
and ‘it does not matter’ were coded as incorrect. For further
analyses, both incorrect responses were merged into one
category ‘incorrect’ because only a few participants
answered that staying was the optimal strategy.
In item 2, each participant was asked to estimate the
probability of winning the prize when staying (i.e., a
posterior probability judgment about winning when
staying). The responses 33.3%, 10%, and 2% were coded as
correct in the 3, 10, and 50 alternatives conditions
respectively, whereas other answers were coded as being
incorrect.
In item 3, each participant was asked to make a
probability judgment for winning when switching (i.e., a
posterior probability judgment about winning when

Item
Item 1
Item 2
Item 3
Item 1
Item 2
Item 3
Item 1
Item 2
Item 3

Primary
school
18.2
7.7
0.0
38.2
28.1
12.9
90.9
31.0
20.0

Age group
Secondary University
school
31.2
29.0
26.7
19.4
3.3
10.0
79.3
96.8
63.0
75.0
22.2
29.2
100.0
93.1
77.1
82.1
50.0
25.0

switching). The responses 66.7%, 90%, and 98% were
coded as correct in the 3, 10, and 50 alternatives conditions
respectively. Other answers were coded as incorrect.
Table 3 provides an overview of the percentages of
correct responses on the three items of the questionnaire for
each condition. This table shows that with increased number
of alternatives, the understanding of the MHD seemed to
improve within each age group. Next and in line with our
hypothesis, for each MHD variant, the youngest participants
showed the least understanding of the problem.
Fisher-Freeman-Halton Tests (FFHT’s) were used to test
for statistically significant differences in correct answers for
the three items between the age groups and between the
number of alternatives. A Bonferroni-Holm correction was
used to control the Familywise Error Rate at 5%.
First, FFHT’s were performed for each item with ‘age
group’ as grouping variable and ‘frequencies of correct and
incorrect responses’ as outcome variable, blocked per MHD
variant. The results of these tests are displayed in Table 4
and reveal that age group, to some extent, is systematically
related to understanding of the MHD variants with 10 (items
1 and 2) and 50 (item 2) alternatives. However, in these
MHD variants, age group is not systematically related to
performance on the ‘posterior winning probability
estimation when switching’ question (item 3). Furthermore,
in the MHD variant with 50 alternatives, age group is not
systematically related to performance on the strategy
statement (item 1). Note that the latter might be explained
by a ceiling effect: Table 3 shows that almost all
participants assigned to the MHD variant with 50
alternatives correctly indicated switching as the optimal
strategy in order to maximize winning chances.
Second, FFHT’s were performed for each item with
‘number of alternatives’ as grouping variable and
‘frequencies of correct and incorrect responses’ as outcome
variable, blocked per age group. The results are summarized
in Table 5 and show that increasing the number of
alternatives seemed to affect understanding of the MHD,
especially for the participants of the two oldest age groups.
When looking at the results of Table 3 and Table 5
simultaneously, it becomes clear that participants of the two

2862

Table 4: P-values of Fisher-Freeman-Halton
Tests (blocked per MHD variant) with
‘age group’ as grouping variable
Item
Number of Item 1 Item 2 Item 3
alternatives
3
.437
.184
.091
10
< .001* .001* .319
50
.187 < .001* .038
Note. * = Statistically significant p-value
after Bonferroni-Holm correction for
multiple testing.
oldest age groups experienced more advantage of an MHD
variant with increased number of alternatives in order to
understand the problem compared to participants of the
youngest age group. While performance on all three
understanding items improved with increased number of
alternatives for the secondary school participants, university
participants improved only on the strategy statement item
and the posterior winning probability judgment when
staying, and the youngest age group only improved on the
strategy statement item. Increasing the number of
alternatives did not help this youngest group of participants
to provide more correct posterior probability judgments.
Overall, of the participants who completed all three items
(n = 252), only 19.0% answered all three correctly and thus
showed full understanding of the MHD. The percentages of
primary school participants who showed full MHD
understanding are 0.0%, 9.7%, and 20.0% in the 3, 10, and
50 alternatives conditions respectively. For the secondary
school participants, these percentages equal 3.3%, 22.2%,
and 50.0%, whereas for the university participants, these
percentages are 10.0%, 29.2%, and 25.0%.
Table 5: P-values of Fisher-Freeman-Halton
Tests (blocked per age group) with
‘number of alternatives’ as grouping variable
Item
Age
Item 1
Item 2 Item 3
group
Primary school
< .001*
.079
.695
Secondary school < .001* < .001* < .001*
University
< .001* < .001*
.152
Note. * = Statistically significant p-value after
Bonferroni-Holm correction for multiple testing.

Discussion
The present study focused on the counterintuitive MHD.
Previous MHD studies showed that participants’ tendency
to stay with the initial choice is malleable (e.g., FrancoWatkins et al., 2003; Slembeck & Tyran, 2004; Stibel et al.,
2009). However, studies also showed that although
participants’ behavioral performance on the MHD
improved, their level of understanding of the problem rarely

increased (e.g., Franco-Watkins et al., 2003; Stibel et al.,
2003). In the current paper, we tried to shed more light on
this dissociation between behavioral performance and
understanding of the MHD. More specifically, we
investigated the equiprobabiliy bias (Lecoutre, 1992) in
participants of different age groups when confronted with
the MHD. In line with previous research, we hypothesized
that older participants would be more affected by the
equiprobability bias compared to younger participants (see
De Neys, 2007). Furthermore, we hypothesized that
increasing the number of alternatives in the MHD would
weaken the effect of the equiprobability bias, because both
the difference between the prior probabilities to initially
pick the correct versus wrong door, and the difference
between the posterior winning probabilities when staying
versus switching, would become more salient.
Considering the behavioral MHD performances, the
present findings indicate that when the number of
alternatives in the MHD increased, switching rates increased
within each age group. This finding can be explained by the
fact that increasing the number of alternatives in the MHD
makes it very salient that the initial choice is most likely
incorrect, therefore eliciting a different reasoning about
staying or switching in the second stage, and thus reducing
the effect of the equiprobability bias. Next, the youngest age
group switched most often in the classic MHD. This finding
can be explained by the stronger equiprobability bias with
increasing age (De Neys, 2007) and formal statistical
education (Morsanyi et al., 2009). Moreover, the influence
of regret was minimized in the present study, ruling out the
tendency to stay with the initial choice due to anticipation of
regret.
Considering MHD understanding, the youngest age group
performed worst, which can be easily understood by their
generally lower comprehension of probabilistic situations
(Fischbein & Schnarch, 1997). In the classic MHD with
three alternatives, full problem understanding remained
rather low for each age group. For the MHD variants with
more than three alternatives, level of understanding differed
for the three age groups: Older participants gained a deeper
understanding of the problem compared to participants of
the youngest age group, which was especially reflected in
the answers on the ‘posterior winning probability estimation
when staying’ question (item 2). Again, this result can be
understood because older participants’ understanding of
probabilistic situations is at least minimally developed
(Fischbein & Schnarch, 1997). Next, the results on the
‘posterior winning probability estimation when switching’
question (item 3) are notable, because age group did not
affect the number of correct answers. This item seems to be
extremely difficult, even for participants who have at least
minimal understanding of probabilistic situations. Further
research should focus on why the ‘posterior winning
probability estimation when switching’ question (item 3) is
so much harder for participants compared to the ‘posterior
winning probability estimation when staying’ question (item
2). This remarkable result is a novel finding, not being

2863

reported yet in the literature.
When looking at the percentage of participants who
showed full understanding the MHD, participants assigned
to the MHD with the highest number of alternatives (i.e.,
50) performed best. This again can be explained by a
smaller effect of the equiprobability bias (cf. supra).
Interestingly, secondary school participants outperform
university participants in this treatment condition. This
finding provides further evidence for a stronger
equiprobabiliy bias with increasing age (De Neys, 2007)
and statistical education (Morsanyi et al., 2009).
Apparently, at an adult age, this bias is developed so
strongly that it sometimes prevents understanding, although
their understanding of probabilistic situations is at least
minimally developed. Notice that secondary school
participants outperforming university participants is
especially due to the ‘posterior winning probability
estimation when switching’ question (item 3), which is
much better answered by the secondary school participants.
Given the important role of the equiprobability bias, the
dual process theory of reasoning (DPT, see Evans, 2003;
Evans & Curtis-Holmes, 2005) may provide a useful
framework to understand the findings of the present study:
The equiprobability bias, which arises when people rely on
the number-of-cases heuristic (Falk, 1992; Shimojo &
Ichikawa, 1989), hinders participants to develop a full
understanding of the MHD and its underlying probabilities.
In order to arrive at a full problem understanding, one
should overrule erroneous heuristic reasoning and involve in
correct computation. However, our results also provide
further critique on a naive conception of the DPT which
would state that heuristic reasoning will be replaced by
analytic reasoning when cognitive development increases
and thus all utterances of heuristic reasoning should
decrease with age: The findings of the present study confirm
that there exist certain heuristics and biases which
strengthen with increasing age (Fishbein & Schnarz, 1997)
and statistical education (Morsanyi et al., 2009).
Summarized, our study findings support the previously
documented dissociation between behavioral performance
and understanding of the MHD (see Franco-Watkins et al.,
2003; Slembeck & Tyran, 2004; Stibel et al., 2009; Tubau
& Alonso, 2003). However, the nature of this dissociation
depends on the participants’ age, and can be decreased for
some participants by increasing the number of alternatives.

Acknowledgments
This research was carried out with the financial support of
the Concerted Research Action ‘Number sense: Analysis
and Improvement’ of the KU Leuven (GOA/12/010).

References
Bown, N. J., Read, D., & Summers, B. (2003). The lure of
choice. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 4, 297308.
De Neys, W. (2007). Developmental trends in decision
making: The case of the Monty Hall dilemma. In J. A.

Elsworth (Ed.), Psychology of decision making in
education, behavior and high risk situations. New York,
NY: Nova Science Publishers.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2003). In two minds: Dual-process
accounts of reasoning. Trends in Cognitive Science, 7,
454-459.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Curtis-Holmes, J. (2005). Rapid
responding increases belief bias: Evidence for the dualprocess theory of reasoning. Thinking & Reasoning, 11,
382-389.
Falk, R. (1992). A closer look at the probabilities of the
notorious three prisoners. Cognition, 43, 197-223.
Fischbein, E., & Schnarch, D. (1997). The evolution with
age of probabilistic, intuitively based misconceptions.
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 28, 96–
105.
Franco-Watkins, A. M., Derks, P. L., & Dougherty, M. R. P.
(2003). Reasoning in the Monty Hall problem: Examining
choice behaviour and probability judgements. Thinking &
Reasoning, 9, 67-90.
Friedman, D. (1998). Monty Hall’s three doors:
Construction and deconstruction of a choice anomaly. The
American Economic Review, 88, 933-946.
Gilovich, T., Medvec, V. H., & Chen, S. (1995).
Commission, omission, and dissonance reduction: Coping
with regret in the “Monty Hall” problem. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 21, 182-190.
Granberg, D. (1999). Cross-cultural comparison of
responses to the Monty Hall dilemma. Social Behavioral
and Personality, 27, 431-438.
Granberg, D., & Brown, T. A. (1995). The Monty Hall
dilemma. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21,
711-723.
Lecoutre, M.-P. (1992). Cognitive models and problem
spaces in “purely random” situations. Educational Studies
in Mathematics, 23, 557-568.
Morsanyi, K., Primi, C., Chiesi, F., & Handley, S. (2009).
The effects and side-effects of statistics education :
Psychology students’ (mis-)conceptions of probability.
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 34, 210-220.
Page, S. E. (1998). Let’s make a deal. Economics Letters,
61, 175-180.
Shimojo, S., & Ichikawa, S. (1989). Intuitive reasoning
about probability: Theoretical and experimental analyses
of the “problem of three prisoners”. Cognition, 32, 1-24.
Slembeck, T., & Tyran, J.-R. (2004). Do institutions
promote rationality? An experimental study of the threedoor anomaly. Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization, 54, 337-350.
Stibel, J. M., Dror, I. E., & Ben-Zeev, T. (2009). The
collapsing choice theory: Dissociating choice and
judgment in decision making. Theory and Decision, 66,
149-179.
Tubau, E., & Alonso, D. (2003). Overcoming illusory
inferences in a probabilistic counterintuitive problem: The
role of explicit representations. Memory & Cognition, 31,
596-607.

2864

