UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Semantics of Climate Change and Global Warming

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3pw2d2qc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Gann, Timothy
Matlock, Teenie

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Semantics of Climate Change and Global Warming
Timothy M. Gann (tgann@ucmerced.edu)
Sierra Nevada Research Institute and Cognitive and Information Sciences, University of California, Merced
5200 North Lake Rd. Merced, CA 95343 USA

Teenie Matlock (tmatlock@ucmerced.edu)
Sierra Nevada Research Institute and Cognitive and Information Sciences, University of California, Merced
5200 North Lake Rd. Merced, CA 95343 USA
Abstract

with a diverse set of climate impacts, with a focus on effects that have already happened (Whitmarsh, 2009). These
differences have concrete effects on how people comprehend
speech about climate science, and how they respond to questions about it. For example, there is a correlation between
outdoor temperature and people’s belief in global warming
(Joireman, Barnes Truelove, & Duell, 2010), which helps
drive the intuitive appeal of arguments against global warming based on unseasonably cold weather (an argument that
has less bite against “climate change”). Even one’s choice
of gum, either a cooling mint, or a warm cinnamon flavor,
can prime concepts about cooling, warming, and temperature
change that influence people’s acceptance of climate science
(Lewandowski, Ciarocco, & Gately, 2012). Due to the influence labels can have on perception, there have even been calls
to switch to other terms, such as “climate disruption,” because
they may activate more favorable associates in the audience
(Jaskulsky & Besel, 2013).
These labels also elicit varied reactions based on the cultural and political orientation of their audience, who also have
their own preferences for which term is most appropriate
(Akerlof & Maibach, 2011; Schuldt, Konrath, & Schwarz,
2011). Villar and Krosnick (2010) even argue that at a population level, the choice of words doesn’t have a large effect
on people’s perceptions of the seriousness of the problem, but
that among different subpopulations it can make a big difference. This disparity between how climate change and global
warming are viewed by the partisan extremes creates a situation where people may be using similar words, but words
that have substantially different semantics, making successful
communicate difficult if not impossible (Hoffman, 2011).
Political polarization of views about climate science, especially in the United States, with an early report by Trumbo
(1996) noting that the issue was getting increasingly politicized, a problem that has been getting worse as time passes
(McCright & Dunlap, 2011). Over the last few decades a
strong conservative resistance has emerged over past debates
about the environment and to climate science (Armitage,
2005; Oreskes & Conway, 2010). Whitmarsh (2009) points
out that peoples’ understanding of different environmental issues tend to be linked together. For the most committed skeptics of climate change, climate science and environmentalism
are inextricably bound to leftist politics in general (Hoffman,
2011). This divide appears in surveys that show both that
there is a greater concordance between the scientific consen-

Creating consensus and facing the challenges of climate
change requires effective climate communication. However,
consensus about issues relating to climate science is unlikely to
happen when there isn’t a clear public consensus about which
name is more appropriate, “climate change,” or “global warming,” and what those terms mean. Previous research has shown
that perceptions of these terms varies, depending on factors
such as the audience’s political affiliation. To investigate this
further, we analyzed two corpora from partisan online news
using a high dimensional semantic analysis. This study found
that while there is substantial semantic overlap between the
terms “climate change” and “global warming,” there is less
overlap in the conservative media corpus. The results also
show that there was a larger proportion of conservative articles
that preferred to use “global warming” exclusively, whereas
progressive articles tended to use “global warming” to supplement “climate change.”
Keywords: Climate change; global warming; semantics; climate communication; high dimensional text analysis

Introduction
Understanding and adapting to climate change is one of the
most serious issues facing our society. To overcome these
challenges, it is important to learn to effective communicate
about them. The magnitude of the difficulty of achieving this
is highlighted by the fact that in the public’s mind there isn’t
necessarily even any certainty about what to call the problem.
Public preferences on the topic vary a great deal, with roughly
equal numbers preferring either “climate change” or “global
warming,” and a plurality stating no preference (Akerlof &
Maibach, 2011). This ambivalence is often reflected in survey
research and the media, where it has been assumed in the past
that they are functionally equivalent, or they are presented
together like “climate change / global warming” (Whitmarsh,
2009). However, “climate change” prevails in the scientific
community, and is seeing more and more use in the popular
media (Boykoff, 2007).
Recent research, however, suggests that “climate change”
and “global warming” are not semantically equivalent; they
each have different connotations. Climate change is considered more amorphous than global warming (Whitmarsh,
2009), and is a more neutral rendering of the concept. Global
warming has more in common with terms used in other [European] languages which focus on combative concepts. Global
warming is also supposed to be more strongly associated
with concepts related to temperature, the greenhouse effect,
and human causes. Climate change tends to be associated

505

sus and Democrats’ beliefs about climate science (McCright
& Dunlap, 2011). There is also a difference in this disparity
that depends on partisanship. Conservatives being more open
to the scientific consensus when asked about climate change
rather than global warming. Additionally, climate change is
viewed as more serious (Villar & Krosnick, 2010; Schuldt et
al., 2011). This may be one reason why conservatives appear
to be ignoring the oft-cited advice by Luntz (2002) that they
should favor the use of climate change over global warming.
Global warming may be more attractive to conservatives because of this greater resistance (Schuldt et al., 2011). Progressive samples, on the other hand, tend to view the terms
more interchangeably, with some indications that they might
even see the opposite effect of taking global warming more
seriously (Villar & Krosnick, 2010). Feinberg and Willer
(2013) found that progressives cast environmental issues in
moral terms in a way that conservatives do not. They suggest
that one approach to bridging the divide between partisans
would be through reframing these issues in ways that mesh
better with a conservative moral framework (a call echoed by
Lakoff, 2010).

ple co-locations of words by recruiting a more sophisticated model of word relationships. The Hyperspace Analogue to Language model (HAL) attempts to transform local
co-occurrences between words into richer representations of
meaning by encoding the contextual history of a word into a
vector within a high-dimensional semantic space. What HAL
does is read through a body of text using a moving window,
creating a matrix of how closely the words in the corpus appeared to each other. Each word then corresponds to a vector
in the matrix, with this vector encoding the contextual history of that word. The assumption is that words that appear
in similar contexts have a categorical relationship (Burgess,
1998; Burgess & Lund, 2000). From these vectors, lists of
nearest semantic neighbors can be generated. HAL has been
shown to produce measures of word similarity that correlate
with word priming data and lexical decision tasks (Lund &
Burgess, 1996). More germaine to the current topic, it has
also been used to analyze corpora related to political speech.
(Murphy, Burgess, Johnson, & Bowler, 2012) used HAL to
analyze the content of California ballot initiatives to see if
there were systematic differences between the words used in
pro- and con- arguments, and along partisan lines.
Our project aims to do the same thing with a corpus of
language about climate drawn from partisan news sources to
develop new insights into how the phrases “climate change”
and “global warming” are used. Schuldt et al. (2011) propose that ideological effects for comparisons between the use
of these terms may reflect different patterns of word association, and we’d expect this to be reflected in a semantic
analysis of partisan corpora. For this reason, partisan news
sources are more likely to show differences in the meanings
behind these terms. Our primary hypothesis is that this difference should be apparent in the comparison of the relationship
between these two words in both a progressive-oriented and
conservative-oriented corpora. Both closer relatedness and
greater overlap in the semantic neighborhoods surrounding
“global warming” and “climate change” should be seen in
the progressive corpus than in the conservative corpus. We
should also find a preference for global warming over climate change for conservatives, clarifying the divergent results
found between Akerlof and Maibach (2011) and Schuldt et al.
(2011).

Much of this work was done using surveys, but conducting content analyses have also been an important element
of studying the language used in climate communication.
Approaches have been varied, depending on the questions
being asked. A simple approach by Schuldt et al. (2011)
counted up the instances of “climate change” and “global
warming” within the publications of a couple dozen partisan think tanks, finding the above mentioned preference for
“global warming” amongst conservatives. Some have tracked
how media representations have changed over time, for example, Boykoff and Boykoff (2007); Boykoff (2007) note
that the American journalistic norm of trying to strike a balance between both sides, no matter how unbalanced (climate
scientists, for example, express a remarkable consensus; Anderegg, Prall, Harold, & Schneider, 2010), has declined. Several researchers have done substantial human coding of corpora, determining whether articles expressed a supportive
or dismissive position on climate science, and what kind of
frames they used (e.g. Hoffman, 2011; Trumbo, 1996). Using this approach, Hoffman (2011) found that supporters of
climate change in newspaper opinion pieces used more moral
frames, mirroring the experimental findings mentioned above
by Feinberg and Willer (2013). One problem with this kind
of approach is that human coding of corpora can become extremely labor intensive as the size of the corpus increases.
This has lead to recent attempts to example climate communications using more automated approaches. Grundmann
and Krishnamurthy (2010); Grundmann and Scott (2012) analyzed a large corpus of news articles about climate change
by compiling a list of all of the co-locations of words within
the text, identifying the words that appeared beside climate
change or global warming, and only then coding those words
for whether they fit into particular frames.

Method
Corpus Construction
To make a comparison of ideologically driven views of global
warming and climate change in online media, we assembled two corpora composed of articles drawn from the websites of publications that typically reflect polar opposites of
the right-left political spectrum. Articles for the conservative corpus (5006 articles, 4280346 words) were selected
from sources such as The National Review, Fox News, and
The Wall Street Journal; the progressive corpus (5859 articles, 5249624 words) were selected from sources including
Think Progress, The Nation, Mother Jones, and The Huffin-

We’re interested in going one step beyond looking at sim-

506

Results

gton Post. To be included in either corpora, articles had to
include either “global warming” or “climate change” in the
body of the text. The primary topic of the articles from which
the text was drawn are not necessarily primarily about global
warming or climate change, however each use of those terms
contributes a useful context within which they appear and
from which meaning can be drawn. Extra text, such as the
comments attached to an article, were removed. All articles
were published between January 1, 2008 and December 31,
2012. These data include a period of increased skepticism regarding climate change, due in part to the “Climategate scandal” in 2009, and the beginning of a shift within the United
States in preferences between the use of global warming and
climate change (Hoffman, 2011; Grundmann & Scott, 2012).
The corpora were cleaned to remove misspellings (many
were proper nouns). Words with especially low frequencies
(< 100) were also removed from the corpus, because low frequency words tend to have inflated measures of relatedness
in subsequent modeling (Bullinaria & Levy, 2007). In both
cases, omitted words were replaced with a dummy symbol
so the distance between words remained constant. The terms
“climate change” and “global warming” were converted into
single tokens by removing the space between them.

Climate change is the favored term by frequency in the progressive corpus, used almost twice as often as global warming
(63.7% vs 36.3%). In the conservative corpus, they are used
in roughly equal proportions (53.1% vs 46.9%) with a slight
edge to climate change. These results, at first glance, conflict
with the findings of Schuldt et al. (2011), who found in their
partisan think tank corpus an advantage for global warming
use among conservatives. However, it is interesting to note
that progressives rarely use global warming in isolation: only
15% of the time, on a by-document basis. Conservatives on
the other hand will use global warming in isolation in 31%
of documents. Progressives generally favor using both, 50%
of the time, and conservatives use both in only 27% of documents. A test of independence finds that χ2 (2) = 592.2
(p < 0.0001) with Cramer’s V= 0.235, indicating a moderate
dependence between ideological grouping and their choice of
terms.
The HAL analysis showed that global warming and climate
change were each others’ closest associates (conservative corpus: z = 2.26; progressive corpus: z = 2.57) in both corpora.
This suggests that their meanings were indeed considered to
be very close–at least closer than any other tokens in the corpus. This does not preclude the possibility that there are still
significant points of divergence between the two tokens. To
test the degree of overlap between them, we created a list of
words that was constituted from a union of the 100 nearest
neighbors to both climate change and global warming within
each corpus. We used this set of words because it would allow us to look at a meaningful comparison between relatively
close associates (we’re most interested in meanings that are
relatively close to at least one of the targets) without cherry
picking from the data. This resulted in a 115 word list for the
progressive corpus, and a 127 word list for the conservative
corpus (there was only a 75 word overlap between the two
lists).
One sign that these nearest neighbors do not overlap completely is that the union of these two neighborhoods yield a
list of 115 words for the progressive corpus, and 127 words
for the conservative corpus (further, comparing these lists
across corpora only find 75 that overlap). This is a tentative
first indication that these neighborhoods may have differing
degrees of overlap. In Figure 1, in the left column we present
a scatterplot of the distances between the nearest neighbors
for both corpora. The correlation between the words’ distance
to climate change and global warming were r(115) = 0.76 for
the progressive corpus, and r(127) = 0.45 for the conservative corpus. The progressive corpus showed a high degree
of overlap between the two terms, whereas the relationship
was weaker in the conservative corpus. These two correlation
coefficients reliably differed, z = 3.87, p < 0.01. So while
they both show a large degree of overlap, the progressive corpus shows a slightly stronger concordance within the nearest
neighbors of climate change and global warming.
Another sign of the divergence between their neighbor-

HAL Modeling
Two HAL matrices were generated from the corpora. We
used the implementation of HAL and the distance metrics
provided in the S-Space package described in Jurgens and
Stevens (2010). The window size used was seven words wide.
While other analyses using HAL (e.g. Murphy et al., 2012)
have used a larger window size of ten, seven was chosen because it was a compromise between evidence that matrices using smaller window sizes tend to perform better and the possibility that a larger window size might make up for the relative
small size of the corpora. The dimensionality of the resulting
vectors was reduced to the 2000 dimensions that contained
the greatest amount of information as evaluated by an entropy
metric included in the S-Space package. While Bullinaria and
Levy (2007, 2012) demonstrate little to no penalty for including more dimensions, 2000 were used because the number offered a good compromise between matrix size and outcomes.

Data and Analysis
Vector cosine angle distances were used as the distance metric. S-Space has implemented cosine angle distance and euclidean distance metrics, and some research by Qian, Sural,
Gu, and Pramanik (2004) has shown that they perform similarly when applied to nearest neighbor queries. Because our
topics of interest are climate change and global warming, we
computed the cosine between the vectors for those tokens and
every other word in each corpus (after data cleaning, there
were 8370 unique tokens in the corpora). These cosines were
in turn standardized through a z-transformation to aid in interpretation by making the units more comparable (a similar
z-transformation was done in Murphy et al., 2012).

507

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5

Z−score of CC distances

2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5

2.5

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

Conservative Corpus

Cons. Corpus (using Prog. NN)

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5

Z−score of CC distances

2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5

2.5

Z−score of GW distances

2.5

Z−score of GW distances

0.5

Z−score of CC distances

Prog. Corpus (using Cons. NN)

0.5

Z−score of CC distances

Progressive Corpus

0.5

Z−score of GW distances

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

Z−score of GW distances

Figure 1: The left column plots the nearest neighbors to global warming and climate change. The right column shows the same
relationship using the nearest neighbors for the other corpus, showing that many words that are highly related in one corpus are
not as highly related in the other. In each plot, the dashed line signifies the line along which scores that are the same would
follow.
hoods can be see in the two plots on the right in Figure 1. These show the relationship between the distances
to global warming and climate change using the other corpus’s wordlist. There was a very high relationship between
the terms when looking at the conservative nearest neighbors
in the progressive corpus (r(127) = 0.96), and the progressive
nearest neighbors in the conservative corpus (r(115) = 0.89).
While there are many words that overlap (75, as noted above),
they show the addition of many words with far lower relatedness in each case, signifying the words that were close associates for one corpus, but not the other.
On a word-by-word basis, there are some interesting results, and some confirmations of findings seen in other literature. One of the larger comparisons between the corpora was
that there was a difference of 1.33 standard deviations (z) be-

tween the average relatedness of the word “anthropogenic” to
climate change / global warming, showing it to be much more
closely related to those terms in the progressive corpus than
in the conservative corpus. “Scam” was more closely related
in the conservative corpus (diff = 1.13). Another interesting contrast was that “skeptical” was more highly related in
the conservative corpus (diff = 0.63), while “skepticism” was
more highly related in the progressive corpus (diff = 0.42).
There was a closer relationship with “denier” in the progressive corpus (diff = 0.67). This makes sense because progressives will pair the target words with “denier,” while conservatives will generally not label themselves as such. Similarly,
they might express themselves as being skeptical, while progressives talk other people’s skepticism.

508

Discussion

as a sanity check that there is some meaningful contrast between the corpora that tracks with attitudes presented in other
studies, like there being more of a focus on human causation
for climate change / global warming amongst progressives.
Second, they offer an opportunity to support or elaborate on
the findings of other content analyses done with exhaustive
human coding. Our investigation was narrowly focused on
the contrast between “climate change” and “global warming,”
but these tools can be applied toward investigating many other
relevant concepts. For example, Nerlich (2010) sought examples of SCIENCE IS RELIGION metaphors. Using HAL, we
can see which corpus those metaphors may be more prevalent
in, and what other concepts they may be related to. In this instance, there is a stronger relationship with global warming
(but notably not climate change) in the conservative corpus
for the words “cult,” and “religion.” Finally, such results can
act as guides for survey construction. Part of our ongoing
research is to use these models to guide research with live
participants in order to both validate the model and expand
our knowledge of the ways in which the meanings of these
climate terms.
Using high-dimensional semantic analysis to examine climate language in varied media sources is informative because
it provides insights into how language use varies according to
political ideology. The corpora used in this study were drawn
from news articles posted on the internet, and it’s possible
that this limits the generalizability of the conclusions that can
be drawn from it. Grabe, Kamhawi, and Yegiyan (2009), for
example, found that people with lower education levels had a
harder time remembering information from offline and online
print media than they did for information they learned over
television. Highly educated participants showed the inverse
result. One goal moving forward is to integrate transcripts
from broadcast media into our corpora in order to account for
the differences in information presentation between the mediums.

Our results confirm that while the meanings and nearest
neighbors of “climate change” and “global warming” are
closely associated, they do not perfectly overlap, and that
this overlap is lowest within the conservative corpora. This
fits with results from other sources that find few differences
in progressive responses to questions about climate change
/ global warming, but larger number of differences in how
conservatives will respond to those words (e.g. Villar &
Krosnick, 2010). We didn’t find the exact partisan differences in preference found in either Schuldt et al. (2011) or
Akerlof and Maibach (2011). Progressives did tend to use
climate change more often than global warming, but conservatives use them in roughly equal proportions. Contrary to
Akerlof and Maibach (2011), progressives in our corpus used
climate change more often. However, this may have arisen
from the difference in samples. Akerlof and Maibach (2011)
conducted a survey of general public preferences, not an analysis of media text. Journalists probably have a considered
preference for particular terminology, and they don’t have the
option of saying “no preference” when choosing a term to
include in an article.
However, we note that there were far more conservatives
who exclusively used global warming. It is possible that our
corpus was not quite partisan enough to pick up on this difference. Some of our sources for the conservative corpus,
like Fox News’ website for example, may not be sufficiently
editorialized. This is in comparison with the corpus used by
Schuldt et al. (2011) which used articles from think tank websites that are nakedly trying to present a particular ideological
viewpoint. In future work on this corpus, we will expand the
number of media sources included and develop a set of objective measures that get at ideological commitment. A clear
measure of ideology would also make it easier to include a
“mainstream” media corpus to act as another point of comparison. The possible segmentation of the corpus into subcorpora that look at the semantic neighborhoods surrounding these words when they are used together or in isolation
would give us some additional insights into the meanings of
these words if they are being deployed strategically in order
to influence readers. Expansion of the corpus is a priority for
these reasons, especially because our corpora were already
relatively small by the standards of these kinds of models
(Bullinaria & Levy, 2007, 2012). Similarly, the results of the
models can be improved by using better distance estimates.
In addition, we included traditional articles, opinion pieces,
and blog entries in the corpus. The differing writing standards may have systematic qualitative differences that should
be accounted for. Blogs and editorial pieces are much more
likely to argue for a particular viewpoint and are more likely
to contain a signal that corresponds to ideology differences in
language use.
The individual word results showing wide cross-corpora
difference between the relatedness of words like “scam” and
“anthropogenic” can be seen in a couple ways. First, they act

Conclusions
Our work extends the established understanding of how conservatives and progressive media use the terms “climate
change” and “global warming.” Our findings indicate that
there is a greater disparity in the meaning of the words within
the conservative corpus, and that there is greater polarization
within the conservative corpus in regards to which term is
used. The use of a high dimensional vector space to aid in the
examination of the semantics of key words within the corpora
is a step forward within the domain of climate communication, and promises to be a productive tool for fostering future
research.

References
Akerlof, K., & Maibach, E. W. (2011). A rose by any other
name ...?: What members of the general public prefer to
call climate change. Climatic Change, 106(4), 699–710.
Anderegg, W. R. L., Prall, J. W., Harold, J., & Schneider,
S. H. (2010). Expert credibility in climate change. Pro-

509

open source package for word space models. In Proceedings of the acl 2010 system demonstrations (pp. 30–35).
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Lakoff, G. (2010). Why it Matters How We Frame the Environment. Environmental Communication: A Journal of
Nature and Culture, 4(1), 70–81.
Lewandowski, G. W., Ciarocco, N. J., & Gately, E. L. (2012).
The Effect of Embodied Temperature on Perceptions of
Global Warming. Current Psychology, 31(3), 318–324.
Lund, K., & Burgess, C. (1996). Producing high-dimensional
semantic spaces from lexical co-occurrence. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 28(2), 203–
208.
Luntz, F. (2002). The environment: a cleaner, safer, healthier
America. Luntz Research, Alexandria.
McCright, A. M., & Dunlap, R. E. (2011). The politicization
of climate change and polarization in the American public’s views of global warming, 2001-2010. Sociological
Quarterly, 52(2), 155–194.
Murphy, C., Burgess, C., Johnson, M., & Bowler, S. (2012).
Heresthetics in ballot proposition arguments: An investigation of California citizen initiative rhetoric. Journal of
Language and Politics, 11(1), 135–156.
Nerlich, B. (2010). ‘Climategate’: Paradoxical metaphors
and political paralysis. Environmental Values, 19(4), 419–
442.
Oreskes, N., & Conway, E. M. (2010). Merchants of Doubt:
How a Handful of Scientists Obscured the Truth on Issues
from Tobacco Smoke to Global Warming. Bloomsbury Publishing USA.
Qian, G., Sural, S., Gu, Y., & Pramanik, S. (2004, March).
Similarity between Euclidean and cosine angle distance for
nearest neighbor queries. Proceedings of the 2004 ACM
Symposium on Applied Computing, 1232–1237.
Schuldt, J. P., Konrath, S. H., & Schwarz, N. (2011). ”Global
warming” or ”climate change”?: Whether the planet is
warming depends on question wording. Public Opinion
Quarterly, 75(1), 115–124.
Trumbo, C. (1996). Constructing climate change: claims
and frames in US news coverage of an environmental issue.
Public Understanding of Science, 5, 269–283.
Villar, A., & Krosnick, J. A. (2010). Global warming vs.
climate change, taxes vs. prices: Does word choice matter?
Climatic Change, 105(1-2), 1–12.
Whitmarsh, L. (2009). What’s in a name? Commonalities and differences in public understanding of ”climate
change” and ”global warming”. Public Understanding of
Science, 18(4), 401–420.

ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(27),
12107–12109.
Armitage, K. C. (2005). State of Denial: The United States
and the politics of global warming. Globalizations, 2(3),
417–427.
Boykoff, M. T. (2007). Flogging a dead norm? Newspaper
coverage of anthropogenic climate change in the United
States and United Kingdom from 2003 to 2006. Area,
39(4), 470–481.
Boykoff, M. T., & Boykoff, J. M. (2007). Climate change
and journalistic norms: A case-study of US mass-media
coverage. Geoforum, 38(6), 1190–1204.
Bullinaria, J. A., & Levy, J. P. (2007). Extracting semantic representations from word co-occurrence statistics: a
computational study. Behavior Research Methods, 39(3),
510–26.
Bullinaria, J. A., & Levy, J. P. (2012). Extracting semantic
representations from word co-occurrence statistics: stoplists, stemming, and SVD. Behavior Research Methods,
44(3), 890–907.
Burgess, C. (1998). From simple associations to the building
blocks of language: Modeling meaning in memory with the
HAL model. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, &
Computers, 30(2), 188–198.
Burgess, C., & Lund, K. (2000). The Dynamics of Meaning
in Memory. In E. Dietrich & A. Markman (Eds.), Cognitive dynamics: Conceptual and representational change in
humans and machines. Mahwaw, N. J.: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Feinberg, M., & Willer, R. (2013). The moral roots of environmental attitudes. Psychological Science, 24(1), 56–62.
Grabe, M. E., Kamhawi, R., & Yegiyan, N. (2009). Informing
Citizens: How People with Different Levels of Education
Process Television, Newspaper, and Web News. Journal of
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 53(1), 90–111.
Grundmann, R., & Krishnamurthy, R. (2010). The Discourse
of Climate Change : A Corpus-based Approach. Critical
Approaches to Discourse Analysis Across Disciplines, 4(2),
113–133.
Grundmann, R., & Scott, M. (2012). Disputed climate science in the media: Do countries matter? Public Understanding of Science, 0(0), 1–16.
Hoffman, A. J. (2011). Talking Past Each Other? Cultural
Framing of Skeptical and Convinced Logics in the Climate
Change Debate. Organization & Environment, 24(1), 3–
33.
Jaskulsky, L., & Besel, R. (2013). Words That (Dont) Matter: An Exploratory Study of Four Climate Change Names
in Environmental Discourse. Applied Environmental Education & Communication, 12(1), 38–45.
Joireman, J., Barnes Truelove, H., & Duell, B. (2010). Effect of outdoor temperature, heat primes and anchoring on
belief in global warming. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 30(4), 358–367.
Jurgens, D., & Stevens, K. (2010). The S-Space package: an

510

