UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Shape Bias Shapes More Than Just Attention: Relationships Between Categorical Biases
&amp; Object Recognition Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3jf60322

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Author
Vlach, Haley

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Shape Bias Shapes More Than Just Attention:
Relationships Between Categorical Biases & Object Recognition Memory
Haley A. Vlach (hvlach@wisc.edu)
Department of Educational Psychology, 1025 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA

Abstract
The “shape bias” describes the finding that, starting around
24 months of age, children generalize object categories based
upon shape to a greater degree than other perceptual features.
To date, research on the shape bias has consisted of debates
about how attentional mechanisms engender the development
of the shape bias. The current work moves beyond theoretical
explanations grounded in attention processes and examines
potential consequences of the shape bias in memory
processes. In this experiment, children and adults’ memory
performance for features of objects was examined in relation
to their categorical biases. The results of the experiment
demonstrated that, across the lifespan, learners with a shape
bias were more likely to remember the shape of objects than
they were the color and size. Taken together, this work
suggests the development of a shape bias may lead to more
than just differences in attention to features of objects, but a
memory bias for shape information.
Keywords: shape bias; object recognition memory; word
learning; categorization; language and cognitive development

Introduction
Categorization is a central process in human cognition and
development. As a result, much research has examined the
developing ability to categorize the world. In particular,
research has examined the children’s ability to categorize
objects and generalize this information to novel objects.
Children’s categorization of objects has been described as
particularly impressive because there are a seemingly
infinite number of ways that objects in the world can be
partitioned and generalized.
One explanation for how children develop the ability to
categorize objects is that they acquire categorical biases,
which are used to narrow the possible ways in which objects
can be categorized. An example of one of these biases is the
“shape bias”, which describes the finding that, starting
around 24 months of age, learners generalize object
categories based upon shape to a greater degree than other
perceptual features (Baldwin, 1992; Colunga & Smith,
2008; Gershkoff-Stowe & Smith, 2004; Landau, Smith, &
Jones, 1988; Samuelson, 2002; Perry & Samuelson, 2011).
In a typical paradigm (e.g., Landau et al., 1988), participants
are presented with a novel object and a novel linguistic label
(e.g., “toma”). Participants are then presented with three
additional objects, one that matches the target object’s shape
and two additional objects that match one of the target
object’s other dimensions, such as color, size, or texture.
The experimenter then prompts participants to pick which
one of the three objects is also a “toma”. The majority of

children and adults will pick the shape match over the color,
size, or texture match, suggesting that learners assume shape
is a more defining feature of object categories than other
perceptual features.
To date, the shape bias literature largely consists of
arguments regarding the types of information children
attend to during categorization and generalization, such as
perceptual, linguistic, or conceptual information (for an
overview of extant theories, see Samuelson & Bloom,
2008). As an example, according to the Attentional
Learning Account (ALA) of the shape bias (e.g., Colunga &
Smith, 2008), attention is shifted to properties of objects
that have historically been relevant for the task context. The
relevant properties of objects are likely to be determined by
statistical regularities amongst perceptual features of
objects. That is, children’s early experiences learning words
and categories leads them to notice statistical regularities
amongst objects (e.g., shape), enabling children to shift
attention to these regularities and make generalizations from
the categories they know to novel categories.
Given the focus on attentional processes, the shape bias
literature has a striking limitation: this work has focused on
the information that children attend to when comparing
multiple objects in one moment in time. In real-world
learning situations, there are likely to be frequent temporal
gaps between encountering a new object and subsequently
generalizing to a second object of the same category.
However, little research has examined how learners access
their learning history (i.e., when the first object is no longer
in the learner’s view) and how this ability relates to
categorization and generalization. Indeed, a central tenant of
all theoretical accounts of the shape bias is that learners
access and use their learning history to guide generalization
across time (for a discussion, see Keil, 2008).
Consequently, it is essential to understand how learners
remember and retrieve information about objects across
time. Rather than argue for one theory over the other, this
work moves beyond arguments of what is attended to in-themoment, but what is retained across time.
The current work builds upon the existing literature by
examining categorical biases in relationship to learners’
memory for perceptual features of objects. As proposed by
extant theories, such as the ALA account, the shape bias
creates enhanced attention to shape (e.g., Colunga & Smith,
2008). The hypothesis is this work is that enhanced attention
to shape has consequences beyond in-the-moment
processing of objects. In particular, it is predicted that
enhanced attention leads to the ability to remember shape to
a greater degree than other perceptual features of objects.

3049

That is, the development of a shape bias engenders a
memory bias for shape information.
If the development of a shape bias engenders a memory
bias for shape information, we would expect to observe
differences in how learners remember shape information
after being presented with an object. For example, for
learners that demonstrate a shape bias, we would expect to
see higher memory performance for shape than other
perceptual features. Moreover, for learners that do not
demonstrate a shape bias, we would not expect to see higher
memory performance for shape, but perhaps higher memory
performance for other perceptual features. Observing these
findings would suggest that there is a relationship between
the shape bias and the ability to retrieve information over
time. Indeed, recent research has suggest that memory
processes, such as forgetting and retrieval, are critical
processes in children’s categorization and generalization of
objects (Vlach, et al., 2008, 2012).
Alternatively, the shape bias may be limited to an inthe-moment attentional phenomenon, without resulting in
differences in memory performance. Recent eye-tracking
studies have demonstrated that increases in children’s visual
attention to objects is not necessarily related to increased
memory for objects (Smith & Yu, 2013; Vlach & Johnson,
2013). Thus, enhanced attention to the shape of objects may
not necessarily lead to enhanced memory for shape
information. This finding would suggest that cognitive
processes other than memory for features are contributing to
the observed relationship between the shape bias and
language and cognitive development. The current
experiment was designed to examine these possibilities.

Current Study
In this experiment, children and adults’ memory for features
of objects was examined in a series of object memory trials.
Memory for three visual features of objects was tested:
shape, color, and size. The features were chosen because
they are features that have been used in previous studies of
the shape bias (e.g., Landau et al., 1988). Memory
performance was assessed on three timescales: immediately
after learning, after a 2 minute delay, and after a 5 minute
delay. These timescales were chosen to mirror delays used
to previous studies of young children’s memory (e.g., Vlach
et al., 2008) and to elucidate the ability to retrieve
information immediately after being presenting with an
object and when accessing objects from long-term memory.
This experiment was designed to examine the
developing ability to remember and retrieve perceptual
features of objects across time. In particular, this experiment
sought to elucidate whether differences in memory
performance were related to learners’ categorical biases,
such as a shape bias. Thus, this experiment examined
memory and categorization during the onset of the shape
bias, starting around 24 months of age (e.g., Landau et al.,
1988; Smith et al., 2002), and during a time period in which
almost all learners demonstrate a persistent shape bias,
adulthood (e.g., Landau et al., 1988).

Method
Participants
The participants were 18, 24-36-month-old children and 40
adults. All children were monolingual English speakers and
recruited from local daycare centers. Adult participants were
undergraduate students recruited from the department’s
subject pool.

Apparatus & Stimuli
Participants were presented with all tasks on an iPad.
Stimuli for the tasks, 2D objects, were constructed in Adobe
Photoshop. Objects were designed so that, when necessary
for the task, objects were exact shape matches, exact color
matches, and exact size matches (i.e., same number of
pixels). Examples of these objects can be seen in Figure 1.

Procedure
Participants were presented with two tasks: a feature
memory task and a shape bias task. The order of these tasks
was counterbalanced across participants. The order of the
trials within each task was randomly assigned.
Feature Memory Task. Participants were presented
feature memory trials for shape, color, and size.
Participants’ memory for the features was tested on three
timescales: immediately after learning, after a 2-minute
delay, and after a 5-minute delay. Thus, there were a total of
nine trials in the feature memory task.
In each trial, participants were presented with a target
object (see Figure 1, for an example). The experimenter
would say, “Look at this toy!”. The experimenter would
then prompt the iPad to pull up a blank screen. In the
immediate testing trials, the experimenter would proceed
directly to the testing screen. In the 2-minute delay and 5minute delay trials, the experimenter would present
participants with a distractor task. Child participants were
given the option to put stickers on paper and/or play with
Play-doh for the delay period. Adult participants played
Angry Birds for the delay period. After the distractor
task/testing delay, the experimenter would proceed to the
testing screen.
The testing component of each trial consisted of three
objects (see Figure 1). One of the three objects matched the
target object, but only matched on one feature. As a result,
each testing trial assessed participants’ memory for one
feature of the object seen previously in the trial. For
example, in color memory trials, all of the objects would be
the same shape and size, but a different shape and size than
the target object. The only dimension on which the three
objects differed was color; one of the test objects had the
same color as the target object. Consequently, participants
could only respond correctly if they remembered the color
of the target object. After presenting the three testing
objects, the experimenter would say, “Which of these looks
like a toy you have seen before?” and then point in the
general direction of the screen. The experimenter recorded

3050

participants chose and continued to the next trial of the task
until all trials were complete.
There were a total of nine trials in the shape bias task.
The placement of the feature matches (shape, color, and
size) was counterbalanced across the trials. Additionally, the
features used in this task were not repeated across trials (i.e.,
distinct shapes, colors, and sizes on each trial) nor used in
the feature memory task.

Results

Figure 1. Examples of tasks in the experiment. The
ordering of the tasks was counterbalanced across
participants. The ordering of trials within each task was
randomly assigned.
which object the participants chose and continued to the
next trial of the task until all trials were complete.
Across the nine trials, the placement of the correct
features (shape, color, and size) was counterbalanced across
the trials. Additionally, the features used in this task were
not repeated across trials (i.e., distinct shapes, colors, and
sizes on each trial) nor used in the shape bias task.
Shape Bias Task. The shape bias task was modeled
after tasks used in previous research (e.g., Landau et al.,
1988). In each trial of the task (see Figure 1, for an
example), participants were first shown an object and then
provided with a novel linguistic label for that object. For
example, the experimenter would say, “This is a tika!” and
point to the target object on the screen.
After presenting the target object, the experimenter
would prompt the iPad to display three test objects below
the target object (see Figure 1). One object had the same
shape as the target object, one object had the same color as
the target object, and one object had the same size as the
target object. The experimenter then asked the participants
to infer which one of the three test objects was also a
member of the same category as the target object. For
example, the experimenter would say, “Which one of these
toys is a tika?” and then point in the general direction of the
screen. The experimenter recorded which object the

Feature Memory Task Performance. A central goal of
this experiment was to examine children and adult’s
memory for features of objects. Children and adults’
memory performance for each of the three features was
plotted across the three testing timescales, by feature (shape,
color, and size). As can be seen in Figure 2, adults appeared
to have overall higher memory performance for each feature
than did the children.
To examine the differences across the age groups, a
mixed repeated measures ANOVA was conducted with age
(child or adult) as a between-subjects factor and testing
delay (no delay, 2-minute delay, or 5-minute delay) and
feature (shape, color, or size) as within-subjects factors. The
results of this analysis revealed a main effect of age, F(1,
56) = 27.948, p < .001, a main effect of testing delay, F(1,
56) = 7.376, p = .009, and a main effect of feature, F(1, 56)
= 5.823, p = .019. There was also a significant interaction
of feature and age, F(1, 56) = 4.186, p = .045.
To examine the nature of the interaction, the data were
separated by age group (children or adults). For the adults,
a repeated measures ANOVA was conducted with testing
delay (no delay, 2-minute delay, or 5-minute delay) and
feature (shape, color, or size) as within-subjects factors. The
results of this test revealed a marginally significant main
effect of testing delay, F(1, 39) = 7.376, p = .097, and a
main effect of feature, F(1, 39) = 21.686, p < .001. Next, a
set of planned comparisons, with Bonferroni corrections,
was used to examine differences in performance between
the features. The corrected p-values are reported. These ttests revealed that performance on the shape trials was
significantly higher than the color trials at the no delay,
t(39) = 3.122 , p = .003, two minute delayed, t(39) = 2.966 ,
p = .005, and five minute delayed tests, t(39) = 3.204, p =
.003. Performance on the shape trials was also significantly
higher than the size trials at the no delay, t(39) = 4.333 , p <
.001, two minute delayed, t(39) = 4.149 , p < .001, and five
minute delayed tests, t(39) = 4.149, p < .001. There were no
significant differences in performance between the color and
size trials at each testing delay, ps > .10.
The same analysis was used for children’s memory
performance: a repeated measures ANOVA was conducted
with testing delay (no delay, 2-minute delay, or 5-minute
delay) and feature (shape, color, or size) as within-subjects
factors. The results of this test revealed a main effect of
testing delay, F(1, 17) = 3.620, p = .046, but no main effect
of feature, F(1, 17) = .031, p = .863. Next, a set of planned
comparisons, with Bonferroni corrections, was used to

3051

Figure 2. Mean percentage of correct responses on the feature memory task trials. Participants are grouped by age.
Adults had significantly higher memory performance for shape than color and size. Conversely, 2-year-old children did
not appear to have differences in memory performance across the three features. Error bars represent one standard error.
examine differences in performance across the testing
delays within each feature. The corrected p-values are
reported. These t-tests revealed that children had
significantly higher performance on the immediate test for
shape and color than on the 5 minute delayed test, ps < .05.
In sum, adult participants demonstrated significantly
higher performance than children across the perceptual
features. Moreover, adult participants demonstrated
significantly higher memory performance for the shape of
objects than the color or size of objects. Conversely,
children did not demonstrate differences in memory
performance between the three features.
Categorical Biases and Memory Performance. A second
goal of this experiment was to examine whether
participants’ categorical biases, such as a shape bias, would
affect memory performance for specific features of an
object. It was predicted that learners demonstrating a shape
bias would have higher memory performance for shape
information than other perceptual features. Indeed, the
results described above indicate that, on the group level,
adults had higher memory for shape than other features.
First, each participant was classified as having/not
having a categorical bias. There were a total of nine shape
bias trials; to be classified as having a bias (e.g., a shape
bias), participants would have chosen the particular feature
match on more than half of the trials (e.g., choosing the
shape match on 5 or more trials). Table 1 outlines the
breakdown of bias by age group. All of the adult
participants demonstrated a shape bias (replicating Landau
et al., 1988) and thus these data were not re-analyzed.
Children’s performance for each of the three features was

plotted across the three testing timescales, by feature (shape,
color, and size) and by categorical bias (shape vs. no/other
bias). This data provided forgetting functions for each of
the three perceptual features. As can be seen in Figure 3,
there appeared to be differences in performance between the
shape bias group a no/other bias group.
Table 1: Number of participants with
categorical biases by age group
Age Group
2-year-olds
Adults

Shape
9
40

Color
3
0

Size
2
0

No Bias
4
0

To examine the differences across the categorical bias
groups, a mixed repeated measures ANOVA was conducted
with bias (shape or no/other bias) as a between-subjects
factor and testing delay (no delay, 2-minute delay, or 5minute delay) and feature (shape, color, or size) as withinsubjects factors. The results of this analysis revealed no
significant main effects, but a significant interaction of
feature and bias, F(1, 16) = 6.969, p = .018. To examine the
nature of the interaction, the data were separated by
categorical bias group (shape bias or no/other bias).
For the shape bias group, a repeated measures ANOVA
was conducted with testing delay (no delay, 2-minute delay,
or 5-minute delay) and feature (shape, color, or size) as
within-subjects factors. The results of this test revealed a
significant main effect of feature, F(1, 8) = 4.558, p = .035.
Next, a set of planned comparisons, with Bonferroni
corrections, was used to examine differences in performance

3052

Figure 3. Mean percentage of correct responses on the feature memory task trials. Child participants are grouped by
categorical bias (shape vs. no/other bias). On the group level, 2-year-old children did not appear to have differences in memory
performance across the three features (see Figure 2). However, when grouped by categorical bias, children demonstrated
significantly difference memory performance for the three features of objects. Error bars represent one standard error.
between the features. These t-tests revealed that
performance on the shape trials was marginally significantly
higher than the color trials at the no delay, t(8) = 2.414 , p =
.097, two minute delayed, t(8) = 2.512 , p = .086, and five
minute delayed tests, t(8) = 2.414, p = .097. Performance on
the shape trials was also significantly higher than the size
trials at the no delay, t(8) = 2.414, p = .097, two minute
delayed, t(8) = 2.414, p = .097, and five minute delayed
tests, t(8) = 2.512 , p = .086. There were no significant
differences in performance between the color and size trials
at each testing delay, ps > .10.
A similar analysis was conducted for the no/other bias
group: a repeated measures ANOVA was conducted with
testing delay (no delay, 2-minute delay, or 5-minute delay)
and feature (shape, color, or size) as within-subjects factors.
The results of this test revealed a significant main effect of
feature, F(1, 8) = 3.667, p = .041. Next, a set of planned
comparisons, with Bonferroni corrections, was used to
examine differences in performance between the features.
These t-tests revealed that there were no significant
differences in performance between the color and size trials
at each testing delay, ps > .10. However, performance on
the shape trials was marginally significantly lower than the
color trials at the no delay, t(8) = 2.414, p = .097, and the
size trials at the no delay test, t(8) = 2.414, p = .097.
In sum, on the group level, the 2-year-old children did
not demonstrate differences in memory performance across
the three features. However, when children were grouped
by categorical bias (shape vs. no/other bias), there were

differences in memory performance between the features.
In particular, children with a shape bias had significantly
higher memory performance for shape than color and size.
Conversely, children that did not have a shape bias had
significantly higher memory performance for color and size
than shape at the immediate test. These findings suggest that
the development of an attentional bias may result in
differences in the ways that learners remember the features
of objects, as discussed below.

Discussion
The results of this experiment revealed developmental
differences in memory abilities for features for objects.
Overall, adults had higher memory performance than
children. Adult participants demonstrated higher memory
performance for shape than color and size. Moreover, all of
the adult participants demonstrated a shape bias.
Conversely, on the group level, 2-year-old children did not
demonstrate differences in their memory abilities for
perceptual features of objects or a consistent categorical
bias. However, when children were divided into two groups
(i.e., shape bias and no/other bias), those in the shape bias
group had significantly higher memory performance for
shape than children in the no/other bias group. In sum, the
results of this experiment reveal evidence to support the
hypothesis that learners have different memory abilities for
perceptual features of objects and that the shape bias is
related to these differences in memory performance.

3053

How do the current results relate to extant theories of the
shape bias? As mentioned in the Introduction section, the
shape bias literature consists primarily of debates regarding
which types of information children attend to when
generalizing across objects in one moment in time.
However, extant theories have many commonalities, such as
the idea that learners access their learning histories when
acquiring and generalizing object categories across time
(Keil, 2008). The current experiments were designed to be
a step in this direction – to begin to outline how the
development of the shape bias may change the way that
learners access knowledge about objects in the world.
Moreover, the results of the current experiments begin
to bridge a gap in our understanding of how performance on
an in-the-moment task, such as the shape bias task, relates to
long-term developmental outcomes across years at a time.
The shape bias and/or lack of shape bias has been linked to
several long-term developmental outcomes in language
development and categorization (Gershkoff-Stowe & Smith,
2004; Jones, 2003; Perry & Samuelson, 2011; Samuelson,
2002; Tek, Jaffery, Fein, & Naigles, 2008). For example,
individual differences in children’s early productive
vocabulary predict the type of categorical bias that they
acquire and performance on a novel noun generalization
task (Perry & Samuelson, 2011). Moreover, providing
children with shape category training can engender an early
shape bias, resulting in marked increases in vocabulary
growth (Samuelson, 2002). Finally, children with atypical
language development often do not demonstrate a robust
shape bias (Jones, 2003; Tek et al., 2008).
Why do we observe that the shape bias is related to
these long-term outcomes in language and cognitive
development? This work identifies one potential mechanism
to explain the relationship between the shape bias and longterm developmental outcomes in language and cognitive
development: enhanced memory for shape over other
perceptual features of objects over time. That is, the
development of the shape bias may engender a memory bias
for shape information.
How does a memory bias for shape promote children’s
categorization and generalization? A memory bias for shape
allows learners more readily retrieve shape information than
other types of information, such as other perceptual features
of objects. Thus, when encountering new category
exemplars at later points in time, learners are more likely to
remember the shape of previous category exemplars and
may more readily generalize based upon this feature than
other perceptual features. Indeed, what we remember may
influence how we categorize the world, and our developing
organization of our experiences may change how we
remember information. This bi-directional, circular process
between memory and categorization may result in the
development of a memory system that mirrors the ways in
which we categorize the world, supporting our ability to
generalize knowledge across moments in time.

Acknowledgments
Thank you to the research assistants of the University of
Wisconsin, Madison Learning, Cognition, & Development
Lab for assistance in collecting the data. I also appreciate
thoughtful conversations and feedback from Lynn Perry.

References
Baldwin, D. A. (1992). Clarifying the role of shape in
children's taxonomic assumption.
Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 54, 392–416.
Colunga, E., & Smith, L.B. (2008). Knowledge embedded
in process: The self-organization of skilled noun learning.
Developmental Science. 11, 195-203.
Gershkoff-Stowe, L., & Smith L. B. (2004). Shape and the
first hundred nouns. Child Development, 75, 1-17.
Jones, S. S. (2003). Late talkers show no shape bias in a
novel name extension task. Developmental Science, 6(5),
477-483.
Keil, F. C. (2008). The shape of things to come: The future
of the shape bias controversy. Developmental Science,
11, 216-222.
Landau, B., Smith, L. B., & Jones, S. S. (1988). The
importance of shape in early lexical learning. Cognitive
Development, 3, 299-321.
Perry, L. K. & Samuelson, L. K. (2011). The shape of the
vocabulary predicts the shape of the bias. Frontiers in
Psychology, 2:345.
Samuelson, L. K. (2002). Statistical regularities in
vocabulary guide language acquisition in connectionist
models
and
15-20-month-olds.
Developmental
Psychology, 38, 1016-1037.
Samuelson, L. K., & Bloom, P. (2008). The shape of
controversy: What counts as an explanation of
development? Developmental Science, 11, 183-184.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., Gershkoff-Stowe, L., &
Samuelson, L. K. (2002). Object name learning provides
on-the-job training for attention. Psychological Science,
13, 13–19.
Smith, L. B., & Yu, C. (2013). Visual attention is not
enough: Individual differences in statistical word-referent
learning in infants. Language, Learning and
Development, 9, 25-49.
Tek, S., Jaffery, G.,Fein, D., & Naigles, L. R. (2008). Do
children with autism spectrum disorders show a shape
bias in word learning? Autism Research, 1, 208–222.
Vlach, H. A., Ankowski, A. A., & Sandhofer, C. M. (2012).
At the same time or apart in time? The role of
presentation timing and retrieval dynamics in
generalization. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 38, 246-254.
Vlach, H. A., & Johnson, S. P. (2013). Memory constraints
on infants' cross-situational statistical learning.
Cognition, 127, 375-382.
Vlach, H. A., Sandhofer, C. M., & Kornell, N. (2008). The
spacing effect in children’s memory and category
induction. Cognition, 109, 163-167.

3054

