UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Distinction Between Unaccusative and Unergative Verbs in Turkish: An Offline and an
Eye Tracking Study of Split Intransitivity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0491x8v3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Zeyrek, Deniz
Acarturk, Cengiz

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Distinction Between Unaccusative and Unergative Verbs in Turkish:
An Offline and an Eye Tracking Study of Split Intransitivity
Deniz Zeyrek (dezeyrek@metu.edu.tr)

Cengiz Acartürk (acarturk@metu.edu.tr)

Cognitive Science, Informatics Institute
Middle East Technical University, 06800, Ankara, Turkey

investigated, though for example, works on Japanese (e.g.
Kishimoto 1996, Hirakawa 1999, Sorace & Shomura 2001)
and Urdu (Ahmet 2010) exist. Therefore, the current paper
investigates yet another non-Indo-European language,
Turkish, which is understudied with respect to the SI both
linguistically and from the processing side. We first
examine whether native speakers differentiate between
unaccusative and unergative verbs via an offline test of
grammaticality judgment. Then, to capture the real-time
processing problems of native speakers with unaccusative
and unergative verbs, we run an eye-tracking experiment.

Abstract
The Unaccusativity Hypothesis (UH) holds that intransitive
verbs are divided into two broad classes, namely
unaccusatives and unergatives. While there is evidence that
the UH holds cross-linguistically, it is known that languages
do not divide the intransitives into two uniform groups. We
investigate the unaccusative-unergative distinction in Turkish
by an offline grammaticality judgment task using a visual
analog scale and by running an eye tracking experiment to tap
on cognitive processing of split intransitivity. Cluster analyses
indicate that the results of two experiments are broadly
compatible, i.e., native speakers represent intransitive verbs in
two classes, as the UH predicts. However, the offline
experiment results specify uncontrolled process verbs as
unaccusative, whereas the eye-gaze data characterize them as
unergative. This result lends partial support for Auxiliary
Selection Hierarchy. We also suggest that the uncontrolled
process verb class might be where the unaccusativeunergative split occurs in Turkish.

Split Intransitivity and some diagnostics

Keywords: split intransitivity, unaccusative-unergative
distinction, Unaccusativity Hypothesis, Auxiliary Selection
Hierarchy, eye-tracking, reading, processing

Introduction
In modern syntax, intuitive judgments of native speakers are
of great importance in empirically testing the validity of a
linguistic theory. Yet, it is known that even carefully
elicited (offline) grammaticality judgments give variable
results because factors like the multi-dimensionality of
sentence acceptability, informants’ sophistication, the
linguistic context, etc. interact (Gerken & Beaver, 1986).
With the advent of online methods that can reveal aspects of
language processing, psycholinguists and experimental
linguists can have better grasp over their data, for example
by comparing the results obtained from offline
grammaticality judgment tests with those from online
psycholinguistic tasks. The eye-tracking method gives
particularly good results in this endeavor because in natural
and unconstrained settings eye movements and visual
attention are largely coupled (Findlay & Gilchrist, 1998).
Eye movements can capture the cognitive processing of the
linguistic stimuli and in turn allow researchers to compare
eye-gaze data with the results from offline methods.
In this paper, we are interested in investigating a
linguistic phenomenon commonly known as the
unaccusative-unergative distinction (alternatively Split
Intransitivity, SI). The SI is expected to exist crosslinguistically and has been shown to exist in various western
languages. Typologically different languages are less

Ever since the seminal work of Perlmutter (1978), the
Unaccusativity Hypothesis (UH) has been widely accepted
in linguistics. The UH states that, cross-linguistically,
intransitive verbs fall into two broad categories with respect
to their syntactic behavior, i.e. unergatives (run, swim, talk)
and unaccusatives (arrive, sink, bloom). The SI rests on the
idea that while the single argument of unergative verbs
behaves like an agent, the single argument of unaccusative
verbs behaves like an underlying theme.
Various syntactic diagnostics have been proposed to test
the SI. Among the well-known ones are perfect auxiliary
selection (for German, Italian, Dutch), the resultative
construction (for English), impersonal passivization (for
German) (Alexiadou, et al. 2004, Aranovich, 2007), and
genitive negation (for Russian) (Pesetsky, 1982). In
languages that have two perfect auxiliaries (equivalents of
have and be in English), have broadly singles out
unergatives, while be picks out unaccusatives (German Rose
hat gearbeitet; Rose ist gekommen). In English, the
resultative construction is grammatical with transitives and
unaccusatives but not with unergatives (Jane hammered the
metal flat; The river froze solid; *Tom shouted hoarse)
(Levin & Rappaport-Hovav 1995). Yet another syntactic
diagnostics is participial constructions (Kaufmann, 1995),
which seems to be one of the most reliable ones across
languages (Zaenen, 1993). In Turkish, a productive
participial construction exists, i.e. the attributive use of the
past tense suffix –mIş (henceforth the –mIş participle), e.g.,
çürü-müş elma ‘the rotten apple’. This construction appears
to be compatible with most unaccusatives but not with
unergatives (*sıçra-mış sporcu ‘the jumped sportman’).
(See Acartürk & Zeyrek, 2010 for a list of syntactic
diagnostics of the SI in Turkish).
Finally, impersonal passivization (IP) is to pick out
unergatives only, leading to ungrammaticality with

1832

unaccusatives (German Es wurde dauernd geredet; *Es
wurde schnell entkommen) (Hoekstra & Mulder 1990,
Keller 2000). In Turkish, the IP is sensitive to human
agency; therefore, it is grammatical with intransitives to the
extent they can be construed as having a human agent. For
instance, in yan-ıl-dı ‘it was burnt’ the verb is understood as
having a non-specific human subject but in *yet-il-di ‘it was
sufficed’, since the verb cannot be construed as having a
human subject, ungrammaticality results.
Research has shown that classifying intransitives as either
unaccusative or unergatives is problematic because verbs
belonging to one or the other category may deviate and may
show variant behavior with respect to certain diagnostics
across languages. Sorace (2000) argues for an Auxiliary
Selection Hierarchy (ASH), arguing for the centrality of the
semantic notions of agency and telicity for unaccusativity in
Romance and German languages. The ASH predicts that
there is (putatively universal) gradience among groups of
intransitive verbs; i.e., while verbs belonging to certain
classes (placed on the extreme positions in the hierarchy)
categorically show unaccusative or unergative syntax, the
verbs belonging to verb classes in between the extremes are
vulnerable to deviant syntactic behavior. The extreme
positions are occupied with maximally telic and dynamic
verb classes (selecting be) and maximally agentive and
nondynamic activities (selecting have). The verb categories
of the ASH are represented in Table 1, with the
categorically (‘core’) unaccusative verb class at the top, the
categorically unergative class at the bottom.
Table 1: The verb categories of the ASH
Verb class
Change of location (CoL)
Change of state (CoS)
Continuation of a pre-existing state (Sta)
Existence of state (Sta)
Uncontrolled process (Unc)
Controlled motional process (CMP)
Controlled nonmotional process (CnMP)

Example
arrive
wilt
survive
exist
shine
walk
talk

heritage language speakers provide stronger evidence for the
SI, suggesting that even in language loss situations, the SI is
invariant.
Studies showing the psycholinguistic reality of the
unaccusative and unergative verbs also exist. In an online
processing experiment, Friedmann et al. (2008) use a cross
modal lexical priming technique, and find that subjects of
unaccusatives reactivate after the unaccusative verb (i.e. a
priming effect was found after the unaccusative verb), while
subjects of unergatives do not. This result supports the idea
that the single argument of unaccusatives are generated as a
direct object and moved to the subject position in the
syntactic tree. In a neuroimaging study, Shetreet et al.
(2009) examine the cortical locations related with the
comprehension of unaccusatives and unergatives and find
different patterns of activations in the brain, leading them to
conclude that the brain distinguishes between unaccusatives
and unergatives. Their results also reveal differential
cortical activities associated with syntactic and lexical
operations that derive unaccusatives: the inferior frontal
gyrus may be associated with the execution of the syntactic
operation (where the syntactic movement of an underlying
object to subject position takes place), and the middle
temporal gyrus may be associated with the lexical
operations (as seems to be the case in the derivation of some
Hebrew unaccusatives). Lee & Thompson (2011) compare
healthy subjects and agrammatic aphasia patients. They
examine real-time production of unaccusatives and
unergatives using an “eye-tracking while speaking”
paradigm. The eye movement data reveal that for
agrammatic patients, the unaccusative-unergative distinction
plays a role in initial planning stage of sentences. The
results lend support for the fact that human sentence
production system differentially processes unaccusatives vs.
unergatives, and that the distinction is preserved in
agrammatic patients, though their time course of sentence
planning appears to be different than healthy subjects.

Experiment 1
Experimental Evidence for the Syntactic Distinction
between Unaccusative and Unergative Verbs The areas of
language acquisition and language attrition are usually
regarded as test beds for linguistic theories. Through offline
tests, a number of experimental studies in second language
acquisition (L2) and language attrition have pointed out the
difficulties of non-native speakers in producing
unaccusatives and unergatives with appropriate syntactic
constructions. For example, Sorace (1993a, b) shows that
L2 learners of Italian initially exhibit consistent intuitions
with respect to core unaccusative and unergative verbs,
although they cannot attain native-like proficiency. Montrul
(2005) discovers that bilingual heritage speakers of Spanish
display an advantage over L2 speakers in syntactically
distinguishing between unaccusative and unergatives verbs.
While Sorace’s L2 studies have generally shown that the SI
is reflected in the learners’ developing grammar, Montrul’s

In Experiment 1, we elicited grammaticality judgments for
the –mIş participle and the IP with the six verb classes in the
ASH. We collapsed continuation of pre-existing state verbs
and existence of state verbs under the stative class, having
six verb classes to test. A set of sentences was constructed
for the verbs in the –mIş participle and the IP to serve as the
stimuli. The sentences with the CoL verbs were constructed
with a goal phrase, e.g. eve gitmiş çocuk ‘the home gone
child’. A comparison of the judgments showed that when a
goal phrase was used, a higher mean acceptability score was
obtained than when it was not used, t(66) = 3.35, p < .05.
We expected the –mIş participle to broadly identify
unaccusative verbs (CoL, CoS, Sta); the IP to broadly
identify unergative verbs (Unc, CMP, CnMP).
Participants, Materials and Design Seventy-two
participants from the Middle East Technical University
(METU), Turkey, participated in Experiment 1 (mean age =
28.0, SD = 6.63; 37 female). All participants were native

1833

speakers of Turkish. For each of the six verb classes, five to
nine verbs were selected. An additional set of sentences
were constructed with –mIş for CoL verbs with a goal
phrase. Impersonal passives were also formed with the same
verbs. The participants were presented a total of 150
sentences (72 test sentences and 78 filler sentences). The
experiment had a within-subject design with two factors: (1)
syntactic diagnostic with two conditions, namely the –mIş
participle and the IP, (2) verb class with six conditions,
namely CoL, CoS, Sta, Unc, CMP, and CnMP. The
dependent variable was the mean judgment scores of the
participants. The judgment scores were recorded by a webbased interface designed for eliciting linguistic judgments.
The participants reported their judgment scores with
reference to a reference sentence by clicking on a visual
analog scale, which had the end anchors “0” and “100” at
the left and the right ends (a visual analog scale is a
horizontal or vertical straight line used for measuring
subjective judgments; see Cowart, 1997, for the use of
scaling methods in eliciting linguistic judgments). The
presentation order of the experimental material was
randomized. The experiment was conducted in single
sessions with five-minute breaks between three randomized
blocks where the stimuli were presented. The duration of the
experiment was approximately 35 minutes. This is a
modified form of the magnitude estimation (ME) task,
which we chose to use since we wanted to obtain accurate
ratings (but see Sprouse 2011, who argues that the results of
ME experiments are equally well informative as other types
of acceptability judgment tasks).
Results Data from one participant were excluded due to a
technical failure during the experiment. Data from another
participant were excluded because she was a linguist (by
self-assessment). Data from three participants were
discarded because they did not complete the test. The
remaining data from 67 participants were included in the
analysis. The mean judgment scores were calculated for
each test sentence, and the means for the verb classes were
determined by averaging over the test sentences in each verb
class, separately for the two syntactic diagnostics. An
analysis of variance test was conducted to evaluate the
effect of two within-subject factors on the judgment scores.
We used an alpha level of .05 for all statistical tests. The
results revealed a main effect for the verb class Λ = .29,
F(5, 62) = 29.6, p < .01, partial η2 = .63 and a main effect
for the diagnostics, Λ = .37, F(1, 66) = 114.41, p < .05,
partial η2 = .70. Further investigations of the results for the –
mIş participle and the IP are discussed below.
The –mIş participle The follow-up comparisons of the
ANOVA test revealed significant differences in the mean
judgement scores of the verbs with the –mIş participle. The
results revealed highest judgments for the CoS verbs, lowest
for the CnMP verbs. The results are shown schematically as
follows. In the following notation, the greater-than (“>”)
symbol shows a statistically significant difference between
the two sides of the symbol. The “≥” symbol shows that

both statistically significant results and non-significant
results are included in the two sides of the symbol. CoS
received the highest mean judgment score, whereas CnMP
received the lowest mean judgment score. No significant
difference was observed between CoL and Sta. Finally, CoL
received significantly higher scores than Unc, whereas the
difference between Sta and Unc was not significant.
CoS > (CoL = Sta) ≥ Unc > CMP > CnMP
For identifying the split between unaccusative verb classes
and unergative verb classes in terms of the mean judgment
scores, a cluster analysis was run on six variables, each
corresponding to a verb class. A hierarchical cluster analysis
using Ward’s method produced two clusters, between which
the variables were significantly different in the main. The
first cluster consisted of CoL, CoS and Unc, whereas the
second cluster consisted of Sta, CMP and CnMP. This result
suggests that the SI in Turkish can be observed at the border
between the Unc class and the Sta class, when acceptability
scores for the –mIş participle are employed for the cluster
analysis (Figure 1).

Figure 1: Split Intransitivity suggested by the results of
Experiment 1.
Impersonal Passivization A comparison of the mean
judgment scores among the six verbs classes revealed that
the judgments for CoL verbs had highest mean scores with
the IP, whereas the judgments for CoS and Sta verbs
received the lowest mean scores. The results can be shown
schematically below. The hierarchy is similar to the one
revealed by the –mIş participle diagnostics, with the
exception of the location of CoL.
(CoS = Sta) < Unc < (CMP = CnMP) < CoL
For the IP judgments, a cluster analysis using Ward’s
method revealed a slightly different picture from the –mIş
participle: A hierarchical cluster analysis produced two
clusters with significant differences between the variables in
the main. The first cluster was formed by CoS and Sta,
whereas the remaining four verb classes formed the second
cluster. The unexpected member of the second cluster was
CoL, which is assumed to be unaccusative in many
languages. This behaviour of the CoL verbs may be
explained by the fact that in Turkish, the IP controls for the
semantic notion of agency.
To sum up, the results of Experiment 1 unambiguously
showed that the –mIş participle places CoS in the
unaccusative group and CnMP in the unergative group. A
cluster analysis divides the verb classes into two parts,

1834

placing CoS, CoL and UnC in one cluster, and Sta, CMP
and CnMP in the other. On the other hand, the IP
unambiguously places CoS and Sta in the unaccusative
group and CoL in the unergative group. A clustering
analysis for the IP produced two clusters, placing CoS and
Sta in one of the clusters and the remaining four verb
classes into the other cluster. The most promising finding
was the results of the cluster analyses, which divided the six
verb classes into two groups with respect to both
diagnostics. Except for the CoL verbs which cause difficulty
for the IP, the results of the cluster analyses are wellaligned, such that a split was found among the intransitives,
separating CoS and Sta verbs (as unaccusatives) from the
rest. This split was particularly evident with the –mIş
diagnostics.
The results obtained in Experiment 1 are based on the
mean acceptability judgments of the participants. In such
experiments, participants report a judgment for the whole
sentence rather than for a constituent of the sentence, but the
results are usually interpreted in terms of the constituents
rather than the whole sentences. This method of measuring
participants’ linguistic intuitions is usually called “offline”
because a judgment is reported after the processing of the
linguistic constituents. For this reason, the interpretation of
the results obtained by offline measurement techniques is
usually subject to an assumption about the cause of the
difficulty during the course of processing (e.g., the resulting
judgment score is the score given to the whole sentence,
whereas the authors usually discuss the constituents of the
sentence in isolation). This gap between the results and their
interpretation can be partially closed by using online
processing measures, such as the eye tracking methodology
(Rayner, 1998, 2009). In this methodology, certain
properties of eye movements are used as an indication of the
processing difficulties a reader may experience while she is
reading sentential constituents.
The frequently used eye movement parameters in online
measurement of language processing are fixation duration
(the duration of a single fixation on a certain location), gaze
time (the sum of the fixation durations on a certain region),
fixation count (the number of fixations on a certain region),
and gaze regression (the number of passes on a certain
region, measured in terms of fixation counts). Accordingly,
longer fixation duration, longer gaze time, higher number of
fixation counts, and higher number of regressions on a
certain part of the text are used as measures of processing
difficulty about the relevant sentential constituent. Due to its
potential to reveal processing difficulties in reading, the eye
tracking methodology can be used as a measure of online
language comprehension processes (Rayner, 1998, 2009;
Pickering, et al., 2004; see Staub & Rayner, 2007, for a
review). Recently, the eye-tracking methodology has been
used to identify the processing correlates of the ASH in
Italian (Bard et al., 2010).

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we recorded the eye movements of
participants while they were reading the test sentences of

Experiment 1. We employed the –mIş participle as the
diagnostic due to its higher strength as a diagnostic of the
SI. We focused on the number of regressions of the
participants on the critical words (i.e., the verbs with the –
mIş participle). We expected the participants to perform
more regressions toward the critical words in case of
processing difficulty.
Participants, Materials and Design Twenty-nine students
from METU participated in the experiment (mean age =
21.9, SD = 3.50; 19 female). All participants were native
speakers of Turkish. They were presented the same set of –
mIş participle test sentences in Experiment 1. They were
asked to assess the presented stimuli according to binary
judgments (i.e., grammatical vs. ungrammatical). The
participants reported their judgments by pressing one of the
two keys on the keyboard, one for the grammatical response
and the other for the ungrammatical one. This judgment
method is different than one employed in Experiment 1. The
reason for using the yes/no answering paradigm was to keep
the stimuli screen as simple as possible to record higher
quality eye movement data for the stimuli sentences.
The eye movements of the participants were recorded by a
Tobii T120, a non-intrusive, 120 Hz eye-tracker integrated
into a 17” TFT monitor with 1024x768 pixels. The spatial
resolution and the accuracy of the eye-tracker were about
0.30° and 0.50° degrees respectively in the product
catalogue.1 The experiment had a within-subject design. The
presentation order of the experimental material was
randomized. The experiment was conducted in single
sessions in the Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) Lab at
METU, and it lasted approximately 15 minutes.
Results Data from one participant were not included due to
a total calibration failure of the eye-tracking device. The
data from the remaining 28 participants were included in the
analysis. Twelve of a total of 1008 eye movement protocols
(for 28 participants and 36 sentences) were excluded from
the analysis due to a partial calibration failure (98.8 % of all
the collected data were included in the analysis). Fixations
shorter than 50 ms were also excluded from the analysis.
The participants’ gaze regressions to the critical word
(which was always the verb with the –mIş participle) were
calculated for all the stimuli. Table 2 below shows the mean
number of gaze regressions for each verb class.
An ANOVA test revealed a main effect for the
differences in mean number of regressions among verb
classes, Λ = .32, F(5, 24) = 10.1, p < .01, partial η2 = .68.
Further pairwise comparisons revealed the pattern of results
schematically shown below, showing that CoL and Unc
verbs revealed fewer number of regressions than CoS and
1

In reading experiments, gaze time data are better recorded by
an eye tracker of resolution 250 Hz or more (usually, 500 Hz)
compared to a 120 Hz eye tracker (Holmqvist, et al., 2011). To
avoid the drawbacks of the gaze time calculations with the
available eye tracker, we measured gaze regressions to the critical
word, which was much easier due to the relatively large saccadic
amplitude in regressions.

1835

Sta verbs, which revealed fewer number of regressions than
CnMP and CMP verbs.
(CoL = Unc) < (CoS = Sta) ≤ CnMP < CMP
Table 2: Mean number of regressions for the verb classes.
The numbers in parentheses show standard deviation.
Verb Class
CoL
CoS
Unc
Sta
CMP
CnMP

Gaze Regression (SD)
2.02 (1.64)
2.83 (1.99)
2.67 (2.12)
2.26 (1.68)
3.43 (2.12)
2.82 (1.89)

A cluster analysis was run on six variables, each
corresponding to a verb class, to identify the split between
unaccusatives and unergatives with respect to eye-gaze data.
A hierarchical cluster analysis using Ward’s method
produced two clusters, between which the variables were
significantly different in the main. The first cluster consisted
of CoL and CoS, whereas the second cluster consisted of the
remaining verb classes, namely Unc, Sta, CMP and CnMP.
The results obtained by cluster analysis did not group Unc
in the CoL-CoS cluster, contra expectations revealed by the
pairwise comparisons.

Figure 2: Split Intransitivity suggested by the results of
Experiment 2.
To sum up, the results of Experiment 2 grouped CoL and
CoS verbs in one cluster, the remaining verb classes in
another cluster (Figure 2).

Summary, Conclusions & Future Work
In the current study we offered a description of the facts
about the SI phenomenon in Turkish by an offline
grammaticality judgment task and an eye-tracking
experiment. The purpose of Experiment 1 was to obtain
judgments from native speakers with respect to the bestknown syntactic diagnostics of the SI (the –mIş participle
and the IP) and the results informed us as to how native
speakers computed contextualized intransitive verbs with
these diagnostics. Experiment 2 was conducted to
understand the real-time processing difficulties of Turkish
native speakers while reading sentences containing –mIş
participles with six verb classes, providing data as to how
they cognitively processed the intransitive verbs.
The (offline) results of Experiment 1 (particularly those
from the –mIş participle task) and the (online) results of

Experiment 2 are broadly similar to each other. Overall, the
results provide supporting evidence that there is a split
among the intransitive verbs in Turkish, with the CoL and
CoS verb groups as unaccusative, the CMP and CnMP
groups as unergatives, in support of the UH.
The dividing line between the unaccusatives and
unergatives then, might be the Unc verbs in Turkish. The
Unc verbs are classified as unaccusative in the offline
grammaticality judgment task and as unergatives in the eyetracking task. The difficulty of grouping the Unc verbs with
a specific intransitive class with respect to our tasks needs
more explanation. As research in the last decade has shown,
the variant behavior of certain verbs are a challenge for the
UH. Rosen (1984) shows that many uncontrolled verbs
exhibit variant behavior across languages, e.g., sneeze
displays unergative behavior in Italian and Dutch,
unaccusative behaviour in Eastern Pomo, and are
compatible with both unaccusative and unergative
diagnostics in Choctaw. Bleed fairs well with unergative
diagnostics in Italian, with unaccusative ones in Eastern
Pomo.
Regarding our results of Experiment 1, Sta verbs are
either unaccusative or unergatives; regarding the results of
Experiment 2, they are unergatives. So Sta verbs also
exhibit variable behavior in Turkish, similar to many other
languages. For example, in Italian last, in German lay may
take either have or be (Sorace 2000).
According to Sorace (2000), variability is a notion
associated with the position of a verb class on the ASH; the
more a verb class is away from the extreme positions, the
more likelihood it has for variant syntactic behavior. This is
the sense in which she uses gradience. Verbs belonging to
verb classes away from the poles of the ASH will also
exhibit graded perceptions of (un)grammaticality. Both Unc
and Sta are in the middle sections of the ASH, implying that
they would have variable syntactic status and yield graded
(un)grammaticality judgments. While we do not claim to
have found gradience among the groups Turkish
intransitives we looked at, we take the difficulty of
categorizing the Unc and Sta verbs as unaccusative or
unergative as evidence for the variability of these verb
classes, in partial support of the ASH.
Some questions remain unanswered. We have not
checked, for example, the collocational probabilities of the
verbs with the –mIş participle (or the IP). Future research
will show whether such statistical tendencies in the
language have an effect on the acceptability judgments or
eye-gaze data.
Acknowledgments. This study was partially supported by
TUBITAK (Turkish Scientific and Technological Research
Council) BIDEB. Thanks to METU HCI Laboratory, Emine
Eren and Semra Küçük for their support in the experiments
and eye movement data annotation.

1836

References
Acartürk, C., & Zeyrek, D. (2010). Unaccusative/unergative
distinction in Turkish: A Connectionist approach. In S.
Hussain, V. Sornlertlamvanich & H. Riza (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Asian Language
Resouces. (pp. 111-119). Beijing, China: Chinese
Information Processing Society of China.
Ahmet, T. (2010). The unaccusativity/unergativity
distinction in Urdu. JSAL, CSLI Publications, 3(1), 3-21.
Alexiadou, A., Anagnostopoulou, E., & Everaert, M.
(2004). The unaccusativity puzzle: Explorations of the
syntax-lexicon interface. Oxford University Press.
Aranovich, R. (2007). Split auxiliary systems. Amsterdam/
Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Bard, E. G., Frenck-Mestre, C., & Sorace, A. (2010).
Processing auxiliary selection with Italian intransitive
verbs. Linguistics, 48(2), 325-361.
Burzio, L. (1986). Italian syntax: A Government-Binding
approach. Dordrecht: Foris.
Cowart, W. (1997). Experimental syntax: applying objective
methods to sentence judgments. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Gerken, L. A., & Beaver, T. G. (1986). Linguistic intuitions
are the result of interactions between perceptual processes
and linguistic universals. Cognitive Science, 10, 457-476.
Findlay, J. M., & Gilchrist, I. D. (1998). Eye guidance and
visual search. In G. Underwood (Ed.), Eye guidance in
reading and scene perception (pp. 295-312). Oxford, UK:
Elsevier.
Friedmann, N., Taranto, G., Shapiro, L. & Swinney, D.
2008. The leaf fell (the leaf): the online processing of
unaccusatives, Linguistic Inquiry, 39, 355-377.
Hirakawa, M. (1999). L2 acquisition of Japanese
unaccusative verbs byspeakers of English and Chinese. In
K. Kanno (Ed.), The acquisition of Japanese as a second
language (pp. 89–113). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Hoekstra, T., & Mulder, R. (1990). Unergatives as copular
verbs: Locational and existential predication. The
Linguistic Review, 7, 1-79.
Holmqvist, K., Nyström, M., Andersson, R., Dewhurst, R.,
Halszka, J., & van de Weijer, J. (2011). Eye tracking: A
comprehensive guide to methods and measures. Oxford
University Press.
Kaufmann, I. (1995). O-and D-Predicates: a semantic
approach to the unaccusative-unergative distinction.
Journal of Semantics, 12, 377-427.
Keller, F. 2000. Gradience in grammar: Experimental and
computational aspects of degrees of grammaticality.
University of Edinburgh dissertation.
Keller, F. & Sorace, A. (2003). Gradient auxiliary selection
and impersonal passivization in German: An experimental
investigation. Journal of Linguistics, 39, 57-108.
Kishimoto, H. (1996). Split intransitivity in Japanese and
the Unaccusative Hypothesis. Language, 72, 248–286.
Lee, J. & Thompson, C. K. (2011). Real-time Production of
unergative and unaccusative sentences in normal and

agrammatic
speakers:
An
eye-tracking
study.
Aphasiology, 25(6-7), 813-825.
Levin, B., & Rappaport-Hovav, M. (1995). Unaccusativity
at the syntax-lexical semantics interface. MIT Press.
Montrul, S. (2005). Second language acquisition and first
language loss in adult early bilinguals: exploring some
differences and similarities, Second Language Research,
21, 199-249.
Perlmutter, D. (1978). Impersonal passives and the
Unaccusative Hypothesis. In Proceedings of the Berkeley
Linguistic Society, 4, 157-189.
Pickering, M. J., Frisson, S., McElree, B. & Traxler, M.
(2004). Eye movements and semantic composition. In M.
Carreiras & C. Clifton (Eds.), The online study of
sentence comprehension: eyetracking, ERP, and beyond
(pp. 33-50). New York & London: Psychology Press.
Rayner, K. (1998). Eye movements in reading and
information processing: 20 years of research.
Psychological Bulletin, 124(3), 372-422.
Rayner, K. (2009). Eye movements in reading: models and
data. Journal of Eye Movement Research 2(5), 1-10.
Rosen, C. G. (1984). The interface between semantic roles
and initial grammatical relations. In D. M. Perlmutter &
C. Rosen (Eds.), Studies in Relational Grammar (pp. 3877). University of Chicago Press.
Shetreet, E., Friedmann, N., Hadar, U. (2009). The neural
correlates of linguistic distinctions: Unaccusative and
Unergative verbs. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
22(10), 2306-2315.
Sprouse, J. (2011). A test of the cognitive assumptions of
Magnitude Estimation: Commutativity does not hold for
acceptability judgments. Language, 87(2), 274-288.
Pesetsky, D. M. (1982). Paths and categories (Doctoral
dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology).
Sorace, A. (1993a). Incomplete vs. divergent representations
of unaccusativity in non-native grammars of Italian,
Second Language Research, 9, 22-47.
Sorace, A. (1993b). Unaccusativity and auxiliary choice in
non-native grammars of Italian and French: asymmetries
and predictable indeterminancy, Journal of French
Language Studies, 3, 71-93.
Sorace, A. (2000). Gradients in auxiliary selection with
intransitive verbs. Language, 76, 859-890.
Sorace, A., & Shomura, Y. (2001). Lexical constraints on
the acquisition of split intransitivity. Evidence from L2
Japanese. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 23,
247-278.
Staub, A., & Rayner, K. (2007). Eye movements and on-line
comprehension processes. In G. Gaskell (Ed.), The
Oxford handbook of psycholinguistics (pp. 327–342).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Zaenen, A. (1993). Unaccusativity in Dutch: Integrating
syntax and lexical semantics. In J. Pustejovsky (Ed.)
Semantics and the lexicon. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.

1837

