UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Fast and the Not-So-Frugal: Human Heuristics for Optimization Problem Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/616016t3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Kefalidou, Genovefa
Ormerod, Thomas C.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Fast and the Not-So-Frugal: Human Heuristics for Optimization Problem
Solving
Genovefa Kefalidou (Genovefa.Kefalidou@nottingham.ac.uk)
Horizon Digital Economy Research / Human Factors Research Group, The University of Nottingham, Innovation Park,
Triumph Road, Nottingham, NG7 2TU, UK

Thomas C. Ormerod (t.ormerod@surrey.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey, GU2 7XH, UK

Abstract
In this paper, human heuristics have been identified that
provide close to optimal solutions when solving Capacitated
Vehicle Routing Problems (CVRPs). Results from previous
experiments showed humans can produce good solutions
relatively fast that compete with computer-based methods
giving further support to previous research on Traveling
Salesman Problems (TSPs). Multiple Regression analyses
have been conducted to show the best heuristics adopted by
participants and that lead to better CVRP solutions. Identified
heuristics are categorized in visuospatial and arithmetic
heuristics. Visuospatial heuristics (e.g. Clustering, Anchoring)
performed better than the arithmetic (e.g. Balancing).
Strategy switching appears to be a critical step within CVRP
solutions suggesting that heuristics adopted are fast yet notso-frugal, complimenting the fast and frugal toolkit. Results
are discussed under the light of problem-solving theories and
in terms of how best human heuristics can inform the current
state-of-art computational algorithms used in optimization
problem solving.
Keywords: optimization; problem solving; weak methods;
fast and frugal heuristics; capacitated vehicle routing
problems.

weak methods approach (i.e. means-ends analysis and hillclimbing) where people select solution attempts according
to the progress made towards the problem goal, and which
tend to produce satisfactory but sub-optimal solutions.
Gigerenzer’s ‘fast and frugal’ heuristics, build upon Newell
and Simon’s theories and are of low cognitive effort
(Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996). Fast and frugal heuristics
aim to explain near-perfect performance by humans on a
range of seemingly computationally intractable tasks by
capitalizing upon the characteristics of the task
environment, without, however, determining any specific
heuristics under this category. While ‘satisficing’ heuristics
apply sequential searching for available alternatives, ‘fast
and frugal’ heuristics necessitate little information and
computational resources in order to make different decisions
(Gigerenzer, Todd & ABC Research Group, 1999). The
research reported in this paper aims to offer an insight as to
what heuristics are involved in solving hard yet widely
applied problems such as CVRPs and identify their nature
and qualities.

Figure 1: This is a figure.

Introduction
A key issue in developing problem-solving theories is to
identify human heuristics adopted when solving complex
problems. An example of such problems are the Capacitated
Vehicle Routing Problems (CVRPs), which are hard
optimization problems, where the best solution must be
discovered from a set of candidate solutions too large to
allow exhaustive search.
In CVRPs, one has to discover a number of shortest
routes taken by a capacity-limited vehicle from one or more
depots to deliver to customers (represented as nodes)
distributed in Euclidean space (Figure 1). Each station
(node) must be visited once only and the vehicle must not
exceed a weight limit (in Figure 1, it is 100) for each route.
Computational algorithms exist for solving CVRPs each of
which maintain limitations (i.e. unable to tackle with
dynamic environments or local optimum - Michalewicz &
Fogel (2002)). Consequently, CVRPs have considerable
practical importance (e.g., in transportation and logistics)
and theoretical importance as they provide an excellent
testbed to investigate problem complexity and heuristics.
Relevant psychological theories of problem-solving and
bounded rationality include Newell and Simon’s (1972)

Figure 1: The optimal solution of a CVRP 39-6 problem.
Human heuristics employed when solving optimization
problems are of interest for two reasons: for furthering the
progress of problem-solving theories by understanding how
people arrive at good solutions and for informing
computational algorithms. McGregor & Ormerod (1996)
examined drawn solutions to Traveling Salesman Problems
(TSPs) – similar to CVRPs without weight constraints and
multiple routes – and found that, with problems of up to 100
nodes, human solutions were comparable with heuristic
computer methods. They suggested that solutions are guided
by the conceptualization of a convex-hull boundary, which
coincides with the detection of natural object boundaries in
human vision (e.g., Marr, 1980), moving from a global to a

2477

local conceptualization of the solution. Others suggest a
more local-to-global heuristics generation approach: the
‘crossing avoidance’ approach (Van Rooij, Stege &
Schactman, 2003) where lines crossed indicate tour
inefficiency and the nearest neighbor heuristics (Lee &
Vickers, 2000) according to which people select nodes to
complete a tour according to their distance from the current
node. As CVRPs carry additional performance requirements
(i.e. the need to calculate total weights per route to provide
valid solutions), the reliance on global or local feature
detection through visual perception becomes insufficient.
As such, it is unclear as to whether convex-hull-type
heuristics or cross avoidance may lead to near optimal
solutions.
Under a weak methods account, one may exhibit an
incremental testing of route alternatives leading to purely
satisficing solutions while under a ‘fast and frugal’ account,
rapid solutions with very limited alternatives may be
considered that promote optimality in human solutions.

number of nodes. In the Verbalization group, participants
were asked to express all their thoughts (including
calculations and strategies adopted) during the problem
solving process. If they remained silent for more than 1
minute they were prompted to think-aloud.
Stimuli consisted of two problems with 33 nodes with 4
and 5 routes to draw respectively, one problem with 39
nodes and 6 routes to draw and a problem with 45 nodes and
7 routes to draw. An example of a problem given with a
participant’s solution can be seen in Figure 2.

The Experiment
The Experiment asked people to solve CVRPs, while
thinking aloud in order to identify heuristics and strategies
employed during the problem solving process. Task
complexity varied by increasing the number of nodes tours
required in each problem. Human heuristics were identified
based on participants’ verbalizations, on their videorecordings while solving the problems and on participants’
paper notes.

Method

Figure 2: A participant’s solution (33-5 problem).

Participants
Forty-nine students of Lancaster University (M age = 24
years, SD age = 1.86) were paid £6 each to participate.

Design
Participants were randomly assigned to either a
Verbalization (24 people) or a Non-Verbalization group (25
people).

Materials and Procedure
In an individual setting, participants were asked to solve 4
randomized CVRPs after solving one practice problem.
All the sessions were video-recorded. There was no time
limit and the problems were A4 paper-based. Students had
to use different color pencils to draw the different routes.
Each route had to start and end to the depot (a node
represented with a lighter color shade than the others).
Participants were instructed to use either separate papersheets or the same paper stimuli as notepads for any
calculations.
Problem-specific instructions were presented at the
bottom of each problem page indicating the required
number of routes, the total weight to be collected and the

The CVRPs used in the Experiment and their optimal
solutions (generated using a Branch and Cut algorithm
(Augerat et al., 1995) are adopted from the Operational
Research literature in which they have been widely used for
optimization research. These CVRPs were downloaded
(alongside with their published optimal solutions) in text file
format from the ‘VRP Website’ (VRP Web –
http://www.bernabe.dorronsoro.es/vrp/). These problems
were chosen because they have published available optimal
solutions and therefore, comparisons can be drawn between
human solutions and algorithmic solutions. Experimental
stimuli was prepared using software developed by Simon
Slavin (Ormerod & Slavin, 2005) (Figure 2). The quality of
the participants’ solutions was measured in Percentage
Above Optimal (PAO) values (adapted from MacGregor &
Ormerod, 1996) using the following formula: (x / y – 1) *
100, where x is the total problem solution distance and y is
the optimal distance. The PAO values correspond to how far
a participant’s solution is from the optimal solution, which
is always 0. The total distance of solutions and the optimal
distances were calculated using software that the first author
of this paper developed.

2478

Results
Research has shown that participants are able to reach close
to optimal CVRP solutions quickly and that verbalization
did not impair their performance (Kefalidou, 2011).
The verbal protocols were recorded in written form
(typewritten transcripts) where all the verbalizations (both
participants’ and experimenter’s), calculations and time logs
of the participants’ responses were included in the verbal
protocols. An inter-rater reliability was conducted and
Cohen’s Kappa statistic (k-statistic) was calculated for the
qualitative verbalization data obtained from the
experimental data, a high Kappa statistic was obtained (k =
.72) showing that the level of agreement between the
analysts regarding the identified strategies was 72%, which
is considered to indicate good agreement (Bakeman &
Gottman, 1997).
Strategies identified Human strategies are identified
through the verbal and visual analyses of the videos taken
during the experiment. Verbal protocols were retrieved from
the videos of the participants from the experimentalVerbalizing group. Strategies were categorized in superordinate groups based on dominant features of each strategy
(visuospatial route construction (V) vs. arithmetic route
construction (A)) as described below. Participants’
performances (PAO) as grouped by the super-ordinate
categories are presented in Table 1.
Major identified strategies are the Calculating and the
Clustering. Calculators (A) are the participants that summed
the weights of the nodes as nodes were added to each route
ensuring the weight constraint per truck was not violated.
Calculators have similarities to those using the Nearest
Neighbor (V) heuristic with the exception that those using
Nearest Neighbor targeted close by nodes while calculators
selected nodes based on their weight. Clusterers (V) were
the participants who solved the problems based on their
visual perception by clustering the neighborhood nodes into
separate groups each one of which was representing a
different route. Clusterers are differentiated from nearest
neighbor in that clustering nodes together was the first step
prior to generating a solution while for Nearest Neighbor
strategists including nodes based on proximity occurred
during the construction of the solution.
Table 1: Super-ordinate classifications of strategies used
with respective Percentage Above Optimal (PAO) across the
two groups (Verbalization and non-Verbalization).
Superordinate
Classification
Visuospatial
Arithmetic

PAO
PAO
Verbalization NonVerbalization
13.8
10.6
18.0
15.7

Other participants exhibited the behavior of Averaging
(A) where they were designing routes based on the
calculated average capacity per vehicle. Others were

following an Anchoring (V) approach where they were
designing routes starting from the more distant nodes while
adding up weights of nodes to the route while returning
back to the depot. Maximizers (A) were strategists focusing
on handling the nodes with the largest demand first and then
including the smaller ones in their routes. Remainder (V)
was the strategy where participants were planning ahead to
pick up nodes on their way back to depot. Nodes to be
visited on the way back were identified visually by
participants. Balancing (A) participants ensured that each
route they drew retained similar total weight – another
strategy relying on calculations. Finally, Remainder-Filling
(V and A) was the same as Remainder except that
participants were accounting for the weight of the nodes to
be added. A brief extract from a verbal protocol showing
application of strategies is as follows:
“So…I’m gonna try and get the routes…for each
truck…hmm…closer to each other…and then…and closer to
the average…and then for the last truck…I’m going to leave
what’s left…few bits…ok…I’m starting from the depot…”.
The participant above started with the Calculator strategy
and then switched to Averaging suggesting a ‘switching’
phase, which appears to be a prevailing part of problem
solving. Table 1 shows that participants that followed
Visuospatial strategies performed better than participants
that adopted Arithmetic strategies independently of whether
they were Verbalizing or not.
Seventeen participants were categorized as adopting a
predominately Visuospatial strategy while 24 adopted a
predominately Arithmetic strategy. For example, if a
participant was using the Clustering strategy throughout the
completion of the problem (even if he had been switching to
other strategies), they were considered to be a
Visuospatial/Clusterer
strategist
that
followed
predominantly the Clustering Visuospatial strategy.

Optimal Heuristics by Problem
33-4 Problem (P2) One participant from the Silent group
(0.51 PAO) and two from the Think Aloud group (0.26 and
0.35 PAO) performed close to optimal. The participant from
the Silent group who used many strategies, including
Clustering, Calculation, Nearest Neighbor, and Maximizing
(they began their routes with the latter two), Anchoring and
Remainder. They switched strategies frequently. The same
pattern was observed with the two participants from Think
Aloud group who used different strategies interchangeably.
The majority of the participants’ pool performed well
(69%). The worst performance in the Silent group was
26.90 PAO and in the Think Aloud group was 26.27 PAO.
Both participants used Calculation as a main strategy. In
contrast to the participants with a good performance, these
participants used only Anchoring as an alternative strategy.
A multiple forced entry regression was performed to
examine the impact of strategies use on solving all the
problems in the Experiment. The forced entry method was
chosen to test which strategies promote good performance
when solving CVRPs because the qualitative data analysis

2479

and the participants’ performance (PAO scores) suggested
that certain strategies may improve or may impair the
human performance.
As the qualitative analyses conducted though indicated
the high frequency of different strategies usage from both
the Visuospatial and Arithmetic groups, the first author
decided to conduct further regression analyses using the
low-level and more detailed classification of the strategies
adopted instead of the high-level classification.
To investigate further the influence of strategies on
performance a linear multiple regression analyses were
conducted using the forced entry method testing all the
possible combinations of low-level strategies compared to
the participants’ performance.
The regression model that was fit included two predictor
variables. The reason for fitting two predictor variables in
each model is because the sample size of the participants in
the verbalization groups did not allow the fitting of more
than 2 predictors in the model. According to Field (2005),
the number of predictors to fit in a regression model highly
depends on the sample size. All the possible permutations of
strategies’ couples were fit into separate regression models
(two only strategies were fit in each model using the forced
entry method for the reasons explained above). The best
model was chosen based on the best AIC value. The
goodness of an AIC value is determined by how low it is. A
good and robust model has a low AIC value (Wagenmakers
and Farrell, 2004). The dependent variable was the PAO
scores of participants’ performance.
Using the enter method, a significant model emerged
F(2,20) = 5.50, p < .05, Adjusted R2 = .310, AIC = 143.62.
Regression results for the 33-4 problem show that the use of
Anchoring, which is a Visuospatial strategy predicted good
performance. Table 2 shows the regression results on P2
(33-4).
Most of the participants who performed between 10 and
20 PAO had at least two different strategies that they used
more than twice interchangeably. The majority of the
solvers were serial planners, which means that they were
designing their routes one after the completion of other
(70%), while only 30% were parallel planners. The most
popular strategy in the Silent group was Calculating (used
throughout the problem) as well as Clustering and
Anchoring with 90% frequency of use each. The most
popular strategies in the Think Aloud group used throughout
this problem were both Calculating and Clustering,
followed by Remainder (70%), Averaging (10%), Nearest
Neighbor (20%) and Balancing (20%).

33-5 Problem (P3) Fewer participants performed well than
with 33-4 problem (22 participants < 10 PAO vs. 34
participants in 33-4). Three participants performed in the
30-40 PAO range, one who performed in the 40-50 PAO
range and one in the above 60 PAO range. One participant
from the Silent group performed well with 0.62 PAO. No
participant from the Think Aloud group performed at < 1
PAO. However, two participants performed in the 1-2 PAO
range. Again, good-performing participants employed many
strategies throughout, notably the Clustering strategy. They
also used Nearest Neighbor, Maximizing, Anchoring and
Remainder. Switching between strategies was less common
in this problem. The worst performance in this problem
came from a participant from the Think Aloud group with
66.47 PAO. The participant was using Calculating strategy
throughout completion of the problem, only switching to
Anchoring twice.
Using the enter method, a significant model emerged
F(2,20) = 5.08, p < .05, Adjusted R2 = .290, AIC = 172.273.
Regression results on verbalization data for the 33-5
problem showed that an Arithmetic strategy (Balancing) is a
predictor of poor performance. As the number of routes to
draw increases, an Arithmetic strategy such as Balancing
impairs the performance. Table 3 shows the regression
results for this P3 (33-5) problem. Similar to 33-4 problem,
the most popular strategies were the Calculating and
Clustering (100% and 90% frequency of use respectively).
However, the strategy Anchoring appears to gain in
popularity (70%). The least used strategies are again
Balancing (10%) and Averaging (10%).
Table 3: Linear Regression results for P3 Strategies.

Constant
P3BALA
P3REM

Constant
P2ANCH
P2REM-FILL

SE B
2.25**
1.11
1.32

SE B
3.72**
2.77
1.95

β
.56**
.35

Note R2 = .36; adjusted R2 = .29. *p < .05, **p < .001
39-6 Problem (P4) Similarly to the previous problems, a
forced entry linear multiple regression was performed for P4
(39-6) problem (Table 4). Using the enter method, a
significant model emerged F (2,20) = 3.61, p < .05,
Adjusted R2 = .207, AIC = 191.803. The results are
displayed in Table 4.
Table 4: Linear Regression results for P4 Strategies.

Table 2: Linear Regression results for P2 Strategies.
B
16.41
-2.94
-2.54

B
11.90
8.09
3.57

β

Constant
P4CLU
P4NEA

-.49*
-.36

B
41.19
-2.79
-4.99

SE B
7.53***
1.11
2.95

β
-.53*
-.35

Note R2 = .29; adjusted R2 = .21. *p < .05, **p < .001,
***p < .0001.

Note R2 = .38; adjusted R2 = .31. *p < .05, **p < .001

2480

As it can be seen, a Visuospatial strategy such as
Clustering was found to be predictor of good performance.
While performance was poorer than with the 33-4 and 33-5
problems, some participants performed <10% over optimal.
However, the majority of participants (70%) performed 1020% over optimal, and 18 participants performed above 20
PAO. The best performance (2.4% over optimal) had a clear
design and used Clustering and Remainder strategies,
occasionally drawing upon Calculating, Maximizing and
Anchoring. Other participants who performed well used
Clustering and Calculating, occasionally drawing upon
Balancing and Anchoring. One participant performed very
badly (56.45 PAO). Poor performers continued to use
Calculating as a dominant strategy.
Clustering, Calculating and Remainder again are
prominent (90%). Other strategies used are the Nearest
Neighbor (50%), Averaging (20%), Maximizing (30%) and
Balancing (10%).
Those who used Anchoring in their solutions performed
worse (in some cases with 5 percentage points difference in
percentage over optimal) than those who did not. However,
combinations that generated good performance included
Clustering with Anchoring, Clustering and Nearest
Neighbor, Anchoring and Nearest Neighbor and Clustering
with Anchoring and Balancing. Problem 39-6 involves
more nodes to use and more routes to draw and the
participants started to use more strategies.
45-7 Problem (P5) Three participants exhibited their worst
individual performance in this problem. Regression results
showed that participants who used Calculating, Clustering
and switching between strategies performed better than
those that did not. As the size of the problem increased, the
regression model showed that certain interaction of
strategies and strategies’ switching could predict the
performance of participants. Using the enter method, a
significant model (at the 10 % level though) emerged F
(2,20) = 2.90, p = .081, Adjusted R2 = .160, AIC = 155.385.
Table 5 shows the regression results for this P5 (45-7)
problem. As it can be seen, similarly to P2 and P4 problems,
Visuospatial strategies – Clustering strategy specifically –
can predict good performance though this finding is only
marginally significant. The Clustering strategy was retained
in the model because it improved the AIC value of the
model compared to the model without Clustering included
as a predictor.
Table 5: Linear Regression results for P5 Strategies.
B
Constant
25.51
P5CLU
-0.65
P5REM-1.90
FILL
Note R2 = .24; adjusted R2 =
***p < .0001.

SE B
3.00***
0.33
1.63

β
-.41*
-.24

.16. *p < .05, **p < .001,

Participants who performed well used at least 2 strategies
per route but mainly used Clustering. Participants who had
no dominant strategy showed worse performance. A
considerable increase in the use of a number of different
strategies was observed compared with other problems.
Fifty percent used the Nearest Neighbor strategy, while
Calculating, Clustering and Anchoring were used by 100%.
Remainder was used by 80%, Averaging and Maximizing
40%, while Balancing is used the least (20%).

Discussion
Results are congruent with both ‘fast and frugal’ heuristics
(Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996) and weak methods (Newell
& Simon, 1972) as both more ‘optimizing’ strategies (e.g.
visuospatial) and ‘satisficing’ strategies (e.g. arithmetic)
were identified to be interplaying within individuals’
problem solving phase. This also aligns with MacGregor
and Ormerod’s (1996) suggestions that people capitalize
upon visual forms (e.g. convex hull boundary), which tends
to correlate closely with the path taken by good or optimal
TSP solutions.
Furthermore, we have identified that despite participants
exhibit strong switching behavior (thus engaging in an
incremental testing of strategies) this has not occurred on a
global level (e.g. incremental testing of alternative routes)
rather it occurred on a local (subroute) level, especially for
solutions that reached near-optimality. This suggests that
even though this behavior may share elements with weak
methods (i.e. checking for alternatives), this does not
happen on a global level. Participants reached good
solutions quickly employing successful visuospatial
strategies such as Clustering (innate to human perception),
thus aligning to a more 'fast and frugal' approach, especially
for the problems that included a higher number of nodes and
routes to draw. Yet, their 'fast and frugal' approach was
employing a 'not-so-frugal' set of strategies (as they were
rich in numbers) while switching was apparent throughout,
leading to close-to-optimal solutions. An explanation to this
could be that the complexity of the task environment reenforces humans to combine weak and 'fast and frugal'
heuristics in order to overcome thresholds of cognitive
overload.
More particularly, Clustering strategy (Visuospatial
strategy) and Anchoring were found to be predictors of
better human performance compared to the Balancing
strategy (Arithmetic strategy), which was found to be
impairing human performance in CVRPs. This may provide
some support to the ‘fast and frugal’ theory of Gigerenzer
and Goldstein (1996) that ‘quick and dirty’ approaches to
problem solving (e.g. strategies that rely in innate human
abilities and require lower cognitive effort such as
Clustering) can reach or even outperform other more
exhaustive and satisficing means of problem solving (e.g.
strategies that necessitate a higher cognitive demand such as
performing calculations and Balancing). Indeed, such
performance may be subject to the task environment or the
type of problem involved. However, in order to test such

2481

speculation, further research must be conducted.
Furthermore, the ‘intuitive’ reliance on ‘fast and frugal’
heuristics (visually-inspired such as Visuospatial set of
strategies) solely does not promote ‘optimal’ or close to
‘optimal’ performance. This finding contrasts with the
general notion that ‘fast and frugal’ heuristics lead to better
quality (Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996) and the ‘weak
methods’ are usually indicators of ‘satisficing’ accounts
(Newell & Simon, 1972) associated with the production of
lower quality yet error-free solutions. Results suggest that
humans adopt both visuospatial and arithmetic strategies
while attempting to solve CVRPs. However, when
employing visuospatial strategies (such as Clustering and
Anchoring), participants appear to generate better solutions
compared to their counterparts that adopt arithmetic
strategies (such as Balancing).
Visuospatial heuristics appear to be more efficient than
arithmetic. This may be because they employ behaviors that
are ordinarily inhibited within humans. Furthermore, visual
techniques are highly dependent on the environment and
thus their successful use may be suggesting that ‘fast and
frugal’ heuristics through intrinsic ecological rationality can
trigger better performance in CVRP problem solving.
Further research is required though to discern how people
decide that a heuristic is a good one and whether a solution
is a good solution. Strategy switching appears to be a
recurrent theme in a CVRP solving process, thus
constituting an important element of the heuristic
generation. Participants are constantly changing their plan
of action by judging the environment and the constraints
given. Computational algorithms can be enriched by
applying to them better human heuristics while
incorporating critical switching thresholds between
heuristics to optimize their performance and avoid the
trappings of local optimum and dynamic environments.

Kefalidou, G. (2011). Cognitive Processes and Vehicle
Routing Problems, Unpublished PhD Thesis, Lancaster
University.
Lee, M. D. & Vickers, D. (2000). The importance of the
Convex-Hull for human performance on the Traveling
Salesman Problem: A comment on MacGregor and
Ormerod (1996). Perception and Psychophysics, 62, 226228.
MacGregor, J. N. & Ormerod, T. C. (1996). Human
Performance on the Traveling Salesman Problem.
Perception and Psychophysics, 58, 527-539.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision. San Francisco: Freeman.
Michalewicz, Z. & Fogel, D.B. (2002) How to Solve it:
Modern Heuristics, 3rd edition, NY: Springer.
Newell, A. & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human Problem
Solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Ormerod, T. C. & Slavin, S. (2005). Human Solutions to
the Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem, Human Problem
Solving Workshop, Purdue University, USA.
Van Rooij, I., Stege, U. & Schactman, A., (2003).
Convex-Hull and tours crossings in the Euclidean Traveling
Salesperson Problem: Implications for Human Performance
Studies. Memory and Cognition, 31, 215-220.
‘VRP Web’. (2007). A Website for Vehicle Routing
Problems Research. CVRP Instances and Optimal Solutions
data
files.
Retrieved
from
VRP
Web
http://www.bernabe.dorronsoro.es/vrp/.
Last
visited:
30/01/2014.
Wagenmakers, E. J. & Farrell, S. (2004). AIC Model
Selection using Akaike Weights. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, Vol. 1(1), pp. 192-196.

Acknowledgments
This research was conducted as part of Genovefa
Kefalidou’s PhD thesis at Lancaster University under the
sponsorship of EPSRC/ESRC and under the supervision of
Prof. Ormerod and Prof. Eglese. Many thanks are due to all
the participants of the study and to Horizon Research
Institute and the Human Factors Research Group for
providing the resources for the completion of this paper.

References
Bakeman, R. and Gottman, J. M. (1997). Observing
Interaction: An Introduction to Sequential Analysis, 2nd
Edition, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Field, A. P. (2005). Discovering statistics using SPSS .
London: Sage.
Gigerenzer, G. & Goldstein, D.G. (1996). Reasoning the
Fast and Frugal way: Models of Bounded Rationality,
Psychological Review, Vol. 103, pp. 650-669.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P. M. & ABC Research Group
(1999). Simple Heuristics That Make Us Smart, Oxford
University Press, USA.

2482

