UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Three Senses of 'Explanation'

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4074n3jw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Waskan, Jonathan
Harmon, Ian
Higgins, Andrew
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Three Senses of ‘Explanation’
Jonathan Waskan (waskan@illinois.edu)
Ian Harmon (iharmon2@illinois.edu)
Andrew Higgins (higgins9@illinois.edu)
Joseph Spino (spino2@illinois.edu)
Department of Philosophy, 810 S. Wright Street
Urbana, IL 61801 USA

Abstract
‘Explanation’ appears to be ambiguous between a
representational-artifact, an objective, and a doxastic sense.
That the distinctions between the three are still poorly
understood we regard as an impediment to progress in the
philosophy of science and as a source of the field’s resistance
to greater integration with experimental psychology. We
begin to elucidate the overlapping contours of the three sense
of ‘explanation’ using a variation on Powell & Horne’s
Semantic Integration paradigm, showing that both laypeople
and scientists regard doxastic explanations as constitutive of
representational-artifact, but not of objective, explanations
and accuracy as closely connected to objective, but not
representational-artifact, explanations.
Keywords: Explanation; understanding; philosophy of
science

Investigating Conceptions of Explanation
In the early 20th century, many positivistic philosophers
claimed that science rightly concerns itself only with
questions of ‘what?’ not ‘why?’ because, as Stace (1935)
put it, “‘why?’ does not proceed from the intellect, but from
the emotions.” The general sentiment was that answers to
why-questions engender mere feelings of understanding,
empathy, or familiarity. Nevertheless, by the mid-20th
century, there was general agreement that science has the
function of answering both sorts of questions, that it not
only describes but also explains (Hempel & Oppenheim
1948). This shift in attitude had much to do with the
pioneering work of Hempel, who regarded explanations as
representational artifacts – that is, sets of statements that
answer ‘why?’ questions. On one common manner of
speaking (e.g., “There is an explanation for the odd trait on
page 25”) the noun ‘explanation’ does seem to refer to a set
of representational-artifacts; let us call them explanationsr-a.
Hempel (1965) countered worries about the affect-inducing
character of explanationsr-a by claiming that they are doubly
dissociable from psychological states, and he embraced the
apparent corollary that the philosophical study of
explanations is, like formal logic, autonomous from
scientific psychology. Accuracy, on the other hand, he
regarded as essential for explanation.
Many subsequent philosophers would agree with
Hempel’s anti-psychologism and his claims about accuracy.
One holdout is Achinstein (1984), who contends that some
statements E constitute an explanationr-a for q only if an
explainer could cite E and thereby render q intelligible to an

audience. On his view, E need not have actually been used
to render q intelligible; it suffices that it could be used in
this way. Nor, for Achinstein, need E be accurate.
Others made a cleaner break with positivism. Salmon
(1984), for instance, claimed that explanations are sets of
objective happenings, what we will call explanationso. Here
too we agree that there is a common manner of speaking
(e.g., “The explanation for combustion is oxidation”) on
which ‘explanation’ appears to refer to a set of objective
happenings. Similar to Hempel, Salmon argued that
explanationso have nothing to do with what anyone feels or
thinks and, as such, are non-psychological. As for accuracy,
since explanationso are not representations, they cannot be
right or wrong, “they just are” (Craver 2007).
Meanwhile, as early as Craik (1943), psychologists have
undertaken their own investigation of explanations, which
they construe as mental states, or more particularly as
having a belief about what might have produced the target
phenomenon (see Waskan et al. 2013). There does appear to
be a common manner of speaking (e.g., “Lavoisier had an
explanation for combustion” or “The preverbal infant had an
explanation for the meowing coming from the closet”) on
which ‘explanation’ refers to a doxastic state; let us call it
explanationd. The relevant beliefs are those in virtue of
which one understands how or why, at least possibly, the
phenomenon came about or, more succinctly, in virtue of
which one finds the phenomenon intelligible. Psychologists
often study the explanationsd of children and science-naïve
laypeople, whom they often regard as misrepresenting the
state of the world, the tendency thus being to disregard
accuracy as an important feature of explanationd.
It may be that all sides are correct in that the noun
‘explanation’ is actually ambiguous between at least these
three senses. We are not the first to propose this. Craver
(2014), for instance, claims that ‘explanation’ can refer to “a
representation or text…a cognitive act, and…an objective
structure” (also see Waskan 2006). Salmon (1998) likewise
shows sensitivity to “The radical ambiguities of
‘explanation,’” which, he claims, “create almost endless
opportunities for obfuscation and confusion.”
Though ‘explanation’ seems to designate either artifacts,
objective happenings, or mental states, the three senses of
the term are closely intertwined. For instance, what
explanationsd we have may depend upon what explanationsra we have read (e.g., phlogiston or oxidation theory). And
what we believe to be the explanationo for an occurrence
(e.g., combustion) may depend upon what theories we take

3090

to be true; though what the objective explanation is will
presumably not depend upon what we believe or what
theories we have encountered (e.g., in print). These
interconnections complicate the project of disentangling the
various uses of ‘explanation.’ Even so, we regard this as a
worthy pursuit given the role that explanations play in our
lay and scientific lives. Indeed, with regard to science, it is
hard to see how one could effect the larger epistemological
project of determining what makes it such an exemplary
epistemic exercise without first understanding what,
precisely, ‘explanation’ refers to in its various senses.
Philosophers of science sometimes seek answers to
questions about how ‘explanation’ is used, and its referent
conceived of, by consulting judgments about cases. For
instance, in order to show that explanationr-a is in no way a
psychological category, one might imagine a well-supported
hyper-complex model of a phenomenon that is so complex
that it is incapable of rendering that phenomenon intelligible
to anyone and then judge that this model is still an obvious
or clear-cut case of explanation (Craver 2007; Trout 2007).
This practice carries with it the implicit assumption that
others will concur on the relevant judgments. As Hempel
puts it with regard to his own theory, “the construal here put
forward has to be justified by … [showing that it] does
justice to such accounts as are generally agreed to be
instances of scientific explanation…” (italics ours, 1965).
Given that the subject matter here is scientific explanation,
we take it that the agreement in question ought to extend, at
a minimum, to practicing scientists. Obviously there is some
risk that the philosopher’s own judgments will not match
those of scientists, either because they have not mastered
science’s sociolinguistic norms or because their judgments
are colored by the very theories of explanation they are
trying to prove (Cummins 1998). The latter worry is much
the same as the one driving the utilization of theoretically
naïve coders for classifying qualitative data in psychology.
Another staple method in the philosophy of science is to
comb the historical record for evidence that supports or
undermines a given theory. To do this effectively, one must
be careful that one's sample is adequately large,
representative, and unbiased (see Thagard 2012). But these
restrictions are seldom met in practice. Often samples are
small and focus on hand picked cases, revolutionary
developments, or cases about which a theorist has special
knowledge.
While by no means advocate the abandonment of
traditional philosophical methods, the fecundity of which is
beyond question, we think that the above worries suffice to
motivate greater reliance upon other tools, so that the best
descriptive theories of science can be shown to enjoy
converging support from a variety of independent sources.
Bibliometric techniques would seem an almost mandatory
addition to the philosopher’s toolkit, for these can shed clear
(i.e., uncolored by theory) light on facts about linguistic
usage. Overton (2013) has already carried out a bibliometric
investigation of how ‘explain’ and its cognates are used in
recent scientific articles. Unfortunately, he only considers

the semantics of explanation-talk in a small set of case
studies and primarily relies on manual search. Nonetheless,
his basic strategy could easily be augmented to bring the
broader arsenal of techniques available at the intersection of
information and computer science (e.g., machine learning
algorithms, big data text mining) to bear on the analysis of a
far more comprehensive sample of scientific articles.
The methods of experimental and social psychology offer
another, independent way of studying a variety of
descriptive questions about how scientists talk and think.
These methods have already been employed to show that
terms like ‘gene’ and ‘innate’ are used in varying ways by
laypeople and scientists and subpopulations thereof (Stotz &
Griffiths 2008). Here we pursue a related line of
investigation, examining how laypeople and scientists
conceive of explanationr-a and explanationo with an eye
towards possible linkages between each and explanationsd.

Explanationr-a and Explanationo
As noted above, philosophers often regard explanationr-a
and explanationo as dissociable from psychological states
and, on this basis, they view the philosophical investigation
of explanation as autonomous from work in experimental
psychology. Our previous studies suggest, however, that
laypeople and scientists consider it a central feature of
explanationsr-a that they actually produce the psychological
state of finding intelligible. This looks a lot like
Achinstein’s view except that the mere capacity to render
intelligible is not enough.
This finding held up under two very different paradigms.
The first involved traditional brief vignettes (~200 words)
followed by ratings questions (Braverman et al. 2012). In
the second, rather than asking for an explicit rating, which
we worry could prompt explicit deliberations and amateur
philosophizing about category membership, we hid the
explanation probe within a larger true-false comprehension
test about the materials.
It seems plausible that insofar as one understands how or
why-possibly a phenomenon occurred, one has an
explanationd for it, and vice versa. If that is the case, then
explanationr-a comes out looking not just inherently
psychological, but actually constituted by explanationd, and
this brings unity to the psychological and (part of) the
philosophical investigations of explanation. Now it could be
that there is a similar underlying psychological component
of explanationo – that is, it could be that an objective
process is only regarded as the explanation for a
phenomenon if someone understands, or could understand,
how it brought the phenomenon about. To find that this is so
would further unify the philosophical and psychological
projects. To find that it is not would reinforce the suggestion
that there are distinct representational-artifact and objective
senses of ‘explanation’ in play and it would highlight their
distinguishing features.
Also of interest is whether or not accuracy is regarded as
essential for explanationr-a. Because explanationso are
ostensibly just the actual facts, then an accurate

3091

explanationr-a (or explanationd) for a phenomenon should
(with some caveats) elucidate the explanationo for it. We
thus undertake to determine if laypeople and scientists
conceive of explanationsr-a as veridical representations of
explanationso.

Experiment 1: Explanation and Intelligibility
Our first experiment uses similar methods as (Waskan et
al. 2013), except that a lengthy distractor (about
neuroscience) is interposed between the target materials and
the comprehension test. This brings our methods into closer
alignment with Powell and Horne’s (see Powell et al. 2013)
Semantic Integration paradigm, which relies on the fact that,
when remembering a passage of text after a delay,
participants’ memories often reflect their semantic
interpretations rather than the actual sentences they read.
We administered the same materials separately to two
groups of participants, laypeople and scientists. Participants
were presented with one of two variants on the gamma-ray
article:
• Intelligible – the article describes a hyper-complex
computer model and a published research article
describing it (hereafter ‘materials’), which have
numerous theoretical virtues and have actually rendered
the target occurrence intelligible to a scientist (Brown).
• Never Intelligible – same as Intelligible except the
materials are described as prohibitively complex such
that they are incapable of rendering the target
occurrence intelligible to anyone.
We examined how often participants remembered that the
story described an explanationr-a or an explanationo under
each condition.

Participants
For lay participants, we recruited 115 workers through the
Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) work distribution
website.1 For scientists, we recruited 112 practicing
scientists (faculty members, postdocs, and graduate
students) affiliated with the Beckman Institute for Advanced
Research at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Data from MTurk workers and scientists were analyzed
separately.

Materials and Procedure
The gamma-ray article (roughly 1000 words) was adapted
from an article on a popular science website.2 The original
article describes the long history of research into gamma-ray
bursts. Our version utilizes most of this material, but it
culminates in a report on how a noted astrophysicist, Dr.
Brown, produced a computer model of how distant type-B2
stars might produce gamma-ray bursts. The model, called

‘B2-Evo,’ incorporates information about the relevant
physical laws at play inside of type-B2 stars to produce
simulations of how they produce gamma-ray bursts. The
model generates the very surprising prediction that gamma
ray bursts are preceded by gamma-ray bubbles, a prediction
later confirmed by telescopic observations. The model is so
complex that Dr. Brown initially has difficulty wrapping his
head around why the simulated stars produce gamma rays.
Dr. Brown publishes a detailed report of his findings and
provides open access to his computer model.
In the Intelligible condition, Dr. Brown eventually figures
out a way to rein in the model’s complexity in order to
understand the possible origin of gamma-ray bursts. In the
Never Intelligible condition, Dr. Brown eventually
concludes that his B2-Evo model is far too complex for
anyone to use it to understand the origin of gamma-ray
bursts.
After reading the distractor article on neuroscience,
participants in the R-A condition were asked to specify,
granting that the article is accurate, whether or not the
following statements appear to be true given what they had
read in the gamma-ray article:3
○ Brown’s paper and the accompanying computer model
constitute an explanation for why type-B2 stars produce
gamma-ray bursts.
○ Brown understands how type-B2 stars at least might
produce gamma ray bursts.
○ Gamma-ray bursts were first detected by satellites as
part of an attempt to monitor nuclear weapons testing.
○ Sato’s team used the Arecibo telescope in Puerto Rico.
○ Brown’s paper was rejected by the Journal of the
American Astrophysics Association.
The first statement references a set of representational
artifacts, and so we take responses to it to provide an
implicit measure of the semantic activation of participants’
concept of explanationr-a. In the Objective condition, the
first statement was replaced by, “The explanation for
gamma-ray bursts is a physical process which also produces
gamma-ray bubbles.” This statement refers to a physical
process, and so we take responses to it to indicate activation
of participants’ concept of explanationo,
The remaining items were included to measure whether
participants had read the article with sufficient attention to
detail. The second was used to specifically measure if they
correctly remembered whether or not Dr. Brown
understands why-possibly gamma ray bursts are produced.
Participants were next asked to supply demographic
information.

Results
Of the 115 lay participants (MTurk workers) who began
the experiment, we analyzed data from 106 participants.4

1

All MTurk workers for this study were in the United States and
had an 80%+ approval rate. They received $.40 compensation.
2

http://theconversation.edu.au/flash-aah-aah-could-agamma-ray-burst-eradicate-all-life-on-earth-5291

3

Order of presentation for test items was randomized.
Data from 9 participants were excluded, 5 for missing 2+
comprehension questions and 4 for prior exposure to the materials.

3092

4

We also analyzed data from 112 scientists. As shown in
Figure 1, consistent with our earlier work, significantly
more lay participants remembered that Dr. Brown’s
materials constitute an explanationr-a for gamma-ray bursts
in the Intelligible condition than did so in the Never
Intelligible condition (χ2(1, n = 53) = 13.117, p < .001). In
contrast, there was no significant difference between the
Intelligible and Never Intelligible conditions in the number
of lay participants who remembered that the process
described by Dr. Brown’s materials was the explanationo for
gamma-ray bursts (χ2(1, n = 53) < 1, ns).
Similar results held for scientists. Significantly more
scientists remembered that Dr. Brown’s materials constitute
an explanationr-a for gamma-ray bursts in the Intelligible
condition than did so in the Never Intelligible condition
(χ2(1, n = 57) = 5.058, p < .05). There was no significant
difference between the two conditions in the number of lay
participants who remembered that the process described by
Dr. Brown’s materials was the explanationo for gamma-ray
bursts (χ2(1, n = 55) = 3.16, ns).
There was a significant difference between the number of
participants who remembered that Dr. Brown understands
how type-B2 stars could produce gamma ray bursts across
the Intelligible and Never Intelligible conditions for both
laypeople (χ2 (1,106) = 29.150, p < .001) and scientists (χ2
(1,112) = 24.938, p < .001).

affected by the presence or absence of intelligibility,
memory for the explanationo claim was not. Our findings
thus suggest that finding intelligible is central to
explanationr-a but not to explanationo. It is noteworthy that
the lay and scientific communities seem to be in agreement
on this. Also important is that, in the Intelligible condition, a
large percentage from both populations remembered, of the
very same article, that either Dr. Brown’s materials or the
objective process described by them constitute an
explanation. In other words, both populations were
comfortable classifying representational artifacts and
objective processes as explanations, supporting the notion
that ‘explanation’ is ambiguous between these two senses.

Experiment 2: Explanation and Accuracy
Our second experiment studies the importance of
accuracy to explanationr-a and explanationo. As mentioned,
many philosophers consider accuracy to be an essential
feature of explanationr-a. Explanationso, by contrast, are
ostensibly just the actual facts (e.g., about how a
phenomenon came about). Taken together, this suggests that
an explanationr-a will (with some caveats) necessarily
elucidate the explanationo for a phenomenon. One should
expect, then, that varying the accuracy of Dr. Brown’s
materials will alter participants’ memories for both
explanationr-a statements and explanationo statements.

Participants
Participants in this study were 151 workers recruited
using MTurk.5 For scientists, we recruited 111 practicing
scientists (faculty members, postdocs, and graduate
students) affiliated with the Beckman Institute for Advanced
Research at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
As with Experiment 1, data from MTurk workers and
scientists were analyzed separately.

(1a)

Materials and Procedure

(1b)
Figure 1. (1a) Percentage of participants remembering that
the materials described constitute an explanationr-a. (1b)
Percentage remembering that the process described by the
materials is the explanationo.

Discussion of Experiment 1

Materials were much like as in Experiment 1, except that
the story did not end with Dr. Brown discussing B2-Evo’s
capacity to render gamma-ray bursts intelligible, but rather
with mention of B2-Evo’s competitor, Eigen-burst, and of
how the two make very different predictions about the
phenomena that accompany gamma ray bursts. These
predictions were said to be tested, and depending on the
condition Dr. Brown’s model either passed (Crucial Test
Pass) or fails (Crucial Test Fail) this test. This provides
participants with potent indirect evidence of the accuracy of
the materials provided by Dr. Brown.
The only other difference was that the second
comprehension item from Experiment 1 was replaced with:
○ Brown’s B2-Evo model of gamma-ray burst formation
is accurate.

Both lay and scientific participants were clearly sensitive
to the main manipulation to the article – namely, the
variation in whether or not Dr. Brown finds gamma-ray
bursts intelligible. Experiment 1 shows that, for both
populations, while memory for the explanationr-a claim was

3093

5

Eligibility and compensation were as in Experiment 1.

Results

Discussion of Experiment 2

Of the 151 lay participants (MTurk workers) who began
the experiment, we analyzed data from 128 participants.6
We also analyzed data from 111 of the 139 scientists who
began the experiment.7
As shown in Figure 2, significantly more lay participants
remembered that the process described by Dr. Brown’s
materials was the explanationo for gamma-ray bursts in the
Crucial Test Pass condition than in the Crucial Test Fail
condition (χ2(1, n = 63) = 6.87, p < .01). The manipulation
did not significantly affect how many participants
remembered that Dr. Brown’s materials constitute an
explanationr-a for gamma-ray bursts (χ2(1, n = 65) < 1, ns).
As with laypeople, significantly more scientists
remembered that the process described by Dr. Brown’s
materials was the explanationo for gamma-ray bursts in the
Crucial Test Pass condition than in the Crucial Test Fail
condition (χ2(1, n = 54) = 12.946, p < .001). The
manipulation did not significantly affect how many
participants remembered that Dr. Brown’s materials
constitute an explanationr-a for gamma-ray bursts (χ2(1, n =
57) < 1, ns).
Significantly more participants remembered that the B2Evo model as being accurate in the Crucial Test Pass than in
the Crucial Test Fail condition, a finding that held for both
laypeople (χ2 (1,128) = 42.482, p < .001) and scientists (χ2
(1,111) = 37.282, p < .001).

These results appear to contradict traditional
philosophical claims that accuracy is necessary for
explanationr-a. They also further distinguish explanationr-a
from explanationo in that representing the explanationo
appears not to be crucial for explanationr-a. One concern is
that responses from participants in the Objective condition
simply reflect memory that the model described in the story
is accurate. There is something to this worry, for as noted
above, a plausible a priori position is that people will not
regard some specific process as the explanationo for an
occurrence unless there is some explanationd or
explanationr-a of it making reference to the process that we
believe is accurate. However, it seems unlikely that subjects
are merely reporting on whether or not the model is accurate
given that the prompt never mentions a model at all and that
the term ‘explanation’ is explicitly described as a ‘physical
process.’ If using ‘explanation’ in this way were
semantically infelicitous, then subjects would be far less
likely than they were to remember the claim as being
advanced in the story. It would be no part of the story, and
nonsense to boot.

(2a)

(2b)
Figure 2. (2a) Percentage of participants remembering that
the materials described constitute an explanationr-a. (2b)
Percentage remembering that the process described by the
materials is the explanationo.
6

Data from 23 participants were excluded, 14 for missing 2+
comprehension questions and 9 for prior exposure to the materials.
7
28 scientists were mistakenly given the comprehension item
regarding intelligibility instead of accuracy. We only analyzed
their memories for explanationr-a and explanationo.

General Discussion
We noted at the outset that ‘explanation’ seems to be
ambiguous between explanationr-a, explanationo, and
explanationd. Some philosophers claim that the first two
senses are dissociable from psychological states and that
psychology can thus add little to the philosophical
investigation of them. Some claim as well that accuracy is
constitutive of explanationr-a, which seems to entail that any
explanationr-a for a phenomenon accurately represents the
explanationo for it. Psychologists meanwhile have focused
their efforts explanationd.
Our goal is to bring clarity to the ambiguities of
‘explanation’ by supplementing tradition philosophical
research with the methods of experimental psychology. Our
previous research suggests that laypeople and scientists
regard it as central to something being an explanationr-a that
it has actually rendered the phenomenon intelligible to
someone, which suggests that explanationd is constitutive of
explanationr-a. We wondered if explanationd might also be
constitutive of explanationo, and so we examined, using
more rigorous methods than employed previously, the
importance of finding intelligible to explanationr-a and
explanationo. Our findings suggest that, among laypeople
and scientists, finding intelligible is considered central to
explanationr-a but not to explanationo. In this regard
explanationr-a and explanationo appear to come apart.
We wondered as well if accuracy might provide a link
between explanationr-a and explanationo. We found,
however, that laypeople and scientists are no less inclined to
classify a representational artifact as an explanationr-a when
it fails to track the explanationo than when it succeeds.
Those same populations were, however, less inclined to
classify the objective conditions designated by a
representational artifact as the explanationo when that

3094

artifact was inaccurate than when it was accurate. In this
respect too, explanationr-a seems closer to explanationd than
to explanationo. These two sets of findings appear to be at
odds with how many philosophers conceive of explanations.
However, our studies utilize implicit measures of how large
samples of laypeople and scientists conceive of
explanations. We think that findings arrived at through
studies such as ours will generally trump those arrived at
through the more traditional methods discussed above.
Overall, our research bears out the intuitively plausible
suggestion that there are distinct representational-artifact
and objective senses of ‘explanation’ in use among
laypeople and scientists, and it goes some way towards
elucidating in what ways they are conceived of as being
distinct. As concerns accuracy and intelligibility, we see no
qualitative difference in how laypeople and professional
scientists conceive of the different senses of ‘explanation.’
This brings to mind Wilfred Sellars’ (1956) claim that
“science is continuous with common sense, and the ways in
which the scientist seeks to explain empirical phenomena
are refinements of the ways in which plain men, however
crudely and schematically, have attempted to understand
their environment and their fellow men…”
More work is clearly required in order to fully clarify the
overlapping contours of each conception of explanation,
especially that of explanationd. The results of this empirical
work clearly have much importance to philosophy of
science, not only because a big part of the philosophical
project is to determine how science actually works. For even
knowing this, one might find, for instance, that one or more
conceptions of explanation are ill suited to play the kind of
roles they are slated for in science. This would provide some
mandate for a revision to science’s conceptual or
methodological practices, but this again presupposes as its
starting point the kind of clear appreciation for standard
conceptual practices revealed by studies such as ours.
Another interesting possibility is that, once we have
thoroughly clarified the various conceptions, an underlying
unity to the philosophical and psychological investigations
of explanation will become even more apparent. Indeed, it is
worth stressing that we have not ruled out the possibility
that there is an important psychological dimension even to
explanationo. It could be, for instance, that where an
explanationo for gamma-ray bursts defies human
comprehension, the boundaries drawn around the specific
set of objective conditions constituting the explanationo are
grounded in the interests of those asking the original “why?”
question. It could be, in other words, that the boundaries
around objectives explanation are set partly by nature and
partly by us. This too is a hypothesis that lends itself to
empirical study. Indeed, to the extent that one is concerned
with the factual matter of how a given population conceives
of explanations, psychological methods will be useful, and
that is true even if the categories under scrutiny are purely
objective.

Achinstein, P. (1984). The Pragmatic Character of
Explanation. PSA: Proceedings of the Biennial Meeting of
the Philosophy of Science Association: Symposia and
Invited Papers, 2, 275-292.
Braverman, M., J. Clevenger, I. Harmon, A. Higgins, Z.
Horne, J. Spino, and J. Waskan. (2012). Intelligibility is
necessary for explanation but accuracy may not be.
Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society.
Craik, K.J.W. (1943). The Nature of Explanation.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Craver, C.F. (2007). Explaining the Brain. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Craver, C. (2014). The Ontic Account of Scientific
Explanation. Synthese Library 367, DOI 10.1007/978-94007-7563-3__2, 27-52.
Cummins, R. (1998). Reflections on reflective equilibrium.
In M. Depaul and W. Ramsey (Eds.), Rethinking
Intuition. New York: Roman and Littlefield.
Hempel, C.G. (1965). Aspects of Scientific Explanation and
Other Essays in the Philosophy of Science. New York:
The Free Press.
Hempel, C.G., and P. Oppenheim. (1948). Studies in the
logic of explanation. Philosophy of Science, 15 (2), 135175.
Overton, J. 2013. "Explain" in scientific discourse.
Synthese, 190, 1383-1405.
Powell, D., Z. Horne, and N. Pinillos. (forthcoming).
Semantic Integration as a method for investigating
concepts. In J. Beebe (Ed), Advances in Experimental
Epistemology. New York: Continuum Press.
Salmon, W. (1984). Scientific explanation and the causal
structure of the world. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Salmon, W. (1998). Causality and explanation. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Stace, W. T. (1935). Science and the explanation of
phenomena. Philosophy, 10 (40), 409-427.
Stotz, K., and P.E. Griffiths. (2008). Experimental
philosophy of science. Philosophy Compass 3 (3), 507521.
Thagard, P. (2012). The Cognitive Science of Science:
Explanation, Discovery, and Conceptual Change.
Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Trout, JD. 2007. The psychology of scientific explanation.
Philosophy Compass, 2 (3), 564-591.
Waskan, J. (2006). Models and Cognition. Cambridge, MA:
MIT.
Waskan, J., I. Harmon, Z. Horne, J. Spino, & J. Clevenger.
(2013). Explanatory Anti-psychologism Overturned by
Lay and Scientific Case Classifications. Synthese, (DOI
10.1007/s11229-013-0304-2).

3095

